APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBBOROOO‘I 00030007-0

- B?
I men 1979 V. S. VERESHCHETIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8304

2 MJICh 1979

INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN SPACE
LEGAL Qussnous
BY
v.3. Venesncusnu

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publiootiona contain intonation prinrily tro- toroign
novapapora, poriodioala and hooka. but olao tron mo agoncy
trananiaaiona and broadcoata. Hotoriola fro- toroign-lanmaago
oourcoa aro tranolatod; thoao froo anliah-languago aourcoa
aro tranacribod or roprintod. with tho original phroain; and
othor charactoriotica rotoinod.

Hoadlinoa, oditorial roporto. and uatorial oncloood in broohoto
[] are ooppliod by ”RS. Procoaoin; indicatoro ouch ao ﬂoat)
or [Extorptl in tho tirot lino of oach iron. or following tho
loot lino or o brioi, indicoto hov tho original intonation vao
procoaood. Uhoro no procoooioa indicator ia givon. tho infor-
mation vaa aunaritod or oxtroctod.

Unfamiliar naloa rondorod phonotioally or tranolitoratod aro
oncloaod in poronthoaoo. Hordo or nanoo prooodod by o qua-
tion oath and oncloood in paronthoooo voro not oloor in tho
original but havo boon auppliod ao appropriato in oontoxt.
Other unattributod paronthotioal notoo within tho body o2 an
icon originato with tho aourco. rinoa vithin itooo~aro ao
givon by aourco.

m contonta or thio publication in no my roproaont tho poli-
cioa. viova or attitudoo of tho 0.8. Morn-one.

COPYRlGl‘l' [MIG AND "WHO!!! mm mu N
MATERIALS ”PRODUCE 11mm mom um maximum
0! THIS PUBLICATION 3! mntcm motncm. 0“ MR.
mn- -
MN]: oocuutumnou leﬂm' "°~ It lot-MI km '00.
JPRS 15/8304

“"“"""”'
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN SPACE, LEGAL QUESTIONS 2 March 1979

 
 

Mania Manna. “one one seam

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

 

ll. MW ”was.”
ll W m -
HEZNDUNARODNOYE SORUDNICHBSTVO V KOSKJSE, PRAVOVYYE VOPROSY. Moscow. 1977

a
lawman-om

This report contains an examination of the broad range of new international

legal problems which have arisen in international cooperation anon; states in

the area of the research and use of space. A detailed analysis is provided of

the legal bases in the international space programs of the Soviet Union, the

United States. the western European nations as wall as other: states. in '

addition to the legal conditions regulating the use of space .‘.or practical
purposes.

 

".00....“ 0.90”“!

USSR Intercoms Navigation

Space United States can _
Legal proble-s Western Europe United Nations

a W rue. Television

a. seam mm 59 -

It M 8W l‘ M an M M
For official Use Only. Limited UNCLASSIFIED

 

Walter of C ies Available Fran J'PRS. nmmmm
°° UNCLASSIFIED

“M" sum-um museum‘s-m —

my tutu-”l
W at W
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY
JPRS L/830‘

2 March 19 79

INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN SPACE
LEGAL Oussnous

Moscow MEZIIDUNARONOYB SOTRUDNICHBSTVO V ROWE. PRAVOVYYE VOPROSY in
Russian 1977 signed to press 22 Jul 77 pp 1-266

[look by V. s. Vereahchetin. under the editorship of A. P. Movchan. Inatitute

of State and Law of the USSR Acader of Sciences, Izdatel'atvo ﬂauka, 3600
copies, 261. pages]

OONTDITS
Page

Introduction............................. 2

PART I:
The Legal Mechanism of International Space Programs

Chapter I: The Treaty as the Basic legal Instrument of International
Cooperation in Space Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . T

1. The Legal Nature of International Scientific and
TechnicalSpaceAereementa.............. 8
2. Scientific and Technical Space Agreemento as
Sources of International Space lav . . . . . . . . . . l3
3. The Principle of Cooperation in International

SpaceLav......................18

Chapter 2: Multilateral Collaboration of the Socialist Nations.
TheIntercosmaProgram ................. 25

l. The International Legal Mechanism of the Intercoamoa
2. The Joint Activities of States Under the Intercoms

Program in Light of Certain Comon Principles of
InternationalSpaceIav . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

[n - ussn moo]
[m - USSR-35 rouol
- . -

P08 ORIGIN. US! ONLY
m OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Chapter 3: Bilateral Cooperative Programs of the USSR with
0therCountries..................... '01

Chapter 10: "Space Integration" in Western mrope . . . . . . . . . . 56

Chapter 5: International Space Program or the United States
(Political and Legal Aspects) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

Chapter 6: The Role of the United Nations and International
Nongovernmental Organizations in Working Out and

InplenentingSpacePrograns............... 89

l. The United nations and Its Specialised Agencies . . . 8
2. International Nongovernmental Organisations . . . . . 9

PART II: -
Legal Problems of International Application
Space Systems

Chapter 1: The Use of Space for Earth-Oriented Purposes and
StateSovereignty.................... 105

Chapter 2: International Space Communications Systems: Legal
Principles of Their Creation and Operation . . . . . . . 117

l. The International Intersputnik Space Comnications
SystemandOrganization............... ll?
2. The Intelsat International Space Conunications
SystenandOrganization...............122
Chapter 3: Direct Television Broadcasting by S'tellite . . . . . . . 133
Chapterh:Spacellavigation....................1106
Chapters:Spaceﬂeteorology....................158
Chapter 6: Investigation of Earth Resources from Space . .. . . . . . 167
Chapter 7: The Legal Status of International Orbital Stations . . . 182

Bibliography of Soviet Literature on International Space Lav . . . . 199

- b _
roe OHICIAI. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030007-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATION DATA

English titls : INTERNATIONAL 0
LEGAL QUESTIONS

Russian title

WHOM“
KOSIDSE, FRAVOV‘.

Author (s) V. 8. Vsrsshchsl

Editor (s) A. P. ibvchsn

0.

Publishing Rouse Izdstel'stov "N:

00

Place of Publication 3 Home"
Data of Publication ; 1977
Signed to press : 22 Jul 77
: Copies : 3.600
COPYRIGHT : Isdstsl‘stvo "II:

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ML!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDPOZ-OOOSOROOO100030007-O
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Brief Annotation]

[Text] The book examines a broad range of new international legal problems
which have arisen in international cooperation among states in the area of"
the research and use of space. A detailed analysis is provided of the legal

bases in the international space programs of the soviet Union, the United
states, the western European nations as well as other states. in addition
to the legal conditions regulating the use or space for practical purposes.

1

P01 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTRODUCTION

Cooperation among states in the research and use of space for peaceful pur-
poses has become an inportant and permanent factor in International life.
The aim: and 25th CPSU congresses affirmed the intention of the USSR to
further develop nutuallv advantageous cooperation with other states in the
developnent of outer space.1 Our state has firmly adhered to this policy
since the beginning of the space age.

The first earth satellite was launched by the USSR during the period of the
International GeOphysical Year [IOY] which was an extensive and diversified
prograa involving simultaneous scientific observations throughout the world.
On the occasion of the first named flight in space in 1961, the Appeal of
the CPSU Central Conittee, the Presidiu of the USSR Supreme Soviet and
the USSR Council of Ninisters uphasised that "we consider the victories in
the conquering of space to be achievenents not only of our people but also
of all mankind. We are pleased to put than in the service of all peoples,
in thenxzaame of progress, happiness and well-being for all people of the
world.

At present the USSR is involved in international cooperation programs for
the study and development of space with a large nunber of states belonging
to different social systems. The nations of the socialist commonwealth,

the United States, France, India and Sweden—these are the range of states

with which the USSR has the largest space cooperation programs.

However the scale and forms of Soviet cooperation with the foreign countries
in space research go far beyond the limits of these programs. Joint satel-
lite tracking stations are located on the territory of 1.8 nations, and
samples of lunar soil brought back to earth by Soviet autonatic stations
are being investigated in the laboratories of a score of countries. The
USSR is making a major contribution to the activities of numerous inter-
governmental and nongovernmental organisations involved in space problems.

Although the basic portion of space research is being carried out by the

USSR and the United States, space development is becoming an international
matter more and more. Scientific-technical, economic and political factors

are behind this .
2

m 017101". US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A study oi‘ the processes which are developing on a worldwide scale and in
interplanetary space, in being made possible by new technical devices, has
necessitated coordinated actions by various countries. The necessity of
international cooperation has become all the more apparent after the ways
of the practical use of space were determined for the interests of meteor-
ology, long distance cosmunications, navigation and for studying earth re-
sources. The high cost of space and missile equipment, the economic advis-
ability oi‘ the Joint use of the scientific and production potentials of the
nations have also led to the necessity of cooperation in space activities.
For various reasons both the scientifically and technically advanced nations
as well as those states for which participation in space research serves

as one of the means for eliminating economic backwardness are interested in
international cooperation in the development of space.

Truly equal cooperation by states in space research, regardless of certain
difficulties. is developing more and more. Specially established inter-
state and public organisations are working actively in the international
area, hundreds of international agreements have been concluded, inter-
national satellites and research missiles are being launched regularly,
and international special-proJect satellite systems have been developed.

Along with the development of space research and its practical application
and the involving of an ever larger number of states in these activities,
there has been an evolution in the forms and nature of collaboration.

At the outset of the space age, the Joint discussion of the results of
scientific research and a comparison of procedures played the dominant
role. At that time there was only a certain coordinating of scientific

plans. Internitional cooperation in tracking earth satellites also de-
veloped rather early on.

In the middle of the 1960's, Joint work in space in the direct sense of this
word became foremost, including the development of missile and space tech-
nolog and various space devices by the Joint efforts of the states and
their use for solving scientific and national economic problems. For these
purposes. in 1,6", two Western European space organizations were organised.
and in 1967, the Intercosmos program was approved for multilateral collabor-
ation among the nine socialist states. The Soviet Union signed an agree-
ment on space cooperation with France. The United States, along with con-
cluding a number of bilateral agreements on Joint space experiments, began
to organize the international Intelsat Consortima for the use of mice-
tions satellites for comercial purposes.

The picture of international space cooperation in the form that it developed
by the end of the first decade of the space age continues to exist at pres-
ent, and it can be represented in the following way: three world centers
of cooperation--the USSR. the United States and Western Europeuwith defin-
ite relationships between them.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the start of the 1970's. important international agreements were signed
in the area of the practical applications of space research. These were

the agreement on the setting up of the international Intersputnik space
communications system and organisation, and the pennanent Intelsat agree-

ments. The tendency toward the practical use of space technology was also
reflected in a number of other proJects of international working systems
which are now in the stage of implementation.

The recent years have been characterised by the start of a new stage in the
pooling of efforts by states to study and develop space. In accord with
the program of socialist economic integration among the CEHA countries,
there has been further development of cooperation among the socialist
nations. This has been expressed in the signing of the Agreement on Cooper-
ation in the Research and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes of

13 July 1916 as well as in the proposal of the USSR for the citizens of
the socialist countries to participate in manned flights on Soviet space-
craft and stations. The USSR has concluded new agreements on cooperation
with a number of the capitalist states. International cooperation in this
area has also been greatly influenced by the conclusion of agreements in
1912 and 1917 on cooperation in the research and use of space for peaceful
purposes between the USSR and the United States.

Along with the tendency for a development and deepening of ties between
states in the study and developments of space and for the influence of
space activities in Vl rus areas of international life, in the capitalist
world one can clearly note another tendency, one toward separateness and
competition. For a number of years "space Europe” has been in a state of
permanent crisis as it has been unable to reconcile the contradictory in-
terests of its partners. The United States has not abandoned its attempts
to use cooperation for the purposes or maintaining its monopolistic or
predominant position in the capitalist worlds in the various areas of space
technology which may involve a direct economic gain.

The present picture of international cooperation in space as a whole is
complex and contradictory; it has been shaped by coinciding and opposing
forces and trends, and represents a synthesis of various approaches and
aspirations of the states.

International cooperation in the development of space is most directly tied
to the foreign policy of states. The degree of international cooperation
in this area cannot help but depend upon the state of political relations
between the corresponding states. The feedback with politics is expressed
in the fact that international cooperation in space development has a posi-
tive impact on strengthening confidence between states, and makes a con-
tribution in adding a material content to the process of a lessening of
international tension.

However, in the United States there are influencial circles which are en-
deavoring to use scientific and technical cooperation for purposes which

h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have nothing in common with detente. This can be seen. in particular. from
the book published in 1971: in the United States entitled "Soviet Cooperation
in Space" with a foreword written by the fonner U.S. Ambassador to the USSR,
F‘. Kohler.3 In essence its authors urge that cooperation between the United
States and the USSR in the space area be used for interfering in the inter-
nal affairs of the USSR. This book is a new reminder that detente as before
remins an obJect of acute political and ideological struggle.

The carrying out of a broad program of international cooperation in space
development by the USSR and the growing influence of scientific and techni-
cal ties on the system of international relations necessitate a theoretical
analysis and generalization of the international legal questions which arise
in the process of cooperation. the elucidation of the relationships of the
scientific-technical and legal aspects of this process. as well as a dis-
closure of the international legal mechanism of cooperation and a tracing
out of the ways to improve this.

Because of the greater national economic use of space devices. greater at-
tention has been seamed by the questions of elaborating the legal condi-
tions for the international applied or working space systems based on the
use of comunications. navigation and weather satellites as well as satel-
lites for studying earth resources. Related to this group of questions
are the international legal problems which arise in the process of coopera-
tion in setting up international orbital stations. the prototype of which
was the system of Soyuz and Apollo spacecraft during their Joint flight in
1975.

All these questions which as yet have not been sufficiently elaborated in
Soviet and foreign legal literature are not only of theoretical signifi-
cance. but directly involve the practical activities of a umber of the
Soviet ministries and departments.

International space law which was born out of scientific and technical
progress. in turn. operates as an important means in developing coopera-
tion among states in the area of the study and use of space. The effect of
law on scientific and technical cooperation is expressed. in the first
place. in the creation of general space law conditions which ensure the
best circumstances for the development of cooperation among the states. and
secondly. in the regulation of specific relationships between states which
arise when they carry out Joint scientific and technical activities.

Correspondingly. cooperation between states in the legal sphere is carried
out in two basic areas. On the one hand. there has been a process of the
progressive development and codification of international space law by the
elaboration of multilateral general-purpose agreements which regulate the
national and international activities in space. This direction can con-
ditionally be termed cosperation on the question of space activities.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHIOIM. USE ONLY

0n the other hand. Joint scientific and technical activities between states

presuppose the creation of the appropriate international mechanism of co-
operation, as well as a legal fornalisation of the relationships between
the participants in the international projects and programs. ‘lhis also is
a legislative process, but is directly linked with the Joint scientific and
technical activities of the states.

In the book offered to the readers, basic attention has been given to exam-
inins the questions related to the second area of legislative activities,
since they have been least examined by the Soviet and foreign specialists
in the area of space law.

FOOTNOTE
1. "Mater-1m xxrv 8"yezda'KPSS" [Materials of the 21m: cpsu Co ess],
Moscow, Politizdat, 1971. p 30; "Materialy XXV S"yezda KPSS” Materials
of the 25th CPSU Congress]. Moscow, Politizdat, 1976, p 56.
2. PRAVDA, 13 April 1961.
3. D. 1.. Harvey and L. C. Ciccoritti. "U.8.—Boviet Coope'-ation in Space"

(with a foreword by Ambassador F. D. Kohler), Center for Advanced
International Studies, University of Miami, 19110, p 1008.

6
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PART 1: THE MAL MECHANISM OI" INTERNATIONAL
SPACE PROGRAMS

CRAFTS! 1: THE TREATY AS THE BASIC LmAL IIISTRUMD‘T 0F II‘TENATIONAL
COOPERATIOI! Ill SPACE DEVSIDWT

Among the international treaties relating to space activities. a particular
place is held by the general-purpose multilateral agreenents which have
been worked under the United nations. including: the Treaty on the Princi-
ples Governing the Activities 02‘ States in the Research and Use of Space
Including the Moon and Other Heavenly Bodies (1961), the Agreement on the
Rescuing of Cosnonauts. the Return of Cosmnauts and the Return of Objects
Launched into Space (1968). the Convention Governing International Responsi-
bility for Damage Caused by Space Objects (1972) and the Convention Govern-
ing the Registration of Objects Launched into Space (1975).

The enormous significance of these documents which comprise the bases of
law and order in space is indisputable. They contain the most general
standards for the activities of states in the given area, and these stand-
ards are desigted for an indeteminately long time and are recognised as
compulsory by a majority or states. A thorough analysis of the history of
the elaboration. the content and significance of these agreements has been
made in the works of Soviet and foreigl legal scientists. These questions
have been taken up in the works of V. V. Aldoshin, E. G. Vasilevsz.

n. l’. Zhukov, c. P. Zadorozhnyy, F. N. Kovalev. Yu. M. Kolosov. Ye. A.
Korovin. M. I. laurev. P. l. Lukin. B. G. Mayorskiy. G. A. Osnitshaya.

A. 5. Piradov. A. A. Rubanov, Yu. M. Rybakov. O. n. Khlestov. I. I. Cheprov,
v. I. Shilin and others.‘

Alonr, with the designated agreements. there exists another, significantly
more numerous group of international agreenents which regulate the joint

activities of states in space. This is the question of the international
scientific and technical agreements which represent a legal form for es-
tablishing relations between states as related to their joint activities
of studying and developing space. For a long period of time these agree-
ments remained outside the view of the science of space law, although they
encompass a large number of states belonging to different sociopolitical

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OYI’ICIAI. USE ONLY

systems. and their role has been constantly groving. The international
space programs of the 088R. the United States and Western Europe are based

on such agreements.2 At present their total nmber already runs into the
hundreds.

In line vith the great scope of international space activities. the ques-
tion of the legal nature of the agreements governing cooperation in the

research and use of space and their place in the system of international
space lav is assuming an indisputable theoretical and practical interest.

1. The legal nature of International Scientific and Technical Space
Agreements

International scientific and technical space agreements establish. alter or
abrogate reciprocal rights and duties of states relating to their Joint ac-
tivities in the area of the research and use of space for peaceml purposes.
Agreement on Joint activities in the scientific and technical areas of space
development comprises the basic content and subject of all these agreements.

Depending upon the selected criterion. such agreements can be divided into:
general and special; international. intergovernmental and interdepartmental;
bilateral and multilateral (including regional); those concluded in a sim-
plified form and vith the observing of all the knovn stages of draving up a
treaty. They are also extremely diverse in terms of names. 00 all these
factors influence the legal force of the agreements and their classifica-
tion in the sphere of regulation by international lav or civil lav?

Soviet legal science proceeds from the necessity of a clear delimitation
of the public international legal relations vhere the basic principals are
states acting on the international scene through their representative
bodies. and the civil lav relationships vhere the basic principals are the
citizens and organizations acting as legal entities. The first area of
legal relationships is included in the sphere of international public lav.
and the second is part of the sphere of international private and national
lav.

Here it is essential to bear in mind that the public lav treaties betveen
states or betveen states and intergovermental organisations can create
provisions vhich regulate civil lav relationships. At the same time such
treaties also operate as sources of international public lav and sources
of international private lav. For example. Article VIII of the Inter-
governmental Agreement on the Intelsat International Conunications Satel-
lite Organisation establishes the general conditions for the concluding
of civil lav contracts for the delivery of equipment and for the providing
of services.

Although the civil lav relations undoubtedly are part of the overall legal

mechanism of international cooperation in the area of the research and use
of space. they comprise a relatively small portion of the legal relationships

we ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which arise in the course of cooperation. The public law sphere of cooper-
ation is of determining significance. and this includes a predominant major-
ity of the international agreements in the scientific and technical area.
The concern of these agreements is the actions of states as principals of
authority and the sovereign carriers of international rights and obligations.
The obJeet of such agreements. as a rule, is the important and fundamental
questions which directly involVe the interests of the states.

The international legal nature of the intergovernmental and international
agreements is indisputable. The question of interdepartmental agreements

is more complicated. and they comprise the maJority among the scientific
and technical space agreements.

The state can act only through its bodies (of authority and state admin-
istration) which in international affairs act as its representatives. Be-
cause of the complicating and specializing of international relations and

in particular. because of the growth of international economic and scientific-
technical ties. recently a general trend can be observed toward a broadening
of the range of state bodies engaged in carrying out international ties, and
bodies which within the limits of their competence are granted full power

to conclude international treaties. This circumstance has been repeatedly
noted in the legal literature.“

The question of what state bodies are granted full powers to conclude inter-
national treaties has been left by international law completely to the dis-
cretion of the internal state legislation. Although the constitutions of
a majority of nations reserve these powers to the superior bodies of state
authority and administration. there are constitutions where it is directly
stated that certain categories of international treaties can be concluded
by individual governmental bodies.5 The right of state bodies to conclude
international treaties can be determined not only in constitutional enact-
ments but also by other sources of domestic state law. by existing practice
or by previously concluded international treaties. This has provided Jus-
tification to carry out in theory a separation of the state bodies involved
in external relations into constitutional, conventional and special.6

In accord with the Soviet theory of international law. the bodies of foreign
relations include not only the departments of foreign affairs. but also
other domestic state bodies concerned with special questions of foreign re-
lations. within the limits of their competence as defined by the enforceable
enactments.7 In the USSR. among such-bodies in the area of international
cooperation in the research and use of space one obviously would have to
put the USSR Acadew of Sciences.

According to the Academy Charter, it is the superior scientific institution
of the USSR directly subordinate to the USSR Council of Ministers. and each
year the Academy submits a report on its activities to the council. The
Charter defines the right of the Acadesv to engage in international ties
(Articles 8. n. h3"n" and 72M

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Practice shows that in the questions of international cooperation in the
area of the research and use of space. the USSR Acadesv of Sciences acts as
a state body of foreign relations with special competence. and the inter-
national agreements concluded by it in this area should be viewed as inter-
departmental.

In individual instances the right to conclude international agreements is
delegated by governmental decrees or by international treaties to the
Council on International Cooperation in the Area of Space Research and Use
Under the USSR Academy of Sciences (the Intercosmos Council). and this is
adomsstic state interdepartmental body which was set up upon governmental
decision. In such instances the agreements concluded by the Intercosmos
Council should also be viewed as interdepartmental or interinstitutional.9

In the United States the Rational Aeronautics and Space Administration
[nasal is the state body of foreign relations with special competence in
the area examined by us; in France it is the National Space Research Center,
in India, the Indian Space Research Organization of the Indian Government.
in Sweden, the Swedish Administration for Space Activities, and so forth.
Certainly the superior bodies of state authority and state administration
in each specific instance or under general procedures can limit the special
competence of the bodies subordinate to them in terms of the range and
nature of agreements which can be concluded by then.

The question of the leagl nature of the interdepartmental agreements and
their relative force. in comparison with other international legal enact-
ments. belongs among the insufficiently elaborated questions of treaty
law. Recently this has assmed great significance not only in such a
special area of international relations as collaboration in the develop-
ment of space. but also in other areas of international economic and
scientific-technical ties. In particular. it is inportant for developing
direct ties between the ministries and departments of the CW countries.

In discussing the legal problems of socialist economic integration at an
international scientific conference organized by the Institute of State

and Law of the USSR Academy of Sciences in 1911. the question of the legal
nature of interdepartmental ties was discussed among others. In the book

published on the results of this conference. it was pointed out that the
participants of the latter were unanimous in describing interdepartmental
ties as interstate ones. 1°

This conclusion agrees fully with the provisions of international law that
in international relations a state can act only as a single entity, pro-
visions steming from the principal of state sovereignty and the unity of
state power. On the international scene. state bodies can only be repre-
sentatives of the state. and the agreements concluded by them obligate not
only these bodies but also the corresponding states.

10
1'03 OWICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principals of any international legal treaty (including also depart-
mental) and its parties are the states and not the governmental bodies which
haVc concluded them.ll In other words. the rights and duties stemming from
interdepartmental agreements are extended to the corresponding states as a

whole. and not Just to the ministries and departments which have signed the
agreement.

This important theoretical and practical conclusion should not. however.
lead to an underestimating of the role of the interstate and intergovern-
mental agreements. Although any international legal treaty. in placing ob-
ligations on the states, is in this sense intergovernmental. the partici-
pants in international intercourse resort to the concluding of treaties in
the name of states and governments in those instances when they wish to
give them particular significance and authority. For example, this is the
role of the intergovernmental agreement by the nine socialist states to co-
operate in the research and use of space for peaceful purposes of 13 July
1976. and the intergovernmental space agreements between the USSR and United
States of as May 1972 and 13 May 1977 signed on the basis of the existing
interdepartmental agreements between the USSR Academy of Sciences and NASA.
or the intergovernmental agreement on the system and organization of the
Intersputnik space communications.

In Soviet practices. the intergovernmental space agreements are of great
significance also because a number of ministries and departments are en-
gaged in space actixities in the nation, and ensuring the fulfillment of
international agreements within the nation is facilitated in concluding

agreements on the governmental level.

Due to the fact that interdepartmental ties develop actively in international
scientific and technical cooperation and space development, a clear defini-
tion of the intrastate right of the powers of the corresponding bodies to
conclude international treaties assumes great significance. as dees the
preventing of contradictions between treaties concluded among bodies of

the same states which possess a different range of competence.

Agreements on scientific and technical questions of space research concluded
directly between scientific research institutes and the scientific collee-
tives of different nations must be differentiated from interdepartmental
agreements. As an example one might give the bilateral and multilateral
agreements between the astronomical institutions of the academies of
sciences in the socialist nations for cooperating on satellite tracking
and conducting scientific research on the basis of these observations.
Obviously this same category would include certain agreements on analogous
questions concluded by the foreign scientific institutions of the 0.8.
Smithsonian Observatory. If such agreements are not reinforced by inter-
governmental or interdepartmental agreements. they cannot have an inter-

national legal nature and do no: impose obligations on the corresponding
states.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Now let us examine the quention or whether or not the form of scientific
and technical agreementn lnflnencen their loan] foree as sets of inter-
national law. This question in of interest due to the fact that a aajority
of the scientific and teehnienl space unrcemcntn ha: been concluded in a
simplified form. that is. by an exchange or notes or letters. or by the
signing of agreed upon protoenln or memoranduma.

A simplified form or international treaties in nine characteristic for
modern treaty practices or states. With the development and specialization
of international relations. the number of nnrcenents concluded between
states in a simplified form has been eonthununly growing. Authors who
have ntudied this question have pointed eat. for example, that of the

b.83h agreements published by the lenvue of Nations, 1,078 were concluded
by an exchange or notes.‘2 or the 1.000 international treaties which were
first registered with the Uh‘ Secretariat. 2280 were in the form or an ex-
change of notes.‘3 At present the perrentnnc or such agreements is growing
even more. However it in obvious that not any exchange of notes forms an
agreement. but only that which reinforecn an uvhicvcd international under-
standing.

Modern international law dnen an: reCORHiL” a compulsory form of inter-
national treaty. 0n thin question the dhrtrine and practices of inter-
national lnw have been unanimous. The ”n International Lay Commission has
pointed out in one or its draft: that the simplified form does not reduce
the legal force of the trenty.‘"

The 1969 Vienna Convention on Irternatinnai Treaty Law considers inter-
rational agreements among treaties regardless of whether or not such agree-
ments are contained in One or several interrelated documents, and in addi-
tion regardless of their concrete name (Article 2. Point 1 "a"). Although
the Vienna Convention regulates only the law or treaties concluded in a
written form, it specially notes that this circumstance does not involve
the legal force and cffectivoness of the international agreements concluded
not in a written form (Article 3).

Thus. the form and the name of the international nr‘entiric and technical
space agreements depend totally upon the will u: the agreeing parties and
are of no significance for qualiﬁyinn thee an documents of international
law.

The same can be said on the number of participan'a in international agree-
ments. Without creating. an a rule. rirhts and ublirations for third
states without their agreement. a treaty has compulnnry force for all its
participants regardless of whetner the treaty in bilateral or multilateral.

An analysi? nude makes it rosaibiv to state the Ihilnwinn. A maJority of
documents covered by the evere‘: vencept or "international scientific and
technical agreements in the area of space research and use" can be con-

sidered among the international law treaties and is within the sphere of

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

legal relationships regulated by international public law. The obligatory
legal force of these documents for the corresponding states does not depend
either on the level of the state bodies which have signed them. upon the
number of participants or upon the form and name. The rights and duties
deriving from these agreements are extended not only to the bodies which
have directly concluded them, but also to the states which the given bodies
represent.

As space is turned more and more into an area of economic activity and as
the international organizations concerned with the questions of its com-
mercial use continuously grow. the significance of the agreements which
are civil law contracts and are regulated by the procedures of inter-
national private and national law will increase. However, here in the
future international legal enactments will be of determining significance
in organizing international space collaboration.

Of course, there is an entire area of international cooperation in the

study of space among individual scientists, scientific collectives and in-
stitutions of various states. as well as along the lines of international
public organizations; this area is not within the sphere of legal relations,

although it does play an important role in the overall mechanism of inter-
national cooperation.

2. Scientific and Technical Space Agreements as Sources of International
Space Law

Scientific and technical space agreements which are part or the sphere of
international public law are considered in a definite area of it, inter-
national space law. The question arises of what is the role of these agree-
ments in shaping the procedures of international space law?

?or answering this question, it is essential briefly to take up a notion
which was widely found, particularly in the past, and according to which

only a certain portion of international treaties can play a law-making
role.

The dividing of all international treaties into law-making treatiesls
(traites-loi, Vereinbarungen) and contractual treaties16 (traites-contracts.
Vertrage) spread in the doctrine of international law beginning at the end
of the previous century.17 As is known, this theory states that the law-
making treaties include only those which contain general. abstract standards
of law which are new or existed previously in the form of customs. As for
the contractual treaties. they create or abrogate specific rights and obli-
gations of states, and they regulate interstate relations as applied to a
specific case. Only the law-foaming treaties. in the opinion of the sup—
porters of this theory. can be viewed as the sources of international law.
Certain authors have gone even farther and have stated that only a multi-
lateral treaty can be law-making, while bilateral treaties generally cannot
be the sources of international law, regardless of the nature of the stand-
ards contained in them.‘0

13
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It must be pointed out. however, that the designated dividing of treaties
has not gained universal recognition in the theory of international law.
and in practice it makes no sense since the legal force of an international
treaty does not depend upon the category it is in. Both in the past and at
present, along with the supporters of this theory, there has also been a
large number of opponents. At the end of the 19th century, the prominent
Russian international legal expert u. M. Korkunov. while in principle ac-
ceptinglghis division. noted the law-making nature of any international
treaty.

In the Soviet doctrine of international law the predominant viewpoint ‘s
the one according to which "any current international treaty has a leg lly
binding force for its participants. and in this sense is law-making." °
The Soviet international legal experts D. B. Levin and A. N. Talalayev
held somewhat different positions on these questions.

D. B. Levin in his book "Osnovnyye Problemy Sovremennogo Meshdunarodnogo
Prawn" [Basic Problems of Modern International Law]. recognised the defin-
ite significance of dividing treaties into law-making and contractual.
however here he did not deny the role of the latter as sources of inter-
national law, but merely said that "law-making treaties are of greater
significance as sources of international law.“21 A. N. Talalayev in his
work "Yuridicheskaya Priroda Mezhdunarodnogo Dogovora" [The Legal Nature of
an international Treaty] assumed a dividing of treaties into legislative
and nonlegislative, and the latter are not to be considered sources of in-
ternational law. Here the author himself emphasized that it would be very
difficult in practical terms to isolate the treaties which would not con-
tain the provisions of international law, and that treaties which are not
legislative ”can almost not be encountered in the official collections of
the international treaties of states."22

The widely known international lawyer L. Oppenheim, without denying the
"convenience" of dividing treaties into the designated categories, has
noted that in principle all international treaties are law-making. as they
are binding for their participants.23 A similar viewpoint has been ad-
vanced also by H. Nelsen, s. Visher, 8. Rousseau. P. Guggenheim and other

prominent bourgeois scholars.

With good reason the UN International Law Commission, in taking up the
questions of treaty law. found it impossible to recognise the dividing of
international treaties into the mentioned two categories. and no such
division exists in the 1969 Vienna Convention on International Treaty Law.

This does not mean, of course. that in this manner any differences are
obliterated between the treaties which establish general principles which

are widely recognized by the states and the rules of relationships between
states and the treaties which contain more specific special procedures
which are valid only in tense of a restricted range of states or Just two
states. Undoubtedly, the former hold a more important and determining

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

place in the system of international law. and consequently also among its
sources.

However in practical terms it is extremely difficult to make a strict de-
limitation between these categories of treaties. in particular by using a
criterion of a greater or lesser commonness of the provisions contained in
them. without saying that both general and concrete provisions are to be
found frequently in the same treaty. the very concept of the commonness of
an international legal standard is extremely imprecise and elastic. A
standard can be general in terms of its content. it may have an abstract
nature, but be in force only in relations between two states. that is. it
may not be generally recognized.

At the same time a provision which is concrete in its content but is not
designed for repeated application may be binding on a large number of

states participating in the treaty. and for this reason it can be considered
general fr0m the viewpoint of the group of states for which it has binding
force. Thus. if the provisions of international law are examined from the
viewpoint of their action in time and space. we would be forced to state
that the provisions. including those which are found in the same treaty.
haVe the most divergent degree of canaonness.

Let us illustrate this from the example of one of the scientific and tech-
nical space agreements between two capitalist countries.

On 27 February 1965. by the exchange of diplomatic notes. an intergovern-
mental agreement was concluded between the United States and Mexico for
establishing a satellite tracking station on Mexican territory.’“ In con-
cluding the agreement, the government of Mexico. in defending its independ-
ent foreign policy course. demanded that along with the provisions defining
the procedure for establishing. operating and financing this station. the
text of the agreement would include references to certain general principles
which should guide the states in the research and use of space. Previously
these principles had been proclaimed in the resolutions of the UN General
Assembly (the Space Treaty at that time did not yet exist). Thus the agree-
ment mentioned space research and use for the good of man and in the in-
terests of all states regardless of the degree of their economic and scien-
tific development. as well as the fact that the activities of states in
space should be carried out in accord with international law. including the
nu Charter (Article VI).

As a result. the strictly special agreement contained both concrete provi-

sions as well as provisions of a most general nature which. in being formu-
lated by that time only in the resolutions of the UN General Assembly. ac-

quired binding legal force for the states participating in this agreement.

From the example of this agreement. one can see how difficult it is to con-
sistently make a division of treaties into law-making and contractual (here
there are elements of both). eVen if the fundamental possibility of such a

division is assumed.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Provisions which are of a general nature are encountered as a whole in a
series of scientific and technical space agreements. Thus of great signifi-
cance for the progressive development of international space law has been
the obligation of the USSR and United States to cooperate among themselves
and with other nations in the area of settling the international legal prob-
lems of space research and use. as stated in Article h of the v.8. and USSR
Agreement of 18 May 1917. The particular role of the two leading space
powers in strengthening law and order in space is indisputable.

The rules of a technical nature which are contained in the scientific and
technical agreements are often designed for repeated use in the relations
between the treaty-making states. For example, the Intergovernmental Soviet-
Prench Agreement of 30 June 1966 mentions not specific obligations of the
parties to carry out one or several experiments. but rather it is concerned
with the basic directions of cooperation by the two countries in developing
space over the long run, the mechanism of implementing such cooperation and
the obligations of the parties to provide help and support to the interested
organizations of both countries.

Finally. those agreements which consist predominantly of conrete. technical
obligations of the parties involved in conducting Joint experiments also
play an important role in shaping the new provisions of space law. It is
essential to bear in mind that some of the provisions contained in them
and which are repeated in analogous agreements in the future may assume
the nature of a generally recognized provision of state law. The well
known Polish international legal expert H. Lachs has noted that "often the
use of certain principles of even a purely technical nature in treaties of
the same type can be the basis for a broader practice of the states and
thereby become incorporated among the generally recognized principles of
international law."2

For example. the uniform special agreements on creating stations for opti-
cal observations of satellites concluded by the USSR with many nations haVe
giVen rise to principles for the establishing and functioning of such sta-
tions and these principles are widely recognized and observed in practice.
In particular there is the principle in accord with which the scientific
result: obtained by these stations are to be used by the collaborating
states on equal bases and upon agreement among them are to be made avail-
able to the world scientific community. In this manner there arose the
principle in accord with which the states. as a rule, do not make recipro-
cal payments for Joint scientific experiments in space when the results
are the general property of the corresponding states.

The circumstance that according to the Statute of the Hbrld Court in set-
tling disputes turned over to it it should accept "both general and special"
international conventions which establish rules definitely recognized by

the disputing states (Article 38. Point 1 "a" of the Statute) is affirma-
tion that special agreements. along with general ones, should be viewed

as law-making sources of international space law which create obligatory
rules of conduct for the participants of the corresponding agreements.

16

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

As for the relative role of the various scientific and technical agreements
in the law-making process. in the sense of creating new standards of conduct.
as was pointed out in the individual examples. in bilateral and multilateral
agreements, there are encountered standards of a general character which

are subsequently reinforced as principles of space law. standards which de-
velop and concretize general principles in terms of definite types of Joint
activities by states in space. and. finally. standards which merely apply
already existing principles and standards to certain situations which arise
in the process of cooperation. And all the designated types of standards
can be found in the same agreement.

Only by analyzing a specific international agreement is it possible to an-
swer the question of whether or not it introduces new essential elements

into the development of international space law. On this level of great

interest is an analysis of the multilateral agreements of a general nature
which regulate entire areas of relationships involved in space cooperation
and which in terms of their aims come close to universal ones (for example.
the constituent acts of the international applications satellite systems).

Undoubtedly. the standards which develop in the form of cooperation between
states with different social systems have the greatest opportunity for
recognition by a broad group of states.

The provisions of scientific and technical agreements which run contrary

to the mandatory standards of general international law cannot be viewed
as valid or even more as creating new standards of conduct." In terms of
international space law, many jus cogsne provisions are contained in multi-
lateral agreements on space law worked out within the United Nations. For
example. any understanding will be invalid between states should it involve
the appropriation of a portion of space or the refusal of solidary liability
in carrying out Joint activities in space, since such an understanding
would run contrary to the mandatory provisions of the 1967 Space Treaty

and the 1972 Convention on Liability for Losses.

0n the basis of what has been stated. the following conclusions can be
drawn.

in the scientific and technical space agreements. the provisions of space
law are to be found with the most divergent degree of cosmonness both in
terms of content and in terns of the range of states covered by them. in-
cluding provisions which are subsequently generally recognized.

The interstate. intergovernmental and interdepartmental agreements on co-
operation in space development. in comprising the sphere of international
legal regulation. are sources of international space law for the states
concluding them even in those instances when the relative role of such
agreements in the shaping of new general principles of the law is insig-
nificnnt.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Modern international space law cannot be viewed in isolation from the treaty
provisions which regulate scientific and technical cooperation among states
in research and use of space for peaceful purposes. Although many of these
provisions are not of a general nature but rather a concrete and special
one. they are an important component element in international space law,
and they are organically part of it and serve as the basis for the further
elaboration of its general principles.

3. The Principle of Cooperation in International Space Law

In line with the particular role or international cooperation in the area
or space development. it is of interest to bring out the legal content of
the principle or cooperation from the viewpoint of international space law.
In the western literature on this question. opposing viewpoints are en-
countered running from the proclamation of cooperation in space as an un-
conditional duty or all states to the complete negation of the legal force
or this principle.

At a seminar on the teaching or space law held in Buenos Aires in 1972. the
Latin American legal experts approved a declaration which stated that in
line with the coming into force or the Treaty on the Principles for the
Activities of States in the Research and Use of Space. Including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies (1967). international cooperation "is a legal
obligation establishing the legality of the activities carried out in space
and on celestial bodies."27 Analogous statements were made in the speeches
by representatives from certain nations in the United Nations and at inter-
national scientific conferences.2° The legal adviser of the Indian Ministry
of Civil Aviation, in an article published in 1973. also declared that "col-
laboration in space affair: is a recognized obligation of all states."29

however the Dutch professor D. Goedhuis has proposed that the 1963 treaty
“refrained from prescribing a definite obligation in this area."3 A similar
viewpoint was stated by the well known English specialist for air and space

law. Bing Cheng.3‘

Obviously the given question requires an approach from broader positions.
With all the significance of cooperation for the development of space re-

search. it cannot be viewed as a monopoly on Just this area of interstate
relations. Equally important is the role of cooperation in political.
economic and other spheres of international life. In this regard the legal
content of the principle of cooperation in space lav should not be inter-
preted in isolation from the sense which is invested in the concept of the

principle of cooperation in modern international law generally.

The principle of cooperation among states is among the seven basic princi-
ples in international law unanimously affirmed by all the UN members in
the Declaration on the Principles of International Law Concerning Priendly
Relations and Cooperation Between States in Accord with the UN Charter.32
According to this declaration. cooperation between states. regardless of

18
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the differences in their political. economic and social systems. in the
various areas of international relations is an international legal obliga-
tion.

At the same tine not any cooperation is proclaimed as such an obligation in
the declaration. but only that which corresponds to the UN Charter. that is.
cOOperation carried out in observing the other generally recognized princi-
ples of international law. This is reflected in the very name of the prin-
ciple: "the obligation of states to cooperate with one another in accord
with the UN Charter." In elucidating the sense of this principle in the
declaration, its binding nature is particularly emphasized in relation to
the tasks of maintaining international peace and security. In enumerating
the specific types of collaboration. the declaration states that cooperation
should be carried out in accord with the principles of sovereign equality
and noninterVention. The principle of cooperation between states is in-
terpreted analogously in the Final Statement of the European Conference on
Security and Cooperation.33

The principle of cooperation in accord with the UN Charter. as has been
pointed out in Soviet literature. reflects the basic idea of peaceful co-
existence, and presupposes active relationships among states in different
areas.” This principle and the conditions of its implementation are hilly
applicable to relations involved in the research and use of space, as one
of the areas of interstate relations.

At the same time. as applied to space activities by states, this general
principle of international law should be examined in light of the principles
set down in the 1967 Peace Treaty which is one of the basic sources of in-
ternational space law.

The desire of the states to provide maximal aid to the all-round develop-
ment of international cooperation in space has been stated in the preamble
and in saw articles of this treaty. This has provided solid grounds for
a number of authors to put cooperation among states in the peaceful use
and ggsearch of space among the basic principles of international space
law.

The Preamble of the Treaty states the desire to aid in broad international
cooperation both in the scientific and legal aspects of the research and
use of space for peaceful purposes. Article I states that the states are
to assist and encourage international cooperation in scientific research;
Article III also mentions the development of international cooperation and
mutual understanding. Article IX establishes that the member states of the
treaty "should be guided by the principle of cooperation and mutual aid.”

Thus the Space Treaty has reinforced the principle of cooperation among
states as one of the general principles and basic provisions of inter-

national space law. however, in the treaty this principle is also not
viewed in isolation from the other generally recognized principles or as

19

'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an unconditional legal duty. It is closely linked to all the general
principles of international lav and international space lav. The latter.
as is known, in acceptim the basic principles of international public lav.
of vhioh it is a part, also has its own elaborated system of general prin-
ciples.

For this reason the legality of one or another type of activity in space
is determined not only by the principle of cooperation, as is stated in
the above-lentioned declaration of the Latin American legal experts, but
rather by the entire aggregate of the principles of international lav (in-
cluding space lav). Only in observing all these principles can national
and international activities in space he vieved as confonaing to the lav.

A number of provisions of the Space Treaty derives from the principle of
cooperation and makes it more specific. Along such provisions one could
put, for example, the duty to consider the corresponding interests of all
other states in carrying out space activities (Article IX); not to create
potentially dangerous interference in the activities of other states
(Article IX); to provide all possible help to the cosmonautn of other
states (Article V); on equal bases to viev requests from states to provide
an opportunity for them to observe the flight of space obJects (Article X);
to inform all nations of the nature. course, place and results of their
activities in space (Article XI). and certain other provisions.

As in other areas of international relations, the principle of cooperation
in space lav should be interpreted priaarily as the duty of states to col-
laborate vith one another in the area of maintaining international peace
and security in developing space. As for the rest, this principle pre-
supposes only the obligation to laxinslly abet and assist in the develop-
ment of broad contacts and in carrying out Joint vorh related to the study
and use of space for peaceful purposes."

As for the specific rights and duties in the area of scientific and techni-
cal space cooperation, these can derive only from treaties specifically
concluded for this purpose by states and intergovernmental organizations.
Proceeding from their needs, interests and possibilities. the states, by
reciprocal coordination and understandings reinforced in international
treaties. determine the nature and degree of their involvement in the
various international space development proJects and programs. In these
treaties the principle of cooperation is concretised and glven a real con-
tent, and is aanifested in definite legal relationships.

The formal consideration of any cooperation as an unconditional inter-
national legal obligation, in isolation from the other general principles
of space lav, vould be tantamount to forcing the states to participate in
any Joint activity in space, even against their national interests. This
undoubtedly runs contrary to sovereignty and the sovereign equality of
states.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
l.

2.

3.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

The bibliography of Soviet literature on international space law can
be round in the Appendix to this book. A worldwide bibliography of
literature on upaCe law from 196': through 1912 has been published in
the annuals of the International Institute of Space Law. See: ”Inter-
national Institute of Space Law or the International Astronautical
Federation. worldwide Bibliography." IISL. Bib1.. 19611-1972. nos 1-9.

The texts of the basic agreements concluded by the USSR can be round

in the Appendix to the book: V. S. ‘Iereshchetin. ”Rooms.
Sotrudnichesto. Pravo" (Space. Cooperation. Law]. Moscow. lauka.
197)., pp 1105-166. The 0.8. agrees-eats signed before 1965 can be found
in the book: ”United States International Space Prograas. Starr Report
Prepared for the Comittee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences." United
States Senate. 30 July 1965. For the series of agreernts signed by

the Western European nations. see: "Basic Texts. Rules and Regulations.
Agreements.” in: "Doc. IRO SP-lo." 1969.

For this see: 1.. A. Lunts. "Mezhdunarodnoye Chastnoye Pram” [Inter-
national Private Law]. Moscow. 1959. P 9; Ye. '1‘. Usenko. ”Form
Regulirovaniya Sotsialisticheskogo Mezhdunarodnogo Razdeleniya Truda"
[Forms of Regulating the International Socialist Division of Labor].
Moscow. 1965. pp 12': et seq.; "Mezhvedonstvennyye Svyazi v Usloviyakh
Sotsialisticheskoy Ekononicheskoy Integratsii” [Interdepartmental Ties
Under the Conditions of Socialist Economic Integration]. edited by
Ye. T. Usenko. Moscow. Yuridicheskaya Literatura. 1973. pp 10 and 101.

"Kurs Mezhdunarodnogo Prava v Shesti Tonakh" [Course of International
Law in Six Volumes]. Vol IV. Moscow. iiauka. 1968. p 239; I. P.
Blishchenko. "Vneshniye Funktsii Sotsialisticheskogo Gosudarstva"
[The External Functions of a Socialist State]. Moscow. Yuridicheskaya
Literature. 1970. pp 139-1150; N. V. Mironov. "The Hierarchy of Stand-
ards of International Treaties in Their Application in Interstate Law
or the USSR." UCiiDiYYE ZAPISKI VNIISZ. No 22. Moscow. 1970. pp 123

et seq.

See. for example. Article 66 (Paragraph 2) of the Union Constitutional
Law of Austria of 1 October 1920 ("Konstitutsii Burzhuamkh Gosudarstv
Yevropy" [Constitutions of European Bourgeois States]. Moscow. Inostrsn-
naya Literatura. 1957. p 39).

"Kurs Mezhdunarodnogo Prava...." Vol IV. pp 11-18; Ye. ‘i'. Ossako. "On
the Legal Nature of Indirect 'i‘ies Through the Ministries and Depart-
ments or the cm Countries," ”Mszhvedosstvenme Svysti v Uslowiyskh
Sotsialisticheskoy Ekanonicheskoy Integratsii." Moscow. Yuridicheshaya
Literatura. 1913. P 1’4.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

155

16.
1?.

18.
19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Kurs Mezhdunnrodnogo Prava... ." Vol IV. p 26.

The numbering of the articles is given tron the text of the Charter of
the USSR Academy of Sciences Approved by the General Asseshlv of the
USSR Academy of Sciences of 1 July 1963 with asendsente acceped up to

it March 1975. "Ustavy Made-ii Rank 8881!" [Charters or the 0888 Academy
of Sciences]. Moscow. lauka. 1975. Pp 165-183.

For the concept or interinstitutional treaties as a variety of treaties
betveen states, see: N. V. Mironov. "The Legal Nature of International
Intergovernmental Agreements.” "Meshvedonstvennyye Swazi v Usloviyakh
Sotsialisticheakoy Ekanonieheskoy Integratsii." p 36.

"Methedonstvenme Swazi v Usloviyakh Sotsialiatieheskoy nonmicheskoy
Integratsii," p S.

A. ll. Talalayev. "Mezhdunarodwye Dogovory v Sovrenennon Mire” [Inter-
national Relations in the iiodern Vorld]. Moscow. Mezhdunarodnyye
Otnosheniya. 1973. p 12-. I. I. Lukashuk. "Storony v Hezhdunarodmrkh
Dogovorakh" [Parties in International Treaties]. Moscow. 1966. p 8;
"Hezhvedonstvennyye Swazi v Usloviyakh Sotsialisticheskoy nononicheshoy
Integratsii.“ pp 12. 15. 29. 66. 111; and so forth. See also: 1.. Oppen-
heiu. ”Meshdunarodnoye Pravo" [International Lav], Vol I. Senivolt-e 2.
Moscow, Inostrannaya Literatura, 191:9. pp 1126-1027; A. Par-dross.
"Meshdunarodnoye Pravo." Moscov. Inostrannaya Literatura. 1959. PP 172-
115; a. 3m. "Treaty-Making Power." London. 1960. p 20.

"British Year Book or International Lav." 1952. Vol 29. P 205. See also:
ii. Frankovskaya. "The Exchange of liotes as a Form of International
Agreement." GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, Warsaw. No 1. 1965, pp 5-6.

L. ii. Mataradze. "Pom Nezhdunarodnogo Dogovora" (The Porn of an Inter-
national ‘I‘reatyl, Tbilisi. 1971. p 20.

"Report of the International Lav Comission," XVI Session, 1962. p 12.

1hey are also called lav-forming. lav-setting. or legislative treaties.
lav treaties. and so forth.

They are also termed contract treaties.

This division was proposed for the first time by the German international
legal experts c. Berghohs and Ii. 'i‘riepel (c. Bergbohn. "Staatsvertrage
und Gesetze als Quellen des Velkerrechts." Dorpat. 1616. p 79 et seq.;

ii. 'i‘riepel. "Volkerrecht und Landesrecht.“ Leipzig. 1899. p 27 et seq.).
ii. Briggs. "The Lav of nations." llev York. 1952. p '46.

ii. ii. Korkunov. ”Mezhdunarodnoye Pravo." 8t Petershure. 1886, pp 111-112.

22

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
200

21.

22.

23.

2h.

25.

26.

27.

28.

30.

31.

32.
33.

G. M. 'l‘unkin. "Teoriya Hezhdunarodnoso Prava" [The Theory of Inter-
national Lav]. Moscov. Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya. 1970. p 108.

D. n. Levin. "Osnovnyye Problem, Sevremcnnogo Meshdunarodnogo Prava”
[Basic Problems or Modern International Lav]. Moscov. Oooyurizdat.
1958. p 260. In a book published in 19710. D. B. Levin recognizes the
lav-making nature or any international treaty ("Akrual'nyye Problem"
'l'corii Mezhdunarodnogo Prave [Urgent Probleas or the Theory of Inter-
national Lav]. Moscov. Nauka. 197% p 75).

A. N. 'i'alalayev, "Yuridicheskaya Priroda Mezhdunarodnogo Dogovora"
[The Legal Nature of an International Treaty]. Moscov. mo. 1963.
pp Jim-16".

L. Oppenhcin. "Mezhdunarodnoye Pravo." Vol I. Senivolme l. Moscov.
Inostrannaya Literatura. 191:8. p 1109.

“United States International Space Programs." pp 122-132.

M. Lachs, "maosostoronniye Doaovory" [Multilateral Treaties]. Moscov.
Inostrannaya Literatura. 1960. PP 263-2610. .

See Article 53 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on International ‘i‘reaty
Luv.

"Ernaeﬂsnza del Derecho Internacional," umco-cmz. Buenos Aires. 1912,
p 81.

UN 00c. A/AC.lOS/C. 21.811. 197. 5 April 1973. p 3'. M. A. Ferrer. "Earth
Orbital Stations." "Proc. XVIth Colloq. Lav Outer Space.” Davis. 191A.
pp 210-211; A. A. Cocoa. “Remote Sensing of Natural Resources by Means
of Space Technology: A Latin American Point of Viev.” in: "Legal In-
plications of Remote Sensing from Outer Space." Leyden. A. H. Sthhoi‘i'.
1976. PP 53-61:.

S.‘ Bhatt. "International Problems Concerning Use of Space." "Intern.
Studies." Javaharlal llehru Univ.. 1973. Vol 12. No 2. p 269.

"Report of the Shth Conference of the International Lav Association."
The Hague. 1970. p ’13".

8. Cheng, "Le ‘i‘raite de 1967 sur l'escape." JOURNAL DU DROIT Im-
NATIOIIAL, NO 3. 1965. p 616.

"Resolution of the UN General Assembly 2625 (XXV) of 2’: October 1970.
PRAVDA. 2 August 1975.

A. P. Movchan. "Kodifikatsiya i Progressivnoye Razvitiye Mezhdunarod-
nogo Prava" [Codification and the Progressive Developlsent of Inter-
national uv]. Moscov. Yuridicheskaya Literatura. 1972. p 171.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
35-

36.

Nil ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Along the Soviet works on the basic principles of international space
lav. see: 0. P. Zhukov. "Koslicheskoye Pravo" [Space Lav). Moscov.
Hezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya. 1966. pp 23-55; A. 8. Piradov. "Kosnos i
Hezhdunarodnoye Pram" [Space and International Lav]. Moscow. Znaniye.
1970. pp 6-17; ”Mezhdunarodnoye Kosaicheskoye Pravo“ [International
Space Lav]. Moscow. Mezhdunarodme Otnoshoniya. 1975. pp 69-910; 0. t’.
Zadorozhnyy. ”The International Lav Conditions or 8 cc." in ”Kare
Mezhdunarodnogo Prava” [Course of International Lav . Moscow,
Mezhdunarodme Otnosheniya. 1972. pp lSh-lél.

An analogous viewpoint has been stated by Ye. P. Kanenetskaya (Ye. P.
Kanenetsma. ”Sotrudnichestvo Gosudarstv v Osvoyenii Kosaosa v Rankakh
Mezhdunarodnykh Organizatsiy" [Cooperation Along States in Space De-
velopment Hithin International Organizations]. Candidate Dissertation
Resume. Moscow. 1976. pp 10-11).

25

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

CliAPl‘ER 2: WLTILATERAL COLLABORATION OI" THE SOCIALIST NATIOHS.
TIIE IM‘ERCOBHOS PROGRAM

1. The International Legal Mechanism of the Intercosmos Program

Intercosrsos is a multilateral program of cooperation among the socialist
countries in the research and use of space for peaceful purposes. It is
one or the manifestations of economic integration among the socialist
nations. The collective elaboration of the most important scientific and
technical problems which are of interest to a number of states, as well as
specialization and cooperation in solving these problems have made it pos-
sible for the socialist countries to more fully utilize the achievements
of the scientific and technical revolution in the interests of the national

economy .

The Intercosmos Program is one of the most successfully developing and ef-
fective programs of international cooperation in the study and developent
of space. The Joint development and creation of scientific equipment for
earth satellites. spacecraft. geophysical and meteorological rockets, a
number or completed theoretical and experimental works in the area of space
physics. meteorolog. conunications. space bioloy and medicine-a-these are
Just some of the results of the Joint activities of the scientific and pro-
duction collectives in the socialist nations under the Intercoms Program.l

The birth of this program goes back to 1965. when upon the initiative of
the USSR an exchange or letters was made between the heads of government

or the socialist nations on a pooling of efforts in the research and use of
space for peaceful purposes.

0n 1’: April 1965. A. Ii. Kosygin. chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers.
turned to the heads of government of the socialist nations in a letter in
which he proposed that a study be made of opportunities for collaboration
by the socialist countries in such areas as organising long distance radio
communications and television. studying the upper layers of the atmos-
phere and space using meteorological and geophysical rockets and earth
satellites. space physics. biology and medicine. The proposal of the
Soviet government was met with great interest in the socialist countries.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In accord with the basic understanding reached by the heads of government
in November 1965 and in April 1966. conferences were held in Moscow for the
representatives of Bulgaria. hungary. the 00R. Cubs. Mongolia. Poland.
Romania. the USSR and the CSSR at which they discussed the content. forms
and directions of space cooperation considering the scientific and techni-
cal possibilities and the extant scientific schools in the individual
countries.2

0n the basis of the Soviet proposal to lake Soviet rocketry available for
Joint work. particular attention was given to the possibilities of develop-
ing scientific equipment in the socialist countries for the satellites and
research.

The conferences ended with the passage of coordinated docusents which were
approved by the governments of the participating nations. The first of
them was termed: The Report of the Conference of the Representatives of
the Socialist Countries on the Research and Use of Space for Peaceful Pur-
poses of 20 November 1965. and the second: The Report of the Meeting of
Experts from the Socialist Countries on the Study and Use of Space for
Peaceful Purposes of 13 April 196?.3

In essence these reports were an unique form of international legal agree-
ments by the nine socialist countries and concluded on a level of the rep-
resentatives of the ministries and departments. These documents expressed
the coordinated will of the nations on the basic principles. forms and
methods of their collaboration in the development of space. Here the rep-
resentatives of the nations acted within the limits of the powers granted
them by their governmental bodies. Subsequent practice in the development
of cooperation on the basis of these docusents have also shown that the
states recognize them as acts of international legal significance. and
follow them in their Joint activities.

The second of the reports included a general coordinated program which had
been elaborated and approved at the conference for research on the physical
properties of space. on space conunications. space meteorology and space
biology and medicine. Subsequently this program (at a conference of the
leaders of the national coordination bodies of the collaborating nations

in 1910 at Hrociaw) was given the official name of the "Intercoamos Program.“

The mentioned reports also defined the organizational forms of cooperation.
In each of the nine nations a decision was ads to set up an interdepart-
mental scientific coordinating body responsible for carrying out the coordi-
nated program. as well as the bilateral and multilateral agreements on in-
dividual projects and subjects which were concluded within this program.

In a maJority of the nations. the coordinating bodies were set up under

the academics of sciences or the ministries (couittees) for science and
technology. In the USSR. these functions were entrusted to the Council for
International Cooperation in the Area of Space Research and Use Under the

26
ran orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR Academy of Sciences (the Intercosmos Council) set up in 1966 as the
interdepartmental body for coordinating Joint work in the area of coopera-

tion in space with foreign countries as carried out by the various minis-

tries. departments. scientific institutions and industrial organizations
of the USSR.

The annually held conferences of the leaders of the national coordination
bodies approve recommendations and decisions to clerify and develop the
Joint program. as well as an organizational and other practical questions
of cooperation. The conference is chaired by the representative of the
nation in which the conference is being held. and he also performs the
functions of the chairman until the next annual conference.

The routine activities of implementing the program and the elaboration of
new recommendations are made within the pennsnent combined work groups for
the five basic areas of cooperation.

The work groups are directed in their activities by a regulation approved
at a conference of leaders of the national coordinating bodies held in
Moscow on 1h June 1968.~ The conferences of the work groups are held when
necessary. but at least once a year. and they rotate among the member
nations. The group chairman is selected. as a rule. from among the rep-
resentatives of the host nation. and performs these duties until the next
meeting of the work group. The host nation also assumes the functions of
the conference secretariat and bears the organisational expenses related
to holding the conference (53 of the Regulation).

The leadership of the activities of the national units of the work groups
and the organizational support for their functioning are entrusted to the
national coordinating bodies of the nations.

The basic tasks of the work groups consists in ensuring the fulfillment

and further development of the cooperation program in the corresponding
areas. as well as in achieving a high scientific and technical level of the
Joint work. For this purpose the work groups examine and solve scientific
and technical questions arising in the course of cooperation. In ticu-
lar. they regularly examine how the existing protocols (agreements are
being carried out on the specific subjects of cooperation. proposals on
carrying out new work are studied. draft agreements are worked out for in-
dividual subjects and experiments. plans for the launching of satellites
and research mdssiles are prepared. and so forth.

The results of the conferences of the work groups are drawn up in the fora
of a general protocol as well as in the form of individual decisions and
recoanmnnations. Those which are of a scientific and technical nature
become effective immediately for the nations which have voted for their
approval. Decisions and recommendations on organizational and financial
questions require approval by the national coordinating bodies in accord
with the procedure instituted in each nation.

27

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
POI ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

According to the Regulation (Ill. Point 3). each nation has the right to
state its interests in any question which is examined by the work group.
At their conferences. the work groups should endeavor that their decisions

and reconnendations be approved by all the involved nations. In the ab-
sence of unanimity. the decisions and reconnsndations are effective only
for the nations which have voted for then.

A nation's statement of its disinterest in one or another question at the
aoaent of approving decisions and recouendationn does not deprive it of
the right subsequently to ascribe to these decisions and recouendations.
An analogous procedure was adopted subsequently for the decisions and recon-
nendations brought up at conferences of the leaders of the national coordi-
nating bodies. In the last instance, however. for the adoption of the de-
cisions and reco-sendations a naJority of votes by the leaders of the
national bodies was required and only questions involving cooperation of
Just none of the nations would be decided by the approval of the leaders

of the national groups fro- thsse nations.

One should note certain differences in the procedure for approving deci-
sions and recomndations in carrying out cooperation under the Intercosnos
Progress in contrast to the procedure existing in can and a nunber of re-
lated organisations.

In accord with Point 3. Article I: of the CM Charter. all the recs-enda-
tions and decisions in CM are approved only with the agre-ent of the
involved nenber nations. and each country has the right to state its in-
terest on any question examined within GEM. ‘ihe reconendations and de-
cisions do not extend to the nations which have declared their disinterest
in the given question. However. each of these nations can adhere to the
recomendations and decisions approved by the regaining nenber countries.

Ye. 'i‘. Usenko has defined the principle operating in CM of unanimity
among the interested countries as the principle of "qualified" unanimity.
in correctly noting that it provides an opportunity to harmoniously recon-
cile national and international interests of the can countries.5

Under the Intercosinos Program. the decisions and recomendations are also
adopted only by the interested nations. Canon to both procedures is the
fact that they are extended only to the nations which have expressed the
agreement to accept then. In either instance the nations which have
stated their disinterest at the assent of the approval of the decision or
recosnendation can subsequently adhere to then.

however. there is a certain difference in the fact that while the CM
decisions and recosncndations cannot be approved with the disagreenent of

even one interested party. under the Intercosnos Program the approval of
the decisions and recouendations is feasible in such situations.

28

'03 OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. in carrying out cooperation under the lntercosmoa Program, the prin-
ciple of unanimity of the concerned parties is not in effect, although the
Regulation stipulates particularly that at their conferences the work groups
should endeavor that their decisions and recommendations be approved by all
interested parties. Such a procedure. without encroaching on the rights

and interests of the member nations of the program. makes it possible to

carry out effective work under the Intercosmos Program both on a bilateral
and a multilateral basis.

The Regulation (learning the work Groups provides an opportunity for the
establishing of direct ties between the need organisations of the countries
responsible for carrying out the Joint work. in the aim of coordinating the
specific duties of the parties and the times for executing the individual
stages of the work (52. Point 2 of the Regulation). In practice such ties
are extremely broad and diverse. They are formalized as protocols which
in certain instances can be transformed into civil law transactions between

these organizations (for example. for the sale or leasing of individual
types of equipment).

Prior to 1971:. contacts did not exist between the CM bodies and the work-
ing bodies formed under the Intercosmos Program. The solving of the prob-
lems raised in the Comprehensive Program for the Further Deepening and Im-
provement of Cooperation and for the Development of Socialist Economic In-
tegration Mung the cm Countries demanded a strengthening and coordinat-
ing of cooperation by the socialist countries in all areas. Considering
that the work being done under the Intercosmos Program was closely tied to
the scientific and technical programs being carried out within the CW
Couittee for Scientific and Technical Cooperation.‘ in 19‘": a decision was
made to establish the appropriate contacts between the mentioned Connittce
and the Conference of Leaders of the National Coordinating Bodies from the
Socialist "ember Nations of the Intercosmos Program.

here the basic aim was the concentrating of efforts by the scientists and
specialists in the CW countries on working out the most urgent problems

of modern science. the eliminating of unjustified duplicatiOn and parallelism
in the carrying out of scientific research under both channels of collabora-
tion. and ensuring the use of the research results in the national econosv
of the CW countries.

The decisions approved at the Eighth Session of the CM Camsittee for
Scientific and Technical Cooperation (Sofia. June 19710) and the Conference
of Leaders of the National Coordinating Bodies of the Member liations of the
Intercosmos Program (Prague. December 1913‘) established ties between these
bodies in the form of reciprocal information and the holding of consulta-
tions on the basic questions of scientific and technical collaboration. as

well as in the form of mutual participation in the work of the Co-Iittee
and Conference.

29

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8|! ONLY

When necessary. provision was made for the possibility of setting up Joint
work groups.

Thus. in the first stage of the existence of multilateral cooperation among
the socialist nations under the Intercosmos Program. its legal basis was
comprised of the fundamental understanding achieved by an exchange of
letters between the heads of government and three international legal docu-
ments of the type of multilateral interdepartmental agreements (the two re-
ports and the Regulation).

Under these documents. a definite national and international mechanism was
set up. and this provides the successful carrying out and development of
the approved program. It includes national coordinating bodies. annual
conferences of the leaders of the national bodies. conferences of the per-
manent combined work groups for the basic areas of cooperation. and direct
ties between the head national organisations responsible for carrying out
the Joint work.

The successml deVelopment of cooperation under the Intercosmos Program
has affirmed the viability of the accepted organizational forms which pro-
vide a flexibility in implementing the program and simplify decision taking
for the execution of various Joint projects by the concerned nations.

The Greetings of the C980 Central Cousittee. the Presidium of the USSR
Supreme Soviet and the USSR Council of Ministers on the occasion of the
completion of the flight of the Soyuz-22 spacecraft with multisone equip-
ment manufactured in the CDR emphasized that "specialists from the social-
ist countries having pooled their efforts under the lntercosmos Program
are making a weighty contribution to space research.”

At the same time. the problems related to implementing the Comprehensive
Program for the Further Deepening and Improving of Cooperation and for the
Development of Socialist Economic Integration Among the CW Countries dic-
tate the necessity of providiru permanent work to improve the content and
further develop the international legal mechanism for cooperation among

the socialist countries. including in the area of space.

Among the integration measures of the can countries. an important place is
assigned to integration in the scientific and technical area. Its develop.
ment has been accompanied by the broadening and deepening of ties in science
and technology. and by the greater role of these relationships in the inter-
national socialist division of labor.°

The Comprehensive Program provides that the development of socialist eco-
nomic integration should be carried out in accord with the principles of
socialist internationalism. on a basis of respect for state sovereignty.
independence and national interests. noninterference into the internal
affairs of the countries. complete equality. mutual benefit and comradcly
mutual aid. The program stresses that integration is not to be accompanied
by the creation of supernational bodies. The necessity of improving the

30
POI OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

legal bases of economic and scientific-technical cooperation is noted among
the vaya and means of integration.9

One of the forms for improving the legal mechanism of cooperation in the
space area has been the concluding of multilateral intergovernmental agree-
ments on cooperation by the socialist countries in research and the use of
space for peaceful purposes. The agreement vas signed in Moscow on 13 July
1976 by representatives of the governments of Bulgaria. Hungary. the GDR,
Cuba. Mongolia. Poland. Romania. the USSR and the C88R.'° This document.
vithout altering the essence of the proven basic organizational principles
of cooperation. has given it a more definite treaty basis and facilitates
the implementation of the new Joint space programs.

The intergoVernmental agreement has made it possible to reinforce the ac-
quired positive experience of cooperation and at the same time to more ef-
ficiently organise Joint vorh by the socialist countries both in studying
outer space as vell as in utilizing the results of space research in the
interests of the various national economic sectors. Article 1 of the agree-
ment contains an obligation of the agreeing parties to aid in every possible
way in the further development of cooperation among the concerned organiza-
tions of their nations in the research and use of space for peaceful pur-
poses.

The agreement giVes the basic areas of cooperative vork. These are: Study-
ing the physical properties of space. space meteorology. space biology and
medicine. space cormunications. and studying the natural environment using
space means. It has been stipulated that cooperation will be developed in
such forms as the launching of space devices for scientific and practical
purposes; the deVelopmcnt of equipment for Joint space research; the con-
ducting of experiments vith geophysical and meteorological rockets; the
carrying out of Joint observations as vell as experimental and theoretical
research, the processing. analysis and use of the results of the Joint vorh.
the preparation of Joint publications; the providing of reciprocal scien-
tific and technical aid; the holding of scientific conferences and meetings.
the exchange of scientific-technical documents and information.

Cooperation among the concerned organizations of the member nations of the
agreement in the future will be developed on the basis of coordinated pro-
nrsme and plans vhich define the conditions for carrying out the specific
space experiments and research.

The agreement reinforces the principle according to vhich in carrying out
the Joint work in space. the states. as a rule. will not make reciprocal
payments. Precisely this procedure has been accepted at present in the
relationships betveen the member states of the Intercosmos Program. The
rocketry and the services of the command and instrumentation complex are

to be provided gratis by the USSR to its partners in cooperation. An over-
all fund is not created for carrying out the program. Each country finances
the vork under the program vhich is to be carried out by its scientific and

31
f0! OIPICIAL US! ONLY
NI 0010!“. US! ONLY

production organisations. This includes the developaent of instruments and
devices for spacecraft. satellites and research rockets. the carrying out
of scientific research under coordinated program. data processing. and so
forth.

'ihe agreement has assigned the role of the basic leading body in multi-
lateral collaboration to the conference of the leaders of the national
bodies. and has also defined the procedure for coordinating the activities
of the participants in the Joint progran during the period betvoen the an-
nual conferences.

Hith the absence of an international secretariat for the Intercoslos Progran.
in practice its functions from the outset of cooperation have been carried
out by the lntercosnos Council Under the 0888 Acadeny of Sciences. It co-
ordinates the activities of the collectives fros various nations in the

area of carrying out Joint work. it prepares the basic saterials for the
international conferences. it publishes the infornationsl bulletin. and so
forth. The agreement has assigned a treaty nature to these international
hmctions of the Soviet national coordinating body.

The agreenent also stipulates that the scientific results of the Joint
space experiments and research under the understanding of all the nations
participating in this can be made available to the scientists and scientific
organisations of other countries.

This agreenent which is open for signing by other states has reinforced on
the intergovernsental level the principles of interstate relations of a new
type in the leading area of scientific and technical progress. This is
still another proof of the broadening and deepening of scientific and tech-
nical cooperation anong the socialist countries.

A significant event in the developent of the Intercossos Program was the
Soviet proposal for participation of citizens from the socialist countries

in the manned flights on Soviet spacecraft and stations. This proposal as
discussed in talks and consultations delegations of the socialist countries
in Moscow in duh and September 1976.' As a result of these neetings. it
was agreed that in the period of 1978-1983. citizens of all the socialist
countries participating in the lntercosnos Program would partake in flights
on Soviet spacecraft and stations together with Soviet cosmonauts.

Being the logical extension and development of the lntercossos Progrsn. these
flights vill be closely coordinated to the scientific and technological ex-
perinents being performed on board the Soviet spacecraft and stations by
scientists of the socialist countries.

An analysis of the legal nature of the Interconnos Program indicates that
lntercosmos lacks such attributes of an intergovemmental organisation as
a special constituent enactsent. an international secretariat and a general
budget. for this reason. at the given stage. fro. the viewpoint of

32
M ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

international law. Interconnos cannot be viewed as an international. inter-
gOVernmental organization in the strict sense of this word. At the same
time. the presence of intergovernmental agreements on multilateral coopera-
tion and the existence of a precise international mechanism to carry out
thin cooperation make it possible to speak of Intercosmos as an incipient
international organization which in certain instances can enter into inter-
national dealings as a single whole, and in this quality can establish con-
tacts with other governmental and nongovernmental organizations.

2. The Joint Activities of States Under the Intercosmos Program in Light
of Certain Cannon Principles of International Space Lav

In the international agreements which reinforce the bases of modern space
law. it is a question primarily of two types of space activities by the
state: those carried out on a national basis and those within the inter-
national. intergovernmental organizations. Since Intercoomos is not an in-
ternational intergovernmental organization in the strict sense of this
word. the question arises are the principles and provisions of general in-

ternational space law applicable to the current activities of states under
the Intercoamos Program.

Article XIII of the Treaty on the Principles for the Activities of States
in the Research and Use of Space. Including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies states that the provisions of the treaty are to be applied to the
activities of states. regardless of whether or not such activity is carried
out by one member state of the treaty or Jointly by other states. includ-
ing within the international intergovernmental organizations."

The word "including" gives reason to feel that activities within the inter-
national. intergovernnental organizations are viewed merely as one of the
possibly forms of Joint activity provided for by the treaty and not as the
only form.

The validity of such an interpretation is affirmed by references to the
Joint activities of states in the area of the research and use of outer
space. as are found in other international. agreements on space law. Thus.
mention of Joint activities is found in Articles V and XXVII of the Conven-
tion Governing International Liability for Damage. Article V of this con-
vention mentions the solidary liability of participants of a "Joint launch."
regardless of whether or not this launch is ude within an international
organization or not. The Convention Governing the Registration of ObJects
Launched into Space approaches this question from an analogous position;

its Article II mentions "two or more launching states."

Joint work by states in the area of space research. when carried out on the
basis of bilateral and multilateral agreements. at present plays no less
an important role than the activities of the international space organiza-
tions. naturally such work should be regulated by the generally recognized
principles of international space law.

33
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

Cooperation along the states under the Intercoms Program represents one
type of Joint space activity provided for under _the current general aulti-
lateral and international space agreements. the space law principles and
procedures stipulated in these agree-eats apply to it.

Pro- this is follows, in particular, that each of the states participating
in the Intercosnos Progra- in the course or carrying it out any be involved
in legal relations with third states not involved in the program.

Such a situation nay arise, for emple, if an intercesIos satellite causes
harm to persons or property of a third state.

The 1967 Space 'h-eaty establish international liability or states for activi-
ties in outer space. regardless of whether or not such activities are car-
ried out by governmental bodies or nongovermental legal entities (Article
VI). The Treaty ascribed the nature of international legal liability to all
types of liability in the area of international space law, and under this

the principals are the states for, under certain conditions, the inter-
national intergovernmental organi nations .

Article VII of the Treaty regulates a certain type or liability for space
activities which arises in the event that damage is caused by the space ob-
Ject or their component parts. In this specific instance of legal relation;
ships when it is a question prinarily of laterial liability for the losses
caused, the liability also devolves on the state.

An important theoretical and practical conclusion stunning from these con-
siderations is that in international space law, the legal relationships or
liability can occur only between the principals of international law, re-
gardless of who is the party which has lost directly or is the party bound
to restore the losses—the state itself or its physical and legal entities.
The legal relationships in which physical or legal entities operate on one
or both sides are not regulated by international law and should be viewed
separately in accord with the provisions of donestic state and international

private law.

Although Article VI of the Treaty which deals with international liability
in the broad sense or this word specifically mentions only national ac-
tivities in space as well as the activities or international organizations.
Article XIII or the Treaty extended the provisions of the Treaty to all
types of Joint activities involved in the research and use of spue. In
practical terns this nesns that the states involved in the Intercoms
Program bear international liability so that the activities of the persons
and organisations empowered by then are carried out in strict accord with
the Space Treaty and the other provisions of international space law.

The questions of financial or material liability under space law have been
regulated in detail by the Convention Governing International Liability for
Dange Caused by Space ObJects. As in the Space Treaty, the Convention

3»

M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
V03 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

proceeds from the fundamental provision that the principals of legal rela-
tionnhips involving liability are states, an in individual instances, inter-
national intergovernmental organizations.

In accord with the Convention, the losses are defined as "the loss of life,
corporeal inJury or other impairment of health; either the damage or de-
struction of the property of the states or physical or legal entities or
the property of international intergovernmental organizations” (Article I).

In terms of the Intercosmos Program. of important significance are the
provisions of the Convention dealing with liability for Joint space activi-
ties.

Article V (Point 1) of the Convention establishes the principle of solidary
liability for any losses caused when two or more states carry out a launch
Jointly. The concept of solidary liability borrowed from civil law, in
terms of the situation examined by us, means that a state which has the
right to obtain compensation can at its own discretion demand complete re-
covory of the loss from any of the participants in the Joint launch indi-
vidually, from several of them or from all of them together.'2

in line with the provision on solidary liability for damage caused by a
Jointly launched space obJect. the question of what must be understood
(from the standpoint of liability) as a Joint launch of a space obJect
assumes important significance. Neither the Treaty nor the Convention says
anything on this question. however, the Convention links the legal rela-
tionship of liability with the concept of the "launching state" which is
defined as 1) a state which carries out or organizes the launching of a
space obJect; 2) a state whose territory or units are used for launching a
space obJect.‘3 in the understanding of the Convention, in the instances
of Joint activities, the launching state must be understood not only as the
international. intergovernmental organizations, but also the states carry-
lnc out such space activities outside the framework of international or-
uanizations. Thus, the satellites of the intercosmos series which have
carried equipment from several cooperating countries must be viewed as
Jointly launched ones. Also arguing in favor of such an interpretation is
the circumstance that specialists of the nations cooperating under the In-
tereosmos Program to one degree or another participate in all stages of the
work. including the prelaunch testing, the launching and control of the
satellites in flight.

However, certainly in contrast from an international organization where all
the members should bear solidary liability, similar liability in the event
of damage caused by a space obJect launched under the lntercosmos Program
should be borne not by all the states cooperating in this program. but only
those which were directly involved in the given specific launch, for example,
the manufacturing of all or a portion of the satellite equipment or by pro-
viding the carrier rocket. The broad interpretation of the concept of
"launching state" is shared by a number of specialists on international
space law.‘“

35

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In accord with the Convention. a state which has covered the loss has the
right to a claim for exoneration against the remaining participants in the
Joint launch (Article V. Point 2). The Convention also provides the right
or the participants in a Joint launch to conclude an agreement on allocat-
ing financial obligations among themselves and under which they would bear
solidary liability.

In keeping with the further development or the Intercosmos Program and the
increase in the number or space obJects being launched. obviously it would
be advisable to conclude a special agreement between the member states or
the program on the right or exoneration [redress] and the allocating or
financial obligations which might arise with the legal relationships of
solidary liability. Here it is essential to bear in mind that such an
agreeaent. according to the Convention. cannot involve the rights or a
state which has suffered losses to demand total compensation for the losses
from any or the lunching states or all the launching states which bear soli-
dary liability. This provision or international space law has a mandatory
character and cannot be abrogated by such an agreement.

Finally. it is essential to point out that the provisions or the Convention.
in accord with its Article VII. are not to be applied in the event of losses
caused to citizens or the launching state as well as to foreign citizens
when they participate in operations related to the space obJect which has
caused the damage. or it they have been invited by the launching state and
are in direct proximity of the area of the planned launch or recovery of
the obJect. This circumstance may also necessitate the concluding or a
special agreement between the participants of Joint space activities for
the purposes of regulating the guestions of liability for damage which can
be caused in similar instances. 5

The above examined problems of liability. of course, are far from exhausting
the range of legal relationships for the participants or the Intercosnos
Program with third states.

The states carrying out Joint activities will enter into legal relationships
of reliability primarily on the binding side. as the principals of the ob-
ligation to repay the damge caused.16 However. in accord with the current
procedures of international space law, it is also possible to imagine legal
relationships in which the participants of the Joint program act on the
authorized side having the right to demand from third states the execution
of certain actions or to refrain from such actions. Such legal relation-
ships can arise. in particular. over the violating of property rights for
space obJects or their component parts. as well as over the question of re-
turning space obJects which have landed on the territory under the Jurisdic-
tion or third states.

According to Article VIII of the Space Treaty, the right of ownership to
space obJects launched into outer space and their component parts remain
inviolate during the time they are in space. on a celestial body or upon
returning to earth.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OWICIM. USE ONLY

The owners or the scientific equipment carried an the satellites of the
Interconmon series are the states (or their legal entities) in which the
corresponding equipment has been developed and manufactured. Violations of
these rights by any third states as well as by their physical or legal er.-
titien can entail the occurrence of legal relationships in which the par-
ticipants of the Intercosmos Prograa are the entitled party.

Article V (Point 3) of the Agreement Concerning the Rescuing of Cosmonauts.

the Return of Cosmonauts and the Return or ObJects Launched into Outer Space
establishes the right of the "authorities which have carried out the launch"

to demand the return or the space obJects or their component parts which
have been discovered on the territory of other states or at any other place
not under the Jurisdiction of any state. This article gives the partici-
pants oi‘ the Intercosmos Program the right Jointly or individually to make
the corresponding demand to the third state or states.

This same article provides the right of a state which has incurred expenses
in meeting its obligations involved in the detection and return of a space
obJect or its component parts, to demand that these expenses be covered by
the "authorities which carried out the launch." In instances of a Joint
launch, the state which has repaid this expenditure obviously should have

the right of exoneration against its partners in the Joint activities. Such
questions should be regulated by a separate agreement.

In addition, a special understanding or agreement is required between the
states working Jointly on the Intercosmos Program on the questions of the
registration of their cosnon satellites. since space law links definite
legal consequences to the act of registration. Among such consequences,
according to Article VIII of the Space Treaty. is, in particular. the pro-
viding of Jurisdiction and control by the registering state over the space
obJect and over any crew of this obJect while they are in space. including
on a celestial body. -.

The Convention on the Recording of ObJects Launched in Space introduces a
new element in this rule. Article II of this Convention directly permits
the possibility of the concluding of agreements between the participants

in a Joint launch on the question or Jurisdiction and control over the
space obJect and any crew of it. without linking or. more accurately. with-
out compulsorily linking the act or registration to the carrying out of
Jurisdiction and control.

At the sane time. the Registration Convention introduces a compulsory
national registration or space obJects by entering them in the correspond-
ing register which is kept by the launching state as well as in the U]!
international registration.

In the event of a Joint launch. the states should determine which of them

is to enter the given space obJect in its national register (Article II.
Point 2). In the reading or the Convention. the multiple national

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”SB ONLY.

registration of space obJects is excluded. In practice up to now all the
satellites of the intercoamos series have been registered by the USSR.

Article XI of the Space Treaty envisages the desirability "to the maximum
possible and practically feasible degree” of informing the U" Secretary
General. the public and the international scientific conmunity of the nature.
course. places and results of activities in outer space. including the moon
and other celestial bodies. This article of the Treaty lays out definite
obligations on informing the world scientific community. and these have
been strictly obserVed by the participants of the Intercosmos Program. but
from this also stems the right of Intercosmos to be represented at the UN
Committee on the Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. COSPAR. the
International Astronautics Federation and at other international scientific
forums involved with the questions of the research and use of space and
having both an intergovernmental and nongovernmental nature.

Thus. the multilateral cooperation of the socialist countries in the Inter-
cosmos Program represents one of the types of Joint space activities among
states, and these activities are completely covered by the principles and
procedures of international space law.

In the process of carrying out the Intercosmos Program. legal relationships
can arise not only directly among the participants of the program. but also
between them and third states. The legal relationships with third states
or international organdzationsshould be regulated by the general principles
and provisions of international space law.

The absence of an intergovernmental organization in the traditional sense
of this word which would be concerned with implementing the Intercosmos
Program. is not an obstacle in the regulating of these relationships. Re-
gardless of whether the Joint space activities are carried out within the
intergovernmental organizations or outside of them. a whole series of legal
questions arising in the course of Joint activities may require special
agreements and understandings between the participants in these activities.

FOOTNOTES

1. For the Intercosmos Program,see: B. K. Petrov and M. G. Kroshkin.
"Space Physics and Cooperation Among the Scientists of the Socialist
Notions." VESTNIK AKRDEMII NAUK 8883. lo 5, 1972. pp 76-85; "Orbity
Sotrudnichestva" [Orbits of Cooperation]. edited by B. N. Petrov.
Moscow. Meshinostroyeniye. 1915; "Po Programme 'Interkosmos'" [Under
the Intercosmos Program], edited by G. N. ﬂarimanov, Moscow. Mashino-
stroyeniye. 1976.

2. PRAVDA. 2% November 1975 and 16 April 1967.

38

FOR OFFICIAL 082 ONLY
SI

10.
11.
12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the documents or the Intorcosnos Council under the USSR Academy of
Scienccn. nee: "Moterinly SOVoshchnniya Predstnviteley Sotsialis-
tichenkikh Stron no Voprosam o SotrudnichestVe v Izuchenii i Iopol'zovanii
Koenichoskogo Prostranetva v Hirnykh Tselyahh (lb-20 Noynbrya 1965 3..
g. Moskvs)" (Materials of the Conference of Representatives from the
Socialist Nations on the Questions of Cooperation in the Study and Use
or Space for Peaceful Purposes (lb-20 November 1965. Moacov)l. pp lhh-
lhs; "Moteriely Soveshchaniye Ekspcrtov--Predstaviteley Sotsialis-
ticheskikh Strnn po Isslcdovaniyu i Ispol'zovsniyu Kosmicheekogo
Prostrsnstve v ernykh Tselyahh (5-13 Aprelya 1967 g.. g. Moshva)"
[Mnterinls of a Conference of Experts from the Socialist Countries on
the Research and Use 0! Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes (5-13 April
1967. Moscow)]. pp 11-16.

For the text of the Regulation. see the hook: "Mnogostoronneye
Ekonomicheskoyc Sotrudnichesto Sotsialisticheskikh Oosudarstv (Dokunenty
an 1972-1975 53.)" [Multilateral Economic Cooperation Among the Social-
ist States (Documents for 1972-1975)]. Moscow. Yuridieheskaya Literature,
1976. pp 268-271. '

Ye. T. Usenko, "Dvadtest' Pyet' Let Mezhdunarodnoy Organizatsii Novogo
Tipn (Tezisy Dokledu na XVIII Yezhegodnom Sobranii Sovetskoy Assotsiatsii
Mezhdunarodnogo Provo)” [TVenty-Pive Years or a new Type of International
Organization (Report Abstracts at the 18th Annual Meeting of the Soviet

International Law Association)]. Moscow. 1975. PD ”-5.

For the Regulation Governing the Committee. see the book: "Nnogo-
storonneye Ekononicheskoye Sotrudnichestvo Sotsialisticheskikh
Conudnrstv," Moscow, Yuridicheshnyn Literctura. 1972. pp 151-155.

PRAVDA. 29 September 1976.

A. n. Dykov, "Neuchno-Tekhnicheskaya Integratsiya Sotsialisticheskikh
Stran" [Scientific and Technical Integration of the Socialist Nations],
Moscow. Hezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya, 1975, pp 8-16.

"Kempleksnaya Programme Dal'neyshego Uglubleniya i Sovershenstvovaniya
Sotrudnichestva i Rasvitiys Sotsialisticheskoy Ekonomicheskoy Integratsii
Strnn--Ch1enov SEV" [nonprehensive Program for the Further Deepening

and Improvement of Cooperation and the Development or Socialist Economic
Integration Among the OSHA nations]. Moscov. Politizdat. 1971. Section

1. Points 2 and 6.

PRAVDA. 1h July 1976. The agreement came into force on 25 March 1977.
PRAVDA. 17 July and 15 September 1976.

For the concept of solidary liability. see: L. A. hunts. ”Hezhdunarodnoye
Chastnoye Pravo," Moscov. Gosyurizdat. 1963. p 187.

39
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
13.

1h.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

This definition has been borrowed by the Convention from Article VII
of the Space 'i‘reaty.

See. for example: M. Marcoi‘i‘. "Trait! de Droit International Public
de l'Espace.” Pribourgutieneva-oi’arisuliev York.. PA. Univ. Pribourg.
Suisse. 1973. p 250.

On the legal relationships or liability under international space lav.
see: A. A. hubanov and P. I. Lukin. ”Space Activities and the Liability
of States.” "Tendentsii Razvitiya Kouichoshogo Prava" [Development
Trends of Space Lav], Moscow. iiauka. 1911. pp 188-2102; 0. P. Zhukov,
”Liability for Danage Caused by Space Objects." "Mezhdunarodnoye
Kosnicheskoye Provo" [International Space Lav], Moscow. Heshdunarodnyye
Otnosheniya. 1971.. pp 159-1963; 0. r. Zhukov. "The Problea or Liability
for Danae in Space Lav." SOVEI'SKOYE OOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, No 6. 1965;
Yu. M. Rybakov, ”Legal Regulation of Liability for Damage Related to
Space Activities of States." PRAVOVEJmiIYE. No l, 1961. p 115-121;

Yu. M. Koloaov. ”Otvetstvennost' v Hezhdunarodnoa Prave" Liability in
international Lav]. Moscow, Yuridicheskaya Literatura, 1975; A. A.
Rubanov. ”Mezhdunarodnaya Koanieheako-Pravovaya Inushchestvsnnaya
Otvetatvennoat'" [International Space lav Material Liability], Moacov,

llauka. 197?; J. ﬂaJski. ”Odpoviedzialnosz niedsynarodova za azkodv
vyrzadzone przez obiekty koanicsne," Rarsav, 19110.

The reverse case is possible it damage were to be caused to a space
object launched under the Intercosnos Program.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. U88 ONLY

cm 3: BIIATERAL COOPEMTIVE PROORMB OF THE USSR HIT“ arm 0001111118

Agreementn with the United 8tetes

The state end prospects of international cooperetion in spece developeent
to s significant degree depend upon the developaent of ties in this eree
between the USSR end the United Stetes. Although the first contecte be-
tween Soviet end Anericen scientists were estsbliehed et the outset of the
specs ege. et thst time they cue down chiefly to the exchenge of obteined
scientific results st verious internetionel conferences end meetings.

The first bileterel specs egreelnent between the USSR end the United Btetee
wee concluded in the tors: of en interdepertnentel egreeeent of the 0883
Acsdeny of Sciences end the Netionel Aeroneutics end Specs Adsinietretion
(NASA) on 8 June 1962. Three yeers leter. on 8 October 1965. this wee
suppleeented by en egreenent between the suns orgenisetione on the prepers-
tion end publicetion or e Joint work on epece bioloy end medicine.

In eccord with these egreenente. in the siddle of the 1960‘s. Soviet end
Aecricen scientists end epecieliete conducted certein Joint projects.
Since l96|o e direct commicetione chennel hes opereted between the world
noteomlogicel centers estebliehed in Moscow end Heshington. Over this
chennel. eround-the-olock intonetion is trenenitted on the etete of the
etnosphere on our plenet'. this infomtion is used in the operetionel
westher service of e nunber or netione. Moreover Soviet-Mericen experi-
ments hsve been cerried out to eeteblieh comnnicetione in epece using the
Echo-2 peseive conunicetions eetellite. end there hes been en eschenge of
results of neeeurelents for the purpose of drewing up nepe of the eerth'e
negnetic field. Work hes been eterted on writing e Joint work "Oenovy
Kosnicheiikoy Biologii i Hediteiny" [Principles of Specs Biology end
Medicine .

As e whole. cooperetion durim these yesrs wee extremely linited, end did
not correspond to the sceles of the Soviet end Anericen netionel progress
or to the role or these netione in the study end develop-eat of specs.
A shift towerd the develomnt end deepening of Soviet-Asericen coopers-
tion we: noted in 1970-1971. During these yeere there wee e series of

hi
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
ION OFPICIAL USE ONLY

meetings and talks by scientists and technical specialists of both countries.
and at them they discussed the opportunities of cooperation in the area of
developing Joint rendezvous and docking devices for spacecraft and stations.
as well as in a broader area of scientific space research. Of particular
significance were the talks between the president of the USSR Academy of
Sciences Academician M. V. Keidysh and the temporary NASA director. Dr J. Low
in January 1911; these ended with the approval of the "Final Document on the
Results of Discussing the Questions of Cooperation Between the USSR Academy
of Sciences and NASA."

These meetings and talks prepared the grounds for the conclusion of an Agree-
ment Between the USSR and United States on Collaboration in the Research
and Use of Space for Peaceful Purposes during the visit of the 0.8. presi-

dent to Moscow. It was signed on 2h May 1972 by A. N. Rbsygin. chairman
of the uses Council of Ministers. and the 0.3. President a. mom?

The agreement concluded for a period of 5 years with the possibility of sub-
sequent renewal envisaged the development of cooperation between the two
countries in three basic areas:

1) Assistance in carrying out the understanding between the USSR Acadeay
of Sciences and NASA stated in the "Final Document" of 21 January 1911 on
the coordinating or Joint execution of experiments. as well as the exchange
of information in a number of areas of space research;

2) The carrying out of work to develop Joint equipment for the rendezvous
and docking of Soviet and American manned spacecraft and stations. includ-
ing the first Joint experimental flight of ships of the Soyuz and Apollo
type for testing out such systems;

3) Aiding international efforts and cooperation between the two parties
in solving international legal problems related to the research and use of
space for peaceful purposes in the name of strengthening law and order in
space and further developing international space law.

The ”Final Document on the Results of Discussins Questions of Cooperation
Between the USSR Academy of Sciences and NASA" of 21 January 1971. as men-
tioned in the Agreement. provides collaboration in the area of research on
near space, the moon and planets. as well as in the area of the problems
of space seteorology. the studying of the natural environment from space.
as well as space biology and medicine.

The understanding between the USSR Academy of Sciences and lASA provides
for the coordination of research on these subJects and problems. an ex-
change of obtained scientific information. and in certain instances the
conducting of Joint experiments. A number of work groups has been set up
for elaborating and carrying out the corresponding cooperation programs.

h?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

let us briefly take up the content of the work which is being done under the
Soviet-American agreement.

The USSR Academy of Sciences and NASA have exchanged samples of lunar earth
returned by both countries from various areas of the lunar surface. Spe-
cialists concerned with studying the soon have aade available to each other
catelogs of maps and photographs of the noon. and have coordinated the basic
principles for compiling such naps in the future.

A whole series of Joint conferences. seminars and working seetings have
been held by Soviet and American scientists on the questions of studying
the moon and planets of the solar system. as well as studying the magneto-
sphere of the earth and other questions.

There is a weekly exchange of operational data from the rocket weather
sounding from the USSR and American stations. and this makes it possible

to obtain a comparatiVe map of the meteorological situation in the eastern
and western hemispheres.

The work group studying the natural environment has carried out a number

of coordinated observations using the data of ground. aircraft and satellite
equipment. This work is carried out within five sections: geology and
geomorphology. vegetation. soil and land utilization; water. snow and
glaciology; microwave technology; oceanology.

Specialists in the area of space biology and medicine are Jointly examin-
ing the materials of the biomedical research carried out during the space
flights. and they are working out coordinated recommendations on the pro-
cedures for pre- and post-flight examination of the cosmonauts. The pub-
lishing of the Joint three-volume work "Osnovy Kosmdcheskoy Biologii i

Meditsiny” has been completed. American scientists have taken an active
part in the experiments on the Soviet Kosmos-182 biological satellite.

For a number of years, the work of developing Joint rendezvous and docking
equipment for the Soviet and American manned spacecraft and stations has
held a central place in Soviet and 0.8. collaboration in space. In terms
of its complexity and scale, this was the largest proJect ever carried out
on the basis of bilateral cooperation of states in developing space. Both
countries set the task of designing. creating and testing under real flight
conditions new technical devices needed for the interaction of spacecraft
and stations from different countries.

The goal of this work was dictated by a desire to ensure the safest con-
ditions for manned space flights and to create a technical possibility of
aiding one another in the event of an emergency situation. The develop-
ment of compatible docking systems also Opened the way to conducting
future Joint scientific research with the orbiting of cosmonauts from
various countries.

’43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The increase in the range of space flights and the duration man stayed in
space could not help but be accompanied by concern for raising the safety
of manned flights. In precisely the same way that sailors over the cen-
turies have sacredly carried out the established custom of proViding any
possible aid to a ship in distress. the humane rules of mutual help have
also been born in space navigation.

In the past mutual aid in space was impossible since the systems ensuring
the rendezvous and docking of spacecraft launched by the USSR and United
States were incompatible. Although both sides possessed such systems and
repeatedly used them during space flights. they were unsuitable for con-
ducting Joint operations in space.

0n the basis of common principles and coordinated demands. specialists from
the USSR and United States carried out the work of designing and develOping
spacecraft rendezvous systems and docking devices. testing them initially
on the ground and later. in July 1975. under the conditions of the Joint
experimental flight of a Soviet spacecraft of the Soyuz type and an American
craft of the Apollo type with the interchanging of cosmonauts.

The implementation of the plan involved the solution to a whole series of
involved technical. organizational and other problems. Close interaction
was required among the designers. the cosmonauts, the control and instru-
mentation facilities and the mission control centers. The sides Jointly
worked out over 1.500 technical documents. Permanent mixed work groups
were formed for the basic areas of work. and their meetings alternated
between the USSR and United States.3

From the example of the Soyuz-Apollo ProJect it is possible to trace how
closely law and technology are intertwined in the area of international col-
laboration in space research.

The 1967 Space Treaty provides the duty of cosmonauts from one state to

give any possible aid to cosmonauts of other states in carrying out their
activities in space (Article V). In order that this provision of the Treaty
not remain a dead letter, the states launching spacecraft should equip them
with devices making it possible when necessary to execute a rendezvous and
docking of spacecraft from various countries. Precisely this is the aim of
the Soviet-American understanding stated in Article 3 of the Agreement of
21. w 1912.

In addition to this. the practical realization of this program posed new
legal questions which were settled on the level of the authorized depart-
ments. Among such questions were: the interaction of the control centers
during the flight. the subordination of the cosmonauts and astronauts in
moving into a spacecraft of another nation. the procedure for registering
the ships. informing the world community on the course of preparations for
and execution of a Joint flight. patent rights to the results of the
scientific experiments. and so forth.

bk

'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Law and technology. thus. in carrying out the Soyuz-oApollo ProJect inter-
acted closely.

A reflection of the relationship of scientific-technical and legal questions
in the area of cooperation is the fact that the scientific and technical
agreement between the USSR and United States being examined here contains

an article which states: "The parties will aid international efforts aimed
at solving international legal problems or the research and use of space

for peaceful purposes for the sake of strengthening law and order in space
and for the further deVelopaent or international space law. and they will
cooperate among themselVes in this area" (Article h).

Here a dual obligation or the parties is found: 1) Jointly with other
states to assist in solving the international legal problems or the re-

search and use of space. including the further development of international
space law; 2) cooperation amongst themselves in solving these problems.

Indicative is the fact that the designated obligation has been assumed by
states which not only hold a leading position in space research and inter-

national cooperation in this area. but also embody opposite social systems.

In the modern age. only those provisions or international law which are
recognized and observed by a broad range of states can be considered among
the generally recognized. 1n the law-making process in the area of space
law. as one or the areas of international public law. a particular role
and responsibility are placed on the USSR and United States. The maintain-
ing of international law and order in space depends largely upon them.‘

The practical realization of the assumed obligations in the area of solving
international legal problems related to the research and use of outer space
obviously should occur by the holding of bilateral consultations as well as
active search for mutually acceptable solutions in examining the corres-

ponding questions at international forums. and above all in the various UN
bodies.

Article h or the Agreement should play an important role in the progressive

development of international space law and in strengthening space law and
order.

The Interstate Agreement Between the USSR and United States on Cooperation
in the Area of Space. in containing both an understanding on a specific
compatible plan as well as broader and more extended obligations. was pos-
sible only under the conditions or an overall improvement in the political
relations between the two countries. The broadening of contacts and cooper-
ation between the Soviet and American scientific and production organiza-
tions. the carrying out of Joint projects. and cooperation in the legisla-
tive sphere. in turn. should contribute to the further development of re-
lations or mutual trust and a general lessening of international tension.

ks
ros ontcm. use 0qu
FOR OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

However the forces which are working actively in the opposite direction in
American political life have not overlooked the Space Agreement. In l91h,
an extensive historical sociological study entitled "Soviet Cooperation in
Space" appeared in the United States.5 Ito authoro were the director of
the Hashington Department of the Center for Advanced International Studies
at the University of Miami,D. harvey.and a coworker from thin center. L.
Ciecoritti. while the foreword to it was written by the former 0.8. Ambas-
sador to the USSR. P. Kohler.

The book was published during the period of the most intense preparations
for the joint flight under the Soyuz-~Apollo Project, active exchanges of
specialists and scientific—technical information on this project. as well
as frequent meetings between the technical directors of the project and
the leaders of NASA and the USSR Academy of Sciences.

in this situation the fonner 0.8. Ambassador to the USSR stated in the press
that the USSR would endeaVor to extract unilateral benefits from space co-
operation. and that the main element of the Soyuz-Apollo Project (the de-
Velopment of joint rendezvous and docking devices for spacecraft and stations)
was "that area where the 083R was obviously having particular technical dif-
ficulties." and that as a whole space cooperation was essential for the

USSR to use it as a precedent for access to American technology.6

Such an interpretation of the Soviet-American Agreement in the space area
has nothing in common with the tasks of improving relations between the two

states. It is aimed at undermining these relations and at distorting the
essence of the achieved understanding. The absurdity of the assertions by
F. Kohler on any particular Soviet interest in gaining access to American
docking devices becomes clear if one considers that both sides rejected as
unsuitable the devices which previously existed in both nations for joint
space operations by ships of different countries. and they set as their
basic mission the joint development and testing of a completely new dock-
ing device under real flight conditions. The reciprocal interest in this
question was not disputed by any of the specialists and was repeatedly af-
firmed in the official statements of the RASA representatives.

The successful implementation of the Soyuz-oApollo Project was of historical
significance as a symbol of the improvement in Soviet-American relations on
the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence. The flight of the
Soyuz and Apollo spacecraft had a major political impact.

In the course of carrying out the project. complicated problems were solved
such as the development of compatible rendezvous and docking equipment
(this would be of great significance for future manned space flights). the
transfer of cosmonauts from ship to ship with a different atmosphere. the
interaction of the ship locating and rendezvous systems. the control of the
space flight from two centers located several thousand kilometers apart.

b6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Durlme the flight. a whole series of Joint and autonomous experiments was
run in the area of astrophysics. biology and materials engineering. Scien-
tists and engineers. the ship crews and specialists form the control centers
brilliantly carried out their missions and completely fulfilled the planned
program for preparing and carrying out the flight. 0f invaluable signifi-
cance was the experience acquired in having large collectives of special-
ists from different nations work together for the further development of
international scientific and technical cooperation. Based on this experi-
ence. the USSR Academy of Sciences and NASA are presently studying the pos-
sibility of carrying out a new large-scale Joint project for the study of
space for peaceful purposes.0

The Agreement with France. France was the first nation in the capitalist
world with which the USSR signed an intergovernmental agreement on coopera-
tion in the research and development of space. Important prerequisites
existed for this: the established relations of trust and agreement between

the two countries and the presence in France of a large national space pro-
gram.

In possessing its own space centers. a developed aerospace industry. mis-
siles, a space center in Guiana and a network of satellite tracking stations.
France held third place in the world in terms of the scope of space research.
it the same time it was carrying out an extensive program of international
cooperation on both a multilateral and bilateral basis.

The agreement between the USSR and France on cooperation in the area of
the study and development of space for peaceful purposes was signed by the
ministers of foreign affairs of both states on 30 June 1966 during a visit
of Gen de Gaulle to the USSR.9

The preamble of the agreement emphasized the importance of the study and
development of space for peaceml purposes and pointed out that cooperation
between the USSR and France in this area conforms to the spirit of tradi-
tional friendship between the Soviet and French peoples, and would contrib-
ute to a further broadening of cooperation between the two nations and to
the establishing of Mopean scientific and technical cooperation.

The governments of both states agreed on the preparations for and imple-
menting of a bilateral cooperative program and on the providing of support
and help to the concerned organisations of both countries for these pur-
poses.

The sgreement defined the basic areas of cooperation; these were: the study
of space. including the launching of a French satellite by the USSR; space
meteorology using the most modern scientific equipment; the study of space
comunications via earth satellites; the exchange of scientific intonation.
trainees. scientific delegations and the organizing of conferences and
symposiums. By mutual understanding the cooperation would be extended into
other areas as well. Space bioloy and medicine became one such new area

of cooperation.

’07

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A legal mechanism was also established which would ensure the development
and fulfillment of the cooperative program. It included Joint work groups
from the representatives of scientific and technical organizations. and
these would be given the right to sign working protocols which determined
the content and conditions of cooperation. Scientific information obtained
in carrying out the Joint experiments should be accessible to both sides
and should be turned over at acceptable times. The right of first publica-
tion belonged to the authors of the experiment.

The agreement was concluded for a period of 10 years and would remain in
effect until denounced by one of the sides. Amendments and supplements
could be made to it with the reciprocal agreement of the sides.

The viability of this agreement has been affirmed by the successful course
of its fulfillment, and by the significant scientific results obtained by
the Soviet and French scientists in conducting the Joint experiments.

The organizing of the practical work related to implementing the agreement
was entrusted to the Intercosmos Council and to the National Space Research
Center of France (CHI). For each of the mentioned areas of cooperation,
Joint work groups were set up by them with scientists and specialists from
both nations. The sessions of the work groups were to be held annually,
alternating between the USSR and France. The specific program of Joint
work, the reciprocal obligations of the sides as well as the times and
methods of carrying out the work were to be established in the working proto-
cols. The most important questions were to be incorporated in the general
protocol which would be signed by the intercosmos and ONES leaders.

In those instances when the obligations of the parties had a broader and
more extended nature, special interdepartmental agreements could be con-
cluded for developing the general agreement. Sometimes they would be re-
inforced by an exchange of notes between the governments. On such grounds,
on 12 October 1969, intercosmos and the cars signed a special Soviet-French
protocol on organizing a Joint study of photographic observations of space
obJects on the Kerguelen Islands (a French possession in the Indian Ocean).
On 12 September 1972. the weather services- of both countries together with
intercosmos and the ONES signed an agreement to organize the launching of
Soviet and French meteorological rockets on these same islands for the pur-
pose of a Joint study of the upper layers of the atmosphere along a tarpo-
thetical meridian of 60-70° E. long.

On 12 January 1973, a protocol was signed for conducting Joint scientific
experiments in 197lo-1915 under the Araks ProJect on the Kerguelen Islands
and in Arkhangel'skaya Oblast.

The mentioned agreements define the rights and duties of the sides not only
on the essence of the Jointly conducted research, but also on the questions
of utilizing the obtained scientific results. the conditions for the so-
Journ of personnel and the locating of property on the territory of the
other country, and the liability for damage caused to personnel or property.

he
ma OFFICIAL use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. the Mrecment on organizing the launching of weather rockets on the
Keruuelen islands established that Soviet and French personnel during the
stay on the Kernuelcn Ininndu was to be under the laws and rules in effect
thorn. and was to IK.‘ under the authority of the district chici‘ (Article 10).
lauduzihio wan to unnumv-vwnuxnuiihility to repay losses which micht be canned
to Its citizens and property. with the exception of flagrant violations or
intentional actions and oversights the blame for which lay on the other party
(Article ll).

Important practical results were obtained in all areas of cooperation as
outlined by the 1966 Intergovernmental Agreement.

The French scientific devices carried on the Soviet Mars and Vencrs stations
and on the Pronnoz and Oreol satellites, studied interplanetary and near

space. Laser scanning of the moon was carried out using French reflectors
mounted on moon vehicles. Soviet carrier rockets orbited two French MAC

satellites designed for conducting technological research. as well as the
astronomical Snag-3 satellite.

About 50 Soviet weather rockets with Soviet and French scientific equipment
were launched on "ayes Inland (Zemlya Frantsa-Iosifa) for the purposes of
conducting research in the area of space meteorology and aeronomy. Joint
rocket experiments were also conducted in other points of the world.

The scientific experiments. the choice of which is determined by the mutual
interest of both sides. are carried out not only with Soviet space devices
but also on French geophysical rockets and high-altitude balloons. Thus.
in 1975. Soviet and French scientists conducted a maJor Joint experiment

in magnetically matched regions of the world under the name of Araks. This
experiment which opened the path to an active influence of man on the
processes occurring in the earth's magnetosphere was carried out using
French rockets and electron guns developed in the USSR.'°

The work of Soviet and French specialists in the space communications area

has made it possible to ensure high-quality experimental TV program broad-
casts .

"n 10 October l97h. on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the estab-
lishing of diplomatic relations between the USSR and France. a Soviet-
French conference was held in Kiev. and at this the basic scientific re-
sults were reported obtained in the course of the cooperation between the
two countries in the area of the research and use of space.

During the Soviet-French summit meetings, both sides repeatedly expressed
their satisfaction with the course of carrying out the agreement and their
intention to deepen the mutually advantageous cooperation.‘3

The Agreement with India. The first contact between Soviet and Indian spe-
cialists on the questions of cooperation in space research were established

I:9
ros onrcuu. use ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

at the outset of the 1960's on the occasion of the decision of the Indian
government to deve10p an international testing range on its territory at
Thumbs for the rocket sounding of the atmosphere. The location of this
testing range on the geomagnetic equator running an equal distance between
the magnetic poles of the earth made it possible to conduct important scien-
tific experiments at it to study the atmosphere and magnetosphere of the
earth.

Several nations were involved in organizing the range and conducting scien-
tific research at it. On 13 January 1963:. an agreement was signed between
the Main Administration of the USSR iiydrometeorological Service and the
Atomic Shara Department of the Indian Government in accord with which the
Soviet Union would provide India a helicopter. an electronic computer. and
several devices for testing and inspecting equipment for equipping this
range. Both organizations agreed to carry out at the range a scientific
research program of mutual interest. and that the final results of all the
experiments would be made available to the world scientific conunity.

In developing this agreement. on 116 May 1910. the same organizations signed
an agreement on the systematic rocket sounding of the atmosphere from the
Thumbs range using Soviet meteorological rockets. This work is not only

of scientific but also great practical significance. Initially both Soviet
and Indian specialists participated in carrying out the Joint experiments
and in the launching of the rockets. At present, after corresponding train-
ing. the Soviet coworkers of the range launch these rockets independently.
The results of the Joint rocket experiments have been made available to

the world geophysical data centers.

Although the first rocket was launched from the Thumbs range in 1963. the
official opening of the range was after the N11 completion of construc-
tion in February 1968. At present the range has become a maJor inter-
national research and traini center. In accord with the Resolution of
the UN General Assembly 2130?)!” of 21 December 1965, the Thumbs range is
under the aegis of the United Nations.

The next important step along the path of deepening and developing Soviet-
Indian cooperation in the study of space was taken on 10 May 1972. when
the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Indian Space Research Organization of
the Indian Government signed an agreement on the launching of an Indian
satellite on a Soviet carrier missile."

This agreement provided for the launching of a scientific satellite designed
and manufactured in India from Soviet territory on a Soviet carrier mis-
sile. The specific technical questions related to carrying out the project
were to be settled by a Joint working group of specialists from both
countries.

The Soviet side provided gratis a carrier missile and launching equipment
for carrying out the Joint project. and also provided the necessary consul-
tative and technological aid.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The successful launching of the first Indian satellite was held on 19 April
1975. In the course of the work involved in the development. launching and
control of this satellite. Indian scientists and specialists acquired
skills in the deuigning and manufacturing of complex space devices. as
well as controlling them during a flight.

In 1976. the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Indian Space Research Organi-
zation of the Indian Government signed an agreement for launching a new
Indian satellite on a Soviet carrier missile in 1978; this satellite was
designed for conducting experiments to observe the earth's surface from
space.

The Declaration on the Further Development of Friendship and Cooperation
Between the USSR and India notes that the launching of the first Indian
satellite with a Soviet missile from Soviet territory and the concluding of
a new agreement on the launching of a second Indian satellite opened up a
new chapter in scientific and technical cooperation between the two coun-
tries.

The Intergovernmental Agreement on the Further Development of Economic and
Trade Cooperation Between the USSR and India signed on 29 November 1973
also emphasizes the great significance which the sides give to scientific
and technical cooperation. including in space research. The agreement con-
tains the obligation of the sides to mrther develop and strengthen this
cooperation. ‘5

International Agremeents on Setting Up Satellite Tracking Stations. By
the beginning of 1977. the USSR had bilateral agreements on setting up
satellite tracking stations'with Egypt. Bulgaria. Bolivia. Rungary.
Equatorial Guinea. India. Cuba. Mali, Mongolia. Poland. Somalia, Romania.
the Sudan. France. the Republic of Chad. the CSSR. Ecuador and Japan.

Virtually all these agreements were concluded on an interdepartmental level.
On the Soviet side. as a rule, they were signed by the USSR Acadew of
Sciences. and for the other partners. on behalf of the acadew of sciences
or the ministries (comittees) for science and technology. The international
legal nature of these agreements. aside fras all else. is affirmed by the
circumstance that all of them have been concluded with the knowledge and
agreement of the governments of the corresponding countries. The talks on
concluding the agreements in a number of instances were conducted through
diplomatic channels. Those interdepartmental agreements which were re-
inforced by an exchange of diplomatic notes move to an intergovernmental
level.

The concern of the designated agreements is the establishing and operating
of Joint satellite tracking stations on the territory of the corresponding

nations. The technical equipping of these stations is carried out by the
USSR.

51
FOR OYFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Satellite observations using optical methods (visual. photographic. photo-
metric and laser) make it possible to establish geodetic relationships at
great distances. to provide an ephemeris surVey needed for predicting the
lovement of satellites and controlling the work of their scientific equip-

sent. and to study the density of the earth's atmosphere and the irregu-
larity of the earth's gravitational field. The conducting of such research
is only possible with the simultaneous and coordinated work at various
points of the earth. and requires the setting up of a worldwide network of
tracking stations.

As can be seen from the gIVen lists of nations with which agreements have
been concluded. Joint stations have been organized on the territory of a
number of capitalist. socialist and developing nations.

The Joint work of scientists from the socialist countries on optical satel-
lite observations began in 1957. This work formed the basis for further
cooperation among the socialist countries in the study and development of
space. Initially such work was based not on official agreements. but rather
on a direct understanding between scientific collectives and groups of sci-

entists in different nations.

In November 1962. the first coordinating meeting of the Commission on multi-
lateral cooperation between the academies of sciences of the socialist coun-
tries was held in Leningrad on the given problem. Since then coordinating
conferences have been held annually. They rotate among the nations par-
ticipating in the cooperation. Since 1969. this work which is under the
leadership of the Astronomical Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences in
the USSR. has become an organic part of the Intercosmos Program.l7

0n the basis of bilateral agreements concluded in 1967-1910 by the academies
of sciences of the socialist countries with the USSR Academy of Science. the
USSR has supplied the Joint stations set up in these countries with the sci-
entific equipment. and the equipment is completely operated by local per-
sonnel.

Among the capitalist countries. cooperation in this area has developed with
the greatest results with France. For a number of years Soviet-French

satellite tracking stations have been operating on Kerguelen Island and in
French Guiana. Upon the initiative of scientists from both nations. in
recent years msJor international programs have been carried out in the area
of satellite geodesy (IsaJecs. Arctic-Antarctic. and others). Developing
out of Soviet-French cooperation. these programs subsequently were shifted
under the aegis of the COSPAR international nongovernmental organization.
and many countries have participated in them. For example. under the
isaJecs program, simultaneous observations have been carried out at 53
stations located in various parts of the world.

The agreement between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Indian Space
Research Organization of 20 November 1915 can also serve as an example of
a bilateral agreement with the developing nations.

52
303 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The agreement concluded for a period of 5 years with the possibility of an
automatic extension provides for the organizing of a permanent station for
photographic observations of space obJects in India.

'rhe station has been set up as a Joint scientific institution of the two
countries. and it carries out systematic photographic observations of space
obJects over an extended period of time. The observations at the station
are made Jointly by Soviet and Indian specialists under coordinated programs.
With the understanding of the sides, coworkers from scientific institutions
of other nations may be penmitted to conduct observations. The results of
the observations made at the station are used by the Soviet and Indian
scientific organizations on equal grounds. The agreement provides the obli-
gation of the USSR Academy of Sciences to supply the station with a com-
plete set of scientific equipment. to ensure its regular technical mainten-
ance. to send specialists for working at the station along with Indian
scientists. and so forth. The agreement regulates in detail the financial
and other obligations of the parties in building and operating the station.

At present. the station in India. aside from the standard Soviet AFU-TS
device for photographic observations is equipped with a laser range finder.
an unique instrument developed Jointly by the scientific organisations of
a number of the socialist countries. This device makes it possible to
measure distances to the satellites with an accuracy of up to l m.

The legal status of the other nations located in the developing countries is
the same as the one Just examined. In organizing Joint stations on the ter-
ritory of these countries. the USSR is carrying out not only the tasks posed
by its own national space research program. but also provides substantial
aid to the designated countries in training their own national personnel.
and in involving states in the research and use of space where the economic
and scientific-technical development level of these states does not allow
them as yet to conduct independent work in space.

As has been noted by specialists. satellite geodesy makes it possible to
link islands with continents. to unite the geodetic grids of the contin-
ents across seas and oceans. and to study the earth as a single whole.
Because of satellites. the external appearance of the earth has now been
studied lO-ZO-fold better than before 1951."

The bilateral agreements are the most widely found form of international
cooperation in the study and use of space. These are widely used by many
countries in preparing and carrying out international space programs. The
specific content of the bilateral space agreements concluded by the USSR
is extremely diverse. In particular. on the basis of such agreements. the
largest Joint space programs are being carried out with the United States,
France and India. The scale and political significance of these programs
can be seen from the fact that agreements on scientific and technical co-
operation in the development of space have been concluded with the desig-
nated countries on an interstate and intergovernmental level.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The lost nu-eroun group of bilateral agreeaents. mainly interdepartaental
ones. has been concluded by the USSR for the purpose of setting up a net-
work of satellite tracking stations on foreign territories.

1.

2.

Pm

A. A. Blagonravov. ”Soviet and 0.8. Cooperation in Space Research."
V-TNIK AKADENII MUK 88811. No 10. 19610. pp 82-8“. For the text of the

first agreement. see: ”United States International Space Progress.
Staff Report Prepared for the Omittee on Aeronautical and Space

Sciences." United States Senate. 30 July 1965.

VEDGDSTI VmIGIOVROOO SOVBI'A 888R, No 23. 1972. p 19h. For the dis-
cussion of this agree-ant in the 0.8. Congress. see: ”U.8.-USSR Co-
operative Agreeaentn. Report of the Suhcouasittee on International
Cooperation in Science and Space.” August 1972. Hashington. U.8. Govern-
aent Printing Office. 1972.

For more detail on the project, see: "'Soyuz' i 'Apollon'" [Soyuz and
Apollo], edited by K. D. Bushuyev. Moscow. Politiadat. 1976.

On the role of the USSR and United States in creating the standards of
international law. see: 6. I. Tunkin, "Teoriya Hezhdunarodnogo Prawn,”
Moscow, Meshdunarodnyye Otnosheniya. 1970, pp 310-311.

D. L. harwey and L. C. Ciccoritti, "U.8.-Soviet Cooperation in Space,"
Center for Advanced International Studies. University of Mia-i, 1971:.

me. . pp mn-mm.

PRAXDA. 21 March 1973; 9 January 19710, 23 March 19?”, 13, 21 Septenber
197 0 etc.

with the lapsing of the Agreement of 2': May 1972. a new Agreth be-
tween the USSR and United States on Cooperation in the Research and
Use of Space for Peaceful Purposes was signed in Geneva on 18 May 1977
and came into force on 210 May 1971 (for the text of the Agree-ant, see:
IZVESTIYA. 20 May 1971). A majority of the articles of the new Agree-
ment were maintained in their for-er wording and with the previous
nuabering. with the exception of Article 3. where instead of the con-
cluded Soyuz--Apollo ProJect. it was a question of a mrther develop-
ment of cooperation in the area of manned space flights in accord with
the agree-lent concluded for these purposes on 11 Hay 1971 by the USSR
Academy of Sciences and NASA.

mvnn. 1 July 1966.

5h

’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.
11.

12.

.13.

1h.

15.
16.
17.

18.

'01! ONICIM. USE ONLY

PRIWDA. 5 February 1975.

For the experieentr conducted in accord vith the Soviet-french Agree-
ment. see: Yu. I. Oa1'perin and L. A. Vedeahin. "Soviet-French Coopera-
tion in Space Rcoearch." WIK WWII NAUK 888R, No 11. 1972. pp 8':-
92; ”Orbity Sotrudnicheetva," edited by B. N. Petrov. Moscow.
Maohinoetroyeniye. 1975; J. C. ilueeon, ”Cooperation franco-eoviétique
pour 1'etudo ccientii‘ique de l’eepace," LB COURRIER DU cm. ho 10.
1973. DP 29-32.

"Deayat' let Pranko-Sovetekogo Koemicheekogo Sotrudnicheetva” [Ten Years
or Franco-Soviet Space Cooperation]. Joint publication or Intercoaaoa
and cuss. Impriaerie du Sud. 'noulouee. 1976.

PRAVDA. 31 October 1971; 13 January 1973'. 8 December 1975; 18 October
1975-

For the text of the mutant see the Appendix to the book: V. 8.
Vereehchetin, ”halos. Sotrudnicheatvo. Provo." Moscow, lam. 197k,
pp 160-161.

PRAVDA, 1|. June 1976.

For the text or the agreement. see: PRAVDA. 1 December 1973.

A. c. Manevich and I. P. Slovokhotova, "Scientific Research Using
Satellite Observations." NABLYUDDHYA 18W]!!! SPUTNIKOV 8M1,
Sofia, no 1, 1961 (1968). pp 205-213.

A. s. Masevich and S. K. 'i'atevyan, "Soviet-French Cooperation in Space

Geodesy," in the book: "Desyat' Let Prmko-Sovetekogo Kocnicheakogo
Sotrudnicheetve," p 111.

55
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI ORIGIN. "8! ONLY

calm-n: '0: "SPACE IIITNRATION" Ill WK MOPS

At the beginning of the 1950's, the nations of Western Europe set out on a
policy of Joint space developsent. For this purpose two intergovernmental
organizations were set up: the European Space Research Organization (mo)
and the mropean Launcher Develop-ent Organizations (81.00). Later another
two Western Mpean associations arose on an intergovernmental level.
These were the atropean Comications Satellite Conference and the Euro-
pean Space Conference. In addition, the Western naropean industrial firms
which are interested in obtaining large orders paid for by the states, and
not wishing to fall behind their Aaerican competitors. have set up their
own Eurospace Association, as well as a nunber of industrial consortium.l

Within relatively short times. an infrastructure of national and inter-
national scientific and technical institutions was organized in Western
Btu-ope, and development and inpleaentation were started on a series of
Joint projects and programs, that is. everything which in political. tel-lin-

olog has been tensed "space Mops." however. as was rightly noted by the
well-known French writer on international affairs C. Colliard. ”the results

of mropean cooperation in the space area have been extrenely disappoint-
ing."2 Antagonistic contradictions inherent to imperialist integration
have been clearly manifested in the attempts to develop a uniform policy
among the Western European nations in the area of the research and use of
space.3 At the sane time, it must be pointed out that after 1913. with
the reaching of compromise agreements on a number of Joint programs. as
well as on organizational questions related to Western Mropean space co-
operation. a new stage was started in the pooling of efforts by the nations
of this region in space develowent.

The official birthday of ERO is considered to be 20 March 19610, when its
constituent conVention signed on 12 June 1962 went into force.“ The talks
on setting up no continued for several years. The most active role in

the course of the talks was played by Great Britain, France and West
Germany. The task posed here was to provide the national research groups

of the Western Mpean nations with the technical possibilities for launch-
ing the scientific instruments developed by then into space.

56
'03 omcuu. US! ONLY
!0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In drawing up the BSRO program, even before the official establishing of
the organization, the basic principal of its activities was defined. namely:
the development and manufacturing of scientific equipment for the satel-
liten, should. an a rule. be carried out by the institutions of the member
nations of the organisation and paid for from their national currencies.
The development and creation of the satellites themselves. their support
systems as well as the acquiring of carrier missiles were to be carried out
by the organization and under its direct control.

At the moment of its founding, ten states were ESRO members: Belgium.

Great Britain. the Netherlands, Denmark, Spain, Italy. France, Nest Germany.
Switzerland and Sweden. Austria. Ireland, and later on Canada, also parti-
cipated in its work as observers. Other nations could Join ESRO only with
the agreement of all its members.

ESRO set up an entire networh of scientific and technical institutions lo-
cated in the various European countries. The most important of them are:
the Center for Space Science and Technology in the Netherlands, the Control
and Space Data Processing Center in West Germany. the Space Research Insti-
tute in Italy. the Research Rocket Launching Range in Sweden, and the sys-
tem of satellite tracking stations which include four stations built in
Belgium, Alaska. Spitsbergen and in the Falkland Islands.

The largest of these institutions, the European Center for Space Science
and Technology, carries out the designing, development, assembly and test-
ing of the satellites and instrument compartments of research missiles,

and also conducts Joint research and development. Among the six eo-workers
of the center are citizens of five European nations.5

The mentioned ESRO institutions were located in the various Western European
nations in accord with a special resolution approved at a conference of
delegates convened in 1962 for signing the constituent documents of ESRO.6
The legal status of these institutions is defined by agreements concluded
between ESRO and the member states. The agreements regulate ’.3 status of
the corresponding institution and its personnel on the territ.;y of the
member state, including the questions of privileges and immunities, lia-
bility, the law to be applied, the procedure for resolving disputes, and

so forth.

ESRO has signed these agreements as a principal in international law.7
However, the activities of the organization on the territory of the member
states in a number of questions are subordinate to national law.0 Disputes
related to the application or interpretation of the agreements are examined
by international arbitration, the decisions of which are of binding force.

The superior directing body of ESRO responsible for carrying out its scien-
tific, administrative and financial activities is its council where each
member state has one vote. The council sessions are held at least twice a
year, as a rule, at the headquarters of the organization in Paris. The

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

council elects from among its members a bureau consisting of a chairman and
two vice chairmen for a term of one year with the right of reelection for

not more than two terms.

According to the constituent convention. the competence of the council in-
cludes: determining the policy of the organization on scientific-technical
and administrative questions; approving the programs and annual work plans;
determining the level of financing for the subsequent 3-year period at the
end of every 3 years. and the approval of the annual budget; the admitting
of new members. as well as the taking of other decisions related to the
activities of the organization (Article X, Point llo).

Decisions of the council involving admission of new members to the organi-
zation can onhr be taken unanimously. Decisions on financial and certain
other questions also require unanimity or a special maJority.

The council by a maJority of two-thirds of the votes appoints the director
general who carries out the superior executive functions and is the legal
representative of the organization. he also directs the work of all the
IRO institutions (Article XI).

The total number of EEO employees has exceeded 1,000 persons, including
around 200 persons working at the organization's secretariat in Paris.

The financial activities of the organization are regulated by the constitu-
ent convention (article XII), as well as by two special protocols approved
simultaneously with this convention. In 1961:4972, BRO expenditures were
not to exceed 306 million units of account (in 1962. this total was 306
million dollars). For comparison we might point out that the NASA budget

in 1966 exceeded the annual. mo budget by 1&0 times.

It was assisted that the money to be allocated to I30 for the first 8 years
of its activities would make it possible during this time to develop 10-12
satellites and 300 research rockets. Actually by the end of the designated
time, BSRO had launched 7 satellites and 171 rockets (125 rocket launches
were successful).9

The amounts of the contributions by the member nations were to be set on
the basis of national income under the stipulation that none of the 3880
members would be required to pay over 25 percent of the total amount of the
payments (Article XII of the Convention). Around 70 percent of the contri-
butions come from Great Britain, France and Vest Germany.

Since the end of 1966. ESRO has begun to experience financial difficulties.

men then it was clear that it would be impossible to carry out fully the
launches planned over the 8-year period of research rockets and "small"

satellites at the designated times and within the limits of the allocated
funds.

58
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI’ICMI. USE ONLY

A number of nations. particularly England. openly voiced dissatisfaction
with the uneven allocation of industrial orders between the individual
countries. Spain announced its withdrawal from the organization as of

1 January 1968. "for economic. technical and financial reasons." and re-
vised this decision only after its contribution was reduced by 90 percent.lo
In the second 3-year period of its existence (1967-1969). ESRO started with-
out a clearly defined program and a set budget. The situation was further
complicated after the delay and unsuccessful launch of the first ESRO satel-
lite in 1967. As an "extraordinary measure" for the purposes of keeping

the organization alive. the 1967-1968 budgets were set by the council on

a temporary basis and in violation of the rules set out by the constituent
documents.

In November 1968. a conference of Hestern European ministers in Bonn suc-
ceeded in achieving compromise solutions on a number of the disputed ques-
tions related to "space Europe” including on the question of a limit of
expenses for BSRO in 1969-1971. At the same time. this conference for the
first time decided that in the future BSRO would halt its existence as an
independent organization and become part of the unified Diropean Space
Organization which w' ild bring together all the intergovermsental space
organizations existing in hampe.

From 196': through 1965. although there still was not a single orbited
satellite smoag the assets of ssso, its basic activities involved the
launching of research rockets. and this was carried out from the BRO
launching grounds in Sweden as well as frun a number of national missile
grounds.

The first mo satellite. Iris. designed for studying solar radiation and
cosmic rays was launched on 17 May 1968 with a delay of one year against

the planned date. The launch was mde from 0.8. territory using an American
carrier missile. The delay in manufacturing certain scientific instrtssents
and systems for the second Aurora satellite also led to a deferral of the
launch for almost a year. Both satellites were developed with the direct
participation and technical advice from NASA. NASA provided their launch-
ing gratis, but in return the United States gained the right for unob-
structed access to all scientific information from these satellites.

By the beginning of 1977. ESRO developed another six scientific satellites.
They were all launched using American carriers from American territory.
However these launches were now made on a co-ercial basis. For each of
them the United States received several million dollars from Hestern
Europe.

The great significance which began to be given to applications satellites.
and above all the communications and meteorological satellites. caused in-
creased interest in them by 3830. although according to the constituent
convention. it could only be concerned with scientific satellites. From
1961. upon the request of the airspean Conunications Satellite cOnference,
BSRO began to develop a program for creating a Mopean comunications

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OUICIAI. USE OMY

satellite. Together with NASA. the design of a satellite was discussed for
providing air traffic control. In the middle of 1911. P‘rance proposed to
ESRO the further Joint development of its weather satellite.

A number of important decisions on the EBRO program was taken by the council
of this organization in December 1971.“ The main one concerned the programs
for developing applications satellites. in particqu Aerosat (aircraft
service satellites) and Meteosat (meteorological satellites) and Mopean
cormunications satellites. In 1972-197lo. it was decided to spend around

300 million dollars on these programs to be carried out by £830. The organ-
ization was given the right to plan the expenditure of funds for these satel-
lites in the subsequent years. up to 1980. within the established limit.

The ESRO Council also decided to continue the program for creating European
scientific satellites. however having significantly cut back on allocations
for these purposes.‘2 At the same time for the sake of saving mnds. it was
decided to eliminate the was testing range in Kiruna, by turning it over
to Sweden; the Space Research Institute in Italy was also eliminated (it
was turned into the Interational Center for Space Docusentation and Informa-
tion .

The broadening of the applied sphere of ESRO activities required a revision
of its constituent convention. The amendments to the convention prepared
by a work group specially convened for these purposes. provided for the par-
ticipation of the 5R0 members in the development plans for applications
satellite systems of interest to them. For this purpose special protocols
were to be concluded by the concerned l-SRO members for each such proJect

or program.

Although the mentioned amendments to the convention approved at the end of
1972 by the Council have not formally case into force, they have served

as the legal basis for the further activities of ESRO, particularly in the
sphere of the use of space for applied purposes. As will be shown below, the new
stage starting in 1973 in the history of BSRO was related to the system

of decisions involving "space Europe" as a whole.

From the analysis made of the legal status of IRO, it follows that it was
set up as an intergovernmental organization directly concerned with the
creation and operation of certain types of space equipment. In this sense.
ESRO. like certain other operational space organizations, has differed from
the traditional interstate organisations which involve not Joint produc-
tion activities but rather the coordinating of actions of their members in

one or another sphere.l3

Within the limits set by the constituent convention. ssno entered into
international intercourse as a principal of international law. In this
quality. in particular. it established ties and concluded international
treaties with states and other international organizations. In a number
of instances. ESRO. as a legal entity. also entered into civil law rela-
tionships regulated by national law. In accord with the special protocol.

60
roe ontcm. use 0qu

1'4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the member states or ESRO granted the organization and its personnel privi-
leges and immunities analogous to those which usually are granted to inter-
governmental organ 1 zationn . ‘5

In parallel with the creation of £930 and somewhat before. active diplo-
matic talks were carried out over the question of establishing an European

"rocket pool" for the purpose of producing carrier rockets.

As in the first instance, ingland showed the greatest activity in the talks,
and it was interested in using the Biglish Blue Streak missile as an Dire-
pean rocket. Such a decision made it possible for the Btglish government
to some degree to recover the scores of millions of pounds spent on the de-
velopment of the Blue Streak, and to involve the financial and scientific-
technical resources of the other countries in improving its missile. how-
ever this decision was not to the liking of the two other main participants
in the talks, France and Heat Germany. which also wanted to take a direct
part in producing the hiropean launch vehicles. Only after 3181"“! had
made concessions and had agreed to French and Rest German participation

in the development of the second and third stages of the missile, was it
possible to come to terms on setting up a new organization. The other
Western European nations Joined the "pool" out of prestige considerations
and a desire to secure a certain share of the missile business for their
industrial films.

The Convention on the Establishment of the European Launcher Development
Organization (£1.00) was signed in London on 29 March 1962 and came into
force on 29 February 1961‘. 5

The members of the organization included seven states: Australia, England,
Belgium. the hetherlands, Italy, France and Vest Germany. Denmark and
Switzerland participated in its work as observers.

The basic mission of 31.00 was to provide Western mrope with its own car-

rier missiles for launching sattelites for scientific and comercial pur-
poses. It was assumed that ESRO would be one of the main consumers of the

missiles produced by ELDO.

The organization was directed by a council on which each state had one vote.
The council established financial and scientific-technical comitteea. The
international ELDO secretariat located in Paris and numbering over 300 cm-
ployees was headed by a secretary general. We will not take up the struc-
ture and legal status of this organization in more detail since at present
these questions are chiefly of historical interest. However. without at
least a brief review of ELDO activities it would be difficult to describe
the entire complex of acute political and legal contradictions in the space
research area between the Western Mopean countries as well as between
them and the United States.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The initial ELDO program the completion of which was planned for the end of
1966 envisaged the creation of three-stage carrier missiles capable of put-
ting a satellite weighing up to one ton into a low circular orbit. The
duties of carrying out this program were allocated among the members of the
organization in the following manner. England was to provide its Blue
Streak missile and this was to be used as the first stage of the European
missile. France was concerned with the development of the second stage.
and Heat Germamr with the third. Italy was entrusted with developing an
experimental satellite, the Netherlands was concerned with the telemetric
system. and Belgium was in charge of the ground control station. Australia
was involved in the work of the organisation for the purpose of using its
Hoomera Missile Range for the testing and launching of the carrier missiles.

In contrast to ESRO, BLDG did not have the powers to assign contracts in
the aerospace industry or to be involved itself in the production process.
Its functions basically came down to the overall supervision and control
over the course of work in developing the launch vehicles.

A limit of 210 mill ion units of account was set for carrying out the initial
program," and here around '00 percent of the expenditures were to be paid
by England, while France and West Germany each would cover approximately

20 percent.

From the very outset the work of developing an Mopean launch vehicles
was carried out without coordination, in violation of the set dates, and
in a situation of unceasing arguments over the share of expenditures for
the 31.00 manbers. Every 2 years, in 1966, 1968 and 1970, the organiza-
tion underwent an acute financial crisis. The work of the organization
was halted repeatedly. Only the firm intention of France and Rest Germany
to keep the European program for developing the launch vehicles alive at
any price saved ELDO from complete collapse. The special interest of
France and West Germany in keeping BLDG alive was explained, in addition
to political considerations, by a desire to provide an European carrier
for the Symphonia comunications satellite which was being developed by
these two nations. The United States. in viewing Symphonia as a competi-
tor for the comercial comunications satellites of the Intelsat system,
remsed to guarantee the launching of this satellite with its carriers.
Moreover, France was interested in using its missile range in Guiana for
launching the European missiles, as it had spent significant amounts on
its construction.

Soon after starting work on the Mops-l missile it became clear that at
least double the amount of money would be needed to complete it than had
initially been asstmed.

A conference of ministers from the HBO member states meeting in 1966
decided to revise the initial program of the organisation. In addition
to completing the work of developing Europa-l, a decision was taken to
institute a so—called supplementary program for the purpose of producing
a more powerful Europa-2 carrier. The plan was that the launching of

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Europa-r from a new missile range in French Guiana would make it possible

to utilize this carrier for launching European communications satellites.

This would provide a market for the ELDO missiles and ensure Western Euro-
pean independence from the United States in the development of the applied
space systems.la

For carrying out the initial and supplementary programs, the ministerial
conference established a limit of 626 million units of account. but Just
a year after the approval of these decisions. it was clear that it would
take another 100 million to carry out both programs up to the end of 1971.
A new financial crisis developed and this was exacerbated by England's
announcement (in April 1968) that it was immediately withdrawing from the
organization.

Only under the strong pressure of its partners who linked the question of
English membership in BLDG with its admission to the Common Market did
England agree to continue its financial participation in the organization
up to 1971. At the same time, ELDO more and more lost confidence in the
eyes of the other members of this organization. For example, Italy, de-
prived of a number of orders. also announced that it would cease to sup-
port the ELDO program after 1971.

Difficult times arose for ELDO in the autumn of 1970. when a profound
crisis again shook all "space Europe." However the fate of the European
space organizations at that time was determined on a different level. with-
in the permanent space conferenee with a membership of the ministers from
the western European nations.

As for the course of work on the Europa-l and Europa-2 missiles, the first
of these carriers has not yet succeeded in orbiting a single satellite.
regardless of the successful inflight and design testing, while work on
the Europa-2 missile was halted after a series of failures during trials.
By this time over 6&0 million dollars had been spent on the development of
the missile. Nor has there been any deVelopment of the most recent plans
of certain ELDO members which provide for the development of an even more
powerful Europa-3 carrier by the end of the 1970's.

On 27 April 1973. a fatal blow was dealt to BLDG. when at a session of
the council the representatives of France and West Germany announced the
decision of their governments to halt the financing of the program to de-
velop the Europa-2 missile. Since this time E130 has begun to curtail its
activities and in fact has ceased to exist.

The third association of Western European nations in the area of space de-
velopment, the European Coumunications Satellite Conference (GEES). is

not an organization in the strict sense of the word. although it has often
been termed such.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The conference was conVened for the first time in May 1963 for working out
a coordinated position among the Western European countries on an American
proposal to set up a worldwide cos-unications satellite system. The co-
ordinating of the viewpoints of the Western European nations on the ques-
tions of using satellites for comercial communications purposes became
its basic task. GETS did not have a permanent budget or scientific re—
search institutcs, and was not engaged in the direct development of space
rocketry.

Participating in the work of the conference. the sessions of which convened
periodically in different countries, were 16 states. The auxiliary bodies
of the conference were the Comittee on Organizational Questions. the Com--
mittee on Space Technology. the Technical Planning Group and the Secretariat.
The GETS carried out its activities in close contact with the other Biro-
pean space organizations as well as the European Radio Broadcasting Union
and mrovision.

0n the eve and during the course of the talks to work out the so-called
final agreements on the international comunications satellites consortium
Intelsat which were started in Hashington in 1969. the Western Woman
governments used the GETS as a forum for coordinating a unifora hiropean
position at the talks with the Americans. This was a sort of attespt to
undertake collective actions to defend the political and economic inter-
ests of the Western European nations when confronted by the American domin-
ance in the area of space communications.

The second goal which the GETS set for itself was to elaborate a Mopean
program for developing a regional cosnunications system using satellites.
Upon the request of the GETS. BRO was concerned with the direct elabora-
tion of the plans for snairopean commications satellite.

in July 1970 the European Space Conference approved a decision to halt

the activities of the GETS. There was no longer aw necessity for its

existence since the talks to work out the Intelsat agreements had come

to an end and the development of European communications satellites had
been entrusted to 1330.

Before 1966, work among the Western atropean space organizations was virtu-
ally uncoordinated. and no uniform policy was carried out in the area of
space research and development. Difficulties in carrying out the desig-
nated programs, differences of opinion between the Western Biropean nations
on the question of placing orders with industry. and the significant cost
overruns--all of this required the regulating and coordinating of activi-
ties by the existing space organizations.

Upon the initiative of the Italian government. the question of the coordi-
nating of the European policy in the space area was incorporated in the
agenda of the ministerial conference of the ELDO members in 1966. This
marked the beginning to the setting up of a new permanent international
body. the Mopean Space Conference.‘

6h
son orsrcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l‘artlclpatinn in the first European Space Conference in December 1966 were
the seven BLDO nations as well as Denmark. Spain and a number of other
nations as observers. The conference resolved to make an analysis and
evaluation of the existing national and international space programs as a
first step on the way to working out a unified European policy in this
area.

The second conference was held in Rome in the sinner of 1967. Virtually
all the states which were members of the European Space Organizations par-
ticipated in its work. At home a resolution was approved in which the
European Space Conference was made a pemanent body which would hold its
sessions annually on a ministerial level for the purpose of working out

a coordinated mropean space policy and observing its implementation. The
proposals to formulate such a policy were to come from a specially estab-
lished concultai ive programs committee. In Justifying its conclusions on
the necessity of an extensive space research program for Europe, the com-
mittee mentioned first of all considerations of a political nature:
"Europe should first of all demonstrate its determination to be inde-
pendent."2°

The third European Space Conference held in November 1968 in West Germany
approved compromise decisions which involved the current activities of the
European space organizations and the more distant prospects.“ At the con-
ference a decision was taken to merge the existing space organisations into
a single European organization. A draft convention for the setting up of
such an organization was to be ready by l llovember 1969. The conference
approved the ESRO budget for 1969-1971. and empowered the 3830 Council to
assume obligations for the individual projects the completion dates of
which were set for the period after 1971. As the long-range goals. a
European comunications satellite and large scientific research satellites
were to be developed as their programs went beyond the economic and tech-
nical capabilities of the individual countries.

Due to the fact that various viewpoints arose amng the Western European
nations on the advisability of further development of European launch
vehicles. the future program was to be given a more profound character
making, it possible for the nations. in the event they so desired. to par-
ticipate not in all the proJects but only in some of them.

The carrying out of the decisions approved at the conference in West
Germany issnediately encountered difficulties, since England and Italy
refused to participate in the additional expenditures related to imple-
menting the 31.00 programs approved by the ministerial conference. 31.00
was again in trouble, and along with it the entire system of decisions
relating to the future European space program.

A new element in the already tense situation was introduced by the u.s.

proposal to the Western European nations to participate in the long-range
NASA programs to develop orbital stations and reusable space transports.

65

FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under these conditions. in July 1970, a fourth European Space Conference
was held in Brussels. At that time Italy was in the midst of a govern-

mental crisis. and a new Conservative government had recently come to power
in England. Already because of these circumstances it was clear that the
decisions of the conference would have only a provisional nature. But the
questions which were to be discussed by the ministers of the Western
European nations involved the long-range future. namely: the European
space program up to 1980. the merging of the existing space organizations
and the participation of mmpe in a future 0.8. space program.

A maJority at the conference approved a resolution to set up an European
communications satellite system in 1978-1980 on the basis of the comunica-
tions geostationary satellite to be developed in mrope. A decision was
taken together with NASA to continue work on developing the Aerosat system
and to begin research on European meteorological satellites. The confer-
ence considered it advisable at the beginning of 1911 to open for signature
a convention to found an unified European space organisation.

At the Brussels Conference there was a clear split between England and the
small countries. on the one hand. and France. Rest Germany and Belgium.
on the other. A situation had developed whereby the basic burden for car-
rying out the development program for the Mopean carrier missiles had
been assumed by the latter three countries. moreover without having an
certainty that Europe would use these carriers.

The situation was complicated even at the first session of the Brussels
Conference. During the second session in November 1970, also held in
Brussels. the explosion occurred. The conference was unable to pass an
acceptable decision on any of the questions discussed (applications and
scientific research satellites. launch vehicles and a unified aaropeaa
space organization).

The culminating point of these events was the statement of France, Heat
Germany and Belgium that since only these nations held a consistent posi-
tion on the questions of the European space program. they had decided to
follow their own path. if need be. outside the framework of the existing
airopean space organizations. and invited other nations to Join them.
The core of the program supported by the three nations was the Mops-3
carrier missile and the comunications satellite.

The new period of crisis starting with the 1970 Brussels Conference was
the most extended and threatening for "space Europe." For 2 years it was
impossible to convene the next session of the European Space Conference.

In speaking at the International Astronautical Congress in Vienna in
October 1972. the ELDO legal affairs adviser. H. Bourely. stated: "The
present situation is characterized by complete uncertainty not only for
the date of the next European ministerial meeting for space affairs. but
even the very possibility of organizing such a- meeting. and. even worse,
the results that might be expected from it.”

66
ms orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The situation was further complicated by the split in the French and West
German positions an these nations had previously shown the greatest con-
sistency on the question of developing the European launch vehicles.23

At an unofficial meeting of the scientific and technical ministers of
certain Western European nations held in November 1972 and aimed at recon-
ciling the viewpoints in the course of preparing for a session of the
European Space Conference, France was the only nation which categorically
insisted on developing the Hestern European Europa-3 launch vehicle.

west Germany. in agreeing to make a certain financial contribution to this
carrier. stated that it-did not consider the development of the aissile
essential and intended to participate in the future American space program.

On this occasion the French Minister of National Defense Michel Debre
stated in an interview with the newspaper PIOARO that France would be
forced to carry out an independent space program. since a Joint space
program among the western European nations had reached a blind alley.
"Our partners are willing to be satisfied with the role of American sub-
contractors,” said Debre.2“

A month after this statement. in December 1972, a session of the European
Space Conference was held in Brussels. As a result of complicated diplo-
matic maneuvers, the ministers of the western European nations succeeded
in reaching a compromise at this session.

The next session of the European Space Conference met in Brussels in July
1973. At it it was decided that the unified organisation of the western
European nations for the research and use of space which was named the
European Space Agency should begin operating on 1 April l97h.25 Upon the
initiative of Heat Germany which had assumed over one-half of the required
expenses. a decision was taken to participate in developing the orbital
laboratory (Spacelab) for the American reusable transport spacecraft.
Approval was given to a program for developing a new European launch
vehicle, the Arlen, with France carrying the basic share of expenditures.”6
as well as a program for developing the Marots satellite for setving mari-
time navigation. and here England showed particular interest in its de-
velopment.

The decision taken as well as the preJects which were already in the stage
of implementation determined the basic elements in the program of the
European Space Agency activities for l97h-l980. This program included the
development of Spacelab, 27 the Arian hunch "um... and the satellites
which were to be used for developing applications space systems (0T8 for
communications. Meteosat for meteorological, and Aerosat and Marots for
navigational satellites), as well as a series of scientific satellites.

A number of bodies in the European Space Conference was involved in pre-

paring the draft convention for organizing the European Space Agency."
Although this draft was to be worked out by 1 October 1969. the preparation

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or the docunent was delayed due to the absence 01' a unified policy among
the western European nations over the support for the Joint space programs.

The 1962 echo Convention was used as the basis for working out the new con-
stituent document. incorporating the changes approved by the BRO Council

in November 1972 but which had not yet gone into force due to the decision
to set up the Agency. These changes. as was mentioned above. concerned
primarily the powers of mo regarding the programs for developing the
applications satellites. BRO was also entrusted with coordinating all

the civilian space programs carried out by the western European countries.”

The convention to establish the mropean Space Agency was approved at the
session of the European Space Conference held in Brussels on 15 April l975,
and was opened for signing in Paris on 30 Hay 1975 at a delegates confer-
ence. The convention was signed by 11 states. 10 of which were mo mem-
bers: Belgium. Great Britain. the Netherlands. Denmark, Ireland. Spain,
Italy. France, Vest Gerslany, Switzerland and Sweden.

The new convention which consisted of 27 articles and S appendices3° gave
the European Space Agency broad powers going far beyond the limits of those
which previously had been granted to the airspean space organizations.
For the first time the Agency was given the task of internationalizing
the space programs of the amber states, as well as coordinating their
national space policy (Article II). The methods and ways or this inter-
nationalization and coordination as established by a special appendix to
the convention (Appendix IV) in particular imposed definite restrictions
on the right or the Agency member states to carry out bilateral and multi-
lateral space proJects with states which were not members of the Agency.
Such projects whould not run contrary to the scientific, economic and
industrial aims oi“ the Agency, and wherever possible the other Agency
members should be informed of these proJects and invited to participate
in them. The mentioned restrictions could have negative consequences for
the development of extensive international collaboration on a bilateral
and multilateral basis. and they deprive the Western European states of
independence in taking decisions on collaboration with other countries.
As for the internationalization of the programs carried out by the Agency
member states. the convention established the principle in accord with
which each Agency member is bound to provide an opportunity for all the
other members to participate in all the new civilian space proJects
planned by it.

A particular feature of the Agency is also that the space programs are
divided into compulsory which all the member nations should Join, and
elective where the member states may participate at their discretion.
A corresponding division has been made in the financial obligations and

in the procedure for implementing these programs.
The compulsory program financed by all the Agency members includes the
development of scientific satellites as well as the so-called "base

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activities" (technological research, the study of ﬁxture plans. the docu-
nentation and information service, and others). The elective program
which is financed only by the concerned Agency members includes the de-
velopnent of the applications satellites and satellite systems. as well
as the carrier missiles and space transport systems (Article V).

A new element in the organization of Western European space collaboration
is the provision of the convention that the Agency can directly partici-
pate in creating operational (comercial) satellite systems. In accord
with the decisions approved by a majority of the council members. the

Agency has the right to turn over technoloy to operational organiza-
tions. to use these organizations for the launching of applications opera-

tional satellites and control their flight. as well as participate in
other activities upon the requests of the mentioned organizations (Article
v, Point 3).

The convention was opened for signing for only the member states of the
Woman Space Conference. Membership in it is possible only with the
agreement of all the members of the convention (Articles XXI and XXIII).

In practical terms this means that the Agency has been set up as a closed
organization of western European nations.

The basic leading bodies of the Agency are: the council consisting of
representatives from all the member states and a director general. The
organizational structure to a significant degree is analogous to 3R0.

Each state has one vote on the council. The council's functions include
the approval of the work programs and plans of the Agency, the approval
of the annual budget and determining the expenditure level for a 5-year
period (the last case requires a unanimous decision).

The Agency has maintained the financing principle which existed in ssao.
in accord with which the contributions of the nations are set depending
upon their national income.”

In considerim that the council can be formed on the ministerial level
(Article XI, Paint It), the coming into force of the convention will mean
the end of not only nsno and £1.00 but also the European Space Conference.”
In this manner the Agency legally and actually will be turned into the
single intergovermental space organization for Western Europe.

For directing the implementation of each elective Agency program. a pro-
gram council is to be established with representatives from all the
nations participating in this program.

The director general who is elected by the council is given executive and
representative functions (Article XIII).

69
so: orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For settling disputed questions between the Agency members. an arbitra-
tion body is provided for. and its decisions are binding and final for
the disputing parties (Article mm).

The convention grants the Agency the right. in the event of the approval
of unanimous decisions by the council, to conclude agreements on coopera-
tion with other international organisations, as well as with governments
and national organizations of countries which are not members of the Agency
(Article XV). Such agreements can involve, in particular, the participa-
tion of other states in international organisations in the Agency programs.
Article XV reflects the now widely recognised right of interstate organiza-
tions to conclude international legal treaties.3

In accord with Point 1 of Article XXII, the convention is to come into
force after it has been ratified by the 10 nations which were members of
ESRO. The process of ratifying the convention, it is assumed. will last
from 2 to 3 years. In this regard legal questions have arisen related to
the agency's activities during the period from the moment of the signing
of the convention until it comes into force.“

Although the resolution approved in July 1973 by the Mopean Space Con-
ference stipulates that the Agency is to be set up by the "merging" of
3330 and 81.00. the latter of the mentioned organisations has in fact been
eliminated and, in the description of M. Bourdly. since 1973 "has repre-
sented only a legal and political fiction."35 The new program for develop-
ing the miropean Arian carrier began to be carried out not under ELDO,

but rather as a special ERG proJect even before the Agency was set up.

Considering that the convention on the establishing of the Agency to a
significant degree was worked out on the basis of the E30 convention and
also that the current mix-opean programs were being carried out by this
organization, the functions of the Agency during the transitional period
were to be entrusted to BRO. Here from the moment of the signing of the
Agency convention, 3R0 was to carry out its activities under the name of
the "ﬁremen Space Agency," in applying the provisions of the new conven-
tion wherever feasible. The representatives of the states on the mo
and BLDG councils would hold their sessions Jointly until the new Agency
Council was formed. Thus. dc facts the Daropean Space Agency began its

existence on 31 Hay 1975.

Of definite interest are the questions of succession related to the trans-
ferral of the rights and duties of ESRO and moo to the new hiropean

organization.

Article xx of the convention stipulates that as of the date it comes into
effect, the entire aggregate of rights and obligations of BRO and ELDO
is to be assumed by the Agency. As of this same date, according to

Point 2 of Article XXII. Inc and mo dc jars are to cease their exist-
ence. In this manner the Western Dix-open states have formalhr decided

To
to: OHICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not to resort to the legal procedure of dissolving the organizations as
provided for in the corresponding articles of their constituent enactments.
The solution to the question was facilitated by the fact that all the

mso and ELDO members. with the exception of Australia. announced their
intention to Join the new Agency. Australia denounced the BLDG conven-
tion on 1 January l9’f'5.36

The most complicated questions of succession arose over the actual elimi-
nation of BLDO. A large portion of the personnel from this organisation
was dismissed. the property was sold or was to be used by BRO. remaining
formally the property of ELDO. until it ceased its legal existence. 'lhe
final list of rights and duties which should be transferred from 21.00 to
the Agency would be drawn up by the director general of the Agency.”

The creation of the European P-pace Agency has marked a new stage in the

"space integration" of the airspean capitalist nations. 0n the political
level the integration processes in the space area have been proclaimed in
the press of these countries as the "instrument for building Europe." and
as a firm intention to turn Western mmpe into the third "space power."3°

At the same time, even the Director General of the European Space Agency.
R. Gibson. has not concealed the fact that the most difficult task con-
sists not in solving technical problems steming from the new space pro-
gram. but rather to meet the "political challenge" caused by the ”authentic
integration of mropean space efforts."39 In other words. it is a question
of achieving the complete elimination of the independent national space
programs of the Western European nations under the flag of integration.

Only the future will show how lasting the achieved compromise solutions
will be. However, it is indisputable that these decisions are unable to
"eliminate" the antagonistic contradictions inherent to all manifesta-
tions of imperialist integration.

FOOTNUI'BS

1. For the industrial associations and consortium in western Europe in
the space field. see: 0. Giarini. "L'Burope et l'Espace." Inausanne.
1968. PP 222-228; "Drops in Space." (A Survey Prepared by ESRO).
Paris, 19110, pp 127-128; etc.

2. [C. Colliard]. "Mezhdunarodnwe Organizatsii i Uchrezhdeniya" [Inter-
nagional Organizations and Institutions], Moscow. Progress. 1912,
p 12.

3. For the economic and political contradictions of imperialist integra-
tion. see: I. s. Shsban. "Imperialisticheskaya Sushchnost'
Zapadnoyevropeyskoy Integratsii" [me Imperialist Essence of Heaters
European Integration], Moscow. Nauka. 1971; A. M. Alekseyev. A. I.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
T.

8.

1°.

11.

12.

13.

1h.
15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Vikent'yev and B. P. Hiroshnichenko, "Sotsialisticheshaya Integratsiya
i yeye Preimushchestva Pered Kapitalisticheskoy” [Socialist Integra-
tign and Its Advantages Over Capitalist]. Roscov, Banks, 1975, pp 16-
11 .

For the text of the convention. see: "Basic Texts, Rules and Regula-
tions, Agreements,” Doc. mo Sp-lo, March 1969, p 15.

311mm 00 cms/cscnm. no 6. 1969. pp 9-1h.

Doc. 8R0 SP-h, p Us. In the course or the reorganization of ESRO.
the membership and name of the institutions were repeatedly changed.

The agreements were signed by the IRO director general after approval
by the council.

See. for example: 'Agreelent Concerning the European Space Operations
Center," Doc. ERO SP-h, pp 280—285.

"Livre Blane du president de la 08!: our l'Europe Spatiale," AIR ET
cosmos. no 1:33. 1972, pp 15, 63.

Doc. ESRO, Rapport General, 1968, p 22.

H. Kaltenecker. "The Retor- ot BRO (Its New Legal Concept and Com-
mittee Structure)." Essa/mo mums, Rs 20, 1913. pp 8-10.

Up to 1950 the organization planned to launch five scientific satel-

lites designed primarily for astronomical and mgnetospheric research
(one or them ‘Jointly with England and the United States) ("mrope in

Space" (A Survey Prepared by mo). p 18).

In speaking on the successor of ERG, the European Space Agency, the
director general of this agency. R. Gibson, noted: "An organization
similar to ours has more in cos-on with a large industrial firm than
with a maJority of the other international organizations" (BA
mums. No 1. 1975. p. 3).

Doc. ESRO SP-h, pp 119-58.
The legal status of ERG and certain other space organizations has

a number or canon features with the international atomic organiza-
tions. For the legal status of the latter. see: S. A. Helinin,
"The Legal Nature of Atomic Interstate Organizations," SOVETSKDYB
GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, lo 9, 1970, pp 66-71».

For the text or the convention and other egreasents related to £1.00.
see: "Yearbook of Air and Space Lav," Montreal. 1961. pp tho-WY.

72

M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
11.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

2h.
25.

21'
28.

30.

31.

32.

FOR DEVICIAL USE ONLY

In 1962, thin totnled 210 million dollars.

BULLETIN DU CERS/CHCLES, No 12, 1970. pp 27-33.

R. di Carrobio, "thiropean Space Conference," "International Cooperation
in Outer Space: A Symposium," pp 509-5210; M. Bourély, "L'Surope a la
recherche d'une politique spatiale," LA REVUE FRANCAISE DE DROIT A5113",
No 1. 1970. pp 13-36.

"European Space Conference. Report of the Advisory Counittee on Pro-

gram," CSR/CCP (67”; ”Rapport du Conits consultatii‘ sur lee program-es
spatiaux europeens." LA RECHERCHE SPATIALE, No 1h, 1968, pp 25-28.

"Resolutions dc 1a Conference Spatiale Mopeenne," Bad Godssberg,
November 1968.

M. Bourely, "La erise spatiale europeennc," "Proc. XV Colloq. Lav
Outer Space," Davis. 1973. p 182.

Characteristic of the mood prevailing in western Europe at that tine
were the titles of articles appearing in the French press: "A Diffi-
cult Sumner for the European Space Conference," ”Space Europe-Jill
It Survive?" and others (AIR 3r cosmos, No Ma, 1972. p 17; so 153,
1972. P 37)-

FIGARO, 15 November 1972.

For the contradictions among the Western mropean partners which led
to new delays in setting up the Agency, see: AIR 31‘ 008108, No 539.
1975, p 35.

The Arian missile is to be built by a French-controlled industrial
consortium.

For more detail on the Spacelab agreements, see Chapter 5 (Part I).

ll. Kaltenecker, "Ln nouvelle agence spatiale européenne," ESRO/ELDO
MLEI'IN, No 26, 197k, p 16.

"Phil-ope in Space (A Survey Prepared by 5830)," p 15.

For the text of the convention, see the book: N. M. Matte, "Droit
aerospatial," A. Pedone, Paris. 1976, pp 255-285.

The Agency budget was, respectively, 371: million dollars in 1975,
1191 million in 1976, and 557 Iillion in 1977.

The first session of the council on the ministerial level was held
in February 1977.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
33.

38.
39.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this use: M. Bourdly, "The European Space Agency's Contribution
to the Development of Space Lav." "Proe. XIX Colloq. Lav Outer Space."
California. 1977. PP 21-31.

M. Bourely, "Prone-es Juridiques poses par la signature de la conven-
tion ereant l'Agence spatiale européenne,” "Proc. XVII Colloq. Lav
Outer Space." California, 1975. pp 100-106.

Ibid.

Austria. Norway and Canada participate in the vork of the Agency as
observers.

Simultaneously he performs the duties of the director general of mo
and the secretary genersl of BLDG.

”atrope in Space (A Survey Prepared by $30)." p 12.
BSA NMme. lo 1, 1975. p 3.

7!»

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 5: Imrmmm spncn mocnms or THE UNITED sm'ss
(POLITICAL AND LEGAL ASPM'B)

The scale of the 0.8. international space programs and the constant atten-
tion given them by the president. the Congress and State Departnent show
the great foreign policy significance which is given to these programs in
the United States. The heightened interest among American officialdcm

in space has been a direct consequence of the amazement which American
society evidenced after the launching of the first soviet earth satellite.2

For the sake of achieving "national leadership in space" and restoring the
shaken American international prestige in the area of advanced science and
technology, American capitalism has mobilised all its possible resources.

NASA which was set up in 1958 was given enormous funds and broad powers.

The annual budget of this organization has risen from 300 million dollars
in 1959 up to 6 billion dollars in 1966 in the course of carrying out the
most expensive Apollo program. During the period of the flourishing of its
activities in the middle of the 1960's, NASA brought together 17 major
scientific research centers with a staff of 33,000 employees. Around
20.000 industrial firms were working on NASA orders. The total number of
workers, engineers and technicians employed in American space industry
reached up to 1000.000 persons.

The greatest benefits during this artificially inflated boom were reaped
by the maJor 0.8. aerospace corporations such as North American Rockwell.
Boeing. Lockheed Aircraft, McDonnell Douglas. and others. In playing the
role of the main NASA contractors. they secured billions in orders guaran-
teed by the state and bringing high profits. Naturally these corporations
viewed the questions of international space cooperation primarily as an
opportunity to gain new profits by broadening the market for their products
or obtaining new state contracts.

NASA was formed under the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 29 July
1956.3 This law stated the 0.8. principles in space, it created a system
of state leadership over space activities and established the legal bases
for the international IIASA programs.

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 1958 law officially stated as the task of NASA the achieving of U.S.
"leadership" in space activities (Article 102. C, 5). The sue aim was
set in the statement made when President Eisenhower signed the law. in
this regard, a different evaluation must be given to the so-called dualism
of the 1958 law (international competition and cooperation), about which
American authors have written.” In granting IIASA the rights to carry out
international programs, the Congressmen were concerned that international
cooperation be used for carrying out the political and economic tasks
confronting the United States.

Thus, in discussing the draft law on the Comittee on Aeronautical and
Space Sciences, Senator Saltonstall, in giving the reasons for incorporat-
ing a special article on cooperation in the law stated: "Should we solve
this space problem by ourselves? Certainly it would be better if we worked
out international measures which would make it possible to employ the minds
of many nations as well as ours."5 The subsequent practices in carrying
out the international NASA programs have firmed the validity of the con-
clusion that a maJority of these programs were dictated by the interests

of the 0.5. aerospace industry or by a desire to employ the scientific

and technical potential of other nations for American purposes.

In developing the general declarative provision on 0.3. cooperation with
other nations or groups of nations, as was found in the first version of
the draft law, in its discussion within Congress Article 205 was incor-
porated and this gave NASA the right to participate in international co-
operative programs in accord with agreements concluded by the president
"with the advice and consent of the Senate."

Thus, on the basis of 0.8. domestic legislation, international agreements
on cooperation in the research and use of space can be concluded only by
the president with the subsequent ratification of Congress. NASA, accord-
ing to Article 205, acts asethe organization entrusted with carrying out
the programs provided by these agreements.

However, even in signing the 1958 law, President Eisenhower gave it an
interpretation making it possible to conclude less formal agreement-s on
space cooperation. In a statement made at the signing. Eisenhower pointed
out that he viewed Article 205 "only as recognition of the fact that in
this area international treaties may be concluded, and not as a prohibiting
of the inclusion of less formal cooperative arrangements in the appropriate
instances.”5 This interpretation opened up the possibility of signing

(for the NASA international programs) so-called "executive" as well as
agency-to—agency agreements.

Among the agreements relating to the IIASA international programs as yet
there how: been virtually none which have been concluded with the observ-
ing of the entire procedure stipulated by Article 205 of the 1958 law.
The agreement between the USSR and United States of 2': May 1972 is an
example of an agreement signed by the president but without subsequent
congressional ratification.

76
ran orucm. ass on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A predominant. mtlority of the agreements: under which NASA carries out its
international activities has been concluded in the form of executive or
anemw-to-mwncy mareementa. In a number of instances these are signed
directly by "ASA. At times the agency-to—agency agreements are concluded
to carry out already existing executive agreements or with subsequent ap-
proval on a governmental level."

The decision to use one or another type of agreement is taken in each spe-
cific instance depending upon the significance, nature and duration of the
obligat ions, and by consultation with the State Department under which a
special subdivision has been formed concerned with space problems. The
State Department takes an active part in all stages of the talks concerned
with concluding these agreements.

In concluding international agreements in the area of space research, the
State Department and NASA have made a number of requisite conditions which
include the demand that each side participating in the agreement pay for
the expenses related to carrying out its portion of the joint project, and
also that the project be of mutual interest and scientific value, in aiding
the fulfillment of the 0.8. national space program. Preference is given
to agreements on specific scientific projects and not general-purpose
programs.

As a total NASA has concluded over 250 international agreements and under-
standings of different types with more than 30 states. To one degree or
another. scientists and scientific organizations from more than 10 nations
have participated in the various NASA international programs.9

Many of the agreements signed by NASA involve the locating of stations for
receiving information and controlling the flight of American spacecraft
and satellites on foreign territories. A series of agreements provides
for the launching of foreign satellites using American carrier missiles,
the placing of scientific equipment of other nations on American space -
devices. and the conducting 'of joint experiments using research rockets.
Another group of agreements dealt with work of an applied nature involving
communications, meteorology and earth resource satellites. Finally, in
recent years agreements have appeared related to manned space flights

( the Soyuz--Apollo Project and the Spacelab Project).

The overall results of the "ASA international space programs can be charac-
terized by the following figures: More than 20 foreign satellites launched
by American launch vehicles over 30 foreign instruments located on
American space devices, hundreds of joint launches of meteorological and
geophysical rockets made from the territory of . states. and a series of
international programs in applied areas of space use.”

However. behind these figures one must not overlook the fact that many
American space programs are aimed at securing one-sided political, eco-
nomic and scientific-technical benefits and advantages.

7'!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In defending the interests of its space rocketry industry, the 0.3. is

endeavoring to provide it with markets in other nations, to make the space
programs of these countries dependent upon the United States, and to pre-
vent competition by foreign countries in the area of the practical use or

space.

The U.S. legislation contains principles in accord with which the comer-
cial application or space has been put into the hands or private capital.
The second 0.8. national law in the area or space. the Comunications Satel-
lite Act 01‘ 31 August 1962.n gave the right of planning, creating. owning
and operating the comercial conunications satellite system (independently
or Jointly with other states) to the private American Comsat Corporation.
The approval of this law and the subsequent development of events have shown
that 0.8. international policy in the area or applied space quite definitely
and openly is dictated by the economic and political interests or the Ameri—
can monopolies. One of the vivid examples of this could be the talks on
the conclusion of an agreement between the United States and Western Mrope
on developing an international satellite system for air navigation.”

Consercial advantage is one of the dominating factors in the American in-
ternational cooperative prograas in the area of space research.

In speaking in the 0.8. Senate in March 1970. the former NASA director

'1‘. Paine stated: "The satellites which the other nations are delivering
to us for launching by our carriers are significantly more expensive than
the carriers used by us for orbiting them... wherever possible we should
encourage the other nations to take up the most complicated questions,
such as. in particular. the (lenses solar probe.... International coopera-
tion is a good way to help extend our reduced budget for the purpose of
obtaining the best results {or our side and the nations cooperating with
us."” He might note that the total cost of the ﬂellios ProJect (the
solar probe mentioned by '1'. Paine) was estimated at 260 million dollars.
or which 180 million would be paid by West Germany.“

To the question asked him by one or the Senators of what influence inter-
national space cooperation would have on the 0.8. aerospace industry,

1‘. Paine replied that he viewed this influence as very positive. ’1’. Paine
gave data that the foreign purchases from 0.5. industrial firms under the
international proJects would provide the United States with foreign ex-
change earnings from 10 to 20 million dollars annually.” Virtually all
the foreign satellites launched by NASA would be built with the aid of
American firms.

All or this provided full Justification for the director of the American

space agency to state that the international projects brought "very real

benefit... for the United States."

The total value or the NASA international programs carried out and in

process in 1976 was estimated at 1.5 billion dollars. Over the last 10
18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

yearn approximately two-thirds of the expenditures made under the Joint
programs was covered by the U.8. foreign partners.16

Approximately one-half of the funds spent by other countries to carry out
projects Jointly with the Americans goes to the United States in the form
of payment for purchased equipment. the carrier missiles and to pay for
the cost of the launches. Thus, the NASA international activities con-
tribute a significant influx of gold into the United States and aid the
marketing of American aerospace industry products. In addition. since
virtually all the Joint projects in one way or another fit into the 0.8.
national space research program. the participation of foreign states in
them in essence means a partial financing of the American national program.

In the summer of 1969. the 0.8. secretary of state and the Japanese ministm
of foreign affairs signed an agreement on cooperation in the area of space
development. In accord with this agreement, American industry secured the
right to export to Japan unclassified equipment and technical information
needed for the production of carrier missiles and satellites. On this
question the State Department spokesman T. Nesbit stated that the u.s. was
ready to export widely its space equipment and technology to other coun-
tries.‘7 Several years later the U.s. president proposed that American
carrier missiles be sold to all countries in those cases when they would

no he used to launch satellites competing with American ones.'0

The official documents have emphasized that launching of foreign satel-
lites under the condition of paying for the cost of these launches repre-
sents a NASA international activity of "growing significance."19

The United States gives great significance to the political aspect of
international cooperation in space research.20 "There is a close tie be-
tween our space program and the aims of our foreign policy...." stated

R. Packard, leader of the State Department subdivision concerne‘ with
space problems. He saw the foreign policy task of space research to cre-
ate for the United States an image of a technically developed. competent

and dynamic society with which the other nations would associate their
interests.2I

In broadly publicizing the NASA international programs, and in particular
through the channels of the 0.5. Information Agency, American propaganda
has endeavored to present the United States as a country which willing
shared its scientific and technical achievements with other nations, here
failing to mention the economic and scientific-technical benefits ex-
tracted by the United States from this cooperation.

0n the political level, in the NASA international programs an important
place has been given to the developing countries. In September 1969,

NASA concluded an agreement with the Indian Atomic Energy Department for
organizing educational-type television broadcasts with an American satel-
lite to receiving stations serving 5,000 of the Indian villages which were

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

most distant from the center.22 Talks for analogous programs in the area
of space communications have also been held with a number of the South
American nations. At present the United States is actively involving the
developing nations in the American program to use satellites to study the
natural resources of the earth, and has already concluded a significant
number of bilateral agreements for this purpose.

In addition to economic and political considerations which have guided
the United States in carrying out its international space programs. scien-

tific and technical reasons are also of important significance.

One of the basic reasons why NASA was empowered to conclude agreements with
foreign nations was the necessity of creating a worldwide network of track-
ing and data receiving stations for the spacecraft and satellites. Many
NASA agremeents were concluded precisely for this purpose.23 In certain
instances. the expenditures for running these stations and their personnel
are completely or partially paid by the host country. NASA also maintains
close working contacts with the systems of satellite tracking stations
created by the European Space Research Organization and Pranee.2”

The experimental communications satellite work carried out initially by
NASA. and the meteorological and geodetic research have also required the
locating of ground equipment on foreign territories.

The interest of the United States in conducting Joint work is also mani-
fested in the fact that in a number of instances foreign countries have
fully assumed responsibility for carrying out important and costly scien-
tific research provided in the American national program. The results of
such research immediately becomes the property of NASA. Thus, the NASA
ionosphere research program was carried out with Canadian satellites, and
west Germany carried out a complex proJect for developing a solar probe.
and so forth. A series of scientific discoveries and technological inno-
vations obtained in foreign countries as a result of the cooperative pro-
grams hawe gone into American hands.

The NASA international activities have permitted the United States to in-
volve the best foreign scientists in carrying out NASA proJects. This is
the purpose of the widely organised training and retraining of foreign
specialists in the area of space science and technology carried out by
NASA Jointly with the U.S. National Academy of Scienceu. The conditions
for the training of foreign specialists in the United States are such that
the students and trainees should remain in the American laboraties until
they have made a practical contribution to these laboratories. Many 0.8.-
trained foreign specialists have remained permanently to work in 0.8.
industry and scientific research centers.

At the same time it is essential to point out that the scientific and

technical interests in conducting Joint space research as well as the
factors of an economic and political nature contribute to the development

. 80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

of cooperation between countries with different social systems. Precisely
such an interest. along with the overall improvement in the state of
Soviet-American relations. made it possible to conclude the Agreement
Between the USSR and United States on Cooperation in the Research and Use
of Space for Peaceful Purposes in May 1972. However it is beyond doubt
that cooperation with the USSR. as with the other socialist countries. is
possible only on the basis of mutual advantage and equal rights.

Among the NASA cooperative programs with the Western European countries.
the most significant was the Spacelab irogram under which the Mopean
countries were responsible for developing and turning over to the United
States one of the important elements for the new American space transport
system. Let us take up in somewhat greater detail the history of the
talks which led to the conclusion of an agreement on this program. as well
as an analysis of the agreements themselves.

After the conclusion of the Apollo Program. the development of a reusable
space transport system occupied the central place in the American national
space research program. Among the transport spacecraft. the plans were
first to develop the so-called "shuttle" for making trips between space
and near-earth orbits. and secondly a transport towcraft for moving freight
to higher orbits and for other purposes. It was assumed that the shuttle
could make up to 100 flights in space, carrying a crew of up to seven men

and up to 30 tons of freight. The shuttle would land on earth similar to
an aircraft or more accurately a glider.25

The decision to develop the transport shuttle was taken by the U.S. presi-
dent on 5 January 1972. About 7 billion dollars were required to develop
and manufacture two flying prototypes of this ship. The first manned
orbital flight of the shuttle is planned for 1979. and the start of opera-
tional flights for 1980.

In proposing that western Europe participate in its long-range space pro-
gram. the United States was pursuing two main goals.

The long-range goal was to impede western Europe from developing its own
carrier missiles capable of orbiting applications satellites that would
compete with the American ones, since the relatively broad participation
in the American program would necessitate funding that exceeded the total
expenses of Western Europe on the Joint space projects.

The second purpose was of a more competitive and specific nature. In pre-
senting its "post-Apollo“ program as an international one. NASA was hoping
to win greater support in Congress for obtaining multibillion allocations
for this program supposedly in the name of "Atlantic solidarity" and carry-
ing out its international obligations.

After the peak reached in 1966. the 0.5. Congress constantly reduced the
NASA budget. and by the beginning of the 1970's it had a budget that was

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

half the amount of 1966. This led to a decline in the workload and even
to the closing down of certain NASA scientific research centers. The
NASA director J. Fletcher admitted that "critics of the program (HASA.

author) have used this period of ambiguity to foster the impression that
NASA has carried out its historic mission and now can be disbanned."2‘

For precisely this reason. in the first stage, when the new program had
still not been approved either by the president or Congress. NASA showed
particular activity around this question. in offering Europe the most
advantageous and broad conditions for participating in all stages of the
program. but after the allocations for the program had been approved.
NASA gradually narrowed its proposals for the participation of the Euro-
pean countries in it.

These conclusions are affirmed by the entire course of the American-
European talks on the participation of Western mrope in the ”post-Apollo"
program and which were held over a number of years and were characterised
by upswings and falls in the mood of the European partners of the United
States.

It was first officially proposed that Western Europe participate in the
future American space program in October 1969 simultaneously with the
submission of this program for review by the 0.8. president. Such a pro-
posal was contained in the statement of the NASA director, '1'. Paine.
Subsequently there followed a series of meetings on various levels be-

tween the Europeans and the Americans. and in the course of them the
given proposal was repeatedly affirmed and broadened.

For the maJor Western European aerospace firms, the proposals of the

Americans were enticing, as they could involve large orders and profits.
Some of these firms. without waiting for a coordinated decision by the
Western Diropean nations. entered into direct contact with the American
firms, and obtained preliminary orders from them to design the individual
systems of future transport spacecraft.

Since participation in the American program would absorb virtually all
the funds allocated by the Western hiropean nations for the Joint space
program. it was necessary to imediately determine the fate of the Euro-
pean carrier missiles, as well as the conditions for obtaining American
delivery systems needed for launching the European satellites. In Septem-
ber 1970 and February 1971, the chairman of the European Space Conference.
the Belgian Theo Lefevre. twicc traveled to the United States to discuss
the political, financial and other conditions of niropean participation

in the future U.S. space program. as well as the question of the possi-
bility of obtaining American launch vehicles to orbit the kuropean
applications satellites.

Without giving firm guarantees to sell American launch vehicles for
launching European comercial satellites, the United States simultaneously

82

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

let it be known thatit would be absurd to develop independent European
delivery systems since they would be obsolete and would be useless with
the appearance of the American reusable transport spacecraft.

As for the participation of the Europeans in developing such spacecraft.
in npite of its initial promises on the broad participation of Hestcrn
Europe in the "post-Apollo" program. beginning in December 1971, the
United States in every possible way restricted the opportunities for such
participation, and after the approval of the program for developing the
transport spacecraft by President Nixon in January 1972. the Americans
radically altered their position and left for the Europeans only the pos-
sibility of participating in the development of one of the elements of
the transport spacecraft. "NASA has obtained what it wanted." wrote the
informed French Journal AIR ET COSMOS. "and what had been the reason for
its proposals to the Europeans, namely the credits to build its transport
spacecraft. Consequently. the time has passed of generosity and a policy
of a 'condescending elder brother' who offers his broad aid to the 'under-
developed' nations."28

Unemployment in the 0.8. aerospace industry as well as the circumstance
that the transport spacecraft was to be used for military purposes. as
was frankly stated by the NASA leaders,played an important role in re-
ducing European participation.’9

After the hopes of western Europe had evaporated for equal partnership
in developing the transport spacecraft and consequently for using it to
orbit satellites, and here there was no guarantee that in the future
ordinary American rockets would be for sale. again the urgent question
arose of developing Europe's own powerful launch vehicle. - However. the
profound differences of opinion between the European partners Over the
American proposals as well as the technical setbacks in developing the
Europa-2 rocket for a long time did not make it possible for the inter-
ested nations to come to any coordinated decision.

On 9 October 1972, on the eve of the planned European Space Conference,
President Nixon made a statement which the Western European circles in-
terested in participating in a future American program, interpreted as

a guarantee for the delivery of carrier missiles to Europe without any
restrictions. ﬂixon said: "The United States is ready to provide car-
rier missiles to any nations and international organizations for launch-
ing satellites for peaceful purposes. if this is compatible with current
international agreements."30

France reacted with a certain amount of mistrust to this statement. On
this question the press wrote: "France is not certain of the possibility
of receiving American carriers, and the new statement by President Nixon
containing the same restrictions as before should not change anything in
this sense."31

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Attention was drawn to the fact that the stipulation on compatability with
existing international agreements applied primarily to the agreement about
the American-controlled Intelsat space communications system. Article XIV
of this agreement placed serious restrictions on the participation of
Intelsat members in other international space comunications systems. it
they, in the opinion of the Intelsat assembly, could cause economic loss
to this organization. Under this pretext the United States could refuse
to sell missiles to launch the Mopean comunications satellites.

In December 1972 and July 1973, after long hesitation, the Mopean space
conference decided to accept American conditions on participating in the
development of the transport spacecraft. The project which was named
Spacelab was to be based on a series of agreements concluded between the
western European nations and also with the United States.

0n 1’: August 1973, the United States and nine European countries (Belgium.
Great Britain, the Netherlands. Denmark. Spain. Italy, France, West Germany
and Switzerland) concluded an Intergovernmental Agreement on a Cooperative
Program for the Development. Delivery and Use of a Space Laboratory for the
Space Transport System. In further developing this agreement, BRO. on
behalf of the Hestern European countries, and NASA on behalf of the United
States, on 2': September 1973 signed a memrandum which fixed the under-
standing on procedural and technical questions involved in carrying out the
project.” Moreover, the internal relationships between the Western Euro-
pean partners and also between them and 23110 were regulated by still an-
other agreement. 33

In accord with the understanding reached, the Western European nations
promised, in working through ERG. to develop, create and deliver an or-
bital laboratory to the United States by the end of 1978; this laboratory
would be repeatedly put into a low orbit and returned to the earth as an
inseparable component of the American transport spacecraft.“ The labora-
tory consisting of two parts (a four-man living module and an open in-
strument platform) designed-for conducting scientific and applied experi-
ments and research.

Thus, although Spacelab was called an orbital laboratory. in actuality it
was not an autonomous space object but rather one of the elements of an
American spacecraft inseparably linked to it during the entire flight.

Having created Spacelab. the cost of which has now been estimated at 500
million dollars, Hestern Flu-ope would then put it actually under the com-
plete control of the United States. The intergovernmental agreement gave
the United States the right of "full control" over the first Spacelab,
including the final determination or the purposes of its use (Article VII D).
The European partners merely gained the right of Joint planning and the

free carrying out of experiments during the first flight; they were also
promised that a citizen from one of the western European countries would

be a crew member (Article VII 3, G).

810
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As for the conditions for the subsequent use of the American transport space-
craft by the Western European countries, in the agreements these conditions
were defined very imprecisely. It wan merely said that during the future
Spacelab flights, the experiments would be carried out either on a cooper-
ative or a commercial basis. In the latter instance the European partners
would be given preference in comparison over third countries only in select-
ing the experiments (Article VII A, B). If the European nations wanted to
launch a Spacelab for their own needs, they would be obliged to cover the
complete launching expenses as they do presently for their satellites.

As has been assumed by the West German legal expert, von Preuschen, a maJor-
ity of the future flights will be made under the condition that the Europeans

pay the launching expenses.35

The United States did not assume any firm obligations to order a certain
number of additional Spacelabs in western Europe.36 The agreement merely
provided that the United States would refrain from developing its own orbi-
tal laboratories if these would "essentially duplicate" the design and capa-
bilities of Spacelab (Article v).

The monopolistic aspects of these agreements. in the definition of the
French scientist Stoebner,37 are also manifested in the fact that ESRO
promises to make available to NASA all information and documents dealing
with Spacelab, while the United States would provide Western Europe with
information on the transport spacecraft only within the limits needed for
the development of Spacelab.

In signing the memorandum on the Spacelab Project, the U.8. acting secre-
tary of state and the chairman of the European Space Conference stated that
the concluding of this agreement "marked the beginning of a new age" in
space cooperation between the United States and the western European
nations.3

An analysis of the agreements shows that there are no serious grounds for

such an evaluation. western Europe acts not as an equal partner in develop—
ing the future space system, for which it has worked for a number of years,

but rather as a subcontractor supplying at its own expense one of the im-
portant elements for the American space transport system.

On the basis of what has been stated, the following conclusions can be
drawn.

The United States is carrying out extensive and diverse activities in the

space area and these activities have been given active support by the state
system. It would be wrong to underestimate the results of these activities
or their influence on international political and scientific-technical life.

The legal bases for the NASA international programs were established in
the National Aeronautics and Space Act approved by the U.S. Congress in 1958.

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The appropriate international agree-ants can be concluded in the form of
treaties approved “with the advice and consent of the Senate.“ as well as

"executive” and agency-to-agency agreements.

Many U.S. international space programs have been aimed at extracting vari-
ous unilateral benefits and advantages. In a nunber of agreements, the
United States has imposed unequal conditions on its partners. This is true
of the maJor international Bpacelab program in accord with which Western
Europe is to develop one or the elements of the new American space system.

On the other hand, the experience of carrying out the Soviet-American
SoyuznApollo ProJect shows that under the condition of the strict ob-
servance or the principles of equality and mutual benefit, the objective
scientific-technical, economic and political prerequisites can be widely
used for developing cooperation in the space sphere among states with dif-
ferent social systems.

PM

1. "Statements by Presidents of the United States on International Coopera-
tion in Space. A Chronology; October EST-August 1971." Washington,
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1971; B. Galloway, "Congress and Inter-
national Space Cooperation," ”International Cooperation in Outer Space:
A Symposium," U.s. Senate, Doc. II 57-92. 1971. pp 34?; R. P. Packard,
"Space Activities in the State Department," ”International Cooperation
in Outer Space: A Symposium," U.S. Senate, Doc. !! 57-92, 1971, pp 55-610.

2. See, for example, the statement or Congressnmn Hechler ("Hearing Before
the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flights of the Committee on Space and
Astronautics," "0.8. House of Representatives." 1972, 31/V, p 25). See
also the opinion of the former U.S. Ambassador to the USSR, 1". Kohler
(”U.S.-Soviet Cooperation in Space," University of Miami, 197’“ p n).

3. Rational Aeronautics and Space Act, Public Law 85-568.

h. See, for example, the book by the leader or the NASA International Pro-
grams Department: A. H. Prutkin. "International Cooperation in Space,"
1965. pp 8, 112.

5. "International Cooperation in Outer Space: A Symposium," p 6.

6. "United States International Space Program. Staff Report Prepared for
the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences," United States Senate,

30 July 1965. p 1.

7. The concluding or executive agreements by the U.S. government is based
not on constitutional provisions but on practice (A. M. Belonogov,
"The Btecutive Agreement as a Form of U.S., International Obligations,"

ssmusxosomu. POLITIKA, IDEOIDGIYA. No 6, 1913. pp 8-19).
86 '3
1
son orncm. uss om;

l
g
8.

10.
11.
12.

13.

1h.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

21.
22.
23.
2h.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. 1!. Lay, H. J. Taubenfcld. "The Law Relating to Acvitities of Man in
Space," Chicago, 1970, pp 233-236; "United States International Space
Programs. . . ." pp h-6.

A. H. Frutkin, "NASA's International Space Activities," "International
Cooperation in Outer Space: A Symposium," p 13. According to other
American sources, the number or various NASA international agreements
has reached 800 ("legal Implications c: Remote Sensing from Outer
Space," Sthhoff--bcyden, 1976, p la).

"NASA International Programs." Washington. Mar 1973.

Communications Satellite Act, Public Law 87-62h.

For more detail on this, see Chapter It (Part II).

"Hearing Before the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences."
United States Senate, 11 March 1910, Washington. 0.8. Government Print-
ing Office, 1970. pp 995-997.

THE CLEAR LAIG REVS CITIZEN, 13 February 1975.

According to a statemnt made by one of the IIASA leaders in 1975. for
several subsequent years the United States would receive 150-170 million
dollars annually from foreign nations for providing carrier missiles
and carrying out launches (AVIATION WEEK AND SPACE TECHNOLOGY, lo 19.
1975. p 11; No 20, 1975. p 11)-

"Questions About Aeronautics and Space," NASA Doc., 1976.

AIR er cosuos, No 310. 1969. p 16.

AIR ET COSMOS, No 1:52, 1972, pp 16-17.

"NASA International. Programs," April 1972, p 11.

G. S. Khozin, "Kosmicheskiye Issledovaniya i Vneshrwaya Politika 8811A,"
[U.S. Space Research and Foreign Policy], Moscow, Znaniye, 1969.

R. F. Packard, 0p. cit., p 55.

For more detail on this proJect, see Chapter 3 (Part II).

NASA has around 20 stations on the territory of other states.

For the agreement between NASA and ISRO on these questions, see Doc.

£330 sp-lo. pp 33o-33h. At present this station belongs to the Euro-
pean Space Agency.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30.
31.

32.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Space Shuttle," Rockwell International. Space Division. 1976.

J. Fletcher. "Rourke to the Salt Lake City Rotary Club." nan nus.
6 June 1972, p l.

A. locker. "'Ihe Discussions Between Mrope and the United States on
Participation in the Post-Apollo Program." 3880/2100 wLLBI'IN, lo 19,

1972. pp 5-7.

AIR ET COWS, No “:2, 1972, p 12.

'lhe RASA director. J. Fletcher, in a speech of 6 June 1972. said:
"The spacecraft will he of inportant military use" (J. Fletcher. 0p.
cit., p 3).

AIR 3T COSMOS, lo 1052. 1972. pp 16-17.

Ibid.. p 17.

The texts of the agremnt can he found in: "hearings Before the
Col-ittee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 30 October 1973."
\inshington, 0.8. Government Printing Office, 19710, pp 121-135.
Doc. BSRO/c (73)2, Rev. 3.

The first flight is planned for 1980.

R. F. von Preuschen, ”International Cooperation in the Use of Space
Laboratories.” ”Proc. XVIIth Colloq. Lav Outer Space," California,

1975. p 236.

In August 1976, NASA informed the European Space Agency of its inten-
tion to order a second Spacelab.

A. H. Stoehner. "Stations spatiales presentes st futures: technique
et droit." "Proc. XVII Colloq. Lav Outer Space." pp 320-321.

2330 mm, no 5. 1973. p 2.

88

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

CHAPTHI 6: THE ROLE OF THE UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL NONGOVERMGNTAL
ORGANIZATIONS IN WORKING WT AND WWII“! SPACE PROGRAMS

The presently existing international "space" organisations can conditionally
be divided into two groups: the so-called operational organisations set up
for directly carrying out international scientific or applied space programs.
and organizations the mission of which includes assisting the development

of space research, the Joint discussion of the obtained results as well as

a study and elaboration of the legal aspects of space development.

In the former of these groups, belong, for example, the European Space
Agency as well as the international Intersputnik and Intelsat communication
satellite organizations. They. as a rule. are established by states, they
possess large financial assets and have their own scientific and technical
facilities.

The second group of organisations (to which this chapter is devoted). with-
out carrying out independent work involving the use of space equipment,
nevertheless plays an important role in developing cooperation in space
research on the broadest international basis. Among these organizations
we will find both interstate as well as international nongovernmental or-
ganizations.

l. The United Nations and Its Specialized Agencies

The Resolution of the UN General Assembly approved in 1961 states that the
United Nations should be the "center for international cooperation in the
research and use of space for peaceful purposes."1 In the Ull system, the
Comittee for the Use of Space for Peaceful Purposes, a body specially
established by the UN General Assembly, plays primarily the role of such
a center.

The special role of the Committee is explained by the fact that it is the
sole special intergovernmental body it which the states belonging to dif-
ferent social systems can Jointly discuss the broadest range or political,
legal and scientific-technical questions arising in the process of space
development.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

Initially the couittee was confronted with numerous difficulties caused by
American attempts to secure in one form or another a predominant position
on the committee and its bodies. The USSR, in initiating the proposal to
organize extensive international cooperation in space development through
the United Nations. saw to it that such cooperation was equally based.
Since space problems were closely linked to important aspects of ensuring
state security, the principle of equality in the organizing and function-
ing of the UN Space Committee was of decisiVe significance. For this
reason it is quite natural that the USSR, the other socialist states. as
well as India and the UAR remsed to participate in the committee's work
with its initial membership when of the 18 member states of the Committee.
12 were 0.3. allies in political-military bloom:

On 12 December 1959. the UN General Assembly unanimously approved Resolu-
tion 11:72 (XIV) which established the Committee for the Use of Space for
Peaceful Purposes as one of the permanent UN committees and established
its new membership. On the basis of a compromise agreement, the Committee
included 210 nations representing the three basic groups of states existing
in the modern world.3

However, another several years past before conditions could be created
needed for the normal work of the Committee and it could begin its practi-
cal activities. The first session of the Committee with its full member-
ship was held only in March 1962.

The UN Space Committee was confronted with a series of tasks. including
aiding further space research started during the period of the 10!. the
disseminating of infomation, providing help in carrying out national re-
search prograns, and studying the legal problems of space development.
The Committee had to provide a close tie with all governmental and non-
governmental organimations involved in space questions.

For a more concrete study of the ways and methds for organizing coopera-
tion, the Comittee organized two subcomittees each with a full membership:
one for the purposes of discussing scientific and technical questions, and
the other on the legal aspects of cooperation. Later on under the Comittee
and its scientific and technical subconmittee, three special work groups
were formed: for the use of satellites for navigation purposes, direct
broadcasting and the study of earth resources from space.5 The Committee
submits reports on its activities to the UN General Assembly.

In accord with the understanding reached in 1961, the decisions of the
Comittee and its bodies are taken without voting on the basis of the

rule of consensus. The consensual taking of decisions without voting,

in being used presently ever more widely in the UN bodics and at inter-
national conferences, prevents the imposition of unacceptable decisions

on states. The positive significance of the consensus rule, in particular
for the codification and progressive development of international law.

has been noted both by Soviet as well as foreign international law expolrrts.6

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00860R000100030007-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

The clone link between scientific-technical and legal aspects of coopera-
tion among states in the development of space is clearly manifested in the
role which the UN Space Comittee plays in working out the procedures of
international space law. Hithin'this body. scientists. diplomats and legal
a-xperts Inw: an opportunity to discuss Jointly the most complex problems
or international law posed by the development of the leading areas of
science and technology.

In accord with Article 13 of the UN Charter. the General Assembly is bound
to organize research and make recomendations for the purposes or encourag-
ing and progressively developing international law. Consequently. assist-
ance in the development of international space law is part of the direct
duties of the United Nations in accord with its Charter. Due to the uni-
vernal nature of its membership and the tasks confronting it. the United
Nations and its bodies, including the Space Committee. are the most suit-
able place for an international legal regulation of the space activities

0: states.

Upon the initiative and with the active participation of the USSR and the
other socialist countries. the United Nations has been concerned with the
examination of a majority of the legal questions of cooperation among
states in space. The USSR and other socialist countries have endeavored
to prevent space from being turned into an arena of international con-
flicts and to make it an area of peaceml cooperation mong all states of
the world. The elaboration of the agreements which presently comprise
the basis of international space law and order was a major achievement of
the UN Space Comittee and its legal subcomittee.’

At present the practice of elaborating new common procedures of inter-
national space law has become even more complex. In accord with the UN
Seneral Assembly recomendations. the Legal Subcommittee of the U]! Space
Comittee is to study and coordinate the drafts submitted by the states;
then the approved drafts are turned over for further review to the UN
Space Committee and through it to the UN General Assembly which. in turn.
in approving these drafts. appends then to its resolutions and recommends
them for signing by all interested states.0

In accord with the resolution approved by the U1! General Assembly at its
31st session in 1976. the Legal Subcommittee of the UN Space Comittee
with an equal degree of priority is to be concerned with examining a draft
treaty for the moon, the question of working out the principles for the
use of satellites by states for direct television broadcasting. and the
question of the legal consequences of remote sounding or the earth from
space.

At present. almost 20 years after the establishing of the UK Space Committee.
it can definitely be said that its basic achievement has been law making
activities in the area of space law, and the regulating of legal relation-
ships among states in the process of the development of space.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Comittee has been significantly less successful in the inaediate organis-
ing of international space research programs. As can be seen from the pre-
ceding text, this aspect of state activities in space has been basically the
concern of other organisations. Such work is also carried out on the basis
of bilateral and multilateral agreements. The UN Space Comittee as yet

does not have any substantial influence on the specific types of Joint space
programs.

However it would be wrong to underestimate the role of the Cmittee as a
catalyst of international cooperation in the scientific and technical area.
Thus, the Committee carried out important work to organize the international
research rocket launching ranges under UN aegis.

In 1962. the UN General Assembly directed the attention of states to the
advisability of setting up international rocket ranges, and approved the
basic principles which their establishment should meet.9 The setting up of
such ranges by individual nations or groups of nations should contribute

to a deepening of international. collaboration in the development of space
and the training of specialists in the developing nations. The carrying

out of systematic rocket sounding in th' equatorial regions is of particu-
lar scientific interest-for research in the area of meteorology and aeronomy.

The principles which the states should follow in setting up the interna-
tional ranges are contained in the report of the UN Space Comittce of
27 September 1962.)0 These principles stipulate. in particular, that re-
sponsibility for the leadership of the ranges and their operation is born
by the states on whose territory these ranger are located. The ranges
can be used only for carrying out scientific experiments for peaceful
purposes. The UN Space Comittee and the world scientific community are
to be informed ahead of time on the purposes and preliminary schedule

for conducting the experiments. The results of the research carried out
should be published in unclassified periodicals.

The relations between the range-owning states and the user states are de-
termined on the basis of the corresponding agreements. At each range a
consultative council is to be set up consisting of representatives from
the scientific circles of the user nations. The range is taken over by
the United h‘ations by the General Assembly in accord with a recommendation
of the UN Space Comittee.

The governments of India and Argentina turned to the United Nations with a
request for it to take over the rocket ranges being developed on their
territories. International groups of scientists who visited the site of
the ranges for an inspection recomended that this request be granted. In
response to the recomendations of the UN Space Comittee. the General
Assembly in 1965 put the Indian rocket range in Thumbs under UN aegis, and
in 1959, the Argentine range at Mar del Plata. Brazil is also considering
the possibility of establishing an international range on its territory.
0n the question of organising international ranges, Italy and France have
officially announced that the equitorial mobile range of San Marco and the

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

space center of Kourou in Guiana which belong to them could also be used
for Joint international projects under UK sponsorship.

Another important measure which has had a catalyzing effect on the develop-
ment of international space cooperation was the setting up of the Inter-
national Conference for Research and Use of Space for Peaceful Purposes

by the United Nations in August 1968 in Vienna. The conference organized
under Soviet initiative has become a worldwide forum at which 78 nations
and 13 international organizations summed up the first decade of space
research. At the conference the focus was to show in what manner the re-
sults of this research could help in solving the practical problems con-
fronting the developing natiOns. At the conference around 200 papers

were presented and these were heard at 10 special-subJect sessions a: well
as in the course of special discussions.H

The US Space Committee also carries out useful activity in coordinating

the work of various international organizations in the space research area.
Contributing to this work, in particular, are the reviews published regu-
larly by the UN Secretariat upon the request of the Committee of activities
and resources of the United Nations, its specialized agencies and the other
competent international bodies Involved in the use of space for peaceful
purposes.‘2 In accord with Article XI of the space treaty. the UN Secre-
tariat is also concerned with the collection and distribution of informa-
tion concerning the activities of states in space. Such information is
provided on a voluntary basis by many countries, and is published periodi-
cally in the series of UN documents. Since 1962. the Department on Space
Questions of the U3 Secretariat has been keeping an official register in
which information provided by the states on objects launched into space

i: kept.

The Uh Space Committee and Its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee de-
vote a great deal of attention to seeking out opportunities to provide aid
to the developing nations in the area of education and professional train-
ing for personnel involved in the practical use of space technology. Over
the last several years, the "UH Program for the Application of Space Tech-
nology" has been carried out under the leadership of the Committee. within
this program. a number of UK member nations have provided scholarships for
training specialists from the developing nations. For the same purposes.
each year the United Nations holds meetings, seminars and practical ses-
sions in various nations, in particular on questions related to the use
of remote sounding methods for studying earth resources and environmental
conservation. The 3lst General Assembly Session approved the UN program
on the use of space technology and recommended that it be continued.

Within the system of the United Nations, a whole series of groups of
specialized agencies is also concerned to one degree or another with the
questions of cooperation in space development.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The International Telecommmication Union (ITU) holds first place among
them in terms of the quantity and range of work related to space. Space
research is inconceivable without the use of telecommunications. The I'm
and the bodies under it are concerned with allocating the radio bands on
an international basis for various types of space activities and radio-
astronow for the purpose of preventing interference.

The wireless cosnunications regulations worked out at the worldwide admin-
istrative radio conferences of the nu are also applied to the International
Telecomunication Convention and have the force of an international treaty.
The first attempt at allocating radio bands for space research was made in
1959. However in 1963 it was essential to revise the assigning of fre-
quency bands for the various services of space wireless comunications,

and this was explained by the limited nature of the radio spectrum and

the ever growing demand for the use of radio frequencies.

In June-July 1971. the Worldwide Administrative Radio Conference on Space
Comunications was reconvened in Geneva. 0n the basis of the proposals
by ITU members, the conference at which 100 states were represented re-
viewed thc entire range of questions related to the use of wireless com-
munications in the development of space. including the problem of the
placing of satellites in a geostationary orbit and the use of satellites
for direct broadcasting. 'Ihe wireless communications regulation which
was revised at this conference came into force on 1 January 1973. The
last worldwide Administrative Radio Conference on Space Conunications
was held in January-February 1971. At this conference a number of impor-
tant decisions were taken related to assigning positions for radio broad-
casting satellites in a geostationary orbit.1

The World Meteorological Organization (WC. is another example of a special-
ised UN agency which is largely involved with space research. The world
Heather Service and the Program for Studying Global Atmospheric Processes
are the two basic long-range HMO proJects which to a decisive degree rely
0n the use of satellites.1

The United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNSCO)
has shown an ever greater interest in the use of space technology. In par-
ticular, a specially created group of experts for a number of years has

been concerned with working out the areas of mo activities on the use

of space communications for educational, scientific and cultural purposes.

The use of setellites for the purposes of navigation, radio position find-
ing of aircraft and ships and traffic control are within the sphere of
interests of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the
Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization (11400). The last of
these organizations has done significant work in discussing the technical,
economic and legal aspects of an international satellite system for serv-
ing maritime navigation, and in 1975 convened an intergovernmental confer-
ence for examining the question of establishing the appropriate international
organisation. '6

9!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Food and Agriculture Granulation (PAO) also has contributed to the
development of international cooperation in the area of using satellites
to study and protect the earth's resources. and the World Health Organisa-
tion (who) has been interested in the possibilities of utilizing the most

recent achievasents in the area of space biology and aedicine for public
health.

The above-mentioned as well as other specialized UN agencies have made their
contribution to developing international space cooperation mainly by ex-
changing intonation and coordinating national research programs or infti-
sting international proJects. Some of them. in particular the ITU. have
carried out important functions of international regulation and codification
in this area. None of these organisations is engaged in direct activities
in npuce.l7

2. International Nongovermental Organisations

Let us examine the structure and the basic forms of activity of two non—
mvernmcntal scientific organizations which play an important role in the
development of international space cooperation. These are the International

Committee for Spue Research (COSPAR) and the International Astronautical
Federation.”

The significance of these organizations in establishing contacts between
scientists and scientific organizations in individual countries was par-
ticularly great during the initial period of space activities. when the
intergovernmental organizations in the given area had not yet been set up
or were not functioning. Because of this COSPAR activities assumed a semi-
oi'i'icial nature, and this was reflected in its charter. procedural rules
and methods of work. The resolutions and recoamiendations made by COSPAR
have had an indirect impact on the law-aaking process in the area of space
law. Within the International Astronautical Federation since 1960 there
has existed the International Institute of Space Law and this has been ac-

tively concerned with the doctrinal elaboration of the most urgent legal
problems.

Although COSPAR and the International Astronautical Federation, in being
nongovernmental organizations. do not possess an international legal
personality. their study is of serious interest for the science of inter-
national space law.

6. I. Morozov has quite rightly noted that the absence of a legal person-
ality in international nongovermental organisations "cannot explain the
insufficient attention paid to them, for many of them have plqed a very
significant role in modem international relations.”” One cannot help
but also agree with c. I. Morozov that "to deny the role of the inter-

national nongovernaental organizations in international relations and the
presence of a certain minimum of legal elements which allow these organi-
zations to operate means to ignore obJective facts. However. to identify

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

these organisations with intergovernmental ones and to recognize them as
principals of international law is at least unrealistic."2°

The International Committee for Space Research (COSPAR) was founded in 1958
for continuing work in the area of cooperation in space research after the
end or the 10! (1951-1958). cosm arose with the rights of a special
comittee or the International Council of Scientific Unions. the organiza-
tion which initiated the IGY.21 This made an impression on the structure
and forms of activity of COSPAR.

The members ofCOSPAR are the acadetnies of sciences and their equivalent
scientific institutions in 31. countries. as well as the following 12 inter-
national scientific unions which comprise the International Council of
Scientific Unions: the International Astronomical Union. the Interna-
tional Geodetic and Geophysical Union. the International Union of Theoreti-
cal and Applied Physics. the International Union of Biological Sciences.

the International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics. the Inter-
national Union of Physiological Sciences. the International Biochemical
Union. the International Scientific Radio Union. the International nethe-
natics Union, the International Union of Theoretical and Applied Biophysics.
the International Union of '11:eoretical and Applied Chemistry, and the Inter-
national Union of Geological Sciences.

Each of these scientific unions is concerned with various aspects of space
research. The participation of the unions in COSPAR activities makes it
possible for it to consider the interests of the various scientific disci-
plines in examining the results and the plans of space research.

hiring the first year of its existence (up to November 1959). COSPAR was
directed by a temporary charter. Life showed that certain provisions of
this charter, particularly those concerned with membership in the Con-ittee
as well as the structure and powers of its leading bodies. did not meet
the serious tasks confronting COSPAR, and did not create the bases for
equal participation in its work for the scientific organisations of the
socialist countries. Due to the fact that the meabership and organiza-
tional principles of COSPAR did not provide the grounds for fruitful in-
ternational cooperation in arrying out scientific research in space. and
the proposals of the USSR Acadew of Sciences aimed at broadening the rep-
resentation of scientists from different nations on the Cousittee were re-
Jected by a majority of votes. the USSR Acadenv of Sciences was forced to
abandon further participation in COSPAR work. It resumed its activities

in COSPAR only after its new charter had come into force. and this appeared
after extensive discussions and was the result of a compromise agreement
between the scientific agencies of various nations. The history of the
elaboration of the COSPAR charter indicates that international nongovern-
mental organizations in the space area are closely tied to interstate re-
lations and are influenced by the contradictions between the various socio-
economic systems. .

96
roe ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

According to the charter approved in November 1959. the general assembly.
the executive council and the bureau are the basic leading COSPAR bodies.
In the intervals between the general assemblies. the activities of the
Committee are directed by the executive council which includes seven rep-
resentatives from the scientific institutions of the countries elected at
the general assembly and one representative from all the scientific member
unions of COSPAR. The executive council can meet with a restricted member-
ship of the seven elected members who form the bureau. All the decisions
of the executive council are considered binding only in the instance that
they are supported by two-thirds of the votes of the elected members.

The charter specially stipulates that the voting method for the COSPAR
officials (the president. two vice presidents and the four bureau members)
"should be such as to provide representation corresponding to the distribu-

tion of basic efforts in space research among the COBPAR members" (Article
III .

In accord with this provision, the procedural rules of COSPAR provide a
special procedure for electing officials under which one of the COSPAR
vice presidents is elected by the general assembly from candidates sub-
mitted by the USSR Academy of Sciences and the other from among candidates
submitted by the 0.8. National Academy of Sciences. Two members of the
bureau are elected from a list of candidates submitted by one vice presi-
dent, and the other two from a list of candidates submitted by the other
vice president. The president is elected from among candidates submitted
by the executive council or directly by the general assembly.

The basic mission of COSPAR is on an international scale to contribute to
progress in all types of scientific research conducted using rockets,
rocket transports and balloons (Article I of the Charter). COSPAR is
concerned only with fundamental scientific research, excluding from its
activities the problems of space technology related to the designing of
missiles, engines, missile flight control. and so forth.

Like other international scientific organizations, COSPAR does not directly
conduct scientific research. Its sessions discuss the obtained results

and work out recommendations on planning and coordinating scientific ex-
periments carried out under national and international programs. COSPAR
does not have the right to pass any binding decisions relating to the
national scientific research programs.

COSPAR carries out its basic scientific activities in eight working groups.
At the annually held sessions of these groups, information is exchanged on
space research programs being carried out and planned. The recommendations
of the working groups represent the authoritative opinion of the inter-
national collective of scientists in a certain area of space science.
Although these recommendations cannot be viewed as international legal
documents, they do carry great weight in scientific circles. In carrying
out their space activities, as a rule, the states consider them.

97
FOR 0F?ICIAL "SB ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first COSPAR working group is concerned with the scientific problems
of satellite tracking using optical and radio equipment, as well as study-
ing the dynamics of satellite motion. This keeps a list of the tracking
stations and this is published in the COSPAR Information Bulletin. The
group has worked out a special manual on organizing optical observation
stations. It gives great attention to preparing international cooperative
programs in the area of space geodesy.

The second and fourth COSPAR working groups are concerned with examining
the results and coordinating scientific experiments to study the inter-
planetary medium. the magnetosphere and the upper atmosphere. One of
these groups participated in elaborating a new major international draft
on studying the magnetosphere. The result of the work of the fourth group
was the compilation of an ”International Atmosphere Reference" which gave
important intonation for experimenters and practical workers on the aver-
age characteristics and composition of the atmosphere at various altitudes
and their variations related to the time of day, season, phase of solar
activity, and so forth.

The moon and the planets of the solar system are the subject of study of
the seventh working group. The problems of the use of space technology
for solving astrophysical problems. including the forecasting of solar
flares. are the concern of the third COBPAR working group. The sixth
working group assists in international cooperation in the area of using
satellites and rockets for meteorological purposes and the investigation
of the earth from space. With its help, in particular. the rocket sensing
of the atmosphere has been coordinated in the various countries. The
eighth group examines the theoretical and experimental problems related
to the behavior of various materials under space conditions. Finally,
one other COSPAR group (the fifth) has as its task an investigation of
space bioloy problems.

In 1962, the COSPAR contultative group on the questions of the potentially
harmful consequences of experiments conducted in space was established.
This group has operated as the basic center of the International Council
of Scientific Unions for reviewing the consequences of space experiments
which could represent a danger from the viewpoint of changing the natural
environment or cause interference for further research. The recon-benda-
tions of the group, after their approval by the COSPAR executive council,
have been disseminated in the various nations and international organiza-
tions. In particular, this group has given a great deal of attention to
the measures of preventing microbiological contamination of the earth
and planets in the course of space experiments.23

The COSPAR sessions are held annually in various countries. During these
sessions. in addition to scientific and organizational meetings. the general
assembly of COSPAR members is held and at this papers are presented by the
national scientific institutions and international organizations on the
results of space research conducted during the year. Thus, the OOSPAR

98
pct: orncm. uss om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sessions annually sum up the results of work done throughout the world on
the study of space.

COSPAR publishes an information bulletin which appears in English.2“ as
well as the works of its annual sessions. It maintains close ties with a
number of international organizations. including the UN Space Committee.
which has granted it consultative status in accord with the UN General
Assembly Resolution 1721 (XVI) of 20 December 1961.25

The International Astronautics Federation is the other nongovernmental
scientific organization which aids actively in extensive international
exchange of results and plans in the area of the development of space
science and technology.2 The federation arose in 1950 as an association
of eight national societies interested in the problems of rocket produc-
tion and space research. The International Astronautical Federation, in
the view of its founders. should become that body which would make it pos-
sible to concentrate the efforts of many countries for the preparations
and subsequent execution of an interplanetary flight.

The first federation charter approved in 1952 in Stuttgart stated that the
Federation "set as its goal to aid in the founding of an International
Astronautical Scientific Research Institute the task of which would be to
carry out space flights for nonmilitary purposes" (Article 6). Although
this task of the Federation has remained unrealized and obviously could
not be carried out by the forces of an international public organization.
it plays an important role in the development of international cooperation
in space research. Its activities increased particularly after the launch-
ing of the first satellite.

The Federation is presently led by a charter approved in 1961 in Hashington.
with amendments made in 1968 and 197%. It brings together around 60
national astronautical societies from 37 countries. Each nation can be
represented on the Federation by several national societies, but only one
of them has the right to vote in the leading bodies.

The charter reinforces the provision according to which the role of the
country in space research should be considered in the elections to the
leading bodies of the Federation. as well as the principle of a Just geo-
graphic distribution.

The general assembly is the superior body of the Federation. Its member-
ship includes one representative from each federation member. The assembly
meets annually in different regions of the world simultaneously with the
astronautical congresses. In the intervals between the sessions of the
assembly. the current work is carried out by a bureau.

Within the Federation several standing committees have been created. These

are for bioastronautics. on educational questions. applications satellites.
publications. and others. The astronautical congresses which are organized

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICI'AL USE ONLY

annually by the Federation hold a central place in its activities. The
first such congress was held in Paris in 1950. Since then they have been
held regularly in different nations bf the world. The sessions of the
astronautical congresses are attended by scientists and specialists of
virtually all nations engaged in work in the area of space r---earch. The
subJects of the papers given at the congresses, as a rule, encompass a broad
range of scientific and technical questions related to space research. in-
cluding questions of a social and legal nature.

The Federation maintains close ties with a number of intergovernmental
organizations. In particular, it has been given ponsultative status under
UNESCO as well as the UN Economic and Social Council. and also observer
status on the UN Space Committee.

Soviet scientists have participated in the activities of the Federation
starting with its sixth congress (1955). In 1956. at the seventh Inter-
national Astronautical Congress in Rome, the Cosmission on Interplanetary
Communications under the USSR Academy of Sciences” was admitted to the
Federation.

within the framework and under the leadership of the Federation two other
international organizations established in 1960 also carry out their ac-
tivities. These are the International Acadew of Astronautics" and the
International Institute of Space Law the membership of which includes
scientists elected for life who are well known for their achievements in
the area of astronautics and space law.

The interest of the Federation in the problems of space law was initially
reflected in the establishing of the Standing Legal Comittee. 'lhis was
established in August 1958 during the linth International Astronautical
Congress upon the initiative of the prominent American legal expert E.
Haley who at that time was the Federation president. In 1959. before the
Comittee had actually begun its work. a decision was made to transfonl
it into the International Space Law Institute. The charter of the Insti-
tute was approved in August 1960. in Stockholm.

The tasks of the Institute include the holding of international colloquium
on space law. the carrying out of special research. publishing activities.
the awarding of prizes. and so forth. At present around 1.00 legal experts
from 158 nations are members of the Institute. The work of the Institute

is headed by a council of directors with 15 members elected by the general
assembly for a period of 3 years. In electing the nembers of the council.
the principle of adequate representation of the various legal systens of
the world should be considered.

The basic activities of the Institute (like those of the International
Academy of Astronautics) consist in organizing scientific conferences and
publishing the works of these conferences." Under the leadership of the
Institute each year international colloquium are held on space law. These

100
ml OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contribute to the scientific elaboration ot‘ the most complex questions or
international space law. The organizing of these colloquiums within the
international astronautical congresses provides the representatives or
natural and social science: with an unique opportunity to discuss Jointly
the scientific-technical and social problems related to the study and de-
velopment or space.30

In describing the significance of COSPAR and the International Astronauti-
cal Federation, the American legal experts 8. bay and H. Taubeni'eld have
Jointly emphasized their important role in exchanging scientific and tech-
nical intonation and in "the generating of ideas." As these authors note,
COSPAR and the Federation, being nongovernmental organizations, do not es-
tablish international procedures directly. although in certain instances
their research and activities can bear directly on the positions held by
the governments on the corresponding questions.3l

Above it was already mentioned that to one degree or another a large num-
ber of governmental and nongovernmental international organizations are
concerned with space problems. However, as yet there is no intergovern-
mental space organisation which in terms or its membership pad functions
would have an universal character. In the literature the idea of creating
such an organization has been voiced. for example, similar to the Inter-
national Atomic hergy Agency. Here the plan is that the new organization
should be concerned both with the "operational” aspect of cooperation
among states in space development, that is, the use 01’ space rocketry,

as well as the legal regulation of space activities.

Considering the scope of the national and international space progress
and their proportional amount in international scientific and technical
life, these ideas merit the closest study. However it is obvious that the
creation or such an organization would be Justified only in the instance
that it can introduce a qualitatively new element in international space
cooperation, and would not duplicate the already existing and successfully
operating channels of cooperation.

ME

1. Resolution of the UN General Assembly 1721 (XVI) of 20 December 1961.

2. The Temporary UN Committee for the Use of Space for Peaceful Purposes
with such a membership was set up by the Resolutio: of the UN General
Anne-bu 131:8 (x111) or 13 December 1956.

3. In 1961 and 1973, the membership of the Comittee was increased ini-
tially up to 28. and then up to 37 states (Resolution of the UN
General Assembly 1721 (xvr) or 20 December 1961 and 3182 (mum
of 18 Decanber 1973). For more detail on the history or the setting
up or the UN Space Committee, see: P. N. Kovalev. "The UN Co-ittee

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the Use of Space for Peaceful Purposes,” "Kosmos i Mezhdunarodnoye
Sotrudnichestvo" [Space and International Cooperation], Moscow,
Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya, 1963, pp 77-109.

or great importance for increasing the work of the Cosnittee was the
Resolution of the UN General Assembly 1721 (XVI) of 20 December 1961.

For more detail on the activities of the working groups, see Chapters
3, h and 6 (Part II).

See, for example, A. P. Movchan, "Problem Kodirikatsii i Progressivnogo
Razvitiya Meshdunarodnogo Prava" [Problems of Codification and Progres-
sive Development of International Law], Doctoral Dissertation Resume,
Moscow, 1971:, p 25; E. R. Finch and A. L. Moore, "Outer Space Law and
the Global Comunity," m NATIONAL LAWYER, No II, 19710. P 761;

E. Galloway, “The Future of Space Lew," ”Proc. XIX Colloq. Lav Outer
Space," California, 1977. P 7.

As was noted above, a special systematic examination of these agree-
ments is not part of the current research. The corresponding provi-
sions of the agreements have been analyzed in the work in relation

to a specific problems or cooperation. For a detailed history of

the elaboration and an analysis of these agreements, see: 6. P. Zhukov,
"Kosmicheskoye Pravo," Moscow, Meshdtmarodwye Otnosheniya, 1966;

c. P. Zhukov, "The Questions of the Peaceful Use of Space in U]!
Activities," "00!. Itogi, Tendentsii Perspektivy" [The United lotions.
Results, Friends and Prospects], Moscow, Meshdunarnodme Otnosheniya,
1970, pp 188-228; C. P. Zhukov, "Mezbdunarodnoye Koamicheshoye Pravo,"
Moscow, Znaniye, 1971; Yu. M. Kolosov, "Bor'ba za Mirnyy Kosnos" [The
Struggle for Peaceful Space], Moscow, Meshdunarodnoye Otnosheniya, 1968;
A. S. Piradov, "Kosmos i Mezhdunarodnoyc Prave,” Moscow, Znaniye, 1970;
A. 8. Piradov, "The-Struggle or the USSR for maborating the Provisions
of International Space Law," "Tendentsii Razvitiya Kosmicheskogo

Prave" [Development Trends in Space Law], Moscow, Rauka, 1971, pp 5-32;
0. P. Zedoroznhyy, "The International Legal Status of Space," "Kurs
Mezhdunarodnogo Prava," Moscow, 1972, pp 1514-161; "Mezhdunarodnoye
Kosmicheskoye Pravo" [International Space Law], edited by A. S. Piradov,
Moscow, Mezhdunarnodme Otnosheniya, 197.5, and so forth.

\ . H. Yanovskiy, "The Role of the United Nations in Shaping the Provi-
x—fons of Space Law," SOVETSKDYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, No 11, 1969,

up 65-68.

Resolution of the UR General Assembly 1802 (XVII) or 1h December 1962.

Official Reports of the General Assembly, 17th Session, Appendices,
Point 27 of the Agenda, Doc. A/5181.

102

MR OHICIAL USE ONLY
11.

12.
13.

1h.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

21.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Practical Benefits 11‘ Space Exploration," (A Digest of Papers Pre-
nented at the UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, Vienna. 1968). New York. United Nations, 1969; "Space

Exploration and Applications," United Nations Publication, II 3.69.1.16,
Vols l-ll. '

See, for exasple: Un Doc. A/AC 105/100.

B. G. Mayorakiy, "The Registration of Space Objects," "Mezhdunarodnoye
Kosmicheskoye Pravo," pp 125-1112. The importance or this UN activity
has increased even more after the Convention on the Registration of
ObJects Launched in Space came into force on 15 September 1976.

For the activities of the ITU, see: P. I. Lukin, "The Use of Satellites
for Radio Conunications." "Pravovyye Aspekty Ispol'zovaniya
Iskusstvennykh Bputnikov dlye 'l'seley Heteorologii i Radiosvyazi”

[Legal Aspects of the Use or Satellites for Meteorological and Radio
Communications Purposes]. Edited by 3!. A. Ushakov, Moscow. ﬂanks,

1970. pp 103-126; P. I. Lukin, "Coanunications Satellites and Inter-
national Relations," "licence 1 Problems Vseobshchego Mira" [Space and

the Problem of Universal Peace], Edited by 0. P. Zedorozhnyy, Moscow,
Hanks, 1966, pp 152-160; a. P. Zhukov, "Kosnicheskoye Prawo," pp 178-
198.

For more detail on this see Chapter 5 (Part II). See also: 3. 0.
Vasilevskaya. "Legal Problems of Space Meteoroloy and International
Cooperation," in the book: "Pravovyye Aspekty Ispol'zovaniya
Iskusstvewkh Sputnikov dlya Tseley Meteorologii i Radiosvyasi."
pp 65-102.

The second and third sessions or this conference were held in 1976
(for more detail on this see Chapter 10 (Part II)).

For the role of the specialized UN agencies in the exploration and
development of space, see Ull Doc. AlAC.lOS/100.

For more detail on the history of the founding of these organisations
and their activities in the initial period. see: "home i
Mezhdunarodnoye Pravo," Edited by Ye. A. Korovin, Moscow, Mezhdu-
narodnyye Otnosheniya, 1962, pp 153-170. ,

C. I. Morozov, "Meshdunarodnyye Organisatsii (Ilekotoryye Voprosy
Teorii)" [International Organisations (Certain Questions of Theory”,
Moscow, Mysl', 197%, p h".

Ibid.. p 317.

Ye. D. Lebedkina, "Mezhdunarodm Sovet Nanchmkh Soyuzov i Akadeniya
Rank 888]!" [The International Council of Scientific Unions and the
USSR Acadelw of Sciences], Moscow. Hanks, 1971:, pp 185-196.

103
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
23'

2h.
25-

26.

30.

POI OFFICIAL US! GIL!

Charter of COBPAR (November. 1959).

In 1912. the activities or this consultative groupmteuporarily
halted.

See COSPAR INFORMATION NLLETII, Nos. 1-76, 1960-1976.

For COBPAR also see: R. H. Porter. "International Scientific Co-mity:
ICSU and COBPAR," "International Cooperation in Outer Space: A Sy-poaiun,"
11.3. 333%., DOC. N 57-32, 191?.

On the history or the creation of the Federation, see: A. G. Haley.
"Space Law and Cover-meat," New York, 1963, pp 31037380; "International
Astronautical Federation." Paris, 1971.

Later this comission was renaaed the Omission on the Research and
Use of Space. Since 1976, the Interkosnos Council of the USSR Academy
of Sciences has been a usher of the Federation.

For the history of the rounding and activity of the Acadew, see:

"The International Acadew of Astronautics. The First Decade,” Paris.
1970; c. s. Draper, ”International Acadew or Astronautics," ”Inter-
national Cooperation in Outer Space: A Smosiun," pp 565-575.

Also known are such publications of the Academy and Institute as the
major dictionary on astronautica in seven Duopean languages, the
Journal AS'I'ROMUI‘ICA ACTA, the annual bibliographies on space law.
and so forth.

For more detail on the institute, see: 3. Pepin, "International In-
stitute of Space Lav," "International Cooperation in Outer Space: A

Symposium" pp 515-580.

S. 3. but and II. J. Tauhenfeld. "Tue Lav Relating to Acvitities of
Man in Space," Chicago, 1910. p 238.

105
m OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

PART I': LESAL PROBL£MS OF INTERNATIONAL APPLICATION SPACE SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 1: THE USE OF SPACE FOR EARTH-ORIENTED PURPOSES AND STATE SOVEREIGNTY

In the now customary phrase "research and use" or space. emphasis more and
more is being put on the word "use." This is not a playing down of the
role of fundamental research in space which in the future will hold the
most important place in elucidating the true picture and laws of the world
around us, but rather a quite natural desire to more rapidly put space to
work for man and to help in solving many terrestrial problems.

Communications. meteorology, navigation, and the study of the natural re-
sources of the earth--these are the basic areas or human economic activity
which are now inconceivable without the use of space equipment. In the
sphere of the practical applications or astronautics. the benefit of ex-
tensive international cooperation is particularly great.

The designated areas of space activity directly involve the political and
economic interests of states. For this reason the international legal
problems which must be solved in organizing cooperation assume particular
urgency.

A majority of these problems to one degree or another is related to the
principle of the respect for state sovereignty. underlying modern inter-
national law. The answer to the question or whether or not the given spe-
cific type of space activity could influence the realisation of a state's
inalienable right to :overeignty acts as the starting point in determining
the need to elaborate special legal conditions for this type of activity.
This is why the problem of state sovereignty in terms of the applied use
of space has a general nature and is or great theoretical and practical
significance.

Bourgeois doctrine of international space law has rather well confused the
question of the role or the principle of state sovereignty in international
space law. During the first years of the space age. certain western inter-
national law experts used the universal recognition of the principle of
the freedom of research and use of space as a pretext for attacking state
sovereignty generally, declaring it an "obsolete" concept in the space age.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI ORIGIN. US! ONLY

Nov we are witness of a new attack on state sovereignty related to the in-
cipient age of the active use of space for the practical needs of man.

however. it would be wrong to depict the picture as if such a position was
held by all or a majority or the representatives in the bourgeois science

or space law. Many legal experts in the developing and capitalist countries
who have investigated these questions approach this problem realistically.

In discussing the various aspects of the legal regulation or the applied

types of space activity in the United Nations. a majority of nations has
actively come to the defense or state sovereignty. At the same time.

American representatives in the United nations and a number of American
international legal experts see the principle of respect for state sovereignty
merely as an interference in the earth-oriented use of space.

The international applications space systems based on national economic
satellites'. are firmly entrenched in the life or many countries and
peoples. Telephone. television and other types of long distance co-unica-
tions for a number or years have been carried out by international. co-mni-
cations organizations and syeteas via the Intersputnik and Intelsat satel-
lites. Upon the initiative of an intergovemental maritime consulting
organi zation. at present a new international organization has been estab-
lished for a maritime satellite system. The nations of Western mrope.

the United States and Canada are vorking on the plans for setting up an
experimental Aerosat satellite system designed to monitor air navigation
over the Atlantic. Heather satellites are also of decisive siaificance
in carrying out the global cooperative programs in the area of meteorology.

The Uh Space Cos-ittee for several years has been concerned with emining
the legal and organisational questions related to two other types of the
practical use of space: studying earth resources from space and direct
television broadcasting via' satellites. The prospects of creating inter-
national orbital stations which have some significant” closer as a result
or carrying out the Soyuz--Apollo ProJect open the say to the integrated
use of such stations for solving a whole series of national economic prob-
lems.

Comon to all types or applied space activity is the fact that the employed
space devices in the literal and figurative sense of the word are facing
the earth. The applications satellites are designed not for space research
as such. but rather for solving purely terrestrial problems; mom of them
"participate" in human economic activity.

As was noted by one of the French authors. the applications satellites
have posed greater problems on the earth than in space.2 These problems
invoIVe both relations between the participants in the international ap-

plications space systems (the necessity of ensuring the legal equality of
the states). as well as the conditions whereby it would be possible to

carry out various types of space activities over foreign territories.

106
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "3! ONLY

From the political and legal viewpoint. the greatest complexity has arisen
over the questions of studying earth resources from space and direct tele-
vision broadcasting via satellites. In the first instance it has been a
question or the necessity of preventing violations of the sovereign rights
of a state to its natural riches. and secondly, the inadmissibility of
interference into the internal affairs of a state.

In line with the discussion of the legal aspects of the use of these types
of applications satellites, in the Hestern legal literature recently tvo
theoretical concepts have appeared on the role of state sovereignty in
international space lav. Conditionally let us term them the "American"
and the ”French." although. undoubtedly, not all American and French legal
experts adhere to these views.

The American notion proceeds from a denial of the applicability of the
principle of state sovereignty to any types of space activity. The French
viewpoint is based on the assertion that the principle of state sovereignty

is inapplicable to space research. but is fully valid in terms of the use
of space.

Let us imediately stipulate that we do not intend to put both these views
on the same level. In actuality, while the American theory is aimed at
establishing the freedom of any space activity over foreign territories.
the French pursues the directly opposite aim of establishing the necessity
of respect for state sovereignty in the use of applications satellites.

At the same time a serious shortcoming of the French theory is the provi-
sion that international space lav in its first stage supposedly reJected
the concept of state sovereignty.

In an article devoted to the legal problaas of studying earth resources
from space, the American legal expert G. Robinson mentions sovereignty as
an “illusory dogma" of international lav, and uges a revision of the
theory of sovereignty in light of the most recent technical achievements.
He supports the statements that ”the possibilities of remote sensing from
manned and automatic satellites have neutralized the effectiveness of
sovereignty...and made it obsolete."3

Other American authors have developed the notion that since the current
agreements in the area of space lav do not impose concrete limitations on
the various types of the use of space. there is no basis to incorporate
such limitations in space lav in the future. Proceeding from this position,
official 0.8. representatives in the various Ull bodies have impeded in
every possible vay the elaboration of legal docuents vhich vould regulate
the spec’fic types of space use.

Such vievs have mingled with appeals to reject the principle of state
sovereignty; these appeals have been particularly vociferous after the
appearance of the first satellites. "Sovereignty is neither necessary
nor sufficient for solving problems created by the space age." wrote the

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

special advisor to the Commission on the Questions of Science and Aeronautics
of the House of Representatives of the U.8. Congress, 5. Beresford, in 1959.“
"...Thc concept of sovereignty could in practical tenns be taken out of the
dictionary of both air and space law." echoed the Canadian legal expert

. Binet. At that time proposals were also voiced to set up supernational
bodies for controlling all space activities, as well as to transfer such
control functions to the United Nations or a specially established inter-
national space agency.

On a broader level, the ideas of the redaction of state sovereignty have
long been propagandized by the supporters of the theory of structural func-
tionalism which is widespread in the United States; one of the prominent
representatives of this theory is E. ﬂeas, professor at the University of
California."

The true picture of the development of international space law repudiates
the theoretical constructs on the inapplicability of the principle of the
respect of state sovereignty in this area of international law.

Sovereign states and international intergovernmental organizations which
carry out activities in space are the principals of international space
lav. having reJected the extension of territorial sovereignty to space,
including the moon and other celestial bodies, space law at the same time
is based on a respect for state sovereignty in carrying out space activity.

Sovereign states are the participants to all multilateral international
agreements in the area of space lay. The principle of sovereign equality
among states, in particular, is reflected in the universal nature of these
agreements and in the absence of a binding court procedure for their in-
terpretation and for solving international disputes between the participants
of the agreements.

If we turn to the specific agreements. we will see that the 196? Space
Treaty, having prohibited national annexation of space and its component
parts by proclaiming sovereignty over them, by use, occupation or any
other means (Article II), and having declared space and its component parts
open for research and use by all states (Article I), at the same time es-
tablished the duty of states to carry out their activities in space re-
search and use in accord with international law, including the UN Charter
(Article III). The UN Charter is based upon principles of sovereign equal-
ity and noninterference into the internal affairs of states (Article II.
Points 1 and T of the UR Charter).

In accord with the principle of respect for state sovereignty, the Space
Treaty has imposed a whole series of limitations on the freedom of space
activity. In addition to the already mentioned provision on the extension
of the common principles and provisions of international law to space
activities, one must mention the prohibition on any discrimination against
states whatsoever (Article I). the necessity of proper consideration of

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the corresponding interests of all other states (Article IX). the liability
or states for all national activities in space, including the activities of
nongovernmental legal entities (Article VI), and other restrictions. The
treaty directly prohibits certain types of the military application of space
(Article IV). In it attention is drawn to the applicability of the resolu-
tion of the UN General Assembly condemning the propagandizing of war to
space.

The maintaining of Jurisdiction and control over space obJects and crews by
the states while they are in space (Article VIII) is also one of the mani-
festations of sovereign rights. The 1968 Rescue Agreement regulates the
relationships between states also with strict consideration of the principle
of sovereignty. Even operations involving the rescuing of cosmonauts who
have made an emergency landing cannot be carried out on foreign territory
without the agreement of the state possessing this territory, and in any
instance should be carried out under its leadership and control (Article II).

The 1972 Convention on Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects regulates
the material relationships between states and not between physical and legal
entities, that is, it does this from the positions of state sovereignty and
the sovereign equality of states. Such an approach is also characteristic
for the Convention Governing the Registration of ObJects Launched into Space.

It must be pointed out that certain American authors have also drawn atten-
tion to the designated circumstances. although as a whole American doctrine
is characterized by a negative approach to the given problem. "At the same
time that a general opinion exists, particularly among nonspecialists."
wrote 3. Gorove. "that sovereignty has been completely abolished in terms
of space, it is essential to emphasise that the Space Treaty bans only
‘national annexation' by the proclamation of soVereignty. but not the real:-
zation of all forms of sovereignty, sovereign rights or Jurisdiction."7

Thus, the assertions that space law has developed under the badge of denying
state sovereignty or without consideration of this principle clearly do not
confonn to reality or to the actual state of affairs. Equally inadmissible
is to put the principle of respect of state sovereignty in opposition to

the principle of the freedom of space, when it is a question of space ac-
tivities which directly involve foreign territories. The freedom of space
cannot serve as grounds for violating the sovereign rights of states on

the earth.

The French notion of the role of the principle of sovereignty in inter-
national space law has been stated in a number of works written by legal
experts collaborating in a work group on space law under the National
Center for Scientific Research of France. This group was set up in 1963
upon the initiative of Prof Suzanne Bastide. and brings together university
instructors, specialists from the National Center for Space Research and
the National Center for Scientific Research. as well as representatives of
the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The group has prepared a series of special studies, and periodically pub-
lishes an information bulletin entitled LE DROIT DE L'ESPACB [Space Law].°
The group has been repeatedly instructed to work out the cfficial French
position in the United Nations on individual questions of international
space law.

The designated view has been stated most extensively in an article pub-
lished in 1973 in the Journal RECﬂERCKE SPATIALE by the prcminent French
international legal expert c. A. Colliard who headed the space law working
group.

From the standpoint of legal regulation, c. A. Colliard draws a sharp dis-
tinction between research and use of space. Initially, in his opinion.
international space law developed as law applied to research in the particu-
lar space domain. Although this spatial domain itself was not clearly de-
fined, since the boundary between air space and outer space was not estab-
lished, the system of law relating to it had an autonomous and "revolution-

ary" character, since it "abandoned the classical concepts of sovereignty
and ownership."10

Activities in the area of the use of space pursuing not space but rather
terrestrial sins. in the opinion of C. A. Colliard. lead to a situation
where autonomous space law gives way to "terrestrial" international law,
where the concepts of sovereignty and sovereign equality are dominant.
According to this theory, the "revolutionary and autonomous" space law
regulates only activities related to space research, but as for the use of
space. it should be carried out in accord with the provisions not of space
law, but rather "classic" international law.u

A number of the provisions in the 1iven viewpoint cannot help but cause
dispute. In the first place, current international space law encompasses
activities related both to research as well as to the us: of space. In

the 1967 Space Treaty and in other general multilateral agreements which
lay down the bases of space law and order, the words "research and use"

are almost always employed together. The provisions of international space
law are extended to all types of space activity. However the broad scope
of practical activities in space during recent years, as well as the circum-
stance that in a number of instances these activities nay involve foreign
territories have necessitated the further progressive development of inter-
national space law, in particular by working out special legal conditions
for certain specific types of applications satellites.

Secondly, international space law has never rejected the concepts of
sovereignty and ownership. Being one of the sectors of international
public law. international space law accepts its general principles and
provisions, including the principles of sovereignty and the sovereign
equality of states. As was shown above, international space law, in intro-
ducing into international law the new principle of the freedom of space
and the nonextension of territorial supremacy to space, regulates the

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?0R 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

relationships between states in the area of their space activities on a
basis of strict respect for the principle of state sovereignty.

As for the concept of ownership. it also is not alien to international space
law. Having prohibited the annexation of space, including the moon and
other celestial bodies. the Space Treaty defined that the rights of owner-
ship to space objects launched into space. including objects delivered to
or built On a celestial body. and their component parts remain unimpaired

while they are in space or on a celestial body. or upon return to the
earth (Article VIII).

Finally. also debatable is the view of C. A. Colliard that in the use of
space. international space law "gives way" to international public law.

The extension of international law to all types of space activity is spe-
cially stipulated by the Space Treaty (Article III). MoreOVer. the elabora-
tion of new international documents which regulate the specific types of
the practical application of earth satellites is carried out precisely with-
in the limits of international space law. the current provisions of which
encompass both the research and use of space. Conseduently. it would be
more correct to speak not of the halting of the action of space law, but
rather that in line with the specific nature of the practical use of space.
certain principles of general international law (primarily the principles
of sovereignty and the sovereign equality of states) which simultaneously
are principles of international space law. assume greater force as applied
to the given types of activity.

however. regardless of all the shortcomings and the dubious provisions of
the designated viewpoint, it is essential to emphasize its great positive
significance which consists in the fact that. as was already pointed out
above. it focuses attention on the role of the principles of sovereignty
and the sovereign equality of states in carrying out practical space ac-
tivities. This concept proceeds from the limited nature of the principle
of the freedom of space and the inadmissibility of putting it in opposition
to the supremacy of states on their territory.

Over the centuries, in the theory and practice of international law. the
principle has been established of the unchallenged power of the state over
its territory. including the land. the waters and the air. The supremacy
inherent to a state on its territory and independence in international
relations are the most important component elements of state sovereignty
in its political and legal understanding. Without the principle of state
sovereignty. modern international law is inconceivable." A discussion of
the question of whether or not state sovereignty is violated with the
passage of satellites over the territories of foreign countries at one
time was the starting point in the birth of international space law.

A predominant eaJority of authors has been unanimous in the fact that the
flight of satellites above the territories of foreign states does not vio-
late the control of these states over their air space. and access to space

111
!OR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the purpose of its peaceful exploration and deVelopment should be open
on equal bases to all nations of the world without any discrimination.

The ubiquitous and rapid recognition of this principle was large aided by
the circumstance that the space age began in the period of carrying out an
unprecedentedly broad program of international scientific cooperation. the
International Geophysical Year (IOY). The Special Cemmittee to Carry Out
the IGY even in l95h approved a resolution which noted the great scientific
interest of setting up experiments using research rockets and satellites.
Although the 10! Program officially was r‘t of an international character.
it was carried out with the active suppo. and approval of governments.

But. of course. an even greater role in establishing the principle of the
freedom of space was played by a recognition of the historic significance
of man's entry into space and those possibilities which were opened up in
this regard for scientific and technical progress and for strengthening
international cooperation.

The principle of the freedom of space immediately became established in
international relations at first with the tacit consent of the states and
later in the form of resolutions of the UN General Assembly. and. finally.
in a multilateral international treaty.

Because of this. of course. the claims advanced recently by certain nations
to extend their sovereignty to certain parts of space itself cannot be
considered as valid.‘3 The ban 0n the national annexation of any part of
space is presently a generally recognized provision of international law.

At the same time. Soviet legal science from the very outset has emphasized
the circumstance that the nonextension of the sovereign power of a state
to space as such does not obviate the action in space of the general prin-
ciples of international law which are binding for relationships between
states. regardless of whether tbeir activities are carried out in the open
sea. in air space or outer space.‘“

The special rules established by states in terms of the conditions of each
of these spaces do not obviate but merely clarify. develop and concretize
such general principles of international law as the observance of terri-
torial integrity and state sovereignty. noninterference into internal
affairs. the prohibiting of aggression and the propagandizing of war. and
so forth. These provisions now are affirmed by the conventional provisions
of international space law. As was rightly noted by A. P. Movchan. "The
rise and development of space law have convincingly shown that scientific
and technical progress do not entail a revision or abrogation of the basic
principles of modern international law which have withstood the test of
time and represent a generally recognized basis for fruitful collaboration
among states in the most diverse spheres of international relations. in-
cluding the areas engendered by the scientific and technical revolution.”‘5

112
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, since the birth of space law, the freedom to explore and use space has
been interpreted within the relations between sovereign and equal states
which carry out their activities in space in full accord to the basic prin-

ciples of international law. The freedom of space has never been understood
an a totally unrestricted freedom for any activity in space.

In analyzing the content of the principle of the freedom of space. the
French specialist Simon Courteix has written: "The 1967 Space Treaty in
the first article proclaims the principle of the freedom of the research
and use of space. This freedom in essence consists in equal access for all
states to space activities. and in the nonannexation in any manner of any
part of space, the moon or other celestial bodies. However it can be car-

ried out only in observing definite conditions and restrictions established
by the treaty itself.“6

The Czechoslovak professor J. Busak has correctly drawn attention to the
fact that "in accord with the Space Treaty the principle of the free use of
space in no way is an exception to the binding principles of current inter-
national law applied in relations between states."‘7 "And precisely for
these reasons." writes J. Busak, "the activities of the applications satel-
lites should be regulated by the generally recognized principles of inter-
national law. and in particular by the principles of the respect for the
sovereign rights of states...." a The treaty provisions of international
space law do not contain definitions for the concepts of "research and use"
of space. in the texts of the agreements. these concepts. as has already
been pointed out. are used together. Although the conditi.1s for the use
of space is more restricted in comparison with the conditions of research
(for example. certain types of military use are directly prohibited), in-
ternational space law does not establish a separate general legal regula-
tion for thc use of space in contrast to the legal regulation of space
research.

By the use of space, in the broad sense, one must understand all activities
in space which pursue not only the aims of broadening scientific knowledge
about space itself. In other words. the term "use of space" includes both
the concept of the use of space itself and its component parts. for example,
by exploiting the resources of celestial bodies. as well as the concept of
the use of space equipment for solving various problems on earth.

From the viewpoint of legal regulation, of particular significance are
those types of space use the consequences of which are felt on the earth.

All types of the presently used applications satellites are used to satisfy
terrestrial needs. however the degree of their impact on terrestrial af-

fairs and the consequences of their use are far from the same.

The basic types of practical satellite use can be conditionally ranked in
the following sequence in terms of the degree of their possible impact on
the exercising of sovereign rights by states on the earth: space communica-
tions employing ground receiving and transmitting stations. space navigation.

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

space meteorology, remote sensing of the earth. and direct television broad-
casting.

As for the first two types of satellite use. the problem of state sovereignty
arises chiefly in terms of ensuring sovereign equality for the states and
the prohibiting of any discrimination whatsoever among the states in setting
up and operating the corresponding international systems and organizations.

Uncontrolled activities via any type of communications and navigation satel-
lites on the territory of states are impossible. since their use requires
the placement of complicated receiving and transmitting stations on the
ground. This is inconceivable without the knowledge and approval of the
corresponding states. The systess of such communications and navigation
satellites do not represent a threat to realizing the territorial supremacy
of states.

The use of satellites for meteorological purposes up to now has also not
created any specific international legal problems. Such satellites are
widely used on a national basis and fit easily into the international
meteorological programs. However. even now the necessity has arisen of
preventing the danger of the use of space as well as other scientific and
technical devices for controlling the natural environment and climate for
military and other purposes not compatible with the interests of ensuring
international security. well being and the health of peeple. Moreover.
any activity involving a change in weather and climatic conditions over
vast areas can involve the interests of a number of states and demand the
corresponding legal regulation.

The use of satellites to study earth resources (remote earth sensing satel-
lites) requires a special international legal regulation which prohibits
the use of the obtained information on the resources of foreign states to
the detriment of their sovereign rights.

Direct television broadcasting via satellites to home receivers represents
a type of space activity the purpose of which is to produce a definite ef-
fect on earth. Obviously if such an effect is aimed at a foreign territory.
the agreement of the appropriate state must be obtained. Otherwise this
activity must be viewed as interference into the internal affairs of the
state and as a flagrant violation of its sovereignty.

The given considerations make it possible to conclude that it is scarcely
possible to elaborate a special general legal framework for all types of
use of space obJects for practical purposes. Certain types of satellite
use generally do not require the elaboration of special legal conditions
which differ from those which have already been defined by current space
law in terms of any activity related to the research and use of space.

The particular features of the use of satellites to study earth resources
and direct television broadcasting, in involving their effect on the exer-
cising of sovereign rights by states, first of all necessitate a special

legal regulaton for these types of space activity.
llh
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The legality of each specific type or the use of space devices for carrying
out practical missions on the earth and, respectively. the degree of freedom

for the use or space (with the absence of special legal conditions for the
given type) should be determined depending upon whether or not these ac-
tivities conform to the generally recognized principles of international
law (including space lav). in incorporating the principles or respect for

state sovereignty and the sovereign equality of states.
FOOTNOTES

1. The concepts of applied, practical and national economic use of space
are used as synonyms.

2. A. H. Stoebner, "Domaine d'applieation des satellites: données scien-
tiriques et techniques et problems poses," Paris, 1972, p 16.

3. G. 3. Robinson, "For a worldwide Utilization and Dissemination of Data
Acquired Through Remote Sensing," "Legal Implications of Remote Sensing
from Outer Space," Sthhoi‘i‘nLeyden. 1976. pp 111:, 117.

h. S. M. Beresi'ord, "The Future of National Sovereignty," "Second Colloq.
Law Outer Space, London, 1959,“ Vienna, 1960, p 8.

5. ﬂ. Binet. "Tovard Solving the space Sovereignty Problem." "second Colloq.
Lav Outer Space, London. 1959." p 15.

6. For the theory or structural hinctionalisn, see: c. I. nor-om,
"Nezhdunarodnyye Organisatsii" [International Organizations], Moscow.
Mysl'. 1971;, pp 71-81».

T. s. Gorove, "Developments in Space Lav: An Impressive Record for the hall
of Fame.” Almagordo, 1976, p 8.

8. LE DROI'I' DB L'ESPACE. KILLEI'IN D'MALYSE ET D'INPORMATIONS, Paris.

9. C. A. Collisrd, "Le droit de l'Espace et les satellites d'applieations."
LA RRWCHE SPATIALB. V01 XII, No 2. 1973. PP 1-5.

100 Ibide , pp 1-5.
11. Ibid.

12. G. I. Tunkin. "Teoriya Mezhdunarodnogo Prava," Moscov, Mezhdunarodmye
Otnosheniya. 1970. p 252.

13. Such claims were advanced in 1976 by a group or equatorial nations
over the sectors of a geostationary orbit.

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1h.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the first time in Soviet literature this viewpoint vss stated by
the founder of the soviet science of space lav. Ye. 0. Korovin (Ye. 0.
Korovin, "0n the International Conditions of Space," WEARODIIAYA
znzzn', lo 1. 1959. p 7b).

A. P. Hovchan, "Problem Kodifikatsii i Progressivnogo Razvitiya
Mezhdunsrodnogo Pram," Doctoral Dissertation Resume. Moscow, 1971:, p 2b.

"Documents d'études. Droit international public. Ls documentation
Prancaise,” Paris, 1973. No 3.010, p 7.

J. Busak, "Some Reﬂections on Applications Satellites," WI. J..
V01 “3. 1976) P 356-

Ibid.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cm 2: INTERNATIONAL SPACE CONJUNICATIONS SYSTEMS: LBJAL PRINCIPLI
OP TREIR CREATION AND OPERATION

A number of factors explains the particular interest in the political and
legal principles for setting up the international space comunications
systems. Comunications via earth satellites is one of the earliest and
most developed areas of the practical application of space technology.
Certain other practical areas (navigation, direct television broadcasting)
from the viewpoint of the equipment can be viewed as varieties of space
comications. In the Western doctrine of international space law and in
the practical activities of certain capitalist states, these circumstances
gave rise to a tendency to use international legal principles and methods _
of work in one of the existing space commications organizations, Intelsat,
as the precedent for future legal regulation in other applied areas of
space activities.1

At the same tine precisely differences over the political and legal prin-
ciples have led to the creation of two parallel international space coal-
nuniaations organisations and systems (Intersputnik and Intelsat], although
the advantages of one worldwide comunications system are obvious from the
technical and economic standpoint. Sharp differences over political, eco-
nomic and legal questions related to the comrrcial use of comunlcations
satellites also exist within the capitalist world. In the diplomatic sphere
these have been clearly apparent at the conference to work out the so-called
final agreements on Intelsat in 1969-1971. In the practical area this has
been expressed by the creation of a Western European regional systel that

is independent of Intelsat.

The present chapter is devoted to an analysis and comparison of the multi-
lateral agreeuents underlying the two international satellite colIIunica-
tions organizations and systems and the prospects for cooperation between
states in this area.

1. The International Intersputnik Space temunicationa System and
Organization

the agreement to set up the Intersputnik international space coauunications
system and organization was signed in Moscow on 15 November 1971. and case

117
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

into force on 12 July 1972!.2 Intersputni): was to meet the needs of the
nations served by it for telephone and telegraph channels, color and black-
and-white television and other types of data transmission via earth satel-
lites.

The proposal to set up the Intersputnik international system and organiza-
tion was made by the nine socialist countries in August 1969 in Vienna
during the UN Conference on the Exploration and Use of Space for Peaceful
Purposes. The initial draft of the agreement was published as an UN docu-
ment. In subsequent years, the technical, economic and legal questions
of setting up Intersputnik were discussed at sessions of the permanent
working group on space cosmuni cations which exists within the multilateral
cooperation of the socialist countries under the Intercosmos Program.

As a result of these discussions, certain amendments and clarifications
were made in the initial draft of the agreement. but these did not alter
its substance.

Intersputnik was established as an international intergovernmental organiza-
tion. At present its members are the governments of Bulgaria, Hungary_

the GDR, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Rosania, the 0883 and 088R. Membership in
the organization is open to all states which share its views and principles
and seems the obligations stemming from the agreement.

Intersputnik is concerned with the questions of the designing, development,
operation and augnentation or the international satellite communications
system. This system consists of two basic components: the space component
which includes the satellites and orbiting satellite control equipment, and
the ground component which includes the stations which provide two-way com-
munications via the satellites. The space complex can belong to the organi-
zation with ownership rights or by leasing rights; the ground station is

the property of the states or the operating organisations.

The general funds of the organization, as a rule, can be spent only on the
space complex; the ground stations are set up by funds from the correspond-
ing states or operating organisations (state or private).

Article 5 of the Agreement provides for the gradual creation of the system.
The first stage encompasses the carrying out or experimental work by the
members or the organization at their own ground stations using the con-uni-
cations channels which are provided gratis by the USSR on its communications
satellites. The second stage presupposes the use or the conunications
channels on the satellites under leasing arrangements. The third stage is
the comercial operation of the consunications system.

The difference between the second and third stages consists in the fact
that in the second stage, the members of the organization may consider it
economically more advantageous to lease only a portion of the communications
channels on the already existing satellites of the organisation's manbers
and not to lease or create a space complex as a whole at their own expense.“

118
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 08! 0|“)!

The dates for moving on to the third stage at which the space complex as a
whole will belong to Intersputnik under ownership or leasing rights are to

he set by the members of the organization depending upon economic advisa-
bility.

The launching of the comunications satellites which are the property of the
organization and their control in orbit are carried out on the basis of
special agreements by the lntersputnih members.

The gradual development of the system also determines the procedure for
forming the organization's money (Article ls). Initially only a special
annual budget is to be formed. and from this expenses are to be covered to
pay for the directorate and other administrative measures.5 But when the
needs of the organization are established for leasing or creating its own
space complex. a charter capital will be formed for the organization. and
its size will be set by a special protocol. The proportional participa-
tion of the nations informing the charter capital is proportional to the
degree of their use of the communications channels. The profit obtained
from operating the comunications system would be distrituted between the
organization's members proportionately to their contributions.

The basic bodies of Intersputnik are its council and directorate. In addi-
tion there is provision to set up an auditing comission for inspecting
financial activities. as well as other auxiliary bodies. at the discretion
of the council.

The counci'I is the main directing haw. It includes one representative from
all members of the organization. and each has one vote. The principle of
"one nat‘.on-one vote" ensures the greatest demcratic management of the or-
ganiution and conforms fully to the international nature of its activities.‘
All fundamental questions covered by the Agreement are considered in the

competence of the council, the sessions of which are held at least once a
year.

in accord with Point 7 of Article 12 of the Agreement, the council should
endeavor that its decisions be approved unanimously. In the absence of
unanimity the council's decisions can be approved when at least two-thirds
of all the members have voted for them. However, in the latter instance
the council's decisions are not binding for those members who have not
voted for their approval and have stated their exception in a written form.
Subsequently these members may adhere to the approved decisions.

The council sessions review and solve a broad range of technical. adminis-
trative. financial and legal questions related to the activities of the
organization. 7

The directorate is the permanent executive and administrative body of
lntersputnik with headqmrters in Moscow. It consists of the general
director elected by the council for a term of 31 years with the right of

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPPASIAL 08! ONLY

reelection. a deputy general director who is elected for the same term but
without the right of reelection. and the necessary staff the selection of
which is made considering professional competence and a Just geographic
representation. The directorate is staffed by citir s from the states

which are members of the organization. The general director and his deputy
cannot be citizens of the same state.

The Motion of the general director. as the chief administrative official
of the organization. are clearly outlined in Article 13 of the Agreement.
where it is specially emphasized that in all his actions the general direc-

tor is responsible to the council. and the limits of his powers are set by
the Agreement and by the decisions of the council.

The directorate is an international body with clearly expressed executive
functions. It is completely accountable in its activities to the council
as the main leading body of Intersputnik.° For this reason the assertion
by the American legal expert 8. Doyle that the powers of decision taking

and management of the organization in Intersputnik are concentrated in the
directorate is totally inaccurate.9

As a legal entity (Article 8 of the Agreement). the organization is em~
powered to conclude treaties. to acquire, lease and dispose of property,
and undertake pleadings. In accord with agreements with the competent
bodies of the states on whose territory it carries out its activities. the
organization on the territory of these states has a formal legal capacity
needed for achieving its goals and carrying out its functions.lo Inter-
national and other agreements on behalf of the organization are concluded
by the general director upon instructions of the council within the powers
established by the council. Thus. Intersputnik should be viewed as a
principal of international law and the national law of the states on whose
territory it carries out its activities.

In operating the space complex. the organization allocates conunications
channels between its aembers. proceeding from their requests. The plan for
allocating the coauunications channels is approved by the council. The
organization can lease the comunications channels which exceed the overall
needs of all its members to other users. The procedure and conditions for
using, the commications channels by other users are also to be defined by
the council. here the Agreement notes that the rates for using conunica-
tions channels should be on the level of the world average. This means
that the use of the Intersputnik system is open not only to the members of
the organization, but also to other both national as well as international
users. Certainly an indispensable condition for using the system is the
compatibility of the technical characteristics of the ground stations to
the requirements of the organization.

The Agreement does not restrict the right of its members to participate in
the development or operation of other national or international space com-
munications systems. in granting them complete freedom in this area. Also

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II. lines not exclude the ponnihility of cooperation between the lntcrsputnik
ny::ta~m and other comunications systems.

The text or the Agreement (Article 7) notes that the organization coordi-
naten its activities with the IN and also cooperates with other organiza-
tiona when their activities are related to the use or comunications satel-
lites both in technical terms and on the questions of international regula-
tion.“ The special mention oi‘ the ITU as an organization with which Inter-
sputnik coordinates in its activities is explained by the important role or
this organization in regulating a series of technical space comunications
questions, including the use of the radio spectrum.

The actual work of setting up the lntersputnik system started even before
the Agreement on establishing the organisation and forming its basic bodies
had come into force. The above-mentioned permanent working group on space
comunications within the Intercosmos Program was concerned with the plan-
ning and coordinating or this work. And at present Intersputnik maintains
the closest ties with this working group.

The preliminary technical plans provided two versions for building the
communications systems. One of them was designed for that group of nations
which have presently signed the Agreement. and the other encompasses a sig-
nificantly larger area of the earth's surface and can be employed with an
increase in the number of states which have Joined Intersputnik. These
versions differ in the nmsber of satellites. the power or the retransmitters
on the satellites, and certain characteristics of the ground stations.’2

By the beginning or 1977. ground stations of the Intersputnik system were
operating. in addition to the USSR. on the territory of the GDR. Cuba.
Mongolia. Poland and the CSSR. Ground stations were also being built in the
other member states. Scientific research and experimental design work are
beinr, carried out successfully. and the results of this are being used in
developing the space complex and the gromd stations comprising the system.

The international legal aspect of the organisation's activities has also
been further developed. The necessity of elaborating and approving certain
additional legal documents was directly stipulated in the Intersputnik Agree-
ment. Article 12 mentions the Regulation Governing the Personnel of the
Directorate which should be approved by the council, and the procedural

rules for the work of the council; Article 9 describes the agreements with
the competent bodies of the states on the territory of which the organiza-
tion is to carry out its activity; Article 15 deals with special protocols
on financial questions.‘3 Subsequently the need may arise for a special

regulation of patent rights and the methods of resolving international dis-
putes.

Obviously there must be a clarification in Article 10 of the Agreement in
order to bring it into agreement with the Convention Governing International
Liability for Damage Caused by Space ObJects. Article 10 establishes that

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10R OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

the organization bears financial liability under its obligations within the
limits or the property belonging to it. but is not responsible for the ob-
ligations or the organization's members. as the latter are not responsible
for the organisation's obligations.

At the same time the COnvention CoVerning Responsibility for Damage has set
an a Jus aogsns provision the principle of solidary liability for damage
caused as a result of Joint space activity. without limiting this liability
to any definite amount. And the solidsry liability is born both by the
intergovernmental organization and by its members (Articles V and XXII or
the Convention). The designated contradiction has been caused obviously
by the fact that the Convention on Liability for Damage was approved after
the Intersputnik Agreement.‘"

In describing the international legal principles on which Intersputnik is
based. P. I. Lukin has noted completely correctly that this is ”an organi-
zation without privileged and unequal partners. in which each or the partici-
pating states has been granted opportunities under egual conditions to use
the newest achievements of science and technology."l

The Intersputnik international space communications system and organization.
as is stated in its constituent Agreement. is to be set up on the basis or
the principles of respect for the sovereignty and independence of states,
equality of rights. noninterfercnce into internal affairs. as well as mutual
help and mutual benefit. Intersputnik should help in strengthening and de-
veloping the all-round economic. scientific-technical. cultural and other
relations among its members.

2. The Intelsat International Space Communications System and Organisation

On 20 August l96h. in Washington. two interrelated agreements were opened
for signing dealing with the setting up of a commercial satellite communica-
tions system: one agreement (the intergoverr-crt-I coo) “ct up the organi-
zational structure and basic principles for creating the future system,

and the second (signed by the representatives of the coammmications admin-
istrations and private companies) took up the financial, technical and
operational aspects of the system.'6 These agreements marked the beginning
to setting up under 0.8. aegis the Intelsat international communications
satellite consortium, and subsequently this has been turned into the largest
commercial space organization in the capitalist world.l7

Benefiting from its monopolistic position in the area of communications
satellites and launch vehicles among the capitalist nations, in 1965 the
United States relatively easily was able to impose on its partners in the
Hashington agreements unequal conditions which reinforced the dominant role
or the American private Comsat Corporation in the international system.

An important concession by the United States which the western European
nations succeeded in gaining was merely that the agreements were of a pro-

visional nature and would be revised every 5 years.

122
I0! OPYICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when the Conference of Delegates to Work Out the Final Intelsat Agreements
was convened in Hashington in February 1969. the situation was already dif-
ferent. England. France. West Germany and the other Western European
nations had begun to be actively involved in space research. The indus-
trial companies of these nations were constantly demanding a more equal
share in the allocation of orders for the Intelsat Programs. In various
regions of the world. plans had arisen and were being implemented to set up
national and regional satellite communications systems. The Third Horld
nations were also heard now and by this time they were already a maJority
of the Intelsat members. Finally. in 1968. the socialist countries had
come up with their own draft agreement on an international space communica-
tions system. The democratic principles of this draft attracted universal
attention and significantly impeded the United States in being able to die-
tate its conditions for the future space communications organisation. As

a result the United states found it significantly more difficult to conduct
the talks from a position of strength than previously.

The attempt of the United States to overlook all the listed circumstances
led to a situation where the debates which lasted a month at the 1969
Washington Conference did not lead to the working out of a text of the
final agreements. It took another two rounds of this conference before a
compromise text of the new agreements appeared.lo

The new Intelsat agreements which were opened for signature on 20 August
1971 came into force on 12 February 1973.‘9 Like the l96h temporary agree-
ments. these consist of two basic documents: the intergovernmental agree-
ment and the operational agreement. The second was signed by governments
or under governmental authorization by the communications administrations
or private companies. In a certain sense the structure of Intelsat estab-
lished by the new agreements also is of a temporary nature. This applies.
in particular. to the question of the role of Comsat the powers of which

as the manager of the system have been extended for another 6 years.

At the 1969-1971 Hashington Conference. the Intelsat members succeeded in
gaining a whole series of important concessions from the United States.

At the same time, these concessions did not lead to fundamental changes in
the principles on which the given system is based. Fundamental changes
did not occgs in Intelsat. and the United States kept its dominant posi-
tion in it.

Let us examine the most characteristic features in the structure and powers
of the leading bodies. as well as the operating methods of Intelsat as de-
fined by the new agreements.2'

In 1963. Intelsat was set up not as an international organisation in the
true sense of this word. but rather as an international consortium or Joint

venture.22 The absence of an independent legal status has led to a situa-
tion where Intelsat could not act on its own behalf and for carrying out

legal operations was required to seek the aid of Comsat. As a result. a

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY

situation developed whereby the sovereign states that were members of Intel-
sat in a number of instances were dependent upon a private corporation.

Thus. in concluding contracts for the manufacturing and delivering of equip-
ment for the comunications satellites as well as in carrying out other
transactions. Intelsat operated through Comsat. In the event or the occur-
rence of any disputes on the rights and obligations stoning from such con-
tracts. the Intelsat members were also obliged to turn to Comsat. Access
by the Intelsat members to patent. inventions and technical information ob-
tained by the subcontractors in the course of working on the Intelsat
proJects. and consequently to the money for all its members was also car-

ried out only through Comsat. iiithout being a legal entity. Intelsat could
not possess property in its own right.

The absence of an international legal personality and the status of a legal
entity for Intelsat led to other shortcomings in its activities. and these
were listed in detail in a report of a special working group which reviewed
this question at the Washington conference.23 Because of this the question
or whether Intelsat would be turned into an international organisation
caused sharp debate in working out the final agreements.

Behind this seemingly legal technical dispute was hidden the 0.8. desire
to keep Intelsat as a consortium which was completely dependent upon a
private American corporation. For this reason the United States continued
to hold out on the given question. even being left in complete isolation.
however ultimately the United States was forced to give way. and at present
Intelsat is officially named not a consortiu- and not a Joint venture but
rather an international communications satellite organisation. In accord
with Article IV of the intergovermental agreement. Intelsat has been given
the rights of a legal entity. By this article it is granted the right to
conclude agreements with states and international organisations.

The founders of Intelsat from the very outset laid claim to a worldwide

( "global") coverage for the space coalsunications system being set up by
them. The preamble of the 196': Intergovernmental Intelsat Agreement states
a desire to set up a "unified global comersial comunications system with
the aid of satellites." The preamble goes on to mention that "cos-unica-
tions by satellites should be organised in such a manner as to allow all
states (emphasis ours. author) to have access to this global system. .."
And there were also words to the effect that the most modern technical
devices should be used "for the good of all nations of the world." These
or analogous phrases were kept in the preamble of the 1971 Intergovernmental
Agreement.

By the logic of things. an international communications system which sets
such goals for itself should have a universal nature. that is. be open for
membership by all nations of the world. however. the 196': Agreement in-
cluded articles which ruled out universal membership in Intelsat and were

in sharp contradiction to the proclaimed goals. Thus. Article VII envisaged

12':

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that the Agreement was open for signing and adherence only for members or
the I1‘L In this manner the doors were closed for participating in a sys-
tem which should assist in intercourse between all states of the world for
a whole group of states which for various reasons. often not depending upon
them. were not ITU members. This clearly discriminatory provision was
aimed against a number or the socialist countries.

Regardless of the fact that many states were in favor of universal member-
ship in the future organization at the Hashington Conference.’“ the United
States was able to maintain the existing restrictive rule in the final
agreements (the preamble and Article XIX(a)(ii) or the intergovernmental
agreement).

Although the states which are not members or Intelsat now have been given
the right or access to the use or the system through their own ground
stations or stations belonging to other states. this concession does not
eliminate the question that the membership procedure in Intelsat flagrantly
violates the principle of sovereign equality among states. As was rightly
noted at one of the international colloquiums on space law by the Argentine
legal expert O. Brital. "strict observance of the provisions or the 1961
Space Treaty demands that the global satellite communications system be
open for all states on equal footing.”5

In the course or the three rounds of the Washington Conference, the sharpest
debate among the Intelsat members was over the questions of the structure

and powers of the managing bodies as well as the rights or the Intelsat
members to set up their own independent space communications systems.

According to the 1965 agreements. the activities of Intelsat were to be
managed by a temporary committee of 18 representatives. but by 1969 69
states were members of Intelsat. Consequently, over 50 states which had
inVested their money in setting up the system were in practical tenms
completely outside its management. The voting procedure on the temporary
committee was organized under the principle or how much capital had been
invested. Under this sytem of ”capital voting," the 0.8. representative
on the temporary committee initially had 61 percent of the votes. and then
with an increase in the number or Intelsat members. 53 percent. However.
actual power in the consortium belonged not even to the temporary committee.
but rather the American Comsat Communications Satellite Corporation which
acted simultaneously in three persons: the manager of Intelsat. the v.8.
representative on the temporary coeldttee. and a private corporation work-
ing to earn a profit. Precisely Comsat settled all the major questions
related to the designing. construction and operation or the international
system.

In reviewing the temporary agreements, a predominant maJority of states
was in favor in the new Intelsat structure of setting up a management body
or bodies in which all members of the organization would be represented.
as well as internationalizing the Intelsat executive body.

125
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the entire conference. the United States held the most rigid and un-
compromising position an the question of the status of Cossat. endeavoring
to keep its guiding position in the international communications system no
matter what the cost. The position of the American delegation at the con-
ference to a decisive degree vas determined by the interests of this private
corporation and its desire to hold on to its monopolistic position. In re-
ferring to a desire to ensure efficiency and econemy in the operation of
Intelsat. the 0.8. delegation reJected the ides of internationalisation and
proposed that the functions of the managing body be maintained by Comaat

for an indefinite time. As one of the American Journals wrote at that time.
Comsat did not wish to give even an inch in its firm intention to remain

at the helm of the administrative leadership as before.”26

After long debates. the United States agreed to a compromise ”package” of
Japanese-Australian proposals. in accord with which a four-tiered structure
was to be set up in Intelsat: an assembly of parties (governmental repre-
sentatives). an assembly of participants (representatives of the communica-
tions administrations or private cemmunications companies empowered by the
governments). a board (with a restricted number of representatives). and

an executive body.27 Precisely this structure later on was reinforced in
the 1971 intergovernmental agreement.

The assembly of parties presently is the superior body of Intelsat (Article
Vii). The sessions of the assembly are held once every 2 years. Each
Intelsat member has one vote in the assembly. Decisions on substantiVe
questions are taken by a two-thirds maJority. and on procedural questions,
by a simple majority. The agreement states that the assembly "will examine
these aspects of Intelsat which are of interest primarily for the parties
as sovereign states" (Article VIIc). however. in fact the assembly carries
out only consultative functions. It can approve only recommendations on
questions relating to the overall policy of the organization."

Eycn more limited are the powers of the assembly of participants which at
its annual sessions is merely concerned with the discussion and presentation
of recommendations on technical and financial questions.

Real power is concentrated in the board where. in the expression of the
French legal expert Lafferanderie. ”the principle of weighted voting has
replaced the rule of legal equality."29 The number of board members should
not exceed 22. As on the temporary committee. the representation of the
nations on the board and the number of votes which they possess there de-
pend upon their financial contribution to Intelsat. Without taking up in
detail the involved system of determining the group of nations which sit

on the board. we would merely note that the maximum possible number of
votes by one member has been reduced to to percent of the total number of
votes of all board members. The voting procedure established by the agree-
ment excludes the possibility of blocking the board's decisions by the votes
of less than four states. Nevertheless. the United States. as the largest
investor in Intelsat. without possessing the right of a veto. can relatively
easily impose any advantageous decision for the United States on Intelsat.

126
ton onlcm. use ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL 088 ONLY

The board is responsible for the elaboration. creation. operation and de-
velopment of the "space segment" of Intelsat. that is. the space portion
of the system which includes the satellites and the ground control facili-
ties. it apprOVes the plans and programs of Intelsat activities. the
procedure for allocating orders in industry. it apprOVes the budget and

carries out a number of other important functions. Board meetings are
held at least four times a year.

As for the executive body of Intelsat. it should be finally established

only 6 years after the new agreements come into force (by 1979). By no
later than this date the general director should be appointed by the board
and apprOVed by the assembly of parties (Article XI). The general direc-
tor will be the chief executiVe officer and the legal representative of
Intelsat.” Up to 1979. the functions of the executiVe body and manager of
the system as before will be kept by the American Comsat Communications
Satellite Corporation which thereby extended its dominant position in Intel-
sat for 6 years. Only certain administrative and financial obligations were
to be carried out in the transitional period by the board-appointed general

secretary. The latter. howeVer. could not carry out any leading role vis-
a-vis Cement (Article XII).3'

Since the founding of Intelsat, the western European partners of the United
States have constantly struggled against the attempts of Intelsat. and more
accurately the 0.3. representative of Comsat in this consortium. to monopo-
lize the right to set up space communications systems. France has shown
particular activity on this question. in defending the right of the Intelsat
members to set up regional systems within the framework or outside of Intel-
sat. France has been supported by the other western European nations which
have begun to deVelop an independent European satellite communications sys-
tem.

The official u.s. position on this question can be Judged from the American
draft of the final Intelsat agreement which was submitted in the course of
the first round of the Washington Conference. Article VIII of this draft
proposed that the members of Intelsat be prohibited. under the threat of
exclusion from the organisation. in participating in the creation or use
of other international space communications systems.32 it is not surpris-
ing that this proposal which is in sharp contradiction to the basic princi-
ples of international space law as affirmed in the 1967 Space Treaty was
disputed by a majority of the Conference participants and was not incor-
porated in the text of the final agreements.

However the intelsat members were unable to achieve complete independence
in settling the questions of setting up national and international communi-
cations systems outside of Intelsat. The intergovernmental agreement. the
preamble of which mentions the "unified" global commercial satellite com-
munications system, obviously excludes the possibility for the Intelsat
members to form a parallel system or systems with global coverage. As

for the regional systems. according to Article XIV of the Intergovernmental
Agreement. they can be set up only after a complex procedure of preliminary

127
'03 OFYICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL "8! ONLY

consultation with the board and the assembly of parties over the technical
compatibility of these systems with the current or planned Intelsat systems
and after giving guarantees that the regional systems vill not cause "sig-
nificant economic harm to the worldvide Intelsat system."33 The establish-
ing of the national systems also requires preliminary consultation with
the Intelsat board on technical questions.

The extended dispute between the United States and Western Europe on the
conditions for the selling of American rockets to launch the European
communications satellites shows what the restrictions established by Article
XIV of the Intergovernmental Intelsat Agreement can lead to in practice.

During the years which have passed since its founding. Intelsat has un-
doubtedly made significant technical and economic advances. More than 90
states are members of this organization. and s maJority of them have built
ground communications stations which are part of the system on their terri~
tories. Since 1969. the Intelstat satellites could provide communications
for virtually the entire territory of the world. In the system several
generations of communications satellites have been developed. and the num-
ber of their telephone channels has risen from 250 to 6.000. The rates for
using the conmunications channels have declined significantly.”

However. behind these successes it must be seen that the Intelsat agreements
flagrantly violate the fundamental principle of international law. the
sovereign equality of states. Bour eois legal experts also recognise the
unequal nature of these agreements. 5 The Intelsat agreements seriously
encroach on the sovereign rights of the member states of this organisation
and reinforce the dominant role of the United States.

In contrast to Intersputnik. where all nations are represented on the manag-
ing body. and each nation has one vote. real power in Intelsat had been
kept for the body with limited representation of the nations and by the
system of weighted voting. While in Intersputnik the executive functions
are carried out by an elected international body (the directorate). at
Intelsat these questions up to now have been under the control of a private
u.s. capitalist enterprise. At the same time that the Intersputnik organi-
zation is open for all nations to Join. membership in Intelsat has been
closed for states which are not in the ITU. Finally. the Intersputnik
Agreement does not restrict the rights of its members to participate in
other space communications systems. But the members of Intelsat cannot
settle these questions independently.

The given differences show why Intelsat has not been able to be turned into
a truly universal satellite communications organization. and why develop-
ment has occurred along the path of forming two parallel international
space conmunications systems and organizations. In this manner it has
been impossible to realize the objectively existing opportunities to set
up a unified universal space communications organization based upon the
principles of the equality of its participants. or principles which would
exclude the dictating of terms in this organisation by one state or group

of states.
128

I03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The political and legal principles of Intelsat. in spite of the assertions
of its apologists. cannot serve as the model for setting up the other inter-
national space organizations.

Along with Intersputnik and Intelsat. the world presently has a number of
other national and international space communications systems. For many
years. the Orbita system has been in Operation and developing in the USSR;
this system includes around 80 earth stations located on Soviet territory.
in 1973. the Canadian national space communications system began operating;
in 197%. the first national system on U.S. territory. In l97h. France and
west Germany using an American launch vehicle lofted the experimental
Symphonia cosmmmications satellite. western Europe is developing and is
planning to begin operating its own regional system by the end of the 1970's.
In 1976. a national satellite communications system was organized in Indo-
nesia. The plans are known for setting up national space systems in India.
Japan, Brazil and other countries.35 In 1976. a group of Arab countries
approved a decision to set up their own regional system.

The presence of several international and national space communications
systems has posed the question of cooperation in one form or another be-
tween them. as well as the interaction and coordinating of their activity.
Since neither Intersputnik nor Intelsat excludes access to the system for
nonmember states. the simplest form of cooperation would be use of the
satellite commmnications channels of one system by the individual states or by
by a group of states from the other system. This form of cooperation could
also be used between states having their own national systems. or for those
instances when satellites belonging to an international organization are
used on the one hand. or national satellites. on the other. Such forms of
cosperation are already being used in practice both by the USSR and United
States and also by other nations. In particular. a special hotline between
the United States and the USSR has been set up on these principles, and
this circuit passes via the Intelsat satellites and the Holaiya Soviet
satellites.

Another. more complex form of cooperation which obviously will arise in the
future is the direct interaction of the international space systems. This
requires special internatiOnal legal regulation and the coordinating of a
number of scientific-technical and economic questions. Here of primary
significance will be the questions of the technical compatibility of the
parameters in the various systems. Such questions cannot be settled by

the dictating of terms or by imposing one's standards on any system. but
require coordination and consideration of the interests of the correspond-
ing countries. At present there already is some experience in the inter-
action of the Intelsat and Intersputnik technical systems.

In creating the various types of space communications systems it is also
essential to exclude interference in using the radio frequencies and in
placing the satellites in a geostationary orbit.37 Both bilateral and
multilateral contacts and agreements as well as the international organi-
zations concerned with the various problems of space communications should

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be used for solving the range 01‘ questions which will arise in the process
of interlinking and coordinating the different space comunications systems.

1.

10.

11.

POUI'NOTBS

See. for example: w. von Kries. ”Organizational Aspects of Couercial
Satellite Systems." "Proc. XXVII Colloq. Law Outer Space," calii'ornia,
1915. pp 68-71.

VDOMOS‘I’I VERKROVIIOOO BOVETA 888R. No 3". 1972. P 317; No 15. 1972. p 118.
0]! Doc. A/AC. 105/56. 9 August 1968.

Since 1976, Intersputnik has been leasing television and telephone
channels on the Soviet cos-micationa satellites in accord with a
special protocol and contract concluded by the Intersputnik Directorate
and the USSR Ministry of Conunications.

The budget is based upon the principles of equal proportional partici-
pation or all the members of the organisation. The payments for the
leasing of channels on the Soviet col-unicstions satellites by the or-
ganization's members are made through the directorate.

c. I. Min, "Teoriya Mezhdunarodnogo Prava," Moscow. Heshdunarodnyye
Otnosheniya. 1970, pp 387-389.

The first session of the council was held in 1972 in the USSR. the
second in 1973 in Bulgaria, the third in 19?): in Hungary. the fourth
in 1975 in the USSR, and the fifth in 1976 in the arm.

The general director -of Intersputnik was elected at the second session
of the council in 1973.

8. Doyle, "An Analysis or the Socialist States' Proposal for Inter-
sputnih: An International Comunications Satellite System." VILLMOVA
um azvm. Vol 15, No 1, 1969. p 105.

The agreement on the formal legal capacity, the privileges and immuni-
ties of the International Intersputnik Space Conunications Organisa-
tion was signed in Berlin on 20 September 1976. In 1916. an agreement
was also signed between the govemment of the USSR and the International
Intersputnik Space Communications Organization for regulating the ques-
tions related to the headquartering or Intersputnik in the USSR.

In particular, such ties were established with the International Organ-
ization of Radio Broadcasting and Television. Intersputnik also co-
operates vith CW and other international organizations.

130
”I OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

13.
1h.

15.

16.

17.

18.

190

21.

22.

23.
2h.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For more detail on the technical characteristics of the Intersputnik

commications system. see: I. Ya. Potrov, "The Intersputnik Agreement
«An Important Act of International Cooperation." VESTNIK SVYAZI, No 8,
1972, pp 30-31; V. P. Minashin and V. P. Ronantsov. "Cooperation of the
Socialist Countries in the Area of Space Conunications." “Po Progrszne

'Interkosnos'" [Under the Intercosnos Program], Moscow. Mashinostroyeniye.
1976. pp 335-3'I8-

These documents have already been worked out and approved.

The convention vas opened for signing on 29 March 1972 and came into
force on 30 August 1972.

P. I. Luhin, "The Use of Satellites for Radio Comunications," "Pravovyye
Aspekty Ispol'sovsniya Iskusstvenmrkh Sputnikov dlya Tseley Mateorologii
i Radiosvyazi," Edited by N. A. Ushakov, Moscow. Nauka, 1910. p 135.

For the text of the agreements see: "Yearbook of Air and Space Lav 1965,"

Montreal. 1961. pp 1023-1539. In 1965. an additional arbitration agree-
aent was also signed.

The name International Comunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat)
was adopted on 28 October 1965.

The conference was held in Washington tron 25 February through 21 March
1969, from 16 February through 20 March 1970, and from 1b April through
21 May 1971.

For the texts of the agreements, see: "International Cooperation in
Outer Space: A Symposium,” U.8. Senate, Doc. 1! 51-92, pp 609-651.

S. Courteix, "Recherche Scientifique et Relations Internationales,"
Paris, 1972, p 119'. G. Latterranderie, "Du regime définitif d'Intelsat,"
LA REXIHH‘CHE SPATIALB, No 5, 1971, pp 25-28; A. H. Malavialle, "Le.
consortium international des telecomunications par satellites:
Intelsat," LA RBCMCKB SPATIALB, lo 2, 1W3. pp 9-15.

For more detail on the discussion or these questions at the Washington
Conference, see: V. S. Vereshchetin, "Legal Questions of Space Con-
munications at the Hashington Intelsat Conference." "Tendentsii
Razvitiya Kosnicheskogo Prava." Edited by A. 8. Piradov, Moscow. ﬂauka,
1971, pp 137-158.

The concept of "Joint venture" has no defined international legal sig-
niticance.

Conference document: Con. 11/11, 13 March 1969.

Conference document: Con. 1/83 9 (Final(, 15 March 1969.

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY :
25.

26.

27 .
28.

30.
31.

32.
33.

35.

37 .

30R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0. F. Brital. "The Global System or Telecommnications by Satellite in

Face of the Theory or 21 January 1967." "Proc. XII Colloq. Lav Outer
Space." California. 1970. p 65.

S. Mtchelson. "Communications by Satellite," FOREIGN MAIRS. Vol 108,
No 1, 1969. p 73.

Conference docmnent: 93. 8 March 1970.

3. Cheng. "Comunications Satellites," cunnm 1.an 930131.343, Vol an.
1971, pp 226-228; A. M. Malarialle, 0p. cit.. p 1h.

0. Lafferranderie. 0p. cit., p 27.
The general director of Intelsat began work in January 1977.

On the legal problems related to determining the Intelsat executive

body. see: C. Patermann, "Actual Legal and Administration Problems of
Intelsat Organization," "Proc. m Colloq. Lav Outer Space." California.

1977. Pp 351-356.
Conference document: 10. Art. VIII.

For the differences in the 0.8. and Western European interpretations
on the procedure for submitting recommendations of the assembly of
parties on these questions. see: A. H. Malavislle, 0p. cit.. p 12.

"Pocket Guide to the Global Satellite System," Information Office.

Comsat. 19710; P. Langereux. "Donne annees de teleconunications spatiales."
AIR ET COSMOS, No 539, 1971‘, pp 39-103.

As has been pointed out by S. Corteix. the actual inequality betveen

the Americans and their partners "was apparent in the concluding of

an unequal treaty" (S. Courteix, 0p. cit., p 123). C. Colliard also
writes that the advantages of the United States in the technical area
also impede the implementing of the planned Intelsat reform (C. Colliard,
"Heztdunarodnyye Organisatsii i Uchereshdeniya." Moscow. Progress, 1972.
p 61 .

AIR er cosmos. No 539. 1971:. pp 3943.
A circular orbit about 36,000 km high and with a zero inclination is
termed geostationary. A satellite placed in this orbit is permanently

above a certain spot or the earth's surface. Only a limited number of
satellites can be placed in a geostationary orbit without interference.

132
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P08 OPPICIM. USE ONLY

CRAPTER 3: DIRECT TEIEVISION BROADCASTING BY SATELLITE

Direct television broadcasting by earth satellites is a mndamentally new
type of space communications. and its social, political and legal conse-
quences have been actiVely discussed for a number of years in the various
international organizations and in the literature.

This type of space connunications can play an exceptional role in bringing
people closer together, in raising the educational and cultural level.
particularly in nations or regions with an insufficiently developed network
of ground broadcasting. At the sane time. the appearance of this new power-
ful means of cosmunication raises serious political and legal problems re-
lated to the necessity of preventing the use of the direct broadcast satel-
lites for encroaching on state sovereignty. for interference into internal
affairs or for exacerbating relations between states.

Although a number of authors. particularly American. have asserted that
direct broadcasting by satellites is a question of the distant future.

and supposedly there is for this reason no need to be concerned with the
probleas of its legal regulation at present. the practice of international
life repudiates such assertions.

As is known. in 1915-1916. an American-Indian proJect was carried out to
broadcast education-type television programs to 5.000 Indian villages via
the ATS-F satellite. The method of transmission used here represents one
of the forms of direct television broadcasting [m] via satellites some-
times called "semidirect" broadcasting. For carrying out this proJect. in
September 1969. NASA concluded a special agreement with the Indian Atomic

Energy Department.

The American ATS-P satellite was put into a geostationary orbit on 30 Hay
1971:. Initially the satellite was used for conducting experisents over
American territory. Then it was shifted to another point for an experiment
in transmitting educational programs to Indian territory.1 During a year
each day for It hours transmissions were carried out to 2.h00 villages in
which specially equipped TV sets with 3-aeter antennas were set up. In
another 2.600 villages participating in the experiment, the TV broadcasts
were rece red via the usual ground satellite comunications stations.

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An important feature in this first international experiment in the area of
ms was the fact that the content of the TV programs (their subject included
questions of agriculture. public health. family planning. school education.
and so forth) was completely controlled by the Indian goVernment. The pro-
grams were produced in India and transmitted to the ATS-P satellite by
Indian stations located in Ahmadabad and Delhi.’

From the standpoint of international law. a completely different situation
arises if in the future a state or its organizations wish to carry out
direct broadcasting via satellites to the territory of another state. with-
out asking the permission of the latter.

In the USSR and abroad. a significant number of studies has been published
devoted to the international legal aspects of direct broadcasting via earth
satellites. Among the Soviet research we should mention the work of 6. P.
Zhukov. s. n. Dudakov. Yu. M. Kolosov. P. 1. Min and A. s. Piradov.’ The
United Nations. its specialized agencies as well as the international non-
governmental organizations have also devoted a great deal of attention to
these problems.

From the large number of questions related to direct broadcasting via satel-
lite. ue will take up only certain ones which. in our view. are of funda-
mental significance in light of the efforts being made at present in the
area of the international legal regulation of this type of space activity.

The concept of "radio broadcasting via satellites" in the broad sense of
the word includes not only the television broadcasts. but also sound and
other types of transmissions carried out using radio waves.“

In line with this certain authors have raised the question of whether the
international legal regulation of the use of satellites for direct broad-
casting should cover all types of transmissions via satellite or only the
television transmissions. ‘lhe necessity of a legal regulation primarily
of TV broadcasting is determined by the special role of television in
modern life and by the particularly strong impact of visual images which
do not know linguistic barriers. D'i'B will sake it possible to bring these
video signals to any point in the world. and this previously was possible
only for sound signals.

Unsanctioned television broadcasts via satellites to the territory of
foreign states can represent a serious threat to the security and sover-
eignty of states. The French international legal expert C. Colliard has
described such activity as a new form of the "occupation" of foreign ter-
ritory and the inslavement of the population of one country by images and
slogans.5 The Indian legal expert R. ﬂingorsni has qualified such broad-
casting of one of the forms of aggression using satellites.6

Specialists in the area of space comications technology differentiate
two basic methods for receiving television programs which have been relayed

13'!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by comnications satellites on the ground and transmitting them to viewers.
In using the first of these methods for receiving the signals from space.
large antennas are required with a diameter of 10-25 meters. highly sensi-
tive receiving equipment. the amplification of the received signals using
special equipment of a TV center and their subsequent transmission via the
ground comunications lines to the ordinary hone receivers. Precisely this
method is presently used in the national and international space couunica-
tions systems, including Intersputnik and Intelsat.

A significant increase in the power of the satellite radio transmitter makes
it possible to use a method of receiving the TV programs on the ground which
is fundamentally different from the former. here there is no necessity of
large and expensive antennas and complex transceiving ground equipment. in-
cluding television centers. This method has been named ”direct television
broadcasting. "

In turn DTB is divided into two types. the differences between which are
essential from the technical viewpoint. but are not of fundamental signifi-
cance from the viewpoint of their international-legal regulation. These
are direct transmissions to small collective ("com ") antennas with
additional technical devices ("semidirect broadcasting") and direct broad-
casts to individual hone receivers.

The dividing of television space comunications into the above-given types
has been substantiated in the documents of the world Administrative Radio
Conference on Space Conunications held in Geneva in 1971. In accord with
the definitions accepted at this conference. the concept of ”direct recep-
tion" is extended simultaneously to individual and collective reception.

Certain Soviet authors have noted that from the viewpoint of the inter-
national legal regulation it is advisable to disregard the dividing of
satellite television broadcasting into the various types.9 It seems that
this consent is valid only in terms of the two varieties of m (to col-
lective and individual antennas). But as for broadcasting using large
ground communications stations. or. as this is also termed in the litera-
ture. "point-to-point broadcasting." the transmissions of TV programs using
such technical devices are easily put under national control, and for this
reason the nature of their international legal regulation differs from me.
With the different approach, the specific features of the legal qualifica—
tion of MD as a special type of space comanications requiring special
regulation are eliminated.

U.S. representatives in various international organizations and American
legal experts have actively propagandized the idea that there is no urgency
for an international legal regulation of m. since broadcasting to indi-
vidual TV sets in all probability will not be possible before 1985.lo Here
they refer to the first report of the 01! working group on direct broadcast
satellites. At the same time. this report also mentions that "direct tele-
vision transmission to adapted home receivers from the technical viewpoint
could have been feasible in 1975.“1 In the fifth report. the working group

135
'01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFXCIM. ”SB ONLY

noted: "Over the last several years. the technical possibility of direct
broadcasting from satellites has come significantly closer to practical

realization. This makes it possible to redict with some certainty that
opemting systems (emphasis ours. authors could arise in the next decade.“2

Certain American authors have asstned that the state of DTB equipment and
the already existing regulation of such activities generally eliminate
the problem of elaborating special principles and provisions. Thus. in a
report at the 17th Intemational Colloquium on Space Law. a staff member
of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences of the 0.8. Senate.

J. Gehrig. stated: "It is essential to bear in mind that satellite broad-
casting which causes the greatest anxiety. and precisely television broad-
casting to any receiver at any point or the world, will not occur at all.
The technical differences between the television systems and the existing
rm rules make the use of satellites for broadcasting which would repre-
sent interference (into the internal affairs of another state. author)
virtually impossible. The rm rules contain the corresponding provisions
on spillover. and states could relatively easy control the undesired trans-
missions."l3

However, regardless of the specific dates for realizing MB to individual
receivers. the elaboration of international rules for such broadcasting
will not tolerate delay. since from the legal viewpoint there is no mada-
mental difference between broadcasting to collective antennas (this is
already a question of today) and broadcasting designed for individual re-
ception. It is essential not to overlook the circumstance that. as experi-
ence shows. the elaboration of international legal documents and their
acceptance by states require significant time.

The various aspects of MB were initially discussed in the United Nations
and its specialized agencies (chiefly the rm and UNESCO) in parallel with
other questions relating to satellite communications.“ In 1967. the UN
General Assembly. upon the initiative of Sweden. specifically drew the
attention of the UN Space Couittee to the problem of 1m. and in 1968,
the Assembly approved the recomendation of this Conittee to set up a
working group on direct broadcast satellites.15

The working group has been concerned with an interdisciplinary discussion
of the questions of m via satellites, including the technical. social.
cultural and legal consequences of this type of space activity. In 1969-
19“, it held five sessions and submitted its reports to the Oil Space
Committee.ls

In the course of discussing the on questions. the members of the working
group and other UN bodies divided into the supporters and opponents of
international legal regulation of m; serious differences arose over the
nature of such regulation.

The opinion of a predominant maJority of states was reflected in the (III
General Assembly Resolution 2916 (XXVI!) approved on 9 November 1912.

136
so: orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This recognized the necessity "of working out principles for the use of
earth satellites by states for direct television broadcasting for the
purposes of concluding an international agreement or agreements.” The UN
Space Committee and the UH General Assembly pat the elaboration of princi-
ples for the activity of states in the DTB area among the primary questions
on the agenda of the Legal Subcommittee of the UN Space Committee.

8eVera1 draft documents related to the international legal regulation of
0TB were submitted to the Subcommittee for review. In particular. the
corresponding proposals were submitted by the USSR. the United States
Argentina. Canada and Sweden (the last two nations did this Jointly).‘7

The principles which states should follow in carrying out 0T8 were stated
most consistently and fully in the draft Convention Governing Principles
for the Use of Earth Satellites by States for Direct Television Broadcast-
ing and which was submitted by the USSR to the 27th Session of the UN
General Assembly.18

The Soviet draft contained the following basic provisions:

1) DTB should be carried out exclusively in the interests of peace. prog-
ress. the development of mutual understanding and the strengthening of
friendly relations between peoples. It should help to raise the educational
level of the population. to develop culture, and broaden international
exchanges.

2) All states have an equal right to carry out DTB and to benefit from
such broadcasting without any discrimination whatsoever.

3) DTB is carried out in foreign states only with the definitely expressed
agreement of these states.

h) Transmission to other states carried out without the clearly expressed
consent of the latter are recognized as contrary to the law and entail
international liability. The same would be true of the broadcasts which
harm the support of international peace and security, which represent inter-
ference into the internal affairs of states, which encroach on the basic

rights of man. which contain propaganda of violence and atrocities. which
undermine the bases of local civilization and culture. or which misinform

the population.

5) States can take the measures accessible to them for countering illegal
OTB carried out on their territory.

6) A state bears liability for all national OTB activities. regardless of

whether these are carried out by governmental bodies or nongovernmentaJ
organizations and legal entities.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

Forced to consider an opinion of a majority of states. the United States

in March i97h submitted to the UN working group its own working document

on a draft of principles concerning direct broadcast satellites.l9 Here.
howeVer. the 0.5. delegate against stressed that his nation had "serious
stipulations on the advisability of approving binding principles in the area
of such broadcasting.”2° The 0.8. document lacks such a major principle as
preliminary agreement of a state to broadcasting destined to its popula-
tion.

Substantial progress in working out the legal principles of 0TB was made

in the Legal Subcommittee of the UN Space Committee in 1976 and 1977. when
agreement was reached on a number of principles. These included: the ap-
plicability of international law. international cooperation. the liability
of states. the right and duty to hold consultations. the peaceful resolu-
tion of disputes. notification of the United Nations. and others." Hov-
cver. the principle of preliminary agreement which was crucial to all legal
regulation of DTB remained among those principles on which agreement had
not been reached. In the draft Soviet Convention. this principle was for-
mulated in the following manner: "The states who are participants of the
current convention can carry out direct television broadcasting using earth

satellites to foreign states only with the definitely expressed agreement
of this by the latter" (Article H.“

An analogous principle was contained in the document distributed by the
Soviet delegation at the third session of the working group on direct
broadcast satellites in 1970.33 In one form or another it was supported
by a majority of the delegations in the Legal Subcommittee of the UN Space
Committee.

Since the enemies of the legal regulation of 0T3, in establishing their
positions. often utilize the slogan of "freedom of information." and pro-
claim it as a recognized principle in international law. the Soviet legal
literature rightly devotes great attention to an examination of 0TB as one
of the mass information media.3“

At the same time. for international space lav. DTB is primarily one of

the types of the practical application of space. The specific features of
0TB examined in this light consist in the fact that the aim of the activity
carried out in space consists in obtaining the desired effect on the earth.
In this manner the state engaged in 0T3 carries out activity not only in
space but also on the earth (on its own or on foreign territory). In in-
terpreting the problem of the international legal regulation of 0TB on this
level. we gain an opportunity to construct a legal concept of DTB on two
fundamental principles: the freedom of space and respect for state sover-
eighty.

As one of the types of space activity, OTB is fully covered by the basic
principles of international space law, including the principles stated in
Article I of the Space Treaty: "Space. Including the Moon and Other Celes-
tial Bodies. is open for exploration and use by all states. without any

138
roe omcm. use any
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

discrimination whatsoever. on a basis of equality and in accord with inter-
natlonal law...." From this stems the equal right of all states to DTB

activities and the use or the benefits of such broadcasting without any
discrimination whatsoever.

However. the freedom to use space for OTB purposes undoubtedly cannot be
unlimited. A number of restrictions of a general and special nature are

contained in the Space Treaty and in other sources of international space
lav. -

Among these limitations. let us isolate two which are of general funda-

mental significance. According to Article III of the Space Treaty. DTD
activities. as one of the types of the use of space. should be carried out

in accord with international law. including the UN Charter. Article IX

of the same Treaty requires that all activities in space be carried out

"with due consideration of the corresponding interests of all other states...."

Obviously references to the freedom of space as a basis for unsanctloned
activities the consequences of which tell on the territory of other states
and consequently activities for interfering into the internal affairs of
these states. cannot have any legal grounds under them.

As was pointed out above. international space law is permeated with a
spirit of respect for the principle of state sovereignty. The nonexten-
sion of territorial sovereignty of states to space cannot be used as a
pretext Nor violating state sovereignty on earth.

"From the legal standpoint.” writes the Czechoslovak professor. J. Busak.
"the relations between the transmitting (the DIS program. author) state

and the receiving state should be viewed as relations between two sovereign
states with equal rights to which are applied the general principles of
international law stemming from the UN Charter.... The rights and obliga-
tions of states based on these principles, in all instances. including DTB.
are always the same."25

An analogous viewpoint was stated by C. Colliard: ”A state whose territory
could be 'blanketed' by transmissions received directly on its territory
cannot play a passive role in relation to the transmitting state."2‘

The position which has now gained broad support was reflected in the UK
General Assembly Resolution "0n the Llsboration of An International Conven-
tion Governing the Principles for the Use of Satellites by States for
Direct Television Broadcasting."27 The resolution contains repeated rer-
erences to the necessity of observing the principle of state sovereignty

in carrying out 0TB. In particular. it states that the activities of
states in the area or 0TB should be based on the principles or mutual re-

spect for sovereignty. noninterference into internal affairs. equality.
cooperation and mutual benefit.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL 083 ONLY

The necessity of respecting sovereignty in satellite broadcasting was also

emphasized in a special URESCO declaration approved by the General Confer-
ence of this organization on 15 November 1912.2.

The banning of direct satellite broadcasting to the territory of another

state without its definitely expressed approval is a logical consequence of
state soVereignty and one of its manifestations.

At the same time, in the mentioned UN and UNESCO resolutions. and particu-
larly in the latter. mention is found of the necessity of ensuring a "free
flow of information" and "freedom of information."

References to freedom of information. ensuring the free flow of information.
and so forth are the favorite stratagem of the opponents of the principle

of preliminary agreement of a state to television broadcasting to its ter-
ritory. The 0.8. representatives have particularly often referred to freedom
of information, stating that the acceptance of provisions on preliminary
agreement supposedly would set a precedent in establishing an obstacle on

the path to the free flow of information and ideas.29

in working for the recognition of the freedom of information as a principle
in international law. the capitalist nations are in no way concerned with
the rights of the individual or the good of peoples. Into the content of
this principle they have invested a definite sense which borders on the
right of interfering into the internal affairs of other states.

0n the level of international law. the essence of the question is that the
long established and generally recognized principle of state sovereignty

is put in opposition to a provision (freedom of information) which never
has had an does not have the nature of a generally recognized principle of
international law. and in any instance cannot prevail over such fundamental
bases of international law as state sovereignty and noninterference into
internal affairs. 3°

In this regard indicative are the conclusions which are found in a book
published by a group of French scholars who specially studied the legal
questions of direct satellite broadcasting.31 The authors of this book
write: "In fact. it (freedom of information. author) is recognized chiefly
in documents which as yet do not have a binding force.... However the
case. even if freedom of information is recognized on the international
level. it must be stated that this freedom is limited.”32

Other specialists concerned with this problem have also drawn attention to

the absence of a generally recognized "principle" of freedom of informa-
tion in international law.33

The defenders of the "principle” of freedom of information put it in the

sphere of the personal rights of man. Respect for the rights of man belongs
among the progressive principles of modern international law. However. as

130
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P0! OFI’ICIAI. "8! ONLY

6. I. Tunhin emphasizes. the effect of international law on the area of
human rights "does not mean either that the rights of Ian are directly regu-
lated by international law nor that they haVe ceased to be basicalh' the
internal affairs of a state."“

The Nest Geman legal expert H. Dauses in his report submitted at the 11th

International Colloquium on Space Law has written: "In international law.

the sovereign rights or states should be viewed as taking priority in com-

parison with the right or an individual to the freedom or information which
can be carried out solely within the limits set by constitutional or legis-
lative means by the national sovereign. Precisely because of these sover-

cign rights. each state is free to permit or prohibit television broadcasts
directed at its territory."’5

Thus. references to freedom of information as a pretext to reJect the princi-
ple of preliminary agree-eat with DTB are invalid. The latter stems direct-
ly from the principle of state sovereignty. while freedom or information
cannot be viewed as a recognised principle of international law. let alone
haVe predominant strength in comparison with the basic principles of inter-
national law.

Along with the already mentioned principles and provisions of international
law. a whole series of other international legal provisions to one degree
or another are related to OTB via satellite.1

Thus. international law. including space law, has long known the ban on the
dissemination and propagandizing of ideas and views inimical to the cause
of peace. security and well being of peoples.

The preamble of the Space Treaty directly points to the applicability of
the UK General Assembly Resolution llo(II) of 3 November 1937 to space.
This resolution condemns propaganda aimed at or capable of creating or in-
tensifying a threat to peace. the violating of peace or acts of aggression.
This provision has direct bearing on m.’

The International Convention on eradicating all form of racial discrimina-
tion which came into force on lb March 1969 declares as contrary to the law
any propaganda based on ideas or theories of racial superiority and any
propagation of ideas based on racial superiority (Article '4).

A number of important provisions relating to m is found in the Declaration
on the Principles of International Law concerning frien relations and
cooperation between states in accord with the Ull Charter. 3 In particular.
this declaration affirms the illegality of all forms of intervention directed
against the political. economic and cultural bases of a state.

"or has the Convention on the Use of Radio Broadcasting in the Interests of
Peace worked out in the league of liations in 1936 lost its definite sig-
nificance. At present aromd 30 states are members of this Convention.”

lhl

NR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another group of restrictions on satellite broadcasting is of a technical
nature and is related to the necessity of preventing interference in the
operation of satellites, as well as interference for other ground and space
services using the radio spectrum. The coordinating of such questions is
carried out by states within the 110. The Vorld Administrative Radio Con-
ference on Space Coammnications set up in 1971 in Genera by the ITU was

the first to assign definite bands for the urn service. It also approved
a number of other decisions and recommendations dealing with the placing of
satellites in a geostationary orbit, the restricting of the power of the
emitted signals. and so forth. Important decisions on these questions
were also approved at an ITU conference held in Geneva in January-February
1977.

Soviet and foreign literature has correctly drawn attention to the fact that
some of the questions discussed within the ITU. for example the placement

of satellites in a geostationary orbit, are not only of a technical nature
but also have political and legal significance.“°

On the basis of what has been said, it is possible to conclude that the
international legal provisions relating to 0TB via satellites at present
are contained in documents which are extremely diverse in terms of the
range of participants. legal force. the subject of regulation and sphere of
action. Systematization of the existing provisions and the elaboration of
new ones brought to life by scientific and technical progress as well as
the recognition of their indisputable legal force necessitate the conclud-
ing of an international agreement on the principles for the use of satel-
lites for 0TB by states.

However. any list of permissive and prohibitive principles which such an
agreement might conclude inevitably would not be exhaustive. It would
merely represent the general legal limits for permissible and impermissible
actions in the area of DTBr The guarantee against possible abuses here is
the principle of preliminary agreement which would make it possible for a
state. proceeding from political, economic. technical, ethnic or other
considerations. to impose additional limitations on broadcasting to its
territory or completely prohibit such broadcasting.

The approval'of this principle combined with the already recognized princi-
ple in space law of consultations between interested states (Article IX

of the Space Treaty) will facilitate the solution to a number of other DTB
problems. for example, the content of programs, spillover into a foreign
territory. and so forth.

The elaboration and reinforcing in a single international agreement of the
basic principles for the use of earth satellites for OTB have become an
imperative of today. Considering that 0TB represents a specific type of
the use of space whereby activities are carried out simultaneously in
space and on the earth. the right of a state to ban foreign broadcasting
via satellites to its territory is one of the manifestations of its sover-
eignty, and an important guarantee against possible abuses with 0TB.

1h:

FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY
I.

2‘

10.

11.
12.

13.

Ill.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roomom

See "Report of the UN Conference on satellite-Assisted Broadcasting
System for Educational Purposes." UII Doc. A/AC.105/128 or 5 April 1971:.

For more detail on the experiment. see: R. n. Ringorani. "Commica-

tion Satellite: An Indian Experiment." ”Pros. XIX Colloq. Lav Outer
Space," Mince. 1916.

See. for example. 0. P. Zhukov. "Hezhdunarodnoye Kosnicheskoye Pravo."
Moscow. Znaniye, 1911. p 26-31; In. M. Kolosov. "Massoma Infomtsiya
i Mezhdunarodnoye Pravo" Mass Information and International Law]. Moscow.
Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya. 1971:; B. G. Oudakov. "InternatiOnal Legal
Questions of Using Satellites for Direct TelevisiOn Broadcasts."
PRAVOVEDENIYE. llo h. 1970; "Meshdunarodnoye Kosnicheshoye Pravo." Moscow.
Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya. 19710. pp 171-185; B. a. Dudakov and Yu. H.
Kolosov. "Massovaya Infomtsiya Chores Kosnos" [Haas Information Via
Space]. Moscow. Znaniye. 19756 and others.

For the definition of radio comunications and radio broadcasting con-
tained in the Appendix to the International Teleconunications Conven-
tion, see: ”Mezhdunarodma Konventsiya Elektrosvyazi (Monti-e, 1965 3.)"
[International Telecosnunications Convention (Montre. 1965)]. Moscow.
Izvestiya. 1969. pp 62-63.

c. Colliard. ”Preface.” in: 8. Courteix. ”Televisions sans frontier-ea."
p VIII.

R. O. Hinsorani, Op. cit.

M. Kaplanov. "The Space Conunications Channel.” IZVB‘I'IYA. 5 Ray 1913.
UN Doc. A/ACJOS/IOO. pp 710-75.

"Mezhdunarodnoye Kosaichsskoye Provo." p 115.

See. for example: 8. Galloway, "Direct Broadcast Satellites," "Proc.
XVII Colloq. lav Outer Space." California. 1915, pp 30-101.

UN Doc. A/AC.105/Sl. p h.

"Rerrt on the Committee on the Peaceful Uses 01' Outer Space." lIev York.
197 . p 10.

J. J. Gehrig. "Broadcasting Satellites-wProspects and Problems." "Proc.
XVII Colloq. Lav Outer Space." p 51.

C. A. Colliard. ”Les satellites de radioditmsion directe." "Annuaire
francais de droit international." Vol XVIII. 1972. pp 717-730.
1h3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
15.
16.
17.

18.

26.

2'7.
28.

30.

31.

32.

FOB ORIGIN. USE ONLY

on General Asnenbly Resolution 2553 (um) or 20 December 1968.
UN Doc. A/Ac.105/Sl. A/Ac.lOS/66. A/Ac.105/83. A/Ac.105/117. A/Ac.105/l2'f.

UN Doc. A/Ac.lOS/127. Appendices II-V; HEADS/135; A/Ac.l05/C. 2/1..
102.

PRAVDA. 11 August 1972.

UI Doc. A/Ac.105/V.0.3(V). 039. 2. 11 March 1975.

"Press Release.” 0.8. Mission, Geneva. 13 lurch 1971:.

um Doc. A/AC.105/171.

PRAVDA. 11 August 1972.

um Doc. A/ACI105/83 or 25 m 1910. Appendix Iv.

Yu. M. Kolosov, "Kassovaya Internatsiya i nezhdunarodnoye Prsvo.”

J. Busak. "Ls radiodifmsion directe par satellite." "Proc. XVII Colloq.
Lav Outer space." p h.

c. A. Collisrd, "Les stellites de rsdiodirmsion directe." p 2l.
UN General Assembly Resolution 2916(XXVII) of 9 November 1972.

”Declaration of Guiding Principles on the Use of Satellite Broadcasting
for Free Dissemination of Information. for the Development of Education
and for the Broadening or Oultm-al Exchanges." Ull Doc. A/Ac.105/lo9 or
12 February 1973. For a critical review of this declaration. see:

Yu. M. Kolosov. ”Masovsya Intornstsiya i Neshdunsrodnoye Prsvo," pp 90-
91.

"Statement by the 0.8. Representative at the Fifth Session or the U]!
working Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites." Geneva. Press Release.
13 March 1975.

V. Korobeynikov. "what is Concealed Behind the Concept of ’Preedou of
Infomtion’7", WODMYA ZHIZII', lo 1. 1976. pp 95-103; 3. G.

Duane; and Yu. M. Kolosov, ”Hassovaya Infomtsiyn Chore: Kosnos."
Pp 9-1 -

"L'utilisation do satellite: de diffusion directe,” Paris. Press. Univ.
France, 1910.

IBM- . P 55.

lhh
M OFFICIAL USE OILY
33.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

See, for example: M. 0. Mercofi', "Traite de Droit internetionel public
dc l'eapoce." Pribourg-weneveni’eriewlev York. Rd. Univ. Fribourg.
Suieae, 1973, pp 620-621.

0. I. Tunkin, "Teoriya Mezhdunorodnogo Prue." Moscow, Mezhdunerodnyye
Otnoaheniye, 1910. p 93; see also: V. A. Kerteehkin, "Mezhdunerodnqye
Zeohchite Prev Cheloveke" ['me Internetionel Defense of the Rights or
Men], Moscow. Mezhdunerodnyye Otnoeheniye, 1976.

H. A. Deuces, "Le liberte de l‘infomtion en mtiere de le television
directe per satellites," "Proe. XVII Colloq. Lev Outer Space." p 23.

See, for example, the list of international documents relating to MD

submitted by a group of nations to the United Nations (A/Ac.105/133 of
6 June 19710).

Also relating to DTB is e series of other articles of the Spece Treaty:
1, II, VI. IX and XI.

UN General Assembly Resolution 2625(XXV) of 2|; October 1970.

The USSR is not among these states.

8. G. Dudekov, "been Problems of the Use of Orbits for Earth Satellites,"

sova'rsxom cosunansrvo I mvo, No h, 1973. pp 78-81»; J. Basalt, "Geo-
stationary Satellites end the Lev,” WCM‘ION J .. No 8. 1972.
pp 1087-1591.

lbs

193 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER ’0: SPACE NAVIGATION

Satellites used for navigation requirements of civil aviation and maritime
navigation, both hon the technical and from the international legal view-
point, have much in connon with co-Iunications satellites. Often naviga-
tion satellites are called sea and air col-unications satellites.

According to the definition proposed by the UN Working Group, by a system
of navigation satellites one understands "such a system which includes

all types or a portion of services needed for safety and the economic op-
eration of aircraft, vessels, and so forth."1

The legal questions related to the use of satellites for navigation pur-
poses do not require the elaboration of a special status for this category
of space objects as is required, for example, for the direct TV broadcast
satellites. Although, like the other types of applications satellites,
they are designed not for space research per se, but rather for satisfying
terrestrial needs, their use does not involve interference into the sphere
comprising the domestic cupetence of states. The principles and provi-
sions of space law which define the general conditions for space objects
are also extended to navigation satellites.

The task of the international legal regulation consists primarily in elab-
orating the institutional forms which will provide for the creation and
functioning of navigat an satellites systems in accord with the generally
recouised principles and provisions of international law.

Should such international systm be set up by alreaw existing or new
international organisations? What are the functions, the meabership,
structure and powers of the leading bodies of these organisations? Should
such an organization be concerned solely with the space portion of the sys-
ten or also with the ground? What is the procedure for financing these
systems and is the participation of private capital in their creation to
be permitted? What sorts of questions have been and are being discussed
in the literature and at international conferences related to the future
use of navigation satellites?2

1136

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic advantages of employing satellites for navigation come down to
the following: an improvement in all types of comnunications with ships

at sea and aircraft in flight for increasing their efficient use; improving
the ship and aircraft radio fixing service for increasing navigation and
flight safety; improving the use of the radio spectrum for developing new
frequency bands.

According to calculations given in American literature, by 1980 the number
of large-tonnage vessels (over 10.000 tons) will reach around H.000." and
at each moment 70 percent of these vessels can be at sea. More than 90 per-
cent of comsunications between vessels and the shore is now handled by

radio telegraph using Morse code in the high- and medium-frequency bands.
Due to poor signal transmission conditions and other factors, these connuni-
cations are unreliable. and the daily traffic between the ship and the shore
does not exceed ts words. According to 1966 data, ship collisions and
groundings occurred an average of 15 times a day. A satellite system cap-
able of providing more effective eossnunications and navigation services

will make it possible to reduce such accidents.5

The aircraft navigation system is particularly important in flying across
oceans. since after approximately 500 km away from land the intercontinental
aircraft do not have reliable contact with ground stations. The use of
satellites will make it possible to keep air comunications under constant
control of the ground centers. in particular. over the routes of the heavi-
est traffic. for example over the Atlantic. Thus, the Aerosat system is

aimed at localizing aircraft over the Atlantic every 5 minutes with an accu-
racy on the order of 1800 meters.6

0n the international level. a discussion of the range of questions involved
with the advisability and technical feasibility of using satellites to
solve problems of marine and air navigation was held under the United
:iations and in two specialized Uii agencies. the International Civil Avia-

tion Organization (ICAO) and the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative
Organization (IMCO).

In 1966. the 0!! Space Comittee and later the UN General Assembly (Resolu-
tion 2223/XXII) approved the setting up of a working group on a system of
navigation satellites. The group was given the task of examining the

technical. financial. organizational and legal aspects of the problem re-

lated to the necessity and possibility of setting up a navigation satellite
system.

The working group held its only session in July 1967 with the participation
of representatives from the involved Uil specialized agencies. Legal ques-
tions were virtually not examined by it, and subsequently the discussion

of these questions. in this instance concerning the marine navigation
satellites. was held within the mm. In its conclusions the group followed
the opinions oi the mac and D400 as potential users of the future system.

1'17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The members of the group expressed their conviction that the elaboration of
a navigation system for the needs or civil aviation and marine navigation
uninn satellites was technically possible. However. the group refrained
from any rccosssendations whatsoever on the functions. technical character-
isticn and organizational principles for the international navigation system
or systems. merely saying that these questions could be examined only after
the elucidation oi‘ the precise requirements. economic estimates and further
experiments and research.

Nevertheless the report of the work group pointed out that the use of space
technology could be required in the near future in the controlling and ob-
serving of air flights in regions where the use of conventional ground
radars is impossible. and in marine fisheries which gradual were extend-
ing their operations encompassing all regions or the oceans.

The subsequent discussion on the practical needs in setting up the naviga-
tion satellite systems. the organizational forms of cooperation and the
related legal problems was held in the UN specialized agencies as well as
between the European Space Research Organisation (mo) and the United
States.

The similarity in the navigation problems for civil aviation and marine
navigation explains the fact that in the first stages the technical devices
(satellites) and the institutional forms were conceived of as the same for
the marine and aeronautical services. Subsequently. however. the practical
work of developing the satellites and an examination of the organizational
questions were carried out separately for the marine and air navigation
services.

In carrying out one of its main tasks for assisting in the development or
international civil aviation. recently the ICAO has devoted a great deal
or attention to the questions of using space technology for civil aviation.
in 1968. the basic leading group of the ICAO. the Assembly. unanimously
approved a resolution which stated that the ICAO bears responsibility for
determining the position of international civil aviation in terms or using
space technology.°

In the same year or 1968, the ICAO Aeronavigation Couission set up a group
of experts on the technical questions for the use of space technoloy for
the needs of international civil aviation. and this was abbreviated the
ASTRA group. The activities of the group were basically linked to determin-
ing the technical characteristics or the air navigation satellite system.
Characteristically. the list compiled by the group for the possible areas
of using space technoloy in international civil aviation contained 37

points.

The basic aim of the nature ICAO activities in relation to space, as this
is defined in the ICAO document submitted to the United nations. is "the
creating of an operational air navigation satellite system."9 However.
the approach of the ICAO to creating such a system has been marked by

1’58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPP‘ICIM. USE ONLY

great circumspection. In the opinion of the ASTRA group. this should be
preceded by experience acquired as a result of operating an experimental
system which would function in parallel with the conventional presently
used conununications and radio fixing systems. The year 1980 has been named
as the closest date for the full operational use of the system "even in
using accelerated procedures." The group does not exclude that this time
could be moved back 5 or more years. °

The western European nations, in endeavoring not to fall behind the United
States in the area of earth-oriented space research. proposed a program
for setting up a satellite system for air navigation based on developments
which had been carried out in this area by the French Rational Space Re-
search Center. The decision to carry out this work within ESRO was ap-
proved in November 1968 and affirmed in July 1970 by the European Space
Conference.n On 20 December 1971, a special agreement came into force
signed by the interested ESRO member nations on this question.”

The dependence upon obtaining American launch vehicles for orbiting the
navigation satellites forced ESRO to carry out the program which was named
Aerosat Jointly with the United States. The talks on carrying out this
proves had a very stormy nature and were repeatedly accompanied by out-
breaks of acute political differences between the Hestern European countries
and their overseas partners.

Initially the talks were held between mo and MSA. After many questions
had already been agreed upon, the 0.3. government at the start of 1971.
informed 8330 that henceforward the American side in the talks would be
represented by the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA). As a result, all the
discussions started all over. At the same time, the United States let it
be known that the Joint program could be extended only to the sons of the
Atlantic. while the Americans preferred to carry out an independent program
for setting up a navigation system for the Pacific zone.

By the end of the summer of 1971, a memorandum had been approved between
ﬁne and the FAA in accord with which the program was to be based on the
principles of equal rights, duties and expenditures between the western
European nations and the United States. One portion of the program con-
cerned with the creation of the satellites themselves was viewed as the
general ("integrated"), and the other relating to the establishing of
ground stations and the necessary equipment on the aircraft was considered
only an "coordinatable." For carrying out the program, an Aerosat Council
was to be set up and its decisions would be taken with the consensus of
both sides.

In February 1912, the 0.3. president vetoed this memorandum and abrogated
the preliminary understanding. The 0.8. government notified its partners
that "after a study carried out considering the domestic, parliamentary

and international aspects of this question, the president had decided that
the draft agreement between EEG and the PM on the air navigation satellite

11-9
son ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

prom‘am did not conform to the policy or the U.8. government and should be
radically revised.“3

The American arguments came down to having the agreement on the development
on the satellites be concluded by 3330 directly with one of the private

American industrial firm. while the program itself would be of a strictly
experimental nature. At the same time. the United States agreed to conclude
an additional agreement between ssno and the PM on the procedure for util-
ising this system.

Thus, that portion of the- program which under the previously approved memo-
randum was considered to be "integrated.” was now offered to western mrope
as one to be carried out Jointly with an American firm. while the ”coordi-
notable" portion of the program remained within the limits of an agreement
between 5380 and a 0.8. governmental body. the FAA. mo was confronted
with the prospects of conducting talks on the creation of the system con-
comitantly with two American parties: a private company and the FAA.

0n the U.S. refusal to follow the previously reached understanding. the
English newspaper DAILY EXPRBS wrote that "American entrepreneurs have
caught an opportunity to extract large profits and have applied intense
pressure on the white House, after which all the goodwill of Hashington
evaporated rapidly and without a trace.”"’ mo announced its intention
to begin independently on the experimental design work related to the
Aerosat program.

In the autumn of 1972. the dialogue between the United States and Veetern
Daropc over the question of the Aerosat system was resumed under conditions
dictated by the United States. By the start of 1973, £380. the FAA and
Canada which had Joined in the progrun agreed on a draft for a new memoran-
dum on a "general program of experiments and evaluation of the potential
possibilities of aeronautic satellites.” According to this memorandu
which defined only the general requirements for the space portion of the
system and the questions of its experimental use. an Aeroaat Council should
be set up and representing the interests of all parties participating in

the program. The memorandum pointed out that the Aerosat program would be
carried out following the reconssndations made by the ICAO.

New differences of opinion arose after the interference of American aviation
companies. and these deferred the signing of this memorandum for more than
a year. This time the differences arose over the question of the frequency
bands and other technical characteristics of the system. The House of
Representatives of the American Congress, in considering the obJections of
American aviation comanies. refused to approve the FAA allocations for

work on developing the Aerosat system. The talks again had reached a
blind alley.”

Only at a price of new concessions by western hirope in May 19”", finally.
was the memorandum initialed.‘6 0n 2 December 1911:, a second agreement was

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OfflCIAL USE ONLY

signed on the development of the satellites for the Aerosat system. The
participants of this agreement were ESRO. Canada and the American Consat
General Company.” In accord with the agreements reached. two satellites
of the Aerosat system were to be placed in the Atlantic zone. The first of
these satellites was to be launched at the end of 1979.‘8

The history of the holding of the talks and an analysis of the concluded
agreements dealing with the Aerosat system again affirm that the United
States. having passed the Comsat Law in 1962. and then having set up
Intelsat. had assmed a firm policy of turning the earth-oriented use of
space technoloy into a sphere for private capital. Both the 0.8. govern-
ment and Congress on these questions acted solely from positions of de-
fending the interests of their monopolies. A clear example of this is
the blocking initially by the White house and later by Congress of inter-
national documents relating to the air navigation satellite system and
which previously had been approved with the official 0.8. governmental
bodies. In the first instance the veto was actually imposed by the space
firms. and in the second. by the private aviation companies.

The talks on setting up Aerosat did not eliminate the question that in
the nature the need could arise for developing a broad and equal inter-
national agreement on a system of air navigation satellites for experi-
mental and operational purposes. Among the existing intergovermental
organizations. the ICAO is the most suitable forum for working out such
an agreement.

The interest of a broad group of nations in using satellites for marine
navigation is apparent in the creation of the International marine satel-
lite communications organisation.

Upon the initiative of the 11400. from 23 April through 9 May 1975. an
intergovernmental conference was held in London to create the Inter-

national Satellite System for ﬂarine Conunications. This conference
was prepared due to the beneficial activities of a group of experts on

marine sgtellites organized in 1972 by the mco Committee for Safety
at Sea.

The IMCO began to be concerned with the questions of using space tech-
nology in the interests of marine navigation as early as 1966.” Even
in the course of the preliminary discussion of this problem within the
IMCO, the demand was voiced that the marine satellite system be used
primarin not only and not so much for navigation purposes in the issue-
diate sense of this word (determining the location of a vessel). but
rather for improving all types of marine communications.

After a detailed examination of the question wuegmup of experts and
the Committee for Safety at Sea. the Eighth DiCO Assembly in November
1913 recommended the convening in 1915 of an international intergovern-
mental conference for solving the question of establishing an

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

international marine satellite system and. with the positive solution to
this question. concluding a corresponding agreement. ‘

The work of the conference was to be based on the report of the group of
experts on marine satellites, and thin report was approved at its fifth
session in September 1971:.22 The preliminary version of the report was
distributed to the governments and international organizations, and
evoked many commentaries and comments.

The final document was a comprehensiVe document which reflected the tech-
nical requirements and the possible parameters of the future system, the
economic calculations. as well as the organizational measures needed for
establishing it. Appended to the report were two draft international
agreements: a draft convention on the International Organisation for a
Marine Satellite System (Inmarsat) and a draft Protocol on Privileges and
Immunities of the International Organization for the Marine Satellite
System. On a number of articles in these drafts, the group of experts
did not reach agreement. and they were given in several versions.

Thus. in the area of using satellites for the purposes of marine naviga-
tion. the elaboration of the international legal principles for setting
up the system was first carried out within an UN specialized-agency and
preceded the experimental phase of setting up the system. Here a maJor
role was played by Soviet initiative in submitting the "Tentative Prin-
ciples for Creating an International Organization on Marine Satellite
Communications and Radio Fixing" at a session in November 1972 of the
group of experts on marine satellites.23 Many provisions of this docu-
ment were approved by the group of experts and incorporated in the draft
proposed by them. Here of important significance was the fact that a
maJority of states did not wish to repeat the Intelsat experience where
the United States unilaterally imposed complete organisational decisions
on its partners.

In the course of the discussions held in the IMCO. the United States
took pains to convince the other states to reJect the idea of establish-
ing a new intergovernmental organization. The United States proposed
that the setting up of a marine satellite system be turned over to a
consortium set up like Intelsat in its initial form or the present or-
ganization of Intelsat.

The first U.S. proposal was not supported, since. in the opinion of a
predominant maJority of states. control over the international marine
satellite system should be carried out on a governmental level. The
second proposal was equally turned down, and in accord with this Intelsat
would have become the organization determining the policy and exercising
control over the marine satellite system. One of the reasons was that
Intelsat did not include a number of maJor sea powers, while the satel-
lite system to be developed should be truly international. In addition.
certain small nations which had a large merchant fleet rightly feared
that their votes would not have proper influence in Intelsat.

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under these conditions, the United States proposed using Intelsat as an
organization which would provide and manage the equipment of the system
on the basis of a special agreement with the future intergovernmental
organization. At the same time the United States was constantly against
the establishing of a new international organization and for this reason
initially held back its position on the entire report of the IMCO group
of experts.’“

A review of the given problem made by the competent IHCO bodies showed
that a majority of states was in favor of setting up an independent inter-
governmental organization which would carry out the management and control-
ling functions for the marine satellite system which would improve com-
munications with marine vessels for the purposes of ensuring safe naviga-
tion and increasing the efficient management of the fleet. The powers

of such an organization were to be extended primarily to the space por-

tion of the system. or to the space "segment." as it is called in the
IMCO documents.

The question of whether or not the organization would own the satellites
or lease them from other national or international organizations has re-
mained open. The possibility of signing a special agreement is not ex-
cluded and under this the direct technical management of the system would
be entrusted to another body or organization. The ground cmmmunications
stations working with the satellites should belong to the states or to
their operational organizations.

The differences of opinion over a number of fundamental questions which
arose at the conference devoted to the establishing of the marine satel-
lite system held in April-May 1975 in London did not make it possible to
approve final decisions on the discussed documents. Another two sessions
of the conference had to be held for overcoming the differences. and
these took place also in London in February and September 1976.

At the first session an understanding was reached reflected in the final
statement of the conference on the necessity of setting up a worldwide

satellite system for marine communications and a new international inter-
governmental organization for managing such a system.

In the course of the second session of the conference. two constituent
documents were basically agreed upon: the convention signed by the
governments. and an operational agreement of which governments or national
organizations appointed by them (state or private) could be the partici-
pants. The remaining disputed questions (on the maximum number of votes
of the organization members in the council. on the possibility of making
exceptions to the convention and on the official and working languages

of the organization) were resolved at a third session of the conference.
This opened the way to signing the Convention on the international organi-
zation for marine satellite communications (Inmarsat) and the correspond-
ing operational agreement which regulated the rights and duties of the
members of the organization in the financial and technical areas.35

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁhe convention established that all states could Join it. and the vessels
of all flags and classes could use the services of Inmarsat. The organiza-
tion was to carry out its activities exclusively for peaceful purposes.

The superior managing body of Inmarsat is the assembly. where all members
of the organisation are represented, and each of them has one vote.

The main executive body responsible for the space portion of the system
in the council. This body consists of 23 participants of the operational

agreement. 19 of which are determined depending upon the amount of their
contributions to Inmarsat. Four members are represented on the council

independently of the amount of their contributions for the purpose of en-
suring the principle of a Just geographic representation on the council.

The voting procedure on the council does not exclude the possibility of
employing the principle of weighted voting whereby the votes of the
council members depends upon their proportional participation in the
capital investments and upon their need to use the services of the system.
This voting formula was the result of a compromise decision which con-
sidered that the council would be made up primarily not of governments
but rather operational organizations acting as independent legal entities.
and could not serve as a precedent. According to the convention, the
superior executive of Inmarsat was the general director appointed fer a
term of 6 years from among candidates submitted by members of the organi-
zation.

Inmarsat should cooperate with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies. as well as with other international organizations. Close co-
operation and contact would also be maintained with the IMCO.

For the purpose of preparing the practical activities of Inmarsat, a prepara-
tory committee was set up. Naturally one of the basic questions which

this body encountered was related to establishing the possibility of de-
veloping or leasing the "space segment" for the needs of the organization.

As for the actual development of satellites for marine navigation. during
one of the sessions of the IMCO group of emperts in September 197h, it was
given information on the Marisat satellite system being developed by the
American Cement General Corporation. as well as the £830 Marots satellite.
However. the group of experts correctly decided that at this stage it would
be premature to examine the role which these systems could play in a global
marine satellite system. and it refrained from any recommendations what-
soever on this.

The American Marisat system which was to be put into operation initially
in 1975 was designed to provide satellite-assisted communications for 0.8.
naval vessels as well as for merchant shipping. Two satellites had been
placed in a geostationary orbit since 1976: one was in the Atlantic and
the other in the Pacific. Using two ground stations which had been built
on the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of the United States as well as special

15h
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ship equipment, the satellites were to provide around-the-clock two-way
communications with the shore for vessels in the Pacific and Atlantic.

The development and operation of the system were the concern of Comsat
General. a daughter company of the American Conant Communications Satellite
Corporation; Consat General had inVestcd an initial capital of 80 million
dollars into the Marisat ProJect.26 The first experiments of communications
with maritime vessels via Intelsat satellites were carried out by Comsat

in 1972 and 1973.27 In 1976, only 20 merchant Vessels used the services

of Narisat which handled basically the needs of the American Navy.29 The
Comsat representatives endeavored to involve a maximum number of ship-owning
companies from the capitalist world in this system.

The western European Marots satellite was designed for the experimental
handling of radiotelephone. radioteletype and radiotelegraph communica-
tions for merchant vessels and the transmission of data in a digital form.
as well as for studying the problems of navigation measurements and the
automatic transmission of information on the current position of the vessel-
to-ground stations.

The satellite was developed by the European Space Agency upon the initiative
of England who had assumed over 50 percent of the expenditures of 75 mil-
lion dollars needed for the creation of this satellite and the ground sta-
tions. The satellite was to be launched by an American launch vehicle in
1978. It was to be placed in a geostationary orbit over the Indian Ocean.29
A review of the legal and organizational questions concerning the use of
satellites for the purposes of air communications and marine navigation
makes it possible to draw certain conclusions.

The creation of international satellite systems for sea and air communica-
tiona and navigation requires the establishing of an international. inter-
governmental organization (or organizations). The ..ic task of such an
organization would be to provide the space portion of the system which
would be paid for by the member states.

The international, intergovernmental organization, regardless of the com-
mercial nature of its activities and the ensuing particular features,
should be based upon the principle of the sovereign equality of states.

In practical terms this principle should be reflected in the universality
of the organization. in the right of access to the system for states which
are not members of it, in the structure, powers and procedures of its
managing bodies. as well as in the procedure for resolving international
disputes.

Participation in the organization should not exclude the right of a state
to set up other systems and organizations if they consider this advisable.

155
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The constituent convention and activities or the organization should con-
form to the generally recognized principles and provisions of international
lav generally and international space law. in particular.

The activities of the organization should pursue only peaceful purposes

and be carried out in close contact with the United nations and its special-

ized agencies.

FOOTNOTES

1. UN Doc. A/Ac.1OS/38 of 3 August 1961.

2. See, for example: D. Kerry, "Problsmes Juridiques des satellites d'aide
aux transports maritimes et aeriens.” "Pros. XVII Colqu. Lav Outer
Space," California. 1975. pp 211-215; 0. Lafrerranderie. "Les satel-
lites d'aide a la navigation maritime." LA RECHERCHE SPATIALE. lo 3.
1973. pp 15-18.

3. "Practical Benefits of Space Exploration," New York. United Nations.
1969. pp 37-h1.

h. In 197%. there were over 8,000 such vessels (IMCO Doc. MARSAT V/6,
16 September l9Th).

5. J. snot-3cm mm socxms, Vol 10, no 9. 1973. pp sin-51:8.
6. m sscasscss spa-mas, Vol m, No 3. 1973. p it.
7. us Doc. ulnc.105/38 or 3 August 1967. pp h-s.
8. UI Doc. A/AC.105/100, 1972, p 1’02.
9. mm, p 11.6.
10. Ibid.
11. J. Arets, "Le programme de satellites aeronautiques de l'Organisation
f:;gpé;n:;.de Recherches Spatiales." LA RECKERCKE SPATIALE, No 3.

12. u: naorr ns L'ESPACE. mm n'mvsrs er D'Iuromnon, Paris,
No h, 1971., p 81.

13. AIR El‘ COSWS, lo 1:25. 1972, p 15.
1". DAILY EIXFﬁﬁs. 9 March 1972.

15. AIR Err COSMOS, KO 506, 1913s P 39; FLIGHT. V01 10'}, No 3360, 1W3,
pp 182-183.

156
son osncm. uss om:
16.

17.
18.

19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
2h.
25.

27 .

28.
29.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ESRO NNSLE’ITEJI. No 7. 1971:. p 5. The memorandum came into force on

2 August 19710. For the text see: "Space Lav. Selected Basic Docu-
ments." 0.8. Government Printing Office, Washington. 1976. pp Biol-363.

For the text. see man pp 36Io-386.

In the spring of 1977. due to the refusal of the 0.8. Congress to allo-
cate the necessary Nude. the Aerosat program was again threatened with
complete collapse. See: AIR LT COSMOS. no 672. 1977. P 51.

M. Ye. Volosov. A. L. Kolodkin and N. D. Smirnov. "The IMCO and Certain
Legal Questions Related to Setting Up an International Marine Satellite
Communications Service." in the book: "Haterialy po Morekonu Pravu i
Mezhdunarodnosv 'ibrgovosv Moreplavaniyu" [Materials on Maritime Law
and International Merchant Shipping]. No 6. Moscow, Transport. 197's.

pp 23-31.

on Doc. Macaw/loo. 1972. p 11.8.

IMCO Resolution L305 (VIII) of 23 November 1973.

MARSAT v/6. 16 September 197”.

msn'r ss.1/36.

MARSAT, v/6. 16 September 1971:. pp 2-3.

On 3 September 1976. the convention was signed by the representatives
of 12 states, including the USSR.

In addition, the creation or the system was partially financed by
three other American firms.

"Maritime Comunications Via Satellite. Comsat General Corporation."
August 197%.

"Comsat General Corporation. Marisat Status Report." 9 July 1976.

men-r. Vol 101.. No 3361, 1973, p we AIR m cosmos, 11° 1.97. 1973,
p to; m mums, so 1, 1915. pp 32-33.

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FQR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 5: SPACE WROLOGY

Human production activities depend largely upon meteorological conditions.
Agriculture, mam industrial sectors, all types of transportation, hydro-
electric plants. co-unications lines_and the power transmission systems
require prompt and reliable weather forecasts. hence the constantly grow-
ing demands on improving the existing forecasting methods.

One of the serious difficulties here is that the network of ground stations
carrying out constant observation of the weather provides a sufficiently
dense coverage for only one-fifth of the earth's surface, while the remain-
ing four-fifths are over the world's ocean and in inaccessible and uninhabi-
ted areas of land.

The air masses and atmospheric currents which influence the nature of the
weather during a period of 2': hours can shift 2.000-2.500 km. This means
that for compiling a weather forecast for any point for Just 2h hours to
come it is essential to analyze the weather observations around the given
point for at least a radius of 2,500-3,000 km, and for compiling long-
range forecasts, there must be a thorough study of processes occurring
throughout the entire layer of the atmosphere above the entire territory
of the earth. Here certain important characteristics in the condition of
the upper atmospheric layers cannot be obtained at all using ground equip-
ment.

A new page in the history of meteorology has been opened with the use by
the weather service of earth satellites making it possible to carry out
regular and systematic observations over the development of atmospheric
processes around the entire world.

In the USSR. the Meteor space system has been working successfully since
1967. This consists of weather satellites and a range of ground equipment.1
The information received from the satellites includes pictures of the cloud
cover on the daylight and nighttime faces of the earth, as well as data on

the thermal enery reflected and radiated by the earth and atmosphere. These
materials are promptly transmitted to the weather institutions and forecast
centers of the 0888 and other nations, and are widely used for compiling

158
son orncm. us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

weather forecasts as well as for scientific purposes. Special comunications
channels make it possible to transmit weather charts. graphs and photographs
of the cloud cover and other data by wire or radio. One of these inter-
national comunications channels the operation of which started in l96h
exists between Moscow and Washington.

The appearance of weather satellites which have provided good help to the
weather service has necessitated a different approach to international co-
operation in this area. Its organization has been facilitated by the fact
that the use of satellites for meteorological purposes has not necessitated
the creation of specialized international organizations and has not en-
countered maJor international legal obstacles. here an important role has
also been played by the fact that the weather services of different nations
have had behind them a long tradition of cooperation within the World
Meteorological Organization (WHO) which brings together around 1110 states.2

In addition to the greatly developed bilateral and regional cooperation,

the weather services of virtually all countries of the world have come to-
gether to conduct two global cooperative programs in the area of meteorology.
One of these programs. the World Weather Service, has a direct practical
purpose, and the second, the Program for Investigating Global Atmospheric
Processes (PIGAP) pursues primarily scientific aims.

The use of Soviet and American earth satellites as well as the weather
satellites developed by other nations has been of decisive significance in
carrying out both programs. The WHO and the International Council of
Scientific Unions [ICSU] which have coordinated the carrying out of these
propels have not developed and do not operate weather satellites. This is
their fundamental distinction from Intelsat and Intersputnik. Global co-
operation in the area of meteorology has been organized in such a nanner
that the international organizations, intergovernmental and public, are
only the place for developing, coordinating and approving international
programs, while their practical realization. in accord with the approved
recomendations, rests almost completely on the shoulders of national organ-
izations.

The World Weather Service (WW8) was conceived of and exists to coordinate
the activities of all the national and international meteorological organi-
zations of the world. It is aimed at conducting simultaneous observations
around the world using satellites, ground stations and other technical de-
vices, the rapid processing of the obtained data and their quick transmis-
sion to all interested states for drawing up weather forecasts and for '
carrying out scientific research.

Each of the three main elements in this global system (the collecting of
data, their processing and transmission ova-r wireless communications chan-
nels) requires enormous organizational and scientific-technical work, as
well as great material outlays. Significant time and money are needed also
for training specialists (particularly in the developing nations) capable of

159
son orncm. uss' om:
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

interpreting and using the data received from the satellites. For this
reason the creation of the HHS has gone through several stages and has not
been limited by strict time phases.

The initial plan dating back to 1968-1971 was approved after careful pre-
paratory work by the Fifth World Meteorological Congress in Geneva in 1967.
The Sixth Congress held in April 1971 approved the revised plan of the W8
for the 1972-1975 period, and in this even greater emphasis was put on the
use of earth satellites. In 1975. the Seventh World Meteorological Congress
approved the new plan for 1976-1979.3

Even during the first stage of the W8, the operating weather satellite
systems of the USSR and United States were able to observe the atmospheric
processes over virtually the entire globe. One of the examples of the
achieved successes is the prompt warning of such dangerous phenomena as
hurricanes and typhoons.

The current plan of the "H8 envisages the launching of geostationary satel-
lites located above the equator, as well as the launching of satellites into
near-polar orbits. The USSR and United States have announced their inten-
tion to launch geostationary weather satellites. Two other satellites are
to be put into geostationary orbit by the nations of Western mrope and
Japan. However, the international system of weather satellites is viewed
not as a single whole controlled hos a cannon center, but rather as an
aggregate of national and international satellites the work of which will
be intercoordinated.

The satellite data, like ordinary weather information, are sent to three
world meteorological centers located in Moscow, Washington and Melbourne,
where they undergo appropriate processing and are then disseminated through-
out the world. In addition to the world centers, includes a network of
regional 1nd national meteorological centers.

In 1962, the UN General Assembly turned to the International Council of
Scientific Unions (ICSU) with a request to develop an extensive program of
scientific research on atmospheric processes. This program would supple-
ment the programs being carried out under the “no.5 It was proposed that
this work should involve the international scientific unions and the national
academies of sciences which were members of the ICSU. The UK appeal served
as a stimulus for the establishing of a new maJor international scientific
proJect, the Program for Investigating Global Atmospheric Processes or
PIGAP. The ICSU and the "-0 were to be concerned with the planning and
organization of this program, and on 19 October 1967 they signed a special
agreement for this purpose.

PIGAP has as its task a study of the physical processes in the troposphere
and stratosphere, a knowledge of which would help to improve forecasting
accuracy and better the understanding of the physical basis of climate.

For this purpose using computer methods, a series of theoretical atmospheric

160'
ms orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

models should he created with the simultaneous carrying out of observations
and experiments to check the conformity of these models to the actual con-
ditionn. Herc observations made within the HHS will he sidely used. and
the service. in turn. will be enriched by the scientific results obtained
in carrying out PIOAP. In particular. from the PIGAP results it will be
ponuible to provide recommendations on the optimum location of the network

of meteorological observation stations and the required composition of
measured meteorological parameters.

The PIGAP program provides for the organizing of various types of experi-
ment: regional and global, each of which will use earth satellites. The
first of them. the Atlantic Tropical Experiment. was carried out from

15 June through 30 September l97h. It was focused on studying the physical
properties of cloud accumulations in the tropical region of the Atlantic
and the influence of this "weather kitchen" on the general circulation of
the atmosphere.6 The global experiments which are to he carried out not
earlier than 1978 are still in the planning stage. However. even now it
has been noted that for organizing them four geostationary satellites and
two or three satellites in near-polar orbits will be required.

As is seen from the given examples. international cooperation in the area
of space meteorology has gained broad scope and has good prospects. As an
essential component it is being written into the existing general coopera-
tion among meteorologists in all countries.

Heather satellites examine basically not the earth's surface but rather at-
mospheric processes of various scales. All nations, without exception,

are interested in the practical application of the results from this re-
search. For this reason the use of satellites for meteorological purposes
on an international basis up to now has not posed serious legal problems.
The international legal treatment of weather satellites at the given stage
does not differ fundamentally from the general conditions of earth satel-
lites, as these are defined by current space law.7

However. this does not mean that specific problems will not arise in this
area in the future. reauiring international legal regulation. Some of these
problems can be clearly ascertained even now.

hmile presently the basic efforts of science and practice are focused on
improving weather forecasts. tomorrow can bring the urgent problem of con-
trolling the weather and of man's active influence on atmospheric processes.
0n limited local scales using ground equipment and aircraft experiments to
combat bad weather phenomena are being carried out even now in a number of
nations. The Soviet Hydrometeorological Service has achieved significant
successes in carrying out this work, and in particular. in measures to pro-
tect valuable agricultural crops against hailstorms.a

The controlling of atmospheric processes on a large scale. while bringing
benefits in some regions. can cause unfavorable changes on the territory

161
ros omcm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of other states. In this regard the prospects of a controlled change in the
climatic conditions raises complex political and international legal prob-
lens.9 The latter cannot be solved solely within space law. since the regu-
lation of space activity pursuing the designated aims is only a portion of
a more general question of the international legal regulation of the use

of modern scientific and technical devices for actively controlling the
environment.

Although neither international law generally nor space law in particular
contains provisions which directly relate to the work of actively control-
ling atmospheric processes. nodern international law undoubtedly repudiates
the sometimes heard thesis on the legality of everything that is not pro-
hibited. The well-known Polish legal expert Manfred Lachs has rightly noted
in his speech at one of the international astronautical congresses: "At
present the old principle that everything not prohibited is permitted no
longer is valid. The freedom of action is determined by the probability of
violating the rights of others. From this stems a limitation of rights and
the necessity of cooperation and consultation in the corresponding inﬁtaacea.
1Mis is particularly important for space.”1°

Many Soviet and foreign authors have pointed out that in modern internat; nal
law there has been universal recognition of the notion that a state bears
international legal responsibility in the event that its territory is used
to cause hanm to other states.n

In examining this question on a broader level in terms of environmental
problems, N. A. Ushakov has written: "Each state is obliged to carry out
its activities within the limits of its Jurisdiction and control in such
a manner that these activities do not cause damage to the environment in
other states or regions laying outside of national Jurisdiction."12 H. A.
Ushakov considers it desirable to affirm and concretize this generally
recognized notion in the provisions of an universal agreement.

If one turns to space law. it should be remembered first of all that
Article 1X of the 1961 Space Treaty which. in particular, obliges states,
in carrying out space activities to properly consider the corresponding
interests of all other states. and establishes a procedure of international
consultation, when there is reason to assume that activities or an experi-
ment plannedin space by one state will create potentially harmful inter-
ference in the activities of other states.

Recently in Western literature a tendency has appeared for a very limited
interpretation of the applicability of the provision for international con-
sultation in carrying out space activity. The supporters of this viewpoint
consider that Article Ix of the Space Treaty provides for consultation only
in those instances when the space activities of one state can interfere with
the space activities of another state or states. These authors assert that
the established procedure of consultation does not apply even to activities
involving unfavorable changes in the terrestrial environment and space which
are mentioned in the same Article IX.13

162
roe orrIcmL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, it is indisputable that prior to the elaboration of special legal
provisions which regulate the group of international legal problems in—
volved with the purposeful change of weather and climate. the consultations
between states no envisaged by Article IX of the Space Treaty will remain
an important means for settling possible international disputes in those
instances when activities related to changing the weather and climate will
be carried out using space technology. For this reason the restricted in-
terpretation of the applicability of the consultation provision seems un-
acceptable to us and does not conform to the general sense of Article IX
and the spirit of the Space Treaty.

Certainly the above-mentioned general provisions of international law and
international space law do not eliminate the necessity of working out a
special agreement or agreements which would regulate the activities of
states in the controlled change of weather and climate. Such proposals
have been repeatedly placed in both Soviet and foreign literature. 3. G.
Vasilevskays considers it essential to conclude a special international
agreement. “ Ya. Ya. Baskin and A. Yu. Baskin have written on the advis-
ability of approving a declaration on general principles for the protec-
tion of the atmosphere.‘5 8. Taubenfeld and h. Taubenfeld (United States)
have proposed approving a corresponding UN declaration and then a treaty,16
while 8. Courteix (France) feels that a special international organization
should be set up with broad powers.‘7

However, beyond any doubt the primary task of international legal regula-
tion in this area should be not to permit the turning of the potential
controlled change of weather and climate into a means for complicating
the international situation and particularly into a means for waging var.

Concern for preventing the threat of using new scientific and technical
methods for controlling nature, including the weather and climate, as a
weapon of war was responsible for the Soviet Union submitting a draft Con-
vention on Prohibiting the Control of the Natural Environment and Climate
for Military and Other Purposes Not Compatible with Ensuring International
Security, the well Being and health of People for review by the 29th UN
General Assembly Session in September 1973!.18

The timeliness of the Soviet initiative vas affirmed, in particular, by the
fact that according to information given in the US Congress, in 1961-1912,
the Pentagon had spent over 21 million dollars to change the weather in
South Vietnam over the regions under the control of the People's Liberation
Anny.‘9 The statements appearing periodically in the press on the Pentagon's
plans to prepare for "meteorological and Geophysical Warfare" have long
caused concern in the world public.2°

Under the influence of public opinion. lb American senators in 1912 sub-

mitted to the US Congress a draft law prohibiting the use of any changes in
the environment and the geophysical properties of the planet as weapons of
war. The immediate reason for this draft law was the experiments which had

163
ton orrtcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been carried out on man-made rain in Indochina for the purpose of flooding
roads and preventing the transporting of freight in South Vietnam.

Of important significance for diverting activities related to the study of
the possible improvement of weather and climate into peaceful channels
meeting the interests of all mankind was the bilateral understanding be-
tween the USSR and United States reached in July 197': for working out effec-
tive measures to eliminate the danger of using devices to control the
natural environment for military purposes.2'

The meetings and talks held made it possible for the USSR and the United
States on 21 August 1975 to submit to the Disarmament Committee coordinated
identical draft conventions for preventing the military or any other hostile
use of the means of controlling the natural environment.22

After thorough discussion. these drafts were used as a draft convention
prepared by the Disarmament Committee; this draft was approved on a multi-
lateral basis and in 1916 submitted to the 31st UN General Assembly. A
predominant maJority of assembly votes accepted the resolution to approve
the convention. The resolution contained an appeal for the states to sign
and ratify it in the near future.23

The convention proposes that military or any other hostile use of the vari-
ous means of controlling the natural environment which may have broad, last-
ing or serious consequences be outlawed.

From the convention it follows that among the various scientific and tech-
nical methods for controlling the natural environment. the use of space
uevices for influencing the weather and climate is to be prohibited, if
these devices are designed for military or other hostile purposes.

The observance of the provisions in the convention should be secured by
having each state, in accord with its constitutional procedure, approve

the necessary measures to ban and prevent any activity contrary to the
convention, as well as by consultation and cooperation among states. Com-
plaints related to a violation of the obligations stemming from the conven-
tion are to be reviewed in the UN Security Council.

The convention specially stresses that its passage should not prevent the
use of devices to control the natural environment for peaceful purposes

or international economic and scientific-technical cooperation in the area
of the utilization, conservation and improvement of the natural environ-
ment for peaceful purposes. In this manner the convention does not impose
a general ban on carrying out national and international projects related
to the active control of atmospheric processes, if such work is carried
out in the interests of peace, the well being and health of people and with
due respect for the legitimate interests of all states.

163:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The broadest prospects for the further development of space meteorology.

- including the problem of controlling weather and climate, are to be found
only by international cooperation and the use of recent scientific and
technical achievements exclusively for peaceful purposes.

FOOTNOTES
1. PRAVDA. I; June 1967.

2. D. A. Davies, "'lhe Role of the World Meteorological Organization in
Outer Space Affairs," "International Cooperation in Outer Space: A

Symposium," U.S. Senate. Dec. 57-92, pp 331-363.

3. ”World Meteorological Organization. Seventh World Meteorological
Congress. Abridged Report with Resolutions," Geneva. 1975. pp 1': et seq.

10. "Europe in Space (A Survey Prepared by IRO)." Paris. 1971:, p 29.
5. UN General Assembly Resolution 1802 (XVII) of 1’: December 1962.
6. Ye 'rolstikov. ""l‘rOpeks-Th' Before Launching," PRAVDA. 3 May 1971:.

7. B. C. Vasilevskaya, "Legal Problems of Space Meteorology and Inter-
national Cooperation." ”Pravovyye Aspekty Ispol'sovsniya Iskusstvennykh,"
Hanks, 1970. p 96.

8. Ye. Pedorov, "From Forecasts to Control of the Heather," PRAVDA, 30 Janu-
ary 1911.

9. A group of American authors who examined this question from the view-
point ot‘ national lav give data that in the United States more than
one-half of the states introduced special legislation regulating the
artificial control of the weather. These same authors give instances
when the 0.8. courts have examined suits on such problems ("Controlling
the Weather," "A Study of Lav and Regulatory Procedures," 1!. J. Taubeni‘eld
(Bd.), New York. 1970, p XI).

10. International Academy of Astronautics. Doc. IM/Sci. Leg. Ctee..
November 1910. See also M. Markoff, "Implementing the Contractual
Obligation of Art. I, par. 1, of the Outer Space Treaty," "Proc. XXVII
Colloq. Lav Outer Space." California. 1975. p 136.

ll. See. for example: 3. H. Dimenko, "Gosudarstvennaya Territoriya"
[State Territory], Moscow, Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya, 197%. p 8h;
8. Cheng, "Le 'i‘raite de 1967 sur l'espsce," p 5811; R. Taubenfeld and
ﬂ. Taubenteld, "International Implications of Heather Modification
Activities," INTERNATIONAL onomnnon. Vol xxm, No to, 1969. p 815.

165
ton orncm. use ONLY
12.

13.

1h.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N. A. Ushakov, "Fundamental Runes of Cooperation Among Staten in the
Area of Natural Conservation." "Problem Gosudarstva i Prava na
Sevremennon Btape (Trudy llauchnykh Sotrudnikov i Aspiratnov IOPAR 888R)"
[Problems of State and Law at the Present Stage (works of the Scien-
tific Coworkers and Graduate Students of the Institute or State and

Lav oi' the USSR Acadeay of Sciences”, No 7. Moscow, 1973. p 253.

J. Sztucky, "International Consultations and Space Treaties,” ”Proe.
XVII Colloq. Lav Outer Space," California, pp 1107-181.

8. 6. Vasilevsma, "Prospects for legal Regulation of Space Meteorology,”
SOVEI'SKOYB GOSUDARSTVO I FRAVO, lo 2, 1966, p 71.

Yu. Ya. Rankin and A. Yu. Baskin, "International Legal Aspects of the
Artificial Modification 01‘ Heather," mvommms. Ito h, 1968, p 106.

R. Taubeni'eld and H. Taubenfeld, 0p. cit.. p 830.

S. Courteix. "In cooperation internationale dans le doaaine de la
neteorologie apatiale," LA RmRERCHB SPATIALB, No 3. 1973. p 12.

PRAVDA, 2? September 1975.

PRAVDA, 26 September 1971‘.

For more detail on this, see: A. I. onrysh and M. I. Lazarev, "Atom
1 Kosnos" [The Atom and Space], Moscow, Atonizdat, 1965, pp 29-30;

a. S. Khozin, ”V Zashchitu Planety” [-In Defense or the Planet], Moscow,
Znaniye, 1975, p 33-

On the Soviet-American meetings on this question, see: PRAVDA, 1 Novel-
ber 197M 7 March .1975.

PRAVDA, 23 August 1975.

PRAVDA, 28 Decelber 1976. On 18 May 1977, the convention was signed in
Geneva by 33 states. including the USSR and United States (IZVESTIYA,

20 my 1977).

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 6: INVESTIGATION OF BART}! RESOURCI FRGI SPACE

The use of space for studying the natural resources of the earth can be of
great benefit to agriculture and forestry. hydrology and oceanography.
geology and minerology. geography and cartography.

For example. in the area of agriculture the task has been set of obtaining
regular intonation on the state of planted areas, pastures, the scope and
nature of blights on agricultural plants.

For the geologists space research helps to discover geological structures
containing minerals, and to better understand the structural patterns of
the earth's crust and the location of mineral and other riches of the
earth.

Great opportunities are provided for mapping various characteristics of the
earth's surface. This is important because more than two-thirds of the
earth’s surface has not been covered by reliable and detailed maps.

Hydrologists will be able to more accurately determine the dimensions of
areas covered by snow, the moisture content in the soil. and the intensity
of rain. Observations fra: space will make it possible to forecast more
precisely the runoff of water after the spring flooding, and this will be
of great significance for increasing the harvest yield, for increasing the
efficient use of hydroelectric plants. and for combating flooding.

In the area of oceanography. space devices can be used for determining the
temperature and state of the sea surface, for mapping sea currents, for

observing ic -bergs. and in the future, for detecting areas of possible ac-
cumulations of fish. and for solving other problems.

The return expected fran the use of space technology for studying earth is
far from exhausted by the given examples. In particular, of great sig-
nificance is the use of space equipment for monitoring the condition of
the environment.

167
son onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

Au cxtennlwe range or ground. air and space research and experiments must
be carried out to elucidate all the potential opportunities for studying

nature from space and to work out the methods for such a study.

In the report of the UN working group specially concerned with an examina-
tion of the given question. remote sensing from space2 is defined as "a
method helping to describe the conditions and nature of natural resources,
natural features and phenomena and the environment surrounding the earth
by observations and measurements carried out from space platforms.3

The remote sensing system. both experimental and operational. consists of
space and ground coaponents. 'lhe space component includes lofted devices
with their photographic. television and metering instruments as well as

the equipment for transmitting the information to earth. The ground compo-
nent consists of stations receiving this infomtion as well as the equip-

ment for its processing. decoding. storage and dissemination.

For the purposes of studying nature. equipment is used which makes it pos-
sible to obtain photographic and television images. as well as :mectra of
the various ground and atmospheric fonations in the ultraviolet. visible.
invisible and microwave wave bands.

At present experimental work is being done to study nature from space.

Here diverse space devices are being employed. including: earth satellites.
automatic stations. manned orbital ships and stations. Along with space-
craft. airplanes and ground observation devices are also employed. Only
the integrated use of all these devices makes it possible to obtain the
most reliable results.

The development of specialized satellites for studying the natural resources
of the earth is being carried out in a number of countries. The launching
of the first such satellite was made by the United States on 23 July 1912.
It was named the rms (Earth Resources Technology Satellite). and in 1975.
it was renamed the Landsat-l satellite. On 22 January 1975. the United
States launched a second satellite of this series. Landsat-2.“

In the USSR. a broad range of experimental work on studying the natural
environment has been carried out on the manned orbital spacecraft and sta—
tions. 0f great significance for working out and improving the scientific-
technical methods and devices for stuthring the earth from space has been.
in particular. the flight of the Bows-22 spacecraft on which. in September
1976, a new multizonal photographic device developed by Soviet and East
German specialists was tested out.5

On 9 July 1911:. along with the standard meteorological equipment. the Soviet
meteor satellite carried into space equipment for studying a number of
characteristics of the earth's surface.6 Information from this satellite
was processed at the USSR llydrometeorological Center and the state scien-
tific research center for the study of the environment and natural resources.

168
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This marked the beginning to the functioning of experimental, specialized
satellites for studying the natural earth resources in the USSR.

The recording of data obtained from the satellites on earth and then the
processing and interpretation of the enormous amount of information as yet
are beyond the capacity of a maJority of states. The absence of skilled
personnel able to interpret the obtained information as well as the lack
of the specialized equipment needed for data processing do not make it
possible for many developing nations even now to use effectively the satel-
lite information, even if it were offered to them.

In this regard, the press of a number of nations has expressed the fear
that the earth resource satellites will be used by the monopolies for the
purposes of economic espionage.’ The legal problems related to the use of
information received from space arose in the capitalist nations even in
terms of their own territory. The small American companies were concerned
that they might be in a disadvantageous position in comparison with the
large monopolies which in the competitive struggle can use their ability
to process and utilize satellite information on natural resources more
efficiently and better. In this regard, the 0.8. legal literature has
discussed in what manner the rights of the large and small companies to
use satellite information on earth resources can be managed.8

However of a much more serious nature is the international legal aspect of
the given problem involving the obtaining and distribution of information
on the natural resources of foreiyx countries. The urgency of this prob-
lem becomes particularly apparent with the threat of the depletion of
certain types of natural riches of the earth and the energy crisis which
has shaken the capitalist world. Certain American legal experts feel that
in addition to moral considerations, the states are not bound by any obli-
gations in terms of the comercial use of information on the natural re-
sources of foreign countries obtained by space means, even in that instance
when it is a question of the intention to acquire foreign territory for
exploiting its minerals.

The prominent American space law specialists 3. Lay and ﬂ. Taubenfeld in
their book ”The Law Relating to the Activities of Man in Space," write:
"International law obviously develops in such a manner that it permits a
state which has received information (it is a question of space information
on foreign territories. authors) to use this infomtion for its own com-
mercial purposes." "In the absence of agreements which provide the transfer
of ccuercial and economic information obtained by space observation it is
dubious that any legal obligation would exist to share such information."
The authors go on to say that even in the event of concluding an agreement
on the acquisition of territory for the purpose of exploiting its minerals
the presence of which is indicated by satellite information, "there is no
obligation to share such informtion so that the states would be in an
equal position in concluding the contract."9

169
son orrrcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These arguments completely overlook both the principles stated in the 1967
Space Treaty as well as the provisions on the sovereign rights or states
to their natural riches reinforced in several resolutions of the UN General
Assembly.

The Preamble oi‘ the 1967 Space Treaty states that "the exploration and use
or outer space should be aimed at the good of all peoples, regardless of
the degree of their econaaic or scientific development." Article I contains
the following provision: "The exploration and use of outer space, includ-
ing the moon and other celestial bodies, are to be carried out for the good
and in the interests of all countries, regardless of the degree of their
economic or scientific development. . . ."

Even in 1952, the UN General Assembly approved a resolution which proclaimed
that "the right of peoples to freely use and exploit their natural riches

and resources is an inalienable element of their sovereignty, and conforms

to the goals and principles of the UN Charter.”‘° This same resolution

urged ”all states to refrain from direct or indirect actions which would
impede the exercising of sovereignty by any state over its natural resources."

Subsequently the UN General Assembly in its resolutions repeatedly affirmed
the sovereign rights of states to their natural resources.

Resolution 1803 (XVII) approved 10 years later in 1962, in particular, states:

"2. The exploration and exploitation of such resources and the disposal or
them. ..should be carried out in accord with the rules and conditions which
the peoples and nations, upon their own freely taken decision, consider
necessary and desirable for permitting. restricting or prohibiting such
types of activity.

"7. Violation of the right of peoples and nations to sovereignty over their
natural riches and resources contradicts the spirit and principles of the
UN Charter, and obstructs the development of international cooperation and
the maintenance of peace."11

The authority of these documents in the sphere of the international rela-
tions or states is not disputed by anyone. The sovereign rights of states
to their natural riches are generally recognized from the standpoint of
the doctrine and practice of international law.

The inalienable sovereignty of states to their own natural resources should
include the sovereign right of states to dispose of intonation about these
resources.

As was already pointed out, the freedom of research and use of space should
not be contrary to the principle or state sovereignty. In the instance
examined by us, when the object of research is not space itself but rather
the sovereign territories on the earth studied by space means, the observ-
ance of this provision is particularly important.12

170
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However in modern space law special provisions are lacking which would regu-
late activities in the area of remote reconnaissance of earth resources.

The task of space law. consequently, should consist in seeking out such
methods for a legal regulation of this new type of space activity which.
without hindering the development of the given promising area of space
development. would prevent the possibility of utilizing the obtained infor-
mation against the economic interests of the states.

The solution to the posed problem can be achieved by working out the general
legal eonditons for the space devices themselves by which the natural re-
sources of the earth are studied. As was pointed out above, such work is
carried out by specialized earth satellites. by manned orbital spacecraft
and stations. and by other space devices the legal status of which varies.

We must also not overlook the fundamental distinctions in the international
legal conditions of the component elements of the natural environment and
the territories which are subJected to study. It is one thing when it is
a question of studying the world's ocean, atmospheric processes for a state's
own territory. but something quite different if the territory of foreign
states is the object of stucb'. In the first instance no problem of sover-
eignty arises, and all states have the right to conduct such research and
freely dispose of the obtained information (the questions which night arise
here have principally a domestic state nature). In the second instance,
when the research is carried out over the territory of other states, the
sovereign rights of these states to their territory and natural riches

can be involved.

On this basis should there be a total prohibition on remote sensing of the
earth over the territories of foreign states, without their approval?13

It would be possible to point out a number of obstacles which would arise
on the path of implementing such a ban. In the first place, the ban would
be difficult to realize technically, since this would require the switch-
ing off of satellite equipment each time it passed over the territories of
certain states. Secondly, it would be virtually impossible to monitor the

fulfillment of this ban. And. thirdly, such a ban could create inter-
ference in carrying out observations in which all states are interested

and related. for example. to environmental conservation and preventing
natural disasters.

The solution to the problem can be found in regulating the procedure for
using natural resources intonation obtained by space devices.

Proceeding from the sovereign rights of states to their own natural re-
sources and the provisions of the 1967 Space Treaty. space law should re-
inforce the principle in accord with which it would be prohibited to use

space information on natural resources to the detriment of states which
possess these resources. Responsibility for the observance of this princi-
ple by all legal and physical entities. on the basis of Article VI of the

17].
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

Space Treaty, should be born by the states as well as the international
organizations engaged in space activities. In this case the states and
international organizations would be obligated to make certain that certain
types or all information on natural resources located on foreign territories
would not be publicized and would not be put into private hands, turned
over to third states or international organizations without the agreement
of the states which own these natural resources. 0n the other hand. a
state whose territory has become an object of research should have the
right to receive intonation on its natural resources under mutually ac-
ceptable conditions.

The legislating of such principles would not create restrictions for a
broad study of the natural environment using space means, and at the same
time would serve as a legal guarantee against the use of the obtained
information against the interests of the states.

At the beginning of 1977, Argentina. Brazil. Venezuela. Canada, Mexico.
France. the USSR. the United States and Chile” submitted to the United
Nations (Jointly or separately) official documents related to the inter-
national legal regulation of activities in the area of studying ground
resources from space.

Since May 19110. the discussion of the legal aspects of remote sensing of
the earth from space has been concentrated in the Legal Subcomittee of
the UN Space Couittee. For a number of years these problems have figured
on the Subcomittee's agenda as primary ones.

The 110th and 15th sessions of the Subcommittee (1975 and 1976) worked on
the questions of the remote sensing of the earth on the basis of three main
documents: the Joint draft of France and the USSR. the Joint draft of
Argentina and Brazil which was supported by Venezuela. Mexico and Chile.
and the U. 8. draft.”

It is indicative that the United States which has carried out activities
in the area of remote sensing of the earth on the questions of the legal
regulation of these activities until most recently has held an excep-
tionally restrained or more precisely negative position. For a long time
this nation has not put forward any of its own proposals. and in discus-
sing the drafts of other states. American representatives have voiced the
idea that there is no necessity whatsoever for a legal regulation of the
given type of space activity and on the international level the concern
should only be for solving organizational and technical questions.

At the lloth Session of the Legal Subcommittee of the UN Space Comittee in
February 1975. the United States submitted its own working document on the
principles of remote sensing. However. this document says nothing of the
sovereign rights of states to their own natural riches, nor does it mention
any limitations arising from this on the question of the dissemination of
the obtained information.

172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The nest amazing feature," the Dutch legal expert G. ReiJnen has noted,
"is the fact that the 0.8. working docmnent does not even mention sover-
eignty."16 Such an approach is no accident. It reflects the U.S. position

on the questions of the legal regulation of the studying of earth resources
from space.

In carrying out extensive surveying of foreign territories at its on dis-

cretion using the Lansat satellites and in making available the thus obtained
information on foreign territories to anyone so desiring vithout any limita-
tions, the United States has endeavored to introduce into international space

law a custom in accord with which any information on the natural resources
of foreign states uould be available without restriction.

The numerous bilateral agreements concluded by the United States with other
nations on the work of the Landsat satellites are aimed at this sane goal.
Evidently the United States intends to view these agreements as a precedent
for an overall legal regulation of activities in the area of earth remote
sensing. On this question the Bulgarian legal expert M. Marcoff [Markov]
has correctly drawn attention to the fact that by itself the conclusion of

even numerous bilateral agreements is still not a proper guarantee against
possible violations of the legitimate interests of third states.”

All the drafts submitted to the United Nations by other states emphasize
the sovereign right of states to dispose of their natural resources. Here
reference has been made to the corresponding resolutions of the UN General
Assembly. These drafts proceed from the fact that the right of states to
dispose of their own resources imposes definite restrictions on the activi-
ties of states, organizations or private individuals to use space devices
for studying the natural resources of foreign states or even for using in-
formation obtained by such means.

As for the scope and nature of the restrictions steaming from the inalien
right of states to dispose of their natural riches. there are significant
differences in the draft submitted on the given question.

The Brazilian draft proposes that activities be banned in the area of re-
mote sensing of natural resources belonging to another state, without the
agreement of the latter, having given the states the right to take measures
for the purposes of defending their territory against unsanctioned remote
sensing activities. This is the farthest reaching restriction of all which
have been submitted up to now officially by the states.1°

The draft submitted by France notes that "each state, the territory or
waters of which are covered by activities related to remote sensing, should
be notified ahead of time by the state, states or international organiza-
tion which are responsible for carrying out these activities."19 It has
also been proposed that the UN Secretary General be informed of the time,
the duration, the nature and the goals of activities in the area of remote
sensing of earth resources fros outer space.

173
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Argentine draft raises the idea of delimiting the legal conditions for
research and exploitation of natural resources. If exploitation should be
carried out exclusively in accord with the national laws and rules, natural
resource research from space should be, in the opinion of the authors of
this draft, fully internationalized. Although the draft emphasises the ex-
clusive right of states to their own natural riches. it says nothing of
the ensuing principle on the preferential rights of states in relation to
the information about these riches obtained using space methods. As was
already mentioned, later on Argentina supported the Brazilian draft.

Regardless of the noted discrepancies, a maJority of the submitted drafts
had a number of cannon fundamental provisions making it possible to hope
for the elaboration of a unified international document which would regu-
late the legal aspects of studying earth resources from space. An impor-
tant step in this direction was taken in May 1971:, when the USSR and France
submitted to the Legal Subcomittee of the UN Space Committee a Joint draft
of principles regulating the activities of states in the area of remote
sensing of earth resources using space equipment.20

In the Soviet-French draft, the emphasis is put on the procedure for using
information on natural resources of foreig: states obtained in the course
of space activities.

Such information should be turned over under mutually acceptable conditions
to the state whose territory has been the object of research, and cannot be
made public without the clearly expressed consent of the state which owns
these natural resources. 'me documents obtained as a result of activities
in the remote sensing area should not be turned over to a third party, be
it a government, an international organization or private individual, with-
out the approval of a state whose territory is involved. An exception to
this principle is made only in terms of information on natural disasters
and phenomena which may cause harm to the environment as a whole.

Like the Soviet draft previously submitted to the United Nations,“ the
Joint draft of the USSR and France proceeds from the fact that the inalien-
able right of a state to dispose of its natural resources is extended also
to information about such resources.

Proceeding from the practical considerations related to the very nature of
the space remote sensing equipnent, and to the scale of the research being
carried out, and also endeavoring to assist as much as possible in develop-
mg this promising area of the practical application of space activity,

the Soviet-French draft does not provide for the compulsory obtaining of
preliminary consent of the states to carrying out activities in the area
of remote sensing over their territory.

Here the guarantee against possible abuses, in addition to the already
enumerated demands, is the provision according to which each state the ter-
ritory of which is involved in remote sensing activities for earth resources

17!:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can. upon an understandimt with the state carrying out remote sensing for

earth resources, participate in these activities under equal and mutually
acceptable conditions.

1he Soviet-French draft stresses that remote sensing of earth resources
should be carried out exclusiVely for peaceful purposes, for the good and
in the interests of all countries, with respect for the principle of the
uaVereignty of states. The results of such activities should help to im-
prove the condition of the environment.

The draft also provides the right of all states, under equal and mutually
acceptable conditions, to receive and process data which are the result
of remote sensing activities over territories which are outside the limits
of the national Jurisdiction of any state.

The Soviet-French draft which has synthesized not only the previous provi-
sion: of these two countries but also a number of provisions contained in
the drafts of other nations is a good base for elaborating an international
document which would regulate the legal problems of studying earth resources
using space equipment.

The common elements contained in the draft submitted by the various nations
made it possible for the Legal Subcommittee of the UH Space Committee in
1976 to formulate a series of legal principles over which general agreement
was reached by all subcommittee members.22

Unfortunately. the principles agreed upon do not encompass such key ques-
tions of the legal regulation of remote sensing as, for example, the pro-
cedure for disseminating information on foreign territories. Obviously
extensive work and talks are still required before the unresolved questions
can be agreed upon.

A new aspect which arose at a session of the Legal Subcommittee in 1916

was the attempt to draw a distinction between the primary data. the proces-
sed data and the information obtained as a result of an analysis of the data.
Such a distinction, in the opinion of the representatives of a number of
nations. will make it possible first of all to determine the procedure for
disseminating processed data on natural resources, or establish limita-
tions on the dissemination of primary data with a ground resolution above

a certain "threshold" expressed in meters. In other words, it is an issue
of establishing limitations on the dissemination of not all information

on the natural resources of foreign countries. but only certain types of
this ini’ormation.z3

Also of important significance is a clear efinition of the concept of
"remote earth sensing," since in our view, the subject of regulation should

be primarily the remote sensing of earth resources as such, and not the
airspace surrounding the earth, although the latter also belongs to the
earth resources in the broad sense of this world.

175
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The legal regulation of the use of space devices for studying earth re-
sources is also related to the development and strengthening of equal in-
ternational cooperation which makes it possible to carry out remote sens-
ing on the basis of an understanding between states (bilateral and Iulti-
lateral), and also reduces the probability of abuses in the practical use
of the obtained information.

Important steps have already been taken toward developing international
cooperation in this area. There is a series of bilateral scientific and
technical agreements on studying the environment using space devices.
Thus. within the general agreement between the USSR and United States on
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful pur-
poses, the USSR Academy of Sciences and NASA are conducting Joint or co-
ordinated experiments to develop methods to study the natural environment
from space. In carrying out this work, legal problems have not arisen
related to the study of foreign territories, since according to the condi-
tions of the agreement the work is being carried out over the world ocean,
and also by each country over its own territory. 0n the basis of Joint
developments by Soviet and East German scientists, specialists at Karl
Zeiss Jena haVe developed a complex multispectral camera which is used on
Soviet space obJects. The interest shown by the other socialist nations
in studying earth resources using space methods caused the setting up in
l97h of a special working group of scientists and specialists from the
socialist countries within the Intercosmcs Program.

As was mentioned, NASA has concluded a significant number of bilateral in-
ternational agreements on the launching of the Landsat satellites. Scien-
tific collectives and individual experimenters from over 50 nations are
participating in the Landsat Program.2“ Regardless of the broad inter-
national character which the United States has given to this program, the
conditions for participating in it have been Justly criticized in the
world press as incompatible with the principle of state sovereignty.

According to these conditions, any use or publication of the obtained re-
sults by the participating nations in the program is prohibited before
these results have been given to the NASA Documentation Service. At the
same time the United States acquires the right to freely and without re-
striction to disseminate the obtained information, including information
on foreign territories. Even in those instances when the governments of
the corresponding nations would wish to prohibit the dissemination of
certain data concerning their territories, these data should be turned over
to the NASA archives.

On this question the legal adviser of the National Space Research Center of
France, A. Tchenonog, wrote in the French Journal LA RECRERCHE SPATIALB:
"The aim of such a policy is to ensure a uniform interpretation of re-
sults obtained from the ERTS satellite. However its use is incompatible
with the principles which should regulate remote sensing, since the United
States receives the results of all work carried out over foreign territories

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

first. and then these results are freely disseminated. and the states to
which the corresponding territories belong cannot prevent this. Thus.
the sovereignty of states to their own natural riches is ignored."25

The French newspaper LE MONDE wrote on this question: ”Governmental or-
ganizations financing the work of researchers will be compelled in order
not to lose touch with actively developing technology, to accept condi-
tions imposed by the American partner. thereby agreeing to the creation,
under the aegis of the American government, the most fantastic means which

has evgg existed for studying earth resources. the data bank at Sioux
Falls.

The ground stations for receiving information from the American Lanaat
satellites have been built or are being built in a number of nations in-
cluding: Brazil, Zaire, Iran, Italy. Canada and Chile.” Since 1976. or.
United States has demanded that the nations building ground stations on
their territory pay for the right to access to the Landsat satellites

(on the order of 200,000 dollars a year). The annual income of NASA from
operating the Landsat satellites is about 1 million dollars.28

It goes without saying that the rules unilaterally dictated by the United
States for its partners in the Landsat program cannot and should not be
viewed as a precedent in working out the international provisions which
would regulate remote earth sensing.

The United Nations on a multilateral basis is actively concerned with the
questions of international cooperation in the area of studying the natural
resources of the earth using space equipment. The beginning to this was
made in 1971, when by a decision of the UN General Assembly,29 a working
group was set up for remote sensing of the earth using satellites. The
group consisting of representatives of all members of the UN Space Com~
mittee has worked under the leadership of this cummittee and its Scientific
and Technical Subcommittee.

In 1971-197h. the working group held three sessions (not counting the organ-
izational one), as well as a series of meetings of its auxiliary bodies
which discussed the entire range of questions involved in the international
aspects of using space ecuipment for studying the natural resources of the
earth.

Two opposing trends can be seen from the very outset in the activities of
the group. Representatives of the socialist countries, a maJority of the
developing nations and certain capitalist countries (for example France)
have noted the necessity of elaborating the legal principles which would
rcgulate‘activities in the area of remote earth sensing, along with exaa-
ining and solving the scientific-technical and organisational questions of
cooperation. The U.S. representatives and those of a number of other
countries have defended the thesis that the elaboration of the legal prin-
ciples is not an urgent matter, and the solving of organizational questions
possibly will make the legal regulation in this area generally unnecessary.

177
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This dichotomy in the opinions was the reason that the working group was
unable to work out any uniform recommendations on the discussed problems.
Its final report made in March 1971:,30 contained only a list of various
opinions and recommendations put forward by the states. As for the possible
organizational measures to develop cooperation, the group studied several
alternatives which were also reflected in its final report. However, all
these alternatives relate solely to the ground portion of the remote sens-
ing system (ground stations. and data processing. storage and dissemina-
tion equipment).

Certain states, in particular Sweden. proposed examining the possibility of
setting up an international organization under the UN aegis. This organiza-
tion would finance. own and control the space portion of the system, but

this proposal was not further developed since the creation of such a system
involved great financial outlays.31

The report of the working group analyzed in greatest detail the questions
of setting up within the United ﬁctions an international center or centers
for receiving. processing, storing and disseminating data from the remote
sensing of the earth from space. Such centers are to be set up on a global
or regional basis.

Since l9Th. the review of these questions has been continued directly with-
in the UN Scientific and Technical Subcommittee for Space. In particular,
the UN Secretariat has prepared special research on the possibility of hav-
ing the United Nations play the coordinating role in future operational
activities in the area of the remote sensing of the earth from space.32

The cautious approach to the questions of setting up extensive international
ground technical installations under conditions when the space portion of
the system has not yet been organized is completely logical. For this
reason, in the first stage of setting up the global or regional centers.

it would be advisable to restrict their functions primarily to the questions
of an informational and reference nature, as well as to the questions of
training personnel, particularly for the developing countries.

However, in the future the essence of the problem will obviously consist
in determining who and under what conditions will set up, possess and
manage the space portion of the international remote sensing system (the
spacecraft and the equipment carried on them). Otherwise the functioning
of the entire ground infrastructure will depend upon the goodwill of the
state or states which own the space devices.

The solution to all these questions would be significantly facilitated
under the condition of putting international activities in the area of
studying earth resources from space on an appropriate treaty law basis.
The organizational. technical and legal problems in the development of co-
operation among states in using space equipment for studying the natural
resources of the earth are closely interconnected.

178
son orncuu. use own
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY

The nIVen considerations make it possible to draw certain conclusions.

The sovereign rights of states to their natural resources are generally

recognized from the viewpoint of the doctrine and practice of international
law.

From the principle of state sovereignty. there follow restrictions on the
use of information canccrning the natural resources of foreign states ob-
tained by space equipment.

As yet no special provisions exist which regulate activities in the area of
the remote sensing of the earth from space. For this reason the scope and

nature of the mentioned restrictions as yet have not been defined by space
law.

The elaboration of the provisions of space law on the questions of study-
ing earth resources using space equipment should prevent the possibility
of using the obtained information against the economic interests of the
states, without creating, at the same time, an obstacle to the development
of this new promising area of applying space technology.

The first concern for legal regulation should be to institute a procedure
for distributing the remote sensing data containing information which
touches upon the sovereign rights of states to their natural resources.

Legal regulation of remote sensing of earth resources using space equip-
ment is linked to the development of equal international cooperation.
Over the next few years a mechanism should be elaborated for multilateral
cooperation in this area.

FOOTHOTES

l. B. V. Vinogradov and K. Ya. Kondrat'yev, "Kosmicheskiye Metody
Zemlevedeniya" [Space Methods of Earth Sciences], Leningrad,
Gidrometizdat, 1971; R. z. Sagdeyev, "The Study of Earth from Space,"
ZDILYA I VSELBHNAYA, NO 3. 1977. PP 18-8.

2. The term widely used in UN practices for studying the natural re-
sources of the earth using space equipment.

3. "Report of the Working Group on the Questions of Remote Sensing of
the Earth Using Satellites on the Work of Its Third Session," UN Doc.
A/AC.105/125 of 13 March 1971., p h.

h. N. M. Matte. "Droit aerospatial." Paris, 1976. p lh9.
S. B. Petrov and K. Crete, "Along the Path of Integration," PRAVDA,
28 September 1976; "Space--The Arena of Cooperation," PRAVDA, 30 Sep-
tember 1976.
179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.
11.

12.

13.

1’4.

15.
16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRAVDA, 11 July 1971:.

See. for example: "Les USA feraient de l'espionnage econoaique par
satellites," AIR Er cosuos. No 270, 1968. p 18; mom. Vol 9». No 3098.
1968. PP lhO-lhh; AEOSPACB DAILY. 3 March 1970. p 10, 6 March 1910,

p 37; CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR. 2 December 1970. and so forth.

6. J. Alexander, "Two merging Problems of Space Lav Concerning Remote
Sensing Satellites," “Proc. XII Colloq. Lav Outer Space.” California,
1970. pp 258-263.

S. H. Lay and 1!. J. 'I‘aubenfeld. "'me Lav Relating to Activities of Man
in Space," Univ. Chicago Press, 1970. pp 187-188.

UN General Assembly Resolution 626(VII).

See also the UN General Assembly resolutions l3lh(XIII), 1958; 2158011).
1966; 2386(XXIII),1968', 2600(XXIV), 1969; 2692(m), 1970; 3016(XXVII),
1972; 3171(xxv1n). 1973; and 3281(xx1x). 1971:.

On the relationship of the principles of freedom of research and the
use of space and state sovereignty in terms of the designated problem,
see: A. Tchernonog. ”A teledetection des reasources terrestres par
satellites," LA RECHERCHE SPATIALE, lo 3, 1973. pp 1-5.

Such a proposal is contained in the draft submitted to the United
Nations by Brazil (on Doc. A/AC.105/122) and the Joint Argentine and
Brazilian draft (UN Doc. A/c.1/1oh7 of 15 October 1911»).

The drafts of Argentina, Brazil, France and the USSR, as well as the
Joint Soviet-French working document can be found in Appendix IV to
the Report of the Legal Subcommittee on the Work of Its 13th Session
(6-13 May 197:.) (UN Doc. A/AC.105/133 of 6 June 1971:). The Argentine-
Brazilian draft which Venezuela, Mexico and Chile supported at the
131th Session of the Legal Subcomittee can be found in UN Doc. A/C.l/
101.1. The 0.3. working document is in us Doc. AlAc.lOS/C.2/L.103 of

19 February 1975.
UN Doc. A/ACJOS/llﬂ; A/ACJOS/l'n.

G. C. M. ReiJnen, "Remote Sensing by Satellites and legality," "legal
Implications of Renate Sensing From Outer Space," SthnoffuLeyaen.
1976, p 27.

H. Marcoff, "Traite de Droit international public de 1'expace,"

Fribourg--Geneva--Paris--Rev York, Ed. Univ. Fribourg. Suisse. 1973,
p 570-

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
18.

19'
20.

21.

22.

23.

2h.

25-

26.
27.
28.

30.
31.

32.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analogous formulations are contained in the Joint proposal of Argentina
and ?razil which was supported by Venequela, Mexico and Chile (Alnc.1,
101‘? 0

UN Doc. A/AC.105/L.69, Point h.
UN Doc. A/A¢.lOS/C.2/L.99 or 27 Hay l97h.
"Rough Draft of Principles for the Use of Space Equipment by States for

Studying Earth Resources" was submitted by the Soviet delegation at a
session of the UN working group on remote sensing of the earth using
satellites on 18 April 1973 (Uh Doc. A/AC.105/c.2/L.88). The basic
provisions of this document were incorporated in the Joint USSR and
French draft.

UN Doc. A/AC.105/171 of 28 May 1976.

An analogous consideration was raised by the Soviet delegation at a
session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee in 1977 (UN Doc.
A/AC.105/c. I/L. 96).

"Legal Implications of Remote Sensing from Outer Space." p lhB.

A. Tchernonog, "A telédetection des ressources terrestres par satel-
lites." LA RECHERCHE SPATIALB, lo 3, 1973. p h.

LE MONDE, 26 September 1973.
"Legal Implications of Remote Sensing from Outer Space," p lh8.
SPACE FLIGHT, Vol 18, so 6, 1976, p 221.

Resolution of the UN General Assembly 2733(XXV) of 16 December 1970 and
2778(XXVI) of 29 November 1971.

UN Doc. A/AC.105/125 or 13 March 197k.

According to calculations made in the United Nations in 1970, the
full cost of an operational system would be h30 million dollars, of
which lh3 million would be for the space portion or the system and
237 million for the ground (UN Doc. ECO/80c B/hTTQ, b November 1970).

UN Doc. A/AC.105/15h or 9 January 1976 and Alac.105/1Sh, Add. 1 of 15,
October 1976.

181
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 7: THE LEGAL STATUS OF Ill'l'ERNATIOIIAL ORBITAL STATIONS

The development of permanent orbital stations on which man can live and
work for an extended time in space is viewed as an inportant promising
area or astronautical development. The first experience in developing such
a station was acquired during the 6-Ionth operation of the Salyut scien-
tific station which was put into a near-earth orbit on 19 April 1971. For
2': days a heroic crew consisting of the cosmonaut pilots G. T. Dobrovol'skiy,
V. N. Volkov and V. I. Patsaysv worked on this station.1 In subsequent
years, the USSR has continued to develop and orbit stations of the Sa‘Lyut
type and these have operated for an extended period both under automatic
and manned conditions. In 1973. the United States launched its first
Slqlab orbital station with a changeable three-man crew.

The permanent orbital stations take it possible to carry out various scien-
tific, technical and national economic tasks. Astronoaers and meteorolo-
gists, geologists and oceanographers, biologists and medical workers, as
well as scientists and practical. workers in other areas have placed great
hopes on the possibilities of conducting extended and systematic observa-
tions and experiments in near-earth orbits.2

Although the first stations were designed primarily for conducting scien-
tific research, in the future they will be used more and more widely for
studying earth resources, for weather prediction, for controlling the en-
vironment, for working out new production processes and for solving other
national economic problems.3 The orbital stations will become an important
means for developing new earth-oriented space systems and for complementing
already existing ones.

A number or international organizations, for example the International
Astronautical Academy, for many years has been concerned with the theoreti-
cal elaboration of problems related to studying the possibility of creat-
ing international orbital stations or laboratories.” Among the other
problems, the legal questions which night arise in carrying out such pro-
grams have also been discus-\ed.

182
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

After carrying out the Soviet-American Soyuz--Apollo Project, these prob-
lcmn have moved from the theoretical area into the sphere of the practical
activities of states.

In actuality, during one of the stages of the experimental testing of the
compatible equipment for the rendezvous and link-up of the manned Soviet
and American spacecraft and stations, and precisely during the period of
the 2-day Joint flight, the single system of Soyuz and Apollo spacecraft
represented a sort of international orbital station. This was the first,
although brief, experiment in the existence of an international manned
space system in a near-earth orbit.

In the greetings of L. I. Brezhnev to the crews of the Soyuz-19 and

Apollo craft, it was pointed out that Soyuz and Apollo are the prototype
of future international orbital stations.5

The Spacelab being developed by the Western European nations, along with
the American recoverable transport spacecraft to be used with it can also
be viewed as an unique international orbital station.

The Soviet proposal for the participation of citizens from socialist
countries in the manned flights on Soviet spacecraft and stations was a
new important step on the way to the development of international orbital
stations. From 1978 through 1983 the nations of all the socialist coun-
tries at work on the Intercosmos Program will participate Jointly with
Soviet cosmonauts in manned flights.

In this regard of significant interest, no longer Just theoretical but
also practical, is the legal status of the international orbital stations.

what problems could arise in the event of the creation of permanent
international orbital stations? Hill their legal conditions differ from
the general conditions of space obgects as established by current space
law? How were these questions settled during the experimental flight of
the Soyuz and Apollo craft, and how are they to be settled in the future?

The first difficulty which arises in examining the posed questions is a
purely terminological one. In astronautics and space law as yet there
are no generally accepted definitions of a space laboratory or space
station, and in the literature these terms are sometimes used for desig-
nating the most diverse space devices, including the automatic earth
satellites. Moreover, as is known, in international space law there also
are no generally accepted definitions of space and space objects.

Naturally it would be difficult to answer the question of whether or not
a particular legal status exists for international orbital stations with-
out possessing definitions for such a station, a space object and space
itself. This has not been elucidated either in the course of discussing
the legal status of orbital stations at a number of international collo-
quiums on space law.7

. 183
son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In terms of the given research, by an international orbital station one may
understand a space complex developed or used by two or more states and which

for an extended time can operate in a near-earth orbit under manned and
automatic conditions, and is designed for carrying out scientific, tech-
nical and national economic tasks.6

The given definition emphasizes such elements as the international nature
of the station, the missions carried out by it, the presence or the pos-
sibility of the presence of a crew, the extended functioning, the orbiting
around the earth. and technical complexity in comparison with other space
obJects.

The station can acquire an international character due to various factors,
including: the creation of the station by several states within the frame-
work or outside of international organizations, the providing of oppor-
tunities on a national station for carrying out experiments or production
processes by foreign specialists, the incorporation of foreign cosmonauts
as crew members of a national station, and so forth.

As a rule, a permanent station in a near-earth orbit presupposes the pres-
ence of periodically changed crews. However, as experience shows, such

stations can operate for an extended time under automatic conditions. De-
pending upon their purpose, the stations can also be developed as unmanned.

Orbital stations can consist of individual modules for varying purposes
assembled on the ground or directly in space. They are linked with the
earth by a transport system for replenishing supplies and changing the
crews.

From the given definition it follows that we are excluding from the review
the international stations which could be created in orbits around the
moon, other planets or directly on these celestial bodies.

Now let us examine on the general theoretical level, as well as in terms
of the specific Soyus--Apollo and Spacelab programs, the most character-
istic features of the legal status of international orbital stations.

Implementation of "Jurisdiction and Control." Article VIII of the Space
Treaty provides that a state which has registered an obJect launched into
outer space ”keeps Jurisdiction and control over such an obJect and over
any crew of this object while they are in outer space...." The rights of
Jurisdiction and control mentioned in this article of the Treaty in their
nature represent sovereign rights exercised by a state in relation to its
space object and its crew while they are in space to which territorial
sovereignty of any state is not extended. Certain authors qualify such
rights of a state in outer space as "quasiterritorial Jurisdiction."9

The sovereign essence of the rights and obligations of a state stipulated
in Article VIII of the Treaty is affirmed by the history of the elaboration

18%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of this article. The Soviet draft of the declaration of basic principles
regulating the activities of states in the exploration and use of outer
space. in underlying the corresponding declaration approved by the UN
General Assembly and subsequently the Space Treaty, states that a state

maintaiss its sovereign rights to the obJects which it launches into outer
space.

Although subsequently the texts of the declaration and the Treaty used the
words "Jurisdiction and control" instead of the words "sovereign rights,"
this has not altered the sense which the agreeing parties invested in the
content of the given concept. The American doctrine, in particular, uses
the concept "Jurisdiction" in terms of the cases examined by us in the
sense of the ability of a state "to prescribe the provisions of the law

or force their execution."11 The sovereign nature of the rights of a state
to its space obJects has been noted by a number of American legal experts.12

In examining the content of the term "Jurisdiction and control," the Hungar-
ian legal expert 6. 061 has written that the important component elements
of Jurisdiction and control are the right to prescribe laws, decrees and
the general legal procedure which should be followed by people on a space-

craft, as well as the exclusive right to control the actions of the space
obJect.

In terms of manned orbital stations the provisions of the Treaty on Juris-
diction and control imply that the law of the registering state is used on
the station. that the civil law and criminal law questions arising on the
station should be settled in accord with the national law of this state,
and it has the right to control the station and the actions of its crew.

Of great significance is the provision of the Treaty that the Jurisdiction
and control of the registering state apply to any crew of the space obJect,
that is, if it is an international crew, it, regardless of the citizenship
of its members, should obey the laws and legal procedures of the registering
state "if a special understanding on a different procedure is not in effect."

One is struck by the fact that the Space Treaty does not say anything about
registration as the basis for the occurrence of the rights of Jurisdiction
and control. It merely stipulates the "maintaining" of these rights for
the registering state while the space obJect is in space. In this manner
the Treaty tacitly proceeds from the assumption that with Joint space ac-
tivities the states themselves should agree on the procedure for imple-
menting their Jurisdiction and control, bearing in mind that in the absence
of such understanding these functions are assumed to be with the register-
ing state.

In this sense the act of registration in the treaty is given preference in
comparison with all the other possible bases, including: right of owner-

ship, citizenship of the crew members, the launching place of the obJect,
the place the obJect or its scientific equipment was developed, and so forth.

185
roe orncm. use om: .
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

It must not be overlooked that legal relationships with third states (for
example over the question of liability for damage caused by a space obJect
or related to rescue operations) could arise not only for the registering
state but also for all other participants in the Joint space activity.
since the space agreements in these instances mention not the registration
state or the state carrying out Jurisdiction and control, but rather the
"launching state“ and the "powers carrying out the launch."

Joint activities whereby the right of ownership to the space obJect may be
with one state, the right of ownership to the launch vehicle to another,
the launch may be carried out on a third state and the crew may be made up
of citizens from several states inevitably involve the appearance of com-
peting Jurisdictions.

While the Space Treaty tacitly proceeds from the possibility of an under-
standing between the states on carrying out Jurisdiction over an inter-
national space obJect and its crew, the Convention Governing the Registra-
tion of ObJects Launched into Space directly provides such a possibility.
Article II of this Convention mentions agreements "which are concluded or
can be concluded between launching states on the question of Jurisdiction
and control over the space obJect and any of its crew."

Thus, in launching an international orbital station, the rights of Juris-
diction and registration do not unfailingly belong to the same state. The
possibility of competing Jurisdictions in relation to international orbital
stations can necessitate a special agreement on these questions between the
participants of the Joint activities. The necessity of an understanding

on Jurisdiction and control may also arise in relations with third countries,
since the current provisions of international space law leave open the ques-
tion of Jurisdiction and control during the period that the space obJect
passes over the airspace of other states or when it lands on their territory.

In carrying out brief Joint space flights. the problems of Jurisdiction and
control do not present serious difficulties. and the understanding of states
is basically focused on the questions of controlling the Joint flight and
maintaining general order and discipline amont the members of an inter-
national crew,

Thus. in preparing for the Joint flight under the Soyuz-—Apollo ProJect,

the parties agreed that when the cosmonauts moved from one ship into an-

other in accord with the preset work schedule, the actions of the crew on
board the corresponding ship would be under the ship's commander and the

ground control center of that nation to which the given ship belonged.

The technical flight directors and the leaders of the control centezs worked
out in detail and approved flight documents which provided for the behavior

of the ships and the crews during all regular and irregular situations.

Responsibility for decision taking during irregular situations was en-
trusted to the control center and the con-ander of the "receiving side."

186
son OFFICIAL uss om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that is. the ship in which such a situation arose while the cosmonauts of
the other side were in it. The right of taking an imediste decision in
the absence of contact with ground personnel was given to the commander of
the receiving ship.

The question of what state would provide Jurisdiction and control over
Spacelab while it was in space has still remained open. In the Hester-n
literature the viewpoint has been voiced that such a right should belong

to one of the 3880 member nations or to the organization itself.” How-
ever, considering that Spacelab will be an inseparable part of the American
transport spacecraft until it returns back to earth, it is difficult to
conceive that the western European nations will succeed in agreeing with
the United States on the exercising of such functions. In the event of

the granting of such competence to the European nations, Jurisdiction
should be carried out by one of thc nations, since the international organ-
ization cannot possess sovereign rights.

The importance of the Jurisdiction questions will rise as the number of
cosmonauts simultaneously on board a station rises and as the duration of
the time spent in space increases. As is known, even new plans are being
discussed for super-large multipurpose orbital stations designed for a
crew of up to 100 and mare persons. The carrying of such a number of per-
sons on board the station naturally requires the elaboration of a definite
internal regulation which should be followed by the station's collective.
as well as a precise definition of the competence of the states in terms
of reviewing civil law, criminal law and other questions which may arise
in the relationships between the members of such a numerous collective.ls

Registration. The Space Treaty mentions only the national registration of
space obJects, that is. the entry of such obJects in the register of any
state. And national registration before the Convention Governing the
Registration of ObJects Launched into Outer Space came into force remained
elective.

Initially the procedure of international registration of space obJects, in
being carried out mthe basis of data voluntarin submitted to the UN Sec-
retary General, was established by the Resolution of the UN General Assembly
in 1961.16 la accord with this Resolution, the states periodically in-
formed the UN Secretary General in writing of space obJects launched by
them into outer space. The Department for the Questions of Outer Space
Under the UN Secretariat kept an official register in which this informa-
tion was entered. Copies of the letters received by the Secretary General
were sent out to all U]! members. 17

In the case of international launches, information was provided by one of
the states participating in the Joint space activity. Thus, the launchings

of satellites in the intercosmos series were registered at the United
Nations by the USSR; the launchings of the ESRO satellites were registered

with France .

187
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The new Convention Governing the Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
Space which came into force on 15 September 1976 introduced compulsory
national registration of space objects which were launched "into orbit
around the earth or further into outer space" (Article II). The keeping
up of the national register and the conditions for keeping it were deter-
mined by the state itself. As for international registration, this had
the nature of a general centralized accounting of information provided by
the states to the UN Secretary General "in the immediate practically feas-
ible period" (Article IV). The Convention established a minimum amount of
information on the objects which was to be provided by the states in the
United Nations, and also regulated other questions involved with the regis-
tration of space objects.

As was pointed out above, the national registration of space objects can en-
tail definite legal consequences. In the absence of an understanding about
this, the Space Treaty links the Jurisdiction and control functions to
registration. Article V of this same Treaty demands the return of cosmo-
nauts who have made a forced landing to the state with which their space-
craft is registered. Space objects and their component parts are also to
be returned to the registering state (Article VIII). The Rescue Agreanent,
having established the obligation to return cosmonauts and space objects
"to the authorities who carried out the launch," has not abrogated these
articles of the Treaty. It is essential to mention that the responsibility
of states for national activities in space (Article VI of the Treaty) also
presupposes the possibility of reference to registration as to the grounds
for establishing to which state the space object belongs.

For this reason, without exaggerating *he role of the active registration
in space law which, in contrast to maritime and air law, does not auto-
matically entail the assigning of ”nationality" to a spacecraft,18 it is
essential to recognize the serious legal significance of this act. In
terms of the sense of the Registration Convention and from practical con-
siderations, instances of multiple registration, that is, the entry of the
same object into the national registers of several nations, should be ex-
cluded. The Convention stipulates that in the launching of a space object
by several states "they should Jointly determine which of then is to regis-
ter this object."

The situation is more involved with the launching of an object by an inter-
national organization. Article VII of the Convention states that the con-
cept of a "state" according to the Convention, with the exception of cer-
tain articles, encompassez. any international intergovernmental organiza-
tion which engages in space activity, if it assumes the rights and obliga-
tions stipulated by the Convention. and if a majority of its members are
participants of the Convs .:ion and Space Treaty.

In practical terms this means that the Convention allows the possibility
for an international, intergovernmental organization to keep its own regis-
tration of space objects launched by it or the transfer of such functions

188
FOR SWICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100030007-0

. a
89
2 MRO" 1979 V. S. VERESHCHETIN
FOR OPTIMAL USﬁ ONLY

to one of the member states. In the former instance. howeVer. in parallel
with the establishing of the organization's own register. its nembers should
reach an agreement as to which of them will carry out Jurisdiction over the
space obiects launched by the organisation. since the organization itself
cannot be given such rights.

The Registration Convention does not institute a special registration pro-
cedure for one or another class of space obJects. At the same tine. the
registration of orbital stations has its particular features.‘9 Obviously
the detachable modules and elements of the station which are capable of
existing independently in a near-earth orbit. like the transport spacecraft,
s'.ouid be registered along with the station itself. This provision applies
even more strongly to those instances when the autonomous modules of the
station or the transport spacecraft flying to it belonged to different states
or international organisations.

In carrying out the flight under the Soyuz-~Apollo Project. the Soviet and
Anerican spacecraft were launched and returned to earth independently.
During the period they remained in near-earth orbits. for a larger portion
of the tine they flew as separate space objects. For this reason it is
natural that each of these ships was registered in its own country.

0f certain theoretical and practical interest is the question of the regis-
tration of the Western European Spacelab. As was already pointed out. dur-
inr, the first flights of the American transport spacecraft. the Spacelab
module developed in western Europe from the start to the end of the flight
will be inside tre knerican spacecraft. For this reason it is impossible
to agree with the viewpoint of .he Vest Osman legal expert. won Preuschen.
.hat the flight module and the ship in legal terns represent autonomous
space objects and should be registered separately. 2° In the future. if it
is technically possible to realize the possibility being presently dis-
cussed of the independent mission of Spacelab in a near-earth orbit. after
being delivered there by the transport spacecraft, Spacelab could be viewed
as a separate space object. ‘dith the present flight conditions, it is an
inseparable conponent of an American space object.

'Jith the corresponding understanding between the United States and its
European partners. registration in one of the airspean nations is possible
only for the entire systen as a whole. including the Spacelab space ship.
In practical terms this say be advisable in the instance when in the future
a Spacelab will be launched by the United States specially upon order of
the Western European nations or an international organisations.

International liability. In considering the protracted existence and di-
verse nature of the functions carried out by international orbital sta-

tions, the questions of international liability related to legal violations
or material harm caused as a result of legitimate activities can assme
great significance.

189
roe orncuu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Liability in international space law has been interpreted from public law
positionn. It regulates legal relationships of liability between states
and. under certain conditions. between intergovernaental organisations.

on the one hand. and states. on the other. but not between legal and phys-
ical entities or between states and such entities.2‘

In those instances when the legal or physical entity is the inJured party
or the party causing inJury, their interests in international liability
relationships. according to the current provisions of international space
law. are represented and defended by definite states. These provisions
correspond to the principles of sovereign equality of states and to the
particular significance which states give to the research and use of outer
space.

The Convention Governing International Liability for Damage Caused by
Space ObJects. in regulating in detail the liability relationships. has
specially defined that its provisions are not to be applied to instances
of damage caused by a space obJect of a launching state to citizens or
this state and to foreign citizens during that period they are involved
in operations related to this space obJect (Article V'?). This means
that the liability relationships for damage covered by the Convention
are not to be extended to the participants of a Joint launch or to an
international crew on board an orbital station.

Ihe liability relationships between the participants of Joint space ac-
tivities. with certain exceptions, are outside the sphere covered by the
provisions of international space law. In carrying out long-range space
projects. such relationships should be covered by special agreements be-
tween the participant nations.

however. these agreements cannot abrogate the mandatory provisions of in.
ternational space law concerning the liability for third states.

The most important among such provisions is the principle of solidary
liability for any damage caused in carrying out a Joint launch by two or
more states (Point 1 of Article V of the Convention Goyerning Liability
for Loss). Point 2 of the designated clause specially stipulates that
agreements concluded between the participants of a Joint launch cannot
Jeopardize the rights of a state which has suffered loss to damcnd full
compensation for the damage caused by any of the launching states or all
the launching states who bear solidary liability.

The Convention differentiates two types of Joint activity whereby such
liability may arise: within international, intergovernmental organiza-
tions and outside such limits.

If the damage has been caused by an international orbital station launched

by an intergovernmental organization, then the organization itself and
its nember states bear solidary liability. However. here any claim for

190

IDR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

compensation is submitted first to the organization. If the latter within
6 months has not paid compensation. the plaintiff state can raise the ques-
tion of the liability of the member states of this organization (Article
XXII).

with a Joint launch outside an international organization, a demand to re-
cover losses can be submitted inediately to any state which falls in the
category of a ”launching state," and the latter is obliged to provide full
restitution for the damage caused; this does not exclude its right for a
retroactive demand on the remaining participants in the Joint launch.

If the damage has been caused to the property of an organization (for ex-
ample, its orbital station). it in this manner becomes the authorised
party, then the demand to pay compensation for damage is submitted not by
the organisation itself but rather by one of its member states (Article
XXIII, Point it). By this one understands that the members of the organi-
zation should determine which will act on their behalf and how the obtained
amount of compensation will be allocated subsequently.

International liability is not lifted from a state in an instance when the
orbital station is created by private organizations. Article VI of the
Space Treaty establishes the international liability of a state for space
activities regardless of whether this is carried out by governmental bodies
or by nongovernmental legal entities. and obliges the states to make certain
that the activities of nongovernmental legal entities in space be carried

out with the permission and under the constant supervision of the corres-
ponding state.

The Convention on liability has introduced into space law the principle of
so-called absolute liability for damage caused by a space obJect on the
earth's surface or to an aircraft in flight. By "absolute liability“ one
understand liability without the fault of the responsible party.

however, fault, as the basis of liability. is nintained in the event of
causing damage by one space object to another space object or to persons
and property on board such objects. In these circmstances, a state bears
liability only in the instance that ”damage was caused due to its fault '
or to the fault of persons for which the state is responsible" (Article
III). This provision can be of important significance for the activities
of international orbital stations, since their extended stay in orbit en-
tails repeated delivery flights. maneuvers and docking of the spacecraft
which bring personnel, food and equipment.

The establishing of the principals of solidary liability is of great sig-
nificance with the occurrence of liability relationships involving damage
caused as a result of the activities of an international orbital station.
as well as in any Joint space activities.

19].
1’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Convention puts the launching state in the category of liable principals.
giving a broad interpretation to this concept. Moreover. the Convention
specially stipulates that "a state from whose territory or units a space
obJect is launched is viewed as a participant in the Joint launch."

Thus. in the launching of Spacelab by an American transport ship, regard-
less of the legal possession of Spacelab and the internal agreements between
the participants in the proJect. the United States. as One of the launching
states. would be among the principals of solidary liability. In accord
with the intergovernmental agreement between the United States and the
western European nations. the parties agreed to consult imnediately among
themselves on a Just allocation of expenditures which they would bear in
the event 01' solidary nanny for dauge caused to third states.”

The presence on board an orbital station of a citizen or citizens from a
state which has not taken a direct part in the development and launching
of a station obviously also gives grounds in liability questions to con-
sider this state among the launching ones and thereby bearing solidary
liability. Such a construct is particularly valid when the damage has
been caused due to the fault of the citizen or the given state.

Finally. in determining the range of the principals in liability relation-
ships. in particular in those instances when it is a question of inter-
national liability in the broad sense of this word ari not merely financial
liability. one must not overlook that Jurisdiction and control over a space
obJect and over any crew of this obJect while they are in space are main-
tained by the state where the given obJect is registered (Article VIII of
the Space Treaty).

The liability relationships with Joint space activities presupposes a
multiplicity of principals bearing solidary liability for the damage caused
by a space obJect. and. as a rule, require special regulation of the lia-
bility questions among the participants of the Joint activities. without
infringing the legitimate interests of third countries in so doing.

Rights of Ownership. Article VIII of the Space Treaty stipulates that
ownership rights to space obJects and their component parts remain in-
wiolable while they are in outer space. on a celestial body or upon return
to the earth. In other words. space obJects and their components while
in space and after their return to the earth belong to those states. legal
or physical entities to which they belonged prior to the flight.23

International space law does not go into the question of how ownership
relationships for space obJects and their component parts are regulated
among the participants of Joint space activities. leaving this to the
discretion of the agreeing parties.

The question of the right of ownership to international space stations and

their components can be settled differently. depending upon the understanding
among the concerned states.

192
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In carrying out the Soyuz--Apollo ProJect. the given question did not arise,
since during the entire flight and after its completion the states only
maintained the right of ownership to their ships. This project did not
envisage any financial payments between the countries.

in accord with the internal agreement between the western European countries
and ERG. the owner of the first flying model of Spacclab would be i-SRO
(presently. respectively, the European Space Agency). This model we: to
be turned over gratis to the United States. It is not excluded that at

the same time the right of ownership would be transferred to the United
States. The owners of the subsequent flying models could be either the
United States or their Mopean partners. depending upon under whose order
these models would be manufactured. In those instances when Spacelab would
be developed for the needs of the western Mopean nations. the rights of
ownership could belong to an international organization. to one or several
countries, or to their legal entities. The flight of Spacelab as part of
an American transport craft. in accord with Article VIII of the Space
Treaty. does not alter the marship status.

Rescue Operations. The Rescue Agreanent stipulates that cosmonauts and
space objects are to be returned "to the authorities carrying out the
launch." Article VI of the Agreement explains that this term applies to
the state or international organization responsible for the launching.
under the condition that this organization declares its willingness to
accept the rights and obligations provided by the Agreement. and that a
majority of the member states of this organization is participants of
the Rescue Agreement and Space Treaty.

The duties provided by the Agreement for states in the area of the rescu-
ing and return of crews differ from their duties in the area of the rescue
and return of space obJects themselves. The states should take every pos-
sible measure to rescue and provide the necessary help to the crew of a
spacecraft which has landed on foreign territory as a result of an emer-
gency. a disaster, a forced or unforeseen landing. Such a crew is to be
isnediately turned over to the representatives of the authorities who
nadc the launch. The very space obJects and their components are to be
salvaged and returned to the authorities who made the launch only upon

the request of the latter and at their expense.

The 1963 Space Treaty also provides an obligation when necessary to provide
all possible mutual aid by cosmonauts of different states while they are
directly in space or on other celestial bodies (Article V).

For the practical realization of these obligations and for ensuring the
technical possibilities of carrying out rescue work in space. of the
greatest significance is a solution to the question of international
standardization or compatibility of the docking mechanisms on the space-
craft and orbital stations. Otherwise the provisions of the Treaty on
carrying out rescue work by different states directly in space may rennin
merely good intentions.

193
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Mutual aid in space." writes the Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy
of Sciences K. D. Bushuyev. "is virtually impossible if the ships are not
equipped with the required facilities for locating. rendezvousing and dock-
ing. if it is impossible to move from one ship into another in order to
provide technical aid or. if need be. take the other crew into your ship."“
For precisely this reason the understanding between the USSR and United
States on developing compatible equipment for the rendezvous and docking

of spacecraft and stations and the successful testing of this equipment

under the conditions of a real space flight in the Soyuz--Apollo ProJect
were of such great significance.

The Right of Visitation. In accord with Article XII of the 1967 Space
Treaty. all stations, units, equipment and spacecraft on the moon or on
other celestial bodies are open to the representatives of other states on
the basis of reciprocity and in observing definite conditions (preliminn-v
notification). An analysis of this and other articles of the Treaty pi ,.
vides reason to assume that such a right can be interpreted broadly and
recopised also for manned stations in orbit around the earth. This opinion
is shared by a number of space law specialists.

In examining the question of the ”right of visitation" in terms of Spacelab,
the west German legal expert von Preuschen has pointed out that "am visit
on a space object not based on a celestial body creates a serious threat

to its safety and normal operation and this could involve a fatal danger

for the crew."25 Von Preuschen writes further that "a visit to an orbit-

ing space laboratory would require cmplex preparatory work which should
be carried out Jointly with the concerned states."26

The French specialist Stoebner in a paper devoted to the legal and techni-
cal problems of space stations presented by him at the International Astro-
nautics Congress in Amsterdam 1971;. emphasized that for obvious technical
considerations a visit should be dependent upon the receiving of prelim-
inary permission.27 An analogous position is supported by he American
legal expert J. Tan-I,2° the Austrian legal expert B. P‘asan2 and many
other representatives of space law science who have studied this question.

In the event that a state desires to send its cosmonauts to an orbital
station belonging to another state or to a group of states, preliminary
permission of the latter must be obtained. The Space Treaty also does
not pennit the use of orbital stations for inspecting automatic space de-
vices without the agreemen‘. of the states .0 which they belong.

The Purpose of an Orbital Station. The purpose of the space obJect and
the mission assigned it play an important role in the legal characteris-
tics of any space object. including an international orbital station.

Permanent orbital stations can carry out multipurpose scient.‘ fie-technical
and applied functions, however here a certain specialization of the orbital
stations should not be excluded. Thus, among the work which probably will
be carried out in the nature flights of Spacelab. in addition to scientific

19h
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experiments. mention has been made of earth observations‘ coununications.
navigation. the manufacturing and process of materials.3 Naturally. spe-
cialized legal conditions which are being presently worked out for a number

of types of space applications will be hilly extended to the international
orbital stations used for these purposes.

The American press has published statements that the United States is dis-
cussing plans to develop in the 1980's stations for carrying out various
production operations. This station would be rented to the industrial

firms and later turned over fully as their property.31 Such use of orbital
stations requires a special intragovermental and possibly also inter-
national regulation. Here the leasing of the station or the transfer of

it as the property of private firms cannot eliminate the mandatory provi-
sion of international space law according to which states bear international
liability for space activities. regardless of whether these activities are
carried out by governmental bodies or by nongovemnental legal entities.

An unique legal status will also be characteristic of the international
orbital stations ii in the nature they are used as launching platforms

for interplanetary flights or as intermediate bases for the return of space-
craft which have visited other planets.

The purpose of a space object plays an important role for its legal quali-
fication also due to the fact that the freedoa of space activities for
states. as has already been repeatedly noted. is not unlimited. The use of
new technology should not lead to a violation of the principles and provi-
sions of international law generally and international space law. in partic-
ular. Space activities which are contrary to these principles and provi-
sions should be recognized as illegal.

In the development and operation of international orbital stations. in addi-

tion to the examined questions, a whole series of other legal ones nay
arise.

Experience shows that the carrying out of projects to develop international
orbital stations. considering their scale, cost and political significance.
requires the conclusion of special intergovernmental agree-ents. as well
as agreements which develop and supplement than between the organizations
directly involved in their fulfillment. In the event of the c"yup-Apollo
ProJect. this involved the intergovernmental agreaent between the USSR
and the United States of 2': Kay 1972. as well as a series of agreenents

and understandings between the USSR Acadaw of Sciences and MBA. In the
event of the Spacelab Project. there were the intergovernmental agreement
of the western Wopean nations and the United States of 115 August 1913.
the agreement between $30 and IIASA of 23: August 1973:, and other docuents.
The general principles and provisions of international space law supple-
mented by the provisions contained in such agreements regulate the rela-
tionships between the participants of a Joint project and the legal status
of the international orbital station.

195

P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [183 ONLY

Penanent stations. including international ones, will be set up in several
stages, and in the first stages stations of a narrower purpose will be
used. with small crews and a relatively short period of existence.32

ll'he legal status of an international orbital station will have both traits
inherent to all space obJects as well as certain particular features. The
canon traits are detersined by current international space law the pro-
visions of which are extended to an international orbital station as one
of the space obJects. 'ihe specific features of the legal status derive
mainly from the international nature of the station, the placing of it in
orbit around the earth, and its purpose.

The international nature of an orbital station nay necessitate the conclud-
ing of a special agreement or agreements between the participants in the
specific project on questions relating to Jurisdiction, registration,
liability for danage, ownership rights and other questions.

The purpose of the international orbital station and the Motion carried
out by it may be of decisive significance for defining its international
legal status. Undoubtedly, such stations should be set up and eaployed
exclusively for peaceful purposes, for the good and in the interests of
all people in the world.

In accord with the Peace Program which gained new affirmation and develop-
sent at the 25th CPSU Congress, the 088R is working so that international
cooperation in space, in being an important coaponent in scientific and
technical cooperation among states, has a positive influence on the
strengthening of confidence between states, and serves the cause of peace
and progress for unkind.

PM

1. "'Salyut' na Orbite (Osnovy Konstruktsii Orbital'noy Stantsii 'Salyut',
Etapy yeye Poleta 1 Material; lauchnykh Issledovaniy)" [Salvut in
Orbit (Bases for the Design of the Salyut Orbital station, the Stages
of Its night and the Materials of Scientific Research”, Moscow.
Mashinostroyeniye, 1973.

2. B. I. Petrov "Orbital Stations and the Study of the Earth fro- Space,”
VPSTIIIK MIMI! “UK SSSR, lo 10. 1910. pp 15-30.

3. R. Sagdeyev, "For Worldwide Cooperation in Space." IIOVOY'E V'RMA. lo 39,
1975. Pp 21-23.

lo. "Orbital International Laboratory and Space Sciences. Conference Pro-
ceedings," llew Mexico, 1969.

5. PRAVDA. 18 July 1975.

196
m onrcm. uss my
7.

8.

13.
1h.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRAVDA, 17 July and 110 September 1976.

"Introductory Report and Cements on Legal Status of Earth-Orbiting
Stagons," "Proe. XII Colloq. Law Outer Space," California, 1910, pp
93- .

For other definitions of international orbital stations. see: A. I.
Rudev and V. G. kin, "Near-Earth Manned Space Stations," SOVB'I'BKOYE
WWO I PRAVO, No ’0, 1972, p 112; A. W. Stoebner, "Stations
spatiales presentes at futures: technique et droit." "Proc. XVII Colloq.
Lav Outer Space," California. 1975. pp 320-321.

3. Cheng, "Le Traité de 1967 sur l'espace," mem. nu anon Ima-
sA'rIouAL, no 3. 1968. p 570.

UN Doc. A/AC.105 C.2/L.6 (Article 8).

C. Q. Christol, "The International Law of Outer Space." Washington.
1966, p 1.16.

See, for example, 8. H. by and H. J. Taubenfeld, "The Law Relating
to Activities of ﬂan in Space," Chicago, 1910, p 52; S. Corove, "The
Future of Space Law: A Legal Regine for Space Colonies," "Proc. XIX
Colloq. Lav Outer Sme," California. 1977. pp h1-51.

c. on, "Space Lav," Budapest, 1969. p 215.

R. F. von Preuschen, "International Cooperation in the Use of Space
Laboratories," "Proc. XVII Colloq. Lav Outer Space," pp 233-2“.

McDougal, Lassvell, Vlasic, ”Lav and Public Order in Space," New Eaves--
IDndOﬂ, 1961., pp 671-67160

Resolution 1721 (XVI) of 20 December 1961.

B. C. Mayorskiy, "Registration of Space Objects," "Meshdunarodnoye
Kosnicheskoye Pravo," Edited by A. S. Piradov, Moscow, llezhdunarodrwye
Otnosheniya, 197%, pp 129-131.

In international space law there is no concept of the "nationality" of
a space object. Different viewpoints on this question have been stated
in the doctrine. Although a majority of authors considers this ter-
useless. a number of Western legal experts are in favor of introducing
such a concept. for example: R. F. von Preuschen, op. cit., pp 237-
239; A. Beuckling, "The Formal Legal Status of Space Stations in Orbit,"
"Proc. XVI Colloq. Lav Outer Space." California, 1971:, pp 2110-218;

C. Q. Christal, op. cit., pp 520-1322; J. C. Cooper, "Explorations in
Aerospace Lav," Montreal, 1968, pp 251-2510; B. H. Mankievicz, "The
Legal Status of Space Vehicles," "Rept. S34 Conf. ILA. menos Aires,
1968," London, 1969.

197
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

23.

2h.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

A. I. Ruden and V. 6. min. "Near-Earth ﬂamed Space Stations,"
SOVETSKOY'B OOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO. lo '0. 1912, p 113.

R. F. von Preuschen, op. cit... p 239.

For lore detail on this see: A. A. Ruhanov, "Hezhdunarodnaya
Komichesko-Pravovaya Imushchestvennaya Otevetstvennost'” [International
Space Lav Property Liability]. Moscow, lam, 1971.

Article II or the Agreement. For the text. see: "Hearings Before the
Conittee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. 931! Congress, 30 October,
1973," Washington, 1911:. pp 128-13h.

See: P. 6. Dublin, "Con-ercial Utilization of Space and the Lev,"
"Yearbook of Air and Space Lav, 1961," Montreal, 1970, p 289-.

K. Bushuyev, "Mutual Aid in Space," "Sovrenenme Dostizheniya
Kosnonavtiki" [Modern Achievements in Aeronautics], Moscov. Znaniye,
1973, p 23.

R. F. von Prouschen, op. cit... p 2101.
Ibid.

A. H. Stoehner, "Stations spatiales presentes et futures: techniques
et droit." p 329.

R. J. Tam, "Reflections Upon Legal Aspects of Slqlab and the Space
Shuttle." "Proc. XVI Colloq. Iav Outer Space," California, 1971:,
pp aka-2H6.

B. Pecan. "Comments to the Introductory Report on the legal Status of
Earth-Orbiting Stations," "Proc. XII Colloq. Lav one: Space," Cali-
fornia, 1910, p 97.

"Burope in Space." p his.

AVIATION WEEK AID space mower, Vol 91, No 19, 1969. pp 61-61:;
A. M. Dula, "legal and Econmic Prerequisites to Space Industrial-
ization," "Proc. XIX Conoq. Lav Outer Space," pp 257-266.

B. l. Petrov. "Space Research and Scientific-Technical Progress,"
"Lenin i Sovrenennaya Hanks" [lenin and Modern Science], Moscow. llauka.
1970. PP 150-158.

198
FOR OFFICIAL USE “LY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY 0P SOVIEI‘ LITERATURE ON INTERNATIOIIAL SPACE LAW.

1. Aldoshin, V. V. . "Agreement on the Rescuing and Return of Cosnonauts and
Space ObJects." SOVETSKOYB OOSUDARS'I'VO I PRAVO, No 11, 1968. pp 133-137.

2. Aldoshin, V. V.. "Space Should be a Zone of Peace." HEZHDUNAMDRAYA
mzn', No 12, 1966, pp h9-53.

3. Aleksilov, A. A., "The National Space Council," SSHA. EKOIIOHIKA, POLITIKA,
IDHJIDOIYA. lo 3. 1972, pp 119, 120.

h. Aleksinov, A. A., "h Oktyabrya 1957. Sputniki 1 8811A" [h October 1957.
Satellites and the United States], Moscov, Molodaya Gvardiya, 1972, p 221.

5. Blagonravov, A. , Vereshchetin, V., "Outer Space and International Coopera-
tion," 0383, lo 7 (9h), 196k, pp 26, 21 [in Baglish].

6. Blagonravov, A. A. , Vereshchetin. V. 8., "The Soviet Union and Interna-

tional Cooperation in the Peaceful Development of Space,” MIA I V83-
mmu, No 1, 1967. pp 2-10.

7. Bleeonravov, A., Vereshchetin, V., "Die internationale sanenverking,"
"Encyclopedic van de Ruiltevaart, Vol II, Amsterdam. 1967. pp 350-358
[in Gem].

8. Bordunov, V. D., ”International Legal Problems of Using Satellites for
Studying Natural Resources," "Problew Gosudarstva i Prava na Sovrenennom
Etape (Truw lauchnyhh Sotrudnikov i Aspirantov ICPAI 8883)" [State and
Law Problems of row (Works of Scientific Coworkers at the State and
Law Institute of the USSR Acadew of Sciences”. lo 1. Moscow, 1973,

PP 297-303.

9. Bordunov. V. D. . "The Study of Natural Resources from Space," SOVE'I'SKOYB
GOSUDARSIW I PRAVO, lo 12, 1975, pp 107-110.

' The bibliography includes the works of Soviet authors published up to 1
January 1917. It was compiled by Candidate of Legal Sciences Ye. P.
Kanenetskaya.

199
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Bordunov, V., "Practical Use of Space Means in the Light or the Princi-
plea of the Sovereignty of States over the latural Resources," "Proc.
XVI Colloq. Lav Outer Space," California, 1975, pp 103-105 [in Wish].

11. Bordunov, V., "Ice problems Juridiquea de la teledétection de la Torre
a 1'aide de technique spatiale,” "Proc. XVII Co11oq. Lew Outer Space,“
California, 1915. pp 196-199 [in Wench].

12. Bordunov, V. 0., ”Legal Problems of Ualingl the Data [of] Remote Sensing,"
"Proc. XIX Colloq. Lav Outer Space,” California, 1971, pp 2h0—2'02 [in

English] .

13. Vanin, 1., "Space and International Relations ," MIROVAYA EKOIIOMIKA I
mmmonsm omosmna, so 6, 196:, pp 15-25.

1h. Vasilevskaya, B. 6., "Review of the Book 'Problen or Since Lav' (Moscow,
Inostrannava Literature, 1961, 221 pp) ," "Sovetekiy Yezhegodnik Mezhdu-
narodnogo Prava" [Soviet Yearbook of Intenational Lav], 1962, Moscow.
Nauka, 1963, pp 319-322.

15. Vasilevskava, E. 6., "Review of the Boo): 'Space and International Lw'
(Moscow, Mezhdun- ‘nyye Otnoaheniya, 1962, 183 ); 6. A. Osnitskava.
'The Developent 01 Space and International Lau' Moscow, Cosyurizdat,
1962, 12 pp)," "Sovetskiy Yezhdgonik Mezhdunarodnogo Prava," 1963, Nos-
cov, Nauka, 1965, pp 560-563. .

16. Vasilevskaya, E. O. , "Aid to Crews of Space Vehicles in Distress "
"Proc. VI Colloq. Lav Outer Space," California, 1965 [in English .

11. Vasilevskaya, E. 6., "Prospects for the Legal Regulation of Space
Meteor-clog," sovrrsxon: some I mvo, lo 2, 1966;» 61.42.

18. Vasi1evskaya, B. 6., "Review of the Book or P. Kerberger, 'Lesal and
Political Problem Arising Over Space Research. Bibliograptw' (Ban-
burg, $965. 365 pp)," SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, No 9, 1966, pp
159, 1 0.

19. Vasilevskaya, E. 6., "Regulation of the Legal Status of the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies,” SOVBTSKOYB GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, l0 8, 1968,
pp 75-81.

20. Vasilevskaya, a. 6., "Space Meteorology and Law," AVIATSIYA I Kosmsnv-
TIKA, No 11. 1968, pp 59, 60.

21. Vasi1evskaya, B. 6., "On the Use of the Natural Riches of Celestial
Bodies," SOVEI'BKOYB OOSUDABS‘I’VO I PRAVO, lo 5, 1969, pp 75-33.

22. Vasilevekaya, 3. 6., "Space and Lev,” IZVES'HYA. 3 March 1970.

200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
23-

235 .

25.

27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL 'ISB ONLY

Vesilevskm, E. 6., "The Exploration of the Moon: Certain Prospects
of Legel Regulation," SOVEI‘SKOYE OOSUDABSTVO I PRAVO, lIo lo, 1971, pp
92.99-

Vessilevsknye, B. 6., "tassel Reguletion of Activities on the Moon tor
the Cause of Peece end Progress," "Proc. XV Colloq. Lev Outer Space,"
Californie, 1973, pp 178-181 [in English].

Vesilevsksye, E. G. , "The Exploration of the Moon in the Interests of
Esme end Proyees," SOVBTSKOYB OOSUMRSTVO I PRAVO, No l, 1973. pp
'93-

Veesilevsheye, E. 0., ”bezel Problem of the Exploretion of the Moon
and Other Planets," "Proc. XVI Colloq. Lev Outer Specs," pp 168-171
[in English].

Veeilevskeye. B. 6., "Prevovyye Problem Osvoyeniye may i Plenet"
[Legel Problems of the Exploretion or the then end Planets], Moscow,
Neuke, 197%, 129 pp.

Vessilevskeye, E. G. , "Brewing up s Dret‘t Treety on the Moonu-Puture
Contribution to the Progressive Development of Internstionel Specs Lev,"
”Proc. XIX Colloq. Lev Outer Specs," pp 99-102 [in uglieh].

Vesilieve, I., "Sociel Consequences of Overlepping end [the] Problem
or the Resuletion of the Direct Television Broedcesting by Meens of
Artificial Earth Satellites (ms) in Internetionel Lev," "Proc. xv:
Colloq. Lev Outer Space," pp 81-89 [in English].

Vereshchetin, V. 8., "Specs in the Service of “wind," AVIATSIYA I
mmmm, no 6. 1962, pp 22-25.

Vereshchetin, V. S. , "8pece-the Arene of Peace. Review of the Books
'Spece end Internetionel Cooperetion' (Moscow, Nezhdunerodnyye Otno-
sheniye, 1963. 256 pp; 'Modern Problem of Spece st' (Moscow, Ino-
strean/e Literature, 1963, I000 pp)," MEZHDUIARODIIAYA ZHIZI' , lo 6,
1961:, pp l3h-l37.

Vererhchetin, V. s. , "Biu'opeen epsce Rxploretion end A licetion Organi-
zations," WANNA“ ZHIZII', lo ll, 1961:, pp llolo-l 6.

Vereshchetin, V. 8., "The Sky Must Be Cleer (The Soviet Union end Inter-
netionel Cooperation in Pesceml Uses 01' Outer Spece)," Moscow, Novosti
Press Agency Bxblishing house, 1965, 16 pp [in English].

Vereshchetin V. 8., "Scientific Progress end Cooperation," SOVIET UllIOll
mm, no 3 (133). 1966, pp 1, 2.

201

Iron onrcm. uselomx

I.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39 .

ho.

hl.

112.

h8.

NR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

Vereshchetin, V. 8., "Legal Pox-Ia of International Cooperation of the
USSR in the Peaceful Exploration of Space," SOVBTSKOYB GOSUDARSTVO I
mvo, No 1. 1967, pp 69-73.

Vereshchetin, V. 8.. "Legal Forms of International Cooperation of the
USSR In Peaceful Exploration of Outer Space " "Proc. IX Colloq. Law
Outer Space," California, 1967, pp 213-218 tin English].

Vereshchetin, V. 5., "For Equal Cooperation in Space Research,"
AVIATSIYA I Kosmm'rm. No 3, 1968, pp 65-67.

Vereshchetin. V. 8., "Space and Lay," ZMYA I VSBLENNAYA, No lo, 1968,
pp 12-111.

Vereshchetin. V. 5., "The Legal Nature of International Space Scientific
anda'gechnical Agreements," SOVEI‘SKOYB GOWDARS'I’VO I PRAVO, lo 5, 1968.
pp -9°o

Vereshchetin, V. 8., "Scientific and Technical Agreements on Space,"
"Proc. X Colloq. Lav Outer Space," California, 1968, p 151-163 [in

Eaglish].

Vereshchetin, V. 6., Zhukov, G. 9., "The 10th International Colloquium
on Space Lav," soversxom oosumnsrvo I vao, no 6, 1968, pp 112-1115.

Vereshchetin, V. 8.. "Principles of Space Lu and Order." "Sovetskiy
Yezhegodnik Hezndunarodnogo Prava," 1966-1957. Moscow, lauka, 1968,
pp 116-126.

Vereshchetin, V. S., Zthsev. Yu. I. , "Space kploration—An Interna-
tional Concern,” NOVOYB WA, No l. 1968, pp 16-18.

Vereshchetin, V. 8., "Racks on Certain Legal Principles of Building
Space Telecummicstions, Systems ," "Proc. XI Colloq. Lav Outer Space."
California, 1969. Pp 210-213 [in English].

Vereshchatin, V. S. , "12th International Colloquium on Space Lav,"
SOVETSKOYB 0081mm I PRAVO, NO 5. 1970, pp 1135-1107.

Vereshchetin, V. 8., "Legal Questions or Satellites Teleco-unications
at Washington Intelsat Conference,” "Proc. XII Colloq. Lav Outer Space,"
California. 1970, pp 16-21 [in mam].

Vereshchetin. V. S. , "Space—An Arena of International Cooperation."
AVIATSIYA I KOBWAVTIKA, Ho 9, 1971, pp 28, 29.

Vereshchetin, v. 3., "Kosmos 1 Hezhdunarodnoye Sotrudnichesto" [Space
and International Cooperation], Moscow, Znaniye, 1911, 58 pp.

202
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
50a

55.

61.

62.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Verechchetin. V. 8., "Legal Aspects of Orbiting International Labora-
tories." "Proc. XIII Colloq. Lav Outer Space." California, 1971. pp
112-119 [in Engiinh].

Verenhchmin, V. 8.. "International Space Cmicatione System (Legal
Principles of Their Creation. Motioning and Coordination." "Proc.
XIII Colloq. Lav Outer Space." pp 259-263 [in minah).

Vereahchetin. V. 3. . "Research on the "canal Environment from Space."
somsxon: cosmnsrvo I mvo. No 1. 1972. pp 121-12».

Verenhchetin. V. 5.. "The 'Intercoenos' Program in Action," NAUKA I
zmzu'. no 7. 1912, pp 1.6-50.

Vereehchetin. V. 8.. "International Space Communications Systems (Legal
Principles of the Creation. Functioning and Coordination." "Bovetnkiy

Yezhegodnik Mezhdunarodnogo Prava." 1910, Moscow. Hauka. 1912. pp 225-229.

Verechchetin. V. 8., Zhukov, G. 9.. "Review or the Book by 0. Gal
'Space Lav' (Budapest. 1969. 320 pp).” "Bovetakiy rezhegoauk Mezhdu-
narodnogo Prava." 1970. pp 29h-296.

Verechchetin. V. 8., "International Space Lav.” ”Kratkiy Spravochnik po
Koanicheakoy Biologii i Heditaine" (Conciee Reference on Space Biology
and Medicine], Moscow. Mediteina, 1972. pp 176-180.

Vereahchetin, V. 8.. "Intercoanoa: Results and Proapecta." SPACE WELD
(USA).Janua1-y1912. p 38 [in mglieh].

Vereahchetin. V. 5.. "Legal Regulations of Inventigation of natural
Environment from Outer Space," "Proc. XIV Colloq. Lav Outer Space."
California. 1972. pp 110-1111 [in English].

Vereahchetin, V. S.. "Interaputnik: organisation et eyethe internation-
ale dc télécoauunicatione Ipatialee." LA lumen SPATIALZ. Paris.
l.'o 2, 1973. pp 16-19 ( in french].

Vereahchetin. V. 8.. "The 'Inte1 coanoc' Prop-me in the Light of Main
Principles of Space Lav," "Proc. )0! Colloq. Lav Outer Space," pp 233-
238 [in 5:511:11].

Vereahchetin. V. 8.. "Koanoe. aotrudnicheotvo. Pravo" [Space. Coopera-
tion. Lav], Moscow. ﬂauka. 1913:, 167 pp.

Vereahchetin. V. 8.. "Soviet and American Cooperation in Space Devel-
opnen'.." mammalian ZHIZE', No 7. 1975, pp 32-38.

Vereshchetin, V. 8., "The Use of Outer Space for Earth-Oriented Purpoue
and State Sovereignty." SOVETSKOYE OOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO. lo 8. 1975.
pp 8h-910

203
'0! OFFICIAL US! OIL!
66.

67.

68.

70.

71.

72.

73.

FOR OHIO!“ US! ONLY

Vereshchetin. V. S. . "The Takeoff of 'Intercosnos' .“ NOVOYB VBMA.
No hi. 1976, pp 21. 22.

Vereshchetin, V. s. , "Legal Questions of Earth Resources Research from
Space and the Prospects of International Cooperation in This Area,”
"Kosaicheskiye Issledovaniya Zennykh Resursov" [Space Research on Earth
Resources], Moscov. lauka. 1976. pp 366-375.

Vereshchetin. V. 8.. ”Intercosaos: Present and Nture,” "Annals of Air
and Space Lav.” 1976, Vol I, Toronto—Paris. pp 2143-25,: [in English].

Vereshchetin. V. S. . "Perspectives of the Uses of Outer Space for
Applied Purposes and State Sovereigty," Proc. XIX Colloq. Lav Outer
Space." pp 103-107 [in English].

Volosov. M. Ye.. Kolodkin. A. I... Snirnov, ll. 0., "11420 and Certain
Legal Questions of Creating an International Maritime Satellite
Comicatious Service ," ”hterialy po Morskouu Pravu i Meshdunarodnonu
Torgovonu Moreplavaniy'u" [Materials on Maritime Lau and International
Maritime Shipping}, B0 6. Moscov. Transport. 1971:. pp 23-31.

Vysotskiy. O. F. , ”me Legal llatur'e or Organizing Cooperation Anon;
States for the Peaceful Development of Space." VESTIIIK AN "883, no 10,

1971 . pp 56-65.

Galina. A.. "On the Question or Interplanetary Lav," SOVBTSKOYB 0080-
mas'rvo I mwo, no 7, 1958. pp 52-58.

Gubin. V. P. . "Reviev of the Boob 'Space and International Cooperation'
(Moacov, Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya. 1963. 256 pp); 'Hodern Problem
or Space Lav' (Inostrannaya Literature. 1963. 1:00 pp) ." "Sovetskiy
“:2"ng Mezhdunarodnoso Prava," 19611-1965. Moscow. llauka, 1965.

PR 55 5 .

Dekanozov, R. V. , "Relationship Between the Status of Outer Space and
the Status of Areas Vithdravn From State Sovereignty." "Proc. XVI Colloq.
Lav Outer Space," pp 9-12 [in English].

Dekanozov. R. V. . "Certain Questions of the Legal nature of Territories
(ches) withdrawn from the Sphere of State Sovereignty," "Sovetskiy
Iezhegodnik Mezhdunarodnogo Prove." 1913. Hanks, 1975, pp 203-215.

Detanozov, R. V.. "Legal Nature of Outer Space Including the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies ." "Proe. XVII Colloq. Lav Outer Space." pp
200-207 [in English].

Dckanozov, R. V.. ”Review of the Book 'International Space Lau' (Moscow.

Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya, 1971:, 286 pp) ," SOVEI‘SKOYE GOSUDARS‘I'VO I
mvo, so 2, 1976. pp ain't-1&9.

2030

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
78.

79.

81.

820

88.

POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Oudakov. B. 6.. "International Legal Questions of Using Satellites for
Direct Television Broadcasts," PMVOVBDHIYE. No ’5. 1970, pp 86-95.

Dudakov, B. 0.. "Bone International Legal Issues on the Direct Tele-
vision Broadcast Satellites." "Proc. XIV Colloq. Lav Outer Space."
pp lsh-lS? [in hglish].

Dudakov. B. 0.. "International Legal Probleas on the Use of Geostationary
Orbit," ”Proc. XV Colloq. Lav Outer Space.” pp 71. 72 [in English].

Dudskov. B. 6.. ”Legal Problems of Satellite Orbit Use." SOVETSKOYE
oosummvo I rmvo. no In. 1973. pp 18-81..

Dudakov. 8.. "Legal Aspects of Direct Television Broadcasting.” "Proc.
xv: Colloq. Lav Outer Space.” pp 65-70 [in nun-n).

mdakov. 8., "The Outer Space Treaty and Subsequent Scientific Develop-
ment of International Space Lav.’.' "Proc. XVII Colloq. Lav Outer Space,”
pp 107-112 [in English].

Dudskov. B. 6., Kolosov. In. 11., "Massovays Inromtsiya 01ers: Kosnos"
[Mass Intonation via Space], Moscow. Znaniye, 1975, 56 pp.

Dudskov. B. 6.. "International Legal Problqns on the Use of Geostationary
Orbit." "Proc. XIX Colloq. Lav Outer Space," pp 1006-1-10 [in English].

Durdenevskiy, V. I. . Osnitskaya. G. A.. "A Monograph on Interplanetary
Navigation," somsxon: oosumns'rvo 1 mvo. No 12. 1959. pp 1&3, 1n.

Yerigin, 1)., "The Soviet Molniyas and the Future of Space Conunications.”
nm'rsnn 1 Kosmmmmn, no 1, 1966, pp 21-2».

2hvaniya. G. . ”International Legal Principles of Space Research and
Use.” somsxom mvo (Tbilisi), no h. 1961., pp 25-36.

Zhukov, G. P. , "Space Espionage Plans and International Lav.” W-
:unonmn muzn' , No 10. 1960, pp 72-19.

Zhukov, G. P. , ”Space Espionage Plans and International Lev.” "0.8.
Senate Synposiun. Legal Problems." Hashington, 1961. pp 1095-1101 [in
banish].

Zhukov, G. P. , "The United lotions and the Problem of the Peaceful Use
of Outer Space," "Sovetskiy Yezhegodnik Mezhdtmarodnogo Prove.” 1960.
Hoscov,Izd-vo Ali SSSR. 1961, pp 177-185.

Zhukov. O. P., "1(0st 1 Menhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya" [Space and Inter-
national Relstions]. Roscov, znsniye, 1961, to pp.

205

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
93.

91.

98.

100.

101 .

102.

103.

103.

M OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Zhukov, G. P., "Dailitarisstion and neutralization of Outer Space,”
SOVE'PSKOYB commas-m I mvo. lo 5. 1962, pp 62-12.

Zhukov, G. P., ”be cosmos et la cooperation internstionale.” mans
sovmzqum. May 1962. pp 56-60 [in French].

Zhukov. G. P. , “The Prohlen of the Peaceful Use of Space.” ”Neshdu-
narodnyy Yeshcgodnik. Politika i none-its" (International Yearbook.
Political Prohlens end Econoaics]. Moscow. Politizdat, l962. pp 92-106.

Zhukov, O. P., "herican Plans to Use Space for Aggressive Purposes
and the Security of Ststes." ”Sovetshiy Yeshesodnik Mezhdunarodnogo
Pravs.” 1961. Ind-Yo an 9883. 1962. pp 111.202.

Zhukov, G. P., ”Legal Questions of Spsce Research at the 13th Congress
of the International Astronautical Pederstion." PRAVOWIYB. lo 2.
1963. pp 186-188.

Zhukov, G. P., "Practical Problem of Space Lav." WANNA“ man,
No 5. 1963. pp 3743.

Zhukov. c. P., ”Space and the Lev," sova 1111on room. August 1963.
pp 2. 3 [in Mich].

Zhukov, G. P.. "Le cosnos none denuclearisee.” mm: sown-nets
(Paris). Oecanber 1963. pp 10. 11 [in French].

Zhukov, O. P., ”The Prohlen of Outer Space Lev Qualifications ," ”Proc.
of American Society of International Lav,” Hashington. 1963, pp 193-
195 [in Mink).

Zhukov. G. P., "Problems of Spsce Lev at the Present Stage.” ”Proc.
v Colloq. m Outer Spsce," California. 1963. pp 1-33: [in English].

Zhukov, G. P., ”The luclear Oeuilitarizstion of Space." SOVE'I‘SKOXE
oosumns'rvo I mvo, lo 3. 1963. pp 19-83.

Zhukov. G. P., "International Cooperation in the Rescuing o! Cosmonauts,"
AVIATSIXA I KOSKDI'M'I'IKA lo 10, 1963!, pp 51-33.

Zhukov. G. P., "Les Perspectives de cooperation internationele pour le
sauvetege des cosmonautes." m SOVIETIQUB, Septenher 1965. pp
’05-'07 [in French].

Zhukov, G. P., 'Preedos of Space and its units." "Proc. XI Oolloq.
Lev Outer Space." pp 1-7 [in English].

Zhukov, G. P., 'Etspy i perspektyvy rozvoju prua kosnicznege ," 8PM"!
mum (Ru-saw). lo l, 1965. pp S’s-66 [in Polish].

206

POI OFFICIAL US! MY
105.

l06.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

115.

116.

117.

118.

FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

Zhukov. G. P.. "The Problem of Liability for Deluge in Space Lav,"
sovm‘sxom cosunms'rvo 1 mvo. No 6. 1965. pp 66.71..

Zhukov. G. P. . "For a Clean Space. On Preventing Potentially Harmful
buperiuents in Space," AVIATleA I Kosmuv'nxa. "0 11. 1965. pp 39-52.

Zhukov. O. P.. ”Basic Stages and Imediate Prospect of the Develop-
ment 01' Outer Space," "Proc. VII Colloq. Lav Outer Space.” pp 315-325
[in English].

Zhukov. G. P. . ”The United Nations and the Problem of the Peaceful Use
of Space,” ”00!! i Aktual'nyye Mezhdunarodnyye Problem" [The United
Nations and Urgent International Problems]. on the 20th Anniversary

of theBUnited Nations. Moscow, Hezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya. 1965. pp
312-33 .

Zhukov. G. P. . "0n the Legal status of Celestial Bodies ." NOVOYE VRMA,
no 2'0. 1966. pp 15. 16.

Zhukov, G. P., "The Moon. Politics and Lav." HEZUDUUARODNAYA ZHIZU'.
1966. pp 36.1.2.

Zhukov, c. P., "Teleconmnicationa by Satellites (Smary of Replies),"
”International Law Association. Report of the 51st Conference,"
Helsinki. 1966 [in English).

Zhukov, G. P. . "Kosnicheshoye Pravo" [Space Lav], Moscow Hethdunarodme
Otnoaheniya, 1966, 296 pp.

Zhukov. G. P. . ”Space Flights and the Problem or the height Limit of
Sovereignty," somsxon: oosumns'rvo I mvo, so 8, 1967, pp Sla-62.

Zhukov, G. P. . ”An anglish Legal Expert on Space Lav. Review or the
Book by c. U. Jenks 'Space Lav' (London, 1965, m6 pp)," somsxom
oosumns'rvo 1 mvo. llo 12. 1967. pp nos-in.

Zhukov, G. P. , "worldwide Telecallmnication Systan by Satellites (Legal
Aspects) ," "Proc. IX Colloq. Lav Outer Space ," pp 91-95 [in Milli].

Zhukov, G. P. , "Space Lav.” "Kurs Kezhdunarodnogo Prava v Shesti Tenth"
[International Lav Course in Six Volumes], Vol III. Moscov. Hanks,
1967. pp 337-379.

Zhukov. G. P.. "Qu'est-ce que l'espace cosnique‘!” RENE mm D:
L'AIR er DB L'wPACE (Paris), January 1968, pp 56-58 [in Preach].

Zhukov. G. P., "Outer Space Legal Aspects,” IllDIAll JOURNAL 0? 11mm-
uanow. LAU, so 2, 1968, pp 2&2455 [in anglisn].

207

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
119.

120.

121.

122.
123.

123.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

1320

133.

’0! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Zhukov. O. P., "Space Code in Action." SPACE WORLD (USA). May 1968.
p b6 [in English].

Zhukov. o. 9.. ”Moon for All States," SPACE WORLD. July 1968. pp lob, ks
[in mush].

Zhukov. O. P.. "International Cooperation in Rescuing Cosnonauts.
Report.at the UI Conference on the Research and Use of Space for Peace-
on Purposes. Vienna. 1968.” Ull Doc. A/Cop.3|a/IX.7.1968.

Zhukov. G. P.. "Heltramrecht." Berlin Verlag. 1968. halo pp [in German].

Zhukov. O. P.. “The Prone. or the Definition of Outer Space." ”Proc.
1: Conoq. Lav Outer Space." pp 211-215 [in English].

Zhukov. G. P.. ”Legal Status of Scientific Research Stations on [the]
Moon," “Proc. X Conoq. Lav Outer Space.” pp 60-63 [in Wish].

Zhukov. 0. P.. ”Space Lav.” "Kosnonavtika. Malen'kaya Entsinopediya"
(Astronautics. A Small Encyc1opaedia]. Moscov. Sovetskaya antsiklo-
pediya. 1968. pp 193-198.

Zhukov. C. P. , "Legal Problems of Space Radio Col-lunications.” Hashing-
ton. ”as, 1968. 31 pp [in match].

Zhukov. G. P. . ”Space Flight and the Problen or the Altitude Frontier
or Sovereignty.” ”Yearbook of Air and Space Lav. 1966.” Montreal. 1968.
pp has-1091 [in mush].

Zhukov, G. P., "Legal Status of Space Objects ." SOVE'I‘SKOYB W0
I mvo, llo 9. 1969. pp 93~99.

Zhukov. G. P.. “Space Law.” "The Soviet Encyclopedia of Space night.”
Moscow. Mir. 1969. pp 1.16-1.21 [in English].

Zhukov, G. P.. "On the .Question of Interpretation of the Tern 'Peacei'ul
Use of Outer Space' Contained in the Space Treaty." "Proc. XI Colloq.
Lav Outer Space.” pp 36-39 [in English .

Zhukov. O. P.. "International Cooperation on the Rescue of Astronauts,"
"Proc. XI Co11oq. Lav Outer Space.” pp 1211-132 [in English].

Zhukov. G. P.. I"l‘endencies and Prospects of the Development of Space
Lav," "Proc. XI Colloq. Lav Outer Space." pp 215-218 [in mush].

Zhukov. G. P., ”hmdansntal Princip1eo of Space Lav." "Contenporary
International Lav." Moscov. Progress. 1969. pp 263-291 [in English].

208

’0! 0!?ICIAL US! ONLY
13" .

135.

137.

138.

139.

1&0.

1'41 .

1’12.

1103.

1“”.

155.

1’16.

1"? .

POI! OHICIAL US! ONLY

Zhukov, 0. P. , ”Space Lav,” New Delhi, Indian National Scientific Docu-
aentation Center, 1969, 291 pp [in English].

Zhukov, 0. P. , "Registration of Space Objects." AVIATSIYA I KOSMIMVTIKA,
Ho 6. 1910. pp 25, 26.

Zhukov, O. P., "Questions of the Peaceful Use of Space in Ull Activities."
”0011: Itogi, Tcndentsii, Perspektivy” [The United Nations: Results,
Trends and Prospects]. on the 25th Anniversary of the United Nations,
Moscow, Mezhdunarodnyye Otnoeheniya, 1970, pp 188-229.

Zhukov, 0. P., ”Space Lav," "Kosnonavtiha. Malen'kwa Entsiklopediya"
(Astronautics. A Snell acyclopaedia], Moscow, Sovetsksya mtsihlo-
psdiya, 1970, pp 219-22h.

Zhukov, 0. P., ”Registration of the Launching: of Space OhJects by
Secretary General of the United Nations," ”Proc. XII Colloq. Lav
Outer Space," pp 121-130 [in English].

Zhukov, G. P. , ”national Registration of Space Objects," ”Proc. XII
Colloq. Lav Outer Space," pp 131-133 [in English].

Zhukov, 0. P.. "Review or the Book or Yu. H. Kolosov 'The Struggle
for Peaceful Space (A Critique of Bourgeois Space Lav Theories)',"
"Sovetskiy Yezhesodnik Mezhdunarodnogo Prava," 1969, Moscow, llauka,
1970, pp ”10, 31.1.

Zhukov, C. P. , ”Space Lav" The new Extraterrestrial Jurisprudence,”
nmcr: sczmcsrr scam. No 3. 1971. pp 265-271. [in English].

Zhukov, G. P., "Mezhdmarodnoye Kosnicheskoye Pravo" [International
Space Lav], Moscov, Znaniye, 1971, 116 pp.

Zhukov, O. P.. "United nations and Space Lav," "Proc. XIII Colloq.
Lav Outer Space," pp 2i-38 [in Snslish].

Zhukov, G. P., "The Legal Regine for the Moon. Problems and Prospects,"
"Proc. XIV Colloq. Lav Outer Space," pp 50-52 [in English].

Zhukov, o. P., ”who Owns the Moon?" "Naselennyy Kosnos” [Inhabited
Space], Moscow, llauka, 1972, pp 358-363.

Zhukov. G. P. , ”The United nations—the Center of Cooperation Anon;
States on Elaborating the Provisions of International Space Lav,"
”Sovetskiy Yezhegodnik Hezhdunarodnogo Prava," 1913, pp 115-1331.

Zhurahhov, V. 0., Kolosov, Yu. 14., "an. International Cooperation."
mmmm-mxovmwmns. lo 6. 1911. pp uh, 3:5.

209

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1'08.

1'49.

150.

151.
152.

153.
15': .
155.

156.
157.
158.

159.

160 O

161 .

FOR ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

Zhourakhov. V.. "Legal Regine or Social Consequences of Direct Tele-
vision Broadcasting Through Artificial Barth Satellites," "Proc.
m Colloq. Lav Outer Space." pp 73. ﬂu [in English].

Zedorozhnyy. O. P.. "The Earth Satellite and International Law.”
SOVEn‘SKAIA ROBSIYA. 11 October 1957.

Zedorozhnw. O. P., "Aton. Koanoa, Mirovaya Politika" [The Atoa. Space
and world Policy]. Moscow. Hezhdunarodmo Otnoeheniya. 1956. 80 pp.

Zadorozhm. 0. P. . "International Legal Condition. of Outer Space."
"Mezhdunarodnoye have" [International Lav]. edited by P. I. Kozhevnikov,
Moscow. Meandunarodnyye Otnoaheniya. 1966. pp 251-265.

Zedorozhnyy. O. P.. "International Legal Conditions or Outer Space .”
”Kurs Heahdunarodnogo Prava" [International Lav Course]. edited by F.
I. Kozhevnikov. Moscow. Meahdunarodme Otnosheniya. 1972. pp 155-161.

Zolotov. 0., "Rights and mm in Space." mmmonasn mn'. IIo '
1. 1963. Pp 121-123.

”Th: Study of Space Lav,” somamrs GOSUDARSTVO I PMVO. lo 5. 1959.
p 1 9.

onrysh. A. 1., Lazarev, M. 1., "Atom i Kosnoa" [The Atom and Space].
Hoecov. Atonizdat, 1965. 69 pp.

Kanenetakaya. 8.. "The Role of International Organisations in the Por-
nation or International Space Lav.” "hoe. XVI Colloq. Lav Outer Space.”
pp 1:24“ [in Wish].

Kennetama, 3.. "Cooperation of States in the Peaceful Exploration
and Use of Outer Space Within the Pranevork of International Organi-
zations." ”Proc. XVII Colloq. Lam Outer Space," pp 189-191 [in English].

Kanenetshaya, Ye. P., "Review of the Book of V. 8. Vereshchetin 'Space.
Cooperation. Lav' (Moscow. llauka, 19710. 167 pp) ." 80W GOSUDARSTVO
I mm. '0 1‘ 1915. PP 152, 153.

Kaunetahava. B.. "Cooperation of States in the Exploration and Use or
Outer Space—One of the Bacic Principles of International Outer 8 cc
Lav," ”Proc. XIX Colloq. Lav Outer Space," pp 289-302 [in Engliah .

Kovalev, 1’. IL. Cheprov, I. 1., "Earth Satellites and International
Lav,” ”Sontskiy Yezhegodnik Hezhdunarodnogo Prove," 1958. ﬂoacov.
Nauka, 1959. pp 128-th.

Kovalev. 1'. IL, Cheprov, I. 1., "On the Elaboration of Legal Problem

cram» Space." com-snore comma I mvo, no 1. 1960. pp 130-
13 .
210

IO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
162 .

163.

16'! .

165.

166.

167 a

168 O

169 .

170 .

171.

172 .

173.

17".

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kovalev. F. IL, Cheprov, I. 1.. "Na Puti k Koanicheskomu Pram" [0n

the Path to Space Law]
179 pp.

, Moacov, Mezhdunarodnyye Otnoaheniya. 1962.

Kovalev. F. N.. "The Space Problem in the United Iationa in 1961,"
"Sovctakiy Yezheaodnik Meshdunarcdnogo Prava." 1962, pp 260-262.

Kolodkin, A. L. . Voloaov. M. E. . ”Sole International Law Questions on
the Batahliahaent of an International Maritime Satellite Communications."
"Proc. XVII Colloq. Lav Outer Space." pp 221-223 [in English].

Kolodkin, A. 1.. , Voloaov, M. B. . "0n the work on the Establishment of

the International Mari
XIX Colloq. Lev Outer

Kolosov, In. 14.. "The
1966. pp 3-5a

tile Satellite Syatau (mm-w "Proc. of the
Space." pp 303-307 [in English].

Urgency of Space Lav." uovon: VRMA. no 35.

Koloeov. ru. 14.. "Prohlm or Space Lav." 1mm 1 onsxcmzs'rvo (Kiev).

No b, 1967, pp ha. Ma.

Koloaov. Yu. H., "A Barrier Againet Space Adventures,” AVIATSIYA I
msuonmrm, No 5. 1967. pp 2h.26.

Koloaov. In. 11.. "Space and the Atmosphere: Sovereignty and Prontiera."
AVIATSIYA I msmnm'm. no 10, 1967. pp 79-80.

Koloaov. Yu. H. , ”A Critique of Reactionary Concepts of International
Space Lav." ”V lauchnu Poiake. Ucheme Zapiaki none” [In a Scien-
tific Search. Scientific lotea of the Moacov State Inetitute for Inter-
national Relational, Moacov. 1957. pp 339-360.

Koloaov, In. 14., "The

Struggle of the USSR in the United Nationa for

the Peaceful Use of Space," "Sovetakoye Goaudaretvo i Hezhdunarodnoye
Pravo" [The Soviet State and International Law], Moacov, Mezhdunarod-
nyye Otnoaheniya, 1961. pp 172-116.

Koloaov, In. H., "Space in the Service of Mankind," SOMSKO’IB OOSU-

DAJB‘NO I PRAVO, lo 2,

Koloeov, In. IL, Shili

1968. pp 150, 151.

n. V. 1.. "The Comnautuueuenger of Mankind."

AVIATSIYA I KWAVTIKA. llo h. 1968, pp 15-17.

Koloaov, In. M.. "Bor'
Koanicheekogo Prava" I

ha :a Mirna Koaaoe. Kritika Burzhuaznyhh Teoriy
The Struggle for a Peaceful Space. A Critique of

Bourgeoia Space Lev Theories], Moscow. Meehdunamdnyye Otnoaheniya.

19689 127 W0

211

MR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
175.

176 .

177 .
178.

179 .

180.

181.

182 .

183 .

18“.

185 e

186.

187.

188.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kolosov, Iu. IL, Whakov. Yu. 1L. ”Space Should Bring Peoples closer
Together. Review of the Book "releccmmicationa via Satellite.

Legal Aspects' (Paris. 1968, 156 pp)." somsxors coalmns'rvo I pmvo,
no 9. 1969. pp 159-151.

Kolosov, Yu. M.. ”A Durantee for Observing Law and Order in Space."
AVIA‘I‘SIYA I KOBIDIIAV‘I'IKA. lo 11, 1969, pp 3:0, '01.

Koloeov. Yu. 14.. ”Television and Lav," IZVEB'I'IYAJ Deco-her 1969.

Kolosov, Yu. 14.. "The Develop-ant of Space Lav in 1966-1967." ”Sovetekiy
Ygzhegodnik Hezhdunarodnoso Prava," 1968. Moscow. lauka, 1959. PP 38%-
3 7.

Koloaov, Y. M. , ”On the Internationalization of Outer Space.” COSMOS
AND socmrr. No 5/7. 1970. pp 119-1h1 [in English].

Kolosov, Yu. 14.. ”Certain Urgent Questions of Space Lav.” WAND-
NAYA zmzn', No 8. 1910. pp 3M0.

Kolosov. In. M. , "Television Broadcasting Via Satellite: A Free Hand
or International Legal Cooperation? Review or the Book 'Internationel
Conunications Lav' (Leyden. 1971)." sovmxom some I mvo,
No S. 1912. pp 1312. H3.

Kolosov. Yu. M., "Prospects of 'Vorldvision'," ROVOYB WA, No 33»,
1972. PP 28-330.

Kolosov. Yu. M.. "Mass Intonation and International Law," SOVETSKOYE
GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, lo 11, 1972, pp 89-96.

Kolosov, Xu. FL, ”On the Path to Space Horldvision," AVIA‘I‘SIYA I KOS-
IOIIAVTIKA, 1'0 11. 1972. p 31.

Kolosov. Y. M. . "Lega1 Consequences of 'Bpillover' Resulting m
Satellite Direct Broadcasting." "Proc. XV Colloq. Lav Outer Space,”

pp 13-15 [in men-h].

Ko1osov, Yu. IL. ”Television and International Luv," NOVOYE WA,
No S. 1971., pp 15-16.

Koloeov. Yu. #1., "Reviev of the Book by E. G. Vasilevskaya, 'Lesal
Questions or the Exploration of the Moon and Planets' (No-con, lauka,
1975, 129 pp) ." SOWOYE WW I PRAVO, lo 11, 197%, pp 151.
152.

Kolosov, Yu. IL, "llasscwwa Intonatsiya i Hezhdmarodnoye Pravo"

[Mass Intonation and International Lav]. 'Moacov, Hezhdunaromye
Otnoeheniye. 197”. pp 80-116.

212

M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
189 .

190.

191 .

192 .

193.

19k .

195a

197 .
198.

199 a

200.

201 .

203 .

2031.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kolosov. Y.. "Interrelation Between Rules and Principles of Inter-
national Outer Space Lav and General Rules and Principles of Interna-
tional Lav.“ "Proe. XVI Colloq. Lev Outer Space," pp hS-hB [in English].

Koloeov, Yu. 14.. "Otvetstvennost' v Mazhdunarndnon Prave" [Liability
in International Law], Moscov, Yuridicheskaya Literature. 1975. pp
223-235. .

Kolosov. Y. M.. "Sovereignty in Outer Space Lav." "Proc. XIX Colloq.
Lav Outer Space.” pp 1:11-1:13 [in English].

Korovine, 3., "La conquete de la stratosphere et le droit international."
$2vu3 oznngann DB uaoxr INTERNATIOKAL PUBLIC, lo 6, 193k, pp 675-686
in French .

Korovin. Ye. A., ”On the International Conditions of Outer Space,”
MBZHDUNARODIIAYA ZHIZN‘, No 1. 1959. PP 71-80.

Korovin. Ye. A.. ”On the Neutralization and Denilitarlzation of Space,"
MEZHDWARODMYA ZHINZ'. No 12. 1959, pp 109, no.

Korovin, Ye. A. . ”Osnovnyye Problem Sovrenennykh Mezhdunarodm/kh
Otnosheniy” [Basic Problems of Modern International Relations]. Moecov,
Soteekgiz. 1959. pp 161-166.

Korovin, Ye. A. , "Foreword," "Problesv Kosnicheskogo Prava [Questions
of Space Lav], Moscow, Inostrannaya Literature, 1961, pp 5-9.

Korovin. Ye. A., "Space and Lev." SOVEI‘SIQ’Y SOYUZ. lo 2. 1960. p 53.

Korovin, Ye. A.. "On Peaceml Cooperation in Space," WARDDMYA
ZKIZN', No 3, 1962, pp 82-85.

Korovin. Ye. A., "International Law in Space." IOVOYE WA, lo 17.
1962. pp 13, 1h.

Korovin, Ye. A.. "Space Lav," AVIATSIYA I KOSQDIIAVTIKA, lo 10. 1962,
pp 16-20.

Korovin, Ye. A.. "Space and Lev.” NEDELYA. No 31, 1962.

Korovin. Ye. A., "To Turn Space into a Zone of True Peace.” mu-
nanonunxa zutzn'. no 9. 1962. pp 116-118.

Korovine, B. A., ”Urgent Tacks of Space Lav," Proc. V Colloq. Lav
Outer Space" [in English]. ,

Korovine. B. A.. "What Binders Process of Space Lav," "Proc. VI Colloq.
Lav Outer Space” [in mush].

213
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
205.

206.

207 I

208.

210 .

211'

212 .

213.

21': .

215.

216.

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Korovin, Ye. A.. Zhukov, O. P.. "Introductory Article." "Sovrenenny-ye
Problenv Koanicheakogo Prava" [Contemporary Problem of Space Lav],
Moscow. Inoetrannaya Literatura, 1963. pp 5-107.

Korovin. Ye. A., "Interplanetary Lav." HEZHDUNARODIIAYA ZHIZN' . no 3,
1961., pp 128-130.

"Space Should Become a Peace Zone," MEZHDURARODIIAYA ZEIZII', No 12,
1963. pp 58-61.

"Koanoa i Mexhdunarodnoye Pravo" [Space and International Lav]. Moacov.
Mezhdunarodnyye Otnooheniya, 1962. 183 pp (Editor-in-chiet Ye. A.
Korovin. Author collective: V. S. Vereahchetin. 0. P. Zhukov, 0. P.
Zadorozhnyy. Ye. A. Korovin and G. A. Oanitakaura).

"Koo-ca i Mezhdunarodnoye Sotrudnicheatvo" [Space and International
Cooperation]. Hoacov. Hezhdunarodnyye Otnoaheniya, 1963. 255 pp.
(Editor-in-chiet G. P. Zhukov. Author collective: B. 0. Vasilevakaya,
D. D. Yerisin, G. P. Zhukov, F. n. Kovalev, M. I. Laznrev. A. I.
“under. 0. S. Staahevakiy. I. I. Cheprov and V. L. Shveteov).

"Koanoo 1 Problem Vaeohahchego Mira" [Space and the Problem or Uni-
versal Peace], Moscow. Nauka. 1966. 195 pp (Editor-in~chief G. P.
Zadorozhnw. Author collective: B. 0. Vaailevakaya, G. P. Zhukov and
P. I. Lukln).

Kulehyakin, V. 11., "Theﬂoon Treaty-«In the Interests of Mankind,"
mmumtomma zam' , No 8. 1971, pp 7h-79.

Kulebyakin, V. N. , "Examination of the Legal Questions in the Explora-
tion of Outer Space in the UN Agenciea in 1970," "Sovetakiy Yezhegodnik
Mezhdunarodnoso Prava,” 1971, Moscow, Nauka. 1973. PP 323-325.

Kulebyakin, V. It. "Review of the Book 0! Yu. H. Koloaov 'Naaa Infor-
mation and International Lav' (Moacov. Hezhdunarodme Otnoaheniya,
197%. 168 pp) ." sovrrsxon comma I mvo, no 10. 1911:. pp 150,
151.

Kurie. P. M. Bulota, A. Yu., "Space Exploration and International Law,”
um I mama (Vil'wua), lo 12, 1963. pp 5-9.

Kuris, P. M. . "Problem of Space Lav." llAUKA I mm. (Vil'nyue).
Ilo 5, 1967, pp 15-18.

Lazarev, M. 1., "0n the Problem of Preventing the Use of Space for
Military Purpoaee ," "Sovetakiy Yezheeodnik Mezhdunarodnogo Prove," 1959.
Moacov, Izd-vo AN SSSR. 1970, pp 3:09, 1‘10.

21h

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
?17 .

218.

219 .

220 .

221.

222.

223.

225.

226.

227.
228 .

229.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lazarev, M. 1., "Review or the Book of G. P. Zhukov 'Space Lav'
(Moscov Hezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniya, 1966, 296 pp) ," "Sovetskiy
Yezhegodnik Hezhdunarodnogo Prava,” 1968. pp 397. 398.

nukin, P. I. , "On the Question of the Sources of Space Law," "Uchenyye
Zspiehi m)" [Scientific Notes of the Institute of International Re-
lations], Legal Series, No 16, Questions of Intenstional Lu, Moscow,

Lukin, P. I., "On the World Presentation Pox-[uh for Space Lav," "Proc.
VI Colloq. Lav Outer Space" [in Wish].

Lukin, P. I. , "Law and Space Radio Conunications," SOVETSKOYE GOSU-
nAnsrvo I vao, Ito 7,. 1970, pp 83-90.

Lukin, P. I., "On the Concept of a Space ObJect," SOVBTSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO

Lukin, P. I. , "On the Definition of Space ObJect,” "Prox. XIX Colloq.
Law Outer Space," pp 312-315 [in English].

Makaudov, L. H. , "Paper on the Question of the Legal Regulation of
Outer Space," "Sovetskiy Yezhesodnik Mezhdunarodnogo Prava," 1959. P '13.

Malinin, S. A. , "On the nuclear Denilitarization of Space," VBSTIIIK
@1363:le Ull-‘I'A, lo '1, Economics, Philosophy, Lav, lo 23, 1967.
pp 73- .

"Mezhdunarodnoye Kosnicheskoye Pravo” [International Space Lav], Moscow,
1971:, 286 pp. (Bditor-in-chief A. s. Piradov. Author collective: V.

V. Aldoshin, V. D. Bordunov, E. O. Vasilevskeye, V. S. Vereshchetin,

B. G. Dudakov, G. P. Zhukov, V. O. Zhurakhov, A. I. sth, Ye. P.
Kamanetskwa, Yu. H. Kolosov, V. l. Kuleby'akin, P. I. Lukin, B. G.
Mayorakiy, A. S. Piradov, A. I. Rudev and V. G. thin).

"Le droit international de l'eapace," Moscow, Prop-es, 1976, 370 pp
[in French].

"International Space Law," meow, Progrese, 1976, 211 pp [in English].
Movchan, A. P., "Review of the Book of F. l. Kovalev and I. I. Cheprov
'On the Path to Space Lav' (Moscow, Menhdunarodme Otnosheniya, 1962,
179 pp)." somsxors oosmmnsrvo I mvo. No 5, 1962, pp 1h3-1h5.
Movchan, A. P., "Koditihatsiya i Progressivnoye Razvitiye Mezdhuna-

rodnogo Prava" [Codification and ProyeaaiVe Development or Inter-nap
tional Lav], Moscow, Yuridicheskaya Literature, 1972, pp 189-195.

215
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
230.

231.

232.

‘ 233.

235.

235 .

237.

23B.

239'

2130.

2’41 .

2"2 0

2103.

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Nikolayev, A., "On International Cooperation in the Peaceml Use of
Space," mmmmmx zam' , No 5. 1960. pp 107-113.

Nikolayev, A. 6., "Practical Lessons of Space Lav." CHELOVEK I ZAKON,
lo lo, 1971, pp 8-11.

"Space Exploration and Certain Problems of International Relations ,"
MIDWARODIIAYA ZIIIZR‘, lio 11, 1959. PP 116-126.

Osnitskwa, 0. A.. "International Legal Questiomoi‘ Space Exploration.”
"Sovetskiy Yezhegodnik Mezhdunarodnogo Prava." 1959. Pp 51-65.

Osnitskeya, o. 11., "On the May to Space Lav," mvovanmus, no lo, 1961. .
pp 105-110.

Osnitsksya. 6. A., I”Osvoyeniye Kosnosa i Mezhdunarodnoyo Pravo" [Space
Exploration and International Lav]. Moscow, Gosyurizdat, 1962, 71 pp.

Osnitzkaya, 6. A., "Prospects of the Develop-mt of Space Lav," "Proc.
V Colloq. Lav Outer Space" [in English].

Osnitskaya, G. A., "Review of the Book by P. I. Kovalev and I. I.
Cheprov 'On the Path to Space Lav' (Moscow, Mezhdunarodnyye Otnoeheniya,
1962. 1:30”)... "Sovetskiy Yezhegodnik Mezhdunarodnogo Prava. 1963.

PP 557- .

Osnitskeya, G. A.. "Examination of Legal Questions in Space Exploration
at the U]! Agencies in 1965." "Sovetakiy Yezhegodnik Meshdunarodnogo

Prava," 1966-1961, pp 217, 278.

Osnitskaya, G. A., "Exanination of Legal Questions in Space Exploration
at the III! Agencies in 1968." ”Sovetskiy Yezhegodnik Mezhdunarodnogo
Prava," 1969, pp 383, 38".

Osnitskaya, G. A., Kolosov. Yu. 11., "Review or the Book 'Space and the
Problem of Universal Peace' (Moscow, Nauka, l966, 191 pp)," "Sovetskiy
Yezhegodnik Mezhdunarodnogo Prava,” 1968, pp 1001-1001;.

Osnitskaya. 6. A., "A Monograph of a Canadian Scientist on Space Law.
Review of the Book. of N. Matthey 'Aerospace Lu' (Toronto, 1969),"
SOVBTSKOYE GOBUDARSTVO I PRAVO, No 8, 1911, pp 152-15“.

Osnitekaya, G. A., "Space Lav," "Mezhdunarodnoye Pravo" [International
Lav], Editor-in-chief G. I. mu. Moscow, Yuridicheskava Literature,
191”, pp 327-3102.

"On Cooperation in Space," NOVOIB WA, lo he, 1965, pp 1, 2.

216

108 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
21134 .

2'45.

2116.

2M.

2358.

2h90

250.

251 .

252.

253.

25" .

255.

256.

251.

258.

POI OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Parkhit'ko. V.. Shilin. V.. ”Agreement on tho Rescuing of Connonauta."
DBZNMARODNAYA 2111210, no 6. 1968, p 137.

Piradov. A. 8., Zadorozhnyy. 0. P.. "Space and International Lav."
"mm. 25 July 1966.

Piradov. A. 8. Rybakon In. It, "The First Space Treaty," WAND-
ltAYA ZHIZII', no 3. 1967. pp 28-35.

Pgadov. A. 8.. "Cosnonaut and International Lav," PRAVDA. 21 August
1 T.

Piradov. A. 8. . "Tendencies and Proapectives or Developaent of Space
Luv. United nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uaea
of Outer Space. Vienna. 1968" [in mgliah].

Piradov, A. 8., "Koanoa i Mezhdunarodnoye Pravo” [Space and International
Lav]. Moscow, Znaniye. 1970, 61 pp.

Piradov. A. 8.. “L‘honne et l’eapace." Moscov,mition de l'Agence de
Preaae Novoaty, 1913. 150 pp [in French].

"Pravovyye Aspekty Ispol'zovaniya Iekueatvennykh Sputnihov Dlya Tseley
Meteorologii i Radionvyazi" [Legal Aspects of the Use or Satellites
for Meteorological and Radio CoaIIunications Purposes]. Moscov. llauka,
1970, 178 pp (Editor-in-chief II. A. Ushakov. Author collective: E. G.
Vasilevshaya. P. I. Lukin and 0. P. Zhukov).

"Problem of Space Exploration and International Relationa." mum:-
NARODIIAYA ZHIZII' . No 6. 1961, pp 81-90.

.Rouanov, V., “The Moon Treaty-«In the Interests of Earthlings ," IOVOYE

WA, No 25. 1971. p 26.

Rubenov. A. A., "Mezhdunarodnaya Kosnicheeko-Pravovava Inushchestven-
naya Otvetetvennoat'" [International Space Lav Financial Liability],
Moscow, nauka. 1977.

Rudev. A. I. , min, V. 6.. "Near-Earth Manned Space Stations." som-
snoys cosunAnswo I mwo. llo It, 1972. pp 111-116.

Rudev, A. 1., thin. V. 0., "Manned 8 ce Station in Earth Orbit,"
SPACE mam, October 1972. pp 32-31: in English].

Rudev, A. . "Legal Aspects of the Manned Space Station: in Earth Orbit."
"Proc. XVI Colloq. Lav Outer Space,” pp 239-251 [in mglieh].

Rybakov, Iu. 14.. "Examination of Legal Question in Space Exploration
at the UN Agencies in 1962-1963,“ "Sovetskiy Iezhegodnik uezhdunarod-
nogo Prava," 1963, pp 519-523.

217
Iron OMCIAI. US! ONLY
259 .

260.

261 .

262 .

263.

26k .

267 O

268.

270.

271 .

272.

M OFFICIAL 088 OIL!

Rybakov. in. M.. "Exanination or Legal Question: in Space Exploration
at the U1! Agencies in 1961:." ”Bovetskiy Yezhegodnik Mezhdunarodnogo
Prava." 19Gb. 1965. pp 390-393.

ivbakov. Va. 14., "Legal Regulation of the Rescuing or Cc onauta and
Spacecraft." SOVETSKOYE OOBUIMS‘IVO I PRAVO. lo 5. 1966. pp 123-121.

Rybakov. Yu. 14., "Legal Regulation of Liability for Damage Related to
Activities of Staten in Space." PMVOVBDBIIYE. No 1. 1967. pp 115-121.

Rybakov. Yu. M. . "International Legal Cooperation in Space.” SOVEI‘BKDYE
GOSUMMVO I PRAVO. lo 2. 1970, pp 110-57.

Beaikashev V. . ”The Space Research Treaty.” EZRWIIAROIIIMA ZHIZII" ,
no 12. 1965. pp 11.9. 150.

Stan. 6.. ”The International Code for Peaceful Activities in Space."
novon: mam. no 3. 196». p 29.

Staahevskiy, 0. 8.. "Cornunications Satellites and International Lav."
SOVETSKOYE OOSUDARS‘I'VO I PRAVO, lo 12, 1961:. pp 51-66.

"Tendentsii Razvitiya Kosnicheskogo Prava” [Develop-lent Trends in Space
Lav]. Moscow. lauka. 1971, 253 pp. (Editor-in-chief A. 8. Piradov.
Author collective: V. V. Aldoshin, E. O. Vasilevskaya. V. 8. Vereshche-
tin. 0. P. Zhukov, V. o. Zhurakhov, P. I. Lukign. s. Piradov, A. A.
Rubanov and V. 0. tin).

Ul'yanova. IL, "liome Pravovyye Voprosy, vaazannyye s Issledovaniyel
Xosnicheskogo Proatranstva" [llev Legal Questions Related to Space
Research]. Sovetakoye Pravo. 1958. pp 133-138.

Ul'yanova. ll. 11., ”2a Mirnyy Rosana” [For a Peaceful Space]. Kiev,
1961. 1:8 pp.

Ushakov, II. A.. ”Review of the Book 'Space and International Lav'
(Moscow. no. 1962. 182 pp) ," SOVETSKOYB OOSUDMB‘I'VO I mvo. lo 11,
1952. pp 156-158.

Khlestov. 0. ll. , "Elaboration of the Provisions of Space Lav."
30mm GOSUIMRSTVO I PRAVO. 10 8, 1963:, pp 67-77.

noun, 0. s. . "SSSR—SSM: Orbity Kosnicheskogo Sotmdnichestva"
[USSR-waited States: Orbits of Space Cooperation]. Moscov. ”undu-
narodnne Otnosheniya, 1916. 159 pp.

Khokhryakov. V.. "The 15th International Astronautical Federation

Congress.” "Hezhdunarodnn Yezhegodnik. Politika i none-ma" [Inter-
national Annual. Politics and Economics]. Moscov. Politizdat. 1965.

pp 337. 338.
218

M omcm. US! OIL!
273.

271-
215.

216.

27?.

218.

279 .

280.

281.

282 .

283.

28“.

285 s

286.

. POI! OI'PICIAI. ”8! ONLY

Cheprov. I. 1.. Vereshchctin, V. 8.. “Discussion of Legal Questions
or Space Research at the International Astronatucal Federation."
somexom 0080mm 1 mvo. no In. 1962. pp 126-130.

Cheprov, I. I. . ”Law and Space.” NOW! MIR, ”0 8. 1962, pp 280-282.

Cheprov. I. 1.. ”The Monopolies Move into Space." mmanommn
zum', No 12. 1963. pp 1.9-57.

Cheprov. I. 1., "Space Conunications as Business." AVIAN!“ I KOSMO-
uwrm. no 7. 1965. pp 91.93.

Cheprov. I. 1., ”The Space Treaty-on Victory for Soviet Diplomacy."
SOVEI'SKOYB GOSUDARS‘I'VO I PRAVO, No ll. 1967. pp ”-56.

Cheprov, I. 1., ”Rome Problem! Mezhdmarodnogo Prava” [new Problems
of Iztzrnational Lav]. Moscov,Mezhdunsrodny-ye Otnosheniya. 1969.
PP 3 ' 10

Chizzov, 3., "Space and International Lav,” NOVOYE mm. 30 29. 1971:.
PP 2 o 27.

Shilin. V. 1.. ”The Problem of Preserving Peace and International Space
Lav." SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO. lo 5. 1958. pp l2h-l28.

Shilin, V. I. . "The Problem of the Limits of State Sovereipty in
the Space Above the Earth." ”V llauchnon Poisxe. Uchenyye Zapiski
momma 2. Moscow. 1969. pp 218-231.

Shilin. V. I. , ”Space Lav." "Mezhdmarodnoye Pravo [International Lav],
Moscov. Yuridicheskaya Literatura. 1970, pp 316-361.

anin. V. 6.. ”The Problem or State Sovereignty in International Space
Lav," VESTNIK Ali WSKOY 888. 013an IAUKI. lo 2. 1970.
PP 15-23.

anin, V. 6.. "International Lav: Direct Broadcasting Satellites,"
MEZHDWARODIIAYA ZHIZN', Ho 11, 1971, pp 153-155.

thin. V. 0.. "Kosnicheskiye Apparaty i Hezhdunarodnoye Pravo" [Space
Devices and International Lav]. Moscov. Znaniye. 1972. 62 pp.

Yanovskiy. M. V.. "The Role of the In! General Assembly Resolutions in
Drafting the Space Treaty." SOVETSKOIE PRAVO, lo 2. 1969, pp 91-95.

Yanovskiy. H. V.. “The UN Role in Shaping the Provisions of Space Lu.”
sown-snort manna I mvo. No 11. 1969. pp 65-68.

219

M ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

288. uneven}, M. V.. “The Role of the Genera. nee-b1; Reeoluuone in the
Develop-em. of Space Lev.” "Generel'ngye Meubleye. Mezhdmerodno-
Prevevyye Voproey" [The General Aeeenb . Intemetionel Legal Quee-
uon-l. mama». Bhtinitee. 1911, pp 2 9-269.

m
COPYRIGBT: Izutel'etvo "Hm,” 1977
10272
080: Glut/0602

220

”I OFFICIAL US! ONLY