APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100m005-1

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040005-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8369
3 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 12/79)

IL S.JCDHNT'HUBLKQAJ1CHHSFRESEJNRCFISERVNCE

FOR OFFICIAI USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040005-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasta. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained .

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was sunnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within iteus are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT U95 AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSEIIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATIOR
OE TIIIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOEEICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/Ol
3 April 1

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(rouo 12/19)
Commas

ALGERIA

Dutch Aid. Cooperation Reported
(nancuzs TROPICAUX Br HBDITIRIANIINS. 2 Her 79) ....u.

Goo L1quofoctton Pleat
Routing and Untveretty
Blectrdc Power Plant

IRAN

Khoeoyni Reported Shocked by Reelttlee
(Jeroae Duloulin; L'IIPRBSS. 2‘ rob 79) ..............

Current Sttuetton in Iron
(Kealze Hburod; L3 NOUVBL ODSIIVATIUI, 12 Her 79) ...
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

DUTCH AID. COOPERATION REPORTED
Gee Liquefaction Plant
Parie MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in 'rench 2 Her 79 p 561

[Text] In a letter to Parlianent dated 20 February. the Dutch ainiater
of the Scone-y. Hr GiJebert Van Aardenne. announced that the Low Coun-
triee will lend Algeria 812$ aillion to help finance the Areav gaa lique-
faction plant if ﬂeet Oernany grante the Algerian authoritiee a loan of
equal value.

SONATEACﬂ had requeeted a loan of 250 nillion florina ($125 nillion)
free private Dutch banka. Theee banka would not agree to the loan un-
leee the State Enterpriee for the lnaurance and Financing of Exporta
agreed to cover the riaka involved in the operation.

Algeria and the Low Countriea are partiee to a tentative contract which
providea for the delivery of 6 billion cubic aetere of liquefied gee a
year for 20 yeare. it la recalled by The Hague. Thin contract. whoee
inplenentation ie to coenence in the l980’a. will be definitively aigned
when Algeria haa obtained the financing needed to enlarge the Arrow gee
liquefaction plant.

ﬂoueing and Univeraity
Parie HARCBES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERIANEZNS in trench 2 Her 79 p 561

[Text] An agree-ant wae aigned on 22 February in Algiera between the
Algerian national enterpriee ECOTEC [National Office for Econoaic and
Technical Studiee] and the Dutch lredero International conpany. to create
a temporary "joint and aeveral" group for the purpoee of fully funding
the conatruction of 2.000 unite of houeing and the 10.000 etudent uni-
veraity. with ita ecceaeory equip-eat, at Tizi-Oueou.

Conetruction of the 2,000 houeing unite will etert neat June and will
be completed in 30 nonthe. Conetruction of the univereity atructurea
will atart in January 1980 and be coepleted in 1986.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A Dutch henk will finence ell the foreign exchenge require-ente of the
projecte. which ere eetieeted to be 60 percent of their totel coet.

He recell et thie tine thet the Algerien linieter of Houeing end Conetruc-
tion hed eetehliehed no one of hie eeeentiel policy guidelinee the perti-
cipetion of foreign enterprieee with netionel enterprieee in the fora of
tenporery joint end eeverel groupe.

In eccordence with thie policy. £00120 concluded the ehove-eentioned
egreeeent with Bredero ee pert of ite enhitioue eulti-yeer plen. which
includee 16.000 houeing unite of the 100.000 unit program to he initieted
in 1979 end eeverel univereitiee throughout the country: Univereity of
Tiei-Oueou (10.000 etudente). univereity centere of Siei-Bel-Abbee end
Betne (4.500 etudente eech). end three technologicel inetitutee et
Conetentine end Kroub.

Electric Power Plent
Perie HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS in French 2 Her 79 p 561
[Text] The Dutch Thoeeeeen Rollend 3.9. coepeny of the Rijn-Schelde-
Verolee group hee received en order froe Algerie for e conplete 550 eege-
wett gee turbine electric power plent. The velue of the order ie 276
nillion tlorine. lt ie Thoneeeen'e eecond order froe Algerie within e
short time.

COPYRIGRT: Rene Horeux et Cie Perie 1979

9399
050: £600

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!an USE ONLY

IN

KHMYNI RZPGITED SIDCIGD BY REALITIBS
Paria L'mnrss in french 2‘ Feb 79 p 79
[Article by Jaro-e Dmoulin]

[Text] Still core than the 'l'ehran leftiata Khoneyni'a No 1 concern ia the
South. where the Toudah controla the oil workera.

"Being in Tehran theae daya." Yaaeer Arafat exclaine. "ie for me like being
in Jeruaalal." l'lanked by Prise Hiniatar Hehdi laurgan and Vice Prise
Hinietar Ibrahim fazdi. the PLO leader. healing. poaea in front of the
Paleatinian flag. A few houre later. he will he taking poaaaaaion of the
former Iaraeli nieeion on one of the capita a elegant avanuea.

"The Iranian Revolution haa conpletely upaet the aree'a atrategic balance."
Arafat declarea. rendering honage to "our Inn. Ayatollah Ruhollah lhoneyni."
Tueaday he ia eating a pilgrinage to Heahed. lran'a holy city. Paradoxically.
Arafat. who for a long tine proclaimed hi-aelf a partiaan of a aecular
Paleatinian etate, in now lining up under the banner of the noat lilitant
Ialan. And. noreovar. on the aide of lranian Shiian. he thua riaka
atretching hie relationa with Arah govern-euro fron Iraq to Algeria. But

he ia aleo weighing the advantage of being able. henceforth, to game
between two ailent partnera: Saudi Arabia and Iran. Not to forget a

euppluentary henefit: atrangthening hie relationa with the South Lebanon
Shiites.

The no head no longer lakea any Iyatery of the honda which unite hi-
to the Tehran revolutionaries. But he hurls a warning to hia Pedayeen'a and

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Houdjehiddin edsirersa ”One sen only." Arefet seys. ”represents the Irenisn
people end ell eilitentsu Ayetolleh Khonsyni.“

The revolutionery youth will not be wheedled by these nice words. Too neny

things ere giving it ceuse for enger in the process of strengthening monyu's
power.

First. the erny. The leftists would like to see it disesntled froe top to bot-
toe end rebuilt on e ”populer besis.“ Next. the governesnt. ”A tee- of old
pen.” "the lower eiddle close“: the expressions ere not gentle. A Fedeyeen
exclsins: "For the Besergen followers end eseocietes. the revolution is ter-
eineted. Not for us.” Lestly. the nedis. The Iilitents. this ties supported
by the liberels. ere denouncing Sedeeh Ghotbsedeh. for-er spokes-en of ﬂesuphle-
le-Chsteeu. new television heed. ”He is cerrying on e censorship which is worse

then thet of the for-er resins.” the enployses stete. threstening to resuse the
strike.

Contested on their left. noseyni end Bessrgen elternste wielding e stick end
holding out e cerrot. "If the leftists ceuss trouble.” the prise sinister ssys.
"I shell crush then.“ The eyetolleh goes one better: "I shell not per-it sn-

srchy.“ The Inee's propscende couittse blurt out the strong steteeent: ”They
sre couunists.“

In the written press. still free. leftists. cos-unists. deeocrets end ethnic
end religious ninorities egein find the-selves side by side. This is true per-
ticulerly in the deily. AYANDBGAN. whose circuletion hes eultiplied in e setter
of weeks. One of the editors in chief sunrises its position: "He ere minst
s single perty of God: we respect Khooeyni . but we see e court for-sing eround
hin lending hie-to dictatorship.”

The systolloh else knows how to unloed bellest. In the cese of the any. he
quickly retrected s certein nueber of eppointeents which were contested. He

decided upon e eessive purge. perticulerly the physicsl liquidetion of the gen-
ersle soot in the public eye in the foreer regi-e.

To eppeese the Tehren youth. the governeent leunched the plen of e netionel
word: e populer eilitie which would integrete soldiers. houdJehiddins. Fe-
deyins--end their weepons now hidden in e sets plece.

In the cepitel. everything wee reopened. even the eovies. The veil is on
the downswing. tnough to vex the eyetollsh.

But Khomeyni's big concern is elsewhere. In the South. In the Ahves end
Abeden eree the 30,000 oil workers heve not ell gone beck to work. The ecs-
bcrs of the union dosineted by the Toudeh Conunist Psrty-~..esrly e third of
the personnel. it is ssid--ere denending the right to intervene in the open-
tion of NIOC. the netionel oil conpeny. In Ahves. s ”soviet" of workers dis-
eissed ebout lO teehnicel directors. And the Toudeh is ellegedly involved in
the secessionist difficulties in Kurdisten.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OPI’ICIAL USE ONLY

A State Within e sum

laroneyni is swore of the stokes. Hhile condo-hing the "traitors“ uho ere cer-
tying on the strikes. he sends the oil workers e letter with s peternel end
concilietory tone. ‘l‘o entice thee. the governesnt lender. who cannot play the
cord of wages end does not wish to ploy thet of self-unspent. is counting
on s renegotietion of the contracts. ”Those which ere contrsry to the inter-
ests of the notion will be cenceled.’ e high officisl etstes.

Hehdi Demon eppoints Henson Nuih. leader of the hu- eseocietion end lone-
tine toe of the sheh. es heed of N100. This Jurist without oil experience is
going to restore order in this eteu within s stein-measly. K100. _‘l'he ep-
pointeent is well received in the Tehren heedqusrtere. In the South it is e
different sffeir. Even if the workers of Ashe Jeri. the lost extensive de-
posit. offer their ellegience.

"In my case.” one of the notional coxpeny'e officisls stetes. "there is uns-
nieity within NIOC not to go beck to the 6 sillion hex-role per (in level. He
shell not exceed 2 nillic—n.” As hehdi Bessrgen puts it. while intentionelly
remaining vogue: “The level or our exports will rise in stages.“

The rocketing of prices on the sexiest will thus be sore then s straw tire.
For industriel countries the resueption is again put off indefinitely.

COPYRIGRTI 1979 SJ. Group Express

856%
cso. anoo

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

CURRENT SITUATIM IN IRAN
Peria LB NOW OBSERVAIBUR in French 12 Her 79 p 109
[Article by Keniae ﬂoured: "The Ayetollah'a Anathema")

[Text] "The ayatollah ia a bulldozer but I an a little car." Thia ia bow
Hehdi Bazargen. Iran'a prine niniater. introduced hineelf during hie in-
augural addreaa a few waeka ago. Today, people aak thanaelvea if the bull-
dozer night not flatten the little car. Everything cease to point to that.
in any cue. Iron the holy city of Qon, where he had vithdran in order-
it was thought--to let the proviaional gowernnant do ita job. Kboneyni
iaeued directivea on the way to run the atate and kept up a conatant flow
of the eevereat criticiana. totally aapping the prise niniater'a authority.
"You act like one of the niniatera of the old regime." he accuaed hin. "You
are weak. Heaternized. and luxury-minded." In the light of the extreae
nature of theae ruarka. one night aak oneeelf what the ayatollah'e 'purpoae
ia: to downgrade the preaent adniniatration and to force it to reaign? 0r
ainply to intinidate it an that. until the referendun in any cane. it will
toe the line. The ayatollah aa a letter of fact does not like the challenge
which ia emerging increaaingly day after day in Iran and which it in the
proceaa of beconing organized around the National Democratic Front. created
laet Tuesday by Heater hatin Daftary. Hoaaadegh'a grandaon.

lhia front repreaenta the big hope of the noncouuniat left. It ralliea
above all the intellectuale and the aelf-anployed profeaaional nan who have
been fighting for a change but who reject a new dictatorahip and it haa
eynpathy within the government. when, for ample, it denounced the triala
that were held behind cloned doors and the salary uecution of forner of-
ficiela of the regine-but alao of pinpa and thievea-mit wee tacitly backed
by Bazargan who often cowlained about the "lhoneyniatea coultteee" which
arreated and executed their own chief by firing aquad. than it defenda the
rights of women, it in aupported by the vaat najority of the Iranian wonen.
Although nany decided to wear the veil an a political nenifeatation againat
the Heeternization inpoeed by the ahah. they underatand that the choice ia
left to each wonan. And exceaaea, auch ea attache on wonen not wearing voila
in the atraeta, the raida by young nen againat girla' high echoola to force
than to wear the veil. the ban on eecretariea to go to work in a wide akirt,
their hair blowing in the wind—theaa are aewerely criticized.

6
P08 OHICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR 0?FICIAL USE ONLY

Are these exceeoee perpetrated by excessively zealoue religioue uilitente?

Not only. unfortunately! Khoeeyni--who for a long time had been very evaeive
on the Ielenic republic and eepecielly on the etetue of wbnene-now. the: he is
in power. epelled out hie thinking ee followe: "The voeen euet cover their hair.
the nape of the neck. the arne. end the lege." 0n the ieauee of divorce and
pilu. he node contradictory etetenente--a tactic which he hee been pureuing
since the etert of the etruggle end which enabled hie to echieve unenieity.
with each pereon hearing whet he or ehe vented to heer.

0n the other band. on the eeeential ieeue. the ieeue of the referendue which
is to take place on 31 "arch. the eyetolleh wee quite clear. In the face of
the danger repreeented by the National Deeocratic Front. which triee to modify
the follwing queetionx "Are you in favor of en tel-1c republic?" To read
instead: "Are you in favor of on Ielaeic democratic republic?" he hurled
anathema. "Voting for e deeocratic Ieleeic republic would be e ein becauae
the word 'deeocracy' ie e Heetern notion."

On that ecore. he publicly dieevowee hie head of government, Mehdi Beeargen
who coined the tern "democratic Ielenic republic." when Khoneyni wee etill

in Paris. Deeocracy abriouely ie a notion the ayetolleh doee not like much.
Today he :e the blemter of Iran. th ehould he be etubborn end renounce hie
vision of a pure end tough leleeic republic? But parhepe he undereetieatee
hie fellou citizene from who- he hed been awey for 15 yeere. if he forcee
Hehdi Bazergan to reeign. while the letter ie preeently the only link between
the different tendencies. Khoeeyni rieke finding hieeelf confronted with

an even tougher opposition.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 "1e Nouvel Observeteur"

5058
680:4800 - gun -

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040005-1

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040005-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040005-1

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040005-1