FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10632
2 JULY 1982

East Europe Report

ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOLIO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son

JPRS publications contain information primarily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, ana material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGH.‘ LAHS AND REGULATIORS GOVERNING MERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Industrial Robotization in CSSR Outlined
(Milo. Figiber; TBCRNICKY TYDENNIK, 27 Apr 82) ...

Need for More Electronics in Machine Tools Stressed
(Bedrich Chodera; TECHNICKY TYDENNIK, 11 May 82) .
INDIBTRIAL ROBOTIZATIOR nl 0533 ourmsn
Prague TECHNICXY Txnsnm in Czech 27 Apr 82 pp 10-11

[Article by Eng Milos Pibiger and associates: ”What llext in the Development
of Industrial Robots"; portions within slantlines in Bold Phce]

[Text] Intensive development of electronics and particularly
microelectronics, experience gained so far with canputeriza-
tion of industrial production, all this makes it possible to
get closer to the goal of utilizing computerized means of
production in three shifts, in which service is required only
during the first shift and at the most also in the second
shift. That brings about penetrating rationalization and at
the same time releases working people from heavy and monoto-
nous work which is harmful to health. Industrial robots and
nanipulators in particular need to be utilized for flexible
computerization of production processes.

Great attention is being paid now in industrially advanced states to industrial
robots and manipulators. Their manufacture is registering the highest growth
in this decade. The development is advancing rapidly from simple manipulators
through robots with program control to robots now using elements of synthetic
intelligence.

Several hundreds of various types of industrial robots and manipulators are
now in operation in the world, ranging from the smallest types all the way to
robots capable of manipulating loads weighing several hundred kilograms.

low, industrial robots and manipulators are used routinely in welding,
machining, forming, surface treatment, thermal processing, installation work,
and they also appear in almost all branches but mechanical engineering. At
the congresses of conunist parties held last year in the maJority of the
socialist states, the development of computerization and robotization was
included in the strategic goals of future development and effective measures
were adopted to provide for it. This was the case especially in the USSR,
where the CPSU dealt with the development of industrial robots and manipula-
tors at its session in August 1980. In the GDR, the congress gave instructions

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l Vaa v. a analaa. \a-Ia. v-‘dnl

to introduce 100,000 to 105,000 robots by 1985, and in the Bulgarian People's
Republic the development of robotization was categorized as the party's second
principal strategic goal in industry.

Resolution of the CSR Government

The (.‘SSR Government has also included the development of industrial robots and
manipulators in selected target programs of the state, and its resolutions are
designed to bring about a coordinated advance in the entire national economy.

However, that requires an urgent creative approach of all components in indus-
my and in the organizations of the National Front, and an effort on their part

In seek the most effective ways of utilizing and developing this new technology
in the computerization of production.

In order to provide for the maximum creative approach of all components and
organizations to the elaboration of the concept of development of production
computerization involving the use of robots and manipulators, we present a surb
vcy of measures adopted so far and examples of the procedure used in the prepa-
ratzon or the concepts and programs in all suitable branches, fields and tech-
nologies of the national economy. Information about the share of the branch
offices and organs of the CSVTS [Czechoslovak Scientific and Technological
Society] in the robotization program is given elsewhere in the ZPRAVODAJ
(Reporter) of theCCSVTS Czech Council.

Z'he Presidium oi‘ the 058R Government, acting at its session on 12 October 1981,
adopted resolution No 211/81, and in January 1982 the (SR and 868 governments

adopted resolution [lo 6/82 on the concept of the development of industrial
robots and manipulators.

In these resolutions, the appropriate ministers are instructed to provide for
the necessary production of industrial robots and manipulators, components.
investment units and so on. Instructions are given to federal ministers of
general engineering, metallurgy and heavy engineering, electrotechnical indus-
try, fuels and power, transportation, technical and investment development, and
‘1130 to ministers of industry, agriculture and nutrition, construction, health,
-:wn;truction development and technology of the (BR and 883 to work out in their
Jurisdictions the program and utilization of industrial robots and manipulators
in the Seventh Five-Year Plan, the goal being to expand the program especially
in the rolloving periods. Opportunities for their own manufacture of robot
unclessories are to be evaluated at the same time. Cooperation is to be utilized
in the process with the central, Czech, and Slovak councils of the CSVTS.

I'l'he basic goal of the program is to produce and put into operation by 1985 more
than 3,000 robots and manipulators, and save the services of 5,500 production
-orkcrs, and by 1990 to put into operation 13,000 robots and manipulators in
macI-ine building as well as other technologies./ The program instructs the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pederul Ministry of General Engineering to build 920 conputerized technological
work centers using robots and nanipulators to si-plify the terninology, we use
abbreviations in the following text: m / [for Ouputerised Technological Work
Centers] and rm: [for Robots and Ihnipulators],/h60 of then in netallurgy and-
heavy engineering and 125 in the electrotechnical industry. The rest in other
depart-ants under federal and national ninistries.

Organisation of the hogrn

The Federal Ministry of General Engineering is the program coordinator. The

Metal Industry Research Institute (vumv) in Preaov holds the function of the
connissioned organ. The institute is also entrusted with marketing coordina-
tion, import coordination, and coordination of production field 1519, na-ely,

Industrial Robots and lhnipulators (PRaM).

In the depart-ents of general engineering, netallurgy and heavy engineering,
and electrotechnical engineering, guarantors for the program or robotization
were designated, and workers responsible for the program were naned in indi-
vidual econaaic production units [VB-I]. Their assignent is to act Jointly
with enterprises and provide for the use of the planned nuber of robots and
aanipulators. Bach VHJ works out the progran for the establishment of Id'P
with PRaM, which is an obligatory docuent for all the nanaged enterprises.
All VHJ of the éptrtnent of general engineering have now conpleted the prepara-
tion of this docuent. k1 organisation of guarantors has also been selected
for the preparation of the progrll in other depart-onto. Guarantors have been
orere being nominated in ainistries, general directorates, enterprises and
nanufacturing establisuents. Also, most ministries and economic production
organisations have designated organisations of the type of technological and
project institutes and mufacturing establisheents to provide assistance in
the preparation of individual proposals and a cuprehensive program for the
entire organization.

Iliowever, lost of the ninistries are only beginning to organize the work on
the program. Therefore, we nention as an emple the procedure selected by
the (SR Ministry of Industry. This is the nost rational procedure for the
initial stage of the work./

Workers in manufacturing establishnent can have the best ideas about ﬁrst could
be and would have to be caputerized in the future and how PRal! could be
utilised in the process. ‘l'hey are fa-iliar with their base and their produc-
tion progral, they know which workplaces are difficult, harmful to health and
nonotonous, or where it would be purposeful to use production scans in three
shifts. Such workplaces exist not only in the departnents of these ministries
which have been assigned the task, but also in other branches of the national
economy. By providing this infornation, we also want to give then an oppor-
tunity to take part in the exploration and expand the progran to include their
production processes, too.

FORMALUSEONLY
PW UPPILMI. 05‘ URL!

[t is obvious that in many cases computerization will require mechanisms
which will be entirely different from the robots and manipulators manufactured
today, but the goal of this drive is also to formulate such requirements in
specific terms.

This should lead to a program which, if improved continuously each year, of
course, will make it possible not only to formulate specifically the require-
ments with regard to our industry, but also to set up a program in the entire
CEMA. Similar drives are being conducted also in other OSHA countries. The
program will create prequisites for the necessary standardization and unifica-
tion of robots and manipulators, particularly sectional modules and casponents
for robotized workplaces, and arrangements for their specialised production in
appropriate cooperation of the CBNA countries.

Procedure in the CSR Ministry of Industry

VHJ of the CSR Ministry of Industry, acting in cooperation with the appropriate
specialized institutes, expert organs of the CSVTS and MW in Presov, are
organizing in April briefing programs for guarantors and representatives of
branch offices of the (BVTS. Depending on the needs, they are also forming
suitable teams to deal with the problems. They also transmit to them the form
and examples showing how to proceed with the research work.

The vurssp [2Research Institute of Heavy Dhchine Building Industry] in Prague.
a leading work center for scientific technical development in the area of
manipulation of material, storage, and containerization, acting in cooperation
with the organizations PIKAZ in Prague and VIKOV in Presov, has worked out the
primary basic material (methodology, forms, and examples).

Those who are interested in this material can request it from their guarantors
in the ministries, from the authors, or from the secretariat of the PRaM work
groups attached to the Czech Council of the CSVTS. The material will become
available gradually also in consulting and advisory centers of the CSVTB
technoIOgy buildings in all kraJs.

The material used for determining the possibility of introducing ATP centers
consists of two parts: the title paper and three tables for basic technical
economic purchase order (ZTEZ).

The title paper serves for orientation about the degree to which the preparatory
work has been worked out and for the establishment of ATP. The executive

organ (a unit of the given enterprise or an external supplier) and the time
schedule for the initiation and completion of the activity are indicated for
each stage. Six stages are recommended for the preparation and implementation
of the entire drive (project preparation of the 2m; production documentation;
modernization of the production technical base; implementation; testing and

lo
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
delivery), and 22 sectional stages such as preparation of the Z1? [ﬂieavy
Itchine Building] programs, proJect assigt-ent, single-stage introductory
proJect, executive project, etc.

The arm is filled out for each technological work center which can be
computerized not only by the PM listed in the existing program, but also by
the equipment developed and manufactured in the production facilities of the
m the-selves or by the enterprise, etc.

It contains basic characteristics concerning the technical problems of the
program. the manipulated object or material, environment, nature of the work,
number of workers, and so on, specification of peripheral systens, cost limits;
the required target parameters (production of the workplace, operational time,
time synchronization, operating hours, time utilisation, time for control
switch, etc., planned target date, expected economic results), additional
reasons for the establishment of an ATP, possibility of repeated construction
within the manufacturing establishent, comentary, opinion of the specialized
professional work center of the “Us, end opinion of the organisations as to
whether the selected technological work center is feasible and suitable for
compute ri sat ion .

The ministry has instructed the enterprises to complete the research work

listed on the required standard form by 30 Hay 1982, to process the set accord-
ing to the technologies for individual We by is June 1982, and to deliver all
the basic data to the departmental Technical Bconaaic research Institute of

the Oonsuacr Goods Industry, which has been given the task of further processing

of the work. hiring the south of July, the institute is to evaluate the
proposals of the technical economic assignments and fonulate them more
specifically in [august Jointly with the vucov, the van, and the enterprises.
The prepared program of installation of robots and manipulators for the depart-
ments under the QR Ministry of Industry is to be delivered then to the federal
ministries of technical and investment development and general engineering for
complex processing of'the program for the (383 by 30 August 1982.

[Why is it necessary to work out by 30 August 1982 the draft program for
individual branches, ministries as well as for the 0868 national econcaw? It

is necessary first of all because according to the uniform methodology which

has been approved currently in (BM, the program has to be delivered to the
appropriate (3!“ organ. Then, by the end of the year, a proposal is to be
prepared concerning the most appropriate modular systems of robots and
manipulators in m and the necessary measures for concentrating the production
facilities for their designing and manufacture./ ‘

rurthermore, in order to work out the concept of computerization of the produc-
tion processes involving the use of robots and manipulators in the (BER, it is
necessary in particular to give sore detailed specifications concerning the

FOR ME. USE ONLY
I \In III I IHII‘U UH“ Vl‘h.

required assortment of robots, manipulators and peripheral equipment, their
quantities and the provisions for production facilities, including inter-
national cooperations, exports and imports, entitlements with regard to
components both in terms of quality and quantity, existing or new tasks of
technical development, international cooperation in research, development, and
also demands as to how to gain experience in installing and operating computer-
ized work centers involving the use of robots, the necessary investment,
foreign exchange, etc., the number of proJect designers, programmers, opera-
tional technicians and maintenance workers in computerised work centers using
robots and manipulators, the number, scope, and specialization of the necessary
short-term training courses, postmaturity extension courses and postgraduate
studies, and so on.

Tasks for Our Organizations

/Additional information indicates that because of the short time limits much
depends on the coordination, initiative and creative approach of the individual
organizations. Indeed, that is the only way to achieve effective results./

A study called ”Methodology for The Formulation of Technologically Justified

Technical Requirements for Industrial Robots and for Determination of Their.

Orientational Requirements up to 1995” was approved in March 1982 at the 25th
Session of the CBMA Committee for Scientific-Technical moperation.

This methodology contains a list of parameters and a method of their determina-
tion. At the same time, these parameters are divided into two basic groups:
classification parameters, which determine the type of an industrial robot,
and parameters determining the technical level of an industrial robot of any

type.

The classification paraneters include in particular the type of propulsion,
loading capacity, method of control, degree of adaptation, type of kinematics,
and certain other supplementary characteristics (mobile or stationary, and so
on). '

The parameters determining the technical level of an industrial robot include,
among others, the number of the leeway degrees, operating speed, accuracy of
positioning, memory capacity, number of connections with external equipment,
and certain additional supplementary characteristics (reliability, programming
method, etc.).

The need for industrial robots is to be determined according to the given
methodology as follows:

--/bydetermining the required types of industrial robots] on the basis of an

analysis of the work centers from the viewpoint of the possibility of computer-
izinc them by means of industrial robots;

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
--/by determining the umber of industrial robots/ needed for computerization
of the production processes under consideration. The prognosis is made on the
basis of the rate of speed (level) of robotisation detemined a priori, and at
the same time the level of robotisation is determined as the ratio of the
amber of robotised installations or robotized work centers and their total
number in the given field (in the given type of production). At the sane time,
the actual economic and technical opportunities are taken in consideration for
each planned period;

-/the effectiveness of installing] industrial robots is evaluated by indicating
the number of nanusl workers released and the nature of their work (of the given

operation) from the viewpoint of the danger of accidents, physical stress,
monotony, etc.

The following tasks ensue for 1982 lira the measures taken by (38A for all
member countries, and therefore also for the 0883/:

--/providing the cum Secretariat with intonation about the construction] of
industrial robots designed for various purposes, which exist in individual
neaber countries of (331A, and about the concept of technical development of
robot technology in these can nenber countries (up to the end of March 1982),
on the basis of which a uniform concept of technical developsent of robotics-
tion will be completed in (SIM neaber countries (by June 1982). The first
version of this concept, based on a consistently modulated principle of the
construction of industrial robots, has already been suhitted for discussion .
at the 25th Session of the (3M Cosmittee for Scientific-Technical Cooperation;

«determining in the appropriate branch permanent emittees of mm the
Itechnologically Justified technical requirements/ in terms of industrial
robots for the given branch on the basis of approved nethodology (by the end
of the third quarter of 1982);

-/approving technical require-ents/ concerning unified Joints and parts of
industrial robots, and preparingtecbnical recanendations for unification of
parameters and areas of their application (at a conference of experts of CEMA
member countries in November 1982).

All these operations are to be carried out in individual (EMA member countries

under the direction of the appropriate central organs for science and
technology.

At the 25th Session of the cam Committee for Scientific-Technical Cooperation
(held in March 1982), there was also approved the text of an intergovernmental
Pranework Agreement. on mtilateral Cooperation in the Area of Development
and Organisation of Specialised and Cooperative Production of Industrial
Robots, which is to be signed at the next, 36th, session of the GINA Council.
A Council of Chief Construction Engineers and a Coordinating (hater are to be
set up on the basis of this agreement.

7 ..
ms 051-10“. USE ONLY
POI OFFKJAL USE ONLY

The Content of the Robotisation Program

The processing of the program, which is based mostly on the implementation and
evaluation of the research work, is merely the first stage. The' prerequisite
for deternining whether the selected designs of rcbotisation are appropriate

is to evaluate thoroughly their technical economic handling. This is done by

using a well-tested and currently used methodology, according to which we
proceed as follows;

I first stage/«preparation or an exploratory technical economic questionnaire
(it is Just being prepared and will be routinely supplemented);

/ second sued—elaboration or a technical economic design (this has been done
so far only for a few hundred or drives);

[third stsgeI—preparation of a proJect of a computerised technological work
center with robots and manipulators (this has been done only in a few dozens
of designs);

/ fourth stage/«manufacture or equipment which is lacking for computerised
technological work centers with PM;

lfitth stage/«construction or the work center (installation work, putting it
in action, test running, formal delivery for routine operation).

By evaluating the completed research questionnaire, one can deter-inc with an
accuracy of about 80 percent whether the work center is suitable for computer-
ization. This result is also expected from an evaluation or the proposals in
July 1982.

The role of the second stage is mainly to document the suitability of the
technical and economic design of the work center, including the need for a
structural development of the peripheral equip-ent, the conditions for labor
safety, and so on. We proceed with the executory proJect only after the
contest procedure has resulted in a go-ahead decision.

We put emphasis on this activity, because it is unavoidable in building ATP
and PM. Experience gained so far shows that the construction and project
preparation of a work center takes 1 to 2 years depending on the complexity
of the elements used in the ATP and in the necessary peripheral equipent.

It means that preparatory work has to start as early as by the end or 1982 in
the case of work centers which are to be built starting in 19810. This does
not apply to cases where manually operated manipulators are used, cases when
the manipulators are part or the production technology, or when it is a
question of repeated standard application.

8
FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
/The following procedure is recommended for a smooth and systentic disloca-
tion of PM and construction of ATP with PM:

i. VLKOV in Presov with its facilities provided for coordinating engineering
and project activities to.satisfy the needs of enterprises under the jurisdic-
tion of the federal ministries of general engineering, metallurgy and heavy
engineering, electrotechnical industry, 08!! and. $3 ministries of indus..ry, and
also of other departments. VIKOV is entrusted at the same time with marketing

coordination and import coordination.

In the area of marketing coordination, it provides mainly for reception,
recording, and balance accounting of requirements of the users and for the
allocation of these requirements among the manufacturers. It provides for
similar activities in coordinating imports of specialised technology. This
means that any requirements by the users must be submitted to MOV in Presov,
which assigns the requests to individual manufacturers, if the requirements
concern PM manufactured in the ($83, which are kept in records under the
program. The situation is similar with regard to claims for imported PRaH.
VIKOV evaluates in such cases the actual situation at the given work center
and its claim for the required imports, and then acts as an intermediary in
dealing with the appropriate foreign trade enterprise.

2. Project organizations of the type of INPRO, PIKAZ, [EAR [Institute of
Technology and Rationalization], UM. Prago Union Institute for Rationaliza-
tion, or technrlogical institutes (even departmental ones) aust gradually
build project facilities to provide for the needs of their own “Us or special
technologies. Certain ministries other than engineering industries, which so
far did not start the preparatory work and found it difficult to determine an
organization for work on the program, face a particularly significant task in
that respect. VIKOV in Presov should keep dealing more and more with typical,
standardized work centers and help in solving collective problems.

3. C.ntrally managed project organizations of the types such as Kovoprojekty
(Metal Projects), Projekty (Projects), ﬂutni Projekt (btallurgical Project),
Keramoprojekt (ceramics Project), lhiprojekt, and so on, must provide for
robotization mainly in projects of new investment construction development.
Departmental expertise units will not accept as of 1983 any project which does
not deal with computerized work centers involving the use of PM in three-
shift operations.

lo. Organisations manufacturing PM are to gradually create units for engineer-
ing technical activities, which will take care of installing PRaM manufactured
by these organizations, mainly in repeated typical and standardized work
centers.

It should be emphasised that each of the given organisations face very
important tasks in the field of PM. It is so especially because in the

9
MWWONLY
I'UK Uranna. UDI’. UIILI

field of robotization the development advances rapidly in all industrial
states, innovations of robots and manipulators follow one after the other,
and as a result of the introduction of adaptive robots by the end of the
current five-year plan the opportunities for utilising robots for ﬂexible
computerization of the production processes will be expanded considerably.

that Can We Count On?

On the basis of the program for the Seventh Five-Year Plan dealing with repeated
introduction of robots and manipulators in computerised technological work
centers, we can consider above all the use of robots and manipulators which

have been developed up to 1981. This applies mainly to the following types:
[industrial robot PR on, industrial manipulator M oh, industrial robot Pa 16,
industrial robot PR 32, manipulation system H 63, industrial manipulator

MN. 06, indUstrial manipulator u 63 on, universal manipulator m 160, industrial
manipulator MZL 10, automatic manipulator All 5. industrial manipulator PROD lo,
industrial robot and manipulator Pm 01, industrial robot and manipulator

PMM 02, sectional manipulator u 1, horizontal setting unit KXOOlK8A, single-
drive setting units, manual manipulators R143 35 and manual manipulators PMS]

(we shall publish a description and pictures of some of these pieces of equip-
ment in the next issue).

Hith regard to the program for the Eighth Five-Year Plan, the research task
called "Adaptive Industrial Robots and Manipulators in 1981 to 1985" deals
with additional types of unified manipulators and adaptive robots: the AM 1
computerized manipulator, designed for servicing forming machines and construc-
tion of computerized production lines; M 3:0 manipulator with a loading capacity
of no kilograms, designed for manipulation of sheet metal used particularly for
surface forming; the AM 80 canputerised manipulation system with a loading
capacity of up to 80 kilograms, used for special purposes of servicing machine
tools, point welding, electrothemal installations, etc.; the APR 2.5 adaptive
industrial robot with a loading capacity of 2.5 kilograms, designed for complex
spatial manipulation and installation; the APR 140 adaptive industrial, used

for complex spatial manipulation and point welding; the SPR 10 spraying
industrial robot, designed for computerization of surface treatment technologies.

Part of the development workalso consists of the development of interoperational
transportation of the type of pitching conveyor belts with a loading capacity
of 500 kilograms, and of computerized suspension rails with a loading capacity
of up to 250 kilograms. Other equipment which is being developed includes
accessories such as large-capacity magazines, position finders, strippers, etc.,
including technological chucks and grippers.

/All the given robots, manipulators, and pieces of equipment are manufactured
repeatedly or are being prepared for production in the following organization/:

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Industrial Automation Works in Presov, which is one of the key manufacturing

establishments. The production of PM based on pneumatic elements is
concentrated there;

--Vihorlat in Snina, which concentrates the manufacture of M 63, UN 160,
HTL 10 manipulators with hydraulic control and the construction of NI'P and
PM for pressure casting;

--VUKOV in Presov, which is oriented to the manufacture of test series of
PM from their own development program (still including in 1982 PR 16, PR h,
PR 32, and H 63), and also to be production of atypical equipment for
interoperational and operational manipulation used for the construction of la?
and PM;

”sz [Heavy hehine Building Works] Detva, which manufactures PR 32, complete
robotizcd welding work centers with PE 32 for electric arc welding, and also
computerized and mechanized welding work centers, including peripheral
equipment;

--ZTS manufacturing establishment in BardeJov, which manufactures H 63 in
relation to the existing manufacture of hydraulic components;

--TOS 'l‘rencin, which has been designated as the manufacturer of the M 63
special-purpose modified manipulation systems for machine tools from the
production program of the VBJ TST [Engineering Machinery Works];

--BAZ [Automobile Works] in Bratislava, which manufactures PM and JUS
[expansion unknown] of the W CAB;

--8AM in wJava, which will manufacture industrial robots for surface txeahent;

-zsz manufacturing establishment in Borice. where the production will concen-
trate on building complete robotised welding centers equipped with PR 32;

-.6koda manufacturing establishent in Ostrav on the Ohre River, which
manufactures pneumatic manual manipulators with a loading capacity of up to
250 kilograms;

--8tro.13malt in Hedger, which manufactures standard equipment for operational
and interoperational manipulation designed for the construction of ATP with
His”;

«Czech Motorcycle Works in Strakonice, which is preparing production of
PROB 10.

It is self-evident that everything has not been provided for as yet for the
production in every manufacturing establishment listed above, either fro: the

11
FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
rum Urrsnun. use. v-ams

quantitative viewpoint or especially from the qualitative viewpoint. In order
to reach the necessary level, not only the control organs and management or
the organizations but all workers will have to develop considerable efforts.

Furthermore, one should emphasize again that the users themselves will have to
manufacture for their own use especially certain special pieces of equipent

and peripheral equipment to complete the entire computerized technological work
centers with PRaM. At the same time. they have to take advantage of the
methods of approach and experience of the combines and enterprises in countries,
such as, for example, the GDR, but also elsewhere where robotization of industry
is advancing relatively faster than in our country.

FIGURE APPENDIX
(Only Captions Given)

Rotc: Pictures and descriptions of some of our other robots and manipulators
will be published in the next issue or TECH‘IJ.CKE NOVIIIY.

Figure l. The PR 32 E INDUSTRIAL ROBOT is designed for automatic servicing of
production machinery and equipment and for the area of electric arc welding and
rr-sistance welding. The control system RS 3 consists of any SM 50/190 micro-
computer, which together with the regulatory power supply and safety circuits
is built in a closed metal control box with forced air circulation and an

IF 1‘3 stage cover. The industrial robot may be connected through the control
system with machinery and equipment which it is servicing and with cooperating
machinery and equipment, thus creating a computerized work center and production
systems. The nominal manipulation weight is 32 kilograms, but when the speed
and acceleration parameters are reduced, it may be as much as 63 kilograms.

The accuracy of positioning of the terminal element "e" is I 0.5 millimeter.

F-‘igure 2. The PR 16 INDUSTRIAL ROBOT is an installation which can be programed
for automatic manipulation of obJects weighing up to 16 kilograms. The basic
design is a sectional construction with pneunatic drives and point control
(PT?) and has a punch-type measuring system. It operates in cylindrical
coordinates with three clearance levels of the arm and two clearance levels of
the wrist. It is designed for sutanatic servicing oi’ production machinery and
evuipment. The robot's control system makes it possible to connect it with the
:-.-~rviced machinery and auxiliary equipment of the computerized technological
wt-rl: centers. A vertical unit is attached to a stand which can be fastened to
the floor or attached to a mobile platform crane. The industrial robot can be
controlled manually or automatically. Manual control is designed above all for
adJustments of operating positions in individual coordinates. Automatic
control is performed by the control system of the as 2 with the central unit

HS 910. The accuracy of positioning is 1 0.2 millimeter. The application or
the :zystem has been tested now on many technological systems. A PR .16 robot
operates in the ATP used to control transformers at the ZVS [General
Engineering Plant] in Dubnica on the Vah River; in the ATP for grinding the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rings of bearings of railroad cars at the ZVL in Dysucke love Hesto; ATP for
pressure casting of metals at Kmlit in Ibdrice; ATP for machining of non-
rotating flange parts at the Jihlavan national haterprise in Jihlava; MP for
pressure casting at the MI? [Autmobile works, National Enterprise] in Hlada
Boleslav; module work center with two machine tools 8PT. 25 NC at-the UTAR in
Bratislava, and other places.

Figure 3. Manual Manipulator on the 36-20 stand is designed for manipulation
of loads weighing up to 20 kilograms. It has been developed and is manufactured
by VUKOV in Presov. The establishent is also manufacturing versions of this
manipulator with higher loading capacities of up to 35, 63. 200 and 250
kilograms. The manipulator has a hydraulic or electrohydraulic drive. These
types of manipulators are called balancers, because when they have been
balanced they can move loads by using a very small aaount of power. Their

use eliminates investments in building crane rails and installing the crane.
Balancers are also built as mobile, depending on the requirements. They are
also used in branches other than those of the machine building industry, for
example at the Stronlast in Trnava for manipulation of heavy reels of glass
fibers. Similar balancera with pneumatic drive are also manufactured by the
Skoda works at Ostror on the 0hre River. They are types PB 1.10 and 180, and
Pan no, 180, and 250.

Figure '0. AUTOMATIC MAIIPIILATOR AN 5 of the standard design consists of a
two-arm manipulator with a loading capacity of 2.5 kilograms on each arm for
the technology of surface and volme forming. It is most suitable for use
with presses using pressures of 6.3 to 16 MPa. It can be modified for special
purposes by adding a third arm. Depending on the shape of the manipulated
object, the manipulator is equipped with electranagnetic suctions or magnetic
tentacles, or combinations thereof. It is controlled by a computer NS 910
which can be programmed or by an UCM 663 pneumatic system. The engine part of
both control systems can remain designed in the same way. The drive of all
axes is pnetnatic, the accuracy of positioning is 1 0.1 milligram. The
manipulator is the result of Joint research by WKOV in Presov and EIIKMASH in
Voronezh.

Figure 5. The M 63 OH INDUSTRIAL WIPULATOR is designed for autanatic
exchange of semifinished shafts and workpieces between the clamp of the machine
tool and the readying conveyor belt or the feeding equipment. It is suitable
for inclusion in automatic production lines with various types of machine
tools which have an automatic operating cycle, with a horizontal axis of
machining, and which provide for vertical input in the operating area of the
machine. If an adJusted or specially developed double tentacle is used, one
can use the manipulator for operational manipulation of flange parts or non-
rotating parts of even greater weight. An additional unit containing tentacles
can be attached to the rotating unit of the arm, when manipulating parts of
long shafts. The accuracy of positioning is 1 0.5 millimeters, the aethod of

13
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f0“ Oil-KIM. USE ONLY

measurement is or the punch type, the control used is the FTP, the m l and

16 2 control system, the programing is manual. The length or the lift of the
sliding support unit can be used within the range of 2,000 to 8,000 milli-
meters sealed at 1,000 millimeters.

Pigure 6. INDIBTRIAL MAIIPUIATOR KM. 06 WITH TENTACLB, of standard design,

is built for automatic manipulation of objects weighing up to 110 kilogrus.

It is also suitable for operational manipulation of hot castings under
conditions of pressure casting of nonferrous metals. It provides for autalatic
servicing of production machinery, and makes it possible to interconnect the
control systems of machine' and the control of auxiliary equipment of tech-
nological work centers. It is able to change at will the programming or the
sequence or the controlled movements. It makes it possible to exchange the
clamping Jaws and tentacles, depending on the shape of the manipulated obJect.
The MTL 06 manipulator is assembled rrcm sectional Junctions and units of the
M 63 manipulation system. The drives of the manipulator are hydraulic, with
electric controls. A fluid which is not easily flammable is used as the
driving medium for safety reasons, because the manipulator is used in plants
with increased operational temperature. The accuracy of positioning of the
tentacle is z 0.5 millimeter. The method of measuring is or the punch type,
control of the FTP type. The control system used is the RS 2 with an N8 910
computer which can be programmed.

COPYRIGHT by the State Publishing House for Technical Literature, Prague 1982

5668
(so: elm/235

14
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEED son was BBCTRONICS IN recum TWLS STRESSBD
Prague TBCINIOKY menu in Czech ll thy 82 p 3

[Article by Eng. Bedrich Chodera: "What Are the Needs of Our lhchine Indus-
try"!

[Text] There is no industrial sector that has been talked
abOut more lately than electronics and microelectronic».
It is a generally accepted fact that if the situation in
our industry, and particularly in the machining industry,
is to improve, it will depend, among other factors, on the
contributions by electronics, and only then on those of
other finishing sectors. After all the electronic equip-
ment of mchine tools of leading world producers sometime
constitutes today the major part of their price and is the
determining factor of their technical level.

And in our country? Hill we succeed in reducing the lag .in the coming years?
The new Federal Ministry of the Electronic Industry very correctly emphasizes
creation of a parts base with an adequate lead and at a level enabling us to
equip our machinery with control equipsent that would not overly lag behind
the top world standard. However, that calls for devoting considerable re-
sources, investments, and capacities to this task.

The Past and the Present

Machine tools without electronic controls are today virtually unmerketable.
As this involves of traditional products which, moreover, to this time formed
a significant part of our exports, we set out in this direction also in our
country. How did it all actually start? We discussed it with the deputy
manager for development in Tesla Kolin, Eng. Jindrich Hlubo'cky, who .t’amiliar-

ized us with the past, present and envisioned future of this interesting
sector in our country.

Already prior to 1970 there originated in the Research Institute for lhchine
Tools and thchining in Prague a group for electronics which outlined the

prospects of its development for producers and for users alike. It also co-
ordinated, and still coordinates, the intentions of all our producers includ-

ing any develop-elite! effort. An even larger group of developent specialists

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AVI\ VAILUW VII.- VI‘L‘A

in electronics devoted their efforts to this sector at the Research Institute
for Conmmnicationa Technology of A. S. Popov in Prague.

As a result, in the early 1970's, the 6888 devised control systems with
germanium transistors which are now referred to as lst generation systems.
Then came the 2nd generation with silicon transistors and the 3rd with
integrated circuits of low integration. For all practical purposes, these
systems are being produced to this day, because our parts base until re-
cently did not offer any other ssibilities. Typical representatives of
these systems are, the N8 471, 351, NS 361, systems. etc., from Tesla Kolin
which in the past years turned out many different types, often custom nude,
for our machine tools. Another producer of this technology in our country
became ZPA [Plants for Industrial automation] in Kosire.

1‘ li‘. concept that an electronic control system is a metal box, full of wires,
parts and circuits which is simply attached and connected to a machine, is
greatly misleading. It definitely does not involve more replacement of manual
control with program comands from a perforated tape. An electronic control
system can accomplish much more: it can render machining more accurate and,
as a result, improve the quality of products; it can increase labor produc-
tivity, introduce diagnostics, and compensate for the effects of tool wear,
CCC.

Cont r ibut ions of Hicroe lectronics

The existing parts base led to a relatively complicated design of electronic
systems and an extremely dense network of interconnecting conductors. In ad-
dition, Men the functional properties of these so-called 3rd generation sys-
tems are limited.

Improvements in the potential of electronic control systems call for transition
to a higher level to microcomputer systems. The first type-dbdeI NS 660--is
already in series production. Within two years Tesla Kolin will launch
serial production of additional types of CNC systems to the point that they
will constitute a major part of the plant's productim. They differ from
previous products in their higher degree of sophistication which is provided
largely by the availability of large capacity internal memory. In the latter
are stored data about how a given part is to be processed and, further, mainly
information regarding the properties of the mchine and instructions necessary
for its control. It can be said that a microcomputer with its software will
actually replace a considerable part of existing system which are many print-
ed circuits interconnected by a complicated network of conductors.

This coltribution is very considerable, if not the only one. Modern CNC
systems from Tesla Kolin can change the control program in a simpler manner,
an operation that used to call for complicated manipulation with a perforated
tape while operating the mchine. The capacity of their memory is such that
it can handle the entire technological process for the production of one or
more parts. This translates into considerably improved reliability. In ad-
dition, there is a possibility for, e.g., machine tool diagnosis.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The key customers for products of Tesla Kolin are the thchine Tool Plants
(T081, e.g., the res Kurin (system for milling and cutting machines), the
res Hulin (turret lathes), the T08 Varnsdorf (horizontal boring and milling
machines), the T08 Olomouc and the ZPS [Precision lbchine Tools Plant]
Gottwaldov (machine tool system), etc. Cooperation with machine builders
is very close and also very successful, as is borne out by the gold medal
awarded to the Model 8P8 25 NC automated lathe frm 2P8 Gottvaldov at the
Brno Trade Fair and interest abroad which betas: manifested at the trade
fair in West German Hanncver.

A System Consists of Elements

They did not wait for the first microprocessors to appear on our market in
Tesla Kolin. For the time being, they substituted a circuit of discreet
components on three circuit borads for the microcomputer system 8080. How-
ever, it is not just a matter of having a processor and memories. A control
system needs additional elements for its operation, such as sensors, which
are also produced by Tesla Kolin. As a matter of fact they turn out two _
kinds: one for direct and one for indirect measurements. These are photo-
electric sensors and inductive sensors. They turn them out in cooperation

with ZPA Kosire, which promotes specialization and concentration of produc-
tion.

An interesting device is also the programsble automation, another product of
Tesla ’T"".n. It is essentially a single-purpose computer which according to
instruct-ons from memory controls functional elements of an operational
machine. Nevertheless, the programble automation is also capable of inde-
pendently solving some technological processes. For instance, of great in-
terest is application of programsble automatons NS 910, modern systems with
contactlees switching of functional elements, used in plating shop equipment
and produced by Kovofinis in Ledec on the Sazsva River. Whoever would want
to see a truly modern and high-performance line for zinc and chrome plating
should go to Kolin to have a look. “man hands do not come in contact with
parts during electroplating.

Giving the Green Light to Advanced Technology

In Kolin they are already contemplating new generations of control systems for
machine tools. They will contain the most modern elements available. For ex-
ample, already in 1983 developmental specialists should have at their dis-

posal a 16-bit microprocessor which will provide three times as many possibil-
ities for its users as the present CNC systems.

There will also be a need for more extensive utilization of new types of semi-
conductor memories, integrated circuits, structural elements. Tesla Kolin
has been a pioneer in introduction of new technologies, e.g., wrapped joints.
In cooperation with the Research Institute for Telecommunications they de-
veloped and produced a semiautomatic winding device which considerably in-
creased the productivity of labor, and minly, quality and reliability.
Another interesting product of theirs is also a microprocessor developental
system (ms 800) without which microcomputer application is unthinkable and

17
FOR OFFICIAL 083 MY
1'03 Ull'LbLN.‘ Ubb UNI-I

which so far nobody else is producing in the cssn. This product is a great
contribution ads by Tesla Kolin to the nationwide program for electronica-
tion of our national economy.

In Tesla Kolin they are also pondering over streamlining the production of
pressed parts from metal sheets and platea--bo:cea, frames, strips, etc.,
large quantities of which are used in electronics and which tie up a lot of
manpower. They dealt with these problems at a high technical level, as one
of the tasks of the state plan for technical developsnt. At the present,
research and development is coming to an end and Tesla Kolin is putting up
a unique production section, so far the only one at this level in the 0883--
an integrated production sector of chipless forming machines. Production
should be launched here in 1983 and solve the strained situation in this
area.

Nevertheless, even in this plant they are plagued with worries and problems
which they cannot solve with their own resources. In developmental efforts
they are hampered, e.g., by inadequate availability of parts saqles from
other socialist countries and, particularly, a lack of information about their
production and mrketing. They also need to know what these countries will

be producing in the coming years and obtain samples, of parts immediately after
concluded development, so that they could make use of them in the systems they
themselves are developing. Our trade organizations should develop a Inch more
flexible approach in this respect than has been the case, as what is involved
is a relatively very small nusber of elements which, however, could bring
superior results.

There are frequent discussions of the price level of the parts base and of
price policy in general. High price of our parts leads to high Prices of
electronic systems which then lose their capability to compete on the world's
markets, to include exports to the USSR.

Same as other producers of electronic systems, here too they feel the shortage
of capacities in development of software for control systems. Today, with
utmost exertion, they can meet only 80 percent of the tasks in this area. It
is expected that help will have to be provided also by key users by providing
certain capacities in their own plants. However, this process should not be
interpreted as shifting the burden on the backs of the users; it is logical '
development brought about by utilization of advanced technology. Electronics
will continue to penetrate into Inchining and other sectors. Under our con-
ditions there is nobody else who can take charge of its systematic implementa-
tion other than producers--final processors.

In Tesla Kolin they are creating for them in the sector all the prerequisites
for the new advanced technology to bring the expected results: a high techni-
cal level and, thus, higher export capability for the products of our industry.

COPYRIGHT: R0}! Prace. Prague 1982

8204
080: 2600/ 257 END

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY