APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-00060R000100050014-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050014-0

I'UR UI'I'ILIAL USI: UNLY

JPRS L/a443
7 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE

Ecouonxc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 8/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R00010006001M
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar naaes rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items «are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROPFICIAI. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS Ia/i
7 May 1!

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(P000 8/79)

Coureurs

CZBCIIOSLOVAKIA

nuanced 10.000 Robots To a. opumomi by 1990
(14110. 171513.: Intent“; TBCHNICKY mmnt,

6 P05 79)....ooll0000000.000no0.400.0000000000000000...

Captgal Invent-an: Inpluantacion hprovanenu Ducuued
(35:03).“ Put-0c; POLITICKA momma. No 12, 1979)....

-a- [III-EE-M

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

ESTIMATED 10.000 ROBOTS 1'0 38 OPERATIONAL BY 1990
Prague TDCIINICKY maven: in Czech 6 Feb 79 p 3

[Interview with Hiloa Pibiger, vice-director of the engineering and
letallurgy branch of the Federal Ministry for Technical and Invest-ant

Developoen t]

[Text] More and more ne‘ently we encounter the word "robot." Karel
Capak in his novel “RUR” once invented this word and the Japanese used
the term to describe mechanical devices simulating the work of a man to
honor the memory of the great writer. The specialists. however, have
another definition: a robot is a device with one or two area. at the

end of which is a grabber which serves to pick up and move an object.

The scientists conclude: it is an integrated system capable of goal-
oriented integration with ite natural surrounding according to programmed
instructions.

There are other definitions but. basically. it is an instrument which re-
places a man in unhealthy surroundings, will replace him during night
shifts. will facilitate automation, etc. All this. of course. only if

a man will give it prior instructions. create conditions for the roboc'a
tireless activity and construct a robot which will work without a mal-
function. we held a discussion with Hilos Fibiger, P.E. vice-director

of the engineering and metallurgy branch of the Federal Ministry for
Technical and lnvesteent Development [concerning the subject].

[Question] According to statistics. there are about 5,000 industrial robots
in the world today. however. the need for robots is constantly increas-

ing because of various economic. technical and social reasons. "hat are

the current situation and projections for the near future concerning the

use of robots in our country?

[Answer] The development and introduction of industrial robots and auto-
mated eyetems is lost advanced in Japan. They started 10 years ago and
have already produced 30.000 robots. that is a substantially higher
nuober than indicated in statistics. It is estimated that by 1985.

20 percent of total production of robots will be robots with higher
"intelligence."

The ClHA [Council of Bconooic Mutual Aid] countries are also making rapid
progress in this area. Poland produces several types of robots and

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

automated systems partly of its own construction and partly under a
franchise; Bulgaria operates in a similar way. Soviet Union will produce
several thousand robots during the current five-year plan and will purchase
nany more--from aungary alone it will import about 200 of then this year.

In our country. we have been involved in manufacture of robots and auto-
mated systems since the beginning of the seventies. In 197‘ we concentrated
our efforts on the state plan task of scientific and technological develop-
ment and we created an advanced workshop of the scientific-technological
development at the Research Institute of Metal-working Industry in Presov.
At the recent exhibit. ROBOT 70, we were able to offer to our industry sass

produced robots TR—l6 and QIN-OZO and automated systems H6, HP-l-R, HU-l-R,
etc.

By 1980 our industry will have at its disposal series of numerically con-
trolled industrial robot models of a building-bloc type with operational
weight of 4, 16 and 32 kilograms [respectively], and also series of
specialized automated system models for machining, forming and casting
parts under pressure weighing from 6 to 63 kilograms. It is probable

that. in addition to this series, a production of two other specialized
robots will be started.

For the future we are considering a wider application of industrial robots
and automated systems and their gradual introduction into flexible manu-
facturing systems of automated workshops and lines in most of the branches
of our national economy. In 1990 we expect that our industry will use
about 10,000 robots and more than 20,000 automated systems. however, to
reach this goal. it will be necessary to complete a research-development
and production basis, including planned capacity and, above all, to
intensify and widen the international scientific-technological cooperation.

[Question] The industrial robot, as a kind of a technical model, is a
flexibly programsbla automated equipment characterized by its ability
to adjust to an environment and is based in cybernetics. It is also one
of the definitions which, to a large degree, involves future development.
In which direction then is the development of industrial robots headed?

[Answer] There are still many opinions about the definition of industrial
robots. They are devices that provide versatile, flexible movement
functions that resemble the movements of upper extremities of a human
being. As a rule, they are divided in five groups:

1. [rrocess control] robots that a man operates directly,

2. Robots with successive work steps according to a set program, condition
and position; it is possible, but still difficult. to change their
programming,

3. Robots taught the work process by a man who directly carries out the
necessary movements which the robot then repeats automatically,

2

PO! OIPICIAL USE ONLY
.' ' .‘I. _‘ , ' 7 L s"
' '. [K‘s - )4, j ‘

.s‘a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Robots with numerical controls which operate on the basis of numeri-
cally coded work information and, finally,

5. Robots which can regulate their own activity through their sensing
and recognition capabilities.

With the expected technological progress, other robots capable of per-
forming bio-mechanical functions and movements as, for example, snakes
or moles may be introduced. It will, therefore, be necessary to adjust
the classification and definitions of industrial robots constantly
according to progress and their construction.

Many countries have adopted the Japanese type industrial robot, because
it points out future trends. By the beginning of the year 1980 Japanese
industry will have hundreds of intelligent industrial robots in the

automated assembly lines and in product controls where they will probably
replace or supplement the sectional assembly line automated systems.

It is expected that intelligent robots will be used to great extent in
the nuclear branch industry and in automated nuclear power plants, in
welding control, etc. It is assumed that the production of intelligent
robots will increase by more than 20 percent by 1980. All advanced
industrial countries are conducting research in this field. In socialist
countries, the Kiev Institute of Technical Cybernetics at Glusov is
working on problems of artificial intelligence in industrial robots.

Our Academy of Sciences and some universities are involved in solving
project segments contributing to development in this field.

[Question] It is possible to say that the industrial robots and automated
systems are in the forefront of interest such as the computers used to

be some years ago. Practice taught us that those using them were not
always properly prepared to use this technology, that often it was just
_a matter of novelty [which attracted them]. How do we plan to use the
robots in our country so that they would not become only a subject of
admiration or claims of ownership?

[Answer] There are still many development, construction and research
tasks to be solved in the technological development of the industrial
robots. Nevertheless, it is becoming clen: that the focus of their
further development and utilization lies especially in their quick and
efficient introduction into the production [lines] since a robot can
work continuously for 26 hours and can function for 600 hours without
a need for repair. The Japanese specialists are considering up to
2500 hours of trouble-free functioning. The greatest task will be to
orgtuize the environment of an industrial robot in such a way that a
continuous flow of materials in supply and transfer lines keep the
machines working without interruption. Here is an open field for the
activity of technical engineers and designers solving peripheral

and software problems. In our state plan, we have considered this
area and concentrated on it more than one-third of our capacity. we

3
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have several dozens of workers who selected about 200 representative model

uorkehops and et 60 of then detailed projects are already proceeding and
are ready for introduction of industrial robots.

Considering that after 1980 we will be producing several hundred robots a
year. it will be necessary that every enterprise and plant. every planning
organization and especially the Research Institute of Metallurgy consider
necessary capacity in preparation for introducing this new technology.

It is necessary to prepare the manufacturing process in the plants. in such
a way that there would not he a repetition of the well-known cases from

the field of other autosation technology which often had to wait for

months to be used and sometimes even longer before it was able to attain
the expected effectiveness.

COPYRIGHT! 1979 - VYDAVATBLSTVI A NAKLADATBLsTVI ROH PRACB

2176
C50: 2600

FOR OIPICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

CAPITAL INVBSWT mama-arm! mmmnrrs DISCUSS-
Pregue POLITICKA moan in Slovak No 12, 1979 pp 1127-1135

[Article by Jeroelav Pidrnuc: "One Alternative for Making the Indicator ~
Syata in Capital lnveetnent Implementation More Bfficient"]

[Text] To carry out the atretegic policy of the developnent of the
Czechoslovak national econony—to raiae to a taxi-um ita efficiency and the
quality of all work-one of the critical require-ante is to inprove the
efficiency of the plan indicator ayeten iteelf. Increasing the effective-
neea of tha caplet of rating and atatieticel-recording indicatora, defining
and epecifying their functiona and alao their interrelationehipa are depend-
ant to a conaiderahle extent a: the aocioecaunic developnenta governed by
then—the efficiency and quality of work peeforned on van a the economic
balance. It ia particularly valid that whatever for-a the basis for evalu-
ating and atinuleting uorkare' collectives in the national economy will

alao be the baeia for orienting their economic activity.

In the directive for econc-ic and social developnent in the 0883 for 1976-
1980. adopted at the 15th CPCZ Congreee. it wee elphaeized as an inportant
teak: "‘ro perfect the indicator ayata for operational and five-year na-
tional econoeie plane and their nutual organizational. branch and regime].
intercmnectiona in order to aore effectively direct the activitiea of
ninietriaa, econanic production unite [We], enterpriaea and national
«mine» for the efficient devalopnant of the reproduction proceee."1

It ia eapecially urgent to inprove the indicator ayaten of the capital in-
veatnent proceaa. Thia ie becauee the inveatnent process ie the corner-
etone of the dynalic of the entire national economic plan owing to couple:-
ity of the relationa anong participantenbetveen invaatora, induatrial de-
aignera. auppliera and eubauppliera and aloe along future uaera of pro-
jecta under conatruction where every develop-eat aberration governed by

the indicatora is very difficult to correct by intervening in the mage-
nent eyetan. particularly aince the invaatnent proceee ie largely an in-

dividual one, repeating itaelf only under differing local. technological
and aupply2 conditicna.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

horaovor. increasing the effectiveness of the indicator system is particularly
urgent in the area of decision-asking es well as in the area of preparation
and also in the area of capital investment implementation. This is evidenced
by short-conings which have developed in all three of these areas of the
capital investnent process. The rapidly growing availability of nodern com-
puter technology and the advanced state of discussions about the indicator
system in the aanagelent of capital investment. however. likewise denonstrate
that objective and subjective conditions are ripe for substantial changes

in the whole indicator systen.

To be sure. it is not possible to elininete existing shortcomings in the
management. planning and implementation of capital investments einply by
means of changing and increasing indicators' effectiveness. Solving the
problems of capital investments depends on improving the systes of planning
nanagenent as a whole, particularly on overall improvement and increased
effectiveness of the planning system which at present must be directed pri-
marily toward efficiency and quality. Not the "indicator" aspect but the
management aspect as a whole must also be decisive in evaluating this one
alternative (difficult enough of attainment) to asks the indicator system
of capital investnent implantation more efficient.

1. 0n the Problem of the Range of Indicators

First of all there should not be too many indicators for the implenentation
of capital investments. Too many indicators only spawns inadequate dove-
tailing and mutual contradictions which in turn make it extremely difficult
to utilise modern technology which cells for optima economic development
at individual segments of management insofar as possible under a single and
distinct indicator. To try to encoapass and regulate as far as possible
all aspects and sectors of operations of supply organizations under a great
number of development indicators weakens their primary orientation toward
key roles.

At the same time. however. the need to regulate more and more aspects of
suppliers' operations gradually raises the necessity of finding new indi-
cators. In the interests of optimum conditions for building-starts it is
proposed to establish an indicator on the volue of building-starts; in the
interests of innovation it appears desirable not only for industrial suppliers
but also for suppliers of structural parts to find and eveluate an indi-
cator covering the amount of new products; in the interests of implementing
the results of science and technology a special indicator on implementation
of the planned role of science and technology is needed; and finally, it

is necessary to definitely prepare a specially designed plan on improving
quality, with products divided according to degrees of quality. Indicators
on the implementation of capital investnents were added the same way in
past years, especially in the sector of specifying the structure of volume
implementation and in the present state of relations between management of
local enterprises. and on higher echelons none of these can be simply desig-
nated as superfluous or anachronistic.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The solution offers—in addition to strengthening central planning manage-
Ient and thus also the importance of key indicators-strengthening of the
authority and responsibility of lower echelons of management. It is pre-
cisely in the under-rating of this other aspect of Lenin's principle of

democratic centralism where the deepest roots of current shortconings lie,
which—being unresolved-«must be counterbalanced by increasing the number
of specific indicators. 0n the other hand, increasing the authority and

responsibility of Viva, enterprises and national comittees would make it
possible to link individual indicators such as indicators on the volume of
output and indicators of quality-«in fact, it is not hard to imagine even

optimaliration of the area of state planning and accounting into a single
indicator.

Such a single indicator (taking an extreme solution) could be the mount of
penalty or, conversely, the bonus for timely, quality and economical ful-

fillment of economic agreements. Ry balancing the plan of capital invest-
ment operations and the obligation of contracting economic agreements, this

indicator could also express comprehensively the fulfillment of planned
tasks by suppliers.

Especially in the sector of capital investment, however optimalisation of
development toward such a single indicator for the work of suppliers would
require a nunber of restrictions: obligatory fulfillment of volume quotas
.on specific and centrally reviewed constructions, the role of export of
investment works and deliveries, the role of construction in particularly
important sectors, such as civil defense, environmental protection, etc.
Assming not too high a proportion of these especially binding investment
works and deliveries (not a preponderant share), however, these restrictions
would in no way invalidate the optimum application of this one indicator-
with the existence of others having only a statistical-recording function.

This kind of change in the indicator system would unquestionably require a
great deal of political-organisational work, if only to get thevministries.
Vlle, enterprises and natimal conittees to shift their main attention
from volune indicators to key indicators of efficiency and quality which
could even include penalties or bonuses. This kind of shift of the main

attention would, however, fully conform to the strategic line of the 15th
CPCZ Congress.

For the time being, checks of management and approaches to meeting econonic

goals at individual levels of nanagement show that generally in the produc-

tion sphere major attention continues to focus on planned volume indicators

and their fulfillment3, contrary to the policy of the 15th congress. But

as long as supply organizations are judged largely according to volume indi-
cators, and personal job income is based on their fulfillment to a wholly

preponderant degree, then it is unrealistic to expect any substantial change
in procedures.

A change in the subjective attitude toward fulfillment of tasks is thus
conditioned on a change in indicators, and a change in actual functioning

7

FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the indicator systen in turn calls for exceptional efforts to change the
very thinking of economic workers (how much political-organizational work
would be required just to create the conditions for reel enforcement of
penalties). This effort to make the indicator systea more efficient would.
however. bring about an inconparably greater savings in the aaount of work
now performed in insuring fulfillment of value indicators even contrary to
societywida interestn primarily regarding efficiency and quality.

Moreover. some experience in utilizing modified (reduced. rationalised)
forts of profits as the decisive qualitative indicator of economic develop-
ment-and penalties or bonuses for timely. quality and economical fulfill-
ment of econonic agreements are nothing but that—has already taken place
in the socialist countries. notably in the Hungarian People's Republic.
which may provide a point of departure.

The significance of increasing the role of the penalty as a qualitative
indicator has also for some time not escaped the attention of Soviet theory.
which in particular began to analyze what anount of penalty would be eco-
nomically justifiable and the form of its el'tect. A new and very important
incentive for these considerations came up in the discussions at the 25th
CPSU Congress and its deliberations. The proposal to change the current
practice of economic management which allowed general recovery of any pen-
alty from enterprise profits to one in which the enterprise bonus fund would
be charged and the responsible workers. in addition to sharing the disci-
pline. would also bear a very specific personal material responsibility,

met with an unusually lively response and unanimous support. and this im-
portant objective to improve management of the national economy was also
incorporated into the documents of the 25th congress.

In implementing capital investments which depend entirely on rapidly chang-
ing supply and demand relations and a selected variety of investment media
supplied by my subsuppliere. the substantially increased role of the pen-
alty would have all the greater impact.

2. Discussion on Replacing Gross Production Indicators with Net Production
Indicators and Capital Investment Implementation

At present. under the burden of prevailing attention directed to the volume
indicators. it is sometimes considered as simply a tragic misunderstanding
that the volume of gross production ever at all became the chief rating
indicator for enterprise operations. It has been shown objectively that it
could always perform only a statistical-recording function.

In this regard one tends to forget, however. that in the economies of the
various socialist countries. including Czechoslovakia. throughout the re-
cent period of intensive industrialisation processes. there was a whole
long period when the quantity of production was really critical. even at
the cost of higher cooperation. which in the long run also had a progressive
impact. Perhaps no sector of national economic development can better
document this fact than precisely the sector of capital investment imple-
Ientation. 8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During this period of extensive development it was also necessary to use
any material that was available, even if it cost more than originally bud-
geted. Moreover, with nininal interest on the part of enterprises in pro-
fits and with strict central manageaent of the economy there was also in
this period little risk that the enterprises might have preferred using

more expensive materials to achieve a higher gross volune of production.

Rating the enterprises largely on the basis of fulfillment of gross produc-
tion, and later according to gross output achieved, was rightly a reflection
of precisely this period.

After overcoming this period, however. the sector of capital investment
implementation still perhaps most clearly evidences the enachronism of per-
sisting in this rating indicator. In the interests of better ratings on the
basis of higher gross value of construction. even industrial designers of
projects would rather use more expensive materials and materially more de-
manding construction with anthusiatic cooperation which. given the individ-
ual character of construction is, on the one her i. particularly easy to do
and. on the other hand. particularly hard to detect. This interest in the
highest possible gross value of their construction is even increasing among
the contractors of capital investment projects and supplies. and they also
are replacing original project materials with more expensive ones and ob-
taining increasing cooperation. The investor is not only unable to counter
these antisocial endeavors with sufficiently effective means but he even
lacks any material incentive to oppose them.

To be sure, ever since 1975 a transition to indicators of net production is
being experimentally checked in 14 enterprises in the 0831!. These are in
three forms: on the basis of net production of goods, net output and re-
duced output. Then. generally according to a specified uethcdology since
1976. the output indicators are cleared. for purposes of drawing wage costs,
of the amount corresponding to unplanned changes in the proportion of

material costs (including cooperation) which also is important in the imple-
mentation of capital investments.

This specified nethodology, however, does not, on the one hand. influence
the actual stage of drawing up the plan for material costs of construction
which is. after all. only to insure naterial economy in a key stage--even

if unplanned changes in the proportion of material costs of construction,
including cooperation, are deducted. 0n the other hand the enterprises
retain a higher profit as a result of the higher cost of construction owing
to more materially demanding production, as well as certain other advantages
issuing fran surpassing the plan of production because of higher aaterial
costs. A qualitative change in the interestedness of enterprises in economy
has not yet cone about. and discussions on a change to a more realistic
indicator of the actual merits of an enterprise are proceeding space.

They are proceeding in general even though enough arguments“ have been

collected favoring indicators of net production versus indicators of gross
production.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But evon in advance it in apperont thot thio indicator: 1) will ooro or
laoo (depending on tho individual fora) not otioulato thc ontorpriooo to
prefer notorially noro donanding production nor of itaolf will it. more or
looa. inepiro than to notoriol oovingo; 2) will givo ontorprioeo all the
greater intoroot in incroaoing the amount of nonual labor or (Dore precioely)
norno of onounto of reported wegoo. aloo contrary to principleo of oconuy.

Since the diocuooiono on ohifting to indicatoro of not production have a
diotinct international cheractor. it to ell the lore neceooory to nontion
tho Crochoolovok experience for which Czechoolovokia paid doarly not oo

long ego:

Certain theoretical propooalo today are tending toword indicotoro of not
production dotorninod by deducting toxoo fron production funde, interoot

on credit. panaion. fixed and certain other peynonto. to that in oooonce
they would he lilitod only to the volune of wagon pluo not profit. Thin
kind of indicotor. however. in too clooely rainiocont of the anterprioe
intereotedneu in grooo rovenueo which the Sik group tried to introduce in
Crechoolovak ocononic rezone during the oocond half of tho oixtiao. The
reaulto of tho ohift to ontorprioe intorootodnooo in grooo revenueo wore

at tho tino anmg tho loot oerioue in tho reviaioniot olido of econonic re-
forno in Crechoolovakia hecauoe tho nenago-ent of unuol lahor woo conpletely
turned around. and intereotodneoo in tho count of grooo revenueo of enter-
prioeo led to overpay-ant of labor which brought obout reduced purchaoing
powor. A return to the concept of ontorprioe intoreotednooo in profit thuo.
at that tine. naturally had to he one of tho firot neeoureo in tho oector
of Ienoganant of tho econony upon for-nation of tho new party looderohip
hoadod by Conrado Buooh.

Particularly in tho oector of capital invcotnent inplenentotion tho ohift

to a rating indicator of not production eloo concoala a great risk aooociatcd
with the danger of greater dioparity in the earning capacity of varioue in-
vootnent operationo and deliverieo. Experience up to now with differing
profitohility, for emple in the conotruction of aportnento on the one

hand. end civic or tochnicol conetruction on the other. ohowod what a un-
oitivo prohlon it io. Even after adjuatnont of wholeoale pricoo ao of

1 Jenuory l977, thero in no guorantee in the prooont price otructure ogainot
ouch a riok with oufficient econonic juatification.

All thio ohowo that the preoent nethod of rating entorprioo operationo not
only connot be regarded oe adequote but that even current diocuooiono on
replacing indicatore of grooo production with indicatoro of not production
are for fro ooouring a finol oatiofactory rcoolution. The ohortconinge of
indicatore of not production in whatever forl. depending oooeutiolly on
grooo cntarprioe revenue. rather orgue for further refinenent of indicotora
of enterprioe nerito ao ae to linit the: to entorprioe profit or ito par-
ticulor forth-penalty or honuo for tinely, econonical and quality fulfill-
ment of the ontorprioc reopmoibility toward oociety and ito econonic
partner.

10

ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

3. The Indicstor Systen of Cepitel lnvestsent Inplenentetion end Reletione
of Supply snd Denend

One of the nest inportsnt tests of the indicstor systen of enterprise opers-
tions. indeed. vieved tron the objective of insuring netionsl econonic de-
velopment. the noet inportsnt one of all. is to etinulete enterprises to
contrect end fulfill supply end denend obligstions end thereby sstisfy
society's needs. but it is precisely here thet netionel econonic problene
ere literelly piling up.

Neither the esrlier chenge from indicetors of gross production to indicetors
beeed on output echieved. nor the clesring of this indicetor since 1976 for
purposes of dreving vsge costs in the enount corresponding to unplenned
changes in the proportion of neterisl costs (including cooperetion) succeeded
in solving. nor could they solve. the nein probles based on the feet thet

e considersble masher of enterprises ere oriented only touerd eeeting gross
velues of production end therefore do not nest severel indicetors. But be-
ceuee the tasks pleced on enterprises ere nore end nore tearing. the result
is s vorsening of supply end denend relstions. perticulnrly noticeeble in
cepitsl investnents inplenentetion.

Thus the ecuteness of the problem celled for. end still cells for, further
neesures. As of 1977 there vss e nodificstion of reting indicetors for
lending econonic workers so thet specific fulfillnent of criticel teslts in
the structure of production becene of prine inportsnce to then.

In the prescribed rsting indicetors. which should nusber no nore then five.
epeciel euphesis is placed on fulfilling undetory tsske in the plea of
cspitcl construction. teske concerning building projects which nust be con-
pleted eccording to centrsl deterninstion. end teske according to supplier
contrscts on the territory of the cspitel city of the csse. Pregue. the
North Boheaisn trej Nstionel Conittee end the cepitsl city of the $81!.
Brstislnvs.

The problen. however. is thst—ss shown by current enelysis—the enterprises
ere still essentislly oriented toverd fulfilling tsske of groving production
volune beceuse fran the indicstors of quentitetive development—output
echieved—there is deducted within the frenevork of the whole netionsl eco-
nay shout 96 percent in vege funds. Reneining only on the periphery of
suppliers' interests-—end sgsin this sppliee especielly to cepitsl construc-
tion—is fulfill-eat of the requested full essortnent of products. to ssy
nothing of the reneinder of nsteriel tesks. fulfillment of the systen of
selected indicstors of oceanic efficiency (it is cherscterietic thet in
prepsring the Sixth rive-Veer Plsn they eerved only as infomtion on
quslity of the dreft plane suuaitted but ere not of s binding neture). end
else indicstore of quelity of production. Purthernore. even fulfillment

of these indicetors, insofsr ss they ere achieved. sgsin ere essentislly
schieved by fulfilling or eurpessing only the volune indicstors themselves.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

thie eituation naturally turne attention toward eubetantielly increaaing the
role of econuic inetruente. It ie not by chance that in the forefront of
thie attention are eanctione for nonfulfillnent of eupply and denend co-it-
.ente. again particularly in capital construction. The peneltiee erected
for nonfulfilleent of eupply and deeand obligatione are not fulfilling their
function eeeentially within the freaework of the whole national econaay.

An inquiry carried out at the beginning of 1977 by the 88!! Ministry of
Develop-ent and Technology along workere of 120 enterprieee and Villa, chiefly
of induetry and building tredee in Slovakia. on reaaone for the ehortcolinge
in capital conetruction did indeed at first glance bring out indicatione
that the penaltiee are at laeet partially fulfilling thie role: According
to the replica. 21 percent of the We and 36 percent of the enterprieee
exacted penaltiee. but according to thie inquiry in 12 percent of the We
.nd 29 percent of the enterprieee penaltiee for the neat part were not ex-
acted becauee the effort exerted wee not eufficiently effective; 38 percent
of the We and 51 percent of the enterprieee even openly adnitted that in

noet caeee they did not exact then in order not to dieturb their relatime
with their euppliere.

Typical of thie view wee the taee of a worker in an invent-ant body who
coneietently exacted eenctione through arbitration for nonfulfillnent of
contractual obligatione and wee finally forced to leave the enterpriee be-
ceuee the eupply organization wee no longer willing to cooperate with hie.

one can etete that in the preeent cheinlike etete of nonfulfillnent of
eupply and deland obligatione it ie difficult to definitely blue the
aupplier: even the anount of the penalty ie not of intereet to the coneuner
(inventor) for ite econonic impact and. loreover. the coneuer (inventor).
conaidering the preponderance'of denand over eupply. ie not on an equal
footing with the eupplier.

Society'e conviction ie definitely growing that penaltiee ehould fill their
uportant role ea eenctione for failure to neet eupply ad denand obliga-
tione and eociety aleo ought to uee the full weight of ite authority to
ineure thie role.5 but the developnent of eociety'e viewe goee even fur-
cher. Many prelinent figuree of eociety are today aleo enriouely thinking
about the queetion of why eenctione are not being applied. not only againat
the enterprieee but aleo pereonally againat their reeponeible workere. not
only for nonfulfillnent of eupply and denand obligetione but aleo for non-
fulfillIent of taeke of technical develop-eat. take of raieing the quality
of producte and. naturally. of reducing coete.6 here there are clear in- '
dicetione of efforte tc extend penaltiee to eanctione for failing to ful-
fill econonic teaka in general with an effective impact on the conpeneation
of reeponeible workere. which. after all. fully correeponde to the denand-
tug requirelente of the preeent etage of developnent.

Priearily. however. there etill reneine the problen of reinforcing the real
purpoee of the penalty ae a eanction for failure to fulfill eupply and

12

ron omcuu. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

delend obligetione end ite oppoeite forn—bonueee for tinoly. econonicel end
quelity fulfill-en: of econalic egreenente.

Peneltiee. for inetence. ought to be en effective aid in eolving euch en
inportent problem for euppliere ee thet of dieedventegeoue production. "Hhet
kind of production in thet? Perhepe it'e not even needed at ell?" eek Soviet
euthore H. Lobecov end V. Jefinov in the erticle ”Plenning lndicetore in

the Hechenien of henegeeent" publiehed in the periodicel KMNIST. end they
theneelvee reply: "No. it ie needed by the coneuner. the netionel econoey.
but it ie dieedventegeoue to the producer beceuee thie kind of production.

ee econonic workere eoeetinee eey. won't get you fer; it won't fulfill the
plen nor will you get e bonue. So the Ienufecturer producee noetly the
producte thet ineure hie fulfill-out end overfulfillnent of the plen'e
'ieple-entetion’ in rublee end tame. end often the coneueer hee to teke

whet doee not euit hin nuch. Therefore neny enterprieee ere eheking: the
job of eupplying on deeend (note. not in production) efficie'. t kinde of
finiehing goode. certein rolled eectione. pipee end other neteriele in
becoeing nore end note coepliceted.”

It eeele thet thie problee cen he eeeily eolved by e einple neene: e
chenge in the Ienner of reting the work of enterprieee according to the
velue of production. teking into eccount the fulfill-mt of production plene
of veried goode coneietent with contrectuel ohligetione. end ordere. Ae
eteted by the cone Soviet euthore "...in each ceee. Juet ee eoon no the
introduction of thie kind of nethod wee brought up, certein induetriel nin-
ietriee ectively objected to thie procedure for verioue reeeone. The eyete.
of inpereonel fulfillment of the plen in ite overell velue ie to entrenched
thet even e quelified foreuletion of the queetion of reeponeibility for

nonfulfillnent of plenned deliveriee eppeere unbelieveble to none econoeic
leedere."a

They ere eleo heth very einiler experiencee in the cssn in the current
prectice of chenging indicetore of the delivery etructure into reting in-
dicetore. even though only in the loot inportent netionel econonic teeke.

The oppoeitim of lending econo-ic workere to reting enterpriee operetione
eccording to their fulfilllent of verietioe of deliveriee in. however.
underetendeble to e certein extent. If it were not poeeible to neke up
for nonfulfillnent of deliveriee of one kind of product by exceeding the
plenned volune through production of other kinde of goode. the enterpriee
would eeldoe be eble to report fulfilment of the plen, often beceuee of
nieeing eubdeliveriee fro- other producere. Theoreticelly. then. it would
even euffice for juet one product out of thoueende to be lacking in the
plenned quote in order for the enterpriee to feil to see: ite plen end not
receive my bonue. In the netionel econo-y. however. the ehortege of thie
eingle itel. elbeit of negligible velue. could ecutelly prevent the finel-

ieetion of exteneive production unite. which ie typicel precieely in cepitel
conetructiaa.

l3

'0! OFPICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In capital tonetruction. however. the ahortege of juet e eingle ninor
”arm or colpanent part which the aupplier rogarde ee "dieadvantegeoue"
pguillotion in one of the Iain factore contributing to the proliferation of
bandingoetarte end extended building deedlinee and againet vhichuee ie
“a... by experience-«he noat authoritative ordere have little effect.
(mung inpcrtent factor. which again in aleo rooted in the eyeten of rat-
in: “nature. ie the fact that the building and aeeenbly organicatione
thmelvea. in their frantic queat to neet volune indicatore. keep increaa-
“; the route of huilding-eterte and thua prolong conetruction pariode.)

In thoee aeeee. though. where even the noet authoritative ordere are of
nttle even. a eubetantial increaee in the role of the penalty could be of
“ﬂaunt help. In Soviet theory and apecifically in the article by the
“more quoted. even the haeic principlee of eetahliehing enounte of penal-
:1“ end aeeigning reeponeibility for than are cryetalieing. ee well ae

(area of Wins then:

1. 11.. Mn: of the penalty ehould coepenaau the coneuner (inventor) for
dﬂsct eueteined. not according to the value of the nondelivered product
bug I...“ on the enount of benefite lost.

1. 11.. ueociation to which the enterpriee belongs ehould he reeponeible
‘0, a. penalty. which. in the Crechoeloval: eyeten of Ianegenent. ie the

. unqueetionably. thie would coneiderahly reiee the role of the niddle
“helm of nascent in the eyetel of eupply end denand ohligetime without
a, further reeolutione.

3. 11.. male ehould be levied on euppliere by Ieane of arbitration without
11:41:!!!“ end et the euggeetion of the arbitration office iteelf. not at
the beheet of the party which suffered the loee.

,0. m. aource of pay-ant for the penalty Iuet not he the etate budget nor
”cannon expeneee but the enterpriee'e or mm on funde. with the re-
00”“1‘ workere being peruonally penalized.

11.“ “that! of rltplecing partial reaponaihility with e eyeten of full re-
naming“, of the eupplier vie-«vie the cam-er (inveetor) at once
c100“! reflects Czechoelovek conditione ea well no the developed neede of
t” CzechoOloVIk eoonony. perhepe with one pointed difference: clearly. in
no other Sotialiet etate ie there ouch e preeeing problem ee the fact that
the gaggfpl‘llu refuee to eeke econoeic agree-ante at all and time take on
“”1, “d tie-end ohligetione. ‘rhie shove. on the we hend. a lack of die-
cipnu in the national econoey and. on the other hand. an inhelance in
"sourcee and in affordable require-en“ of known neede. epecifically en
manna: W“.

‘. mud. Kev lndicatore?

the mgator ”at. of capital invent-eat i-plnentation can be limited
“4 .g we use tine enhance ita effectiveneee. The key queetion here ie

1‘
m MICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

the critical rating indicators on whose character and effectiveness depend
s nuber of other indicators. both nandatory and infornative with s atatis-
tical-rscording function. Themffort to linit the nunber of indicators. to
asks the whole system nore flexible and responsive. however. dose not ex-
cluda but rather directly also calls for new and specific indicators. with
a new role on a higher level of productivity. econonic relations and the
social superstructure.

One such new rating indicator-as is shown by current developnents of eco-
nuic theory—could be the penalty indicator or one of bonuaes for tinely.
quality and econruical fulfillnent of enterprise and Vii! obligations to
society as a specific regulated fora of profit which would reflect‘ the
level of the lost diverse aspects of enterprise operations. The task of
innovation in the indicator system is. naturally. far fro. exhausted by
this.

The area which apparently will require finding new indicators in the very
near future and including then pronptly along critical rating indicators

in the plan to increase the quality of rated products. Generally up to
now the indicators of this plan are not Iandatory and therefore not even
included nag the rating indicators. In spite of this. its fornulstion
is viewed in note than one enterprise and m with confusion and reserve-
tions because the entire thinking of econonic workers for 10 years centered
at s syst. of indicators directed only on fulfill-ant of wine indicators.
The task of raising quality is are of really prise inportance. especially
in capital construction where they create utility values of particularly
longterI use. critical for living standards. (It is not by chance. for
exanpla. that the basis of social policy today is characterized as housing

policy.)

It will not be possible to change the attitude of econosic workers on pro-
duct quality without including the role of isproved quality aaong the de-
cisive rating indicators. (This. however. leans that it is necessary to
increase the umber of nandatory indicators by an indicator of quality.)

Several advantageous avenues are offered here. Particularly noteworthy is
the proposal of the Soviet aircraft builder Antonov, based on current
nethodology of rating indicators. to include the production of lowsrogrsde
quality only partially in the plan fulfill-ant. There need be only a few
degrees of quality. It is characteristic that in acne industrial sectors
at present the nunber of quality grades has been reduced free the for-er
three grades and job lots to only two grades and product groups which do
not neat nor-s. Under present conditions of increasing denand for quality,
this kind of develop-cut is nonal. Also characteristic, however. is that
in these s-e production sectors the discounts for second-grade goods are
currently an average of 10 percent higher.

Unquastionebly. if specific isplenentetion of inwestnent construction re-
sultad in. say. 100 percent fulfill-ant of the plan but products of aecond

15

M OWICIAI. US! ONLY
POI! ONION USB ONLY

rste quelity were counted in the converted plan fulfill-out by e lower co-
efficient of only e few percent. then by the present nethod of reting indi-
cetors this would hsve coneidersble influence on substsntislly incressing
ettention to quslity. but one could go even further: umst plenned indi-
cstors of ouslity counting es only pertiel fulfinnent of volune quotes
could be subject to senctione of s corresponding penslty end thus trens-
forn product quelity indicetore without sny other nendetory indicetors into
this single reting indicetor.

Sinilerly. it would be possible to deduct from plen fulfillnent (st leest
pertielly) unset voluse of new products even if their production were re-
pleced by noninnovstive products: it is even possible to consider deducting
from plen fulfill-en: the production of goods thet ere poor technicslly or
out of dete.

A speciel chsptsr of reguletion by the indicetor systen is "Problens of
building Stsrte." not thet this eree is not sufficiently the center of
ettention. A pert of the plan of reproduction of fixed sesets is elso in
e esperste fore. ”Dots (en-ery) on Buildings Brought into Construction,"
with divisions on nsndetory construction. centrelly reviewed construction
end other construction. with building-eterts under these divisions in the
vsrious yeers of the five-yesr plen. All centrsl orgens (including krej
netionel co-itteesnwithout conprsheneivs housing construction) ere work-
ing up this fornuls for structures budgeted over Kcs 2 nillion end the high
sociel interest in reducing building-stsrts by scheduling teske is spreed-
ing to the enterprises. In spite of this. gosls for reducing building stsrts
ere fer fra being net.

In seeking the reeson for this stete of sffeire the econonists ere very
skepticsl of the view thet excessive building-scene cen be deslt with by
incressing the interstednees of nenegers or other lseding workers of supply
orgenisstions in nesting their sseigned teshs. ‘l'hey rightly see the root

of the probles rsther in the nethodology of the plea. specificelly in the
feet thet investors ere sseigned investunt linits end they. under pressure
of vsrioue interests (every construction job hes its own petron). in turn
urge suppliers to begin nore end core jobs-woven though they nsy not hsve
eveilsble cspscity for then. so so not to lose these linite—sll of which
only helps to further incrsese the renge of building-stern. or et leset

is e serious hindrencs in elinineting excessive building-stsrts. ‘l'het is
why the sconauists showed greet interest in the propossl of the director

of the Institute of Iconouy end Orgsnitetion in Construction in brstislsve.
lngr J. Longsuer. in estsblishing en indicetor for optim- building-stern
in building orgenisetions which would help to shift the plenning end nsnege-
nent of building-sterte to suppliers sccording to their reel cepscitiee.

It nsy be sddsd thet the question of introducing sn indicetor for building-
stsrts is worthy of coneiderstion else for suppliers of technologicsl build-
ing psrts. especislly for sseenbly orgenirstions.

The problens of eetebliehing new indicetore in nensging the inplenentetion

of cspitel construction with ell its caplexity ere, neturelly. nuch broeder
end nsny-feceted. 16

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As production forces. production relations and the social superstructure

are developing lore and nore rapidly it is also necesssry to adjust the in-
dicator syst. lore and lore often to the rapidly changing objective end
subjective conditions. In conclusion. it is. however. necesssry to aphasire
this: basic deficiencies in unaging investnent construction are not due

to sny specifics or peculiarities as conpsred with other sectors of name-
nent of the national econony. Specifically. in the indicator systen there
are generel problens which only appear especially distinct end sensit.ve in
the sector oi nan-sgenent of investnent construction. But it is also possible.

therefore. to seek lost effectively in this sector for the key to at least
gradual alleviation and solution.

FOOTNOTES
1. 15th crcz Congress. Bratislava. Pravda Publishing House 1977. p 566.

2. Recently discussions are reviving with great practical import on whether
capital construction is a production or supply process. Any kind of
narrowed concept of the investment process. however. dangerously nsrrows
the field for seeking the roots of the shortcomings in capital construc-
tion. As I already uphaaized in my study. "Sone Basic Problem of
Analysis of Relations between lnvestnsnt and Balanced Development."
published in matron CASOPIS July 1973 (”660-661). construction as
a production process of building and sasenbly organizations creates
only the construction basis of capital construction which. to be sure.
has a specific place in the process of cspital construction itself.

Then on its basis the investnent process pooceeds as a supply process

which has its on nethods. organization wd nanagenent of supply re-
lations.

3. The sane cmclusion was reached at the meeting of the Central Control
and Review Omission of the crcz Central Cos-ittee. 16 May 1977.

6-. here specifitu in articles by Bngr J. Dvorak. Dr Sc (POLITICKA
m1: hove-her 197‘. January 1976 and April 1977); in the USSR in
an article by the director of the Bcononics Institute of the USSR
Acade-y of Sciences. Pro! 8. Kapustin. concluding an extensive dis-

cussim at indicators of labor productivity (VOPRDSY mm.
Pebruary 1977).

5. In this connection it my be stated as characteristic in the Soviet
Union. where nonfulfillaent of the role of the penalty is more or less
the suns. that it was even proposed thet responsibility for fulfill-
nent of contractual obligations be included directly in the new draft
constitution.

6. "I know of no instance in my experience where a responsible econonic
worker's bonus or remuneration was reduced because he allowed the

17
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
POE ORIGIN. USE ONLY

ptoduetlon of goode technleelly, functionally or eethetlcelly deﬁcient"
(Deputy J. Keveld et the neetlns of the 688R Federal Aeeeably. quoted
(to. the ertlele, "Cuttent Bud”: Policy." mm, 1 July 1977, p 2).

7. Quoted in erttcle 1n WRIST “.0 16. 1975 (Domestic treueletlon m V8!
in Iretleleve. pp 5-5).

8. Ibid pp 7-8.
comma: mm. Prehe 1978

8‘91
080: 2600 um

18
FOR OHICIAL 083 MY