FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10356
1 March' 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 14/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS

1 Ma:

JAPAN REPORT

(FOUO 14/82)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

Statement by Former Premier Kishi
(Takchiko Takshsshi; HAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 28 Jan 82) ...

Fukuds Foresees Turmoil
(Mano Kanstsshi; 111: JAPAN ECONOHIC JOURNAL, 9 l-‘eb 82)

Tanska Faction Expands
(Kcnji Kitshsrs; THE DAILY YOHIURI, 29 Jan 82) .. ...... .

Removal of Nontsriff Barriers Viewed
(Editorial; mmucm DAILY ms, 1 Feb 82)

Disclosure of Arms Development Hen: Urged
(NAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 31Jan 82) .. ..... ................

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Mechanism, Control of Industrial Intelligent Robots Introduced
(KIKAI SEKKEI, Oct 81) ........ ............ ..... . .......

Hitachi Basic Concept. by Shimon Andn, A. Tnnchihashi

Arc-Welding Robot 'Nr Aros', by Shimon Ando, Akiro
Tsuchihashi

Assembly Robot 'Nebot', by Noboru Horots

Painting Robot 'Kobelco-Trsllfs'. by Akio ﬂirose

Grinding Robot 'GP-l', by Kszuo Hinows

Nuclear Robot 'BILARH-83A', by Seiji stei

-a- [III-ASIA-l.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

STATmEN'!‘ BY FORMER PRmIER KISHI

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo mutucnx Dam news in English 28 Jan 82 p 2

[Article by Takehiko ’i‘alcahashi]

[Text]

i-‘orrner Prime Minister
Nubusulre hishi become a
supreme adviser to the Liberal-
Dcmocratic Party at the partv
unii'enliort heldnnJan 2t

There have been tour
supreme adiisers up to now
Tnkco Niki. Tnlteo Fukuttn.
liirokichi Nadao and Ken
Yasui. These tour have had the
experience oi either being the
prime minister or speaker of
the House oi Representativesor
president oi the House oi
Councillors. They are still
active Diet members.

Being an active Diet member
had been a condition attached in
becoming a supreme admer.
This condition has been waived
in making Kishi a supreme
adviser.

‘t‘he sriuatmn within the l.i)P
made it net‘t‘ssary tor the party
regulations to be revised in
order to mak» Kishi a supreme
adviser. Since the operation oi
the LDP i\ grasped by the
1'..iinlra laction. inrmer Prune
Minister i-‘ultu-u- urrierl LDP
President chko Suruki in set
up a vice president between the
presiient and secretary
general At one 'ittlt: Prime
Minister Suzuki considered
doing this but opposition ruse
ti nm the 'l’unaka taction

What Suatikt iiiriuulti oi next

was to make iiisht. who is
[tilt-wins boss. _ _a_ supreme
adviser. ii'ulttida could not
object to this and since Kishi is
on tricndly terms with Kainiei
Tanaka. the Tanaka laction
could not oppose it in this way
the idea oi having a vice
president was shelved and
partybarrnoaywaspreael'ved.
Kishi is 5 years old. On Jan.
2|. theday when he beeamethe
supreme adviser. he attended a
meeting oi ﬁnancial leaders
and said. "there is a saying
'etensal youth aridlongevity.' In
this respectlwouldltketollve
actively without my mind
becomingsenlle"

Non-Political

He added. "i would like to
remain uninvolved in hectic
political altairs and will try to
keep my mouth shut."

At this meeting. Kishi was
asked:

"L'pon looking at the present
iinnncial and economic
situation. 'ilriancial
rehabilitation without a tax
increase! which the prime
minister has repeatedly
mentioned. appears impossible.
In drnlting the budget tor the
next ilscal year. a choice will
pmbablybecomenecessnrybe
tween a tax increase and a
change of the tinancial re

\

eon omciar use: ONLY

habituation plan. in that
case. l’rimc Idlnistcr Suzuki
will become unable to carry out
the 'administrative neiorm' and
‘iinancial rehabilitation without
a tax increase.‘ on which he has
staked his political career it
that happens. will the prime
minister have to assume
political responsibility?"

in reply to this question. Kiwi
answered with a very ordinary
expressim:

"Speaking born the stand-
point ot common sense. the
prime minister should take
political responsibility."

ButKishladded:

"i do not throw whether
Prime Minister Suzuki will do
so or not. He may not take
responsibility and resign
because oi the reason. 'what
would ii I were to
resign?‘ Even then. as a
general principle. he should
assume political responsibility
andresigninsucitaease This
remainsunchanged."

Finance Minister Michio
Wotanabehintedondanzzata
change ol the iinancial
rehabilitation plan. ills replies
to interpeliations in the Diet
have indicated. however. that
he intean to carry out the
iinaneial rehabilitation as
scheduled. This is necessary in
order to relect the demands
EE— :2: 65:42.... 5:.
2.32.8 8.. on 5.2.52. 3
.5 585 .9. 39.28... a...»
:3 2 555.5 a 98.53..
5.5.2...» .33..- o. :5 5:.
5.5.8. .52: ”322....
£53... 7. 2:8 8 52 9.
aces...

32:8.» .5. 2.3.33. 5 =8
r.a......_.ca.sc2d..n 35. 52
:33 = = a 85:0 8 as...»
u... 58...... 8.. 3.5.8.. 96
.25... = a: on 9393:. 3
5.3. = 8. 5 =8 .3... .53.
2.3 .. = .12. :5. 2. .23...
.3 3.5.3: .7 .1u.¢=....._ a
E. . :2. 95:54:43.52 5...:
3.. 5:23 53. 22.5.7 5.
:58 a 9:25....» 3228
Ex. 28.. as: «an

II. ‘\>..-’.P .- .-.>‘u..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AID SOCIOLOGICAL

FUKUDA PORBSEES TURHOIL

mkyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in Biglilh Vol 20, No 992, 9 Feb 82 p 10

[Article by Hanna Kanazashi]

{Text} ltt-wt by at cowy ot knotty problems. both
at domestic and international nature.
.l:-;..tnt~t- politic-s seems in for a rough
t'tNJl\t‘ this year Tultoo Fukuda. lormer
prime minister and one at the biggest leaders
in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. says
that m: \M" be a year at great turmoils
Fultotta recently talked with Masao Kana-
zasht. senior statt writer at the Nihon Ketzat
Slumbun The hlghliylts ot the interview
.‘If(' ;t~ lnlltms

Kanarashl: You say that m2 will be a
tear «it ereat turmnits

Ftthutla The world situation will be tar
lrom quiet today. and there is no immediate
mam that the situation will improve With the
MI" em-ptmn of Japan. countries all over the
world are sutlerttu lrorn inflation and
unemployment l have serious tears about
the [More 0! the world economy I feel my
hair standing on end just by thinkim about
what wtll happen tn the world.

The current economic contusion is not
merely a phase ot an economic cycle but a
dire result of the oil crises. Man now tints
himself squarely controntcd. for the first
time in history. with the tact that natural
resources are by no means inexhaustible.
The world population. on the other hand. has
been grow-ire at an atn-‘tst explosive tempo
and is expected to easily top the 6 billion
mark by the end at the current century. Man
is no longer in a position to uphold the mass
Consumption practice it has come to be so
used to to the post-war years We have to
understand the present worldwide contusion
as part ot a momentous change man is now
going throuyt.

Q: You say that any Iargescale revenue
shorttalls. it they develop. will lead to a
political crisis

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
«:6an 522.3. 8 95.330 .8 2.2.8.
.358 :5 >559? a... so. 28.... .Q .5 =8
:1... :33 s... an .5 5...... 52.3033.- 5
..u :63 3.262.. S... gov»: has... 98...
8. Burn 2:. us 2382...... 36330 7... ..
«:8... 3x5 .3 32...». on £80 a, .55....

cu 23.3.6: 0. 5.. 33....» non—.938
5 3......» 3:... .x. =3. :3. £2. .a 3.2.5 o
2.23. o. .255. 26223 2.3.32.3 37.5.
95.. .3: 5:... 5... :83 5 331:...» :5
32.5 .5... Luau-3.“. 3:28 833....

.9 v.2: .326. 003833 2.... 33.
22.3. 395: 8 a; 2.... 3038 .o .33..
3.58 = .6 2% 383. 862. :8. a...
Eaucaaa =5. =3 .33.... .32.... axe—a I.
<2... 3...... 5.1:...53... =2. $.33. 3....2.
1...... .»33.:_a......=.e .53 .5332.— 2.32:.
92. a. $2.3... 3.3...»33. .. .2 .33.. a...
3....2. 3.9.3.. an... «E: :53 56:12..
5.... :23 3 25:5,... 82.... 3......»— 3.256
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOC IOUDGICAL

TAMARA PACTION EXPANDS

Tokyo Tu: DAILY rooms: in Biqlish 29 Jan 82 p 3

[Article by Konji Kltahara!

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

Time Lt .t urowiu- twin-i that iormer
premier Knltuei Tin-aka \‘.'|it he innnti
guilty in thr inclthceti pawl: trials because
oi recent convictions hit: this has not
dampened the drive oi his (action to m-
crease its strength in th-- lihertti-Demo-
erotic Party ILDPI.

First Kemi Osano. Tnnaka's close lrienti.
was iound ttuilt) and this week 'l‘olt-ul
Wakasa. All Nippon Airways IANAi chair-
man. was iound guilty. There are many
Japanese who wonder how ‘l‘iinaka can
maintain his inﬂuence and even increase
it under the circumstances

The incl that Tanuita retains powerlui
political influence even thouuh i" is under-
golntt trial is even more battling to lor-
ehmers.

in tact. the US congressmen who visited
Japan in early January for talks on the
bilateral trade and security problems net-er
lulled to avlt how Tanaita could continue
to be such .1 strong man in Japanese
politics.

Tannin, who was (creed to step down
as premier after being battered with ques-
tions on his tinrit ilnanrinl dealings at the
Foreign Cort'u-spotidcuts' Club of Japan.
recently has been granting inteniews to
foreign nee-amen.

‘ntnnlta usually guns the lollowintc three
reasons why his {action continues to
expand:

0 The Tat-nan (action is a kind or com-
pra-hu-nsm hospital Whll‘li is stalled by

(sperts ni nuance. ioreiun policy. tit-tense.

elections. and political funds. and so the

motion helm members greatly.

0 ’I‘nnaka Ls indlﬂerent to worldly coin
and Is eauer only to promote his mem-

bers. and

0 in his 35-year: its a. pohticlnn. he has
mntie ntunv [eh-nth

liv Iicusts thut his inctiou cuuiti hove
ac. many as no Diet munbcrs it he wished.

THE DAILY YOMIURI 1982

4120/148

.

nut! that a number at Dictmen soon will
enlist in his faction.

Tannira‘s explanations reva-tti purl oi
the truth but not all or it.

intraparty observers any that Tonuku is
really interested in rspundintt his tacit-m
with an overwhelming number of victim-u
to overcome somehow a court Vt‘rdh‘t
against him and that this movement runiti
split the L0? in the luture.

Tanalta believes pollucs is cvcrythhnt
and decides everything. Therefore. he
equates his trial in the incitheed case to
the trials oi the Unm- oi Pour in China
and Kim Dae Jung in South Korea.

Hence he wants his Judgment handed
down auoinst u bocitsround oi his over-
whelming poiiiicai power supported by
stronz ranks oi Diettnen wiJiin his laction

He seems to hurt begun preparing for
a ruling party 5th alter reﬂecting upon
the 40-day intruparty strile oi 1919 and
the Mill ol a no-conlldcnce motion
against the late prime minister Ohm: in
930.

Susumu Nikaldo. secretury-senerni oi the
Li)? and a 'ranahti than. has established
close contacts with mlddle-ot-the-road par-
ties such as the Komeito and Democratir-
Socialist Party IDSPi which .‘Iittﬂ’ common
security and foreign policy views with thu-
LDP. This Tannita l..t~t ordered Niitultlo to
do. apparently to prepare for a coalition
government it the LDP splits.

This gives 0 pure poilticni reason for tit-.-
expansion 0! the Tanaltn laction.

0! course. Tanalta probably wants to ex-
pand his pom-r because of his worries and
irritations as well.

It is true that the more lrlenda one hurt.
the saier one feels. But how true are his
friends and will they be lrieuds when the
court sum in verdict on 'rnnulta. which I:
expected within this year ll all goes ac-
cordina to plan.

IL
ron omciit. use: onm
REMOVAL OF NONTARIFF BARRIERS VIEW-ID

Tokyo tmINITiiI RAILY NEWS in English 1 Feb 82 p 2

leirnrial]

The strict. complicated procedures oi import
inspection and approval. known as nontarili barriers.
have been obstructing the smooth ﬂow of goods irom
ioreign countries. so the ruling Liberal-Democratic
Party formed a Special Committee for international
Economic Measures to work on improving the
situation. Saturday. the government at Prime
Minister Zenko Suzuki. during the economic cabinet
ministers‘ conierence. iormally approved the com-
m ittee's recom mer dations.

Accordingly. 6’.‘ out at about too nontariii barriers
have been titted in accordance with the requests oi
Japan's trading partners. who also called for an
easmg of import testing procedures. Upon looking at
the list oi items. we wonder why the government
waited until foreign pressure had intensiﬁed betore
taking action.

The dccisnon is an important iirst step toward
opening iurther Japanese markets to ioreign
products. The economic ministers also approved the
LDP proposal on opening an oitice to assist in the
settlement oi grievances related to the openness oi
Japanese markets — the Oiiice at Trade 0m-
budsman, 0T0 — with the deputy chief cabinet
secretary as its head in order to ensure the quick and
adequate disposal of grievances

The Japanese government earlier decided to
implement the tariff rate reduction plans agreed on
during the Tokyo Round ot multilateral trade talks
two years ahead oi schedule. We hope that the United
States and European countries will appreciate
J apan's eiiorts to open its market.

We must understand. however. that the easing of
import approval measures will only result in a
modest increase of imports amounting to about $500
or $600 million a year. Compared with the Slit-billion
U.S. trade deiicit and the sluhillipn European
COPYPIGHT:

CSO:

4120/148

Community tEC) trade deficim'pan last year.
this amount is so negligible it can be compared to a
mere drop in the bucket.

Thus. we have to expect the trade friction to
continue. We know that balance in trade should not be
equally settled between the two nations concerned. if
such efforts were pursued. world trade would decline
unfavorably affecting the people to a considerable
degree. At the same time. we must be aware that the
high unemployment rate — about 9 percent - in the
US. and some European nations is attributed to the

large deficits in trade with Japan. and is a political
problem.

As a second step toward removing Japan's
nontariff barriers. other countries are expected to
demand the abolition of residual import restrictions
on such agricultural products as oranges and beef. an
improvement of our distribution system. and access
to financial and other service fields. Japan must
respond favorably to these demands.

Japan must try to improve the productivity of
these fields by exposing them to international com-
petition. At the very least. efforts must be made to
increase the import quota of these products upon
expiration of the current import restriction
agreement.

From our side we would like tolmake some strong
requests to the United States and European nations.
These nations should remember that their enormous
trade deficits with Japan basically will not be rec-
tified without strengthening their competitive power
in the international market. in this respect. US.
President Ronald Reagan's policy to expand
America's military strength will hinder the reac-
tivation of American industry as a whole. in the us.
congressional report on U.S.Japaneae trade relations
disclosed last year-end; it was pointed out that the
majority of Us government research and
development expenditures are being used for military
purposes which is not contributing toward
strengthening its international competitive power.

in his State of- the Union message. Reagan said he
would not resort to a tax increase to offset the fiscal
deficits. But we know that the gigantic deficits caused
the high interest rates in the us. and the relatively
high value of the dollar to the yen. and brought about
a deterioration of its trade balance with Japan. We
urge the Japanese government. which is trying to
avoid intensified trade friction. to seek a revision of
Reagan's military expansionist policy. .

MAINICHI DAILY NEWS 1982
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040002-0

o‘ln Vhoosooob mun. v. vu-

POLITICAL All) SOCIOIDGICAL

DISCLOSURE OF ARMS DEVELOPMENT MEMO l'RCED

Tokyo .‘iAlNlClil DAILY NEWS in English 31 Jar: 82 p 2

[Text]

We have learned that the Japanese Defense
Agency and the us. Defense Department exchanged
a memorandum on the joint research and develop-
ment oi weapons in June 1966. The existence of the
memorandum was disclosed in a defense magazine
article in October 1980 by a professor of the Defense
Academy and was recently confirmed by the Defense
Agency.

in regard to the content of the memorandum.
Defense Agency officials said that it was nothing but a
memorandum recording the exchange of views
among experts and added that they were studying the
possibility of publicly disclosing it. We strongly hope
that the content will be disclosed.

We demand the disclosure because we believe
that the contents seem to be closely related with the
military technology exchange program between
Japan and the United States. which is being discussed
among the officials concerned. and also the three
principles on the ban of Japanese arms exports. We
have heard that the Defense Agency and the Foreign
M inistry want to promote arms technology exports to
the United States but the Ministry of international
Trade and industry is reluctant to do so.

if such an agreement exists. we can surmise that
the United States and Japan earlier paved the way for
the bilateral exchange of military technology.
Japanese and American officials reached an
agreement in December last year for their joint et-
iorts to conduct research and development. What are
the relations between $30 said agreement and the
latest agreement? ' * "

According to the article. the memorandum said:
1) weapons to be developed would be limited to those
which are required by the U.S. Army. Navy and Air
Force; 2) the twmcauntﬂes would equally share the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600040002-0
development expenses; and 3) patent rights and
rights in pusSt‘Ss know-how resulting from research
and development would in principle belong to the
United States. if this is true. the memorandum one-
sidediy favors the L‘nited States.

"The three principles banning arms exports were
established in February 1967 by Prime Iinister
Eisaku Sato who pledged in his Diet statement that
Japan would not export weapons to the communist
bloc and countries engaged in military conﬂicts. In
February I976. Prime Minister Takeo Mikl expanded
the sphere of the principles when he said that Japan
would refrain from exporting arms to areas hitherto
not covered by the principles.

The memorandum was exchanged between
Japanese and US. officials well before the coming
into force of the three principles. Does the
memorandum have binding power from the viewpoint
of diplomatic interest and obligation? What is the
relation between Article 1 of the U.S.Japan Mutual
Defense Treaty. which is believed to be the base
enabling the exchange or' governmental military
material and information. and this memorandum?
Many points remain obscure. .

Moreover. we are strongly finpressad by the
Defense Agency's apparent determination to' go it
alone in disregard oi the various disputes in Japan
since the United States sought Japan's offer of
military technology in June last year.

Needless to say. Japan's national policy is to
follow the path of a peace-loving nation and the three
principles banning arms exports. together with the
three nonnuclear principles. are the basic policy to
clearly show Japan's determination to the world. The
United States may make strong requests on this
specific issue but it is the Japanese people who must
decide Japan's on policy and the Defense Agency
must have talks with US. officials within the limit of
the Japanese policy.

in particular. defense problems will become
important disputes between the government party
and opposition parties in the current Diet session.
Accordingly. the government must be prudent in
having talks with the United States.

Everybody will agree that. in an open society.
disputes on national defense must be conducted in a
fair manner. This is a salutary way in democracy.
Problems related with the removal of the arms ex.
ports ban to the United States have attracted at-
tention not only from politicians but also irom the
general public. We renew our request for the Defense
Agency to publicly disclose the memorandum.

IGPYPECHT: HAINICHI DAILY NEWS 1““?

ISO:

4120/148

‘I
I
cnn nan-Iran a me- Amp or
FOR OH-II'MI. Ill-Eli ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MECHANISM, CONTROL OF INDUSTRIaL INTELLLGENT ROBOTS INTRODUCED
hitachi Basic Concept

Tokyo KIKAI SEKKEI in Japanese Vol 25 No 12, Oct 81 pp 6b—68

[Article by Shimon Ando* and A. Tsuchihashi'“, Hitachi Ltd]

[Text] Intelligent industrial robots have been manufactured on the basis of
the basic concept that a robot can work independently using its own intelli-
gence in computation and search after a man gives the robot information essen-
tial for the work. The robot under discussion possesses principal functions
such as rectangular coordinate guidance by man. line interpolation, search and
generation of locus. Also. it can weld or paint by the organic combination of
these functions.

An intelligent robot. in particular. among the industrial robots shows promise
as a labor-saving machine for automation suitable for a multiproduct small quan—
tity production line in need of complicated and diversified work that is too
difficult for a conventional special purpose automatic machine. To meet the
needs. development of a so-called independent intelligent industrial robot is
greatly desired. one that understands the work content by itself and works with—

out the assistance of a man.

The capabilities of computers which (an be used for industrial robots are lhmited
from the aspect of cost. The control technology and the mechanical parts used
in them based on the currently available technological level are insufficient

for the ideal intelligent robot.

Within thse limited conditions. we have explored the possibility of creating an
industrial intelligent robot capable of future growth and realizable at the
present technological level. and have already succeeded in manufacturing a weld-
ing robot and a painting robot. although the current intelligence level may not
be fully satisfactory.

*Shimon Ando: Research worker and chief of Machine Research Institute,

502 Kandachi. Tsuchiurn. Ibaraki. zip 300. Tel (0298) 31-5111.

**Akira Tsuchihashi: Deputy director of Engineering Section, Tarashino Plant.
i-l higashinarashino. Narashino. Chiba. zip 275. Tel (0676) 77~llll.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this article, we would like to explain the basic concept behind the develop-
ment of these industrial intelligent robots. as well as the mechanisms. controls
and designed basic functions. and their combination for the realization of the
robot.

Basic Concept

As shown in Figure 1. when guiding the target point of the robot's hand (welding
torch) along a locus (welding line), the locus shown by n broken line is approxi-
mated by a chain of straight lines that connect the space between checkpoints.
If the robot can move independently on the basis of its own arithmetic control
between the checkpoints by line interpolation, the only instruction man has to

give the robot is position information. such as the position at checkpoints and
postures.

 

Figure 1. Basic Concept of Control Software for This Robot

Kev:

(1) driving of robot (5) locus (welding line)

(2) locus control (6) torch and sensor

(3) search action (7) checkpoint (projection gives
(6) line interpolation direction for the hand)

The position information at the check points can be taught by letting a man-
guided robot read out the position information. However. this information can
be searched out by the robot itself using a distance sensor. or better still,
the robot itself can determine the locus and move without being taught by man.

Also. the teaching process can be omitted if the checkpoint position information
can be computed.

Communication between man and robot will be centered around checkpoints if the
man gives position information and an action order at chcckroints. and leaves
action between the checkpoints to the robot.

if the robot can search for the position information and instructions for action
at the checkpoints by itself or can obtain them by calculation, instructions by

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
man become unnecessary to that extent. and independence can be enhanced. Our
objective is the promotion of independence, 1.e.. what is called intelligence,

in regard to the robot. by the invention of various search and computation
methods.

Coordinate Arrangement of Robot Proper

Figures 2 and 3 indicate the external appearance and coordinates of a rectan-
gular coordinate arc-welding robot. Mr Aros, and of a multijoint coordinate
painting robot developed as an intelligent industrial robot. respectively. The
industrial robot's required performance and functions differ widely depending
on the type of work. which results in the practice of adopting a coordinate
system that suits the design. For instance, for arc welding of box structured
construction machine parts, a rectangular coordinate robot as shown in Figure 2
is employed, as a slow but highly accurate operation is required, whereas the
multijoint coordinate robot shown in Figure 3 is used for painting speedily and
as extensively as possible in a small painting booth.

Key:
(1) arm
(2) wrist

(3) horizontal sensor

(4) welding torch

(5) vertical sensor

(6) target position

(7) external appearance of
welding robot

(8) robot coordinates

 

’a) Mic-99'4"". 'o "-' '1 . A" 1
(I)

Figure 2. Mr Aros. Rectangular Coordinate welding Robot

Key:

(1) painting gun

(2) target position

(3) external appearance of
painting robot

(6) robot coordinates

 

u; :ﬁu.n,+nna(3) lb.‘ 0:2,!!!" (6)

Figure 3. Hultijoint Painting Robot

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The coordinate system of the robot will be also affected by oil pressure, elec-
tric driving methods. and the elements of the harmonic drive mechanism and link
mechanism, but to date what affects it most is the computer. Complex and high-
speed arithmetic processing is required to drive a multijoint robot at high speed
by arithmetic control. A multijoint robot that serves as an intelligent robot
was realized at last due to the progress in highly efficient microcomputers.

The coordinate arrangement of robots will also be greatly affected by the compe-

tence of the computers to be

used for robot control in the days to come. For

your information. the specifications for a welding robot and a painting robot

are given in Tables 1 and 2.

respectively.

Table 1. Standard Specifications for Welding Robot Hr Aros

       
 

 

 

Speed Fast operation
Item Stroke gmn/min) (“m/”£31....
___1__ ___
vertical (2) 1,300 mm 70‘V700 8.000
horizontal (Y) 1,100 mm " "
sideways (X) 2,000 mm " "
sway (SH) :90 ° " "
-5 ~50°
bend (80) (from directly below) ” 2,000

   
   
 
     
 

robot proper

oil pressure source

air source
required floor area
weight

driving system

control system

arithmetic function

external symbol

memory capacity

control unit

automatic correction of
position information

power source

Weaving function

 

I.
2.

Notes:

 

position reproduction accuracy

   
   

91.0 mm

normal pressure 70 g/cmz. flow rate 21 liters]
min. tank capacity 100 "

above 4 kg/cm’

1,380 x 4.690 mm

1.500 kg (robot proper)

 

electric-oil pressure servo

PTP (point-to-point) Leaching system C?
control

spot simulation calculation. corner position
continuous calculation. corner position
automatic production

38 symbols (8 for welding condition selection.
6 for welding speed selection. 7 for positioner
stop point selection and 17 for others)

512 steps

PTP corrects at each recording point
C? corrects space by space

200V (910 percent) 3 phases 50/60 Hz 35kVA
100V (:10 percent) 50/60 Hz 2.5 kVA

 

Caterpillar protective cover

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
t‘IA Us a sense. you sons-a

Table 2. Standard Specifications for Painting Robot

 

 

 

Item Specifications
arm, swivel 100' (2,850 mm)
3 arm. up and down 2,500 mm
5 arm, to and fro 1.200 mm
“ sway of wrist 210°
u 'ﬁ bend of wrist 210°
3, 9 twist of wrist 180°
0
u .
°!speed Max 1,750 mm/s
U
é oil pressure source normal pressure 105 kg/cmz. flow rate 29 t/min
“ipower source AC 200 V (:10 percent). three phases 50/60 Re
I 10 kVA
iweight approximately 500 kg
driving system electric oil pressure servo
control system C? control by PT? (point-to-point) teaching
I system)
arithmetic function multijoint coordinates and rectangular
u coordinates conversion calculation. wrist
E correction calculation, line speed control
3 calculation, conveyer synchronous calculation
H
8 memory system core memory bk (16)
U
8 .eaching system remote teaching by teaching box
0
program selection four programs
external synchronous signal seven circuits each for transmission, reception
power source AC 100 V (210 percent), 50/60 Hz 1 kVA

 

Control Unit

Figure 4 gives a blocﬁ chart of the control unit for welding and painting robots.
An 8-bit or 16—bit microcomputer is the central structure of the control.
Sixteen-bit action directives are output through the servo interface to each
shaft of the robot, and the position of each shaft of the robot is input through
the interface by detection using a potentiometer. When a multijoint robot opera-
tion is under arithmetic control. multiplication and division calculators and a
trigonometric function table are required because of the need for high-speed
arithmetic processing. Recently. a multi CPU system has been widely adopted. An
analog circuit conventionally incorporated in the servo of each shaft of the
robot is gradually being replaced by the PWM (pulse width method). indicating an
ever consolidating trend in favor of soft servos.

1h
FOR OFFICLAL.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure h. Robot Control Unit arrangement

Key:

(1) peripherals (13) multiplication division
(2) peripheral interface calculator interface
(3) trigonometric function table (14) console interface

(4) microcomputer (15) sensor

(5) data typewriter (16) servo amp

(6) core memory (17) servo amp

(7) cassette MIT (18) timer

(8) ASR interface (19) multiplication calculator
(9) memory interface (20) division calculator
(10) sensor interface (21) operation console

(11) servo interface (22) teaching console

(12) timer interface (23) to each shaft of robot

Principal Function

The following four items are considered the principal functions of the intelli-
gent robot. and mechanical sophistication and intellectual development of the
robot are achieved by upgrading and combining functions.

1. Rectangular Coordinate System Guidance (see Figure 5)

Guidance of robots by rectangular coordinate action directives are easy for man
to comprehend; an act (wrist correction) that only changes the direction (pos-
ture) of the hand without changing the target point of the robot's hand is an
essential function for the free and unrestricted operation cf the robot.

In order to determine the position of the robot, it is necessary to transform
the coordinates from the robot coordinate system to a rectangular coordinate
system. Likewise, as described previously. when the robot is driven by a rec-
tangular coordinate system action directive from man. it is necessary to trans-

form inversely from the rectangular coordinate system to the robot coordinate
system.

15
ton omcm. use ONLY
(1)90}: I’ltlv!

(2)

 

Figure 5. Operation of Robot Under Discussion

:arget check point (6) teaching console
:heckpoint (5) wrist correction
rectangular coordinate guidance

 

Figure 6. Coordinate System and Dimensions of Painting Robot

(1) target point (2) painting gun

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the case of the painting robot shown in Figure 6, transformation from the
robot coordinate system to the rectangular coordinate system is accomplished

by Equation (1).
X metals! 0 I O O
Y «Intros! 0 0 O sou-”sub”!-
z ' s o 1 o own-neon») o
l 0 O 0 i 0 0 0 I
l 0 O «u 0 ole.
(: m(s-O)sln(I-I)Z)x(0 l 0 :)
o -am(s-ﬂm(s-n° also 0 seen-l.
0 0 l 0 0 0 I

coals-n} o l. I 0 0 0
«muesli! I. o Gﬂ‘-').|I(-') a I, ( )
o o I o o -sin(-I)ces(-I)O o ‘
‘2 0 0 l 0 0 O l l

However, increases of each shaft of the robot, AB, A. and Ad to drive the robot
to the extent of the increases of x. Y and Z axial directions, AX, AY and A2 in
the rectangular coordinate system are obtained from Equation (2).

5): OX OX .1

u ” u u Mun-n
or .v or
“ = T TT ”-“v m
ll ll-K
a: a: s: '
‘17"17"ﬁ'

“- ‘III-‘I
f")

u . 11.3- I.
ax

K(I%—l’0—w—JI \

(2)

Kr-—:,;—Jﬂo '"Y a) (m)

 

Ka-%l)o%n

0-009 ([0]

Kx, Ky and K2 are for correcting the angle of the wrist so that the target
point of the hand will not shift when it is turned by AB and Ar. and Vc is
given so that the robot can follow the X axial movement at a speed of Vc.

The painting robot in Figure 6 has a complex coordinate arrangement. Multiple
solutions are obtained when Equation (1) is inversely transformed, which re-
quires a long process time for assessment of the solutions. In that case, the
speed directive system such as Equation (2) is adopted. but usually Equation (1)
is inversely transformed as long as the robot coordinates are simple.

2. Interpolation

When given the positions at two checkpoints and the posture of the robot's
wrist, the target point of the hand is guided to the next checkpoint linearly
at a designated speed while the wrist posture is being changed at the same
speed. This is called line interpolation.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For this. each shaft of the robot is driven according to each microtransfcr
distance after obtaining microtransfer quantum AL - V/AT in one sampling tine
from sampling time AT and speed V and dividing the distance L between the two
points by AL into N number of equal portions. However, arithmetic and driv-
ing methods for the interpolation will be the same as in the guidance in the
preceding section.

3. Search for Checkpoints

Checkpoints at each specific location onvariously shaped elements can be
searched if a near distance sensor is attached to the robot's hand as shown

in Figure 7 and paired with the actions shown. For instance, when the steel
plates orthogonally meet. as in item (a) of Figure 7, the position of the
horizontal steel plate will be detected by the vertical sensor. and subsequently
the position of the vertical steel plate will be detected by the horizontal
sensor, to obtain the location of the checkpoint on the line of intersection of
the steel plates. In the same illustration, examples of search are shown. The
checkpoint search potential range is further expanded. of course. when search
actions are improvised in accordance with the shape of an element, when the shape
is known.

(1)

Ire/7

  

(a; £82! (6) (c) it'll (7)
ii,7e4wl (8) (9)
iii-ll:r.¢ncvv (10)
Susanne-”(11)
‘i (.IIIIIIII. 1|
«2:; I: C:
Misiﬂ-(IZ) u2$=a (13) (u m x (16)
Figure 7. Various Examples of Work Checkpoint Search Method by Near Distance
Sensors
Key:
(1) horizontal sensor (8) checkpoint
(2) vertical sensor (9) checkpoint
(3) detection point (10) sensor on
(4) orthogonal plates (11) sensor off
(5) compensation (12) vertical plate
(6) acute angled plates (13) horizontal plate
(7) obtuse angled plates (14) open root

18
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Computation of Checkpoint

A3 in Figure 8. a straight line that passes through two checkpoints is deter-
mined by those points. and the corner point which is the point of intersection
of the two straight lines can be also calculated. Likewise. as shown in item
(b) of the illustration. the line of intersection of two cylinders can be ob-
tained when the center position and radius of the main pipe and the branch pipe
are given. Checkpoints on the line of intersection can be also calculated.

(5‘ l. V. Z»;

(1) o:!r:er,.

(2) = r‘

9-: Co

 

(3)3.- ) a-Ix-z ' (50(5) ‘crnﬁang-tu;
"I ;’-" y'l-

Figure 8. Calculable Checkpoints on the Line of Intersection

Key:
(1) checkpoint (3) point of intersection of two straight lines
(2) corner point (A) checkpoints on the line of intersection of two

orthogonal cylinders.

Corner points are often located at corners of box welding structures. which
raises many problematic points for teaching. If corner points can be obtained
by calculation. cumbersome teaching will be unnecessary. Also. if checkpoints
on the line of intersection of two cylinders are obtained by calculation, almost
unmanned operation is feasible for multilayer welding of complex curves, which
require excessive teaching time and labor when conventional playback robots are
used.

Program

Functions of intelligent robots as far as essential parts are concerned are all
realized by software. Figure 9 gives an outline of the program structure. The
progress monitor system (PMS) processes multiple tasks. Naturally. for a high
starting prioritv level. an emergency and abnormal stop pro easing task is allo-
cated. Also. in alloca'ing the task. full consideration of the processing con-
tent is given in order to shorten the total process time. By using software for
the control function. it is feasible to give a delicate abnormality handling
function and interlock function. which are not available in conventional robots.

As the robot concerned can also perform rationality checks that monitor mistcnch-
ing and misoperation by the operator. it can greatly contribute to reducing the
teaching processes and preventing accidents before they occur.

19‘
ron omcm use ONLY
(7) (n as,»no91~-rz(amnl.enen
(8) (2?- !m-v'u-r-z (anammm

VVw-l'lll

 

Figure 9. Basic Structure of Programs by Function

Key

(1) process monitor system (7) robot control subroutine (interpolation
(2) automatic running task calculation. others)

(3) teaching task (8) basic subroutine (trigonometric function.
(4) halt task others)

(5) initializing task (9) subroutine group

(6) abnormality handling task

Conclusion

Welding and painting robots have been manufactured as intelligent industrial
robots. We have discussed the basic concept of the robots, the principal func-
tions by which they were realized, and the coordinate arrangement of the robot
proper. control unit and programs.

Welding and painting robots developed on the basis of this concept are now at
work achieving remarkable automation and labor-saving effects. We are deter—
mined to make further efforts in the future to improve the robot's intelligence
along basic lines.

Literature for Reference

1. S. Ando et a1. "Arc Welding Robot With Sensor 'Mr Aros.'" Proceedings of
the Seventh International Symposium on Industrial Robots, pp 623-630,
October 1977

2. S. Ando. "Computer Controlled Industrial Robot for Painting," Proceedings of
Eighth International Symposium on Industrial Robots. pp 689-700, 1978

3. Yoshikawa, Ando et a1.. "Msikuro Conputa No Sangyo Yo Robotto Eno Oyo
(Application of Microcomputers to Industrial Robots)," HITACHI HYDRON.
Vol 59. No 5. PP ll-lb (1977-5)

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4. Takano. Ando et al.. "Aku Yosetsu Robotto 'Misuta Arosu' (Arc-Nelding
Robot 'Hr Aros')." thACHI HYORON. Vol 57. No 10, pp 17-22 (1975-10)

5. Enomoto, Ando et al., "Sangyo Yo Robotto No Toso Eno Oyo (Application of
Industrial Robots to Painting)," HITACBI HYORON. Vol 59, No 11. pp 11-14
(1977-11)

COPYRIGHT: Machine Design 1981

Arc-Welding Robot 'Mr Aros'
Tokyo KlKAl SEKKEI in Japanese Vol 25 No 12, Oct 81 pp 69-72
[Article by Shimon Ando and Akira Tsuchihashi. Hitachi Ltd]

[Text] We have made clear that the principal functions and basic concept of
intelligent industrial robots explained in the previous article have been effec-
tive. using examples of automation cases of almost manless. ZOO-pass. multilayer
welding of saddle nozzles for pressure vessels by robots, which searched welding
lines. often calculating the locus bv themselves, and welded almost without the
assistance of men the centcr frame of an nil pressure power shovel when several
points were taught.

in this paper. we will provide a concrete explanation of the robots by using two
applied cases to welding work.

One of these is the virtually manless welding of construction machine parts by
robots which have a distance sensor in the hand and which search welding lines
by themselves practically without any directives from man. The other is the
virtually manless ZOO-pass multilayer welding of saddle nozzles and cutting of
the open roots by gas using robots without a hand sensor but with the ability
to calculate the locus by themselves once several points are taught.

Basic Specifications of Welding Robots

The robot used for arc welding the center frame of a power shovel which serves

as a construction machine is a standard type and was shown in Figure 2 and Table l
in the previous article. Figure 1 shows a saddle welding robot which is made by
modifying Mr Aros' wrist to make it suitable for saddle nozzle welding. its
standard specifications are listed in Table 1. The wrist. consisting of twist

and bend shafts, was installed on the end of a rectangular coordinate arm com-
posed of X. Y and Z shafts. A gas torch will he held in the hand when cutting

the open root by gas. while an arc welding torch will be held when welding.

Each shaft of the robot is driven by an electric oil pressure servo. and the posi-
tion of each shaft is detected by a potentiometer. In Table 2, the specifications
of a pulse MIC welder used for saddle welding are listed.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-ROP82-00860R000600040002-0

 

- figure 1.

Key:
(1) robot

Saddle Welding Robot Arrangement

 

Photc

(4) welding torch

(2) metallurgical tool (5) welding workbench

for gas cutting

(3) gas cutting torch

Table 1.

Robot

shafts Stroke

X 1,000 mm
Y 800 mm
2 800 mm
twist TN 05400"
bend BD 45~90°

 

_________———————-—_.

(6) work

Specifications of Saddle Welding Robot

_______——-——--——

 

Driving Conl
Snggd saeed meg
welding speed oil elw
at tip of torch pressure oil

~ prm

100 700 mn/min new
maximum speed special
6.000 mm/min oscillation

motor

__———-

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDPSZ-OO850R000500040002-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Specifications of Welder

 

Style DR-HPY
Rated initial voltage 200 V :10 percent 3?
Rated initial input approximately 30 kVA
§ Rated frequency 50/60 Hz
é Rate of use 100 percent
u Output Current Base 50—v300 A
g Peak 100 A (average)
°‘ Voltage Base 10 ~35 V
3? Peak 10 V (average)
E Maximum peak current 100 V (at time of 200 V input)
’4 Pulse frequency 50/60 Hz. or 100/120 Hz
Outside dimensions 5500:) x 1.170(h) x 930(d)
m a Type TS-SSY
5-; Rated current 500 A
§.S Diameter of wire in use 1.2 o

 

 

The control unit is arranged the same as shown in Figure 4 of the preceding

article. but recent control units have a multiprocessor arrangement as shown
in Figure 2. The robot action control program is processed by a master CPU.
Each shaft of the robot receives action directives through an SVU micropro—

cessor. A teaching box, operation console and external machinery and equip-
ment are connected to the master CPU through an IOP microprocessor.

 
  

Key:
”,1? (1) core memory
an (4) (2) function calculation unit

(3) maintenance console
(a) robot proper
(5) main shafts
(7) (6) wrist
(7) teaching box
(8) (8) operation console
(9) relay input and output
(9) (10) welder

D . 3m—slr.<'.n

        
 

9‘:

Figure 2. Arrangement of Welding Robot Control Unit

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
welding of Box Structures

The welding lines of box structures consist almost entirely of straight lines.
Furthermore, the welding line is often located at an inside corner of art!»-
gonally intersecting steel plates. which is considered the most favored work
for the welding robot. As a typical example of welding robot application, the
upper and lower center frames of an oil pressure power shovel are shown in
Figure 3.

   
 
 

ﬁler-pru-
oil pressure power
shovel

Figure 3. Center Frames of Oil Pressure Power Shovel

For welding work such as this. the work is set on a positioner as shown in
Figure h. The turntable of the positioner can turn and tilt. and thus change
the position and posture of the work so that the robot can always perform hori-
zontal fillet welding. The welding is carried out according to the following
method.

 

Figure A. Welding of Center Frame by Welding Robot Mr Arcs

Key:
(1) center frame of oil pressure (5) positioner
shovel (6) checkpoints
(2) welding line (7) searchaction starting point
(3) locus (8) corner point
(6) search action (9) welding robot
2h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example. taking a look at the "D" shaped welding lines shown in the illus-
tration. first. two checkpoints are roughly taught to robots regarding one
straight welding line for standard work. When new work is set on the positioner,
pretaught checkpoints are shifted to the safe side and designated as search
starting points. After tracing once around the welding lines by passing these
points. search action is executed at each search starting point to confirm the
position of each checkpoint. Using these checkpoints. straight lines are deter-
mined. and corner points where these str-ight lines intersect are calculated.

Eventually, all welding lines are determined. and welding can be performed along
these welding lines.

As described above, if checkpoints are roughly taught regarding one piece of
work at first. all work that follows can be handled by the robot itself. The
working ratio of the welding robot is extremely good; it can operate continu-
ously day and night. Unmanned operation is virtually achieved for the present.

Gas Cutting and Multilayer Welding of the Open Root of Saddle Nozzles

The Joint of a main pipe and a branch pipe is called a saddle nozzle. A saddle
nozzle has a complex three-dimensional shape. Also. a saddle nozzle of a nuclear-
related pressure vessel in particular requires high quality multilayer welding
with up to 200 passes because of the large amount of stress involved. This work
has been considered amthfficult to be automated by conventional playback type
industrial robots.

However. the action capabilities of this robot were successfully turned to an
algorithm by adopting a special open root form that maintained a constant weld-
ing height. after the following two points were brought to attention: 1) the
locus of a saddle nozzle can be easily obtained by calculation of the line of
intersection of two cylinders. a main pipe and a branch pipe; 2) with one-pass
welding. thickness (height) is almost invariable. even when the welding site is
tilted. When the minimum checkpoints necessary for calculation are taught, the
rest of the welding task can be handled by the robot itself.

I. Saddle Locus Control Program

The saddle locus can he obtained by numerical equation as a line of intersection
of a main pipe and a branch pipe as shown in Figure 5. The locus of the branch
pipe is divided into 6A equal parts as checkpoints. and the robot is transferred
between the checkpoints by line interpolation.

  

“a; z ..:.‘M_(2)

   

Key:

(1) standard surface

(2) imaginary nozzle cylinder
surface

(3) nozzle

(4) generated saddle curve

(5) main pipe

(6) imaginary main pipe cylinder
surface

Figure 5. Saddle Locus Generation Method

25
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
I‘Vn VI 0 axons. vua. um...

The locus of subsequent passes in multilayer welding is calculated using the
radius of the main pipe and the branch pipe increased by AZ and AR.

2. Torch Angle Control Program

The torch angle in the direction of the branch pipe'a radius always faces
toward the center of the branch pipe, but the angle of elevation relative to
the main pipe must be changed to face the direction suitable for the welding
operation, as shown in Figure 6. In order to simplify the algorithms through
basic welding experiments. the angle relative to the surface of the main pipe
is designated in this case to a fixed on so that the torch angle of elevation
will be expressed by a simple numerical equation.

 

Figure 6. Torch Angle Control Method

Key: (1) nozzle (3) main pipe
(2) torch

3. Lamination Control Program by Automatic Allotment of Open Root

The amount of lamination and form of the bead for one-pass welding can be deter-
mined by welding conditions such a“ current. voltage and speed. Therefore, the
number of welding layers and the number of passes for each layer can be auto-
matically computed when the form of the open root is given. Figure 7 shows an
automatic allotment based upon the amount of deposit per pass (height AZ. width
AR) in the open root section on the standard surface 0-0. The welding on each
pass is applied by the saddle locus control based upon the automatically allotted
individual pass.

Key:

(1) nozzle

(2) third layer
(3) second layer
(6) first layer
(5) first pass
(6) second pass
(7) main pipe

 

Figure 7. Automatic Allotment of Open Root

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4. Helding Speed Control Program

Although the height of the open root is always maintained at a fixed level.
the sectional area of the open root varies according to the positions on the
locus, and the amount of weld increases at the widest partof the open root.
The amount of the change is l/cosB as shown in Figure 8, and the amount of
weld is controlled by changing the welding speed for this part.

 

Figure 8. Welding Speed Control Method
Key: (1) nozzle (2) main pipe
5. Welding Direction and Starting Point Control Program
The welding direction was reversed on each pass in consideration of the robot
mechanism and cable handling. Also, the welding starting point was shifted in
a zigzag. as shown in Figure 9. for each pass and each layer lest the strength
of the weld be jeopardized if the welding startingpoints were concentrated in
one location. This was accomplished by an appropriate shifting of checkpoints

with which to start welding. since the saddle locus of one pass is approximated
by a polygonal line that connects 6b checkpoints.

I\:¢A(1)
n21¢x(2)

an of mu (4)

Figure 9. Welding Direction and Starting Point Control Method
Key: (1) first pass (2) second pass (3) pass layer (4) second layer
6. Open Root Gas Cutting Control Program
Since a numerical equation that expresses the form of the open root is used for

the automatic allotment of the open root, the target position and posture of
the gas cutting torch are controlled using this equation to conduct gas cutting.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Uﬂ Ufl‘ILIAL vac. van:

Once the robot is taught about several checkpoints that indicate the relative
positions of the branch pipe and the main pipe and checkpoints that designate
the open root form. it can do the job of welding up to 200 passes virtually
without assistance from man.

Incidentally, when the robot operation was in its initial stage, a welder was
assigned to the robot to help clean the clogged opening of the welding torch.
to observe welding conditions and to correct a few welding conditions. In pro-
portion to the welding work mastered by the robot, the human share was greatly
reduced and the welding quality jumped up.

Conclusion

Industrial robots are believed to have a promising future as a very flexible
general machine which can handle various tasks independently without human in-
struction for everything. once it is given mental faculties. Judging by the
present technological level, however. a high level of intelligence cannot be
expected from robots. Evidently. to begin with we must realize industrial in-
telligent robots by means of efficient utilization of the computer's arithmetic
processing ability, sumplification of the work content and the proper combina-
tion of the intelligent robot's basic functions.

we have introduced center frame welding work. which achieves manless welding

by providing a saddle nozzle multilayer welding function and a simple search
function using an arithmetic processing ability. All of these robots are ope-
rating without failure. and are demonstrating remarkable automation and labor-
saving effects. It is considered very important to improve the intelligence of
robots by selecting and polishing the work contents considered intelligent for
robots from among the various tasks given to industrial robots.

Literature for Reference

l. S. Ando. "Arc-Welding Robot with Sensor 'Hr Aros.'" Proceedings of the
Seventh International Symposium on Industrial Robots, pp 623-630, Oct 1977

2. N. Miyake, S. Ando. "Multipass welding of Nozzles by an Industrial Robot."
pp 51-60. 1980

3. Takano, Ando, et al., “Maikuro Computa Aku Yosetsuyo Robotto 'Hisuts Arosu'
(Arc-Welding Robot 'Hr Aros')," HITACHI HYORON. pp 17-22. Vol 56. No 10
(1975-10)

5. Ando, et a1.. "Haikuro Komputa Seigyo Robotto Ni Yoru Nozuru No Taao Aku
Yosetsu Kotei No Jidoka (Automation of Nozzle Multilayer Arc-Welding Pro-
cess by Microcomputer-Controlled Robot)" Text for the 11th Industrial
Robot Utilization Technology Course, pp 19-33, 1979

COPYRIGHT: Machine Design 1981

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Assembly Robot 'Nebot'
Tokyo KIKAI SEKKEI in Japanese Vol 25 No 12. Oct 81 pp 73-76

[Article by Noboru Norota*, Nippon Electric Company]

[Text] In recent years, when user needs have become irzieasingly diversified.
the robot has risen swiftly to the spotlight as a very flexible piece of pro-
duction equipment that can quickly meet product model changes and accommodate
multiproduct small quantity production. Assembly work. especially automation
of multiproduct small quantity production, in the manufacturing industry has
been considered a difficult field and has often depended upon human labor.
However, a new field is about to be pioneered as a result of development and
practical application of assembly robots. It appears that in the near future
it will no longer be a dream to realize a FMS robot as shown in Figure l.

handlén

uvvvuyas,r ro

 

Figu.e 1. rue rairiug a Robot DeVuiuped by N?" and a Cuu.cr~r

Regarding a requirement for assembly robots to be able to contribute on the
production line, "they should have functions which can easily substitute for
current work by human labor." For this. the following conditions must be met:
1. Due to the characteristics of the robot, one robot cannot be expected to
save a great deal of labor. The price of the robot therefore must be encour-
aging enough for it to be introduced.

2. The area occupied by a robot must be equivalent to that occupied by a man.

3. The working speed of a robot must be comparable to that of a man.

6. The position determination must be highly accurate.

 

*Noboru Morota: chief. Robot Promotion Section. Production Equipment Headquarters.
15-7—2 Shibaura, Mimato-ku, Tokyo, zip 108. Tel (03) 451-5139

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. The flexibility and operability must be excellent.

Based upon these ideas for development. a joint type industrial robot. "Nebot."
which is modeled after the human body form. was developed and put into practi-
cal application incorporating an NEC microcomputer and NC technology. Photo 1
shows the external appearance of this robot. In structure. it belongs to the
same system as the Model Scara robot developed and put into practice by Prof
Makino of Yamanashi University. However, our robot can determine positions

in three—dimensional space due to an arm that turns and moves up and down through
the control of a servo motor.

teaching pendant

robot proper
control panel

   
 

’1-7>7<,7,.

' [‘53
J. ; ’l

 
 

hand

Characteristics of "Nebot"

As the movements of the robot resemble those of a human. it can be utilized
for a broad range of uses from various assembly tasks to carrying jobs. The

main characteristics are:

1. Because the arm of the robot is a copy of a human arm, it is comparatively
easy to automate conventional human work by the robot.

2. Because it is a joint type. the action range is large compared to the area
occupied by the robot.

3. All three shafts are driven by DC servo motors. The robot can determine
positions speedily and accurately.

4. The robot has many good points for assembly work.

a. It is good at vertical insertion (because up and down movements are operated
by a direct acting system).

b. Because it has a work direction correction function, the direction of the
work will not deviate even after a turn.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c. The vertical directional insertion force is large.
d. Because of compliance of the arm. fit insertion is simple.

e. Because it has teaching, X-Y axial inputting and condition diverging func-
tions. speed and acceleration and deceleration times can be set freely in
accordance with the values suitable to the application by using parameters.

f. Because it is equipped with a rich self-diagnostic function. operability
of the robot is great and use of the robot can be mastered without difficulty
by anyone.

Structure of Robot Proper

The external appearance of Nebot proper is shown in Figure 2. There are three
models-~large. medium and small. The carrying capacity is 5 kg in the medium
size. The arm length is 800 mm and the height of the hand portion is 850 mm,
high enough to handle work on a standard workbench. At each joint of the arm.
a high precision decelerator harmonic drive is built in. The up and down mo-
tion mechanism is comprised of a ball and three shafts. Under the joint. there
is a work direction correction mechanism that utilizes wirerope and a timing
belt. The main specifications of the robot proper are shown in Table l.

   
 

mum-1(5)
[vulva-7(7)

Figure 2. External Appearance of Nebot

Key: (8) Z shaft driving motor

(I) hand sensor attaching site (9) base

(2) hand turn (10) second arm (Y shaft)

(3) grip (11) work direction correction belt
(h) Y shaft driving motor (12) approximaely 850 mm from the
(5) first arm (X shaft) base surface (lower limit)

(6) X shaft driving motor
(7) pulse encoder

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1. Main Nehot Specifications (medium size)

Structure Joint model
Degree of freedom 3 (5 options)
Action range '

 

Maximum speed First arm 120°lsec biaxial composition
Second arm 120‘ [sec 1200 m/sec
Up and down
movements 260 mm/sec
Carrying weight 5 kg max

Position reproduction accuracy 20.05

——_——_————————

Robot Hand Structure

The hand structure of Nebot with an analog sensor is shown in Figure 3. When
moving up and down during assembly work. tightness of the fit can be judged by
sensing the applied pressure with a potentiometer. Also, there is an emergency
stop function that prevents the destruction of the arm when the tip of the hand
hits an obstacle during its downward movement. In some robots, a microsuitch
or a photosensor is used in place of an analog sensor.

  
 
 

(5) 0-75»:
'Hr-o-‘J

(6) 1715(‘2rib J
(7)5r77Iﬂ

Figure 3. Robot Hand Structure

Key:

(1) potentiometer (5) work direction correction wirerope
(2) lower limit stopper (6) up and down slide shaft

(3) pressure spring (7) chuck fitting site

(6) second arm (8) turn stop shart

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. 0le

Control Unit

The composition of the hardware of the control unit is shown in Figure a.
Except for the terminals, the teaching pendant and motor are built into the

main body of the control. The terminal is for editing application programs
using keyboards.

raw-1H,: {an

 

\- —--_--------

(.Iﬁﬂillu.(3

j
)

Figure 6. Hardware Arrangement

Key:

(1) parallel (6) teaching pendant

(2) serial (7) exterior 1/0

(3) terminal (8) items within the broken line
(4) servo driver are contained in the main body

(5) operation panel

Additionally, the teaching pendant. which is also used for loading and saving

of application programs using paper tapes, serves the purpose of giving action
directives to each shaft during teaching. It is separate from the main body.

since it performs its duty while overseeing tooling near at hand.

The main body of the control has built-in CPU 8080. RON. RAM and a servo driver.
An operation panel is installed in front of the main body.

Software

The robot language Pasla. developed by NEC. is used for hebot. Pasla is a
general term for the software system that includes the Nebot control command.
file management program and operating system for system management. The
arrangement of software is shown in Figure 5.

Users prepare application programs through a conversation system using key-
boards with the assistance or a complete file maintenance module. Application
programs are composed using commands from the command table, as shown in Table 2,
and registered in the file. A maximum of 255 files can be registered in the file.
Similarly. s maximum 255 command lines can be designated in one file. The sen-
tence number must be designated for each command. Besides these features,
general memories open to users are available. General memories are of the one
byte unit, and can be used up to a maximum of 255 memories.

33
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. Software Arrangement

Key:

(1) module management program (10) filing

(2) file maintenance (11) application software

(3) edit (12) file

(A) load tape (13) comand table

(5) punch tape (14) work control

(6) dump (15) teaching

(7) directory (16) origin access

(8) test run (17) relative coordinates

(9) filing (18) mechanical characteristic values

Table 2. Command Table

_________________________————————————

Comand Table
XY. .‘iZ action directive to arm
ON, 0? control of external machinery and equipment (bit unit)
01. timer (10 ms~2.5 sec)
JP. JZ, JN. JE. JG branch instruction
JL. 82. BN 0 unconditional branch

a branch by general memory
0 branch by external input

CF, RF. subfilecone return

NT message print

DF, 10, DC general memory operation instruction
MB general memory

general memory 255 (byte)

—_________________-_———————-——

31:
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nebot Application Examples

As discussed previously. Nebot has various characteristics and is used in many
ways. however. in the following, practical examples realized by our company
will be described.

Photo 2 is an example of automation of an assembly process by robots. This

automatic assembler links two robots, assembles five different parts by har—
monious motions. and sets the work on the existing machine in the next process.

All the work has directional orientation.

robot No 2 robot No l

robot No 2

m robot No 1

 

Photo 2. Automatic Assembler With Two Linked Nebots and Work

Photo 3 shows the automatic assembly of the keyboard switch. which is an exam-
ple of the automation of simple repetitious work by robots. The name has a

built—in high—resolution sensor to judge the quality of the fit.

 

?horo 3. Assembly Robot for Keyboard Switch

r
roa otrtciit use ONLY
PUK UrflklAL Lat. UNL‘

Figure 6 gives an example of an automated inspectionprocess by a robot. Con—
Ventlonally. products A and B were inspected by a worker. The man was replaced
by a robot for manless operation after the floor layout was changed. The
assembler sets products brought by a belt conveyer on the inspection head and
lines up the inspected products in sequence on trays for rejected and accepted
products. A robot handles the same work as a man.

l.) ‘2)
1.3g 1-,‘0,’, .
(:0) ’r.!? “L" ‘ (3)
(5) asn VF: k> / g'f£r~‘q(7)
(h) enuaulr\.ﬁ? ﬁga‘ (g! ”q, . '(3)
g 'xaa-m '
V' I \ ..(lll))

 

Figure 6. Unmanning of Inspection Process by Robot

Key:

(1) robot control panel (7) inspection machine for A
(2) tray for rejected A and B (S) inspection head (for A)
(3) tray for accepted A (9) product A

(5) robot proper (10) belt conveyor

(3) tray {or accepted 8 (ll) product a

(b) inspection machine for B (12) inspection head (for B)

Photo a is an actual example of assembling IC and LSI print substrates. IC and
LSI are of the double hand automatic switch type. This type of robot can handle
assembly work on a belt conveyer. lt appears that the demand for assembly of
special parts on print Substrates will be strong in the future.

 

Photo 4. IC and LSI Assembly by Robot

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-FICIAI. USE ONLY

Another practical use of xebot is seen in transferring TV Braun tubes on a con-
tinuously operated hanger conveyer. Also. work is underway for the practical
application of screw-tightening of 6 mm hexagonal bolts. which requires a high
technology that balances and tightens the bolt using six screws in three stages
by torque. However. this work is being successfully managed by skillfully using
the up and down motions of the robot.

Conclusion

Under the present condition. when robots are to be used for assembly tasks. the
cost of designing the work supply part application, for instance. is higher than
the cost of the robot itself. One of the future assignments is the grouping of
applications into a unit by components so that applications can be designed by
pairing of units. Furthermore. we would like to contribute to the advancement
of industries through our efforts to expand further the range of the work object
by developing highly efficient. inexpensive visual and tactile sensors for the
enhancement of robot intelligence.

Literature for Reference

Hiroshi Makino. "Scara Robotto So Kaihatsu (Development of Scara Robot)."
Material for Spring Convention of the Precision Machinery Society. l98l

COPYRIGHT: Machine Design 1981

Painting Robot 'Kobelco-Irallfa'
Tokyo KIKAI SEKKl in Japanese Vol 25 No 12, Oct 81 pp 77-80
[Article by Akin Hirose*. Kobe Steel, Ltd]

[Text] The introduction of robots in the painting industry is increasing in
order to save labor. increase productivity. and to improve the work environment
and the product quality. The first Trallfa robot was completed in 1969. This
robot. which currently claims 80 percent of the world‘s market share, is struc-
tured with five or six oil pressure actuators controlled by a microcomputer, and
moves smoothly at a high sampling efficiency. A flexiarm that has the same func-
tion as the human wrist is also produced (see Photo 1). In addition. various
magnification functions are furnished by means of utilizing a microcomputer.

Summary of Robot
I. Automation in Painting Field

The call for automation is strong in the painting industry. which must deal with
a shortage of painting workers associated with work in adverse environment, in—
flation of personnel expenses, and generation of inferior painted goods. Further-
more, the introductian of painting robots is rapidly rising at present. when the

_.__-. _———-

18—3—1 Hakihama-cho. Fukiai. Kobe, zip 651, Tel (078) 251-1551

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Photo 1. External Appearance of Flexiarm Robot

production mode is shifting from mass production of a few items to moderate
production of numerous items. As motivations for introducing painting robots.
labor-saving, increase in productivity. improvement of work environment, im-
provement of product quality and energy conservation are cited. Regarding the
introduction of a robot. superficial or near-sightedarguments about the re-
placement of men by robots are meaningless. However, once the functions of

the robot are understood and the robot is organically utilized, productivity

and product quality will be stabilized and improved, and labor-saving will be
effectively achieved, eventually freeing man from working in an adverse environ-
ment.

2. History and Design Idea

Spray painting work entails artistic elements and is different from transport-
ing, assembling and spot welding tasks. Actions continue in time and space.
Static handling does not exactly suit work. Life itself is continuous movement.
Trallfa of Norway understood these points correctly, and completed a painting
robot in 1969 based on the idea of reconstructing a human skill precisely in a
machine, and has repeatedly remodeled it to date. This basic technology con-
sists of a joint manipulator which is a mechanism generically called a Trallfa
model, a continuous pass control (C? control) which is the control mechanism.
and electric oil pressure servos for driving.

Since its debut, the Trallfa robot has become well established as a painting
robot characterized by a refined graceful figure and smooth motion; it claims
over 1,000 robots working in the world and 80 percent of the market share.

Our company entered into a technical tie-up with Trallfa in 1973, and was the
first to introduce these Trallfa painting robots into Japan. For 7 years since
that time we have added our own technology, improved the original. and produced
and sold it as the Kobelco Trallfa robot to arrive at the current mass popula-
rization stage.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basic Structure

The Kobelco-Trallfa robot consists of three parts--a manipulator. a control
panel and an oil pressure unit.

1. Manipulator (see Figure l)

The standard manipulator consists of fixation columns, a base, a vertical arm,
a horizontal arm and a wrist, and is controlled by an oil pressure actuator
with electric-oil pressure servo valves called servos 1.2.3.4 and S. Servos
1,2 and 3 are a linear actuator which actuates the turning to and fro and up
and down motions of the arm respectively. Servos 6 and S are rotor actuators
which turn the spray gun vertically and horizontally; servo S is fixed to the
output shaft of servo 6.

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)

1-415 9-316 1-.“ H‘PT-l- .¢~77;I:.-n.‘

      

1-17-1- (6)

Figure 1. Structure of Manipulator and Names of Each Part

Key:

(1) servo 5 (8) servo 2

(2) servo 6 (9) flexiarm

(3) servo 4 (10) flexiarm type horizontal arm
(4) horizontal arm (11) oil pressure actuator

(S) valve manifold (12) turning plate

(6) vertical arm (13) base cabinet

(7) servo 3 (14) servo 1

There is a flexiarm manipulator as well as a standard manipulator. This gives

the robot six degrees of freedom with a twist of wrist added, the same mechan-

ism as a man's wrist. The horizontal arm and wrist of this type are different
from the standard type. Servos b and 5 become linear actuators that move the
wrist up and down and left to right, and Servo 6 becomes a rotary actuator which
allows a twisting motion of the wrist. Each actuator has a changeover valve

that changes the oil pressure circuit during teaching and makes it possible to
provide teaching using little power together with the special accumulator. Like—
wise each actuator is fitted with a potentiometer and a resolver, and displacement

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UR Ul’HLlAI. var. ONLY

during teaching and reproduction is converted to an electric si a1 and trans—
mitted to the control panel. Accuracy is improved by installing two sensors.

Each arm is fitted with a balance spring, which means each arm can rest at a
desired position when the oil pressure is switched off. Also, each ring of
the manipulator maintains high accuracy as it is provided with a design that

prevents excessive play.

2. Control Panel (CRC Control Panel)

The electronic control system of this robot is shown in Figure 2.

 

Figure 2. CRC Electronic Control System

Key:

(1) generation of sine wave voltage (7) control circuit
(2) digitalcontrol (8) spray gun

(3) manipulator (9) parity check

(4) servo system (10) oil pressure unit
(5) memory (11) ONIOPF function
(6) console panel (12) power source

The position of each actuator is measured every 1/80-1/5 second (switchable)

by the servo system during teaching, and the measured values are converted

from analog to digital as a mode suitable for recording, and transferred to

and stored in the memory. During reproduction, information read into the

memory is transferred to the servo system at a rate of 80-5 points/second and
compared with the measured values of each actuator at a rate of 80 points/second
so as to apply voltage comparable to the difference to each servo valve. At this
time, if the information recorded is less than 80 points/second, 80 points/second
information can be obtained by interpolating between the points (for example,

L0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY

when information is recorded at 20 points/second. 3 points are interpolated at
each space between two points). A microcomputer is used for data processing.
including data transfer. comparison and interpolation. Floppy disks are used
for the memory. since they have greater recording capacity and require simpler
handling than 1c memory or wire memory. which makes it possible to have a
longer recording time and to record more programs (see Table 1). As described
above. this robot is controlled stably by the unprecedented high density posi-
tion information (80 points/second) and can move speedily and smoothly.

Table 1. Memory Capacity

Program reproduc-

 

Sampling tion time
efficiency sin le disk double disk Use
(minutes) (minutes)

80 seconds 4 8 extremely rapid motions

40 " 8 16 all kinds of painting
C P 20 " 16 32 general painting

10 " 32 ea motions that do not require

high speed
5 " 64 128 very slow motions

31 P 128 256
P T P 63 P 256 512

127 P 512 1,02&
Specifications

The main specifications are given in Table 2. The standard model has 2 degrees
of freedom in the wrist, up and down and left and right. An ON/OFP twist mechan-
ism can be installed, to add a degree of freedom in twisting. Also, the standard
model can be converted to a flexinrm manipulator simply by replacing the hori-
zontal arm. Photo 1 previously shown indicates the external appearance of the
flexiarm. and Figure 3 indicates the action range.

 

Figure 3. Action Range of Flexiarm Type Robot

h1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Main Specifications

-________—_—_______—_———————-—-—-——

Standard manipulator Flexiarm

 

1. arm turn 93° (3,1261ml) 93° (3,163m)
2. arm to and fro 75° (975mm)
3 3. arm up and down 72° (2,095mm) 72° (2,100mm)
u 8 b. wrist up and down 210° 176°
3'8 5. wrist horizontal 210° 176°
93 6. wrist rotation 90° ONIOFF control 210°
'° "" (option)
a speed maximum 1.7 m/s
2 rated carrying weight 5 kg
0-
" repeating accuracy :1 mm
é reproducing accuracy :2 mm
B
oil pressure 70 kg f/cm2
floor area for installation 750 x 750 mm
weight robot proper 500 kg. oil pressure unit
200 k control anel 135 k

         
  

 

memory system CRC system

  
     

memory capacity lo~128 min

maximum program number 64 programs
u reproduction speed change 0~120 percent
2 function (double speed editing available)
: Iexternal synchronous signal three circuits each for transmission and
3 reception
E control system C? control by electric oil pressure servos
0 AC 200 V 3 phases 50 Hz 7 WA

PW" °°"'°° AC 220 v 3 phases 60 Hz 7 WA

1. Plexiarm

Specifications are virtually the same as the standard model. The specifications
of the wrist of the flexiarm are shown in Figure 6. The following are account-
able characteristics of the flexiarm.

a. It has lighter operation than the conventional wrist.

b. It resembles a man's wrist. Its movement is easily understood and taught.

c. Because of the slim wrist, the arm can enter into narrow spaces.

he
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

oscillator

21013.7
L————2oo- —-r-———zoo—-l

Figure 4. Specifications of Flexiarm Wrist

d. Since oil pressure hose and wiring are not around the wrist, the arm is
highly reliable, being free of broken wires and oil leaks.

2. Detailed Specifications of CRC Control Panel
Detailed specifications of the CRC control system are shown in Table 3.

Table 3. Detailed Specifications of CRC Electronic Control System

 

Data memory/processing microcomputer + flexible magnetic disk

Manipulator control five or six degrees of freedom. electric-oil
pressure servo position control

recordable up to 5 ON—OFF signals. 3 output amps
are equipped as standard (guiding, loading and
driving by DC 2‘ V, 1A)

CP teaching, variable sampling efficiency (record-
able at a rate of 80.40.20 and 10 points/second)

8-128 minutes (CP), 38,000 points (PTP)
64

below 1 second

Function control

   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 

Teaching system

Maximum memory capacity
Maximum program number
Program search time

Program speed 0-120 percent adjustable by continuous variable dial

0-120 percent synchronizable to the standard speed
by external signals

Conveyer synchronization

Automatic program selection possible by external signals

Automatic repetition and

reproduction "

Start delay delayable 1-10 seconds by continuous variable dial
10 abnormality displays by Lib. disk number displayable

2-line 7-segment LED

Disk monitor

Program number display

    

1:3
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(1) Teaching System

The CRC control panel can be either a CP system or a PT? system, and the two can
be used separately to Suit the purpose by means of a changeover switch.

a. CP Teaching (continuous pass): When a robot is moved continuously. it auto-
matically memorizes the points in the path every 1/80-1/5 second.

b. PTP Teaching (point-to-point): Points in the path of the robot's movement
are stored in the memory point by point.

(2) Program Editing

Two disk units are standard equipment for expansion of the memory capacity, for
one thing. and also for copying, erasing and editing programs (for example, pro-
grams recorded on separate disks can be compiled on one disk. Also, as a varia-
tion in editing, double speed editing is possible.)

(3) Data Correction Device (option)

Utilizing two floppy disks, this device partially corrects teaching contents
point by point by remote control.

Actual Application

Application examples are selected from among the delivered robots and are shown
in Table 6.

Conclusion

Although omitted due to space limitation, there are many options available be-

sides the standard specifications, for instance, movable trucks and a 90° ON-OPF
twist mechanism of the gun.

As previously described, a painting robot's life consists of continuous smooth
motions, and the balance of the three parts--the manipulator, the oil pressure
system and the control system--is extremely important.

Kobe Steel has continuously strived for development and improvement of robots on
the basis of abundant achievements by repeated computer simulations and experi-
ments. In the future, we will direct our efforts further to improve the func-
tions, reduce the cost and expand the service system, and we are resolved to de-
vote ourselves to develop new technologies to meet neu needs for robots.

uh
son orncm. use ONLY
Table 4. Applicational Examples of Painting Robot Kobelco-Trallfa (as of
Harch 1980).

 

Industries delivered to Use Gun in use
Automobile industry body detoner painting airless
body rustproof painting static air spray
body finishing painting air spray powder

body second coat painting
body parts (bumper. cylinder-
block and other painting)
body duster use

 

Home electric home electric appliance parts air spray
appliance industry (TV. cassette tape, etc) painting
lighting fixtures painting.
refrigerator, washing machine
and range coating,
sound product painting

 

Home furniture and steel furniture and wood air spray
appliance industry furniture painting. static spray
kitchen appliance painting. enamel coating

medical device painting

Office machine and calculator part coating air spray
equipment industry locker. desk painting,
copier coating

 

 

Agricultural machinery and sewing machine parts painting,
tool industry. construction lens polisher coating air spray
machinery industry. tractor parts painting
precision machinery industry
Others for washing of carrots
freight car truck frame painting

 

 

COPYRIGHT: Machine Design 1981

Grinding Robot 'GP-l'
Tokyo KIKAI SEKKEI in Japanese Vol 25 No 12, Oct 81 pp 81-80
[Article by Kazuo Hinowa*, Sumitomo Heavy Industries, Ltd]

[Text] Initially. industrial robots were used for simple repetitious tasks
such as loading and unloading work. However. with the development of control
elements such as microcomputers. decelerators and actuators. the use of robots
has broadened into dangerous work such as loading and unloading at a press, and
work requiring high technology under an adverse environment such as painting,
welding and grinding tasks.

*Kazuo Hinowa: Industrial Robot Section. 15-4-2 Yatocho. Tanashi. Tokyo, zip 188.
Tel (942a)23-2681

b5
son omcm use omv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this article. I will discuss a grinding robot (GP—l) system for grinding
tasks in metal mold processing that requires precise surface accuracy.

This system was developed based upon the grinder robotl developed by Sumitomo
Heavy Industries for shaving off black skins from castings. In addition to the
grinding robot. an automatic inspector is introduced for inspection and assess—
ment of the finishing accuracy of the worked surface (see Photo 1).

 

Photo 1. Grinding Robot and Inspector

Job Content

Metal mold processing methods vary depending upon the objects. Generally,
for the processing of metal molds with a three-dimensional curves surface by
cutting, the curved surface of the metal molds is first shaped using a ball-
end mill. Then. finishing work (smoothing work) is carried out to remove
cut marks from the ball-end mill. Subsequently, final finishing is accom—

plished using sandpaper.

The purpose of this system is to remove cut marks from both male and female
metal molds shaped symmetric to a center axis. in this case, overgrinding of
the cut marks results in an inferior product and insufficient grinding leads
to a time loss in the process that follows. Accordingly, this system incor—
porates an inspector which measures the state of processing at its discretion.
and operates the grinding robot which carries on the grinding work based upon

the results of the inspection.

L6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

System Arrangement

This system is composed of a grinding robot, an inspector. a work setter nnd
grindstone exchanger, and a control unit. The system arrangement is compact
because each device shares the functions that often tend to be concentrated
in robots, based upon the job analysis of the objective work. A layout of
each device is shown in Figure l, and specifications are shown in Table l.
The grinding robot and the inspector are installed on a common bed symmetric-
ally to center axis A-A of the work setter. The grinding task is carried out
in Work Area P. and inspection and teaching are conducted in Work Area I.
Each device will be discussed.

 

Figure 1. System Arrangement

Key:

(1) grinding robot (5) controller
(2) inspector (6) oil source
(3) work setter (7) stroke

(6) grindstone

The grinding robot consists of a total of five shafts--three basic rectangular
coordinate type shafts and shafts for elbow and twist of the hand. In refer-
ence to the driving system. all shafts are driven by an electric-oil pressure
servo system. The general appearance of the robot is shown in Photo 1, and the
general configuration is shown in Figure 2. The hand of the grinding robot is
outfitted with a force detector which detects the grinder's pressing force and
a commercial grinder. For the grinding operation, a simulation grind system

is adopted, which grinds following the contours of the work surface while con-
trolling the pressing force of the grinder, since the pressing force of the
grinder is practically proportional to the amount of grinding (depth of cut).

in?
ma OFFICIAL usr. ONLY
in; Robot System Specifications

 

 

 

 

 

 

Action

ving machine range Detector Driving device

t to right 500 mm 12-bit photo-

snd down 400 mm electric electric—oil

k and forth 600 mm encoder pressure servo

valve-oil pressure

st -3OA’90° differential cylinder

ow -15n-30° transformer

ce detector 0~1.2k3

t to right 500 mm 12-bit photo- electric-oil pressure

and down 500 mm electric servo valve-oil

k and forth 600 mm encoder pressure cylinder

_______.___________._________________________________._____________

ulation sensor differential DC motor

face inspector transformer

___________________________________________________________.__
360° 12-bit photoelec- electric—oil pressure

n endless tric encoder servo valve-oil

pressure cylinder

t 0°,15°,30° code board oil pressure cylinder

65°,60

___—___—___—_——————————

grindstone storage disk holds 20 grindstones on the

__________________________________________________________________
rot proper: 400 kg controller: 320 kg work setter: 200 kg

.omatic grindstone exchanger: 106 kg oil source: 565 kg

————_——————————-————
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. General Configuration of Grinding Robot

The inspector is composed of three basic rectangular coordinate shafts. Con-
cerning the driving system. an electric-oil pressure servo system is used for
the base. and an electric servo system is used for the other two shafts. The
general appearance of the inspector is shown in Photo 1 (right side). The in-
spector serves two functions: a simulator which uses a simulation sensor
attached to the hand and an inspector which uses a surface inspection device.
These functions can be changed over by replacing the sensor on the hand. The
transfer is simple. The general appearance of the simulation sensor and sur-
face inspection device are shown in Photo 2. The simulation sensor is used
during teaching. Automatic teaching is performed.2 The surface inspection de-
vice is structured to measure the condition of the ground face on the surface
by rotating a feeler independent of the direction of the cut marks. The reso-
lution and feeler radius of the sensor are 3 um and 10 mm respectively.

    

ir3} ‘. I.
(a) (b)

Photo 2. Sensor of the Inspector Key: (a) surface detection device
(b) simulation sensor

1:9
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
H)“ 0"?“ Ir“. L50: 0551.!

The work setter consists of two degrees of freedom that drivu the turntable.
The rotation of the turntable is endless and is driven by an electric-oil
pressure servo system. The table can be tilted from 0 degrees (horizontal
position) to 60 degrees at intervals of 15 degrees. Fixing. removing and
positioning of work are all operated manually. Incidentally, positioning of
the work is accomplished by utilizing key grooves in the work.

The grindstone exchanger is composed of a cassette disk. a base and a clamp.
Its general appearance is shown in Photo 3. The grindstone used here is on

a shaft, and it is fitted on the grinder through a collet chuck adapter. Two
kinds of such a grindstone can be stored 20 each on the circumference of the
cassette disk. and they are freely changed as required during the grinding opera-
tion. The timing of the grindstone exchange is determined on the basis of the
results obtained from measuring the abrasion of the grindstones (measurement
entails measuring the radius of the grindstones using a soft touch function
which utilizes the force detecting device). Crindstones are exchanged by
loosening the screw of the collet chuck after the adapter is fixed with the
clamp. It takes approximately 15 seconds to complete the grindstone exchange.

   

Photo 3. General Appearance of Photo &. Controller
Crindstone Exchanger

The controller is composed of an upper minicomputer and lower three units of
microcontrollcr systems (G-SVC, l-SVC and HS/Ex). The general appearance of
the controller is shown in Photo A. and the arrangement is shown in Figure 3.
The main functions of the minicomputer are communication with the lower micro-
computers. point data control and interactive input and output processing. The
lower three microcontrollers are assigned specially to each device and consist
of a digital servo system. The interaction with the operator will he accom-
plished using a plasma display and push button (keyboard is for backup during
errors). The plasma display instructs working steps and displays errors and
the condition of each device. A cassette tape is used as a supplementary
memory and stores teaching data.

50
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Arrangement of Controller

Key: (6) cassette tape

(1) minicomputer (7) serial printer

(2) interface (8) grinding robot

(3) plasma display (9) inspector

(4) keyboard (10) work setter

(5) push button (11) grindstone exchanger

Operational Method

The operational method of this system is comprised of a teaching mode that
teaches working steps using a teaching panel and a grinding mode that executes
the grinding work by reproducing the work steps. In the following, each mode
will be explained. Incidentally. the grinding work is operated by a block
grinding system that executes the grinding work block by block after alloting
the grinding surface to the desired number of blocks.

1. Teaching Mode

Teaching is always conducted when a regeneration type robot is in use. This
job directly relates to the quality of the product or the flexibility to meet
changes in the work, particularly with regard to painting and grinding robots.
which makes the need for a simple procedure for changing teaching and data
very important.

This system is designed to simplify teaching by introducing automatic teaching
through a simulation system and a line interpolation function. The teaching

steps are shown in Figure A. For the teaching of the grinding surface. the
posture of the work setter for each block and the posture of the grinder at

the position of the block's endpoints are taught using a teaching panel by

driving the work setter and the grinding robot. Afterward, points within each
block are taught by automatic teaching using the simulation sensor of the inspec-
tor. Therefore. the work at each block can be easily reoriented by merely changing

51
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR UI-HLIAL “3!. ONLY

teaching steps

allotment of grinding
surface into blocks

designation of block number, grind-

ing method, number of allotment
work positioning

driving of grinding robot, memoriz- “Ml...”
ing four endpoints of blocks vor’o‘IItEI

all blocks completed

work positioning

driving of the inspector, (>349'tUIL
memorizing of inspected points “""““

all blocks completed

simulation automatic o\-..-nnnu--.
teaching start
work setter is set at a swmaetrical :;f:;7;2f::
position and simulation grinding “vurww-

point data of the inside ""'

of blocks is compiled

9-9 Masai
work setter is set at the inspection ner::.-I:¢>

position, and inspection point ""‘"‘

data are compiled
all blocks completed

 

termination
Figure a. Teaching Steps

the endpoints. Incidentally, the points taught here are the position from
which to approach the work during the grinding operation. When operating, the
robot grinds the work while correcting the taught points by itself so that the
pressing force of the grinder comes into compliance with the suggested force
using the force detecting device.

2 . Grinding Mode

The grinding job starts by operating the push button on the front panel of the
controller according to the instruction of the plama display after setting the
work. At this time, if the work data is not contained in the minicomputer's
memory, the corresponding data can be read from cassette tapes to carry out the
job. A flow chart of the grinding operation is shown in Figure 5. In the

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

grinding job

setting of work on the work setter

pattern number key-in

start

grindstone exchanger?
grindstone exchange

block grinding

all block grinding complete?
all block inspection

ground surface 0K

terminate

 

Figure 5. Operational Steps

grinding operation. all blocks are first ground twice. This procedure is
practiced to shorten the work time, since the pressing force set at the ini-
tial stage will not incur excessive grinding in the first two applications.
Afterward. the grinding condition (wave height of the cut mark) of each block
is measured by the inspector, and the subsequent grinding task schedule will
be decided based upon the results. The above steps are repeated until the
desired surface accuracy is obtained.

Grinding Results

Regarding a grinding method which uses a grinder, generally, there is a method
which grinds one line at a time as a grinding machine does, and there is a
method which grinds the entire surface by random motion of a grinder. For a
grinding task that requires precise surface accuracy such as the grinding of
metal molds. the random grinding of the entire surface is more suitable. This
system incorporates a weaving grinding which grinds by swaying the head of the
grinder left to right. The cut marks on the metal molds used in this case as
the work objects have undulations of approximately 100 um. The appearance of
the undulatory cut marks are shown in Photo 5, and the grinding results are
shown in Photo 6. Photo 6 shows the ground state of a female metal mold with
an opening of approximately 300 x 640 mm when the work was divided into 26
blocks (teaching block numbers 13. teaching point numbers 13 x 4, automatic
teaching point numbers approximately 500). The maximum total grinding frequency

53
mn OFFICIAL use omv
FUN Ul'flt IAL Ubl’. UNL‘

and surface accuracy of the finishing were set at 3 and 31 um respectively.
The grinding results obtained under this condition showed an overall surface
accuracy of 30 um. and grinding frequency of 2-3 times.

 

Photo 5. Cut Marks Photo 6. Ground Surface of Work
Conclusion
Whether or not the given functions . rtoot which is made to do a job such

as a grinding robot can be fully utilized depends to a large extent on the know-
how of the operator, unlike the conventional robot used for carrying objects.

In particular, the precision grinding robot developed at this tune requires
know-how of an operator. This grinding system is currently being introduced

to an actual production line and takes care of almost 80 percent of the grind-
ing task. Meanwhile. know—how necessary for precision grinding is being

accumulated.
REFERENCES

l. Okamoto. et 31., "Gurainda Sagyo Robot No Kaihatsu (Development of Grind-
ing Robot)." SUMITONOJUKO KIKAI GIHO. Vol 24. No 72. December 1979, pp 1-100

2. Taniguchi. et al.. "Narai Sochi o Mochiita Sagyo Robotto No Kyoshi (Teaching
of Working Robots Using a Simulator)," 22d Automatic Control Federation
Lecture Meeting, 3029, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Machine Design 1981

51:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nuclear Robot 'BlLARM-83A'
Tokyo KIKAI SEKKEI in Japanese Vol 25 No 12, Oct 81 pp 85—88
[Article by Seiji Kawai*, Meidensha Electric Mfg Co. Ltd]

[Text] This is an introduction of the BILARH—83A robot which can skillfully
handle a task mainly in a radioactive environment associated with nuclear
power.

Generally. it is called a power manipulator. Recent models incorporate a micro—
computer. and a robot—like application is being devised. However, the typical
use of this machine is different from that of a robot at a mass production fac-
tory. It is not meant to handle repetitious simple tasks. Precisely, this is

a handling machine which carries out unspecified maintenance work too difficult
to be handled by automated systems in a radioactive or especially hazardous en—
vironment where man cannot work.

Slave Arm

BILARM—83A was developed by Meidensha with the guidance of the Power Reactor
and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation. In this machine, a bilateral servo
mechanism is adopted to give a sense of force. On the other hand, since the

joint closely approximates a human arm. its action range is very wide and it
is very easy to use.

Photo 1 shows the slave arm. The stan—
dard cross-section of the arm is circular.
and it is designed to have a safe and easy
approach to the machines and equipment to
be handled when it is in operation. of
course, the driving part is structured to
contain all the wiring inside. The beau-
tiful smooth external appearance is the
result of function and miniaturization.

The power slave (PS) generally handles
unspecified maneuvers through remote con—
trol by the power master (PM) operated by
an operator rather than through a general
playback operation. There are various
support systems. The concept of the arm
is shown in Figure l.

 

Photo 1. PS: Power Slave

*Seiji Kawai: director, Mechatro Department, Mechatro Business Headquarters.
17—1—2 Osaki, Shinagawa. Tokyo. zip 141, Tel (03) 492-1111

55
FOR OFHCIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"ﬂ" C—p ' r 1 ' ‘
e . ﬂ 9:
l l I

, I r-o I
(9)"";;;- _. R : ﬂ :
’ .lIC-I : : : :

I “0”“) : : : :

I I l I

. I I I I

. 0;; a I» z.

I _ .1". II a. n

' ”E F f E

t Z J ‘

. Ml . ’
(2'0)‘ mmm)

 

Figure 1. Concept of Main System

Key:

(1) span (9) power slave (17) controller (I)

(2) carriage (10) telescope stroke (18) controller (II)

(3) bridge (11) dividing wall (19) monitoring controller
(4) runway (12) closed window (20) display tube

(5) telescope (13) power master (self-diagnosis)

(6) camera CR (lb) master on pedestal (21) left eye monitor

(7) camera CL (15) main control panel (22) hand monitor

(8) camera CH (16) support system control panel (23) right eye monitor

The securing of vision is the most important element in a system such as this.
Viewing the PS and the object to be handled in the sealed chamber through the
window, an operatorperforms tasks within a range of several meters. Other visual
support comes from two groups of ITV cameras: ITV camera CH that always secures a
field of vision of the hand. ITV cameras CR and CL on the shoulder of the PS
which are effective especially for remote-control tasks. Also. a monitor TV
displays the work area. These shoulder cameras work by a servo universal head.
A system has been developed whereby a P8 operation signal is processed by a
microcomputer, and hand movement automatically follows. In addition. automatic
diagnosis and warning of the PS work condition and operational steps can be dis-
played on the display tube.

Likewise. as a typical PS travelling system, three-dimensional travel is made
practical by a telescope that moves up and down and a carriage and a bridge that
travel sideways and straight.

S6
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With these systems combined. it is possible to carry out remote control of
the tasks in every corner of the space in the sealed chamber, but the effi-
ciency is slightly lower than if the job were directly handled by a human.
Nevertheless. considering that it is often not possible for a huamn to do the
job in radioactive conditions, and if the operation by a human entails decon-
tamination steps. these robot systems are obviously effective and useful.

Actuator and Sensor

The PS actuator is small and light; it uses a DC motor which gives high torque.
The DC motor used is a special kind which has passed inspection after a radia-
tion test with carefully selected insulating material and lubricating oil. be-
cause radioresistance is demanded of the motor. The PS has seven degrees of
freedom from shoulder to wrist and one degree of freedom that permits hori-
zontal movement of L02 fingers; the DC motor consists of only two types. and
innovative gearing is designed for the decelerator. Small size and light weight
are also required of the decelerator. A harmonic drive component is used for
all joints.

For the decelerator output of the PS actuator. a potentiometer is integrated
as a position sensor. Power transfer in each joint is extremely simple. A
unit which is a part assembly of the Dc motor, decelerator and potentiometer
is contained in a tubular link of each joint. as seen in Photo 1. In this
structure. the P5 is directly driven only by gears which are highly reliable
compared to conventional models. which are driven by chains and wireropes.
Also. during operation and traveling. it is easier to manipulate the power
slave because of the absence of the protruding driving mechanism on the arm.

Among the degrees of freedom given to the PS, the torque of the actuators, i.e..
the three degrees of freedom counting from the fingers--grip. wrist bend and
wrist twist--is checked by a built-in load cell. These three degrees of freedom
on the power master side are arranged the same as on the PS side. They work as
sensors that feed back the load reaction force generated on the PS side to the

operator, contrary to transferring the force of the operator proportionally to
the PS. Control of the sense of force such as this is called bilateral control,
and its principle and structure are shown in Figure 2.

-..P5'(2)

  

Key:

.:, (1) power master

(2) power slave

(3) torque detector
(5) driving part

(5) position detector
(6) amplifier

Figure 2. Bilateral Control

57
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
DUN UPHLIAL Ubl'. UNLY

Several bilateral systems such as this have been researched for some years

and put into practice using a relatively simple oil pressure driving mechanism.
A bilateral control for nuclear robots, the origin of the research, however.

is still in the development stage in every country. One of the reasons for
this is that all that were developed previously were not fully comparable to
the purely mechanical bilateral sense of force obtained by the conventional
"master/slave manipulator" regularly used in nuclear power research facilities.
However. recently attention has been drawn to an electric-driven power manipu-
lator with a bilateral sense of force and good movability due to the scale-up
of nuclear industrial facilities and the strong appeal to reduce the radioactive
exposure of workers, and BILARH-83A developed by our company has been adopted.

when this control is adopted. vision is likely to become insufficient in large-
scale facilities. but an operator can prevent irrational operation by using the
sense of force in such a case. Breakage of systems on the other side or break-
age of the PS itself can be prevented. However. at the present stage of pro-
gress, in order to avoid the complication ofcontrol lines and the complication
of thearm tare balance compensation, the degrees of freedom are limited to three
in the hand which are considered most effective for the job. Position control
is provided only for the elbow and the shoulder.

Application of Microcomputer

Regarding application of the microcomputer, it is sometimes used for playback
control. but other applications are more prevalent since its typical use is for
unspecified tasks with little repetitious driving. For example, when letting
two ITV shoulder cameras automatically follow the movement of the hand, elbow
and shoulder signals are used for arithmetic processing by a microcomputer
among the PS potentiometer signals--excluding signals beyond the wrist, which
does not move a lot when viewed from the shoulder--and the position of the
hand viewed from the shoulder is obtained. The results are used for drive con-
trol of the electric universal head with three degrees of freedom--rotation,
elevation and twist--which makes it possible for the two ITV cameras, which
are equivalent to left and right eyes. always to follow the hand of the PS.
automatically placing it in the center of the field of vision when an operator
operates the PM.

It appears that an attachable camera mounted on the wrist such as Camera GR in
Figure l is fully satisfactory to get a constant view of the hand. However. a
camera placed in such a position serves only as a supplementary vision to the
operator, because the monitor pictures turn upside down with the turning of the
wrist. Incidentally, as a simpler method of using the ITV than the conventional
generally practiced method. actions of the PS can be followed with an ITV camera
fixed on virtually orthogonal walls that run in two directions using a zoom lens
and a remote control universal head. In this system. the entire picture of the
PS and partial enlargement of the hand are possible if necessary. However, an
ITV camera operator is needed in addition to the P5 operator. It not only takes
time to follow the PS movements, but the operator must construct the movements
judging himself as to the correct direction from which the monitor pictures were
taken. Specifically, when the PS rotates at the shoulder, left and right senses

8
FOR 0mg“ USE ONLY
totally reverse at a turn of 180°, and usually an operation miss is likely to

occur because the operator cannot handle this coordinate transformation by in-
tuition.

As an additional applicationof microcomputers, we are developing a system which
conveys to an operator organized operation support information including opera-
tional steps and overload warnings.

Standard Specifications and External Dimensions

Standard specifications for the PS are shown in Table 1. Also. Figure 3 shows
one example of a traveling system and the external dimensions of the assembled
system.

Table 1. Standard Specification ofPS

 

Action value

———————— Action
Item Active part Master Control box speed
1 Shoulder (vertical shaft) turn 90° b00° 8°/S
2 Shoulder (down-right side) sway 90° 160° 8°ls
3 Shoulder (down-forward-up) sway 165° 8°/S
4 Elbow turn 150' 10°/S
S Elbow bend 135° 10°/S
6 Wrist twist 135° 250°
400 kg-cm 30°IS
7 Wrist bend 90° 180°
400 kg.cm 30'Is
8 Finger standard parallel link MAX 127 II HAX
opening and closing MAX 100 kg 15 mm/sec
9 Composite handling load FULL RANGE 25 kg
Downward and other positions
where force is easily applied 50 kg
Suspended downward from arm 100 kg
10 Under shoulder hook handling 450 kg
11 Telescope extension and retraction “00 mm 0.4A‘4.5
Ila/min
12 Required power source 200/220V, approximate
50/60": 6 kVA

_______—______——————————————-————-—

 

lncidentally. the PS can be operated by intuiton by a PM or it can be operated
joint by joint, in an operational angle range to which normally an operator can-
not physically hend. by a separate accessory controller. Therefore. the action

values of both ways are shown in Table l.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

(5):: (6) '51 (92 '1:Z;E:E ”(10)
(3 Ian, .. i W. , (‘11:). ”€33 //
' /' - c I

    

l . , .
(7)""W ' 31-“""~ ":2‘ ,0. 116). )m-nm-I
(8)m-a-: : .c --,-‘.-_ moo-- ., :
§ .
5 ‘° _}
\‘_‘I a
: x' T
; ”qt “
.l .-
(13) I, I '5”

 

Figure 3. slave Side. External Dimensions

Key:
(1) cable bearing (8) control system, action
(2) side travel rail values in bracket
(3) run system (9) up and down system
(6) run rail (10) power manipulator power slave
(5) variable (11) attaching site
(6) attaching lever (12) travelling system
(7) master slave system, action (13) hook
values without bracket (14) power manipulator TV camera

The action speed indicated is the speed achieved without load. Speed changes
up to about 1/10 can be accomplished without staging the process when the PH
or the controller is operated slowly. However, on the high speed side, with
an operation at a speed above those indicated in Table 1. the PS will follow
at a slightly lagging pace.

Whether to control by a PH or by a controller can be decided for each joint.
This arrangement is very convenient, for example, when it is necessary to
hold a specific joint stationary during PH operation; that joint alone can be

60
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

switched over to controller operation. Even if the PM inadvertently operates
the joint. that particular joint will not be activated but will maintain a
fixed position.

Facts of Application

The BILARM-BJA model was developed not as a general industrial robot but as a
robot that can handle special unspecified maintenance tasks in special places
mainly in a radioactive environment. Heretofore, actual use has also been
limited to maintenance purposes in nuclear related facilities. Recently, appli-
cation to assist regular checkups at power plants, in particular among the same
nuclear related facilities, has been investigated. New applications are drawing
attention one after another. Details of use cannot be disclosed at this time
since we are now at the verification stage by the users. The operability of the
robot is, however, rated highly. Based on the shipping results to date, al~
though the PS has a comfortable margin of freedom-~eight degrees of freedom as

a standard--the objective task can be accomplished even if three-five degrees

of freedom are eliminated for some applications.

Indeed, there has been an inquiry for a specific—use robot, and we are planning
for the development of this robot. Various characteristics are notable in the
BILARH-83A robot. which is modeled after a human arm and is provided with more
degrees of freedom to handle unspecified tasks than general industrial robots.
The greatest characteristic is what is called the joint configuration, which
allows the PS to take the most ingenious postures of all robots, permitting the
robot to do extensive work almost exactly following the form of the operator's
arm.

In the actual handling of the work, special tools for screwing and unscrewing
of bolts up to about H 20 by an impact wrench and various tools are necessary.
He are united with the users in our pursuit of developing advanced robots.

Conclusion

Several sets of the BILARH-83A model have already been delivered to the Power
Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation. and are demonstrating the
initially expected efficiency. I would like to express our deep appreciation

in this paper to everyone in the corporation who rendered specific guidance re-
garding know-how in actual application. Incidentally, this model was developed
for special use, but the use of the machine will be gradually broadened with the
help of the users. All inquiries will be greatly appreciated.

COPYRIGHT: Machine Design 1981

8940
C50: 6106/21 END

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY