FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10478

23 April 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 25/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infornation primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforaation as
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sunnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIG'IT LAWS AND REGIMTIONS GOVERNING MERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUlILICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
KILITARY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/10478

23 April 1982

JAPAN REPORT
(2000 25/82)

CONTENTS

Recent DefenseRelsted Industry Activities Reported

(W No 8m. mic“ “tu)eeaaeaeeeeaasaeaeeeeose 1

Engine for m

Model 88 Tank

Mitsubishi To Randal P-lo

Optical Cannnications Military Applications
Domestic Missile Development

Development or F-l's Successor

Value of NE: Contracts
Remodeling Phantuls

SCIHCB AND TECHNOLOGY
Industrial Robot Production Technology Discussed

(0mm 01m", J“ 82)....seaeoaeaaaaasesaaoaeasoaaaoaceoaa 1"

1981 Industrial Robot Fair , by Monika Masuda. Taksshi Hisutani
Kawasaki Heavy Industries' PUMA, by Yasuhiro Kubota

Toshiba Steel's TOM-300, by Nobuo nguchi

8W0 Seiki's sum. by Yukio Oguchi

Yasukava Electric's 'Notonan' , by SeiJi Borikava

Shim-sin Industry's '1?on J', by Shigso Kavabe

Hitachi Linited's 'Mr Aros' ,by Hitoshi Yosbhida

Creative Science, Technology Fraction Program Being Set Up

(union KOGYO 8mm, 6 Jan; 12 Feb 82) 79

Outline of Program
Research Setup

- a - [III - ASIA - 11]. P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RECENT DEFENSE-RELATED INWSTRY ACTIVITIES REPORTED
Engine for m
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 22 Jan 82 p 9

[Text] Ishikawsjina—Harina heavy Industries has recently delivered to the
Defense Agency the first and second prototype P3 engines to be mounted in

the m. The Defense Agency appropriated approximately 9 billion yen in
FY-80 and FY-81 for development of this engine by Ishikawajine-Harima. After
testing, the Defense Agency will examine and compare its price and perfor-
nance to that of candidate engines from Garrett of the United States and
Snecsa of France. By this October, a final decision is expected to be made
on whether or not the F3 engine will be used in the K11.

HTX development was begun last fall by Kawasaki Heavy Industries as the main
contractor. It is the earnest wish of both the Defense Agency and the industry
that a fuselage as well as an engine be developed in Japan. Concerning the

F3 engine, five prototypes were ordered from Ishikawajima-Harina during FY-80,
1 year before the fuselage. Further-ore, four additional prototypes are to

be ordered by the end of “-81.

Ishikawajina-Hsrina has delivered two out of five prototype engines ordered

in FY-80. By this summer it expects to deliver the remaining three engines.
These prototype engines already fulfill the performance requirement of genera-
ting 1.6 tons of thrust. The Defense Agency is planning to conduct tests

in high-altitude experiment facilities in the United States where humidity

and atmospheric pressure are adjusted to simulate actual flying conditions in
July through Septedaer. In the meantime, it is also planning to conduct vari-
ous performance tests within Japan by sounting F3 engines in a modified Cl
transport plane.

Examining the results of these tests, the Defense Agency is supposed to make
a final decision on whether or not the P3 engine will be used for the MT!

in October. Because Garrett and Snecna are also in the process of developing
engines of this class as a derivative of other engine types. it is expected
that the F3 engine will be chosen if its cost can meet the target of 100-150
million yen apiece in 1980 prices.

The developsent of the HTX is expected to be conpleted by “-87. The Air
Self Defense Force plans to order about 200 HTX's. Since two engines are
mounted in each HTX, the total number of engines ordered will be about

1

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UPPILIAL 1:32. UNIJ

500 including spares. If the F3 engine is chosen, as of Inf-83 the contractor
is supposed to start manufacturing engines which will actually be mounted
on the HTX on a trial basis.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keitai Shilbunsha 1982
Hodel 88 Tank
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHDIBUN in Japanese 6 Feb 82 p 6

[Text] The Defense Agency will start basic design work and manufacture of
prototypes for parts such as the turret in order to develop a new tank that
will succeed the model 76 tank as of FY-82. The Defense Agency has formulated
a 3-year plan to produce a first-phase prototype of a new tank starting in
FY-82, and a partial budget was appropriated for items such as basic design in
the government's budget draft for FY-82. Since a new tank is targeted for a
final decision (on development) in 1988. the new tank is called the model 88
tank. It will be developed by Hitsubishi Heavy Industries as the main contrac-
tor. The turret will be developed by Japan Steel Works, Ltd. The technical
development headquarters of these corporations and the Defense Agency have
been making prototypes of parts such as the engine one by one. This stage

of research and prototype parts production was completed at the end of ”-81.
Therefore, they will start a substantial portion of the development of the
new tank as of ”-82. They intend to develop a tank of the world's highest
standards by improving the firepower and mobility.

According to the Defense Agency's development plan, the first phase prototype
of the tank will be completed in FY-82 through “-84 and the second-phase
prototype in ”-85 and ”-86. Then, the Defense Agency will conduct practical
application tests and decide formally to deploy it in units in 1988. Although
the Defense Agency requested approximately 7 billion yen as development
expenses for an entire first-phase prototype, only approximately 1.3 billion
yen (for the 2 years ”-82 and FY43) was approved in the government' budget
draft as expenses for basic design of the entire tank and for production of
prototypes of some parts such as the turret. The Defense Agency, however,
hopes to proceed with the development plan as originally scheduled by request-s
ing additional appropriations in the budgets after FY-83.

The outline of the model 88 tank will be determined in consideration of a
balance between firepower, mobility, and protectability. As for firepower,

the 105 In turret of the model 76 tank will be replaced with a 120 :- turret.
As for the engine to be mounted. the agency is planning to use a lO-cylinder
water cooled engine with 1.500 horsepower, which is almast twice as powerful

as the engine of the model 76 tank. An increase in running speed and applica-
tion of compound bulletproof structures are also subjects of study. The number
of crewmen will be reduced from the four in the model 714 tank to three.

The Defense Agency has been producing prototypes parts by contracting with
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries for bodies and engines and with Japan Steel works
for turrets. It will bring these prototype parts together to assemble a tank
as of 1-7-82. The prototype turret, for which prototype production has been
provided in the ”-82 budget, is supposed to be designed so that a-unition
will be interchangeable with that of 0.8. forces.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, the main contractor, is seriously preparing for
development of the model 88 tank in hopes of increasing fuel efficiency by
improving engine performance and reducing total weight, while trying to make
various apparatuse. work efficiently by applying mechatronics technology.

Because the budget for the entire first-phase prototype was not approved in
the government's budget draft, there are some areas where Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries has to invest in advance. Therefore, it plans to work out the
details with the Defense Agency in the near future.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kaizai Shimbunaha 1982
Mitsubishi To Remodel 3-6
Tokyo HIKKAN KOGYO SHIMDUN in Japanese 25 Feb 82 p 11

[Text] The Defense Agency has decided to sign a contract
with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (Soichiro Suenaga, presi-
dent) in March for a portion of the service life prolonga-
tion plan (ASIP) of the trial remodeling project of the
P-A Phantom (EJ) fighter-interceptor aircraft, which has
been an object of dispute in the Diet. Because the execu-
tion of the PY-81 budget has been suspended for the
capability improvement portion of the plan, the Defense
Agency and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries will sign a con-
tract only for the service life prolongation portion of
the plan. Immediately after signing the contract,
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries will purchase 25 VGH (velocity,
gravity, and height) data recorders with the budgeted

700 million yen. Then. it plans to extend the present
3,000-hour (hours in the air) lifespan of the P—b by

about 2,000 hours to make a 5.000-hour lifespan. The

ASL? requires that records of actual use of each P-b
compiled by a load frequency meter and information from

a VCR data recorder be processed by computer. After
examining the degree of wear and the limits of each
aircraft, the agency will formulate a remodeling plan.

As for the capability improvement plan, as soon as the
suspension of the budget is removed, the Defense Agency
hopes to select a contractor quickly.

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries started licensed production of the F-bEJ in 1970.
It manufactured a total of 140 P-bEJ's by May 1981, when it delivered the
last aircraft to the Defense Agency. Other aircraft manufacturers are
Kawasaki Heavy Industries and Puji Heavy Industries. However, in the case

of the ASIP for the P-A, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries was chosen as contractor
because of its past experience of dealing with F-k's.

According to the ASIP, a VGH data recorder, which analyzes the aircraft body's

degree of safety, will be installed in one of every six of the 132 F-bBJ's
currently held by the Defense Agency. Then, information from VGH data

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

recorders will be processed by computer along with records of actual use

(CIA data) compiled by J‘Jd frequency meters installed in every P-éEJ. From
the computer, (1) the present condition and future prospect of wear in each
aircraft and (2) limits of wear of related structural parts will be obtained
in order to gather basic materials for checkups and repairs. The Defense
Agency is studying the possibility of domestically producing a part of the
software needed for computer processing. Mitsubishi Electric Co and Tokyo
Precision Instrument Co are under consideration as possible contractors. The
software will be prepared from FY-BI through PY-83. Employment of the A81?
will begin after the completion of software preparation in FY-84.

The lifespan of an aircraft used to be determined as the time when a representa-
tive aircraft of the type was wrecked. Owing to the progress of nondestructive
and other testing technologies, however. it has become possible to determine

the lifespan of individual aircraft. The conception of an ASIP was originally
formulated in the United States in 1972, and it was first applied to the

F-AE. The Air Self Defense Force sent a study team to the United States in
FY-80 to see whether or not supply of the ASIP software by the United States

was possible.

In the case of aircraft, load is imposed on wing joints and outside shell plates,
and these parts wear. The A81? is intended to find worn parts and replace them
with new parts. According to the Defense Agency, although the degree of wear
differs in each aircraft. the plan is to extend the life of aircraft from the
present 3,000 hours to 5,000 hours.

The A51? and capability improvement are two sides of the F-AEJ trial remodeling
project. The capability improvement plan includes replacement of the U.S.
Westinghouse A90 120 fire control system with the Westinghouse AFC 66, which
has been installed in the small P-l6 fighters, and installation of a new
central computer (made by IBM of the United States). which has been installed
in F-ls's. As the result, the missiles carried by the aircraft will be the
most advanced AIH-7F's and AIK-9L's. In addition, the remodeled F-bEJ's will
carry anti-ship air-to-surface missiles and posses a bombing capability. The
execution of the budget has been suspended for the capability improvement plan
due to a dispute in the Diet over Mr Hasuda's (former director general of the
Defense Agency) statement in 1968 that "Fighter aircraft should not be equipped
with bombing capabilities."

Judging that the suspension on the expenditure of 1.3 billion yen for design
costs will be removed soon, the Defense Agency hopes to hasten selection of a
contractor. Although Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is most likely to get a
contract for the capability improvement plan as in the case of the ASIP,

the company appears to need technical assistance from electrical manufacturers
in the fields of fire control systems, central computers, headup displays.

and inertial navigation systems.

COPYRIGHT: Nikan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Optical Communications Military Applications

Tokyo DENPA SHIMBUN in Japanese 27 Feb 82 p 2

[Text] According to information revealed by a concerned source on 26 February.
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Mitsubishi Electric Company. the largest
defense contractor and the defense contractor ranking high in the amount of
orders received, respectively, have started to develop optical communications
systems for military uses in order to prepare for the application of optical

communications to information processing in fighter aircraft and warships
of the Self Defense Forces.

Due to a sharp increase in computers and electronic apparatuses installed

in fighters and warships, all wiring requirements cannot be handled by the
presently used copper cables. Therefore, they have decided to hasten research
and development of optical communications systems for military applications.

0n the other hand, the First Research Laboratory of the Technical Research
Headquarters of the Defense Agency has been studying military applications of
optical communications together with manufactuers of optical communications-
related apparatus.

For this reason, military uses of highly advanced optical communications
technologies, such as the high-speed digital commmmications that have been

developing rapidly in nondefense sectors. are expected to progress at a
rapid pace hereafter.

According to the source. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Mitsubishi Electric
have formed an engineer-level committee which has been studying military appli-
cations of optical communications. They are trying to build up a system within
a short time in order to be able to respond at any time if the Self Defense

Forces decide to use optical communications systems for information processing
in fighters and warships.

Various electronic apparatuses such as central computers, inertial navigation
systems, and fire control systems have been installed in the newest fighters
and warships. Thus, they have become, so to speak, "a mass of electronic
apparatuses." Accompanying this tendency. the volume of internal information
has grown enormously and cannot be handled by copper cables any more. This
is why the two companies have started serious study of military applications
of optical communications.

If optical communication systems are used, data communications can be increased
in volume and concurrently reduced in weight. In addition, there are merits
such as elimination of electromagnetic waves and facilitation of highly dense
wiring.

Fightersandother military aircraft have, among other things, been highly
computerized. The size of missile control and other fire control devices
and inertial navigation equipment has become very small. Instrument panels
in front of the pilot's seat have been in a process of digitaliration.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UH'IL IAL L3]: UNIJ

within the limited space of an aircraft, comnications circuits connecting
these electronic apparatuses are bulky as well as heavy. Consequently, the
future use of optical conunications is inevitable in fighters. The United
States has also begun experiments to apply optical communications in fighters.

For this reason, on the assumtion that "the age of optical comunications"
for fighters and warships will come in Japan. both companies have begun serious
study of systems development and related parts usable in military applications
such as optical cables, light-emitting elements, and optical connectors, and
the checking of their durability and reliability.

Until now, the only instance of military application of optical conunications
in Japan has been the use of a very short optical fiber as part of the radar
equipment. However, if plans for a ground support fighter (FSX) to replace
the F-5 Phantom, which will be greatly reshaped by installation of the most
advanced electronic apparatuses and plans for an improved nobility aircraft
(CCV), which is under development as a fighter of the future, are realized,
large-scale application of optical connunications can be foreseen.

COPYRIGHT: Denpa Shimbunsha 1982
Domestic Missile Development
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanse 1 Mar 82 p 10

[Text] The Defense Agency and defense equipment
manufacturers have been actively engaged in develop-
ment of missiles. As of ”-82 the Defense Agency

will start development of an anti-ship surface-to-
surfsce missile (Mitsubishi Heavy Industries in

charge) and a middle-range anti-tank missile (Kawasaki
heavy Industries and Nippon Electric Cospany in

charge). In addition, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries

has started research and development of an air-to-

sir missile coamissioned by the Detense Agency.

Tokyo Shibaura Electric Company also started develop-
ment of a hand-carried SAH (surface-to—air missile).
Domestic missile development projects are jostling

with one another. All of them are intended to be
employed after 1985. If the Defense Agency formally
decides to employ them, several tens of billions of yen
in orders are expected. Consequently, the manufacturers
developing them are highly motivated. Because electronic
technologies for nondefense use can be applied to guidance
equipment and other components, missiles and considered
"a weapon suitable for Japan." For this reason, they
seem to be the core of defense equipment development.

Makers Expect To Receive Several Tens of Billions of Yen in Orders
The anti-ship surfsce-to-surface missile which will formally become a Defense

Agency development project as of ”-82 is a missile to attack from land enemy
ships which try to reach the shore. Based on the technology used to develop

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the ASM-l--an anti-ship air-to-surface missile-Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
is planning to develop an anti-ship surface-to-surface missile. It expects
to complete development by FY-87.

The middle-range anti-tank missile is for attacking tanks. One of its
characteristics is the application of a new system whereby a missile radiates
laser beams toward enemy tanks and chases the reflected light. Kawasaki Heavy
Industries, the main contractor, and Nippon Electric Company in charge of
guidance equipment, have been making components on a trial basis and advanc-
ing the research and development prior to the formal inauguration of the
Defense Agency's development plan. They expect to complete development in
FY-Bb.

The air—to-air missile (AAM for aerial dogfights) that Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries plans to develop is intended to succeed the AIM-9L Sidewinder,
which is to be manufactured under license from a u.s. company. The hand-
carried SAM that Toshiba has been developing is also intended to be a future
replacement for one currently imported by the Defense Agency. Toshiba is
planning to apply a CCD (charge-coupled device) used for home VTR cameras

in the homing device which locks onto enemy fighters. The plan has attracted
a great deal of attention from the technological viewpoint.

For the development of defense equipment such as missiles, the Defense Agency
ordinarily appropriates a development budget and co-issions companies to do
the work. However, the Defense Agency will conduct its own research on the
development of the Nike Phoenix, a possible replacement for Hike and Hawk
surface-to-air missiles. The Defense Agency is also positively studying the
components necessary to improve the performance of missiles. The Defense
Agency has co-isaioned Fujitsu to develop an IR (infrared) CCD that will
possess the capability to detect infrared rays.

Japanese missile production has mainly been production under license from 0.8.
companies. as in the case of the Nike and Hawk. However. with the successful
development of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries' ASM l and Toshiba's short-range
SAM (short-range surface-to-sir missile) and the beginning of their installa-
tion, domestic missile development has gained momentum.

COPYRIGHT: Hihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Development of F-l's Successor
Tokyo NIKKAH KOGYO SHIMBUH in Japanese 2 Mar 82 p 9

[Text] The idea of developing a successor to the
P-l support fighter (st) has been quickly boiled
down to the essentials, and the Defense Agency has
decided to launch the development plan for the post
F-l aircraft as "research and development for future
fighters" in the FY-Bl Mid-Term Operations Estimate
which the Defense Agency has been hastening to draft.
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Japan's only fighter

7
F03¢MHHCIAI.USE10NLY
run urn-luau. var. UNLI

airplane manufacturer, is eager to develop the aircraft,
saying "we want to make an P5X that can engage in a
high-level air battle after firing anti-ship missiles
and dropping bombs" (Kenji Ikeda, managing director
of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries). The Defense Agency
seems to be thinking of approximately 200 billion

yen for research and development expenses. hhile
preparing three flying corps of support fighters
(P—l), the Defense Agency is attempting to increase
support capability by prolonging the service life

and improving capability (trial remodeling) of the
P-k (EJ) which soon will exhaust their flying hours.
One hundred out of the 132 F-é fighters the Air Self
Defense Force now possesses will be remodeled. The
competition in terms of military uses between the

FSX and the remodeled F—b as a successor to the P-l,
whose manufacture is supposedly to cease soon, has
begun to attract attention.

Support fighters are loaded with a large number of anti-ship air—to-surface
missiles and bombs. They assume the mission of aerial attack against enemy
ships which threaten the sea lanes and fleets which try to land troops and
preventing enemy invasion by attacking at the water's edge. The P8X is
intended for development as a successor to the P-l. Psx fighters are supposed
to possess the capability not only for support at sea but also to attack

tanks and supplybasesof enemies which have landed. 0n the ocean. an

ordinary pulse radar can pick up targets such as warships. but that is not
the case on land. The PSX is expected to add the ground support capability
that the P-l lacks by using a pulse doppler radar to improve look-down capabil-
ity and, furthermore, by installing a laser precision targeting system.

Research and development of the st will start in the latter half of the FY-Bl
Hid-Term Operations Estimate (FY 83-87). Development expenses are estimated
to be approximately 200 billion yen. The 8.5 billion yen appropriated as
expenses for trail remodeling of the FHA in the FY-SZ budget is extremely
small in terms of cost compared with the case of developing an aircraft in
the United States. Since the remodeled v.4 will be equipped with apparatuses
from the world's most advanced ground attack airplanes and support fighters,
the remodeling of the F-6 may look like an experiment for the P5X. Because
the P-k is an excellent fighter-inspector and can take off and land on an
aircraft carrier, the F-4 is expected to be remodeled into a support fighter
with extraordinary capabilities.

In remodeling the F-6, the Westinghouse APQ 120 will be replaced by the
digital arc 66 (Heatinghouse) as an PCS radar. An AFC 66 is the PCS radar
installed in the F-16 and has a history of being a target for worldwide
condemnation because it was used in the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear
power reactor. As for a radar display, the 29200-01 by Kaiser of the United
States, which is also the P-l6's radar display, will be installed. As for

a central computer, IBM's CP lO7S/AYK, which has already been released for
the P-15, will be used. As for an inertial navigation system which flies
an aircraft to a destination without guidance, the LL 39 (made by Litton)
which is used in the A-lo. America's representative tank attack airplane,
will be installed. Since the P-b will be equipped with all these apparatuses,

8
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
remodeling of each aircraft will cost 8.5 billion yen. As Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries will receive the contract for remodeling the P-b, it is expected
to accumulate knowhow concerning ground support capabilities and should be
able to apply a considerable portion of this knowledge to the P83.

If all 100 modifiable P-b's are converted to remodeled P-é's, the Defense
Agency may face a decision as to whether the remodeled P-b's will be used

as fighter-interceptors or ground support fighters. According to the national
defense plan outline, the number of fightsr-interceptors has been set at

about 250. The plans for additional purchases of F-ls's and remodeling of

the F-é's happen to coincide. But the P-lS's cost over 10 billion yen apiece.
and under the present difficult financial conditions the additional purchase
of F-ls's is difficult. For this reason, it is possible to cancel some of

the items in the mass production stage of r-a remodeling and to make remodeled
F-a's fighter-interceptors. In this scenario, the necessity of the FSX is
increased.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982
Value of NBC Contracts
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Mar 82 p 7

[Text] It has become certain that the value of Nippon Electric Company's

(NBC) FY-81 Defense Agency contracts for co-unications and control apparatuses
will approach 30 billion yen. Since the beginning of March, the last month

of this fiscal year, NBC has entered the final spurt period for obtaining
orders for defense-related apparatuses. According to NEC's government sales
group, the total amount of contracts in FY-Bl. including direct orders by the
Defense Agency's Central Procurement Office, shows a steady increase and is
expected to be 29 billion yen, a 3.6-percent increase over last year.

The actual value of "30's contracts in FY-80 was 22,313,000,000 yen. This

was only the portion directly received from the Central Procurement Office.

If the orders received from the Ground, Maritime, and Air Staff Offices are
added, the total reaches approximately 28 billion yen. This has been further
increased to almost 30 billion yen in FY-81. NEC's defense division supplies
mainly cosmmnications equipment such as radars and microcircuits and control
apparatuses such as missile guidance systems. These apparatuses are indispen—
sable for almost all defense equipment, such as airplanes, escort warships,
and tanks. In addition to an increase in the defense budget, because current
equipment--particu1ar1y aircraft--are in the process of being replaced now,
for example the P-15 is now in the process of deployment, NBC's contract total
has been steadily increasing. with further budget increases in the next fiscal
year and construction of not only single items but also a "central command
system“ for the purpose of mobilizing and commanding each Self Defense Force
unity promptly and properly in case of emergency, a large increase in orders
for communications and control apparatuses is expected. For this reason, it
appears certain that NEC's contract total in PY-82 will exceed 30 billion yen.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

9
FOR1OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Remodeling Phantoms
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHMUN in Japanese lo, 5 liar 82
[Article by reporter Kunihiko Tanabe]
[lo Mar 82 p 11]

[Text] Is the Phantom, a great airplane which has
changed the concept of fighter aircraft and has
been playing the main role in Japan's air defense,
a rogue that likes to fight too much? its debut

in Japan was really sensational. Because of its
extraordinary high performance, it caused a big
debate on defense. In the and, former Defense
Agency Director General Hasuda made it clear in

the Diet in 1968 that "The Phantom is not to be
equipped with bombing capability," and therefore,
the Phantoms came in force without striking power.
However, because the bombing capability will be
restored in the Phantom trial remodeling project
that is intended to extend its service life and
improve its capability, the aircraft has upset the
Diet again and has even caused suspension of the
execution of the budget. Compared with the case

of the F-15 Eagle, a new air defense ace that will
replace the Phantom and which was approved by the
Diet without any obstacle, the Phantom is in
striking contrast and is destined to be a rogue.
The Defense Agency is planning to prolong the life
and improve the capabilities of the "aged" Phantom,
whose flying hours will soon be exhausted. and open
the road to "reemployment" of the Phantom. lean-
while, the defense industry is also eagerly awaiting
the project, which will cost over 100 billion yen.
Therefore, I have explored the situation surrounding
the Phantom remodeling project.

The P-lo Phantom 8.], which has been the star of Japan's air defense since the
latter half of the Shows loO's (1970-74), has surrendered the leading position

as a fighter-interceptor to the P-lSJ. The life of a Phantom is 3,000 flying
hours. The Phantoms were gradually to retire starting in ”-86 and to dis-
appear completely by about 1990, if the Defense Agency did not do anything

about it. At present 132 Phantoms are assigned to scramble in Chitose (Hokkaido),
Hyakuri (Ibaragi Prefecture), Komatsu (Ishikawa Prefecture), and Tsuiki

(Fukuoka Prefecture).

The Defense Agency intends to prolong the life and improve the capability of
the Phantom to strengthen the air defense network, which is expected to consist
of only P-lS fighters from the mid-Shows 60's (1990-). According to the

”-78 Hid-Term Operations Estimate, 100 P-ls fighters are to be eventually
assigned for duty, however. the 2-104 Starfighters and Phantoms are to disappear

10

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
from duty. As a result, the total fighter airplanes will number approxi-
mately 170, including about 70 F-l support fighters. That will be far

from the "approximately 250" fighter-interceptors specified in the national
defense plan outline. 0n the other hand, it is not easy to ask for additional
purchases of F-ls'a, which cost over 10 billion yen apiece. That is especially
true for a government with a shortage of revenue sources. Consequently, the
Defense Agency decided to adopt a plan to extend the life of the Phantom from
3,000 to 5,000 flying hours and to prolong the use of the Phantom by about

10 years.

Although old, the Phantom is the world's best selling fighter aircraft, with
over 5,000 produced. In Japan, Mitsubishi heavy Industries as the main
contractor has manufactured 143 Phantoms. The Phantom is a large fighter
whose body is approximately the same size as the B-29'a which struck Japan
with terror as flying fortresses during World War II. The Phantom is mounted
with two J79-GB-l7 Jet engines and can fly at a maximum speed of Each 2.4
with the strong power of the engines. The original Phantom model could carry
four Sparrows (AIM) and four Sidewinders (AI!) in addition to over 6 tons of
bombs. Its cruising range is an extremely long 4,200 km. Because of all
these characteristics, the original type of Phantom appeared to be a very
aggressive fighter-interceptor that could threaten neighboring countries.

For this reason, the bombing system. nuclear control system, and air-to-
surface missiles were removed from the original configuration, to make the
F-AEJ.

Based on the result of an investigation, the Defense Agency guarantees that
the Phantom is still capable of fighting on the front line if electronic
apparatuses are replaced with the newest types, and the aircraft is remodeled
so that the latest air-to-air missiles and anti-ship air-to-surface missiles
can be carried. The Defense Agency has requested, so to speak, that "aged"
Phantoms approaching retirement be reemployed. In order to convert the
Phantoms into remodeled F-b's which can rival new generation fighters, the
Defense Agency has decided to draw up two plans to prolong their service

life and to improve their capabilities.

According to the plan to prolong their service life, the Defense Agency will
purchase 25 VGH recorders with a budget of 700 million yen during FY-82. A

VGH recorder will be installed in one out of every six Phantoms to obtain

data on velocity, gravity, and height. In addition, C-A data, the actual

record of use of each aircraft, will be obtained from a load frequency meter
which was installed in every aircraft at the time of manufacture. This type

of measure to prolong service life is called ASIP in the United States. Japan's
Defense Agency is supposed to prepare software for the ASIP by FY-83 and start
operation as of FY-Sb.

According to the plan, instead of using the present method of determining

the service life of an aircraft when a representative aircraft of the type is
wrecked, the Defense Agency will determine the service life of each aircraft
separately by examining the detailed data of each aircraft. In predicting the
future degree of wear of each aircraft, the Defense Agency will employ necessary
checks and repairs for each aircraft. In addition, the limit of wear of each
structural part will be checked in detail. The Defense Agency cannot tell

for sure if the prolongation will be 2,000 hours or only about 500 hours until
it examines the result of its surveys.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is no particular problem in prolonging service life. The movement to
develop software in Japan has been rising in the defense industry. As for the
improvement of the capabilities that is the other side of the remodeling pro-
ject, however, the current session of the Diet has suspended the execution of
the PY-Bl budget. The restoration of the bombing system in the Phantom has
greatly stirred up the opposition parties.

[5 Mar 82 p 9]

[Text] Phantoms close to retirement will be converted into extraordinary
aircraft--since the Japanese are skillful, there is the possibility that it
may happen. In response to a remodeling project which requires 8.5 billion
yen in FY-82. speculation about an extraordinary aircraft ran thousands of
miles at a full gallop and the Diet has been giving red signals one after
another to measures to improve the capabilities of the "aged" Phantom.

Certainly. a big experiment on the Phanton is about to be made. Although
the Phantom belongs to the previous generation of fighters, the remodeling
project is aimed at modernizing the electronic apparatuses carried in the
Phantom and atstrengtheaingits missile power while making the best of the
Phantom's flying speed of Mach 2.4. Although the exterior will remain the
Phantom itself, the interior will be designed by picking up apparatuses from
the most advanced airplanes. It is no wonder that the project is considered
in some respects an experiment to absorb hungrily every merit of the P-lS
fighter-interceptor, the P-16 light combat attack aircraft. the A910 anti-
tank attack aircraft, and the Alfajet support fighter.

The capability improvement measures are: (l) improvement of the fire control
system, (2) strengthening and expansion of missile-carrying capability and (3)
improvement of bombing capability. The most outstanding feature of the design
is the installation of a central computer, which the present Phantom does not
have, and the collective processing of all information. If the same In!
central computer as the one in the P-15 is used, the remodeled F-A can be
armed with air-to-air missiles--AIH—7F (the latest Sparrow) and AIHP9L (the
latest Sidewinder). If this computer is installed. the remodeled r-a will
incidentlally also possess bombing calculation capability. However, if it is
the computer used in the F-lS, the bombing capability of the remodeled 3-4
will not exceed that of the P-15. It is unnecesary to cite examples of Zero
fighters and Hayabusa fighters which were loaded with bombs and torpedoes and
sallied forth. Fighters are all equipped with some bombing capability. In
the case of the Phantom, however, because of its extraordinary high performance
and separate installation of a bombing computer. the removal of the bombing
capability was possible.

As for an PCS which locks onto a target, the Westinghouse APQ 120 will be
replaced by the Hestinghouse APO 66 that is installed in the P-l6. Although
both the APO 120 and the APO 66 are made by Hestinghouse, the former is an
analog pulse radar while the latter is a digital pulse doppler radar. This
change will greatly increase the look-down capability, which is presently non-
existent when flying at low attitudes. The doppler effect does not work in
the case of tanks and buidlings on the ground. Therefore, targets must be
identified visually by the pilot. Nevertheless, the APO 66 will be extremely
threatening to warships on the ocean.

12

FOR 0F1WC1AL.USE(NVLY
A pilot sees a shadow of an airplane in the headup display and takes action

to engage it. As a headup display system, the Defense Agency plans to use

the one which was jointly developed by Rest Germany and France for the Alfsjet
support fighter. As for the inertial navigation system (INS) which flies the
airplane to its destination without guidance, the LL 39 (Litton of the United
States) from the A-lO anti-tank attack airplane will be used. Although the
Defense Agency explains that the LL 39 is cheaper than the INS of the P-lé,
the combination of the INS from the A-10 and the PCS from the F-16 will give
new characteristics to the remodeled Phantom. and that concerns me.

The Defense Agency persistently defines the plan to prolong the service life
and improve the capabilities of the Phantom as an effort to retain the fighter-
interceptors. The Defense Agency plans to protect Japanese airspace with Phan-
toms together with the F-lS's until the Shows 70's (1995-2005), when self-
developed future fighters will begin flying. For this reason, it is necessary
to replace the AIM-7B, whose firing speed is Mach 3.5 and whose range is 25 km,
with the AIM-7F, whose range is 46 km even though the firing speed remains the
same in the remodeled Phantom. Also, because the remodeled P-b can separately
fire 7 km and 10 km range Sidewinders, its capability to handle dogfights
within these ranges will greatly be improved. With these reasons in the back-
ground, the Defense Agency even says that the primary mission of the Phantom

is that of a fighter-intercepter. and it will not object to cancellation of
some of the items when mass production of the remodeled F-b's begins in 1986.

Nevertheless, it is true that the remodeled Phantom will collect the functions
of the world's most advanced support fighters and attack airplanes. Review-
ing the history of fighter airplanes, the unrivaled Zero fighters were shot
down as if they were red dragonflies during the final stage of world War II.
The uniformed officers' idea that "the more exclusively defensive Japan's
defense is, the more necessary excellent aircraft are to prevent enemy intru-
sions in advance," coincides with each item of the Phantom remodeling project.

Recently the idea that the distinction between fighter-interceptors and support
fighters is unnecessary has been spreading through the Air Self Defense Force.
It holds that in case of an emergency there is no time to choose battlefields
and all aircraft will have to be mobilized. For this reason, the Defense
Agency seems to want to say that fighters must be allround attack aircraft,

and the restoration of the Phantom's bombing capability is not incidentisl.

The Phantom happens to be close to the end of its normal flying life and just
short of the time when it will be worthless as a fighter. In their dreams
uniformed officers have seen that the world's best attack aircraft can be
produced at a cost of about 1 billion yen in the case of mass production if
measures are taken to prolong the service life and improve the capabilities of
the Phantom, which would otherwise soon be almost without value. The idea is
that it is better to depend on ”the second life" of the Phantom to fight support
battles where the probability of damage to aircraft is high instead of using
the expensive P-lb. The Defense Agency is planning to remodel 100 Phantoms.
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. the main contractor, and various electronic
apparatus manufacturers are casting covetous looks at the remodeling project,
since it means that unexpected extra technological and pecuniary gains will
fall into their hands.

COPYRIGHT: Nikksn Kogyo Shimbunshe 1982

9896
cso: 4105/71 13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.Ul‘ VII-\II‘U \ ‘OI- ‘II‘I‘I

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

INDUSTRIAL ROBOT PRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY DISCUSSED
1981 Industrial Robot Pair
Tokyo DENSHI GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 26, No 1, Jan 82 pp 49-52

[Article by Ryosuke Hasuda and Takashi Hizutani, both of the Control Engineer»
ing Department, Tokyo Institute of Technology: "Sensors, Control Functions, and
Mechanisms which Drew Attention (Fran the 1981 Industrial Robot Pair-Photo—
gravure Commentary)"]

[Text] The Era of Robots With Intelligent Functions

We are having a robot boom today. Robots of all kinds, fros industrial robots
to recreational robots, have caught the public eye. The industrial robot fair
held recently proved this point very well. Never before have so easy people
attended an exhibition of industrial machinery. One had to wait in line a
long tine before entering the hall, and even after entering the hall, one had
to push through the crowd in order to be able to see.

Having been widely publicized by newspapers and TV, the juice serving robot
(Photogravure 16) above all was especially crowded with people. This robot

is capable of recognizing a number of words such as "orange" and "grape" from
a voice input, and according to the program's choice, the robot will pick up
a bottle of juice, remove the cap, and after checking it with a sensor, pour
the Juice into a cup to serve. The existence of such a robot with intelligent
functions, which comes just a little bit closer to the image of a "robot" held
in people's minds. must have stirred people's interest.

Instead of the term "intelligent robot," which has become quite popular in
recent years, "robot with intelligent functions" is used here for the follow-
ing reasons: Although the control technology employed in the industrial
robot today may be quite advanced, the robot does not possess true intelli-
gence or the ability to take action automatically according to the circus-
stances. Rather. the capabilities of the robot today retains at the level of
intelligent functions* including judging, thinking, learning, and adapting
throu detection and memory.

*The tern intelligent functions" is defined as the functions a robot should
possess in the draft definition of robot terminology (Research Report No 2
concerning standardisation of robot; Japanese Industrial Robot Society, 1976).

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Control functions have been significantly improved in recent years. thanks to
the advancement of microelectronics. The statement "microprocessor is being
used" always appeared in the catalog or panel just a few years ago, but not
today. This is probably because microprocessors, whether 8-bit cr 16-bit.
are being utilized so coulonly that limitations on the scale capacity and
computation functions due to hardware have been relaxed to some extent.

Therefore. the problems encountered today in the construction of robots are
related to the sensors and the software used in the control system. A number
of new attempts in these areas could be seen in the recent robot fair, includ-
ing an attempt to raise the level of intelligent functions to that suitable
for industrial application. In the field of industrial robots, the era of
robots with intelligent functions consisting of sensors and associated proces-
sors together with control software may continue for some time to come.

In this article. the sensor functions and the control functions of the intelli-
gent robot, together with the mechanisms which are indispensable for producing
the concrete action function of the robot. will be discussed centered around
the machines displayed at the industrial robot fair.

Activity of Sensors Has Only Begun

Sensor-controlled robots were the type of robots most widely expected at this
robot fair. However. there were only a few examples with unique sensor appli-
cation; it appeared that the time was not yet ripe for extensive and effective
application of sensor technology to robots.

0n the other hand, in spite of the fact that an excellent vision system as a
single entity was successfully developed by Fuji Electric and Tokyo Electron
(the U.S. Automatrix Co), the link between this vision system and the robot
movement has not been well developed. This delay is probably due to the great
difficulty encountered in robot control software when movement control is to
be accomplished by vision input.

The sensor control which is in greatest demand and is also used most widely
today is that used for searching the welding line used on the welding robot.
There were a few different formats of this type of control on display. One
of them was the vision system used on Kawasaki Heavy Industry's PUMA robot
(Photogravures l and 6). In the beginning, when the machine is in the weld-
ing line discrimination mode. this system shines a slit of light onto the

work to be welded. The light reflected from the work is received by a photo-
diodc array camera via an optic fiber and the signal is processed. By this
process, the location of the welding path along an L joint or a butt joint can
be determined. This method uses a two-pass format consisting of the discrimi-
nation mode and the welding mode in order to achieve a highly reliable opera-
tion.

The proximity sensing format, which was used on Hitachi Limited's "Hr Aros"
robot (Photogravure 8), is a method in which the location of the welding line
is continuously checked and determined during the welding process. This
method has been in use for some time now.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tun vrru-uu. nun. vnua

The contact format was used in the welding robot of Shinmeiwa Industry. In
this method, the welding wire itself is used as the contact point, and the
welding line along an L joint is determined by four points which are searched
prior to the welding operation. This format is convenient for practical
applications because no specie. sensor elements are required.

Another method of on-line control of the welding line without the use of a
sensor element, which was used on Yasukawa Blectric's welding robot, also
caught people's attention. This method utilizes the welding current itself
as the feedback signal. This method is quite effective where the nature of
the welding line is known to some extent.

The accuracy of arc-welding can be improved through use of these on—line or
off-line sense functions. However. the most desirable method is one which is

capable of solving problems related to strain in the work being welded and to
optical and electrical noises.

"Pans Robo," a product of Hatsushita Industrial Machinery (Photogravure 3),
was one in which the vision system was utilized for the general operation.
Although it was a demonstration operation, a certain figure pattern was

picked up by a camera and the data was fed into a processor, which extracted
the center location (X,Y) and the angle of inclination (0) of the figure. The
operation table was then positioned by translating and rotating it according
to x-Y-O. The figure pattern was discriminated, a program was chosen, and the
motion of the arm was actuated according to this program.

Another Pena Robo had a photo sensor in its hand, and it was able to sort ob-
jects by detecting the color of the object (see Photograph A). This robot
was able to discriminate five or more different colors. It appeared to have
a highly practical applicational value.

Nippon Electric's keyboard assembly robot (Photogravure 2), together with the
arc-welding robot, is usually considered one of the goals of using a robot.
This robot was capable of detecting pressure on its arm through measurement
of the deformation of a spring in its arm's driving mechanism, and the assem-
bly operation was carried out with a force feedback control. Besides these,
robots with sense of touch control have also been developed by Hitachi, but
no outstanding assembly robots with sensors were on display this time. The
force control technology should be pursued further in relation to the compli—
ance characteristics of the SCARA type robot, which will be discussed later.

Balance Between Control Functions and Operability

The robot's control functions on the servo level and the robot's operability
characterized by the ease with which it can be taught or programmed will be
investigated next.

In regard to the servo control level, the continuous path control is greatly
in demand for the control of such operations as painting and welding. For
example. the welding robots developed by Hitachi (Photograph B) and by
Shinmsiwa (Photogravure S) are capable of smoothing the path by performing

16
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
three-dimensional linear or are interpolation through a amber of given teach
points. This capability enables the robot to connect any two given points in
space with an arbitrary curve. This function, together with the function for
smoothing the atop points and nonstop points, enables the robot to execute a
smooth movement which could not be realized in conventional robots.

Another control function concerns effective coordination with the mechanism-
that is, as more and more robots with jointed construction appear, these
robots are equipped with an appropriate coordinates transformation function
so that they can operate along a path in any coordinate system. As a result,
horizontal and vertical movement of the arm, and movement to maintain a fixed
wrist orientation are greatly facilitated. Moreover, the programing infor-
mation may be dealt with in a specific coordinate system such as the rectan-
gular coordinate system. This feature is indispensable for a robot with
mltiple degrees of freedom. The interpolation function and the coordinates
transformation function require a considerable amount of coaputation. There-
fore, the key factors should be simlification of the computation format and
improvement of computation speed.

The operating systen is becoming more and more advanced and, as far as teach-
ing and programing are concerned. program selection and modification can be
easily carried out not only during the teaching period but also during the
operating period using an external signal.

Now then, since the control of robots by microprocessors became commonly in
use, its Operability has become a focus of attention. All controllers consist,
in general, of a keyboard and a CRT display for monitoring, and these con-
trollers have been simplified to make them easier to operate for on-site
application.

A control device consisting of a flat touch keyboard and a 9-inch CRT used on
the arc-welding robot of Mitsubishi Electric (Photograph C) is a typical exam-
ple. The robot program data, welding conditions, and its relationship to the
external jig control can be displayed on the CRT screen. This system is very
effective not only for teaching but also for monitoring.

The robot languages employed to increase the effectiveness of teaching and
programing the robot include Sankyo Seiki's star and Kawasaki's PUMA language,
VAL. Using SEEP, designation of the XYZ coordinates and designation of speed,
together with the sequence comaand and the loop command connecting these
points can be prograned and entered into the system through the keyboard.

'ro utilize this function it is necessary to learn the language, but it is
worthwhile because the language facilitates the description of a complicated
operation and allows expansion into sensor control. Robot language is con-
sidered to become even more indispensable as the robot functions become more
advanced. At present, it is highly desirable to have more robot languages
introduced so that the use of robot language can become more popular.

Morphological Evolution of Robot

He will continue to review the details of the robot fair from the viewpoint
of the mechanisms.

17
me OFFIClAL USE ONLY
f‘II Ufl‘lLIAb UBI‘. \IIVLI

An overall trend, characterized by the transition from conventional robot ope—
rations consisting of transporting and painting to more advanced operations
such as welding and assesbly, was apparent. A variety of innovations and
changes have been introduced into the shape of the robot itself and the ways
in which robots are utilized.

One of the changes concerns the type of robot. Traditionally, a typical
industrial robot belonged to either the rectangular coordinate type, the
cylindrical coordinate type. or the polarcoordinate type. Robots of these
types have largely disappeared, and the amber of jointed robots resembling
human beings has increased significantly this year. This is because a robot
performing welding or assembly must be able to move freely in all directions
within the operating space, and the jointed type has the advantage over the
conventional type for this type of application. Kawasaki's PUMA is a typical
oxenple. This model was designed mainly for precision operation, and it comes
in several different sizes. It appears that this robot is well prepared to
deal with various applications that nay come up in the future (Photogravure 4).
A similar type of robot was also used in the welding operation by Dainippon
Machinery, demonstrating the superior movability of a robot of this type.

On the other hand, a number of jointed robots with a new shape, called SCARA,
were also on display. As shown in Figure l, the rotational axis of each joint
of this type of robot is vertical. This feature is the main difference
between the SCARA type and the PUMA type. The functions of the SCARA type
robot emphasize operations in a horizontal direction. The SCARA type robots
possess one unique design concept: that is softness (compliance) in the
robot's horizontal action. Instead of highly precise and rigid action. the
robot's movement is in part influenced by external pressure so as to carry
out the operation smoothly. Take the case of inserting a rod into a filleted
hole, for example. If this operation is carried out by the conventional
high—precision control, the rod and the hole may fight one another due to
unavoidable positioning error. 0n the other hand. even if the two are
slightly misaligned, a robot with compliance can align them without undue
strain. because of the softness in its horizontal movement. bales of this
type of robot were displayed by Nitto Precision Industry (Photogravure 9) and
Sankyo Seiki (Photogravure 10). In Pelten's PUHA (Photogravure ll), the
weight of the arm was reduced significantly by an innovative design in which
all the driving units were concentrated in its base. Unfortunately, there
were no firms which designed their demonstration to highlight the compliance.
The utility value of compliance has not yet been fully evaluated, according
to an explainer. It will be a great pleasure to watch its future development.

zations Hall. The future trend will be to strive not only for a more highly
accurate action function but also for smoother operation through adaptability
in movement.

As for the robots for welding, no significant changes either in the mechanisms

or in the types came to attention. However, the goals have been shifted from
conventional spot welding to arc—welding, which is more difficult to perform
and in which the deformation of the work must be taken into consideration. As

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(1) ”7941",:
(all
3

“cm“ (rum m

I

Figure 1. Diagram of Robot's Degree of Freedom

Key: (1) Coupliance (2) Acting force

nore problem inherent to the arc-welding operation are uncovered, more new
Iechanisms will be invented. In addition, there is a trend to replace hunan
operators by robots for all welding operations, where the environment is
harmful to hulan operators. For this reason, too, the robots used in welding
operations must not only possess advanced functions but met also be easier
to operate.

Another way of utilizing the robot was demonstrated by the robot displayed
by Yasukawa Electric (Photogravure 12). An ordinary type of robot is placed
horizontally, and instead of using the robot to carry the welder, the welder
is approached by a robot carrying the work. To be sure, not only will many
new types of robots be developed in the future, but my ideas concerning
utilization of robots will also be invented.

As to other individual ideas, the wrist of Hitachi's robot (Fhotogrevure 6)
provided an increasing example. This is a mechanism capable of working in a
limited space such as painting the inside of a box. Other innovations to ex-
pand the robot's capabilities could be seen in various forms, including in-
troduction of a linear motor into an actuator by Nippon Electric (Photogravure
13). Furthermore, many more ideas must have been put to good use in many
parts of the robot which could not be seen from outside.

The robot fair this year was reviewed briefly mainly from the viewpoint of
mechanisms. In spite of the great potential the robot possesses, its pro-
gress does not appear to be as rapid as that of electronics technology. We
hope that robots in newly evolved forms will soon appear through innovative
technological development.

Conclusion

Robots, including those appearing in cartoons and science fiction, are dis-
cussed widely on television and in magazines today. Probably because of

this, a great many people of all age groups came to see the robot fair this
year. The elementary school pupils, who were found in large umber among the
spectators, my have been puzzled by the industrial robots which look so differ-
ent from the inage of robots held in their ninds and, at the same time, gained
new understanding about robots.

19
M OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
a use vases-asa- ~~~ wise...

But there are still many possibilities for the robot. The range of work
assigned to the robot can only grow wider and more advanced in nature. The
robot, without a doubt. will make progress steadily by overcoming many trials.
Many new phases of robots will certainly be revealed at the next robot fair.
My confidence in its future progress was sufficiently assured by the youthful
future technologists I saw at the robot fair.

5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

PHOTOGRAVURE CAPTIONS

"Treat me like an operator“ was the catch phrase of Kawasaki's PUMA. a
computer-controlled robot.

Nippon Electric's keyboard assembly robot.

Matsushita's Pana Robo. an arc-welding robot, caught attention as a robot
capable of applying its vision system to an ordinary operation.

Kawasaki's PUMA performing welding operation; aiming at greater relia—
bility in operation through application of sensor technology.

Shinmeiwa's Robel, a plasma shearing robot; carrying on board a 16-bit
microcomputer.

Hitachi's spray painting robot "PAPKBR" with a microcomputer.
The wrist of Hitachi's spray painting robot.

Hitachi's "Mr Aros,“ a welding robot, with noncontact type sensor,
carries out welding operation as it measures.

A programmable robot, "Picmat SCARA," for automatic assembly (Nitto
Precision Industry).

"SKILAM series" multiple-jointed robot controlled by microcomputer
(Sankyo Seiki).

Precision assembly robot "PUMA" (Pentel) concentrates all driving units
in its base to reduce the weight of its arm.

Yasukawa Electric's welding robot "Motoman." A robot carrying work
approaches a stationary welder--an interesting idea.

Nippon Electric's precision assembly robot "Model A," with actuator
driven by linear motor. New possibilities are uncovered.

Nippon Electric's juice serving robot can recognise spoken words such
as "grape" and "orange." It opens the bottle and serves juice in a cup

after checking it with a sensor.

20
FOR'DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
Photograph A. Robot capable of discriminating colors (Matsuahita Industrial
Machinery)

 

Photograph 8. Robot capable of etc interpolation (Hitachi Ltd)
PUG urrsuun. was. d-‘Ls

He can cite the qualitative improvement of the robot itself as one of the
factors supporting the robot boom in recent years. The capabilities of indus-
trial robots are being upgraded by leaps and bounds, as indicated by words such
as diversified and multifunctional used to describe them. In support of all

this is the newest electronics technology such as LSI, microcomputer, and sen-
set.

'The 1981 International Industrial Robot Pair" (sponsored by the Japanese
Industrial Robot Society and NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUNSKA) was held at the Tokyo
Industrial Sample Market Assembly Hall in Tokyo-ﬂaruumi for 5 days starting
8 October last year amidst this background. This robot fair, which was the
fourth of its kind. was represented by 36 robot makers (the largest so far),
each displaying its own unique machine, and the fairground was crowded with
the spectators day after day.

In connection with this special issue, some examples of "robots with intelli-
gent mechanisms" which caught most attention at the fair are introduced herein
together with a report written by Messrs Hasuda and Mituta of the Tokyo
Industrial University.

COPYRIGHT: Electronic Engineering 1982
Kawasaki Heavy Industries' PUMA
Tokyo DENSHI GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 26, No 1, Jan 82 pp 53-56

[Article by Yasuhiro Kubota, director of Hydraulic Machinery Business Depart-
ment. Kawasaki Heavy Industries: "PUMA Robot System"]

[Text] The PUMA (Programnable Unilersal Manipulator for Asselbly) robot
system, consisting of a multiple-jointed, electrically operated robot with
artificial intelligence was realized as a result of an R&D effort on the
computer—controlled robot system which lasted more than a decade. The PUMA
was developed not merely to replace human muscular labor but also to simulate
human dexterity.

The medium-scale robots of the 500 series in earlier days were each developed
for the purpose of replacing a human operator and to do assembly work along
with the human worker, so their shape and size were patterned after the
human figure and their range of action was also comparable with that of a
human being.

The minirobots of the 200 series developed later were about half the size of
the 500 series. These minirobots were characterized by their compactness
(shoulder height 33 cm, arm length 40 cm), light weight (robot body weight
approximately 7 kg), high speed (1.5 ale), and high accuracy (20.05 mm). They
were used mainly for the assembly of electronic parts such as inserting
resistors, condensers, and transistors into the printed circuit board.

In response to a demand for power in addition to all the other attributes of
the PUMA robot--inc1uding dexterity, high speed. and high accuracy--robots of

22
FOR OFIHC1A1.USE10N1Y
the 700 series which are 1.5 times bigger in size and four times larger in
load-carrying capacity (10 kg) than the 500 series were developed last summer.

These three types of PUMA robot system were developed on the basis of the same
design concepts (such as structure and control format) except for the differ-
ence in size. Therefore. they are all compact, light weight, and made with
structural precision. They can move faster (1-1.5 m/s) and more accurately
(:0.1-0.05 ma) than the human being can. Moreover, the robot's arm can be
freely switched from left to right, and vice versa. These robots can even
reach the back side of the work object, and since the robot's shoulder can
rotate both forward and backward, they can perform operations behind them, so
to speak, as easily as in front of them.

The robot's movements are all calculated and processed by the microcomputer
contained inside the robot in real-time, so any arbitrary spatial linear or
curvilinear motion can be carried out with a high degree of accuracy. More-
over, the software system in support of this robot system has a versatile
robot language, "VAL," at its disposal, so the user is able to teach his robot
any movement he desires very easily using this program language.

Therefore, PUMA robots, which can work along with human workers, are being
used widely in diversified fields for various handling operations including
arcdwelding. inspection and measurement, in addition to performing assembly of
electronic parts and machine parts.

The System Components

The PUMA robot system consists of the following basic components: the robot,
the control device, and the teach box. To make the robot do actual work,

a program must be composed first and the robot must be taught to behave.

The following additional components are necessary to accomplish this task:

a CRT terminal (or a typewriter) to instruct the robot to move, a pneumatic-
ally operated hand, and an external signal interface (1/0 module). In any
case, these can be simply equipped as an option. In addition, an external
auxiliay memory device consisting of a minifloppy disc may also be used

to temporarily store the program prepared by the user. Figure 1 provides a
block diagram of this system.

The software system VAL, which controls the entire system, is stored in a
PROM inside the control device. VAL is an advanced program language used
for robot control and is equipped with the following functions: 1) maintains
surveillance of the system state, 2) compiles the user program and executes
it. and 3) controls the movement of tha robot. The user may also use this
language to give commands and make the robot perform various operations.

1. Robot Body

The external appearance of the robot body (Model 500), its main dimensions,
and its range of movement are shown in Photograph 1, Figure 2. and Figure 3,
respectively.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iva VI tax-As. was. Vl‘hl

 

 

noun
3 ' (‘0
’63)“ ' .....‘Ioeaa-b .‘ . ‘2
(sf—Tu g ' .’
Lg," ------------- 1'7“:ch __
L- ... - Hrs-on m with... Hunt... m
I;) (1,331,” (7T "‘—:Ts:o—_f:— ‘ﬁé
CONYIOL) L _. __ml!_|
Figure l. PUMA Robot System Block Figure 2. Main Dimensions of PUMA
Diagram Robot
Key: (5) 0r Key:
(1) Robot (6) Terminal TTY (l) Waist rotation
(2) Control device (7) Floppy disc (2) Shoulder rotation
(3) Terminal CRT (8) Teach box (3) Elbow rotation
(4) I/O module (Manual (4) Wrist bending
control) (5) Wrist rotation

(6) Wrist twisting

 

 

 

_ A_ 'i c l o z

Ca__i.'_')1r at 1 "en'- ' un- ' a.

- :- v-7»: "Jilin-toy.- l
.ve- IL..- '1’!”- _m-.

 

Figure 3. Robot's Action Range

Photograph 1. External View of
PUMA Robot
(500 series)

an

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 5. Control Device Block Diagram

Key:

(1) Main computer (7) Arm

(2) Terminal (8) Power amplification

(3) Brake control (9) Encoder

(4) Microprocessor II? (10) (External memory) Floppy disc
(5) Digital servo (ll) Manual control

(6) Analog servo (12) External machine

This control system is coqrised of a microcomputer system consisting of a
CPU (1.5! 11/2), a PROM containing the system software VAL, a RAM for the user
program, a serial 1/? controlling terminal-external memory-teach box conmuni-
cations. a parallel 1/1? in parallel with the control circuit of the robot body
itself, together with the electric circuits for the control of each motion
axis and a Dc power source. All circuits necessary for the control of the
PUMA robot system are contained in it. The external shape of the control
device is such that it can be rack-mounted and its weight is 65 kg, so it

can be easily moved around.

3 . Peripheral Devices

1) Terminal: The terminal may consist of a keyboard (standard typewriter
format) and a video display unit (CRT). or a printer (m). The user may use
this terminal to edit the user program in VAL and also to execute it. This
terminal may also be used to display the robot status. The terminal may be
disconnected from the control device vhile the robot is moving according to
the user program.

2) Floppy disc: The floppy disc drive is capable of storing the user pro-
gram and position data. and if necessary. it can read out data to the RAM of
the control device. The power to this device is supplied by the control de-
vice. so the device becomes operational as soon as the special cable is con-
nected (applicable disc: 4.5-inch minifloppy disc).

3) I/O module: The PUMA robot system Inst work in concert with other equip-
ment such as a conveyer in an actual operation situation. Therefore, the

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UI'I'ILIAL U09 UI‘LI

The robot's degree of freedom consists of three basic axes: waist rotation
(JTI), shoulder rotation (JTZ), and elbow rotathxi(JT3); plus three wrist
movements: twisting (JTA), bending (JTS), and rotating (JT6)--a total of

6 axes. Depending on the type of work, the robot may also be operated with
five-axis movement by deleting the wrist twist.

Each axis is driven by a DC servomotor through a speed-reducing gear train.
The driving unit consists of a DC servomotor, an incremental encoder, and a
potentiometer. The basic axes are equipped with electromagnetic brakes, so

in case of power failure. the robot's attitude can be frozen in order to pre-
vent any damage that may result from contact between the robot and theinciden—
ta1 equipment. In order to realize high-speed action, the dynamic balance of
the structure was carefully considered through extensive measures, including
high—strength member construction with cover, use of light alloy material and
die-casting technique to achieve lightweight design, plus miniaturization of
mechanism design.

Moreover. to insure reproducibility with a high degree of precision, in addi-
tion to the lightweight high-rigidity design described above, a special back-
lash adjustment mechanism was introduced to the speed-reducing gear train.
Thus, the desired degree of precision was attained.

2. The Control Device

The external appearance of the control device and its block diagram are shown
in Figure 6 and Figure 5, respectively.

7I7K-7119

(5)

 

Figure 4. External View of the Control Device

Key:
(1) Input terminal (3) Peripheral equipment
(2) Control unit (6) Teach box

(5) Floppy disc

26
FOR 0F11C]Al.USEtMNLY
PUMA robot system must be equipped with a line through which it can receive
signals fro: other equipment in order to know their status and also to trans-
ait signals to the outside equipment. The 1/0 module is equipped vith these
functions, and it is connected with the control device by a flat cable. It is
constructed in such a way that it can be rack-mounted.

6) Teach box: The teach box consists of vsriom switches for operating the
robot and a display unit to display the nesaage concerning the system status
issued by the control device. In the teach mode, the speed of manual opera-
tion and the position and orientation of the robot's wrist can be set by the
teach box. Or, the user program can be stopped during its execution, or the
speed of the robot can be changed during its operation by the teach box. By
switching to "free mode," the robot can be operated manually. Furthermore,
the pneustically operated hand can be opened or closed, or the coordinate
system used (to be described later) can also be changed by the teach boa.

Specifications and Characteristics of the Robot

The specifications of the robot body and the control device of the PUMA 500
series are su-arized in Table l. and their characteristics are as follows.

1) Superior Operability
(1) Lightweight and coapact construction with multiple degrees of
freedom: it occupies only a small space. so it can be installed easily
anywhere and becomes operable as soon as it is connected to a col-aercial
power source.
(2) Easy to Teach (Program)
The robot can be taught in robot control language VAL.
The robot can be taught by the teach box in various action modes with
respect to: a) each lotion axis, b) absolute coordinate system (x,v,z,),
and c) wrist coordinate aystea.

(3) Program changes can be implemented even during the repeat action
period.

2) Diversified Control and Advanced Functions

(1) Applicable to all control modes including PTP (point to point) and
CP (continuous path) control of the work orientation.

(2) High accuracy (:0.05-0.l mm). high speed (1-1.5 ale).

(3) Coapstible with vision sensor, touch sensor. or force sensor
control.

3) High Reliability

High reliability is insured by a codination of a maintenance-free robot body
and a controller containing LSI-ll.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IJ‘I2)

urscy

500 series (medium type!

550 560

5 6
320‘
250’
270'
- 300°
200°
520°
2.5 kg
6.0 kg (wrist tip)
20.1 In
1.000 In]:
approximately 55 k3

—-—~————_—_—_*

e control

01

Colputer-controlled electric servo

Each axis can be moved nanuslly
freely

Each axis can be loved independently

wrist tip moves in the XYZ coordi-
nate system

Action in the wrist tip (work)
coordinate

Action according to user program
VAL (nunber of commande- approx 100

No linit. Conditional and uncondi-
tional branching may be introduced
freely

Trans-desion (0X) and reception (RX),
8 circuite each (expandable to
32 circuits)

100/200/220 VAC, 50/60 Hz, 1.500 U
320 (a) x 490 (U) x 610 (D) In
Approximately 45 k3

——-——————-———-—_———_

300 baud, 33-232 0
9.600 baud, 83-232 c
Hinifloppy disc

-——-—-——-—————_—__.__.__________

F0.‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
Control Format

The control format belongs to the coeputerhcontrolled electric servo format.

The control signal for each axis obtained by the main computer (LSI-ll) in
real-time computation is distributed to each axis control circuit, consisting
of a microcomputer. a PRO“, and a RAM through a microprocessor I/F. The
action ofeach axis is then controlled by an analog servo driven by the control
signal via a D/A converter. The following five control modes are available:

1) Free control: each axis can be moved manually.

2) Independent control of each axis: each axis can be moved independently.
3) Absolute coordinate control: the tip of the wrist moves in the x12
coordinate system.

a) wrist system control: the tip of the wrist moves in the wrist (work) co-

ordinate system.
5) Program control: movement is controlled by the user program.

In the PUMA robot system, the position information that is, the position of
the hand flange, is stored in the memory in the form of either converted
value or displacement value with respect to each axis. To provide the robot
with a large amount of position information, a relative designation format
can be used (when a reference position exists, the name of the new position
to be designated can be separated from the name of the reference position by
a colon : ). If the reference position is changed, all other position infor-

mation designated relative to it changes automatically. Therefore, it is
relatively easy to deal with a situation involving a change in arrangement of
the work object. Moreover, if the wrist coordinate system is employed, a new
hand's dimensional data need not be designated even after the hand is replaced
by a new hand with a different shape. A new wrist vector matching the new
shape will be designated by VAL.

External Signal Connection

The control device of this system is connected with the external equipment by
the followirg input/output signal lines.

1) Input signal usable by VAL (8 circuits).
2) Output signal usable by VAL (8 circuits).
3) Input signal with special function.

Moreover, since the input/output circuit signals are on TTL level (Figure 6),
it is necessary to amplify the signals in order to be able to drive the relay
and to insulate or isolate the system in order to eliminate noise and to pro-
tect the circuit. Therefore a photocoupler is used to isolate the system from
the external circuit, and the signals to drive relays and the relay output
signal are transmitted via this coupler.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O-soubeso-

"J.

Figure 6. Input/Output Circuit Diagran

Key: (1) I/o nodule connecting connector

Progru Language VAL

VAL is a language developed especially for control of the robot. The robot
can be controlled accurately and easily through the use of this language.

Using the progran language VAL, the user can write his progran describing the
robot novenent (co-lends to robot consist of simple words and where).

VAL has many functions. including: 1) function to control the robot movement,
2) function to edit the progral written by the user and to execute it,

3) function to maintain surveillance over the robot status. A) function to
accept infatuation transmitted fro. various sensors including vision system,
and 5) function to control cosplicated robot novenent in conjunction with
other control functions such as continuous path control (for example, weaving
of robot body). It is also capable of editing progrsn while the robot is in
operation. It is capable of using subroutines written in FORTRAN. Thus,

complicated operations can be progra-ed easily.

The robot system can be tested through the use of monitor cor-land. By doing
so, a umber of parameters stored inside VAL can also be modified (this co-nand
will not be executed while the program is running).

Conclusion:

Although the description is brief because of space limitation. I would like
to add the following in closing: the PM series robots resemble the human
arts in shape and degrees of freedon, and unlike conventional industrial
robots, receive operation instructions in special robot language. Making the
host of its outstanding features. including compactness. high speed. and high

30
FOR OFRCIAL USE ONLY
precision. these robots can pertoru arc-welding on a coeplicated curved sur-
face. painting operation requiring high-speed track control and speed con-
trol, inspection and nsasurenent, to say nothing of various types of assenbly
work. The M series robots are expected to play an active role in various
types of handling operations for some ties to cone.

COPYRIGHT: Electronic Ragineering 1982
Toshiba Steel's roman-300
Tokyo 0811881 GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 26 No 1, Jan 82 pp 57-60

[Article by Nobuo Taguchi, director of lobot Depart-ant, Toshiba Steel:
"resume-300 Robot Systen")

[Text] A general-purpose advanced robot, 3-15. of polar coordinate type
cones to mind when spot-welding of autombiles is nentioned. The technical
know-how related to the spot-welding robot used for sutoeobile body construc-
tion accmlated over the years has been expanded, and a new TOSHAN T-300
series has been developed and put into operation.

The T-300 series is a mltiple-arl robot systen capable of carrying out a nun-
ber of welding operations simultaneously. Its construction employs the
building block format. It can control a uni-u of eight robots having

three AC servo axes and one Oil-0F? axis.

The characteristics of the T-300 are as follows:

1) Easy to organize by the user.

Since the building block forest is e-ployed, the user can choose as many
axes as he wants according to the work object and the welding location, and
organize his robot systen economically.

2) Versatile installation attitude: vertical, horizontal. or oblique.

The robot my be installed in parallel, in perpendicular, or slanted with
respect to the work object. It can even be installed suspended tron ceil-
ing, or changed from right-hand to left-hand arrangenent and vice-verse.

3) Capable of controlling a mint. of eight robots.

Using a aicroconputer, the control device of the T-300 is capable of simul-
taneously controlling a mime of eight robots. Therefore, even if the line
tact is rapid, a large nunber of welding operations can be carried out aiml-
tsneously by properly distributing the work to each individual robot.

lo) Large nenory capacity and high reliability.
The nicroconputer contained inside the control device processes the data and

controls eight robots using tine-sharing format and handling a series of se-
quences by Doc for-at. All of this is handled by the software. The program

31
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ova. vases"...- --., 9......

uses 192 points for each robot. and six different types of operation can
be progra-ed.

5) Easy maintenance through use of electric motor.

Positioning of the direct translation axis is accomplished by an AC motor, so
the reliability is high and maintemlneis simple.

System Construction

The basic specifications and the external appearance of the T-300 are shown

in Table l and Photograph 1, respectively. The system consists of a maximum
of 8 robot bodies. 26 axes plus 8 ON-OFF axes, a console panel containing a
microcomputer, a servo panel to drive the main body motor, and a teaching pen-
dant. The system construction diagram is shown in Figure 1.

Table 1. Basic Specifications of TOSHAN-300

_——_—_—_—.———————————_———

Mechanical specifications

Degree of freedom Each robot can assume the following construction
1) A-axis or B-axis; single-axis construction.
2) A-axis and B-axis: 2-axis construction.
3) A-axis or B-axis and O-axis; 2-axis construc-
tion.
5) Araxis, B-axis, and Oaxis; 3-axis construction.

5) Combination of 12-4) and C-axis.

Action range and speed Action range Maximum positioning speed
1) A axis 200/600/600 (mm) 90 mm/sec
2) 8 axis 200/600/600 (mm) 90 Im/sec
3) C axis 600/900/1200 mm 120 mmlsec
6) 9 axis 60' 20'lsec
Load capacity 20 kg (at a distance 300 mm from wrist center)

Repeated position repro—
duction accurac 21.5 nm/axis (C axis down direction 22.5 mm)

—__.—__—____———-———_————————'

Control specifications

Control for-at Controls a maximum of 8 robots simultaneously

Positioning path PTP (point to point)

Memory capacity Fixed allocation: 192 points per robot (1,536
pts sax)

Car model selection 6 car models (32 points per car model)

External signal 1) Interlock signal: input/output, 2 each/robot

2) Car model detection signal: 6 kinds, 4 stages
3) Holding signal

6) Stop signal
Input electric power AC 200/220 V :10 percent 30 50/60 a:
Ambient temperature 0-60'6

M

32
FOR‘OFEK]A1.USE¢NVLY
Photograph 1. External Appearance of 1-300

(3) A and B exec
nel (6) C axia
pendant (5) Console

 

Figure 1. 1-300 Syotea Couatruction Diagram

: (11)
m panel (12)
' (13)
(110)
not (15)
(16)
meter (17)
rvo unit (18)
(19)

No (20)
(21)

33

8 axis

Mary
External input
C axis

No 8 servo unit
No 2 robot
Main circuit
No 3 robot
Power aource
Conaole

Servo board

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IV“ Isa-raven» DUE. UIVLI

The console panel consists of a power source, a microcomputer unit, I/O units,
and an operation panel. It is capable of controlling a maximum of eight
robots. Eight sets of switches controlling various power sources, main cir-
cuit operation unit, and servo units to drive each axis motor are contained
inside the console panel. The servo units may be added to or removed from
the console according to the actual number of robots used. The teaching pen-
dant may be used to operate any one of the eight robots by a selector switch
on the console. However, during the repeat mode, all eight robots will
operate simultaneously. A signal indicating completion of the work will be
issued to the outside only after the work operations of all eight robots are
completed, and the systen will then take up the next operation. The mechanism
unit consists of a pole-change motor, a feed screw, a detector. and a film
potentiometer.

The position information and the control information are stored in an IC
memory with battery backup.

Control of the three AC-servo axes employs an ON-OFP servo format. That is.
the value obtained by the position sensor and the value read from the data
anacompared, and if the difference between these two values comes to within
a designated deviation range, a stop col-sand is issued to the driver unit to
halt.

Control System

Figure 2 gives the outline of the control system.

The control console may be roughly divided into two parts: a computer unit
containing a microcomputer and an I/O unit handling the external input/output
signals. The CPU card consists of a Toshiba 16-bit high speed microprocessor
and an IC memory with battery backup as its memory, together with an 8 kw
CHOS RAM and an 8 k" EPROH. ibileeach I/O interface baseboard inside the com-
puter unit is controlled by the CPU (processed by the software), the interface
baseboard in the I/O unit receives logic level signals and its output is used
to drive the relays or mercury relays.

After passing through a filter, the input from the potentiometer is subjected
to an AID conversion and then managed by the CPU; the so-called digital pro-
cessing (Doc) format is used. The control formats used during the teaching
and repeat periods will be described next.

1. Teaching Action

The A. B, and C axes are driven by the hardware during the teaching period
without the help of the CPU.

By pressing a push-button switch on the teaching pendant corresponding to
either A, B, or C axis, a drive command can be entered through the hardware

to the corresponding axis output interface, which activates the mercury switch
on the mercury relay driver, which in turn activates the contact inside the
servo unit which drives the motor. Therefore, this mode can also be used as

a manual mode.

3’;
FOR 0FIU€JAI.lEﬂ£(MHLY
Key:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(S)
(6)

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

      

 

Figure 2.
Operation panel (15)
Computer unit chassis (16)
1/0 unit chassis (17)
CPU card (18)
I/O interface (19)
Operation panel input/output (20)
buffer (21)
Operation panel interface (22)
Helory card (23)
ABC axes output interface
Mercury relay driver (26)
Servo unit (25)

ABC axes
Potentioneter

(26)

32-channe1 AID converter and

interface

94vl0g
w') 23
eye's.“ ) )
mean

$9426)

Control Outline Diagra-

Relay baseboard

Filter

Pendant—car aodel interface

Input buffer

reaching pendant

Input interface

Input buffer

Car nodel signal

Lina preparation, welding (input),
interlock (input), 0 P08 input
Output interface

Relay driver

Origin, work completion, interlock
(output), welding (output),

0 P08 output

After the robot is loved to the desired position, the control inforaation
switches on the operation panel and the pendant are set and the memory push

button is pressed.

By this action, the position information in the form of

potentiometer input is subjected to AID conversion and accepted by the CPU
control data. Inside the CPU, the position infornation and the control
infatuation are stored in s neaory address designated for that particular
robot.

This teaching process is repeated until the teaching of all eight robots
is completed.

35

F0!(HHHC1AI.USE(IVLY
I‘W WI‘ILIAI— use. UIVLI

(1) Start

(2) AID conversion of potentiometer (analog)
data of a designated axis-present value
(3) Reference value--preaent value--

deviation
(6) Deviation a 0? (S) Positive-negative
check
(6) Reverse drive (7) Forward drive
register set register set

(8) [Deviation] ‘ low speed range?

(9) Low speed (10) High speed
register set register set
(ll) IstiationI i stop range?
(12) Forward and reverse drive register sets

reset
(13) Output of content of (1k) Output high or
the register set low speed, for-

ward or reverse

(15) All axes completed? drive

(16) Complete

 

Figure 3. Time-Sharing Processing Program

2. Repeat Action

During the repeat period, the information concerning both control and position
contained in the memory address corresponding to each of the eight robots is
first read into the working RAM. The information related to the A, B, and C
axes drive is processed by a time-sharing processing program according to the
time allocated by the system clock.

Figure 3 provides a flow chart of the tine-sharing processing program. Accord-
ing to the time-sharing processing program. the analog data obtained from
potentiometers located at various axes of each robot are subjected to AID con-
version and the digital data (the present value) thus obtained is compared

with the position information (the reference value) read into the working

RAH. Based on the result of this computation, a command will be issued

through 1/0 to effect the changes, such as forward or reverse rotation and
higher or lower speed. This operation is repeated for all axes of the eight
robots. This operation iscarried out in DDC format with sampling.

Figure 4 illustrates the action flow chart during the repeat period.

The main program manages the results obtained from the time-sharing processing
program. It checks whether the deviation (reference value minus present value)
is within the positioning range or not. If so, it confirms the positioning.

As to the ON-OFP axis (the 0 axis) used on the wrist, the main program

36
FOI¢OFFKJAI.USEIMVLY
(1) Read position and control informations at
the address of designed robot.
(2) 0 axis output according to control informatics:

(3) Check 6 axis positioning (Ls position)
according to the control information

(6) Check ABC axes positioning.

(5) Positioning couplets
(6) Output interlock and welding (output) sig-
nals according to control intonation

(7) Check interlock and welding (input) signals
according to control intonation

(8) Read new position and control informations
at the new address of the next robot accord-
ing to control information.

(9) Next cycle.

    

("a”) (9)

Figure «‘0. Flow Chart for Repeat Period

processes the output according to the control information and also checks its
positioning.

After positioning of all axes (A, B, c and O) is completed, the CPU will
decide what is to be done next based on the control infatuation. That is.
it will issue appropriate signals to 1/0 as needed to check the external in-
terlock signal and the welding signal input/output.

This cycle is repeated for the next point by reading the pertinent inferna-
tion from the memory.

Hethod of Operation

A maximum of eight robots can be controlled simultaneously by the T—300.
These eight robots may be concentrated at one station, or distributed over
several stations. Take the case in which there are two robots each at four
stations, for example. The work objects being welded at these four stations
may be the same or different (car model, for example). As the work flows
along the line, after completion of each welding task, the car model signal
for the new work must be read. Therefore. the repeat operation consists of
four modes: step operation, cycle Operation. process cycle operation, and
automatic operation. These four modes of operation are briefly described
below.

37
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1. Step Operation

One of the eight robots is chosen and the addresses with identifying numbers
are visited one after another by pressing the pushbutton. If the car model
signal supplied from outside ispresent, then the action of the robot is deter-
mined by this signal. That is, the control passes to that address correspond-

ing to the car model.

2 . Cycle Operation

Like the step operation described above. one work cycle of a selected robot
is carried out automatically.

3. Process Cycle Operation

This refers to the stage operation of the eight robots. Cycle operation is
carried out in a stage group selected from along one-six stages.

lo . Automatic Operation

In principle, each robot starts operation corresponding to its car model.
Robots belonging to each stage group start operation upon receipt of a signal
indicating the preparation is completed. Those robots which complete the
operation sooner than others will wait until all the robots complete the
operation. when the operations of all the robots are completed, a signal is
issued to the line and preparation for receiving new work begins.

Thus, 192 nulbered memory addresses for each robot can be divided and dis-
tributed among various car model signals. Figure 5 illustrates the assign-
ment of addresses among six different car models. It is evident from this
drawing tnat the address 0 is the origin common to all car models.

 

Figure 5. Allocation of Addresses According to Car Model

Key: (1) Address number (2) Car model

Exanple of Application

When robots are used for spot-welding an automobile body. selection of the
robot becomes very important depending upon the line tact. For example.

38
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
when a cycle time longer than 1 minute is allowed for a robot with a six-axis
polar coordinate system, the number of welding points may be in the range of
30-50, and the six-axis characteristics can be fully utilized. However, if
the cycle time is of the order of only 30 seconds, then the number of welding
points will be in the range of 15-25, and there will be no need for the six-
axis system. Therefore, it becomes more cost- and performance-effective to
carry out the welding operation using a nmber of simple robots with three—
axis construction, such as the 1-300 arranged three-dimensionally.

Figure 6 illustrates a suspended, vertically installed T-300 system. There
are three robots at this station. With these three robots, 39 spot-weldings
are carried out with a robot cycle time of 32 seconds. Therefore, this
arrangement is clearly less costly than the use of two robots with a polar co-
ordinate system. The control console and servo panel are located at a station
where they are easy to operate.

 

Figure 6. Example of T—300 installation

Key: (1) Servo panel (2) Control console

Conclusion

A group control format for robot control was explained with the TOSHAN

T-300 control system as an example. Simultaneous control of eight robots

is a control format suitable for large manufacturers which engage in mass
production of medium variety. This format is not as suitable for an Opera-
tion in which only one station is required. Concentrating eight robots at
one station often poses space problem as well as maintenance problems.
Therefore, the T-300 system is also equipped with other control formats such
as control of two units and sequential control of each axis. He also have
robots of the T-200 series, a sister series, consisting of two-axis construc-

tion.

39
FOIiofFKJAl.USE(NVLY
Robot control technology nust continue to develop and evolve. This cowany is
also undertaking TED of a robot system capable of dealing with a flexible
manufacturing systen.

COPYRIGBT: Electronic Enaneering 1982
Sankyo Seiki'a SKILAH
Tokyo DENSHI GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 26 no 1, Jan 82 pp 61-66

[Article by Yukio Oguchi, director of Industrial Machinery Business Develop-
Ient Office, Sankyo Seiki Hanufacturing: "SKILAH'I Control SysteII"]

[Text] Outline of SKILAH Assembly Robot

This robot is a wltiple-jointed robot with three axes + one axis control,
developed especially for the asaably work. The assembly robot has just
reached the practical application stage, and it appears that sone time will
be needed before the perfect robot will appear because so any control ele-
nents are involved. Heanvhile, SKILAH as a general-purpose robot equipped
with all basic elenenta necessary for asseubly work sense to point to the
future trend. Although its construction is very simple, it has a wide range
of applications thanks to its inroved unipulators and intelligence.

Photograph 1 shows the robot body of Model SR 3, Figure 1 gives its construc-
tion diagran, and Figure 2 shows its working area. Its 91 axis (first joint)
and 02 axis (second joint) are driven by Dc servonotors. The tip can be
positioned at any point inside the working area by controlling these two
angles. The 8 axis at the tip can be rotated 1180' by a stepping notor, and
the attitude of the tool attached to the tip can be controlled. The three
axes referred to above are simltaneoualy controlled numerically. Also, there
is an additional uis (air cylinder) called the 3 axis, which provides up-and-
down notion of the 8 axis. SKILAM can be used on a wide range of applications,
including inserting, pressing, boxing, and soldering small parts.

 

Figure 1. Robot Hechanisn Diagran

Key: (1) Axis (3) 0 ring P11
(2) DC servonotor (lo) Stepping motor
ho

MOMCIALIJSEONLY
Figure 2. working Area

   

Photograph 1. Robot Body Photograph 2. Control and Operation
Box

Electrical Specifications

An outline of its electrical specifications is summarized in Table 1 and its
control and operation console are shown in Photograph 2. The following con-
ditions were taken into consideration during its design as the conditions
necessary from the viewpoint of controlling the assembly robot.

1) Its cost must be able to compete with the personnel expenditures.

2) Its operation control must be simple enough so it can be manned by
workers.

3) Since it is often used in conjunction with other automatic machines, it
must be able to exchange signals easily vith its peripheral equipment.

bl
FOI‘OFFKJA1.U§E(MVLY
fun urn-as use. vas- UNI...

Table 1. Electrical Specifications

Control format

Action format
Position detection

Data memory format
Data memory capacity

Control axis number
External input signal
External output signal
Setting unit

Teaching

Data format
CPU

Offset function
(coordinate modification

Point determination and
modification function by
learning

Sequencer
Power source
Speed control

Servo control by microprocessor and synchronous
control of peripheral equipment

PTP (point-to-point) format

Rotary encoder; S axis is by stepping motor
without encoder

Guns-RAM with battery backup

#00 points (may be divided into 5 types of
variable lengths)

3 axes simultaneous control + 1 axis (3 axis)
16 points (userbreleasad. LED display)

16 points (user-released, relay contact output)
91 and 02 axes: 0.01 mm; 8 axis: 0.0l°

XY coordinate input format using robot language
(833?) (program unit is of separate type,
separate estﬂmation)

Absolute
Z 80

X.Y--msx 19.99 mm, s axis-~max 23.15‘
8 axis~-max $9.99 mm

X. Y rectangular coordinates and 5 axis

SPLCZ (Sankyo product)
AClOOV :5 percent, 1 KVA
Cam curve (NC 2 curve)

—————————_—_—____——___—

a) It should not have special sensors of its own, but must allow connection
of sensors provided by the users.

5) In order to widen the range of general application, a robot language must
be employed so that its intelligence level can be improved through upgrading

its software.

Control Box Construction

This machine was designed to be installed on an assembly production line, so
theoperation box is placed in front of the operator while the control box is
installed separately behind the production line for better work efficiency.
For the sake of economy, the control box does not have any uneasential decora-
tive element. The operation at the operation panel follows the operational
format of conventional machine tools in order to eliminate the image of
numerical control--that is. the operator does not handle numbers directly.

£2

INJIiOIWﬂCtAL USEICHVLY
The special progrul unit is of a separate type, so only one unit is needed to
control several robots. Program can be prepared according to need and then
loaded onto the unit.

Control System

Figure 3 shows the block diagram of the control systen. The CPU . consisting
of a Z 80, is connected with the program unit by an as 2320. The user progra-
vritten in robot language is loaded onto a 6-kilobit 0108 nenory with battery
backup. The user progr-s, which are of variable lengths, are divided into
five types and stored. Any single program nay be selected by the touch of a
button on the operation panel. Functional conputation is carried out by an
APU (AH 9511) for the sake of high speed. It is also equipped with a cue,

so naintenance monitoring can be accouplishsd by simply connecting a CRT dis-
play to it.

(5)
(62

   

49,-7111

Figure 3. Block Diagram

Key:

(1) Power (6) 8-bit CPU

(2) Power unit (7) PLC board 1-bit ICU

(3) Interface board (8) Control panel nan-nachine interface
(lo) Servo anplifier (9) RS 2320 serial interface

(5) Microprocessor board (10) CRT nonitor TV

One of the special features of this machine is the fact that a sequencer

(homemade) is used as the main controller. The 8-bit CPU nerely executes the
subroutines designated by the cos-and issued by the sequencer. Figure lo shows
an example of a flow chart. In this emle. the job for the Z 80 is confined

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run vs 0'“ ans. vua. UI‘LI

(1) Start

(2) Type selection

(3) Return to origin completed. memory
(é) Abnormality memory

(5) Automatic selection
(6) Start lamp on

(7) One-step action

(8) Cycle completed (9) Step lap off
(10) Counter action

(ll) Step switching (12) Step lamp on,

start lamp off

(13) Cycle stop (16) Start button PUSH
(15) Automatic selection

(16) Automatic operation (17) Step button
' complete lmap off PUSH

 

Figure lo. An Exanple of Execution Flow Diagram

to a "one-step action” processed according to a subroutine. The sequencer and
the Z 80 are joined by a 16-bit board. The advantages of using a sequencer
(l-bit CPU) as the main controller are as follows:

1) The time required to develop a software for the sequencer is much shorter
than that required for an 8-bit CPU.

2) Software change can be accomplished very easily, so it can readily deal
with system changes.

3) Real-time processing can be carried out without the use of complicated
time-sharing processing. so the problem related to operational interlock can
be easily and surely dealt with. Peripheral parallel multiple processing is
also possible.

a) The control signal can be treated as a single wire signal instead of a
code, because of the l-bit structure.

5) The system reliability is improved, because it is highly resistant to

noise.
6) The load on the 8-bit CPU can be reduced.

Characteristics of the Servo System

Generally speaking. when a motor is accelerated or decelerated, the speed
reducer will experiencea.sudden change in acceleration and a mechanical shock
resulting from it. To soften this mechanical shock and to increase the dur-
ability of the mechanical members, the acceleration is controlled and kept be-
low a certain fixed value. Acceleration and deceleration of the arm are con-
trolled so that its velocity change follows a special cam curve. This cam
curve consists of the NC 2 curve developed by Professor Hakino of Yamanashi

University.

No
IN)! OFFNJAJ.USE(MNLY
The nethod of control goes as follows: A locus is calculated in advance and
stored in the ROM as the bit image. Using this as the basic pattern, the arm
velocity is automatically varied according to the selected velocity. Figure 5
gives actually measured data. As a result. smoth acceleration and decelera-
tion are achieved through use of the NC 2 curve and there is no overshoot in
locating a point. Thus. improved mechanical accuracy is achieved, and at the
same time the maxim speed can be raised to the mechanical limit without in-
ducing undue stress in the member. Having its own hardware. the feedback
system not only lessens the load on the CPU but also produces accurate compu-

tational results as fast as the arm can move, because of its high processing
speed.

User I/O

It is equipped with an open user terminal consisting of 16 input points and

16 output points. Input/output can be controlled by the robot language used
on the program unit. Its input is not isolated. The noise control countermea-
sures include input inpedance treatment, ground treatment. and software treat-
ment. No-voltage contact and a sensor with open collector output may be
connected to the input. The output is equipped with 16 control relays and may
be user-released to be used as no-voltage contact. Therfore, a load having a
different voltage can also be controlled directly.

1
“IL“ an“) Mill)
I ”Sn-SEC ° LIIE 0 IV

   
  
 

III-“II...
«u III-III..-

° lb) em (a)

Figure 5. The NC 2 Curve

Key: (1) Curve (3) (Arm tip)
(2) Maximum speed (4) Time (second

Self-Diagnostic Functions and Memory Protection

The newest software (level 2) used on this machine is capable of self-

diagnosis and maintenance monitoring. By simply connecting a monitor TV to
the unit, the results of self-diagnosis and error messages can be displayed
on the TV screen. It also enables the operator to maintain surveillance of

'05
roe omcm. us: ONLY
the input status. the content of transferred data, the name of the user pro-
gram, and the conditions during an automatic operation period. Time-sharing
processing is eqloyed to achieve this. Develop-ant of the software is being
undertaken in order to further improve the self-diagnostic functions. Since
a 010$ memory with battery backup is used for the storage of the user program,
the reliability of the nanory in keeping the data content can be somewhat of
a problel.

However, this nachine is equipped with an independent power-failure detection
unit which can not only prevent the CPU from running away at the tine of power
failure but also protect the 0108 memory.

Programing Unit

The Model sap-1o programming unit and its keyboard arrangement diagran are
shown in Photograph 3 and Figure 6, respectively. This unit has a standard
construction centered around an 8-bit CPU. 6800. and assume a portable termi-
nal format. The user progran is written in the robot language SBRF (Sankyo
Easy Robotic Formals) by a special sheet keyboard. The program is translated
into an intermediate language before it is loaded onto the robot. Software is
centered around an editor and consists of syntax processing, translation into
intermediate language. and control or peripheral devices. Figure 7 gives an
exanple of a progran written in robot language as part of the newest software
(level 2). The program allows a conditional juap according to the input. The
details of sear will be onitted. The unit is also equipped with a printer by
which a hardcopy of the list can be produced. The auxiliary neaory unit
utilizes a data cartridge recorder (manufactured by Sankyo) for the conveni-
ence of on—site application. A single cartridge can hold 32 different types
of user progr-s.
In robot language, the position data list is constructed by entering the data
in the form of absolute values of X-Y coordinates. It is also equipped with
a node of operation in which direct operational con-ands may be entered.
While the robot is connected, positioning in the x-Y coordinate systa can
be acconplished by the key command using a method sisilar to an ordinary
mimic function, and the coordinate values of the point nay be either read or
printed out.

Upgrading software

Numerous revisions of software have been made since SKILAH was first put on
the market. Roughly divided, there are three levels to the software accord-
ing to the plan. The software is at the level 2 stage today. when the final
level, level 3, is reached, the robot is expected to become an intelligent
robot loaded with a considerable number of functions. The robot performance
is to be upgraded through change in the software without significant changes
in the hardware. Each time the software is upgraded, it is made known to the
users, and the software is exchanged if requested.

we intend to keep on developing the software in the future with input from the
user so the intelligence of the robot can be raised steadily.

ME I‘-TE$T
"K L

”$8458.13
rid-69¢”.
W'IJZAQ. I“
Nz-lZSI-BL-lu
Wot
Slil(l§).ll(M).L2(Il);Ll(I)nl
20!)
2(3)
mm.”
L an
IF 33')! 6) l0
WMLPLPZ
HIPS-$131.52
KI!
IF 14"]. i] 30
3-) 1,
u NILPIM.”
3005.51.91.52
W2
'30 l
30 E10

Figure 7. An branple of Robot Program

(DPYRIGHT: Elecrronic Engineering 1982

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Yasukawa Electric'a 'Motoman'
Tokyo DENSEI GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 24 No 1, Jan 82 pp 65-68

[Article by Seiji Horikawa, NC Design Division, Tokyo plant, Yasukawa Electric
Manufacturing: "Hotoman and Its Control System"]

[Text] The world's first microcomputer industrial robot was put on market by
this company in 1974 using an "IN? 16" microcomputer which had appeared not
long before. A high-performance industrial robot can be realized only as a
result of successful unification of machine and electronics, as symbolized by
the term "mechatronice." Since the first microcomputer industrial robot was
manufactured, we have engaged consistently in the development of arc—welding
robots, constantly adopting ever superior microcomputers. The know-how related
to both software and hardware concerning robots and arc-welding accumulated
over the years culminated in the completion of Hotoman today. The demand for
Hotoman in the field of arc-welding has been very favorable, so its monthly
production has reached 80. Its reliability, economy, and high performance
have been highly appraised, and it was recognized by the 1981 Machinery Promo-
tion Society award (see Photograph 1).

   

Photograph 1. Hotoman L 3 Photograph 2. YASNAC 6000 RE

The "YASNAC 6000 RC," which is to be introduced here, is the control device
for Notoman. It is a product resulting from a concentration of this con—
pany's control technologies. Its outstanding features will be described

below.

k8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Development Concept of YASNAC 6000 R0

The industrial robot market became highly diversified es the robot became more
and more popular, and demand for a robot system with higher flexibility became
greater. Moreover, much is expected of the robot as production equipment
which is to imrove productivity, so what an industrial robot should be not
not be confined to the viewpoint of a robot single body system but rather
considered from the viewpoint of being a member of a consolidated system in

a future production line.

For example, group management of FMS (flexible manufacturing system) and im-
plementing systematiaation of the robot, among other production facilities
(see Photograph 2).

At first, the industrial robot was considered suitable for small production

of a large variety of products exclusively. Recently. the robot has also been
found suitable for mass production of a small variety of products, and a large
number of robots are being introduced to various types of production lines,
while even stricter demands are placed on its cost, reliability, and maintain-
ability.

Hith this background. the basic development concept for our new control sys-
tem consisted of the following five specific improvements ovar the conven-
tional control systems:

1) Greater system flexibility.

2) Significant improvement in functions to meet the needs.

3) Consolidation of self-diagnostic function and improvement of protective
function of the system.

4) Improvement in reliability and maintainability.

5) Simplified construction for mass production (see Figure 1).

Key:
(1) CPU module
(2) High-speed computation module
(3) Memory module
(6) Cassette I/F
(5) Welding command
(6) Command pulse generation
(7) Position control
(8) To servo
(9) Feedback
(10) Special I/F
(ll) General purpose I]?
(12) Pulse shaping
(13) Outer bus line (data highway
transmission format)
(16) Operation panel unit
(15) Teach box

 

Figure 1. Block Diagram of YASNAC
6000 RC Control

h9
FOR OFHCIAL use ONLY
System Flexibility

A standard Hotoman uses simultaneous five-axis control, but YASNAC is capable
of simultaneous six-axis control. The systen is designed with sufficient
margins in such areas as memory capacity and the number of Ill/OUT channels
for system expansion and diversification.

Improved Functions
Its main functions may be smarized as follows:

1) Hemory capacity(number of teaching points: 1,000).

2) Larger number of analog cosmands for welding machine (4 channels).
3) Improved transistor servodrive.

lo) Consolidationof runaway detection function.

5) Addition of three-dimensional high-speed computing unit.

6) Addition of cu-llative work hour counting capability.

These results are achieved through concentration of both hardvare and software
technologies .

Among these special features of YASNAC, the transistor servodrive among the
three-dimensional computing unit will be described concretely.

l. Transistor M Type Servodrive

From the beginning. YASNAC adopted a servodrive system using "transistor NH
format" and thus achieved superior performance. Servodrive is one of the
host important elements of a robot; it has direct influence on the accuracy
of positioning and the accuracy of interpolation (see Figure 2).

Key:

(1) Servo unit

(2) CPU baseboard

(3) Speed loop PI controller
(lo) Current loop PI

    
 
   
 
  

s (91-? . controller
. (5) Current smoothing
v u _
PM Dunn’s-9 largo-s “3:5,,” inductance
(S u 7 ' I 4-,(11, (6) Position cot-and

      

(7) Deviation counter
(8) Speed command
'6 (9) WA conversion
(10) Transistor m type
power amplifier
(ll) Motor
(12) Current command
(l3) Armature current feedback
(lb) Speed feedback
Figure 2. Block Diagram of (15) Position feedback
Digital Servo System

revvar
our
use.

RI§Il7v-nm’
u “71-!‘1‘17

15 ash-mu

  
   

  

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This company is a special maker of servomotors and systems utilizing servo-
motors. The "CPCRPHR" type servodrive unit installed on board the YASNAC
6000 R0 is fully supported by our know-how in the field. The main features
of this unit are as follows:

1) Fewer number of parts through use of 10's.

2) Appropriate carrier wavelength for the realisation of high efficiency.
3) Consolidated protection function including fuseless main circuit and
open-circuit detection for speed detector (Tc - tachogenerator).

0) Better heat dissipation and protection from dust for higher reliability.
5) Connectors for signal connection with superior maintainability.

Servodrives used in many robots employ "thyristor" drive. The two types of
drives will be compared briefly.

Hhile a carrier having a frequency ranging from several hundred Hz to several
kﬂz regenerated from direct current is used in the transistor PH! type drive
used in YASNAC, the thyristor drive uses a carrier having the same frequency
as the power source. As a result, significant differences exist not only in
the control performances of the two. but also in matters related to maintain-
ability. Because while the thyristor drive is directly affected by the source
voltage, the source frequency, the source waveform, and the phase sequence,
the transistor PHM type device can maintain high-control performance com-
pletely unaffected by the power source.

The fact that there is no need for servo adjustment when the Hotoman is set
up and that stable performance can be maintained over an extended period are
due largely to the transistor PHH type drive.

2. Three-Dimensional High-Speed Computing Unit

A high-speed computing unit using a high-speed microcomputer was developed
for the purposeof simplifying the robot teaching operation. As a result, a
multiple-jointed Hotoman robot can be taught via the rectangular coordinates
system, and the advantage of multiple-jointed robot functions are added to
the superior operabiiity of a rectangular coordinates robot. Furthermore,
the following features are realized in YASNAC through a combination of

this high-speed computer unit and the know-how of this company concerning
industrial robots.

1) Three-dimensional linear and are interpolation function: it is capable of
carrying out linear interpolation through two—point teaching and arc interpo-
lation through three-point teaching in three-dimensional space.

2) Threewdimensional shift function: for work items of the same shape, it is
necessary to teach just once. and the rest can be simply copied. Moreover,
if the work position has shifted, the teaching date can be revised completely
by merely reteachins three points.

3) Three-dimensional mirror image function: for a work item with left and
right symmetry, the teaching data of one side can be easily converted by
means of an inversion.

51
FOR 0F1WC1A1.USEIMNLY
I'UI Ul'l‘l\vll|h Vol. \Il‘l.l

10) Three-dimensional scaling (enlargement and reduction) function: the teach-
ing locus can be enlarged or reduced in size. This function demonstrates
its power when it is applied to multiple layer welding of a heavy plate.

5) Three-dimensional soft-weaving function: weaving for heavy plate welding
can be accomplished in three-dimensional space.

6) Real-time arc sensing function: even when the welding line and the teach-
ing locus become misaligned as a result of thermal strain, the locus can be
revised automatically through sensing of the welding conditions, and the weld-
ing operation can be carried out under optimm conditions.

Self -Diagnosis Function

Uith YASNAC, the movements of various parts are all controlled by microcompu-
ter comands. so it is relatively easy to maintain surveillance of the state
of movement and to make a diagnosis. The self-diagnosis function can be
readily divided into two groups: 0n-line (real-time) and off-line.

The on-line self-diagnosis is a function built into YASNAC. This function is
continuously at work during the operation of the robot. It maintains surveil-
lance of an abnormal state and the status of input/output signals, and displays
these conditions on the CRT. Table 1 contains some examples of the alarm
codes. There are approximately 50 additional alarm codes.

The off-line self-diagnosis consists of a separately prepared diagnostic pro-
gram which can be temporarily loaded onto YASNAC to carry out diagnosis of the
system while the robot is not operating. This function is highly useful for
in—house quality control and reliability test. It also helps to accomplish

a quick recovery from a breakdown once it takes place.

Table 1. Examples of Alarm Codes

ll Abnormal temperature inside panel 31 Servo power source off

16 Offset data destruction 32 Control preparation incomplete
1? Parameter content destruction 33 Emergency stop on
18 Job data content destruction 3!» Servo error
21 Soft limit over 35 Overload
22 Origin position bad 36 Feedback error (PG abnormality)
24 Return to origin, begin position 38 RPG hardware bad
bad
25 Sequence error 39 Overtravel (overrun L5)
26 Insufficient origin margin 81 CPU abnormality
27 Positioning bad 82 lie-cry reference error

Improvement of Reliability

The enviroment into which the industrial robots are introduced is usually
very bad. This is especially true in case of arc-welding robots. In order
to be able to maintain high reliability in such a poor environment, special
attention was paid to development of the following three items:

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1) Completely dust-proof control panel
2) Reduction in nulber of parts.
3) Reduction in heat loss inside the panel.

1. Completely Dust-Proof Control Panel

YASNAC realizes a completely dust-proof control panel through the use of a
central air dust and an indirect air cooling format. All control panels in
which electronic parts are used must ewloy some form of cooling system in
order to maintain a stable operation. High reliability cannot be assured

if the control panel of an arc-welding robot is cooled by the air taken from
its enviroment and merely passed through a filter (see Figure 3).

   

Key:

(1) Operation panel

(2) Pan

(3) Heat dissipation fin
(6) DC power source

(S) Servo drive unit

(6) CPU baseboard

(7) Air duct

(8) Transformer

(9) External air

\II
V

v

. A ._ .
yxovm venue-weal ~3¢~u33v

Figure 3. Completely Dust-Proof Construction of Control panel

2. Reduction in Number of Parts

In order to reduce the number of parts. a custom 1.81 was adopted in addition
to optimizing the circuit design. Six LSI's, each containing several thou-
sands of integrated elements per chip, are used. Although an enormous amount
of time and energy is required to develop any [.51. the 1.81 will remain as one
of the most important electronic technologies for the robot industry in
achieving miniaturization and high reliability (see Photograph 3).

3. Reduction in Heat loss Inside the Panel

Heat loss inside the control panel is the main cause of a t-perature rise
inside the panel and reduction in its reliability. The heat problem must al-
ways be contended with as long as the trend is to ministurise electronic
parts. To reduce the heat loss. the following measures were taken during

the YASNAC design process.

53
POI OFFICIAL 0830le
1) Adoption of IC memory.
2) Overall adoption of IC'a with low power consumption.
3) Development of custom LSI.

Simple Construction

Simple construction is an important factor that must be taken into considera-
tion if mass production of the control units is contemplated. This also has
a strong bearing on the reliability and maintainability mentioned previously.
The motto of YASNAC is: "Simple Is Best."

1. One—Board CPU

The main logic unit is contained in a single baseboard (370 x 460 mm). This
baseboard contains--in addition to all basic circuits required by robot con-
trol, including six axes servo circuit and input/output signal interface--
other functions required for testing and maintenance includi - paper tape
reader interface, paper tape punch interface, and DNC interface centered
around the microcomputer (see Photograph 4).

   

Photograph 3. Custom LSI Photograph lo. CPU Board

A one—board CPU was realized with the aid of custom LSI, a low power consump-
tion IC. and the use of a high-density mounting type multiwire board. The
multiwire board is a special wiring board with four layers of wiring planes.
The two inner layers are used for supplying power to the mounted parts, while
the two outer layers are used for signal wiring. The signal wiring can inter-
sect on the same plane and two wires can be passed between the pins (0.1 inch)
of an IC. This wiring board is equivalent to six—eight layers of printed
circuit board in mounting density and electric characteristics. The fact

that this multiwire board has an excellent antinoise property should also be
pointed out (see Figure 4).

5h
FOR 0F?1C1AL.USE‘ONLY
Figure 6. Hultiwire Board Structure

Key: (1) Hire (2) (from top to bottom) (3) Through hole
Overlay, Binder, Copper foil,
Baseboard, Copper foil,
Binder. Overlay

2. Various Units Hith Connectors

A connector connection format was used for all signal wirings. As a result,
wire harnessing can be accomplished outside the control panel, and the wiring
work has become very simplified as well as separated.

3. Reduction in Number of Signal Lines

To reduce the number of wirings, pert of the data transmission is carried out
by the high-speed serial data processing unit employing CRCC (cyclic redun-
dancy check character).

Conclusion

The industrial robot, whose market is expanding and whose true value is being
assessed on the basis of its impact on both productivity and labor welfare
today, demands the most advanced aechatronice technology. The future tasks
of us, workers, in the field of electronic technology consists of systematiz-
ing various most advanced technologies, including the following:

1) Optic fiber capable of transmitting a large quantity of information at
very high speed.

2) High-speed microcomputer for high-speed data processing.

3) Large memory capacity for storing vast amount of software.

4) Sensor for adaptation control.

These technologies will be boldly incorporated into YASNAC. which is the brain
of Hotoman, so that Motoman may become even more satisfactory to you. the user.

COPYRIGHT: Electronic Engineering 1982

55
FOI<OFUKJA1.USEGMVLY
Shinmeiwa Industry's 'Robel J'
Tokyo DENSHI GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 2h No 1, Jan 82 pp 69-73

[Article by Shigeo Kawabe, chief of Robot Design Division, Tskarazuka plant
of Machinery Plant Manufacturing Division, Shinmeiwa Industry: "Robel J and
Electronics"]

[Text] Greater productivity is demanded of industrial circles in the 1980's.
Industrial robots enable small production of a large variety of products,
which was difficult to accomplish with the conventional special machine. In-
dustrial robots began to play an important role by becoming the nuclear tech-
nology and equipment which enabled automation of various production processes
of the 1980's. The robot industry is expected to make big strides as a
knowledge-intensive industry.

Development of a general-purpose robot was started by this company in 1969,
and a rectangular coordinate system arc-welding special robot was put on the
market in 1973. In 1977 large-scale models-o?" 150 and PW 200--were made
public. and in 1979 the system robot--PH 752 series--was unveiled (see

Figure 1).
mm

xqzlam-gg 7-,.

     

Figure 1. A Group of Robot Products

(1) For mass production work (4) For large and complicated work
(2) For small work (5) For three-dimensional precision
(3) For extra long work shearing of complicated press parts

0n the other hand, a shearing robot for cutting plate material was trial
manufactured in 1975 and it was put on market this year. We have shearing
robots of various types ranging from gas shearing robots to plasma shearing
robots (RC 230, made public this year).

We have accumulated know-how in the field of arc-welding and metal-shearing
in order to provide robots with high reliability and make them easy to use.
The multiple-jointed Robel J type RJ 65 robot, which was made public this
year, was developed onthe foundation of the know-how accumulated over many

NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
years with adoption of the newest mechatronica (see Photograph 1 and Table l).
The special features of this robot include wide action range and simple con-
struction achieved by our own unique design. Software based on a 16-bit micro-
computer has been prepared, to make this robot system not only highly reliable
but also easy to operate.

 

Photograph 1. External appearance of Robel J RJ 65
Construction and Action Characteristics of RJ 65

Figure 2 provides the construction diagram. This system consists of the
robot body, the control device, the remote-control box, and the welding
control device. Options include a welder sensor and a positioner. As
shown in Figure 3(b), this robot has five action axes: ol - as. In the
teaching mode, each axis may be operated manually and independently by the
a system operation, or position teaching may also be carried out in the
XYZ rectangular coordinate system (see Figure 3(a», in which five axes are
all linked together. In the playback mode and automatic operation mode,
the action is always carried out in the XYZ rectangular coordinate system.
As shown in Figure 6(a), after the locations of only two points are taught,
the robot is capable of moving the torch at a designated speed along a
straight line connecting these two points while holding the torch at a
designated angle, with all five axes perfectly synchronized. Moreover, as
shown in Figure 4(b), the welding point does not move when the torch angle
is changed or the torch is rotated, because the actions of the five axes
are perfectly harmonized. Figure 5 illustrates the robot's wide range of
action, and Figure 6 shows the robot's range of operation. Both Figure 5
and Figure 6 show the locus of the rotating wrist axis, so these ranges may
change somewhat according to the torch attitude. The overall specifications
of the robot are as summarized in Table l.

57
FOI¢OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
Table 1. Specifications of RJ 65

 

(1) Robot body

(2)

Height: 1050 kg

Height carrying capacity: For arc-welding...torch only
Degrees of freedoa: five axes

Drive format: All electric (DC servonotor drive)
Position reproduction accuracy: 2 0.2 an (axis unit)
Action range and naximul speed:

 

 

Axis Action range Maxim- speed
Rotation (G1) 240' (+120' ~ -120') 100°IS
Lower am (02) 120' (+ 30' ~ - 90') 90'IS
Upper am («13) 270‘ (+120‘ ~ -lSO°) 100°/s
Bending ((16) 180' (+ 90° ~ - 90') llS'lS
Twisting (as) 356' (+178’ ~ -l78‘) 180°IS

 

Control device

weight: 300 kg

Huber of axes controlled: All five axes controlled simultaneously

Path control for-at: P.T.P. teaching, C.P. regeneration by linear
and are interpolation

Teaching format: Teaching, playback format

Coordinate transformation function: Teaching can be accomplished in
either a system or X-Y systen: playback is carried out in 1H!
systea.

Linear interpolation: A straight line passing through two given points
in space can be traced at a designated speed.

Arc interpolation: A circular arc passing through three given points in
space can be traced at a designated speed.

Speed control format: Controlled steady linear speed (at torch tip)

Position control format: Software servo format

Memory unit: IC nemry

External mory unit: Cassette data recorder

Memory step number: 850 steps

Weaving function: (option)

Sensing function: (option)

Speed setting: 2-10 (1 mm/S increment), 12, 1’0. 16, 20, 50, and 300 MAX
-/S; a total of 16 speeds (mil-1m speed during teaching: 150 -/8)

Inching function: 0.2-1 (0.1 II increment), 1.2. 1.5, 1.6, 2.0, 5.0,
15.0, and 20.0 mm; a total of 16 kinds

External signals: 7 (for input/output)

Tiner: 3 kinds (99 divisions between 0.1-9.9 seconds)

Welding condition setting: 5 kinds (stepless adjustment, change
possible during welding operation)

Ambient temperature: o-as‘c (O-loo'c when cassette recorder is in use)

Power source: A6200V :10 percent 50/60 ll: 30 1.5kVA

58
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(1).

(2)
(3)
(ﬁ)
(5)
(6)
(7)

F

igure 2. Construction Diagram

1153)
[-1 ”(91-0>I‘~Il.) ”Dc-’14")

 

(":-

XY system operation
teaching and playba
Up/doun (Z axis)
Torch rotation axis
Torch tilting
Back/forth (Y axis)
Left/right (X axis)
Action in the XYZ s

mason-um".
”"‘- (1h 0IMIMuIarOM

Figure 3. Action Modes

(during (8) System operation

ck nodes) (during teaching node)
(9) Upper arl a;
(10) Bending on
(11) Lower arn oz
(12) Nisting as
(13) Rotation o1

ysten with (1d) Each axis may be operated

coordinated move-en: of the independently

five axes: a] - as

59
FOR OIIICJAI.IEIE(M‘LY
Key:
(1)

(2)
(3)

(10)
(5)

Key:
(1)

(2)
(3)
(1.)
(S)

s net-au- 1 .
”humus. ”33:33)

  

(you "mum-m,

water'M-b) [5m

 

Figure lo. Completely Banonised Five-Axis Control

Completely harlonired five-axis control: three-dimensional linear
interpolation including torch angle control

Completely harlonized five-axis control: torch ﬁatude control

After the locations of only two points are taught, the robot is capable
of loving the torch at a designated speed along a straight line while
holding the torch at a designated angle with all five axes perfectly
synchronized.

The weldim point does not move even when the torch is rotated.

The welding point does not move even when the torch is tilted.

(1) ’

(A) 7.! Alf-“Annil' um
IIO'v In. shoals...

x...

   
  

I g) I. «msaoﬂ.u..'.
‘ '- 9'”.M..Il..mw.ﬂl.n' ..

Figure 5. Action Range Diagrn

(Note) The range in the direction of increasing angle froa the state

in which the lower and upper arms fora a line (180’)

The 3-3 view

A plane

Rotation center

1. The range of action of a point "a" on the an axis is shown.

2. The range of action of torch tip will vary soaewhat according to the
bending and twisting of the wrist.

60
”WWW?
An6%.wunmnmnvhr

._I3¢A v§A4$

uwlled’

   

5

wwwcno a. >cunuuon< w-sow

.nno: Amy
abounon any

on
Auov
Auuv
AwNv
Awuv
Ap»v
Apuv
Away
Away

manna

anaconno nonouann

”own

cunno

manna

abounnno nuns nooonann

anon ouoon cannon

wouaxcnunn asunwooeou «Ignaz
manna atunnr
Electronics of RJ 65

Figure 7 provides a detailed diagram of the control device. The main and the
auxiliary panels of the control device are used for control of the power
source for the entire systaa and in particular for control of the operation
during the automatic operation period.

As soon as the power source is connected. the cassette data recorder on the
auxiliary panel begins to read in the system software data. This lasts
approximately 1 minute and 30 seconds. The origin setting switch on the main
panel is pressed down next. The five axes of the robot are each equipped with
an optic encoder, which feeds back the angle of rotation of each axis. Origin
setting means an operation to move the robot to a predetermined position desig-
nated as the reference point for action.

Only after the origin is set is the robot able to move freely. The top start
switch is used to set the automatic control in motion. The pause switch causes
the operation to stop temporarily. The operation resumes when the top start
switch is pressed again. An error lamp lights up when an error in operation

is detected. and an error code will be displayed on the remote-control box
simultaneously. The details of the error can be understood from the error

code number. when the eaergency stop switch is pressed, the operation stops
instantly no matter what state the robot may be in.

Eight different types of operation can be performed by selecting any one of
them using the block number switch on the auxiliary panel. The editing
switch enables editing of a sequence of operations according to the block
number. when the editing switch is pressed twice. the operation becomes
endless. and a sequence of operations will be repeated again and again.

The timer is used to set the pause time between steps.

Control device

Common memory

Remote control 1/0

welding remote-control I/O
Panel SH LAMP

Cassette HT

Remote control box

Welding taste-control
Robot body

Gelding electric power source
Torch

Robot body

 

Figure 8. Control System Diagram

62
IOI<0FNKJAI.USE(NVLY
Figure 8 illustrates the control system diagram. A 16-bit computer and a

DRAH 32 k" memory are used. This computer is s high-performance microcom-
puter with a microprogram control format using a high-speed bipolar micro-
processor. Its characteristics include: add co-Iand 0.810 microseconds. mul-
tiply commend 4.9 microseconds, and high-speed data channel 1.85 MHz. Vari-
ous I/O interface connections are connected to the BUS, which is connected

to the CPU via a GP I/O interface. The robot body and all its components are
connected to the computer via these I/O interfaces. The main and the auxili-
ary panels, the remote-control box. as well as the switches and lamps described
above are also connected to the BUS through their own I/O interfaces.

In addition. there are also limit switches for various robot axes which are
activated when the action reaches a preset limit, the welding control box,

and the I/O interface for sensor unit; the drive system employs the software
servo format. There are five independent drive systems for the five axes; each
system consisting of a servo amplifier and a servomotor. Each servomotor has
its own tschogenerator and encoder which generate the feedback signals used
for the speed and position control. The CPU used for the softservo applica-
tion is connected with the main CPU through the common memory and receives
timely position command value from it. The action angle of each axis is
determined as follows: the pulses generated by the encoder are counted by

the UP/DOHN counter and the output value is determined by comparing this value
with the command value. Horeover. a single D/A converter is shared by the
five axes by switching from one to another sequentially. This does not pose
any problem. because the time interval is sufficiently short compared with

the servo system action.

Software

Coordinate transformation: Teaching is accomplished either in the a system
or in the XY system. and playback action is carried out in the X—Y system.
Inside the CPU. coordinate transformation from the a system to the X-Y sys-
tem is calculated first, and the results thus obtained are stored in the
memory as the teaching point data together with all data in the renote-
control box.

During the playback action period, the data are retrieved from the memory and
computation is carried out in the X-Y system. Take the case of linear inter-
polation. for example. The distance between the two teaching points will be
divided by the velocity to find the time. then the new position to which the
robot must move during each time interval will be calculated. The distance

of travel from the present position to the new position will then be converted
to the u system through coordinatetransformation. and outputs to o; - as axes
will be generated. The robot will trace a straight line connecting the two
points at a designated speed with a position reproduction accuracy of 10.2 mm.

Arc interpolation: As shown in Figure 9, if three points in space are given,
the robot will trace a circular arcpassing through these three points at a
designated speed. A complete circle can be traced if four points are given,
as shown in Figure 9. If an additional point is given in addition to a set of

63
F0l(ﬂﬂﬂC1ALlﬂﬂ!0NL¥
(1') 3..., ‘2‘.-
.K‘Q‘. .“
( qugyuae.;: mm

     
  
 

  
  

(1°) 9333:.

Figure 9. Arc Interpolation Function Diagras

Key:

(1) Arc interpolation function: An are passing through three given points
can be traced; the three points say be on a horizontal plane or on a
slanted plane.

(2) Path during teaching node (arbitrary)

(3) Path during playback node

(6) Teaching point

(5) A full circle fros four points

(6) Arc of points 1. 2. and 3

(7) Arc of points 2, 3, and h

(8) Connected arcs

(9) Arbitrary curve interpolation: Application of arc interpolation; small
section of a curve treated as an arc

(10) Useful in tracing complicated curve of press work; applicable to 3-D
also

(11) An arbitrary curve

(12) An ellipse

three points which define an arc. the first point will be omitted and the
robot will trace an arc passing through the remaining two points and the addi-
tional point. An arbitrary curve can be traced by a series of operations of
this type.

Weaving function: This function is achieved by a software fornat as shown
in Figure 10. The pattern is arbitrary. Once the robot is taught a single
pattern is entered into the system as a menu, that pattern can be called and
used elsewhere.

Torch offset correction function (Figure ll): The standard torch has offset.
so it can be used with ease even in a narrow space.

Sensing system [Figures 12-14): This is a unique sensorless sensor. No

special sensor other than the torch itself is used. The welding wire itself
is used as the sensor. Its principle of operation is as shown in the drawing.

IND! OIFICIAL USIIOhﬂJ!
Key

(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(16)
(15)

(16)

(17)
(18)

m
e

(9) 74-HVVQIM7-‘z-v)
(Elvaenlmrz v7r7x73n(10)

    
  

   
 

 
 
  

        
  
  

ntlmmm Ill- 1 av
hiwitlll! "”W’W"
)aq-ewxam I

(IIIIVBI’L

i econ

   

oo4-r>adive
Isa-u].
solttzarnua'
till I
erupt-arena.
rakroo
0Havlmnlrur|
INF/rail“

 

 
  
  
 
   

Figure 10. Pitch Feed and weaving Functions

Pitch feed function

A designated amount is traveled each time the stick is down; fine ad-
justment of the target position; setting weaving pattern; multi1syer
welding program

Speed/pitch

Change

Change can also be imlemented during welding operation

Rectangular coordinates/pitch feed/axis unit

2 nm down in Z-direction

5 mm forward in X-direction

Weaving function (option)

Software format

Setting the starting point, terminal point and the single cycle pattern
Function (clockwise): EXT/Held/Timer/Block]Record/Step]Sensing/weaving
Terminal point

Starting point

A single cycle pattern is registered in the weaving menu (No 03, for
example)

Weaving pattern is registered in menu; the menu is called and used
whenever necessary; menu can be tested with a test piece prior to the
operation: the menu will be easier to use if 1 pitch feed (inching) was
used when the pattern was registered

Menu No 02

Menu No 01

IIIIGNHHCIAI.USE(MVLY
e uro- ugoouuou --.... a.-~-

Key:

(1) Offcenter torch set

(2) For large work with many
straight lines

(3) Concentric torch set

(a) For snall work with many snal
R's

 

’h)¢gasu¢Iv-9n

Figure 11. Torch Offset Correction Function of RJ 65 (for five-axis simul-
taneous control). If necessary, the torch tip lay be attached
in such a way that it is off the as axis.

. . , . , Key:
;\ :1,:;,1751219.>) (1) sensing system (option)
Q:;y;1::::::=;zﬁggn:ﬂgn) (2) Shinmeiwa's unique sensorlcss sens

ing system (S.L.S.) (Patent) using
welding wire as detector

(3) Principle of detection

(4) Hardware

(5) Detection unit

(6) Welding wire

(7) Torch

(8) Changeover switch

(9) Robot control device

(10) Detection circuit

(11) Welding power source

(12) High-voltage power source

(13) Principle of detection

(14) (Software)

(15) Welding wire

 

(16) Torch
Figure 12. Sensing System (17) Work error
66

I1HICIﬂﬂCJA1.USEZO%ﬂJV
' 1 l.x13}:rm_1n’—

Key:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(lo)
(5)
(6)

(7)
(8)

(9)

 

Figure 13.

(6)

”levees-mama!» r)

   
 

... ‘:_:.‘ ~I .

(9) sun-0a r s . sun-sluts“...
mm. 7-99ballmzanuu.

_-. 4-:
5‘]. -/../":9”—_ (1°).27'l?’.z I£112"'

' I
... ,—::u¢;,«" .,
- - M1“ wanna-Ia
% ) tum-mu
swim
‘_ ".Cl

.‘iM'n.

- u : u nun

s at 14' In"

  

Key:
(1)

(2)
(3)

(l0)

@wxmﬁﬁ) (s)
0...!

Automatic extension adjustment function
Correct dimension

Reference surface

Hire retracted

Hire extended

Horizontal fillet: one-point sensing
(detection of parallel travel error)
Sensing menu No 01

horizontal fillet: two-point sensing
(detection of parallel travel error
and rotational error

Sensing menu So 02

Sensing System (automatic extension function)

Application of individual
sensing (menu Nos 03-07)
Detection of small step
error

Option menu (memory capacity
and groove accuracy are re-
stricted; needs advance
arrangement)

Shape, dimension and accuracy
of groove needed

Line formed at the intersec-
tion of two planes formed by
points A. B. and c and points
A', B', and C' is calculated.

Three-dimensional sensing correction (automatic three-dimensional shift)

Detection of error due not only to parallel travel but also to three-

dimensional rotation; welding operation is carried out by automatically

(6)
(7) During welding operation
(8) During program action
(9)

shifting the program.
(10) Multiple sensing correction
(11)

Primary sensing: correction of work position error (such as installation

error on the jig and positioning error on conveyer)
(12) Secondary sensing: correction of errors on components of the work

Figure 14.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sensing system (types of sensor)
High-voltage electricity, 500 V, 600 Hz, is applied to the torch to detect
its grounding condition. The present position and the instructed data are
compared, and the position error is corrected.

Since the extended length of welding wire is a reference, it is adjusted by
the automatic extension mechanism first of all as shown in Figure 13. The
sensor is determined by the menu number. For example, sensing menu No 01,
as shown in Figure 13, is a combination between a vertical sensor and a
sensor for torch orientation detection. Sensing menu No 02 is a two-point
sensor menu. Figure 15 illustrates a number of applications, including
downward fillet welding. three-dimensional sensing and multiple sensor.

Conclusion

The Robel J was developed as an arc-welding robot. This product is based on
an advanced mechatronics technology developed over a period of more than 10
years and reflects the know—how of this company concerning welding accumulated
with inputs from the users over the years.

The Robel J is characterized by its wide action range and its advanced soft-
ware package. Action with flexibility can be easily realized through addi-
tion of new menus or subroutines. we, the maker, are planning to diversify
its application beyond the welding operation, and users' opinions in this
regard are welcome.

COPYRIGHT: Electronic Engineering 1982

Hitachi Limitsd's 'Hr Aros'

Tokyo DENSHI GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 24 No 1. Jan 82 pp 76—77

[Article by Hitoshi Yoshida, Robot Department, Shushino plant, Hitachi Ltd;
Kazuma Ito and Yasuo Saito, Design Department, Hitachi Kyoba Engineering:
"Hr Aros and the Electronics"]

[Text] The work objects of arc-welding robots consist mainly of a large
variety of large, thick products for medium and small production. Therefore,
assurance of accurate path control, adaptability for dimensional errors of

the work objects, and improved operability are demanded. We have solved these
problems by a combination of miniature noncontact type sensor and micropro-
cessor capability and have gone further to insure the reliability and safety
of our machine, which is well received by the user.

In this article we will outline the hardware and the software which brought
about the various functions referred to above.

Specifications of the Helding Robot System

The robot specifications are determined by the work object and the work
detail the robot is expected to handle. The work attitude control that is

required during the welding operation is handled by the positioner.

68
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
Automatic welding of almost all types of welding lines can be accomplished
through a combination of a robot having standard specifications and a posi-
tioner which matches the shape of the work object. Figure 1 illustrates the

external appearance of a standard robot and a positioner and Table l sun-nar-
ites their specifications.

 

Figure 1. External Appearance of Robot and Positioner

Key: (1) Robot (2) Positioner (3) Sensor

Table 1. Specifications of Robot and Poaitioner

    
   
 
   
    

Positioner bod!

_ Item 3 ecification
" R (rotation)
‘r (Twisting) _

    
  
  

S ecification

   
    
    
    

   

(Walk)

  
   
   

   

     
   
   
 
     
 

 
    

” X

g Y (To and fro)

3 2 (Up and down)

: SH (Suing) elding 18°-lllo°/min

3 BD (Bend) Fast feed 660’lmin

U

2 Sensor retraction Hark weight 600 kg
including jig)

Position reproducibility 2 1.0 In Power source AC 200V 30

Hydraulic pressure source 70 kg/cln2 1.5 kVA

  

Maximal allowable
of f -center loading

 
  
 

   

normal pressur-

lo kg/cm 20 k8.“

Pneumat i c source

        

or more
Power source 200V 30
5.5 kVA
Height 1500 kg approx.
Welding (torch tip) 150-990 III/min
Fast feed 6000 III/min

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
Control Device

The basic control format of this arc-welding robot system consists of FTP
teach format and C? control format combined with a magnetic sensor. The
system has the following control functions:

1) Sensor function: The sense information enables the robot to accurately
aim its torch on the welding line.

2) Check function: The robot is capable of checking with its sensor the
deviation between the welding line on the work object and the teaching data
and automatically corrects the position data prior to the playback operation.

3) Corner point coordinate computation function: It is usually difficult

to accurately teach the corner section of a work object. The robot is capable
of automatically calculating the corner formed by the intersection of two
straight lines from the available information taught and then controlling
various axes of the robot.

4) Linear interpolation function: The robot is capable of tracing a
straight line passing through two teach points at a designated fixed
linear speed by carrying out linear interpolation computation.

S) wrist correction function: The action of the robot's main axis can be
controlled so that the aim of torch tip will remain fixed even while the two
wrist axes are moved.

6) Follow control function: welding operation is carried out by following
the welding line with a sensor.

7) Angle correction function during checking, weaving function, unilateral
sensor function, and arc interpolation function can be added as options.

The construction of the control device is centered around amicrocontroller

using a microprocessor, and the majority of the functions listed above are

implemented by means of software, so the number-ofparts can be reduced

and the reliability of the device increased. Figure 2 shows the construc-

tion of the control device: Photograph 1, its external appearance;Table 2,

its specifications; and Photographs 2 and 3, the external appearance of the
operation console and the teaching box, respectively.

As shown in Figure 2, each unit is subdivided according to the function and
is connected with the system bus. The master CPU in charge of the control
of the entire system, the SVU unit in charge of the control of the position
servo system, the operation console, the teaching box, the peripheral equip-
ment, and the 10? unit in charge of connection, all employ a multiprocessor
format equipped with a microprocessor in order to shorten the time of compu-
tation and processing. The memory device consists of a core memory used
on-line and a cassette tape deck (CHT) for storing operation program off-
line. Various necessary functions are also included in the handy teaching
box; special consideration is given in the arrangement of the buttons, and
the number of signal cables is reduced through adoption of series transmis—
sion format for the convenience of the operator.

70
FOR‘OFI‘CLALIJ§E(HVLY
Figure 2.

Ition unit
Iole

Construction of Control Device

(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(16)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)

Robot body

”riot

Pooitioner body
Teaching box
Operation console
Relay input/output
Pocitioner hydraulic unit
Welder interfncc
Holder

Synten has

1/0 bus
PU“ WPILlAL UM URL!

table 2. Specifications of Control Device

__—_———————-—-————

lten S ecificat one

Teachiu for-It Route teaching by teachin bot

Control for-at C? control turnout lineer Interpolation end It?
touching

Control eaie nunber llectric hydreulic eervo: S are anti-n (for robot)
llectric eervox 2 ma III!“ (for poaitioner)

Position detection Potentioneter

Poaitlon control Software eervo forIat

roeition wry Core ne-ory

.‘ienory outer £16 etepe
Propru division nuber listin- of I.

Speed contnl Cong; l’gger emd
Speed Welding 150-990 on (1 etepa) any be changed ring

Control
I t feed 6
‘Jeldine current 156 divieion IlIl-I 6 atene) Kev be churned
during welding
Holding voltage 256 diviaion mine- (6 etepa) Hay be changed

in 1 “Min

Addition, correction. and elilinntion of teaching point: Poeaible
Senoe unction

Check function

Conwtation function Corner point coordinate connotation function
Linear interpolation
uriet correct function

"MW control Illusion
Torch contact

Arc break
Detector
Abnomlity detection cw abnorulity
runction Seneor abnornnl epproach
Uirefeed feilure
Ilo air supply
. lizdreulic greeaure eource abnorlelitz
trouble dia‘noaie fee
Au: l r: neno unit Can ette deck
For control AClOOV (:10 percent) 50/60 if: eincle pnane L! “A

Power For hydraulic ACZOOV (:lo percent) 30/60 Ila three pnaee 5.5 in

Source for poaitioner AC200I220V (:io percent) 50/60 lit three pheee l.)
kVA

Bternal lobar 1100 V I Sun a: uni!

Diunnion agitioner 300 U a SAM) l noon
Protective conatruction Duet-proo type
£333! semnture o-«o‘c
-e
“It‘ll: W—ﬂ—

Pogitig! B . _—7_§—_71—5——
uterior muell . nco .

Color of coating Interior "
125204 of enligtion Sgrex painting
. Honing function 0 vriet up/dovn bending axle
Shift function
Unileteral eennor function
Min nodificetion function
Check angle Iodification function
Arc interpolation function
. lncreeee in nenory nueoer 576 are” (3!. J'. .Iu
type)

lncrenge in Icon umber 212 otege $51. ‘1”:

Option (unctiona

~e’w-l-uuu—
. . .

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3 shows the block diagram of the SVU system. The microprocessor in-
stalled 0n the SVU unit is connected with the system bus as a slave, and the
interface delivers and receives data (conmands, various types of parameters)
command and status using a pseudodual port RAM (a RAM capable of reading/
writing independently from the system bus and the microprocessor in the SVU
unit) using software. The operation output (servodrive output) consists of
2 kHz short form wave obtained after an 8-bit data1 is subjected to D/A
conversion by the PRU (pulse width modulation) circuit. The position feed-
back consists of a signal obtained after the potentiometer output is sub-
jected to AID conversion (12-bit).2

During the teaching process of a_robot having playback control format, the
operator must step into the action range of robot. This means that a human
accident could be caused by a runaway robot or positioner. Therefore, care-
ful attention must be paid to the matter of safety.

      

1—!1(2)
Figure 3. Block Diagram of SVU Unit Figure 4. Detection of Abnormality
Key: Such as Potentiometer
(1) System bus Breakage
(2) Interface Key:
(3) Command (1) Trouble
(4) Microprocessor (2) Broken wire

(5) D/A conversion

(6) AID conversion

(7) Servo valve of each axis of robot

(8) Position of feedback of each axis
of robot

The unit is equipped with an abnorlality detection circuit (see Figure 4)
which can prevent the robot or the positioner from running away even if a
breakdoun in the potentiometer or a breakage in the circuit should take
place.

f:_2 The data length is not fixed. It is variable according to the effec-
tive stroke of the robot and the accuracy requirement.

73
FOI(HHWC1AI.USE1ONLY
2. Input/Output interface

Figure 5 shows the block diagram of the 10? unit. Almost all input/Output
information required for the operation of the system are grouped together
and the information is transferred to the master CPU via the 256-byte dual
port RAM. The UART transfers data concerning the button, digital display,
and light-emitting diode via the series-parallel conversion board contained
inside the operation console and the teaching box. Moreover, various input/
output registers are constructed of an 8-bit parallel bus belonging to an
independent 1/0, and the input/output informationof the peripheral equipment
are transferred via the relay input/output unit or the welder interface unit.

Key:

(1) System bus

(2) Dual port m4

(3) Microprocessor

(a) Timer

(5) UAR! series/parallel conversion

(6) Various input/output register
gates

(7) Positioner hydraulic unit/
welder

(8) Operation console/teaching box

   

L ;. rw- “vow-s

—--I’u-9t,$"l

Figure 5. Block Diagram of IO?

3. Sensor Interface

if the robot orbit is to be modified according to the work object. a sensor
which can detect the distance between the work and the torch becomes neces-
sary. A contact-type sensor used in the automatic follow device has a number
of disadvantages. including the fact that it is affected by sputter, scale,
temporary welding. and defects.

The sensor used in "Mr Aros" is a noncontact type magnetic sensor which will
not be affected by the are heat. sputter, surface condition of the work.
fumes, or external noise unique to arc-welding.

Its principle of operation utilizes the change in magnetic flux, and as shown
in Figure 6. it consists of excitation coil Co. and detection coils Cl and
c2. By connecting the two detection coils Cl and CZ of the same winding in
the differential action format, the change in magnetic flux due to the eddy
current generated between the work and the coil can be detected. The thermal
performance of this sensor is characterized by an error of the order of

a percent when used at a temperature of zoo'c or less and a distance in the
range of 0-8 mm from the work. Figure 7 shows a block diagram of the sensor
interface. Hhen excitation coil co is excited with a 20 RH: AC wave form.
output voltage will be induced in detection coils Cl and C2. If this output
voltage is amplified and waveform shaped. a curve like those shown in Figure 8

7h
moa«or1nc151.uss¢mvtv
'.

  

'////°-9(ii)

Figure 7. Block Diagram of Sensor

Kay:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(S)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

Interface

Oscillation circuit
Amplifier circuit
Rectification

LOG conversion
Position setting
Conpariaon circuit
Function conversion
Syeten bus
Protection circuit
Sensor

Bork
can be obtained. To use this signal in the various functions described
above, the signal is subjected to an AID conversion at the last stage.
Like the abnormality detectunncircuit described previously, this circuit
also contains a protectioncircuit which can prevent robot runaway if a
primary or secondary breakage of sensor cable should take place or if the

sensor should come too close to the work object. exceeding a designated
distance.

Software

The majority of the functions of this robot are realized through software.
The basic construction of the software is illustrated in Figure 9. The pro-
cess monitor system (PMS) carries out multiple processing of various tasks.
It executes a task according to the priority order when an interruption
occurs (such as an input/output press-button). A high-level starting pri-
ority is assigned to tasks related to emergency and abnormality treatment.
and all individual tasks are carefully ordered by taking into consideration
the detail of treatment so as to shorten the treatment time. At the end of
a task, the control is returned to the PMS. During the execution of a task,
if the starting conditions for a task having higher priority order should be
established, the PHS would withdraw all registers of the present task and
execute the task that had been inserted. Table 3 sunrises the tasks that
are actually used and Table 4 shows a summary of the subroutines.

1.?

 
   

     

(8) all I blmvn-O Milli-.40.)
Itvwaw-r’ w—sktaom)

Figure 9. Basic Construction of Software

(1) Process monitoring system

(2) Tasks related to automatic operation

(3) Tasks related to step operation

(a) Tasks related to manual operation and teaching

(5) Tasks related to stopping

(6) Tasks related to initialisation

(7) Tasks related to emergency treatment

(8) Robot control subroutine (interpolation and other); basic subroutine
(data transfer and other)

(9) Common subroutine group

76
FOI!OFFKJA1.IEIE¢HVLY
Table 3. A List of Tasks (classification and assignment of tasks)

Important Abbreviated

 

factor s2b_ol I/_0 Remarks
02 BSTOP I hergency atop
03 STOP I Instant stop
06 ABM I Abnormality I (same as intent stop)
05 BS‘I‘OP I Block stop
07 CSTOP I Cycle stop
10 RCVRY I Recovery from emergency stop
11 IDAD I Hydraulic pressure loading
12 01.00 I Hydraulic pressure unloading
13 CTAU‘I' I Snitch automatic mode
1’: crs'rp I Switch step mode
15 mum I Switch teach node
20 STUPO I Step and group center operation
1.2 was 0 hergency stop on
53 HANDV 0 Manual operation
55 TEACH 0 TEACH TASK
60 STOPG 0 Instant stop on
63 STEP 0 Step operation
67 AU‘l‘CR 0 Automatic operation
72 mono 0 Automatic node on
77 CPUI‘I‘ 0 CPU INITIALIZB
——-Ilportant factor I : interrupt
for starting 0 : 00502

Table A. A List of Subroutines (standardized subroutines for Aros series)

 

N_0; Nae Abbreviated sEbol
1 Transfer now:
2 RM CLEAR CLEAR
3 ENOODE DATA moon
’0 030005 DATA 03000
5 Multiplication HJLT
6 Division. one of then DIVI
7 IE son
8 CORE MEMORY Read core memory 110032
9 CORE MEMORY Write core memory HOOKS
10 Quadruple length addition AD «'0
ll SINB SIN
12 Corner cosputation ccm
13 COSINE cos
1!. Index matching HEX?
15 Normalization NORM
l6 Multiply floating HP
17 Absolute ABS
18 BCD to binary BCDTB
T7

FOIOFFIGALWONLY
A delicate abnormality treatment function and interlocking function which
could not be achieved in the conventional robot, were realized through the
use of software. The rationality checks--more than 30 in number-- which
maintain surveillance over the operator teach error and the operation error.
have a significant effect on prevention of accident and increasing the teach—
ing work number, by teaching the operator in advance. unlike the conventional
robot, with which the teaching errors can be revealed only after it is

played back. Table 5 smarizes the causes of abnormalities which are
checked and the details of their treatment.

Table 5. Cause of Abnormality and Its Treatment (abnormalities being
checked and details of the treatment)

.______.__._________________.___________________________________.____________
Signal name Cause of abnormality Details of treatment

Emergency Emergency stop button Deviation signal to servo valve OPT
stop pressed Stop arc

Emergency stop lamp on

Stop positioner

Hydraulic power source OFF
(unload simultaneously)

Abnormal oil Oil temperature > 50°C Block stop
temperature A
Abnormal oil Oil temperature > 60°C Same as emergency stop
temperature 3 Abnormality display (main console)
Motor Thermal trip on hydraulic Same as emergency stop
overload unit Abnormality display (main console)
Encoder lamp Lamp inside encoder Same as emergency stop
broken broken Abnormality display (main console)
Torch contact Torch touches work Same as emergency stop
Abnormality display (main console)
CPU CPU fails to operate Same as emergency stop
abnormality Abnormality display (main console)
Teaching box Abnormalityin teaching Same as emergency stop
abnormality box circuit or missed
transmission from Abnormality display (main console)
teaching box
Broken arc Overall abnormality of Instantaneous stop of automatic
welding power source operation

Abnormality display (main console)

Sensor Broken sensor or Same as emergency stop
abnormality abnormal approach to work Abnormality display (main console)

___________________.__——-————————-———-————

The industrial robots are about to change from lonesome stable robots to
ranch robots with social status thanks to the development of the microproces—
sor. It is the task of the maker to realize the dream robot of the user.

COPYRIGHT: Electronic Engineering 1982

9113

C80: 4106/66 78
FOIIOIINC1A1.U5510NLV
CREATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY PROMOTION PROGRAH BEING SET UP

Outline of Program
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SBIMBUN in Japanese 6 Jan 82 p 2

[Text] a Greater Degree of Freedom: The Path to Success for the Creative Science
and Technology Promotion Program

The Science and Technology Agency announced the “Creative Science and Technology
Promotion Program" as one of its new policies for the 1980's. It began in 1981
with an initial budget of approximately 600 million yen. At the end of October
last year, the general directors of tour research projects were named, and now a
total of 80 researchers (about 10 percent from overseas) are being selected. By
the end of March all personnel will be selected and the research is scheduled to
get under way in earnest.

This program abolishes the concepts of previous science and technology policies
and aims at promoting science and technology with an "individual-centered organi-
zation." An increase to 1.98 billion yen was approved in the 1982 budget. how-
ever. in order to achieve the final goals, the people involved from industry,
government, and academia must all recognize that this is a "difficult project“
which requires a great turnaround in thinking.

The Creative Science and Technology Promotion Program. along with the "Next-
Generation Basic Industrial Technology R and D Program." is a major part of the
government's proposed policy for building the country on the basis of science and
technology in the 1980's. The thinking behind it is quite unusual.

The creative science program is a plan for selecting people of exceptional ability
to be general directors, gathering superior researchers under their leadership by
contract from industry. government, and academia, and using existing research
facilities to carry out highly original research. The purpose of the progras is
to discover the "seeds" of science and technology which can become the source of
innovative technology. The aim throughout is to carry out research in an "indi-
vidual-centered" way which will make the most of the ability of creative and
ambitious researchers.

In accordance with the conclusions of the Council for Science and Technology. the
New Technology Development Corporation. which is the parent body for promoting

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l V” U." 0‘ IRA. U~).. ‘I.~.¢'

the new program, selected the four following subjects on which to begin research
in 1981: super-fine particles. specially structured substances, fine polymers, and
perfect crystals. A researcher-president of a private company and three univer-
sity professors have been chosen as general directors. Some of the research has
already begun, but it will start in earnest in April. In addition, "holonic func-
tion" and "bioinformation" have been selected as new research subjects for 1982.

In view of these conditions, it would seem likely that the Creative Science and
Technology Promotion Program would go ahead smoothly, but in reality, this is not
necessarily true.

The reason is that it is an "individual-centered" research and development project.
which differs in concept from the previous government-led projects. Even if it is
suited to creative activity, it is doubtful whether it can be easily accepted by
Japan's industrial society.

For example, there is the problem of retaining researchers. At present, there is
great interest in the various industrial sectors and it is necessary to refuse
some applications for participation. However, in the long term, there is a prob-
len of whether Japanese industry, with its principle of "company loyalty comes
first because of lifetime employment," can accept a research organization that
gives priority to the individual.

In any case, we hope that the related institutions will respond with greater free-
dom in order to at least reward the efforts of the general directors, among who-
are included representatives of industry who believe that this is a public service
and that the pxofit of private corporations comes second.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1982
Research Setup
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 12 Feb 82 p 15

[Text] SiXty-Eight Researchers including Foreigners; New Technology Corporation's
Creative Science Program; 15 Locations Selected for Research Facilities

The New Technology Development Corporation is hurrying to organize the "Creative
Science and Technology Promotion Program" which began last fall. The places where
the research is to be carried out and the persons who will perform the research,
including the group leaders. have been mostly determined. The equipment and in-
struments necessary for each research theme are being ordered, and the main re-
search activity will begin early in FY-82. Research will be carried out at 15
locations, and there will be 68 researchers including the group leaders (30 of
these are scheduled to sign contracts by March). Eight of the researchers are
foreigners.

The Creative Science and Technology Promotion Program will work on four projects
expected to be the seeds of next-generation technology innovation: 1) super—fine

particles. 2) specially structured substances, 3) fine polymers, and 4) perfect

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
crystals. These projects will be undertaken in a 5-year plan under a new system-
known as a flexible research system. Superior researchers will be gathered for
the projects from industry, academia, and government and placed under project
leaders who are excellent researchers with managerial ability. This program will
work under a person-centered research system. The research locations and the num-
ber of researchers for each project are as follows.

Super-fine particles (project leader: Shuzei hayashi. president of Nippon Vacuum
Technology)-l) basic material properties: Meijo University Science and Engineer-
ing Depart-ant (Nagoya), five researchers; 2) physical application: Cakei Elec-
tric (Tsukuba Research and Education Garden City), four researchers; 3) biochem-
ical application: Maruzen Oil Company (Satte-machi, Saitama Prefecture), four
researchers; 4) method of refining: Nippon Vacuum Technology Ultimate Materials
Laboratory (Sanbu-gun, Chiba Prefecture), four researchers.

Specially structured substances (project leader: Takeshi Masumoto, Tohoku Univer-
sity professor)-1) basic physical properties: Electromagnetic Materials Labora-
tory (Sendai), six researchers; 2) amorphous compounds: Otsuka Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Company (Tokushima). four researchers; 3) amorphous metal thin
films: Gakushuin University (Tokyo). three researchers; 4) special ceramic mate—
rials: Furukawa Electric Central Research Laboratory (Tokyo), four researchers;
5) intrastratal compounds: (will be researched in basic material properties group
during 1981), one researcher.

Fine polymers (group leader: Maoya Ogata, Jochi University professor)-l) molecule
design: Jochi University Science and Engineering Department (Tokyo), four re-
searchers; 2) selective function materials: Mitsubishi Chemical Industries Gen-
eral Laboratory (Yokohama), five researchers; 3) organic electron materials:
Matsushita Technical Laboratory (Kawasaki), five researchers.

Perfect crystals (group leader: Jumichi Nishirawa, Tohoku University professor)--
1) basic structure: Semiconductor Laboratory (Sendai), seven researchers; 2)
super-high-speed elements: Mitsubishi Electric (ltsmi, Hyogo Prefecture), four
researchers; 3) perfect crystal manufacturing process: Mitsubishi Metals (0miya,
Saitama Prefecture), four researchers; 4) optical application: Hamamatsu Televi-
sion (Hamamatsu), four researchers.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

9651
C80: 4106/65 END

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY