FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10104
9 November 1981

USSR Report

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT

(FOUO 5/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEKINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10104
9 November 1931

USSR REPORT
CONTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT

(P000 5/81)

CONTENTS

HB‘I'AIM)RKING EQUIPMENT

Development of Machine Building Industry Discussed
(3. Kheynman; VOW m‘mu, Aug 81) ooeooooooeaoooooooooeo 1

Abstracts From 'V'ESTNIK WNW MAGAZINB'
(VESTNIK HASHINOSTROMHA, Aug 81) Ono...ooocooaooooooootooooo 13

- a - [III - USSR - 36a P000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HETAMRKING EQUIWENT

DBVEOPHDIT OF HACHDIE BUILDING mus-rm um

2!:ro VOPMBY KOIOHIKI in nussien No 8. Aug 81 (signed to press 11 Aug 81) pp
'34

[Article by SJheynnan: 'Probless of hchine Building Develop-ent']

[Text] The 26th party congress. having stressed the exceptional iaportence of
Inchine building in the developeent of the national econony. fox-minted the basic
problem that are faced by this industrial sector in the eidrties. The rescuip-
sent and systentic isproveeent of the production apparatus of all sectors of the
national econoey. including the production apparatus of achine building itself.
inply the production on a sufficient scale of nodern. constantly rumble (st

rates corresponding to the rates of scientific-tecinologicel mess) loans of labor

end equipeent tor nonproductive purposes. including household and other equipmt
for personal use.

The higher technical level of the leans of production is an isportent condition
for the intensification of the letter -- an increase in the yield end a reduction
in the cost of unit power. e reduction in the cost. use of nterial end nan-hours
per Job for the product.and the reduction in the length of the production cycle.
The role of uchine building in colpleting the transfer of the econoq to en inten-
sive path of develop-out also expresses itself by providing the following:

technological conditions for the output at high quality products. wide production
of equip-eat for the preservation of the final and interesdiste products and the lini-
nisation of their losses:

dynasic correspondence between the technological and dinensional pare-stare of the
equipsent to eieilar paranetere of parts end processes which are processed end
executed on it;

the possibilities at the design stage of its subsequnt econonic end flexible
nodernisation end of switching over to nking new products:

econoeic. trouble-free and efficient operation of the equip-ant. guaranteed eer-
vicing and repairs.

Aeong the basic problem of the econoeic anisocial developeent of the country in the
eighties. the 26th party congress outlined broad transierntiona in the lost

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iaportant sphere in the life of the people -- in labor: “...Iaprove and lightai
working conditions. provide wide possibilities for highly productive and creative
work. erase considerably essential differences between sental and physical labor.
and transfora agricultural labor into a fora of industrial labor." This systea
is inseparably related to the radical probles of econoaic develop-ant -- a stable
growth in the productivity of social labor. Conditions. the content and nature of
labor which are adequate for the dennds and possibilities of sodern n. are the
basic preaises for increasing the productivity of labor and becoaing one of life's
benefits which depend prinrily upon the seans of work and the role played by the
social-econoaic criteria in the production of whines. their design and mufacture.

The desographic situation. in the eighties and the probless of social-econosic trans-
forntions in the sphere of labor pose several proble- in achine building. First.
it is necessary to provide a sufficient output of aodern equip-est (the leans for
large and cull-scale nschsnisation) of high quality for the systentic reduction
of the nusber of nnual workers whose ratio is half of all the workers in a nusber
of industrial sectors.

Also required is the accelerated developsent of production autontion. including its
highest for»: equipsent with nuaerical prognaed control. autosatic lines. auto-
antic aanipulators (industrial robots) etc. The 26th party congress outlined a
broad progras in this area. wide introduction of autonted loans of production

is one of the lost important preaisee for autosating nterial production in indus-
trial sectors.

The equipsent which. at the start of the eighties. is at the design stage on the
drawing boards of the design bureaus. detersine the nature of labor in the eighties
and nineties. Therefore. their utilisation and their associated technologies lust
create conditions that will aeet the requiresente of a worker at the end of the 20th
century and the start of the 21st. Designers. technologists and workers of N11
LScientific Research Institute]. I! [Design Bureau] and enterprises that esbody
technical and technological solutions in setal mt provide the following in their
developsents: sechanisation of heavy and unskilled nnual labor; observe (in
equip-ant and technology) all hum engineering preaises for the total safety and
confortable working conditions with systeaatic eliaination of the sonotonous eleaents
of labor; the transforsation of agricultural labor into a fors of industrial labor.

The material basis for raising product quality is created prinrily by nchine
building. The technical characteristics of the Dans of production and. of course.
of technology aust provide the production of high quality products by the given
equip-ant. The 26th party congress posed the problem "...I-prove and strengthen
the 'upper stories' of the respective industrial sectors: the so-called fourth con-
version in aetallurgy. the finishing work in construction and final production in
light industry. They detersine. to a great extent, the quality and soaetiaes also
the quantity of the products.“ This applies equally to the production of drying
and impregnating equip-ant for wood-working. to the creation of rolling aille that
provide a high technical standard of surface and strength properties of nnufactured
rolling stock. especially in equipping mhine building itself with finishing equip-
aent and. generally. in the quality of Iachine building products.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Questions of social developsent and the raising of the people's welfare still pose
a nusber of probleas for Inchine building. In particular. it was noted at the 26th
party congress that it is necessary to iaprove considerably equipmt in food and
light industries enterprises. develop sectors for the production of technically
perfect products for long-tern use such as household articles. strengthen the :-
terial equip-ant base of state and cooperative coaaerce. raise the industrialisation
standard of public nutrition. take Isasuree to accelerate and introduce widely
scientific-technological achievenents in asdicine. increase the provision of public
health establish-ants with instrulents. ledioal equip-ant. transport and con-unice-

tions facilities, with a wide introduction of aodern equip-ant in schools and edu-
cational enterprises.

The production of a new in principle class of technical facilities - Iedicsl.
instructive and other equipnent -- so far has not been sufficiently assinilsted by
dowestic sachine building and it is supplenented by iaports. As a result. the

standard of equipaent of all industrial sectors in this area do not fully nest
sodern require-ants.

The development of a long-range prograa of achine building develop-ant and bring-
ing its structure and organisation into correspondence with the probleas it faces.
a:- well as the coapletion of the transfer of this conpler to the road of intensive
developaent assuae an analysis of the present state of achine building and a deter-
aination of the most inportant directions of its further developaant.

USSR nehine building (including aetal working) is distinguished by a capacity of
high resources: about 100$ of all workers and half the engineers. technicians and
enployeee in the industry. 23.3% of the fixed production capital and 27.95 of its
gross output. (bviously. Iachine building is characterised by a higher nan-noun
per Job standard and a relatively lower capital-labor ratio. li‘his is attested to by
the fact that intensified progress in nchine building production itself is acutely
needed and. at the ease tiae. it represents an essential factor in transferring

its entire industrial production to the road of intensive developaant.

He will consider the resources at the disposal of the donestic achine building
industry as well as the special features and the dennds for its products. In
this case. in our opinion. a national econoaic approach is necessary to character-
ise social labor resources whose expenditures are related to the develop-ant of
machine building. i.e.. it is necessary to take into account the labor and nterial
resources related to the production of the equip-ant. as well as to its nintenance
at the users or. to put it differently. resources spent on 'nchine production“
and “aachine servicing.“

The nohine building coaplex and the areas associated with it absorb a considerable
share of the national econoaic resources. At the seas tile. having at its disposal
huge labor and aaterial resources. and continuously increasing then. achine build-
ing is not able to solve any iaportant national econonic problem it faces at the
present tine. As a result. it frequently becoaes a factor that liaits the possi-
bility of solving a nuaber of radical production developnsnt problem.

in the eighties to nineties. it is planned to nintain accelerated rates of nohine
building developnent. Thus. in 1981-1985. for an increase in the national incoae

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of 18 to 20K and industrial production or 36 to 285. it is planned to increase
nehine building output by 1.1; tines. Over 005 of the entire increase in indus-
trial output will be provided by increasing the output of nehins building products.

At present.there are actually three achine building coaplsnes in the country. The
first one -- the machine building plants of machine building industries. “real”
nchine building guided at all levels by nchine builders. oranically related to
a system of achine building NH and K3. It contains less than half the achine
building equipasnt pool.

The second cosplex is mhine building plants of noneachine building ainistries and
depart-eats. They contain several aillion workers and have at their disposal a
considerable equipment pool.

These enterprises are outside the sphere of inﬂuence of nchine building 311. Min-
istries in which these enterprises are included are technical "staffs" of aetallur-
gical. textile and other production custoaers and not equip-ant producers.

The quality and efficiency of any technological equipaent are detersined not only
by the knowledge of technologies and the directions of the technical progress in
industrial sectors -- users of the squipaent. but. to a greater extent. depend on
the technical standard and technology of the achine building production itself.

It is precisely these properties that. by its very nature. the “second achine
building coupler” does not have. An analysis we carried out for 29 sectors of .-
chine building indicated that at plants within the nchine building industries. the
level of labor productivity and the output-capital ratio are higher by 20 to 255
respectively than in plants within the sectors -- equipaent users.

Proposals are frequently ends in publications on transferring aachine building
plants and associations to sinistries that use the given equip-est. This position
is substantiated by the insufficient orientation of equipaent producing industries
toward satisfying the dennds of users and the frequent violation of the fulfillmt
of orders. and schedules of delivery of the corresponding equip-mt. However. the
policy of orientation toward the user. outlined in the last party congresses. cannot
be achieved by converting a user into a producer. This could also lead to the fur-
ther expansion or the natural [in situ] facilities in nehine building which was
already decisively censured by the 25th party congress. The transfer of coal 3--
chine building to the USSR hinistry of the Coal Industry did not Justify itself.
Such a practice leads only to lowering the quality of the product and the effi-
ciency of uchine building.

Finally. the third systea of lachine building ~~ aschine and sachine repair shops
and subdivisions. within nonaachine building enterprises. They contain 45! of the
total pool of the aetal working equipasnt in the country and. it is estinted. no
less than 5 to 6 nillion workers. This say be called ”in pure fora“ the natural
sector of nachine building. The pool of natal-cutting whine tools and forging-
press equipaent in the USSR is greater than in the United States. Japan and the
F‘RC together.

The high resource capacity of the lashine building couple: is due prinrily. in our
opinion. to a trend (and. aoreover. a strengthening one) of the develop-est of the

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

facilities in nichine building itself, as well as in 'nohine-using" industrial
sectors. The effect of this trend has a dual nature. First. in nohine building
itself. there prevail historically forsed colprehensive enterprises having. as a
rule. casting, forgin . tool (frequently also nobine tools at plants that do not
produce nchine tools and auxiliary shops up to sawnills and woodworking facilities
at the largest sachine tool plants (for the unufacture of packing for the sachine
tools). however. about a third of the nohine tool pool of the uchine building
plants the-selves is outside the basic production in their auxiliary shops. Loading
these shops with the wsnufacture of single products unavoidably reduces the produc-
tivity of labor and the yield per unit of squiplent. Auxiliary workers (in auxiliary
and basic shops) mks up about half of all the workers in achine building.

Secondly. nohine building (this is also related to the nature and structure of its
products) is forced to serve the natural facilities which are developing in other
sectors of the econosy. For exasple. it is necessary to nnufacturs and renovate
wood franes in aini-sawnills, garage equip-sat in sini-garsges etc. Repair and
nchine shops that captivated enterprises of all ainistries and depart-eats require
universal aachine tools and casting. forging-press and welding equip-ant of all types.

To supple-ant and partially renovate this pool of equip-exit. aachine building
capacities are loaded with the mnufacturs of a huge quantity of ordinary (and which
therefore, do not require high technical characteristics. ”convenient" for produc-
tion) equipment. in this case. the ordinary nnufactursd squipaent itself. in its
turn is very little utilised by the user. It is not by chance that in the 0333.

for a ssailer voluae of production and a generation of electric power. allost half
that of the United States. that there are produced and operated several tines sore
electric actors as drives for various squipsent (with powers of 0.75 kw and greater).

Loading aachine building with the production of ordinary equip-ant. including aetal-
working equipsent. and saturating sectors of the national econony with it where it
is utilized far fros fully detsraines. to a considerable extent. the present state
of nachine building. the nature of the (island for its products. the trend of its
developsent. its resource capacity and efficiaicy and. by the way. also to a great
extent. the so-called ”deficit” of achine tool operators.

in our opinion. the way out of this situation is to create new capacities and build
enterprises oriented toward specialised production. At the ease tine. it is neces-
sary to increase the specialisation level of existing production facilities and
capacities. For this purpose. it is necessary to mks the cooperation sschanisn
sore rigid. strengthen penalties for nonfulfilllsnt of deliveries on cooperative
contracts and change prices (and corresponding payaents for funds and other re-
sources) for the products of their ”own“ natural facilities. Such seasures will
make it possible to elisinate the artificially created high profitability of the
latter. it is advisable to lisit deliveries of new equip-mt to natural facilities.
orienting then toward purchasing squipsent freed by the basic nchine building
plants.

The status and prospects of developing the nachine building production aeohanisn
are inseparably related to the progress of aschine tool building. Uhile ntsriali-

sation of scientific-technical progress depends on achine building. the tecimical
and econoaic possibilities of nohine building itself depend on sachine tool building.

5
row omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In its turn. uchine tool building depends on its cosplelsnting sectors -- the
electrotechnicsl. electronic and instrulent building industries. It lust be

stressed that the technical standard of the natal-working equip-ant produced and

its efficient functioning depend. to a pest degree. specifically on these sectors
(electric drives and high torque actors. electronics. controlling. nonitoring and
recording devices etc.). All this squiplsnt deter-lines the standard and possibilities

of the Iachine tools. presses etc.. but are produced by dosestic industry in insuf-
ficient quantities and are not always of high quality.

Specialized production of tools and technological fixtures lags noticeably behind
the scales of uchine tool building and the nohine tool pool. Standardisation and
specialization in the production of intersediste products. functional units and
parts of machine tools. and technological fixtures are insufficimtly developed. An
increase in the scale of such production facilities would hits it possible to reduce
the load on Inchine tool plants and provide for the production of special and spe-
cialired equipsent for the needs of various production facilities and of the XIII.

Attention should be given to the positive experience in this area accumlated. in
particular. in nchine tool building. Thus. several kinds of achine tools of the
"processing center" type are being designed and lads on the progressive basis of
starriardized units whose mnui'acture is assiyied to specialised enterprises already at
the stage of crest ing prototypes. For exalple. one of the uchine building plants
produces steel guides and a series of linear notion drives for actuators. Another

-- devices for the automatic change of processed parts. A third plant -- sechanisu
for the sutontic change of tools etc. In this case. the tins betweu: overhauls was
increased by 60$ and for inactive tools 01‘ the sass sise. but different arrangesents.

it was increased by 90!. Siailar possibilities also exist in other subsectors of
"achine tool building.

The complex of problems of repairs. sodernisstion and the output of spare parts for
the equipment is related to the renovation of the pool. Busting repair practices.
as a rule. do not provide for the proper quality and life of the repaired equip-ant.
thereby increasing the idle tins of the equipsent. (restore of my types of equip-
ment do not produce the ncessary set of replaceable and repair units and parts for

it. Therefore. host of the units and parts for repairs are nnui'actured in their
"own" machine repair shops.

we think that the tine has cone to include in the production standards for each
given equith the conditions for sanufacturing (by the equipment alter) a suffi-
cient set of replaceable and repair units and parts. as well as the order for
guaranteed repairs and servicing of the equip-mt. These standards met be observed
strictly and would require. on the one hand. a corresponding systes of Iaterial in-
centives and. on the other hand. the introduction of penalties.

As noted previously. the available sachine building capacities cannot provide the
necessary rates of renovation and replace-ant of the equipsent pool. At the sale
tine. with the presence of a powerful production apparatus and with high rates of
technical progress. the problen of pool renovation cannot be solved only by re-

placing it with new equipsent. For countries that have such capacities as are at
the disposal of the USSR and the United States. a full replace-ant of the pool of

equipsent would absorb not less than a 20-year output of achine tool building.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore. the aodernisation of equipasnt becoaes vary urguit. At pres-it. the
aodemization process is achieved. as a rule. by uterpriees operating the equip-
asnt which. not being sachine building enterprises. cannot aoderniae to a high
technical standard. For aoderniaation to be efficint in movating the equip-mt.
its technical bases met be provided by the efforts of nchine building itself.
muipsent producers already incorporate aodemisation possibilities at the design
stage creating. so to speak. "genetic preaises" for aodeinisation in order that the
nin working parts can be replaced. continuing the operation of the basic units
using the aoet netal. By aanufacturing new. aore productive aodels. the plants
would provide the needed quantity of unite for the aodernieation of the operated
equipnent thereby. It is advisable to accoapany capital repairs of the equipmt
with aodernisation. Thus. production and continuous provision of the users with a
set of replaceasnt and repair unite and parts sufficimt for operatic). repairs and
aodernination of the squipaent. lust becoas an integral characteristic of aodern
nchine building.

it should also be noted that the voluae of installation and dis-ntling equipasnt
is insufficient in the sachine building output. Therefore. nking repairs increases
the nuaber of aanual workers considerably. According to the 0888 Test! [Central
Statistical Adainistration]. about one quarter (23‘) of the nnual workers (not less
than 3.2 aillion people) are occupied with repairs.

Based on the above described problea of the further developmt of achine building.
we will consider the basic directions of a coaprehensive prograa for developing and
iaproving its structure and organisation over a long-range period. The prograa
should. first of all. outline the structure of the equipaent produced. In a con-
solidated plan there could be the followings technological equipmt with a full
set of finishing and auxiliary equip-ant. a required not of units and parts for re-
pairing and aodemising the equipssnt in all sectors of the production of nterial;
sufficiently flexible capacities for the production of sciattific-erperiasntal
equipaent and devices for equipping the nonproductive servicing sphere. including
educational institutions. health safety. the leisure industry and rest and recreation:
household equipaent for personal use: nvironasntal protection equipasnt.

In manufacturing all these types of equipaent it is necessary to take into account
their social-economic effectiveness. providing optin working conditiais. as well
as observing ell ecological criteria at the very bases of the equipasnt and tech-

nology .

In the area of structural laterials. technology and nterial consuaption in mhine
building. the required effect my be achieved by changing over to aetal-saving de-
signs. the reorientation of designs (wherever this is expediait) froa castings to
rolled stock. froa aerchant shapes to sheets, thin sheets. etaapings and welded
designs: a systeaatic reorientation of technological solutions toward plastic de-
forsation,staaping and welding aethods on the basis of prospects for increasing

the share of sheets in using astals change the production apparatus of achine
building and eachine tool building to correspond with above-cited natal-saving
orientation in sachine building as a whole.

Aaong the especially iaportant problem of nohine building developmt. it is
necessary to consider the huge probless in organising achine building production.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This concerns. first of all. the specialisation level and its necessary bases --
standardisation and nornlisation of equip-eat units and parts. Ming the last
several fiVe-year plan periods. in spite of a nusber of solutions by directive or-

gene. the progress of specialisation in uchine building in all its directions was
very little.

The level of product specialisation is low. Thus. 22 plants of the Hintyashnsh
[Ministry of Heavy and Transport hchine Building] nnufactuzeonl 17% of the rate-
rial handling equipsent. The resainder (831) is mufactured at plants of 35
sinistries and departsents. A sisilar situation exists in road-building and sunici-
pal engineering equipsent. A considerable share of natal-working equipsent (espe-
cially setal-cutting sschins tools) is nnufactured outside the enterprises of the
Ministry of the Tool and lhchine Tool Industry. The linkhillash [Hinistry of (hesi-
cal and Petroleus Inchine Building] nnufactures heat exchange apparatus at its
plants. The nnufacture of any types of household equipsent is also very scattered.

essential shortcosings are also found in the develop-mt of tecimological and parts
specialisation. The centralised specialised production of castings and forgings

sakes up 3% of the entire values of these interssdiste products and of castings. in

particular. -- “ﬁx. There are practically no specialised plants that ssnufscture
forgings and staspings.‘

We have no specialized sector for the production of setal coatings. fastenings.
threaded parts etc. Specialised production of uchins units and parts is not being
sufficiently developed."

The path of high specialization and cooperation for achine building on such a huge
scale as it is in the USSR is the only efficient one. This course was laid out in
the directives of the 26th party congress. ”Continue the specialisation of nohine
building production. create new enterprises and develop existing specialised ones.
and large shops that mks castings. forgings. parts. units and assesbliss for in-
dustrial and interindustrial purposes.“

hmctional specialization is an isportant and prosising direction for nohine build-
11.5. This direction becoses especially urgent in connection with the course taken
to create a systen of nehinee for the conprehsnsive nechanisation and autontion
of entire industrial sectors and production facilities.

Functional specialisation is one of the lost isportant conditions for raising the
flexibility of sachine building. the ﬂexibility of the produced equip-ant and the
capacity for rapid adaptation to new situations. This orientation. whose tile has
cone. poses an acute alternative. A sachine syste- for any nodern industrial

'in the United States interindustry enterprises satisfy 70% of the total require-
nents in forgings. 70% of ferrous setal forgings. and about 501 of their require-
nents in torgings and hot staspings. since 1972. a census is taken in a special
sector «the production of autosobile staspings. In 197?. it counted 579 enter-
prises. 132,000 workers and product sales of 9.? billion dollars.

"in 1976. in the United States. autosobile plants had 2746.000 workers with a con-
ditional net output of 15.8 billion dollars. while in plants taking autosobile units
and parts -- 3400.000 workers and 13.7 billion dollars respectively.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sector. as a rule. consists of a wide spectrus of tecknical devices. differ-alt in
functions and tecimology. as well as mufacturing ssthcds. Therefore. a corre-
sponding association or enterprise not either mufacture this ntire spectrus it-
self or a “base“ not be created consisting of utorprisos. specialising in the
production of functional units thst say be used in mufacturing the lost varied
types of units. Precisely this path was used in the production of bearings. They
were standardised. Oily a bearing catalog containing their sisos and other tecimico.‘
para-store is needed in the design process, and the designer selects the required
bearing free it.

A network of functionally specialised enterprises and associations will arse it
possible to assssble (on the nodular principle) a considerable part of the sachino
systes froa finished functional units. This path of whine building develop-at
is detersined by the high rates of scientific tecrnologicsl progress and tho sore
and sore frequent renovation of the equith and the nnufacturod products. It
was noted at the 26th party congress that in creating new machines. equips-it.
apparatus and devices. it is necessary to use the nodular principle widely. utilis-
ing standard units, producing Iultifunctional mhines and equip-ant that can be
rssdjusta‘l when technological processes and types of produced products change.

The introduction of such equipsent will raise the efficiency of nchine building
production considerably. The realisation of thh direction should be specified in
the plans of the sinistries for the iith Five-Year Plan period.

An urgent and, at the sane tile. on oxtresely cosplox probles is the change in the
situation with regard to specialisation. 01s of the weak links in the sconosic
sechaniss is the lack of reliable penalties for suppliers and alsoot a total ab-
sence of the possibility for users to select equipaont. The forntion of a sesns
of production reserves, including reserves of production capacities. specified by
the decree on isproving the econosic sechaniss. creates preaises for solving the
given problem.

However, this will require a long tise by virtue of objective reasons. It is our
opinion that fairly isportant and realistic steps in the developsent of speciali~
nation way be. and must be. taken within the frasework of sinistries. as well as
large sachine building centers. An expedient epscialisatim of intersediate prod-
uct,tool and other plant shops. close in nature to the products. my have and does
have a considerable effect. This is attested to by the practice of enterprises of
s nusber of large sachino building cutters (in particular. by the Lninskiy and
Rostovskiy). so well as enterprises of the Kinsel'khossash [liinietry of Agricul-
tural lhclhinery] and the Hinelektrotekhpros [mun-y of Electrical quip-eat
Industry .

In the ninelektrotekhpros. for oxasple. each large enterprise had indepodent pro-
duction facilities for such products of interindustrial use as castings, welded
natal structures. forgings, hot staspings and fastenings. All plants had their
plating shops or sections and sanufactured for thenelves technological equip-nit
and tools. having sccumlated considerable reserves of both. In accordance with
the decision of the board of the sinistry. industrial territorial councils of
directors were for-ed. m the initiative of the northwestern council of directors.
cosbined production facilities were created which could satisfy the dsnnds of all

electric equipsent enterprises of this econosic region for such products. which

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nde it possible to increase the output-capital ratio and the productivity of labor.
The hinsel’khoeush experience also asrits attmtion. The tool shops of its plants
specialise in the production of one or another type of tool. It is expedient to
fora such production facilities within the ainistriee that accept end execute in~

Busting industrial machine building specialisation, the presence of certain honor
oi istic eleaents in the production of equip-ant end the inability, to a considerable
degree,of the user to select equipaent.create trade that lead to a certain break
between producer and user. The first dose not study the special features of the
require-ante of the second sufficiently. frequmtly sacrificing the possibility .of
greater series production. As a result. according to available data. technical
paraseters of any eachine tools greatly exceed the diaensional characteristics of
the castings, forgings and parts they Iachine. In the dynalic process. nohins tool
parameters (as well as paraseters of other types of equipaent) increase frequently
without taking into accomt changes in the dieensions of the parts nchined on then.

Overestiuted paraseters of equip-mt as colpared to actual require-ants leads not
only to the increased size and weight of the equip-eat, but also to greater an-
hours per job, uses greater aaomts of aetal and has a greater capital-output ratio.
in its turn. this increases the load on hetallurgy, increases capital costs and re-
duces the output-capital ratio of the given equip-ant at the user.

This situation is related to another larger gmeral econoaic problea. 'i'hs produc-
tion of a required series of equip-sot sises. thing it possible for the user to
select equiplent with the paraseters he needs met be accoepanied by a sufficient
ichl of quality or this equip-eat. Otherwise the user selects the scat reliable
machine tool although it say have greater capacity with respect to dilensionel
parameters. An exsnple of this is the screw-cutting lathe. The product of the
Moscow "Krasnyy Proletariy“ hohine Tool Building Plant acquitted itself well over
products of plants producing sealler eise uchine tools. Meanwhile. the linistry
as well as local territorial organs. under existing planning practices. strive to
maintain plants that produce poorer eachins tools and help then to “cons out“ with
hotter indicators and thus ”not spoil” the indicators of the ainistry.

and the acceleration of scientific technological progr . At presait, there are
practically no nohine building plants and associations that accept orders for

users suet sake these nonstandard products the-selves developing corresponding
sachine building capacities. Practically. handicraft production and repairs of
the special squipaent. and waking replace-ant and repair units and parts for it -
are already characterised as being above the ”third'nchine building cosplex. It
should be noted that according to estilatsd data. the level of equip-sat utilisa-
tion in such a coupler is considerably lower than one shift.

Orientation toward the final results as applied to nohins building leans that its
ﬂunctione cannot be cospleted by Just producing equip-ant alone. Phobias building

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is called upon to play a leading role in the investsent process. This also ssans
a certain responsibility of sachine building for the sssiailstion and efficient
functioning of the equipsent at the user. providing the optinlly possible life.
as well as the actual life of this equip-est. These problem were raised in full
at the 26th party congress. N. A. 'i‘ikhonov stressed that achine building is
called upon not only to produce sodern equip-ant. but also to cooperate actively
with the user in its efficient operation. This requires the wide participation of
nchine building enterprises in the installation of cosplex equipsent in the proc-
ess of construction. as well as isplesmting sessures on radical iaprovesmt in
servicing equipsent. and centralised plant repairs.

Apparently. the tile has now cone for s gradual changeover everywhere to a systes
of guaranteed servicing and repairs of the equipnsnt. and developing s Iachine
servicing depart-eat. Equipment producers who create the equipssnt and s scien-
tifically substantiated soda of its operation sust participate in the developsent
of technological equipment and, where necessary. (for exalplo. Ischine tools with
numerical progrased control) in the program. conditions. principles. order and
technology of repairs. In our opinion. the life of the equip-eat mat be one of
guaranteed paraseters but. of course. only when the user follows the specifications
for using the squipnent. This will provide a feedback iron the user snd will facil-
itate raising the quality of the produced equipaent.

lie are not touching upon the isportant cosplex of problem on isproving the organi-
zation of production at the sachine building enterprises the-selves. There are
my urgent and unsolved probless in this area whose isportsnce grows with the
progress of the autosation of production. It is isportsnt for the wide develop-
ment of autontion not only to orgsnise the use production of the aesns for

autontion. but also to isprove systesstically the oranisation of production by
using autosstic nchines and devices.

in planning long-range Iachine building. extensive trends prevail to a certain er-
tent -- to increase unit capacities and the voluse of production. expend the prod-
uct list and increase the output of new. sore aodern equipmt. As" shown by report
data. the situation does not change essentially inasmch as the scarcity of equip-
sent remins: the dennds of equipsent users are far iron being fully satisfied;
its export does not increase. while its isport is increasing. hehine building.

as before. does not play a sufficiently active role in introducing new equipaent.
in its assiailstion and utilisation. limiting itself to the. basic production of
equipment. not creating even material. not even to speak of organisational presises
for its effntive utilisation. such as the level of standardization. output of
spare parts. plant repairs. nchine service etc.

It follows froa this that to continue to nintain accelerated rates in the growth
of machine building. preserve its priority in the distribution of capital invest-
sents. it is advisable to change over to planning ilprovesnt in Inchine building.
devote sore attention to its organisation. as well as to the all-around satisfac-
tion of the dennds of the equip-ant users. For this. the following is necessary:

step-by-step expansion of specialisation -- product. part. tecinological and.
especially. functional: the developsent of the theory and practice of Mcticnal-
cost analysis:

11
FOR ommi. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

expansion of the disensional range of the produced equip-sat -- power. technological.
transport (for an equal level of equipmt quality) that would mks it possible to
reduce excessive technical parsneters sharply and isprove equipment utilisation;

an increase in all sectors of nohins building of the share of finishing equip-ant

which is the tecrmicsl basis for a sharp increase in quality and life of the equip-
sent:

an increase in the orientation of the produced equipsent toward the realisation of
the social-econonic criteria of its effectiveness;

an increase in the flexibility of the produced squipssnt and the tectnology and
organisation of achins building production itself;

wide develop-eat of standardised end specialised production of highly progressive
functional equipment units.

Many demands are made on sachine building and Justified cosplaints are ads about
the lagging behind the growing dennds of social production. However. it is also
necessary to evaluate those require-exits that achine building can and net present
to other industrial sectors and. first of all. to the equip-ant users. Besides
the investnents needed for accelerated develop-ant in uchine building. careful
preservation and operation of the equipment is also required. For axasple. on the
average. about 80% of the tractors. combines and trucks supplied to agriculture is
used to cover the replacement of written-off equipsent without increasing the pool
of equipnsnt.

Machine building progress is unthinkable without a considerable increase in the
values of production and an increase in supplies of electrical equipment and elec-
tronic cosponents to all sectors of uchine building and. prinrily. to achine
tool building.

The decree of the Central Consittse of the GPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers

on strengthening the work of saving ntsrial resources and utilising then effi-
ciently outlined has to improve radically all the work on saving. and the efficient
utilisation of raw nterials. nterials. fuel and power in all links of the national
economy. The comprehensive utilisation of raw nterials. fuel-power. construction
and other latex-isle; the introduction of low-waste and no-wsste teclznologiess a
sharp reduction in losses in areas of production. distribution and consuaptiom
step-by-step reduction in the material used in machines and equipment -- all these
are complex and isportant probless and my be solved only on the basis of proper
equipment and progressive Inchine systeas.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel‘stvo ”Pravda“."Voprosy ekonouki” 1981
2291

0303 1821/00?

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ABSTRACTS PROM'VESTNIK MASHINOSTROYENIYE MAGAZINE'

Moscow VESTNIK NASHINOSTROYENIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (signed to press 31 Jul 81)
pp 76-77

UDC 621:658.516.007.52
PROBLEMS OF UNIFICATION AND STANDARDIZATION IN INDUSTRIAL ROBOT TECHNOLOGY
[Abstract of article by Yurevich, Ye. 1.]

[Text] One of the pressing problems in robot technology is examined--working out
and totally implementing the unification and standardization of industrial robots,
manipulators and their components and also typical robotiaed technological complexes.
The primary advantages that the use of standardized robot nodules give are formu-
lated. An exemplary list of standardized robot modules and manipulators is given.
Two illustrations. Two bibliography references.

UDC 62’82-[830007052

PROBLEMS IN DESIGNING INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS WITH TELESCOPINO COMPONENTS

[Abstract of article by Ageykov, L. 6., Petrosyan. A. 0. and Chelyshev, V. A.]

[Text] Problems in reducing the mass of the operating device, lowering the power
consumption and increasing the resources of industrial robots are examined. A scheme
for arranging the telescoping component and a scheme for adapting the industrial
robot to a mass of structures is given. Three illustrations. Two bibliography
references.

UDC 62-82.]83.007.52

METHODS OF IMPROVING THE DYNAMIC AND STATIC CHARACTERISTICS OF ELECTROHYDRAULIC
DRIVE GEARS IN INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS

[Abstract of article by Alekseyev. A. P., Zhitkov. V. B. and Chelyshev, V.A.]

[Text] Problems are examined in improving the static and dynamic characteristics
of high-speed electrohydraulic drive gears in industrial robots with the aid of

13
FOR OFFMJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

non-linear adjusting devices: a three channel pseudolinear and a relay device.

Use of the suggested adjusting devices makes it possible to expand the transmission
band for the drive gear by more than a factor of two and ensures static accuracy to
one minute of an angle. One table. Five illustrations. Five bibliography references.

UDC 621.007.52

PROBLEMS WITH REMOTE CONTROLLED INDUSTRIAL DEVICES

[Abstract of article by Lakota, N. A.]

[Text] The special features of using remote controlled industrial robots in techno-
logical processes are examined. Their sphere of use, the primary problems that arise
during the design of such robots and also possible efficient ways of solving them
are analyzed. Three illustrations. Six bibliography references.

UDC 621.007.52
THE ENERCETICS 0F GAS (PNEUMATIC) BOOSTERS IN INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS
[Abstract of article by Ivanov. V. 1.]

[Text] The energetic characteristics of pneumatic distributors that are operating
under relay (ShIM) [pulse-width modulation] and continuous control conditions are
examined. Analytical graph relations are derived by which the power loss can be
determined for the distributor under various operating conditions. It is shown that
the relay control condition is more advantageous from the point of view of power
loss in comparison with continuous contra; conditions. Three illustrations.

Three bibliography references.

UDC 62-531.9.007.52
SEVERAL PROBLEMS IN OPTIMIZING THE POWER OF THE OPERATING MEMBER OF A ROBOT-MANIPULATOR
[Abstract of article by Petrov, L. N.]

[Text] A method is examined for improving the energetic characteristics of the oper-
ating members of robot-manipulators on the basis of introducing overcompensation for
the weight of the moving components into the system for balancing the static loads.

A method is suggested for selecting the optimum coefficient of overcompensation by
calculating to obtain the minimum amount of electrical rigging for the operating
member of the robot manipulator.

UDC 62l.98:007.52:658.382.2

PROBLEMS OF ENSURING THAT THE EQUIPMENT 0? ROBOTIZED TECHNOLOGICAL COMPLEXES FOR
COLD SHEET PUNCHING OPERATE SAPELY

[Abstract of article by Kryuchkov, M. A. and Mal'tsevskiy, V. V.]

[Text] The experience in developing a system for controlling the design of a techno-
logical process and for interlocking the primary and auxiliary equipment of a technical
robot complex for a sheet puncher is examined. One illustration.

1h
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.192.001.4

CONCERNING THE ACCURACY OF FORECASTING THE PERPORMANCE RESOURCE OF STRUCTURES
EASED ON THE RESULTS OF ACCELERATED TESTS

[Abstract of article by Pankratov, N. M.]

[Text] The results of research on the accuracy of forecasting the performance
resource are reported. Recommendations are given for forecasting typical situations
that arise during accelerated tests. One table. Tho illustrations. Pour biblio-

graphy references.

UDC 621.822.5
CALCULATING THE SLIPPINC OF PLASTIC BUSHINGS ACCORDING TO THE SPECIFIC PRESSURE

[Abstract of article by Istomin, S. N.]

[Text] In formulating the problem of being flush in the theory of elasticity the
problems of calculating the specific pressures in the slipping of plastic bushings
by considering the setting clearances and the real arc of contact of the shaft's pin
with the bushing's sleeve under a varying radial load are examined in the article.

Three illustrations. Five bibliography references.

UDC 621.822.006

PERFECTINC THE METHODS OF CONTROLLING THE POSITION 0F ROLLING BEARINGS DURING OPERATION

[Abstract of article by Zakhsrov. s. A., Abramov, I. V.. Sychsv, A. A., and Hartynov,
V. M.]

[Text] A context is suggested for accepting decisions when researching the process
of the vibrational control of the position of rolling bearings that are operating
under conditions of limited external vibrational and sound influences and a new
method is suggested for controlling the position of rolling bushings during operation.
Three illustrations. Five bibliography references.

UDC 621.855

THE SYNTHESIS OF A REGULATING MECHANISM FROM NON-CIRCULAR COGGED “HEELS FOR CHAIN
DRIVE GEARS

[Abstract of article by Ututov, N. L.]

[Text] A method is described for regulating the speed of the chain with the aid of
specially synthesized non-circular cogged wheels. A method is described for deter-

' mining the primary geometric parameters of non-circular regulating cogged wheels
depending on the parameters of the chain drive gear. Two illustrations. Two biblio-

graphy references.

15
FOR omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629.11.012.52

THE RADIAL RICIDITY 0F ELASTIC METAL WHEELS HITH THE JOINTS OF THE ELASTIC ELEMENTS
STRENGTHENED

[Abstract of article by Samarin, A. 1.]

[Text] Results are given of experimental and theoretical research into the radial
rigidity of a model of an elastic metal wheel that is intended for use in special
means of transportation under super low temperature conditions and in a vacuum; the
calculated relations for determining the radial rigidity of elastic metal wheels are
obtained with the hypothesis that the displacements are small and give results that
are sufficiently close to the experimental ones for the deformations that occur in
practice. Three illustrations. Two bibliography references.

UDC 678.072:539.6

THE LONG TERM STABILITY OF REACTIVE IAXERS HITH FIBROUS FILLERS HAVING VARYING
CHARACTERISTICS

[Abstract of article by Yartsev, V. P.]

[Text] The effect of unoriented fibrous fillers that have varying characteristics
and dimensions on the physical constants of the reactive layers that define their
resistance to mechanical destruction is investigated from the kinetic concept posi-
tion. It was established that the introduction of fiberglass leads to a substantial
increase in the maximum energy needed for activating the destruction of the composi-
tion. One table. Three illustrations. Eight bibliography references.

UDC 621.867.62.001.24
THE TECHNICAL REAMING 0F SCREW SURFACES

[Abstract of article by Molchanov, V. 1.]

lTextl Calculations for reaming straight and skewed screw surfaces when manufacturing
angers are set forth. Six illustrations.

UDC 621.774-662:621.961.006.18

DETERMINING THE SIZES 0F PIPES USED AS BLANKS WHEN MANUFACTURING CYLINDRICAL ARTICLES
BY MACHINING

[Abstractof article by Sokurenko, V. P.. Gorovenka. c. A., Tertyshnik. I. M., and
Gubar'. E. 1.]

[Text] Recommendations are worked cut on the basis of a probability approach for

determining the sizes of pipes used as blanks when manufacturing cylindrical articles
by machining. A well-founded selection of pipe sizes for blanks ensures, with a
given reliability, a minimum amount of waste metal when machining pipes.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.941.l

OPTIMIZING THE TECHNOLOGICAL PARAMETERS_OF MACHINING PIECES ON A LATHE NITH UNPIXED
CUTTING

[Abstract of article by Kytin, A. A.]

[Text] A method of optimizing parameters is sorted out on the basis of research

into the irregularity of changes in the indicators for the process of machining parts
under unfixed cutting conditions. Use of the suggested method and optimizing program
is expedient mainly for lathe machine tools with cnrn [Computer programmed control].
Calculations have shown that in this case the technological cost of machining is
reduced by 20 percent in comparison with the norm. Two tables. Three illustrations.
Five bibliography references.

UDC 621.9.01:621.9.025.7
RESEARCH INTO THE BREAKDOWN OF THE CUTTING PORTION OF THE HARD ALLOY TOOL DURING MILLING

[Abstract of article by Kabaldin, Yu. 6.]

[Text] A method is set forth for investigating the thermal condition of the cutting
tool under milling conditions. It was established that the formation of longitudinal
cracks in the cutting portion of the hard alloy tool is due to fatigue and the chipping
of the edge is due to its brittle nature.

Hays are suggested of reducing the tendency of the hard alloys to form cracks under
milling conditions. Five illustrations. Five bibliography references.

unc 621-923:669.lb.018.25
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF SOZh [lubricating-cooling liquid] WHEN BURNISHING STEEL FOE TOOLS
[Abstract of article by Fedoseyev, 0. B. and Kravchenko, Yu. 6.]
[Text] The results of experiments of burnishing using water emulsions. nineral oils
and without SOZh under conditions that limit the quality and precision of machining

are given.

Recommendations are given for designating burnishing methods. Three tables. The
bibliography references. '

UDC 621.73.043:Sl9.h7
SELECTING THE OPTIMUM VARIATION FOR THE TECHNOLOGICAL PROCESS OP VOLUME DIE STAMPING
[Abstract of article by Aksenov. L. B. and Aksenova, 0. A.]
[Text] A auiticriteria approach to evaluating the technological processes of volume

die staaping is set forth. It is suggested that the selection of the optimum process
be done according to overall criteria for the technical level of the forged pieces,

17
FOI‘OFFICJAI.USE1NNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the technical level of the technological process and also the amount of expenditures

by using multipurpose optimization methods. One table. Three illustrations. Seven
bibliography references.

UDC 621.833.15:621.979.136
CONCERNING SEVERAL FEATURES OF COGGED REDUCING GEARS IN THE DRIVE GEAR 0F CRANK MACHINES

[Abstract of article by Tytyanov, V. N.]

[Text] Diagrams are examined of cogged reducing gears used in the drive gear of
various types of crank machines for machining by compression; several features in
arranging and loading reducing gears are shown. their classification formulas are
given and the possibility of making a comparative evaluation of the reducing gears
with the aid of these formulas when selecting a specific crank machine is noted.
Three tables. Five bibliography references.

UDC 621.002.5.003.l3.001.24

CONCERNING THE ACCURACY OF CALCULATIONS FOR THE ECONOMIC EFFECTIVENESS 0? NE"
TECHNOLOGY

[Abstract of article by Gilula, N. D. and Gilula, H. M.)

[Text] A method is examined for evaluating the accuracy of calculations for the
economic effectiveness of new technology. It makes it possible to establish the
allowable error in determining the current individual component expenditures and
capital investments based on the accuracy and reliability required for the calcula-
tions of the economic effect. Two specific examples for construction machines are
given. One table. Four bibliography references.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyenie", "Vestnik mashinostroyeniye". 1981

9495
cso: 1321/132 END

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY