APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00880R000100040088-8
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040065-5

I‘UR UH‘lLlAL USt UNLY

JPRS 1/8429

so April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Economc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 7/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040065-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSRIP 0F
HATERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF T" IS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L,
30 Apr:

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(9000 7/79)

CONTENTS

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Hechanized lbblle Coal Mine Support Syutm Discussed
(Jan Outrihon; TECHNICKY mmm, 6 Feb 79)..........

Mechanized Plant Tranyport. Induurtnl Robot- Discussed
(Ivo Bernard; TECHNICKY menu. 20 Feb 79)..........

-a— [III'BE'G

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZBOIIOSLOVAKIA

HECIIANIZED MBILB COAL MINE SUPPORT SYSTEMS DISCUSS.
Prague TBCRNICKY TYDBNNIK in Czech 6 Feb 79 p 6
[Article by Eng Jan Ostrihon: "Modern Mining Technology")

[Text] Deep mining of black coal is important primarily because it fully
covers the domestic consumption of coking coal and its export. Its
further development is limited because of mining difficulties encoun-
tered due to worsening geological conditions especially at depths of
about 1,000 meters. saddle seaa strata in the on (Ostrava-Karvina Coal
Basin) and the necessity to exploit to the fullest coal deposits in
narrow seams 0.6 to 1 meter thick which represent approximately a third
of our coal deposits. Therefore. the required mining volume can be ful-
filled only by introducing advanced deep coal mining techniques and
technologies and by meeting the planned labor productivity increase.

Spurred by the international scientific-technical cooperation of cm
countries. innovation of mechanized mining began as early as the end of
the sixties by the introduction of the more efficient types of Soviet
KS 1 KC mining codaines and of mechanical supports. primarily of the
shield system. In the beginning of the seventies CBHA leader states
adopted a uniform scientific-technical policy in introducing advanced
aining techniques for deep coal mining which took into account special
characteristics of each country. The addition of this technical policy
was due primarily to the development of mechanized support systems
peraitting the concentration of mining in one stope.

The Main Chain Link

The Czech coal mining engineering industry, represented by the concern
enterprise Ostroj Opava. also contributed importantly to the develop-
ment of the mining systems prinarily with the successful types of WP 6
and WP 7 mechanized mobile supports of the second generation, the 'm 500
and TR 600 scraper conveyors. KSV 6 and KSV 101 sining costines for nar-

row seams and belt conveyors of the 1? 600 C and 1'? 630 A series.

Since 1967. when large-scale production of individual Sill-type hydraulic
props began at Ostroj (annual volume about 50,000 pieces) and mobile

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

supports began to be introduced. a qualitatively new stage of mechanized
deep coal mining was reached. In the beginning of the Sixth Five-Year
Plan the volt-e of mining from faces worked with mobile supports already
amounted to half the overall volume with daily quantities of mined cool
amounting to 482 tons from one stops and to 10.6 tons of coal per shift.
The rest of the face was then equipped with individual hydraulic props.
predominantly of domestic production. These stopes yielded more than a
third of the coal lined with an output of 7.3 tons per shift and an
average daily output of 372 tons per stope. Mobile supports reduced the
amount of labor required, isproved the efficiency of mining and coal
transport equipment and in addition markedly improved the safety and hy-
gienic Londitiona in the mines.

Mobile supports became the principal link in the process of comprehensive
mechanization of mine shafts: their introduction was rather complicated.
In the beginning of the sixties the first generation WP 16 and W? 2
test support series, designed for medium thick scams. were produced in
our country, five M 3 mining support systena for narrow seams and [NP 5
supports designed for the exacting conditions of mining mighty coal seams.
Compared to imports of mobile supports from the USSR. the no and Austria,
the Czechoslovak first generation supports were not widely used. due pri-
marily to poor production preparation for this qualitative advance in
mechanizing work in coal lining shafts. However, the high costs of im-
ports in foreign currency (the cost of a system per stope was at least
Ken 50 million) induced users and producers to change radically not only
the development but aainly the production of mobile supports.

Second and Third Generation Mobile Supports

In the beginning of the seventies the manage-ant of the Ostroj enterprise
created conditions for the production of mobile supports of the second
generation; new advanced technological production procedures were intro-
duced such as dynamic roller and ball burnishings, electrovibration weld-
ing of stainless saterials and bronzes. welding with preheating in a pro-
tective atmosphere, etc. At the same time production was solidly based
on the use of standardized hydraulic elements, specifically of switches,
safety valves and spigots. and the basic sizes of hydraulic props and
cylinders were chosen so as to permit using standard pipe semiproducts
and seals for the widest possible production assortment. No less impor-
tant was also the introduction of new intensive testing methods of mobile
supports directly mder production conditions.

At the present time 35 stopes in our deep mines are equipped with UV? 6
and NP 7 supports which. among all types of supports used in deep mines
in all can countries. were highly rated. They proved advantageous in
operation primarily because of their height. adequate working space for
manipulation. long useful life. high reliability in operation and the
requirement of only half the amber of shifts for transportation and
installation compared to other support types.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

Since 1976. developmental work in the field of Iobile supports focused
mainly on saddle seam stapes of variable thickness. irregular bedding and
heavy ceilings. To test mining technology. a mobile prop assembly had

to be imported in the first stage. Simultaneously. intensive development
of domestic mobile prop types is being pursued. especially of type DVP 8 A
which can still be classified as a second generation prop. together with
the development of the third generation UV? 9 mobile support for mining
seams up to 4.5 meters thick.

Other third generation supports are type DVP 10 for mining medium thick
flat seams and type DVP 11 for narrow flat seams. These supports will
already use improved hydraulic cycle elements which will simplify and
accelerate their control. But their main advantage will be their versa-
tility for use in stopes with both a stowing area and a squeeze and for
working scans from 0.6 to 5 meters thick. The support types under develop-
ment will be tested from 1979 till 1982 in compliance with the state plan
for technical development.

A Starting Point of Cooperation

However. the comprehensive mechanization of mining thin seams still
causes serious problems. As in the case of saddle seams. one mining
assembly wss imported in 1977 to test the new technology. But the pro-
spective rsQuiremsnt of supports will be covered by the 0V? 11 type with
the 3 MRS mobile support which is being developed by Czechoslovak-Soviet
cooperation as part of the KTSC plow system. This system was tested in
the Yubileynsys mine in a seam of average thickness of 0.78 meters where
in 1977 the average daily output was 1.019 tons. Further tests will be
carried out at the Staric Mine in the 0K3. Individual SHT 70/30 hydraulic
bitelescopic props developed at Ostroj will have to be used until the
start of large-scale production of the above assemblies. In a stope of
the Ostrsva mine equipped with these props, the collective of Hero of
Socialist Hark Lumir Sakmsr achieved a record output in mining a 51-cm-
thick, lZS-meter-long seam of coal. In 31 work days. 11,320 tons of
coal were mined with an average output of 6.5 tons per shift [as pub-
lished].

The problem of comprehensive mechanization of medium thick flat seams
was practically solved by the introduction of domestic mobile supports.
stope conveyors. combines and stowing machines produced at Ostroj or by
the innovation of this equipment which is in preparation in that enter-
prise. Ths partial shortfall of efficient domestic combines will be
covered by imports from the Soviet Union (types KSlKG; K52; 16868) and
from the Polish People's Republic (types KHB3RDU and ﬁns).

Hitherto unresolved remains the conversion to 1000 V in the stops re-

quired by the higher electromotor output of the mining equipment. The
currently used 500 V limits the installed electromotor output to 100 to
120 k". By using voltage of 1000 V this limit increases to 250 to 300
kw. The problem is also being tackled at Ostroj in cooperation with

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Polish msnufucturers end Czechoslovak producers of electrical equipment.
Belt conveyor production is also expected to be modernized. Outnoded
types of belt conveyors are expected to be replaced by new ones which
have a long useful life. are here reliable. and have s 2 x 30 or 2 x 55
k“ electromotor output. A new series with belt widths of 800. 1.000 and
1.200 millimeters and 2 x 75 or 3 x 75 kw electronotor output is under
development.

The sbovs trends in the introduction of advanced mining sschinery, to-
gether with other organizational measures increasing worker initistive
exhibited by the movement of socialist work brigades end brigades of
comprehensive rstionslizstion, will help meet the more exacting demands
in supplying the nstionel economy with coal in compliance with the teeks
sssigned by the 15th cPcz Congress.

COPYRIGRT: 1979 - VYDAVATBLSTVI A NAKLADATBLSTVI R0“ PRACE

8664
050: 2400

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'm WPICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

MBCHANIZED PLANT MNSMT, IDUSTRIAL ROBOTS DISCUSSED
Prague TBCHNICKY “DENNIK in Czech 20 Feb 79 p 6

[Article by ling Ivo Bernard. Research Institute of Machine-Building

Technology and Bconmics, lrague: "Automating Handling Between
Operations"l

[Text] Not long ago, primary attention in machine building was directed
toward the production processes themselves. It was only in large-
earies and mass production that transportation between operations was
arranged. In one-off. small-series and media-series production,

which account for the bulk of machine building, it was manual handling
between operations, with only the most minor mechanization equipment.

which prevailed and for the most part still prevails, not only here but
abroad.

In many cases. the autaastion of individual workplaces has now been
rather successfully implemented. The current concern is design and
implementation of higher forms. particularly the organization of
integrated structures which will lead to the creation of whole integrated
transport and handling systems. These efforts have led to the
development of many systems. most important among which are:

"combined supply and transport systems; and

- -indus tr ial robots .

These two types of systems are quite distinct in design, application and
operating principles. A cannon feature is their use of canputers to
control work cycles. with considerable flexibility and rapid adaptability

of equipment for a rather broad range of elements in one or several types
of industrial groups.

Combined Supply and Transportation Systems

These have many variants in practice. Their basic features are:

FOR @31an USE ONLY
roa OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--the supply system makes available a predetermined supply of prepared

workpieces and products for further processing (machining, assembly
and so on);

--the transport system provides connection between the production system,

the supply section and a higher- level transport system (intrafscility
transport and the like);

--an interconnecting system makes possible interchange of workpieces
between the transport and supply systens and between the supply
department and individual workplaces;

"organization of individual workplaces within the scope of a transport
system;

--transportation and storage of workpieces in units of one or,
exceptionally, two interrelated sites or independently by the use of
special or universal hangers, by a suitable transport line and so on:

--trnnsportation of equipment (in some cases) to production sections
by the supply and transport systems.

The most widely-used handling systems are described below:

Inductively-controlled electric carts (primarily in intrafacility
transport) are also useful in interoperation transport, both for
delivery of workpieces between individual workplaces and in particular
in the assembly process. The carts are driven by a cable laid in the
floor, and their movements are controlled by frequency signals emitted
by the drive cable according to progrmed control instructions. The
length of the circuit is practically unlimited. The carts may be diverted
st switches and can move both forward and backward. They can be stopped
at a specified point with an accuracy of about :5 cm. An advantage

of this system is that there is no interference with handling by other
transport facilities. Good use can be made of the work rhythm, and
work nesigments can be divided up and regrouped as needed (so-called
"service on demand") regardless of whether it is group-type work or
process line work.

Suspended tracks, with conventional or electronic control, can generally
be assembled in various configurations using building-block components,
with the possibility of branching them and when necessary of changing the

number of vehicles and varying the carrying capacity within wide limits
for an extensive variety of products.

Another system is that of gravity (descending) transport lines using
either roller lines along which the workpieces move to individual work-
places by their own weight, or as rails along which special dollies with
guide rollers move by pravity (UNIROLI. system).

I’m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rm OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another important supply and transport system for small-series
production, especially of box-shaped or flat parts, is a tiered stock
bin with a stewar. These are designed as one-, two- or three-tiered
structures served by one or two stowers moving on wheels, or by a

straddling stewer rolling on a track on the middle range of the stock
bin.

These sytems and many others have their individual merits and shortcomings
which influence their use (size of series, type, dimensions and

weight of workpieces, nature of production process and so on). In any
case, however, they meet the needs of interoperation supply of workpieces
and delivery to individual workplaces and between individual operations.
Computer equipment is generally used to control them.

Industrial Robots

Industrial robots are applicable in industrial automation and to a
certain extent in interoperation handling in mall-series discrete
production. Even chaugh practical experience has led to a certain
cooling of the initial enthusiasm for their use, their development and
further application is continuing, and robots will unquestionably

be an indispensible means of autaaating handling both between and
during operations.

For economic reasons, they show their advantages in workplaces with
conditions unfavorable to health, where they perform physically demanding
tasks, and where labor productivity can be radically increased by their
use. In most cases they operate more slowly than humans, but they

are nonetheless efficient.

A wide variety of industrial robots with a broad range of carrying
capacities (from several decagrams to several hundred kilograms) is
being developed. especially in Japan, the United States, England,
Sweden and Rest Germany. The development and improvement of industrial
robots is also accelerating in socialist countries. ‘i'heir development
is particularly advanced in the Soviet Union, and good results have been
attained in Bulgaria and Poland. Host advanced in this country is the
development of the QJN 020 robot (by the Research Institute of Machine
Building Technology and Econqaics and the Research Institute of Forming
Machinery). The first models in an experimental series are destined
for gear-box gear production lines. An experimental series of the PR 10?
robot (developed by the Research Institute of the Metalworking
Industry, Presov) and a prototype of the PR 041’ robot (developed by the

Research Institute of Machine-Building Technology and Economics, Prague)
are in production.

The unprecedented development of electronics, canputers, control system
and nuaerically-controlled machine tools is creating the conditions
for autmation of interoperation transport and handling. Different
variants of systems with entirely new types of equipment do not compete

7

rm OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rm OFFICIAL USE WIN

with but rather complement each other. In many cases. comprehensive
automation of a production section can be realized by its systematic
interconnection. Precise delimitation of activities and of coordination
between units has not yet been completely solved, and answering this
question is a current task of research and production.

942 7 .
650: 21.00 m

FOR WPICIAL USE MY