FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VPRS L/10197
6 December 1981

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE

[FOUO 9/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. ﬂords or names preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
AGRICULTURE
(POGO 9/81)

CONTENTS

REGIONAL DEVEIDPHBNT

Advice for Abundant "inter Crop Pro- lonchornom Zone
(AGRmmICﬂBSKIY! W, Sup 8].) .....................

AGRO-BCONG‘IICS AND ORGANIZATION
Personnel Remireuntt for Intcr-Bntetpriu Aninnl hubnndty

Cowlexu
(V. A. Kovalov: mmomrswulo-zatvomovonmsxm

on‘mtmnlYA. 1979) oooooloaotocooootnooooo0000000000000

HATER 338003038

Potential for Increuin; Efficiency of 088! tniution
(Dnitriy ‘l'i-ofeycvich Zuzik; mm mm. Aug 81) .

-l- {III-USSR-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“WWW?

worm DEVELOPED“

ADVICE M ABUIIMNT wnrrrn CROP Pl!!! W m
Moscow WWICWIYI SOVB‘I'Y in hueaian lo 17.8sp 81
Lzrticle: "Nonchernozen Zone: For a High aamat of winter Cropa_'17

Lﬁxt] The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congrees point to the need for an increase
in the fertility of soil and in the yield of agricultural crops and for the further
growth of the production of grain. fodder and other plant products.

Ferns in the nanchernoree zone of the Russian Federation mat nake a significant
contribution to the fulfill-eat of theee decisions. lts soil and meteorological
conditione Ike it possible to obtain high her-vents of winter rye and wheat. Usu-
ally. in fall the rainfall there is sufficient for a good development of planta
before wintering. By apring the noisture reservaa in the root layer reach the
field water capaci cy indicators and in collimation with the precipitation of spring
and the first half of sun-er (150 to 200 I) guarantee no less than 40 to 60 quin-
tals of grain per hectare.

Thus. the yield of winter crops is formed fro. the noiature raservee created dur-
ing the fall-winter and early epring period. Further-ore. they ripen earlier than
spring crops and fares can utilize harvesting nachinery and drying equip-ant eore
productively.

The biological characteristics of winter cropa nke it possible to grow than in
many regione of the nonchernoean zone. For exaqle. winter wheat growa wall on
fertile eoddy-podzolic aoil. H100 prowtly sown in fall. it davelope the root
eyeten inteneively and cluetere well. It is anfficiantly frost-resistant and win-
tarhardy. It withetands a prolonged drought in au-er.

"inter rye ia leee denanding of growth conditions. It tolerates an increased
acidity (pl! 5 to 5.3), is frost-resistant and winterhardy. developa a etrong root
systen. tolerates a sulner drought well and aasinilates not eaaily acceeeihle not-
riente. the rapid growth and development during the fall and spring period an-
able rye. when the plant density is noreal. to suppresa weeds.

Agrotechnology

Placenent. wheat is more productive on ouhacid cultivated loany aoil well dreased
with organic fartiliaere. It grows poorly on drained peat hoga and on sandy and
poorly cultivated eandy loan aoil.

”WWW?
MMWONLY

Hintsr rye is cultivated on soil differing in its sechenical cmsitim. including
sandy and sandy lose soil.

After the perforeance of drainage and aselioration operations winter crops can oc-
cupy the leading place on reclai-ad land.

The selection of a predecessor in crop rotation is one of the eain conditions for
a high yield. Clean fellow is considered the best. beans-grass nixmres. clover
of the first year of use. early potatoes. peremial grass after one cutting. early
silage crops and peas for grain are also good. (h light soil rye is also culti-
vated after green-.nured fallow.

when grain crops are harvested at an early date. it is possible to per-it the sow-
ing of wheat and rye after winter crops on well-cultivated and fertiliud soil.

In northern and eastern oblasta winter crops can be placed after barley of the ear-
ly ripening Sever 1 variety.

Soil cultivation. No types of clean fallow-"black and early—are used in the non-
chernozen zone. Black fallow is cultivated according to the type of fall plowing.

In early spring for noisture retention soil is harrowed and in su-ar. in order to

destroy weeds. it is cultivated in layers three or four tines. Organic fertilisers
are applied and turned under 1 to 13: nonths before sowing.

lhe cultivation of early fellow is begun in spring. Organic fertilisers (30 to 60
tons per hectare) are applied and it is plowed. harrowed and cultivated in layers.
The last presowing cultivation is at the depth of 5 to 6 cs.

For the cultivation of fallow occupied by vetch- and pea-oats eixtures, as well as
pulse crops (if there are no perennial weeds). dish or share scuffling at the
depth of 10 to 12 on with a simlteneoue packing with ring-grouse: rolls is used.
After prelininary scuffling plowing at the depth of 20 to 22 on is carried out on
plots infested with rootstock and suchering weeds. basic soil cultivation is con-
pleted 2 or 3 weeks before sowing.

After the harvesting of perennial grass and other predecessors heavy disk barrows
are inediately put into operation. they are followed by codeined plowing units
consisting of a plow. leveler and section of the Ill-GA roll.

Units of the mil-3 type are used for presenting soil cultivation. me uniforeity
and coapaction of the surface soil layer are especially inortant during the col-
tivation of winter wheat. because in nicrodepressions it thins out severely or
dies. Presowing soil cultivation is carried out simltaneouely with sowing or 1
day before it.

Fertilisation. The application of fertilizers according to a certain systen en-
ables winter crops to develop well beginning in fall. hey winter better. grow
well in spring. forn stem and ears and produce a high harvest.

In order to deter-ins the necessary enount of fertilisers for the planned yield,
the data on the renovel of nutrients with the grain and straw harvest and the co-
efficients of their utilisation froe soil and the applied fertilizers are used.

MWWONLY
summon?

The greatest renovsl of nutrients with the harvest per lo quintals of grain with
due regard for straw is as follows: nitrogen—25 to 35 kg; phosphorus—12 to 15
kg; potassium-46 to 30 kg.

Organic fertilizers. a full dose of phosphorus and potsssius fertilisers, are ap-
plied to basic soil cultivation. Part of the phosphorus fertilisers (15 to 20 kg
of granulated superphosphate or nitroamphosks per hectare) are applied to rows
during sowing. Nitrogen fertilizers are applied in two stages: 30 to 65 kg of
active substance per hectare. to presowing cultivation and the naming part. in
the fore of spring and suuer topdreseing. Annie water is applied during plow-
ing or cultivation at the depth of 10 to 12 ca.

0n acid soil line is applied to the previous crop or iI-edistely after its harvest-
ing (before basic soil cultivation). Dosage is established depending on the each-
anical composition and thickness of the arable layer and soil acidity.

Preparation of seeds for sowing. ‘l'he wintering and yield of winter crops depend

on the quality of seeds. Seeds should east the require-ants of the state sowing
standard. their gernination rate should be no less than 90 percent and purity. not
below 97 percent and they should contain up to 200 suds of other plants. including
no more than $0 weeds. per kg.

Seeds of regionslized varieties of the first and second category—hatter fron the
carryover stock-«re used. because they enme an increase of 2.5 to 5 quintals in
the harvest. If they are not available. freshly harvested seeds are first sub-
jected to air and thernel heating for lo or 5 days. or are dried in floor dryers
with active ventilation at the teqerature of 65 to 50 degrees. while noisture is
lowered to 16 or 15 percent.

In the control of covered and loose slat. fussrial wilt and halninthosporiosis
seeds are treated with the following toxic chelicals (kg of preparation per ton):
granosan with a dye. l to 2; m. 1.5 to 2; pentathiurae. 1.5 to 2. the treat-
asnt is carried out in the special nehines 92-10. P840 and Hobitohs with a sus-
pension of the preparation or through soiotening. using 10 liters of the liquid
per ton of seeds. Against pests seeds are treated with lZ-peroent hexachlorsne-
cyclohexone dust in terns of 15 to 20 kg of the preparation per ton of seeds.

Title of sowing. It is detereined depending on the region‘s teqeerature conditions.
length of the fall vegetation period. soil aoisture and other natural factors.
Deviation fron the optilun tine can lead to a significant decrease in the yield.

winter crops winter best at the tillering phase. when three or four shoots are
foreed in rye and two or three. in wheat. Plants attain such a stage in develop-
nent when the total average daily air teneratura fro. the day of sowing until the
tenperature passes +5 is 1080+60 degrees.

0n the basis of scientific research the following approximate tine of sowing win-

ter rye (winter wheat is sown 3 to 5 days earlier) was established for various
regions of the RSFSR nonchernozen zone:

”WWW!”
”WWONLY

northern region: the Koei Assn. the Kersl'sheye asst. Arkhengel'sheye (bleet end

the north of Per-ekeye. Kirovskeye end Vologodskeye meleetsnfron 20-31 July to
10-15 August;

northeastern region: Persskeye end Kirovslreye “lute. the Ud-xrtshsye Assn end
the Heriysheye Assn—fro- 5 to 25 August;

northwestern region: Leningred. Pskovekeye. lovgorodshye end Vologodeheye (b-
leete—froa 5 to 25 August:

western region: Keliningrsdekeye Guest—fro- 20-25 August to 5-10 Septeﬁer;

csntrel end southern regions: Moscow. Seolenskeye. 'ml'skeys. bluehskeye. he-
senskeye end Vledieirskeye Guests. the south-west of lelininsheye wleet end the
south of Gor'kovskeye (bleep-fro- 15-25 August to 5 Septeder; lmovskeye. los-
troeskeye end Yeroelevskeys (blests, the left henk of Gor'kovskeys (bleet end the
north-east of Ksliniaekeye Oblest--fron 10-15 to 20-25 August; the Hot-donkeys

Assam-fro- 10 August to l Septenber; the ‘l'eter A883 end the Chuveshskeye Assn-
frost 5-10 to 20-25 August.

Seeding retee. They depend on clieetic end soil conditions. the degree of soil

moisture end tenpereture in fell end eerly spring. soil fertility end cultivation
end the huehinese of plents (tehle).

Approxinte Seedi_ng letes
Hillion of Ger-insted Seeds Per lectere

Regions 5.5. Hheet
Northern 6.0-6.5 -
Beetern 5.5-6.0 6.0-7.0
Hestern 5.0-5.5 5.5-6.5
Centre! 4.0-5.0 5.5-6.0
Southern - 5.0-5.5

men the sewing tine is optieel end the entire egrotechnologicsl coupler is ful-
filled, the reco-ended retes cen he 10 to 15 percent lower end under dry nether
conditions. especielly when rye is plsced on sendy end seedy lose soil. es well
es during e lets eouing period. 8 to lo percent higher.

Sowing nethods. 1n ell the ohlests end republics of the R838]! nonchernose- sane
crossed end nerrov-rou eethods ensure the highest yield of winter crops. Seeds
ere unifornly distributed over the entire eree, plents utilise nutrients end mist-
ure more efficiently end suppress the develop-set of weeds lore intensively. The

ferns thet promtly prepsre soil end sou st the optics. tine use these sowing
eethode successfully.

Depth of seed plscenent. An insufficient depth leeds to s decreeee in field ger-

ninetion end eonetiees the tillering node been-es exposed. when the depth is ex-
cessive. shoots eppeer mch leter end ere vsekened end thinned out.

”WWW”
MWLWONLY

0n heavy soil the depth of rye seed placenent ehould be 2 to 3 on and on sandy and
candy loan soil. I. to S on.

l'he depth of winter wheat eeed place-ant should not exceed 5 to 6 on.
\

Care of crope. During the fall period the nein taek ie to obtain good sprouts and

to avoid their danege by paste. lf seeds are placed excessively deeply and eoil is
too loose. it met be packed i-ediately.

" Before the appearance of sprouts of winter crope waede met be nowad on adjoining
plots, because pests and diseases develop on than. they can danage eproute. In
the control of ecentleee nyweed. cornflower and loose silky bent treat-ant with
eiansine in the dose of 250 grans of active eubetance per hectare gives good re-
sults. The herbicide is applied i-ediataly after the sowing of winter crope and

before the beginning of plant tillering. for which the boon eprayere PM. “-400,
Oil—4004 and others are used.

In case of average and severe weedineee of crops in epring treatnant with herbi-
cidea is carried out at the phase of tillering of winter crope. 'nze following

are used on plots where epring weeds appear (kg of the preparation per hectare):
1.5 to 2.5—2.6-0 anine salt preparation; 0.7 to l.2-2.b-D butyl ether (butapon);
1.3 to 2 214-601. 80-percant soluble powder. In order to destroy weeds resistant
to these herbicides (ecentleee neyweed. knotweed and he.) nettle). they are sprayed
with dialen (1.9 to 3 kg of the preparation per hectare) and dianet-D (2.5 to 3.9)
or are treated with granulated lo-vpercent butyl ether 2.6-!) (10 to 12 kg) in a nix-
ture with granulated a-oniua nitrate during early spring topdreeeing. Wen the
Swedieh or neeeian fly appears, crops are dusted with 12~percent huachloranecyc-
lohexane in tarne of 15 to 20 kg of the preparation per hectare.

In addition to chenical crop protection agents. epring care includee early top-
dreseing of plants with nitrogen fertilizers and harrowing. All crope, including
weakly developed and weakened, as well as those where viable eproute have a nornel
plant stand, are topdreseed. ‘ropdreeeing is applied at the earliest tine. using
30 to 45 kg of active substance of nitrogen fertilisers per hectare. In addition
to this. root dreaeing with a coqlete eineral fertiliser by aeane of grain nenure
aeeders is used. Nitrogen fertilieera are poured into a grain box and phoephorue
fertilizers. into a fertilizer box. Fertilisers are placed at the depth of 4. to 6
on.

The increaee in the harvest fron the root nethod of application is 2 to 3 quintals
higher as comered with the broadcaet aethod. The efficiency of this nethod in-
creases in the :one'e southern and southeastern regions. where the upper eoil layer
dries up rapidly. as well as on farm using intensive-type varietiee.

The harrowing of winter crops in early spring is an iantant mane of saving nois-
ture. Along with this it contributee to the penetration of air to the roots of
winter crops and to the destruction of snow wold and eclerotinia and inrovee nic-
robiological activity. During harrowing poorly developed weeds are also destroyed
and fertilizers applied in spring for topdreeeing are utilized better.

MWWONLY
e0! 000m use. mm

The lodging of crops does considerable dange to the winter field. Losses fron it
can reach 20 to 50 percent. At the sane ties. the quality of grain deteriorates
considerably. labor productivity decreases and the expenditures on harvesting in-
crease. The resistance of crops to lodging increases if the chlorocholine chloride
preparation is applied to wheat and caqosan, to winter rye. the average increase
in grain free their application is 5 to 6 quintals per hectare. malorocholine
chloride is sprayed at the end of tillsring end at the beginning of shooting (2 to
6 kg of active substance per hectare) and caqoun. in the niddle of the shooting
of plants (b liters). Ihe applicatim of canoeen Md not be codined with
herbicides.

Varieties. 1he following regionalired intensive-type varieties of winter wheat are
recon-aided for the nonchernorsn sons: Al'bidun llb. Zarys. Il'ichsvka. lironov-
skaya 808. Hironovskaya Yubileynaya. Ul'yanovka and Universal.

0f winter rye: Belts. Banbo. Voskhod l. Vyatke 2. Gibrid 173. Mayninyay. Krup-
nosernaya. Lsningradskaya Tetra. Orlovakiy Gibrid. Saratovskaya i. Ural'shaya.
Khar'kovakaya 60. Chulpan and others. the najority of these varieties are resist-
ant to lodging.

when new varieties are selected, their ripening periods are taken into considera-
tion. For the convenience of harvesting it is desirable to have two or three 'va-
rieties with various periods on a fare.

harvesting. The selection of the harvesting nethod depends on the condition of
crops and on weather conditions. Nonlodged short-sten overripe and thinned out
crops are harvested by direct codaining when the grain noistureisno nore than 20
:o 22 percent. heavily weeded. lodged. high-etch crops. which do not ripen uni-
fornly or with an additional plant stand. are swethsd during the waxy ripeness of
grain of a noisture of 30 to 35 percent. Swaths are picud and thrashed when full
ripeness is reached. 0n lodged crops harvesting units are put into operation in a
lateral direction. A correct codination of direct codining and swath harvesting
mixes it possible to harvest in a nore organised way. without losses and in any
weather.

lhe experience of advanced fares in the zone. as well as of far-ere in Ipstovskiy
Rayon in Stavropol'skiy nay. shows that the efficiency of utilisation of equip-ant
in the harvesting of grain crops greatly increases with its quality preparation,
use of advanced flow technology, large-group operation of coltinss. proqt techni-
cal servicing end effective socialist conpetition.

workers of the nonchernosen eons! To obtain high and stable winter grain harvests
lake use of the achievenenta of science and of the experience of advanced farns.
This will nake it possible to greatly increase the gross output of grain iron the
winter field.

COPYRIGHT: ladstol'etvo "Kolos". 1981

11.439
080: 1826/029

”emulates“
FOR OFFICIAL 083 OIL?

AGBOCICOWCS All) communes

RISML mam '03 Inna-3mm “not mu CW8
bacon mzmuomrs'mmo-zntvmovoocusrm comm in Bunion 1979 pp 246-262

[Article by V. A. Kovolov, deputy chief of tho thin mistruion tor Poroonnol
oi the 357511 Iﬂniotry of Agriculturo: "Poroonnol Ihder 1ntor-Entorprioo Cooporotion"
and tale of contents froo the hook "Intor-btorprioo hm]. Huohmdry Aooociotiono”!

[Tort] (bincidcntol vith otrongthonin: tho logioticol hooo of ogriculturo.
occoloroting tochnicol ro-oquippin; ond convortin; production ovor to on induotriol
hooio, tho oulti-bronch choroctor oi oony konthoooo ond oovkhoooo hoo hogun to
rootroin tho procooo oi ociontiiic-tochnicol ro-oquippin. nod to olov down tho
intonoiiicotion of agriculturo.

Iurthor dovolopoont of tho productivo iorcoo roquiroo o hooicolly nov opprooch for
oranioing ogriculturol production. ooro iloxiblo uriculturol opocioliootion ond
tho coohining of torn offorto for tho purpooo oi coking ooro oxtonoivo on of tho
ochiovooonto oi ociontiiic-tochnicol pmgruo.

Nuoorouo oxooploo could bo citod ohovin; hov production opocioliootion ond
concontrotion hovo oxortod o pooitivo ofioct on tho vorh of ioru-ocolo oochoniood
form, cooploxoo ond othor opo'cioliood ontorpriooo ond on thoir oconooic indicotoro.
lohor oxpondituroo for tho production of o unit of output ot ouch focilitioo duo
lovor by o ioctor of 2.5-3 ond production cooto by o foctor of 1.5-2 thon tho
figuroo for non-opocioliood for-o.

Spocioliootion ond concontrotion of ogriculturol production boood upon intor-
ontorprioo cooporotion ond ogroinduotriol intogrotion hovo rocontly hoon dovoiopod
oxtonoivoly. Tho crootion of intor-ontorprioo ond production oooociotiono io ookin;
it poooiblo to oolvo on ioportont odoiniotrotivo prohloo .- tho ootobliohont oi
coot ocoountin; rolotionohipo for oil odoiotrotivo lovolo: briudo - doportlont
(brooch) - for- - oooociotion. Thio onouroo iloxihility for tho orpno oi
oduiniotrotion ond roiooo thoir rooponoihility.

Tho lovoot odoiniotrotivo lovoi in on intor-ontorprioo oruniootion or oooociotion
io o production hriudo ond tho highoot -- tho odoiniotrotivo orgoniootion of tho
ontorprioo or ouociotion. hoodod by o council. Tho octivitioo of tho principoi
oubunito (oorvicoo) ond oiiiciolo oro rooulotod by ototutoo dooliu with tho

otructurol ouhunito ond by oiiiciol inotructiono for workoro ottochod to tho
odliniotrotivo orpniution.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M Uri-luau. use mun

The edninietretion of en inter-enterpriee orgenieetion ie cerriod out by e noeting
of euthorieed repreeentetivee of perticipeting tor-o end e council elected by then
for the inter-entorpriee orgeniretion end deily Ienegeeont -- by the director
(choir-en) of the inter-entorpriee orgenieetion. who eieultenoouely eervee ee tho
choir-en of the council of thie eeeocietion. Thio eppliee to en equel degree to
both kolhhoree end eovkhoree perforldng the functione of en inter-entorpriee
orgenieetion. There in one difference howover. At kolkhocee end eovkhoeee which
perforn theee functione, the ﬂeeting of repreeentetiwee end the council provide
direction only for thet portion of production thet ie intor-entorpriee in neture

(couple: for the meturing of young etock, complex for the tottening oi liweetock end
so forth).

The highly epecielieed neture of production ie meking it poeeible to cerry out
intenee epecielieetion end concentretion of egriculturel production end it ie
reeulting in uee of the brench principle of edninietretion. Under e depeiznontel
structure. the role pleyed by epecieliote ie reieed. In eddition to tochnologicel
functione. they nuet eleo perforn the tunctione of production orgenirere. Plenning,
eccounting, eupply, merketing end eunicipel end everydey eervicee ere ell centrelired
to the meximun poeeible degree et ouch ontorprieee end eubunite which perform theee
functione beco-o lerge eleoonte of the higheet level of edeinietretion.‘

One feeture of en inter-enterpriee orgenieetion ie thet it ie orgenized et e beee
end using the reeourcee of ferne -- perticipente in cooperetion. Thue. in the
edninietretive etructure of en inter-entorpriee orgenieetion end in eddition to the
workere eeeigned to the orgene of edninietretivo control. collective orgene ere
creeted: e meeting of euthorieed repreeentetivee. e council of the inter-enterpriee
orgeniretion end on euditing comnittee.

Trom eech perticipeting fern, regerdleee of ite eiee or degree of perticipetion, en
equel nueber of repreeentetivee ere elected or eeeigned, tor e period of 3 yeere, to

the higheet edminietretivo orgen of en inter-enterpriee orgeniretion -0 the looting
of'euthoriced repreeentetivee.

The meeting of euthorieed repreeentetivee convonoe no leee often then once ennuelly.
During thie eoeting the reguletione for tho intur-enterpriee orgeniretion ere
'epproved end the meobere oi the council end the euditing co-nittoe ere elected for e
period of 3 yeere. The council of the inter-enterpriee orgenieetion epprovee ite
production etructure end eetebliehed the number of edninietretive eteff pereonnel.
The ennuel reporte concerning production-finenciel activitiee end the dreft econoeic
plene for eociel development ere exeoinod. Theee reporte end dreft plene ere
submitted by the council for epprovel during the meeting of euthorieed repreeentetivee
of the ehereholder-ferne. The council erercieee operetionel control over the
production-economic ectivitiee of the eeeocietion.

within the production eeeocietion. e leeding role ie pleyed by e collective orgen ~-
the council of the eeeocietion. The etructure oi the council includeo e choir-en
(generel director) of the eeeocietion end hie deputiee -- kolkhoe choir-en, eovkhot
directore end the leedere of other etete end cooporetive entorprieee end eeeocietione
belonging to the eeeocietion. Specieliete iron the eeeocietion'e edninietretive
orgeniretion end enterprieee included in ite etructure, leeding production figuree

end the repreeentetivee of public orgenicetione ell perticipeto in the work of the
cauncil.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

1
«that» Innu- can "but”!!!
‘ u "lama: (m,,w‘*m m” In srrmnmlules
| in: 3mm» malarérTii— mm: . . .
I'nlnrl @ lulu»!
.mu sm
""5' man
"as um
um- m:-
’ n: n m ' autumn
| m- u 2‘;

      

us-
':.'."‘::::.,-"
I llama-u ' ”m"
I I
' 51"": In nun: nvuuu lulu
.: gm suave- ceu sol w
"aural: ulna-ls :ké:

—Ilum ': nu: — - l'wmlaﬁnm "Inna!
llpuucpuss crcus ynpasacuus I spoussomsessoa Wm

Diagram of s production sssocistion shinistretion

Association council '18. mists of nine]. hmbndry sections
Genersl director; director of the leading 19. Sovlzhos director

ferns 20. Quiefs of subunits

Deputy fsrs director 21. Quiet scone-1st

Director of legs]. services 22. Qnist sccomtnt

Iechnicsl council 23. Quiefs of «settle tar-ins sections
Director of dispstcher services 2‘. Quiets of ninal husbandry sections
Quiet eoono-ist/hesd of econonic services 25. need veterinarian

QIief sccomtsnt/hesd of sccomtin; 26. used of uchsnisstion section
services 27. Chief power engineer

Quiet «mount/head of saronosy services 28. Dead of construction section

Quiet sninsl specislist/hssd of mills). 29. Procursnsnt spsdslist

services 30. Sovldnos director

Deputy general director of the leading 31. Quiet econolist

production Esr- 32. (his! account-1t

Quiet veterinarian/director of veterinary 33. Quiet of vegetable reruns section
services. 34. due! of miss]. husbandry section
Quiet engineer/director of engineering 35. Quiet veterinarian

services 36. Qxiet of the nsdlenisetion section
Quiet power engineer/director of power 37. (his! power engineer

services. 38. lead of the construction section
Quiet construction engineer/director of 39. Procuremnt spsdslist

construction 60. Dual subordinstion

Deputy director of co-ercisl services (01. Mctionsl subordinetion

fhiefs of vegetable farming sections

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLI

Meeting of authorized representatives

Council of an inter-enter-rise or nation

mnaer of an inter-ante rise or nisstion

m Chief bookkee- r
Deput director for production Chief economist
Departnent heads for principal llsads of auxiliary
production _ services

2 II 2 a

Model diagram for administration in an inter-enterprise organisation of an
association

The association's council directs the production-financial activities of all of the
enterprises end organisations subordinate to it. The implsasntation of the decisions
handed dovn by the council is carried out by the association's administrative
organisation heeded by a general director, who bears personal responsibility for

the status of affairs and tie activities of the association.

The manager of the leading enterprise must be the chairman (general director) of the
association. In associations having a detached administrative organization, the
chairman of an association is elected by the council of the association.

The functions of the association's administrative organisation at the leading
enterprise include; planning. logistical support, centralised distribution of funds,
reporting to the higher organs of administration and external coanunications. The
administrative organization of the leading enterprise is also responsible for
introducing the achievements of science and leading practice into operations at all
of the farms of the association.

with the creation of the associations. a considerable increase has taken place in
the volume of information available on the vork of an association, its subordinate
ferns and their subunits. Thus the organisation of dispatcher services is deemed
advisable. They can ensure the collection of informtion on the status of
production and on plans for impending work, the transmission of urgent orders and
control over the fulfillment of plane, schedules, tasks and so forth.

Prior to the organization of the associations, each sovkhos manager and specialist
carried out all of the principal administrative functions, solved the long-range and
operational problems associated with production, supply. marketing and construction
and resolved problems concerned with municipal and everyday services and other
matters. This lowered the effectiveness of adninistrative work, it resulted in
unnecessary parallelism and duplication and it lowered operational responsibility.

' 10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“BIS 1

Number of Administrative and Production Personnel at a Milk Production Complex
Couple: for 2,000 heed

Management lb
Production personnel 63
Service personnel 31
Including:

Department for technical services and repair ll
Sanitary lines 10
Pumping station 3
Creamery 5
Dining hall 2
Total for the couple): 88

The centralization of administrative work and the carrying out of this work by
specialized services made it possible to regulate the labor of workers and to
provide them vith sore free time for solving long-range problems and for periorning .
econonic analysis. Prior to centralization of the cornercial service, the chief
specialists at aovkhozes spent 8-10 percent of their time carrying out supply-
marketing operations end during certain tense periods -- up to 18-20 percent. Under
centralized menageesnt. the chief specialists almoet never concern themselves with
supply or marketing.

Tables 1. 2 and 3 furnish figures on the number of administrative and production
personnel at complexes for milk production. for the raising and iattening of young
large-horned cattle stock and. for swine raising complexes. In the tables cited. it
is noted that the engineering-technical workers and other workers carry out an
entire volume of work and have responsibilities, including observance of the norme
of effective legislation and the established duration of the working day.

At the present tins, vith inter-enterprise cooperation being employed on a nore
extensive scale. great importance is being attached to the work of forming an
administrative organization and to the training and retraining of skilled personnel
for complexes engaged in the production of goods on an industrial basis and other
agricultural enterprises of the nev type. When solving the task concerned with
supplying personnel for these enterprises. enphaeie should be placed upon the fact
that the problems concerned with the training and retraining of apecieliete and
personnel in the one professions umld be solved taking into account the scales
for the development of inter-enterprise cooperation and agroindustrial integration.

The inter-enterprise organizations and associations nust be nanaged by highly
skilled specialists who have naetered the latest methods for organizing and

controlling production. At the same tine. the personnel must understand the
objective need for the measures carried out. they must hnovledgeahly and creatively
solve their specific tasks and they aust constantly master scientific-technical
achievenents and the modern administrative nethods. in the interest of ensuring that
organization and sdninistration in the inter-enterprise organinatione and
associations are developed on a strictly scientific basis. ‘i'hose manegere and

e .11 .
POE OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UA vs‘s‘sbasw «on UNI-i

TAN) 2

Rather of Administrative and Production Personnel at a Complex for the
Raising and Pattsning of Young large-Horned Cattle

(tsunami 30,000 20.000 10.000
fut-Mus) head head head

Management and specialists 16 - 10 8 6
Production personnel. directly engaged 73 lol 17 28
in servicing the animals -
Service personnel 29 1b 6 10
Including:
Sanitary lines - 11 - - -
Other personnel 18 - - -
Total for complex with replacements 118 65 31 Mo
Including workers 97 51 23 34
Of these workers, those directly
engaged in servicing the aninuls 73 lol 17 28

specialists who have not thoroughly watered the theory and practice of inter-
enterprise and agroindustrial cooperation will he unable to organise and direct

the fulfillment of tasks associated with further specialization and concentration of
agricul tura 1 produc tion .

At the present time. there are alnost 800.000 specialists with higher or secondary
educations working in agriculture in Russia. Bach year, more than 19,000 graduates
of Vllz's and 55.000 graduates of technical schools are being assigand to work at
kolkhozes and sovkhozss. Today there is an average of 19 specialists at s kolkhos
and 35 at a sovkhoa. The increase in the number of specialists has made it poasible '
to strengthen the structure of managerial personnel at the kollthoses and sovkhoses.

Jointly with the party and soviet organisations. the agricultural organs are giving
special attention to the selection and placement of personnel at the associations
and complexes. liighly skilled workers. individuals who have proven themselves to be
good production organisers and who possess a great amount of work experience at
kolkhoses and sovkhoses are being assigned to serve as managers and chief
specialists.

The chief specialists of an association are mainly production organisers and
technologists. They must possess a thorough knowledge of the progressive technology.
the economics of production, the latest scientific achiev-snts and leading

practice and they must constantly improve their professional training.

The specialists of farms and administrative organs at inter-enterprise organisations
and associations are able to devote a great amount of attention to the principal
branches, to obtain a thorough understanding of the production specifics, to manage
the branches in s more skilled manner and to improve the production technology.

' 12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Till! 3

Number of Administrative and Production Personnel at Industrial Complexes
for the Raising and lattening of Swine

Couples:

108,000 56,000 12 .000
Swine Swine Swine
Annually Annually Annually

Management 6 5 l

Specialists of services 27 lb 6

Production personnel directly engaged in the 160 80 28
servicing of animals

Service personnel of a complex: department for 62 24 8

processing of farmyard manure and purification
of waste water

Water supply department 16 10 3

Group for the technical servicing and repair 68 30 6
of equipuent

Sanitary service and artificial insemination l2 5 ~
station

Slaughtering-sanitary station 6 b l

Veterinary bacteriological laboratory 5 - -

Boiler unit 35 35 16

Total for the complex, with replace-ants 376 207 65

including workers 301 166 59

0f workers. those engaged directly in the 160 80 28

servicing of animals

Early on in the organisation of inter-enterprise organisations and association.
difficulties arose in connection with the training of managers and specialists in
the new administrative forms and the new production technology. No experience was
available in this regerd. Instruction wee furnished in other branches of the
national economy and foreign experience was employed. Little by little the inter-
enterprise organisations and associations accumulated their own experience. Using
existing associations such as Leto and Novyy Svet in leningrad Oblast. enterprises
and inter-enterprise associations in Moscow. Tul'skaya. Vladimirskaye. Ponsenskaya
and Voronashskaya Oblasts and also complexes for the production of goods on an
industrial basis, training was organised for the personnel of newly created inter-
enterprise organisations and associations.

Prior to being assigned to work at a complex, the specialists had to undergo a
probationary training period at existing complexes or retraining in '02 departments
or in schools for improving the skills of workers. Such retraining use carried out
taking into account the particular specialisation at the inter-enterprise
organization or association.

During the course of retraining. considerable attention was given to studying

scientific labor organization, the problems concerned with planning and analysing
agricultural production. the latest technologies and also scientific achievements
and leading practice. in the conduct of the exercises. extensive use was made of

scientists, managers and specialists from the inter-enterprise organisations and
associations. .

‘13
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONL!

During the past few years. basic training was begun for specialists assigned to
inter-enterprise organisations and associations. directly at higher and secondary
specialised educational institutes. there are presently 55 higher educational
institutes and four of their branches engaged in training highly skilled
specialists for Russian agriculture. They are furnishing training in 36 professions
and 5" \pecialitations. Since 1973, the sootechnical dspartncats have been
converted into sooengineering departments. with the sooengineers presently being
trained in 14 specialisations -- nilk production on an industrial basis, meat
production on an industrial basis and so forth. In addition to biological knowledge.
a sooengineer is provided with the required technical training and organisational
skills.

In the training programs for a majority of the technological and economic disciplines
at higher and secondary educational institutes, sections have been introduced for
the production of agricultural products on an industrial basis and under conditions
involving production specialization and concentration and the organisational-
economic end engineering training of future specialists has been strengthened. tor
a number of years now the agronomic faculties and departments have been training
agrononists for feed production for animl husbandry complexes. scientific-technical
training for all of the agronomic specialties has been strengthened and a now
course has been introduced for the operation of a nchine-tractor pool under
conditions involving production specialisation and concentration. The training of
specialists in the autonation of agricultural production has col-senced.

Norms for the Servicing of Livestock at Milk Production Complexes
for 800 and 2,000 lead

Ill-bar of lead Per Operator

Milking of cows 135* 107*.
Tending of cows 270
Artificgl insemination 800

1' Yelochka milking unit
** ADM-8 milking unit

Norma for the Servicing of Livestock at Complexes for the Raising and
Pattening of Young Large-horned Cattle Stock

Number of Head Per Operator

Raising of calves 180
Pattening of young stock 720

Strong changes have been introduced into the organisation of practical work by
students at higher educational institutes and technical schools. Towards this end,
extensive use is being evade of agroindustrial enterprises and associations and also
complexes for the production of field crop husbandry and aniul husbandry products
on an industrial basis. Pine business-like relationships have been established at
the Moscow Agricultural Acadeny ineni IA. Timiryavsv and at technical schools
throughout the oblast with the lbskovskiy Sovkhos-Conbine. where vegetables are
being grown under glass on an area of 56 hectares. with the Shchapovo Dairy

‘ Us
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Complex which has more than 2,000 milking cows. with the imeni SO-Letiya SSSR
Swine Raising Sovkhos-Combine which fattens 100,000 swine annually. with the
Voronovo Complex for the fattening of young large-horned cattle stock and also with
large-scale inter-enterprise organizations.

Norms for the Servicing of Livestock at Animal Husbandry Complexes
for the Production of Port

Number of lead Per Operator

Tending of boars 70

Artificial insemination 125

Tending of unmated and pregnant sows during the 280
lst period of pregnancy

Tending of sows during 2d period of pregnancy 800

Tending of young weaning pigs 3800-4200

Tending of animals during fattening 1800

During the creation of inter-enterprise organisations and associations and in the
construction of complexes. a requirement arises for specialists in such professions
as sanitary engineering. control-measurement instruments. automation. heat
engineering, purification installations and so forth. Specialists in these and other
professions who were not trained at agricultural educational institutes are assigned
to work at associations and complexes from educational institutes of other branches
of the national economy.

A most important condition for highly efficient work at inter-enterprise and
agroindustrial organizations and associations is that of assigning specialists to
the middle and lower echelons of production. in agronomist, sootschnician or other
agricultural specialist is an organizer and technologist for his branch. The
specialists are obligated to ensure constant scientific-technical progress and to
raise the efficiency of the branch of agricultural production assigned to their
care.

In raising the role played by specialists, great importance is attached to the
efficient organization of their activities in conformity with their official duties
and also to the carrying out of periodic certification. Certification, preparation
for the certification committee, a personal report on their creative work and
participation in the introduction of scientific labor organization and in social
life -- these are all factors which stimulate the work of a specialist. promote
improvements in the managerial style and methods employed for an assigned sector of
work and raise the need for improving the necessary skills.

A most important sector of personnel work at inter-enterprise organisations and
associations is that of assigning specialists to the managerial structure of
departments (sectors) and sections, brigades and farms. to: it is here that the
bread. meat. milk. potatoes and vegetables are produced. This managerial echelon
in agriculture must be staffed with competent specialists. individuals who are
good organizers, possess administrative skills. can work with people and are
capable of organising agricultural production on a modern scientific level.

In October 1977, the cc CPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers adopted the decree
entitled 'kdditional Measures for Stimulating the Conversion of Agricultural

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR U?! MAN. 03% UN»!

Specialists Over To Vork As Managers of SectiOns. brigades. turns and Other Subunits
of the Middle Echelon of Production at lolkhoses and Sovkhosea." This decree is
elininating an entire series of factors which in the past has delayed the conversion
of specialists over to work as middle echelon managers. These positions are
classified as being in the ITR [engineering and technical personnel] category.
Individuals who convert over to work in the middle echelon retain their specialist
wages end at the same time they become entitled to receive the bonuses established
for workers for above-normal output. The publication of this decree was warmly
received by the agricultural specialists, many of whom have expressed a desire to
convert over to work in the middle echelon. Prior to being assigned to the
position of manager of a brigade or farm, the specialists undergo training at
schools for agricultural administration. '

The creation of large scale socialist agricultural enterprises and the
collectivisation of labor during the course of inter-enterprise cooperation and
agroindustrial integration have raised the need for rational specialisation end
division of labor. The profound changes that have taken place in the rural areas.
associated with the industrialisation of production. have brought about the
appearance of many new professions in agriculture.

The basic trsining for highly skilled workers is carried out in agricultural
professional-technical institutes. It is in these educational institutes that it is
possible to provide a graduate with e volume of knowledge that will enable him to
participate immediately in production. to master new equipment and technologies and
to improve his professional expertise.

The conversion of animal husbandry over to an industrial basis and its specialisation
raised a requirement for training operators for the raising and fattening of large-
horned cattle. swine and sheep at animal husbandry complexes; heaters of machine
milking; operators for the preparation and dosing of feed and so forth. The
supplying of the farms with complicated end powerful equipment brought about
specialization in technical servicing and repair operations. A requirement developed
for training expert trauble-shooters for the technical maintenance of the vehicle
end tractor pool. repair-mechanics and so forth. In connection with the development
of egroindustrial and inter-enterprise associations. skilled workers were required
for enterprises engeged in the processing and storage of agricultural products and
for subsidiary trades.

The central figure in agricultural production continues to be a versatile eachine
operator, the training of which is carried out taking into account the development
of specialised subunits and farms.

whereas 10 years ago the institutes trained workers mainly for three professions,
at the present time the SPTU [agricultural professional-technical institute] is
annually training workers in ten professions. In addition to the training of
workers within the system of agricultural professional technical institutes, they
ere also undergoing training directly in the interoentarprise organisations and

associations. Here special importance is attached to probationary training periods
conducted directly at the working positions.

The great and profound changes that have taken place in agriculture have raised a
need for augmenting the ranks of workers in the mass professions. Hith each passing

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

yeer. more end more young men end women ere co—encing work in egriculture .- on
terms. in brigedes end et enimel huehendry compleus.

‘l'he protessionel orientetion of youth co-ences in the junior gredse. it ie
continued in student production brigedee end lehor end recreetion cene end it ie
cerried out with meximum consideretion being given to the personnel requirements of
the sovkhotee end kolkhosee.

The initistive diepleyed by greduetes of schools in nostromekeye Guest. who
expreeeed e desire to work in the rurel erees net with s were response. me. in
1978, more then one helf of the students in Serebryeno-Prudehiy Beyon in Moscow
Obleet rueined to work on (era in the reyon.

In recent yeers the personnel steif et the Serebryenyye Prudy Sovkhos bee been
supplemented to e considereble degree by greduetee from e locel school. A greet
emount of work is being cerried out et the sovkhos in this regerd. At joint
neetings of the sovkhoz end school perty orgenisetions, discussions ere held on
problems concerned with improving educetion. 'l'he leeders, specieliete end leeding
production workers ere conetent perticipents in school getheringe end evening
meetings. ‘l'hey inform the students regerding the fern end the prospects for its
development. The sovkhoz is doing everything possible to ensure thet the students,
while still ettending school. perticipete in the work 0! the sovkhor. In this
menner they will be eble to test themeelves in the cerrying out of genuine lebor end
experience joy in heving done so. For exemple. 20 senior cleee students worked here
on combines during the suuer of 1978. At the sovkhos there is e lebor end
recreetion cenp for the students where. in eddition to relexing. they ere eleo eble
to sccuston themselves to useful lebor .. by perforning work et enimel huebendry
terms or out on the fields. lech yeer one helf of the greduetes reesine on the term.
becomes quelified end improves their expertise.

Experience hes shown thet it is not enough to merely eppeel to the youth. Peternel
concern for then is eleo required. And in those ereee where this feet is recognised,
success usuelly follow.

At the Mir Sovkho: in Moscow Obleet, the term wenegers issue ell kinds of incentives
to the youth -- new equipment is wede eveileble, concern is shun for reieing their
knowledge end they ere provided with comforteble epertmente. Wenty four
individusls ere presently undergoing treining et the expense of the eovkhoe, while
12 other workers ere working on correspondence courses from educetionel institutes.
there ere 232 young workers working et the eovkhos et the present time. or 30
percent of the overell number of sovkho: workers.

A petriotic movement hes been leunched et e secondery school in kusekiy Isyon --
efter receiving one'e certificete etteeting to secondery educetion. to proceed to
work on e project in the nonchernoeen tone. it the present time, youth brigedee end
teens consisting of greduetee of schools heve been crested et kolkhoree end
sovkhosee. Approxinetely 3,500 greduetes of rurel schools in Moscow Gleet heve
vowed to devote their lives to egriculture.

In 1977, there were 203 student production brigsdee in Moscow Ohlest with 27.1000
students working in then, in Kelininskeye Obleet the figures were 185 end 11,000

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a‘vls van L~-eaep vva- Vol-em

respectively, in lyasanskaya Oblast -- 2‘8 and 22.300 and in Smolenskaya Oblast --
lla brigades and 9,900 students. According to the results of an all-ruasian
socialist competition, during 1977 lalininskaya Oblaat occupied third place for the
best work by student production brigades. The students of rural schools in
Lukhovitskiy Rayon in Moscow Oblast earned the challenge red banner of the 38188
Cauncil of Hinistars and the AUCCIU.

During an all-union competition for masters of machine milking, held in July 1978 in
the city of kostroma. Natasha Pavlenko. a student at the Serkovskays Secondary
School in Shchelkovskiy Rayon in Moscow Oblast won first place among students in the
central region. Olya Petrenko, of the Gusyetinskays Secondary School in Bologovskiy
Rayon in Kalininskaya Oblaet, distinguished herself during a competition for young
horticulturists -- she won third place for the 38’83.

The principal form of training for personnel assigned to inter-enterprise
organizations. associations. kolkhoses and sovkhoses is that of agricultural
professional technical institutes.

Each year, approximately 4.000 young men and women are accepted at agricultural
professional technical institutes in Moscow Oblast, in Ryarenakaya Oblast -- 5.200,
Smolenskaya Oblast -- 3.000 end in lalininakaya Oblast -- 6,300. ﬂowover, at the
present time the agricultural professional technical institutes are unable to
satisfy fully the requirements of agricultural production for skilled personnel.
Thus a large number of personnel are undergoing training within the system of course
training conducted directly on the farms. In 1977, more than 100,000 workers were
trained in this manner for kolkhoses and sovkhoses in the nonchernosem sons,
including approximately 60,000 machine operators.

In addition to training new personnel, improvements are also being carried out
annually in the qualifications and classifications of machine operators, animal
husbandrynen and field crop husbendry workers. As a result. the number of let and
2d class tractor operators in Hoscow Oblast as a whole amounted to 58 percent.
Forty five percent of the mechine milking operators bear the title of master of
animal husbandry 1st or 2d class.

The holding of competitions by professions is promoting improvements in professional
expertise and the retention of youth in the rural areas. It is during a competition
that the best experts come to light, individuals who truly love their work and are
able to carry it out in the best possible manner.

Many celebrated sasters of their professions are working at complexes. inter-
anterprisa organisations and associations. In addition to achieving high indicators
for themselves, they are also furnishing assistance to younger workers in mastering

their professions. acquiring erpertise and achieving high results. these are
tutors of youth -- patient and wise teachers.

"Tutors" stated Comrade L.l. Brezhnev during a speech delivered before the 17th
Komsomol Congress. "these are personnel workers who possess a high level of
expertise, who are rich with life's experiences and who, I might add, are talented
teachers. By virtue of their own good will. they instill a love for work in youth.

they aid them in developing expertise and they acquaint them with the heroic
traditions of our glorious working class."

18
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The list of fine tutors includes: hero of Socialist labor and brigade leader of an
all-round brigade at the Kolkhoz imeni Uritskiy in Smolanaks'e Oblast A.3. Sergeyava,
Hero of Socialist labor and brigade leader of the Zeokakiy Sovkhos in Moscow Oblast
6.1. Rybakova, team leader at the Serebryanyye Prudy SovkhOs 1.8. Avarin. a milk
maid at the Bol'she-Alakseyevskoye State Breeding Plant A.G. Pestukh. chair-an of
the Rossiya Kolkho: in lstrinskiy Rayon 1.1. leryshev and many others.

The inter-enterprise organisations. kolkhoses and sovkhosea are carrying out a great
amount of work in connection with improving the working and living conditions of
kolkhos members and sovkhose workers and transforming the villages and hamlets into
well organized settlements. As a result. the standard of living of rural workers

is improving at a rapid rate. A considerable expansion has taken place in the

scale of housing and cultural-domestic construction. The level of civic improvements
in dwellings end cultural-domestic installations has been raised. Improvements have
been achieved in domestic services for the rural population. Conbinee have been
created in all of the reyons and at a majority of the kolkhosea and sovkhosas --
demestic services buildings or all-round receiving points.

The experience and lessons learned during the starting of inter-enterprise
organisations and associations with personnel underscore the fact that the new forms
for organizing production are imposing higher demands with regard to the selection.
placement and improving the skills not only of Ianage:ial workers and specialists
but also of personnel in the mass professions. A great amount of work lies ahead.
The party, soviet and economic organs and all agricultural workers are striving to
solve their tasks in an organized and creative manner, tasks which are called for

in the overall program prepared by the party for the development of socialist
agriculture. Under these conditions, maximum support should be given for the
initiative being displayed by the inter-enterprise organisations and associations;
using their own savings and in addition to expanding production operations, they are
creating a training base for training and improving the skills of their personnel.

The conversion of agricultural production over to an industrial basis is not just a
technical hatter; the force of traditions and usual personnel thinking must be
overcome. In connection with the conversion over to new operational methods. a
broad range of new problems will arise and in addition to organizational and
technological problems there will also be those of a social and psychological
nature .

All agricultural organs. kolkhoses and sovkhoses must concern themselves on a daily
basis and in a purposeful manner with the practical implementation of the CC CPBU
decree entitled "Further Development of Specialisation and Concentration of
Agricultural Production Based Upon Inter-enterprise Cooperation and Agroindustrial
Integration." Under present conditions. this is one of the more important tasks.
Specialisation and concentration of agricultural production based upon inter-
enterprise cooperation and agroindustrial integration are opening up broad
opportunities for transforming this branch into a highly developed sector of the
economy and for realizing high quality changes in social relationships in the rural
areas. This corresponds to the basic interests of sonicipal and rural workers and
to the tasks of communist construction.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EU“ Ul‘l‘bbiﬂh U§b UNA

tabla of Contanta

6.8. Ogryzkin. Hathoda for Davaloping Intar-antarpriaa Cooparation at
lolkhoaaa and Sovkhoaaa in tha llonchamoaaa Zona

8J1. Kranaranko. A New Staga in Spacialiaation and Concantration of
Agricultural Production

VJ. Golubkov. praricnca in tha Craation of lntar-antarpriaa Aaaociationa

V.N. Buahkov, Ida. Sanin. Spacialiaad Par-a for tha laiaing of non-Calvin
Young Cova .

V.P. Grabanyuk. ‘l‘ha Donodadovo Variant

NJ. Stapanov. A Couraa in Spacialiaation

'l'.D. Goahadza. Based Upon Intar-antarpriaa Cooparation
A.c. Kuropatkin. An Association Gathara Yorca

A.A. ‘l‘urov, v.3. Pakhno. Problana of Improving tha Organisation of
Production at tho Bolton Aaaociation

A.V. Kiryuahkin. Tho “fact of lbdarniaation

LN. Burobkin, v.1. Kudryaahov. Labor Organisation at Aniaal mabandry
Intar-antarpriaa Organizations and Aaaociationa

V.A. malav. Paraonnal Undar Intar-antarpriaa Cooparation
COPYRIGHT: deatal'atvo "Hoakovakiy labocniy", 1979

7026
630: 8164/0231
MOMCIALISBMY

HATER mamas

POTENTIAL FOR INCREASING EFFICIENCY 01' USSR rmcauou
Hoacou VOPIIOSY moan: in haaian lo 8. Aug 81 pp ‘6-5‘

[Article by Daitriy Tiaofeyevich Zurik. doctor of agricultural eciancea, profeaaor
at the Hoacov State Institute of Water Reel-arion: "Dacervea for Increeaing Effi-
ciency of Irrigation"]

[Text] Irrigation beconea more iqortant each year. The proportion of producta ob-
tained tron irrigated areas in the overall anount of far-ing producta increaaed to
22-25 percent under the Tenth live-Tear Plu. hiring the period free 1965 throudl
1979 alone the irrigated areaa increued froa 9.9 to 17.0 nillion hectaraa (6 per-2
cent of all the planted area), and the overall eaount of capital inveatnenta in ir-
rigation exceeded 50 billion rubles during thie tin.

Irrigation has begun to be uaed not only in the duart and aaai-deaert regione of
Central Ania, Southern laralthatan and the Caucaeua. but also in the eteppe. foreat
ateppe and nonchernozea regions. the eo-called new irrigation regicna, where noet

of the agricultural producta are produced on non-irrigated land. Non-irrigation
farming will continue in the future to play the Iain role in thia region, but the
importance of irrigation aa a aeana of increasing the productivity of faraing will
increase. During the firat years of Soviet power laea than 10 percent of the lo ail-
lion hectarea of irrigated land tea in new regiona, under the Seventh Viva-Year Plan
(figurea for l965)--alnoet 30 percent. and by due and of the Tenth rive-Year Plan-
more than 50 percent. The irrigated areea will continue to increaaa in the tradi-
tional regiona of irrigation faruing, but at leaa rapid ratea.

The level achieved in the production of agricultural producte on irrigated land in
all regiona of the country doee not yet fully juatify the expendituree that have .
been made. Large area of irrigated land are not uaed at all in agricultural circu-
lation (in 1979—0.6 million hactarea). and any area are not watered (in l979-0.8
nillion hectarea). The water that ia at the diepoaal of the irrigation ayatene and
agricultural enterprises and alao the fixed capital for irrigation are not being
adequately utilized. A nunber of decreea of the CPS" Central (Jo-ittee and the 088!
Council of Miniatera point out the need to eliainate theae ahortcoainga and increaae.
the efficiency of irrigated land. The "Main Directiona for the Econonic and Social
Develop-ant of the USSR During 1981-1985 and the Period up to 1990" act the teak:
"to achieve an all-around increeae in the efficiency .'of the utilization of irrigated
and drained land . . . to inpleunt Iaaeuree for the efficient expenditure of water
for the needa of agriculture and iwrovenent of the condition of irrigated and

21
FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
e 0. Va e Issue. m Ul‘hl

drained land . . . to work nore rapidly to reconatmct existing land reclenation sys-
tem and to iqrnve their water supply . . ." The 0883 water reclenation business

The inconplete return fron irrigated land is related prinarily to the unsatisfactory
utilization of water resources that are at the disposal of irrigation systens and
agricultural enterprises. Irrigation notes are not adequately substatiated ad are
not observed; a large quantity of water that cones into the irrigation system is not
used for flooding and is uselesaly discharged free the systens and lost in filtra-
tion. augnenting the gromd water supply and deteriorating the condition-of irrigat-
ed lad and non-irrigated land'adjacent to it. (lily about half of the water intend-
ed for irrigation is used to increase productivity. ad even less of it is used in
certain ayatens. The reason for this situation consists not only and not so arch" in
the technical inperfection of the irrigation systens as in shortcosings in planing.
designing. constructing and operating then. -

In 1966 the systen of the USSR Ministry of Land leclanation ad Water lianapnsnt es-
tablished a 9S-percent supply for irrigation. according to which the irrigation sys-
tens should be planned for operation during the noet arid years which occur no nore
than five tines a century or once every 20 years. This neana that during 95 out of
100 years all irrigated land should be provided with water according to the not.
that are required only in the rare, nost arid years. so the water mined to the ir-
rigation systens and ferns will not be utilised efficiently during 95 of these years.
This pertains neatly to the steppe, forest steppe and nonchernosen regions where the
irrigation norns for the nost arid years greatly exceeds the none for the less arid
ones.

As auto'nosrusly financed enterprises that are interested in efficient utilisation of
the water and land resources at their disposal, the holldlozea and sovkhotea. violat-
ing the provision concerning the ”women supply, have begum on their own initia-
tive and at their own expense, to increase the irrigated areas (to adjacent non-
irrigated land) and as a result have obtained a significat quantity of additional
products. In the Ukraine the irrigated land that is not intended to be irrigated is
called "ecconpanying hectares." in the Northern Caucasus, Buryatiya and other re-
gions. they are called areas of "initiative" and ”labile" irrigation. and in the
naterials of the USSR Central Statistical Administration this land is given the
neat ”irrigationa on non-irrigated lad." In 1979 the calculated area with irriga-
tiona on non-irrigated land reached 1.1 nillion hectares, about half of which is be-
ing irrigated with nobile equipnent. This provides an inportent opportunity for ag-
riculture to use irrigations on that lad and those crops which during one year or
another or for a period of sore than a year require additional noisturs and it lakes
it possible to obtain a greater effect.

The provision concerning the 95-percent calculated supply becane invalid with the in-
troduction in 1979 of the new Construction Horns and Rules of the 083R Goastroy. ac-
cording to which the calculated supply should be established for each irrigation ob-
ject on the basis of technical ad econonic coaarisons of the various variants of
the calculated provision and the selection of the nest econonical of then. A cor-
rect ratio between irrigation water assigned :0 the systens and irrigated land de-
tersines the econonic effectiveness of irrigatioc nasc'xes.
table 1. Technical and Econonic Indicators for Irrigation (bject in Steppe
legion 91th Various bevela of Calculated Hater Supply for Irrigation

Variance of calculated water
Unite of ' eugzlz for irrigation
Manure-ant

951 751 502 252 51

for for for for for

drieet ned- eve- ud- wet

year in rage iue year

dry year wet

zear mt
Recourcee of irrigation water aillione
of cubic
netere 50 50 50 50 50

Annua1 utilization of irriga-

tion water during many-year
period " 25.5 35.6 66.5 69.2 50.0

Average weighted irrigation nore cubic
aetere per 5000 3500 2500 1500 1000
hectare

Area with irrigation network thouamda
of hectarea 10.0 16.3 20.0 33.6 50.0

Actual irrigated area per year.
average for any-year period " 10.0 16.1 18.6 21.7 22.5

Capital invest-ante in conatruc-
tion of eyeten and agricultural Iillione
assimilation of land of rublae 60.0 68.6 60.0 86.8 120.0

Average annual profit " 6.0 5.6 7.6 8.6 9.0

‘riae period for recouping
capital invent-ante yeare 10 9 8 10 13

Calculated expenditures
(per 1 ruble‘e worth of rublea/

additiona1 output) ruble 1.11 1.05 0.98 1.11 1.30
H)“ WFHJAL UM ONLY

In the desert zone, where only irrigation farming is possible and there are no non-
irrigated plantings in the inediate vicinity. and the irrigation norms depend very
little on natural precipitations and in certain years change alnost not at ell. the
consumption of water on one and the sane irrigated area remains identical, and fre-
quently it depends more on the sources of irrigation water than on the conditions
for natural moisture. In certain years or periods of the year surplus irrigation
water cannot be used for adjacent desert land. Therefore the areas of irrigation.
when the handling capacity of the main structures remain the same, remain constant
(stable irrigation) and the agricultural enterprises are interested in a fuller an-
nual supply of water only for the irrigated areas they already have. Artificial ir-
rigation in the desert zone transform alsost fruitless land into highly productive
agricultural land with repeatedly increased productivity of each irrigated hectare.
and almost all of the products are the result of irrigation and measures related to
it. It is expedient to distribute irrigated land here in the form of large cases
that suffer less from‘ the drying effects of the surrounding desert.

The situation is different in the steppe, forest steppe and nonchernozen zones where
artificial irrigation is conducted mainly on areas that were previously used for non-
irrigation farning and produce considerable volume of agricultural products even
without artificial irrigation. In these zones the productivity of agricultural land
increases as a result of additional irrigations. The fans in regions of non-irri-
gation farsing want the irrigations to be used just as fertilizers are applied and
other agrotechnical measures are conducted, and not always on strictly allotted sec-
tions. but. as much as possible. on any part of the farm where during one year or
another or during one period of the year there arises a need for additional moisture
(mobile irrigation). This can be achieved only with a deconcentration of the distri-
bution of irrigated land. whose agricultural production cm be expediently and effi—
ciently coubined with adjacent non-irrigation planting. -

Ihe main object of the work envisioned in the new Construction Nor-Is and Rules of
the USSR Gosstroy. that went into effect in 1975, consists in selection and techni-
cal and economic substantiation for each irrigation object the level (percentage)

of calculated irrigation whereby one achieves the nest expedient cosbination in the
utilization of water and land resources and effective production of the largest pos-
sible quantity of agricultural products both on permanently irrigated land and other
land of agricultural enterprises that are included in the zone affected by artifi-
cial irrigation.

A technical and economic substantiation is drawn up for each object (farm, area,
system. or region) on the basis of data concerning the annual irrigation nor-s per
one hectare for individual crops and the average weighted irrigation norms that are
determined taking into account the makeup of the crops. In keeping with the estab-
lished grouping of years according to the degree of aridity, the calculated provi-
sion has five gradations: years with 95-percent provision (the most arid years),
7S-percent (sesi-arid years), SO-percent (average years), 25-percent (semi-wet
years), and 5-percent (wet years). A comparison of the technical and economic in-
dicators for these variants will serve a a basis for selecting the most econoaical
of them. Presented below are calculations that were made with respect to the irri-
gation system of the steppe region (south of the Ukraine) which is allotted 50 mil-
lion cubic esters of irrigation water a year. For an initial comparison and selec-
tion of the most economical variant of the calculated supply they used data

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2. Utilization of Irrigation Hater and Land With Irrigation Network Hith
Various Levels of Calculated Hater Supply for Irrigation

Unit of Calculated Hater Suppl!

 

 

Measure-
aent 951 751 50! 251 52
Annual resources of irrigation water millions
of cubic SO 50 50 50 50
netera
Average annual utilization of irri-
gation water (during many-year
period)* " 25.5 35.6 “.5 49.2 50.0
Average annual quantity of water
remaining unused " 26.5 110.6 5.5 0.8 0.0
Average annual percentage of uti-
lization of irrigation water 2 51 71 89 98 100
Overall area of land in zone affected thousands of
by irrigation hectares 50 50 50 $0 50

Area of land with irrigation network " 10.0 14.3 20.0 33.6 50.0

Area of land with actual watering
(average annual for many-year
period) " 10.0 14.1 18.10 21.7 27.5

Actual irrigated area in percentage
of area with irrigation network I 100 98 92 65 1.5

Area of land with irrigation network
in percentage of own): area of
land located in zone effected by
irrigation " 20 28.6 -'.~0.'0 66.6 100

* The degree of utilization of water was determined for a 20-year period. For
each variant a calculation was oade for very dry years (1 year). medium dry
years (6 years), average years (10 years). nediuo wet yearn (’0 years) and wet
years (1 year), using the corresponding irrigation norm.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PW 03".th U3l UI‘I‘I

concerning capital investments and planned profit obtained as a result of these in-
vestments. which served as a basis for determining the time periods for recouping
capital investnents—one of the main indicators of economic effectiveness. The com-
parative effectiveness was determined according to the expenditures that were made.
The indicators of the economic effectiveness of the compared variants depend on the
degree of utilization of irrigation water and land with the irrigation network.

Accounting for the water consumption over a period of many years (in the example un-
der consideration-20 years) makes it possible to establish the actual utilization
of water in terms of all the variants for the years with various amounts of natural
moisture and to establish the average annual amounts for the many-year period.

One can see from Table 2 that with s 9S-percent calculated supply of water resources,
only 51 percent are used. As the level of the calculated supply decreases the degree
of utilization of the water increases, and the most efficient application of the wa-
ter is found in the transition from s 95- to a 75- and SO-percent supply, precisely
from 51 percent to 71 percent and 89 percent of the utilisation of the existing re-
sources of irrigation water. '

when determining the economic effectiveness of irrigation with the variants that are
being compared. it is important to take into account the sizes of the areas with the
irrigation network and the actual irrigated network during a period of many years.
As the level of the calculated supply decreases, the areas of irrigated land (sore
precisely, land with an irrigation network) increase considerably more rapidly than
do the areas which could actually be irrigated. Thus with the reduction of the cal-
culated supply to 25 percent and 5 percent, the proportion of areas with an irriga-
tion network that remain unirrigated increases significantly in individual years.
which negatively affects the effectiveness of cqital investments in the construc-
tion of an irrigation network.

Complete annual irrigation of all areas with an irrigation network can not be achiev-
ed except with the 95-perccnt variant of calculated water supply, and the quantity

of unirrigated land increases ss-the percentage of the calculated supply decreases,
and water irrigation resources are utilized completely only with the five—percent
variant of calculated supply. with the other variants, part of the irrigation water
cannot be used in individual years.

with the SO-percent variant of calculated supply (lost effective), out of 50 million
cubic meters of water an average of 5.5 million cubic meters of water a year or ll
percent remain unutilized. To expend this amount with ordinary sethods requires a
considerable increase in the area with an irrigation network, which is tantamount to
changing over to a lower calculated water supply, and this is less economically ef-.
fective than the SO-percent supply. This is related to the need to construct an ir-
rigation network on very rarely irrigated land. The aforementioned reserve of water
can be utilized on the basis of an experiment of the kolkhozes and sovkhoaes in ir-
rigating non-irrigated land without constructing a permanent irrigation network. At
the present time about half of the aforementioned area for irrigation of non-irri-
gated land is irrigated with mobile equipment.

26
Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.US£4DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The planned level or calculated supply, determined on the basis of a comparison of
technical and economic indicators for several variants. as a rule, is lower than the
normative of the 9S-percent calculated supply. Horsover, the area of land with a
permanent irrigation network increases. In the sample under consideration this
area increases 2-fold—from 10,000 to 20,000 hectares, even without accounting for
irrigation of additional areas with mobile equipment.

A cod>ination of irrigation farming and non-irrigation farming makes it possible to
conduct selective irrigations of the more valuable crops and areas that are most
greatly in need of water during a given period. thus providing for increased effect-
iveness of the utilization of each cubic meter of irrigation water. Ordinarily non-
irrigated land can even be irrigated with water that is intended for permanently ir-
rigated land which does not require it during the period of the regular irrigation
or requires less than does the area that lies outside the irrigated sector but is
experiencing a great shortage of moisture. Such selectivity and nobility of irri-
gations within agricultural enterprises is an inortant means of increasing the pro-
portion of more intensive crops as comared to the amount of them in the existing
crop rotation. Sometimes the farms (especially when there is a shortage of water)
irrigate only the areas that are‘ planted in the leading crops, and the irrigation
equipment is moved during the process of the crop rotation along with these crops.
Irrigation in regions of non-irrigation farming should be carried out along with
other agrotechnical measures not on limited sections of stable irrigation, but on
any part of the farm where there is a need for additional moisture.

Mobile irrigation in full volume is a task of the more distant future, but even now
it should be introduced and taken into account when planning, designing. constructing
and operating irrigation systems. and organizing agricultural utilisation of irri-
gated land and non-irrigated land adjacent to it. Practice shows that this method
is also effective with the current level of technical equipment for irrigation. Ho-
bile irrigation opens up large possibilities for further utilisation not only of ir-
rigation water, but also natural precipitation on the territory of each farm through
the use of regulating irrigations, primarily of non-irrigated land.

In regions where irrigation is carried out against a background of mainly non-irri-
gation farming, artificial irrigations play a dual role. First. they augment mois-
ture supplies in the soil by increasing the intake part of the land's water balance.
The effect of this is determined by the ratio between expended water and additional
yield--thc coefficient of water consumption. Second. with irrigations it is possible
to make up for the "gaps" in the schedule of the plants' water consuwtion that form
during dry periods. that is, it is possible to regulate water consuqtion.

Fluctuations in the yields of agricultural crops in the steppe, forest steppe and
nonchernozen regions depend mainly on the more or less lengthy dry periods that oc-
cur here. disturbing the normal development of the plants. ‘lhe negative effects of
droughts are manifested not only in that they decrease the plants' supply of water,
but also in that they reduce the degree of utilization of all precipitation. Thus
frequently favorable moisture conditions provide for good initial development of the
crop and quite favorable prospects for the yield. but a drought that occurs in the
second half of the growing period makes it imossible to obtain a large yield. And
if a drought comes during the first period of the crop's development, the weakened
and frequently thinned plantings cannot subsequently utilize even very abundant
0'0“ Urrsesnu m Ul‘lsl

precipitation. which leads to a reduction of the yield. Thus a dry period reduces
the effect of precipitation that falls both before and after this period. Irrigat-
ing planted areas during a drought eliminates the retardation of the plants' develop-
ment and thus improves the utilization of natural precipitation that falls during

the entire growing period. ‘

Even a small amount of irrigation during a dry period, for example, 100-300 cubic
meters per one hectare, can prevent a reduction of the yield. The effect of such

an irrigation is conditioned not by the fact that the overall intake of water into
the soil is increased by 5-10 percent, but by the fact that, because of its effect

on the water conditions for the agricultural crops. they utilize more effectively

the 3.000-6,000 cubic meters of natural precipitation. This means that a small irri-
gation norm during the period of the plants' most critical need for water increases
the useful effect or the large quantity of natural precipitation many times over.

In the steppe, forest steppe and nonchernozem regions there are usually from 300 to
500 nullimeters of precipitation, which corresponds to an annual volume of 3.000-
S,000 cubic meters of water per one hectare, and on one farm with an area of 10,000
hectares-~30-50 million cubic meters. But because the precipitation is not uniform
(throughout the territory of the farm) or regular, the useful utilization of it does
not usually exceed 50 percent. Mobile irrigation. especially regulating irrigations,
improves the effectiveness of natural precipitation. Thus an increase in the degree
of the utilization of natural precipitation of only 20 percent is tantamount to the
farm's obtaining an additional 6-10 million cubic meters of irrigation water, while
expending on this measure a quantity of water that is several times less from the
irrigation system.

Consequently. the use of mobile irrigation makes it possible not only to significant-
ly increase the actual irrigated area and the amount of products obtained from it
with the same water resources. but also to greatly increase the degree of utilisa-
tion and productivity of each cubic meter of irrigation water and each millimeter of
precipitation. These additional possibilities of mobile irrigation not only con-
tinue to be important when designing new irrigation systems. but also serve as an
important means of increasing the economic effectiveness of the operation of exist-
ing irrigation systems. '

In order to increase the efficiency of irrigation it is very important to improve
the relations between state irrigation systems and agricultural enterprises that
consume water, and also between water management construction organizations and ag-
ricultural organizations and enterprises. At the present time irrigation systems
that are on the budget financing serve kolkhoaes and sovkhores that are autonomously
financed organisations. The administrations of state irrigation systems can perform
operations work and provide service for agricultural enterprises only within the
framework established by plans and estimates of expenditures, in which it is inpos-
sible to take into account ahead of time the changing conditions of economic activi-
ty. Irrigation system workers are not materially motivated to improve their work.
As distinct from autonomously financed enterprises that are motivated to economize
on material and monetary resources, budget irrigation systems try as hard as they
can to expend all funds allotted to them since residuals at the end of the year are
identified with a failure to fulfill the plan.

28
FOR¢NHHCJA1.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many shortcomings in the operation of irrigation systems, including wasteful utili-
zation of water, are explained by the lack of material motivation to economize on
"free" water. 1his pertains to state systems on budget financing that are construc-
ted and operated with state allocations. In intrafarm irrigation systems that are
put into operation, as a rule. at the expense of the farms themselves, which inde-
pendently operate then. irrigation is conducted on the basis of autonomous financing.
which has a positive effect on the economic indicators of irrigation.

order to cause then to expend water more economically is constantly increasing be-
cause of the annually increasing shortage of the water balance in the majority of
basins of the main irrigated regions, particularly in Central Asia and Kazakhstan
where the diversion of part of the flow of Siberian rivers involves the expenditure
of many billions of rubles. therefore it becomes especially important to take mea-
sures to economize on water. There are large unproductive losses of irrigation
water in both old and new irrigation systens which are considered to be technically
perfected. Extravagant utilization of irrigation water is brought about not so Inch
by technical imperfection of the systems as by inefficient utilization of it because
of the lack of payment for water and the lack of material motivation to economize on
it. Therefore the cosplex of technical measures directed toward reducing losses of
water and improving its application should be costined with manurea for economy.

Above all it is necessary to change land reclamation system over to autonomous
financing.

are decreased by 20-30 percent just as a result of reducing useless losses of water,
and without harming the crops. Practice shows that with ‘thelchangeover to autono-
mous financing the agricultural enterprises and administrations of irrigation sys-
tess, on their own initiative and at their own expense, reconstruct systems and in-
stallations. striving to utilize water more effectively. The attitude towarr‘. ac-
counting for water also changes. In systeas that are asintained on budget finan-
ing, even already installed water meters quickly begin to malfunction, and observa-
tions are made irregularly, as a result of which the supply of water meters does not
exceed 50 percent, while in irrigation systems of the Kirghiz 88R all autonomously
financed systems have a 100 percent supply of water meters.

The effects of autononous financing factors, mtual responsibility and material in-
centives should be extended to the construction of irrigation systens as well. In
order to increase the effectiveness of autonomous financing of interrelations be-
tween construction organizations and agricultural agencies and farms on which irri-
gation is conducted. the latter should be made responsible at least partially for
the functions of the clients.

the farms' actual need for irrigation, the actual possibilities of prospt assimila-
tion of irrigated land and their effective utilization. Water management organiza-
tions do not depend on the effectiveness of the assimilation of the irrigated land

and frequently conduct work without the necessary accounting for the interests and

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
s Uh Us a (\uel‘h vee- VIV~I

capabilities of the agricultural enterprise. "hen a farm receives irrigation free
of charge it is difficult to refuse to carry out even irrigation work which they can
not assiailate. And the higher agricultural agencies are forced to be linited to
sanctioning final plans. This leads to the construction of irrigation systems which
are not properly utilized for nany stbsequent years.

Now the USSR Ministry of Land Estimation and Hater Resources orders. plans, and
constructs new irrigation systems, and the USSR Ministry of Agriculture operates
then. The builders are not very concerned ﬂout how they will be operated. For
then the main thing is to economize on each hectare. But for the operators—the
agricultural enterprises--this frequently ends up in inconveniences and large losses.
They must elininate at their own expense the iQerfections caused by the construction
workers. turning for assistance to seasonal workers, since water management construc-
tion organizations refuse to perform such work. With budget financing of irrigation
systems not only all operations work. but also expenditures on eliainating inperfec»
tions in construction are covered by funds from the state budget. frequently by the
same construction organizations, for I0" noney. This ﬂee the operating agencies
less demanding of the construction workers and creates conditions for releasing and
accepting irrigation systems that have imdectim. As a result the plans fre-
quently include seasures for reconstructing land reclamation systems that were re-
cently constructed.

Increasing the inportance of agricultural enterprises in efficient organization of
irrigation requires the corresponding redistribution of capital investments in land
reclamation between the USSR Ministry of Land RaclsIation and Water Manage-ant and
the USSR Ministry of Agriculture without increasing the overall a'nounts of invest-
aents, but increasing the econonic substantiation and effectiveness of the irriga-
tion work that is conducted.

From what has been presented bows it follows that water reels-stion has great re-
serves whose utilization will sake it possible for agriculture to obtain more addi-
tional products as a result of lore efficient utilization of irrigation water, in-
creased material incentives for water nanagsmsnt operation and construction organi-
zations, and increased productivity of agriculture on the basis of autonomous finan-
cing.

A narrow departesntal approach to solving the problens of autononous financing in-
pedes the establishment of overall naterial incentives of water nanagenent and agri-
cultural enterprises snd organizations to increase the efficiency of irrigat -on and
other land reclamation work that is conducted for agriculture. As VASKhNIL acadeni-
cian s. Shunakov eaphaeized: "One cannot forget that land reclamation does exist
for itself, it is a branch of agriculture. And, this being the case, the final goal
of all work is the crop.“

COPYRIGH‘: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomiki”, 1981

11772
(30: 1826/16 run

*SBL'SKAYA mtm' , 5 December 1980

30

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY