FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10658
5 July 1982

USSR Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY
(FOUO 3/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”TE

3988 publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OP
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
MWUSION‘LY

JPRS
15 J:

USSR REPORT

SCIENCE AND Tecuuomcv Poucv
(moo 3/02)

Cements

Financing an From
(Po MW, Te 310$“: 11m Emma? 82) eeeeeeeeeo

Effectiveneee of w mgr-e Reflected in Bonn
(Ve Fel'zenbeull, Qt de} vm 33m, ‘9’ 82) eeeeeeee

Overcening Obeteclee in neutron-Production Cycle
(In. 8. Lipewv, L. V. Denieenko; mm WI m 8883,

“If 82) 000......O...‘OOO’0.000000~ 0....ODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Legel Reguletion of Scientiﬁc Workm Wee lieeeerch melity
(Le Fe PCtm0’ m MI W 8383, Jan 82) eeeeeee

Soviets Actively Perticipete in Interneticqel "(an end Bicephm'
(v. Ye.» Sokolcv, a. V. Nielmikg VEST!!! Amman m 888R,

m 82) D0.0.0....0.0.00.0.000.0...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCO

Acedeniee of Science end Republic WZ'e To Strengthen Tiee
(mm MI W 3353, D00 81) OOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

new Edition of Multileterel Wretiou of the Academies of
Sciencee of the Socieliet Countriee' lowed .-
(Se Ge MM, W MI W 8833, m 82)eeeeee

8861' Policy Being Weed in can Cumin-ice
(0e W, .t ‘1‘ Vm “am, D00 81) eeeeeeeeeeeee

Rev iced-v of Sciencee Huber-e Proﬁles
(mm MI W 8888, m 82) eeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeee

-e- [III-UBSR-Zlos

MWWWY
POI<OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

FINANCING SST PROGRAMS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 13-22

[Article by P. Sedlov and T. Sletova: "Financing Scientific and Technical
Programs")

[Text] Scientific and technical programs are a specific form of intersector
planning and control of scientific and technical progress. They are formulated
for the resolution of such complicated problems which require the involvement
of a large number of scientific organisations and enterprises of various
sectors. the concentration of scientific forces. material and financial
resources.

The creation of effective systems for controlling programs was acknowledged
by the 26th CPSU Congress as one of the primary tasks. The systems for con-
trolling them should be organically entered into the economic mechanism. The
complexity of solving this problem is that on the one hand. it is necessary
to strengthen the centralized basis for solving the intersector and inter-

regionai problems in order to concentrate resources on solving the most
important of them. and on the other hand. broader development of cost
accounting. The economic mechanism for controlling intersector programs
can be effective if it stipulates equal economic conditions for all links
which are participating in the implementation of the "science-production-

application" cycle.

The system of controlling scientific and technical progress and its component.
the financing system. still do not permit complete realization of the advan-
tages of the program-target method since they are primarily oriented on the
sector principle of control. Planning and control are organically separated

into different stages of a unified scientific-production cycle which is
encompassed by comprehensive programs. In particular. the GKNT [State

Committee for Science and Technology] coordinates the NIOKR hcientific
research and experimental design work] and plans financial resources

for the fulfillment of this work by programs. Planning of the production

stage which is associated with the development and introduction of new equip-
mcnt. including the preparation and development of production facilities. is

the function of the USSR Gospian.

Rapid control of scientific and technical programs has been decentralized.
The main ministries and organizations which are responsible for the ful-
fillment of the program as a whole. practically do not have levers for

1
FOIIOFFKJAI.USB(IVLY
FOR OFFK’IAI. USE ONLY

influencing the co-executors beyondthe limits of their sector. They do not
have authority. do not have a control apparatus for solving questions of
financing and material-technical support for the entire set of interdependent
sectors and industries covered by the programs. Consequently. the chief
ministry is not capable of overcoming the disagreements which go beyonlthe
framework of sector planning. financing. and material and technical support
by using their own forces. All the interdepartmental disagreements are
placed at the level of the USSR Gosplan and the GENT which overloads their
resolution of these questions. They could be and should be solved rapidly

at the level of program supervision.

The experience of realizing integrated scientific and technical programs.
sector. intersector and regional in the 9th and 10th Five-Year Plans indi-
cated their profitability. Among the 208 intersector scientific and technical
programs developed under the supervision of the GKNT. a number of programs
have been successfully fulfilled for the development of the country's fuel
and energy base which stipulated the creation and development of series
production of unitsoflncreased unit output. production of compact engines
with power of 8.000-10.000 hp. more advanced energy consuming equipment and
technology. accelerated development of atomic machine construction. etc. As
a result of fulfilling these programs. the indicators for conservation of
consumed resources and the quality characteristics of the created samples
were considerably improved as compared to the base. For example. the metal
consumption of boiler units created from one of them was reduced by 401 .
the periods for installing the equipment were cut in half. the capital
outlay: were decreased by 301.ctc.

Work has been intensive ontheprogram of creating and using in production
automatic manipulators with program control (robots). The Kovrovskiy
mechanical plant was the first to broadly introduce industrial robots. Now
robots are operating there of the models "Tsiklon-3B." "Universal—ISM."
"Universal-S“ in the stamping. machining and other industries. As a result
of their use. labor productivity rose an average of 3-fold. and at individual
operations using robots. 5-6-fold. The labor intensity of processing the
parts diminished on the average by 632.

b
The development of a number of programs indicates the successful cooperation
of academic science and production. For example. in order to solve tasks
of intensive development of the economy of Siberia. the Siberian department
or the USSR Academy of Sciences in cooperation with the sector institutes
and production is realizing a long-term integrated program "Siberia" which
Includes 35 target programs to investigate and use the fuel and energy and
mineral-raw material resources. develop the territorial-production complexes.
and create the equipment and technology with regard for the climate conditions
at application. The Ural scientific center of the USSR Academy of Sciences
hands up the long-term target integrated program "Intensification of Indus-
trinl Production of the Urals.“ The implementation in the Latvian SSR of a
regional integrated program for mechanizing manual and heavy labor in
industry. in transportation and in other sectors made it possible to con-
ditionally release about 16.000 workers engaged in manual labor. According
to the scientific and technical programs developed in the 10th Five-Year Plan.
ahuul I900 new types of machines. equipment and instruments. and over 1000
advanced production processes were made. Analysis of the realization of

2
FOR OIIHCJAI.USIE(NNLY
FIIICMWNC1AI.USEGDNLY

some of them made it possible to reveal a number of shortcomings and diffi-

culties governed both by economic and organizational reasons. We will
examine them in the example of one of these programs.

According to the integrated program for the creation of automated control
systems for production processes. unitsxand industries headed by the Ministry
of Instrument ﬂaking . 292 types of new electronic computers. devices and
instruments were developed and introduced into production. For the develop-
ment and organisation of series production of sets of technical and program
resources 8H3. 8H6 of the international system of small computers (SH EVH).
the collective of developers of the program was awarded the State Prize for
science and technology in 1981. About half of the complexes obtained by

the national economy have been supplied to the machine construction sectors
for control of production processes. automation of design operations and
control of the complexes of metal-working equipment; 221 in the sector of
the extracting and processing industry for control of production processes;
162 of the complexes are being used for control of experiments in the
sphere of science. The use of 8N3 and 5H6 complexes for automation of the
planning of new items permitted a 2-2.5-fold acceleration of this labor-
intensive process.

A large economic effect is yielded by the use of the system of small computers
in the preparation of controlling programs for machines with numerical pro-
gram control. These programs were previously prepared on large computers whose
cost is considerably higher than the small computer system. The transition

to the system of small computers reduced the periods for compiling the control-
ling programs several times and significantly diminished the outlays for

their development.

However the scales of production of small computer systems does not meet the
national economy's demand for them. "hat is preventing the rapid increase in
volumes of production of minicompnters? The fulfillment of the aforementioned
program. like others. was associated with a number of difficulties due to
various reasons. including departmental barriers. incomplete order for finan-
cing and material-technical supply. The Ministry of Instrument Making which
is responsible for the program as a whole did not always succeed in concluding
a contract in time with the co-executors for including in their plans of
individual assignments.of the program and the allocation of the appropriate
resources. Great efforts were required to arrange the orders for development
and series production of the developed models at the enterprises and produc-
tion associations which specialize in the production of computer equipment.
The chief developer could not. by by-passing the sector sections of the USSR
Cosplan. correct the plans of loading the production facilities of the manu-
facturers so that production was guaranteed of the programmed product in

the schedules set in the approval of the program. The course of its ful-
fillment was also affected by the circumstance that neither the financial
support. nor the material incentive of the executors took into consideration
the features of program and interdepartmental interaction.

In total complexity. about 60 percent of the work to create and introduce
experimental and experimental-industrial samples stipulated by the scientific
and technical programs of the GKNT was removed or transferred to other periods
because the assignments of the programs for construction. installation and

3
FOR OffﬂﬂAl.USE(MVLY
FOIIOFFICJAI.USIZ(MHLY

shipments of set-forming items and equipment were not always agreed upon

by periods. or were not included in the sector plans for capital construction,
production and material-technical supply of the corresponding executors. For
example. the program for creation of chemical resources for the protection

of plants stipulated the start-up of eight industries at the enterprises of
the Ministry of Chemical Machine Construction. Becavse of the untimely finan-
cing or insufficient volumes of it. the lacktafaspecific organisation that
was responsible for the start-up of the facilities. and for other reasons.

the periods for the start-up of three industries was shifted to 1979 and 1980,
son the others to the ilth Five-Year Plan.

The order for financing work for new equipment that was active in the sectors
was used without any changes for financing the scientific and technical programs.
Each ministry which participates in the fulfillment of program work used for
financing the work stipulated in the program capital which was mainly intended
for ensuring the scientific-technical development of the in-house production
base of the sector and updating of the manufactured product. as well as for
financing work on intersector programs. This order generally does not create
interest in rapid and high-quality fulfillment of the intersector work. since
the diversion of resources of each ministry (department) for these purposes

can contradict the primary interests of sector development.

The order {or listing the resources for financing programs and calculation of
their spending are also incomplete. The capital allocated for financing work
on programs are listed on the calculated account of the organization-executor
and are depersonalized in the total sum of income. This impairs the calcula-
tion of their target use for program needs. Undercalculation of the specific
nature of intersector divisioa of labor. departmental separation of the execu-
tors. the large number of sources for financing work for new equipment. and
the lack of the necessary correlation between the assignments of the program
and the plans for production and capital investments contradicted the require-
ments of the target control of scientific and technical programs. and
essentially became a dr1g on their bread and effective application.

In evaluating the important role of scientific and technical programs in
accelerating scientific and technical progress. it should be noted that they
do not completely reflect the requirement of directivity for the achievements
of science and technology to final national economic results. In the majority
of them. for example. there was no stipulation of assignments for series
production and the use of innovations. The programs for the creation of new
machines. equipment and instruments generally ended with the fabrication and
testing or the main sample or the manufacture of an adjustment series. the
first batch of a product with the use of the new technological process. Con-
sequeotly. at best they stipulated the initial development of the created
equipment. but did not plan its broad application.

The question of the need to Include completing stages of series production
into the scientific and technical programs and the use of new equipment has
been raised many times in the economic press. In the last five-year plan.
individual elements were worked out for a program-target method of planning

 

 

ISee. for example. Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of Sciences L.
Cainvskly. "Strengthening the Orientation of Plans and Stimuli at Highly Effi-
cient New Equipment (VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No 5. 1977); D. Bobryshev. V. Pokrovskiy
"Control of Scientific-Technical Development" (VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No 12. 1977)
and others.

I.

5(IICHNHCJAL USE:(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and control at intersector and sector levels. The accumulated experience

was generalized. and in the decree adopted by the CPSU Central Committee and
the USSR Council of Ministers "0n Improving Planning and lntensification of
the Effect of the Economic Mechanism on Improving the Efficiency of Production
and Quality of Hork" measures were stipulated for the development of the
system of programs. inclusion in them of assignments for organization of
series production of new equipment and introduction of the leading technology.

The inclusion into the target scientific-technical programs of the completing
stages of series production of new equipment and the introduction of techno-
logy makes it necessary to create an efficient organizational-economic
mechanism of control which meets the requirements of intensifying scientific
and technical activity and orientation of all the economic links on high final
results. It is apparently necessary to raise the status of the agencies of
program control and give the main organizations the right to independently
eliminate the current intersector discrepancies for each program.

The creation of a mechanism for planned control of intersector programs is
impossible without the solution of such an important problem as their financing.
The time has come to centralize and regulate the financial planning at higher'
and middle levels of control.

Financing of scientific-technical programs must. in our opinion. be implemented
on an indepenent plan which will distribute and calculate the resources. It

is very important that the unified integrated plan define from the very begin-
ning the financial resources for the entire cycle of work covered by the
programs. and distributed at the stages of work. for scientific research.
experimental design. technical preparation of production. development. etc.
This distribution must be supplemented with efficient monitoring and calcula-
tion of the target spending of capital. It is also important to eliminate

the multiplicity of sources and multiple-stage nature of distribution of
finances.

The financing system must be aimed at timely provision of capital to the planned
volumes of work and its rapid concentration on the most strained sections.
Therefore. financing of work done on intersector scientific-technical programs
should be done with regard for the main principles of program-target method,

as well as the adtive statutes on the order for using state budget resources.
credit. resources of the unified fund for development of science and tech-

nology and other sources of financing work on new equipment at enterprises.
associations and organizations.

The founding principles for this system. in our opinion. should be the follow-
ing. First. the functions of financial control of programs should be centra-
lized on higher and middle levels. and more precisely delimit according to
levels of control the responsibility of the managers of financial resources.

It is expedient to provide for more active participation of the agencies of
the USSR Ministry of Finances in selecting the forms of financing and control-

ling the financial resources. Secondly. financing of problems. topics and

5
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

work1 must be target. Thirdly. there should be guarantee of flexible combi-
nation of the percentage financing from resources of the ministries. depart-
ments which are interested in the results of the pograms.and resources of
the state budget and credit allocated for fulfillment of definite work.
Pourthly. it is important to regulate the processes of formulating financial
plans. establish control and calculation of the spending of resources from
the active sources of financing work on the new equipment. having guaranteed
in this case the priority of allocating resources for programs from all
sources.

The system for financing integrated scientific-technical programs constructed
with regard for the stated principles. in our opinion. will permit target and
timely financing of the work planned according to the programs. scientific
research. experimental design. fabrication of experimental and experimental-
industrial samples and units. test stands. development of experimental samples
in production. technical preparation of production for series manufacture

of products. including work on reconstruction and expansion of production
facilities.

The introduction for all ministries and departments participating in

financing the corresponding programs on percentage principles. of a unified
order for deductions of financial resources and their primary allocation from
the corresponding sources will create definite guarantees for the fulfillment
of assignments on schedule. in this case it becomes possible in limits of

the general limit allocated for the program to distribute beforehand the
financial resources according to stages of work. to implement a balanced
correlation of financial resources with material-technical supply of the

work. rapidly correct the distribution of resources in limits of the

estimated cost and use the reserve (if it is stipulated) with regard for
actual fulfillment of the work. Finally. expansion of the use of credit.
giving the main organizations the right to dispose of the capital allocated for
the program (and if necessary to involve enterprises and organizations of
different departments in the work on economic contracts) will create an effi-
cient mechanism of control over the programs based on a new progressive system
of payment for completely finished work which has been handed over to the
customer.

Especial attention should be concentrated on the executive (managing and stimu-
lating) functions or the control agencies for intersector programs. Depending
on the scale of work. its spatial and temporal boundaries. various solutions

to this problem are possible. in those cases where the functions of rapid
control are placed on the main organization. its authority should be expanded
for disposing of the capital allocated for the needs of the program and setting
up control over the fulfillment of work and stimulation of the groups of exe-
cutors. For rapid control of large—scale programs. special intersector
agencies may be set up. in each specific case it is necessary to regulate the
lThe use of the system of target or problem planning for orders and the corres—
ponding financing of the sector scientific-technical organizations made it pos-
sihlc to regulate the intraministry thematic planning. and abandon some tradi-
tional. but not very promising trends in research and concentrate scientific-
tvchnicnl resources on problems important for the sector and national economy.
In addition to accelerated introduction of innovations into production. an
important result of this system was the improvement in use of speicalists in
scientific and technical organizations.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the economic and legal status of the control agency . determine the nature
of its interrelationships with the higher planning agencies. with the
linear-staff and funcational subdivisions of the organizations who are
participating in the work on the programs.

In order to improve the order for financing scientific and technical programs
it is first expedient to formulate an interrelated system of plans for finan-
cing them which includes state. sector and financial plans for specific
programs. It should be correlated to the entire system of plans. having
pinpointed the trends for using the active sources of financing work for

new equipment in the sectors and at the enterprises. This does not require a
basic review of the rights and functions ofthe apparatus for the sector systems
of control of scientific-technical progress and the significant changes in the

organization of forms of interaction of several sectors in the realization of
integrated programs.

The formation of a system of plans for financing scientific and technical
programs is dictated by theexpandeduse of program-target method for solving
the most important and large-scale problems. and increasing the volume of
allocations for development of programs. In addition. the spatial and tempo-
ral boundaries for realization of the programs rise. there is an increase in
the number of co-executors. All of this requires a more precise control and
calculation of the allocated resources at all levels of control. In other
words. the time has come to strengthen the functions of the centralized
planning and control in solving large-scale intersector problems.

The state plan for financing scientific-technical programs should be compiled
for the five-year plan based on calculations of the estimated cost of work
presented by the main ministries and departments responsible for the fulfill-
ment of specific programs. Its structure can approximately be the following.
In the first section of the plan "Volume of Financing lntersector Scientific-
Technical Programs by Sectors" it is expedient to reflect the volumes of
financial resources allocated for each sector for the fulfillment in the
planned five-year plan of work on intersector programs according to the
approved list of programs of the state plan for the development of science
and technology.

The first section oftheplan for financing must indicate the total allocations
of the sector for the entire set of fulfilled programs both target and for the

resolution of the most important scientific and technical problems regardless
of whether the sector is the main or the co-executor. The total must

isolate expenditures for scientific research and capital investments needed
for the sector's fulfillment of the corresponding assignments for intersector
scientific and technical programs.

In the second section. "Trends of Target Financing." it is necessary for each
program to isolate the ministries and departments which are responsible for
the fulfillment of the main assignments and financing this work. as well as

the sources of financing. For each program. the first indicates the main
ministry (volume of allocations allocated to it for fulfillment of the assign-

ments of this program. sources of financing the work. state budget. unified
fund for scientific and technical work. etc.). Say that for the program of

7
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
rum urrauuu. ”on URL!

creating automated control systems for production processes. units and
productions in industry. the first indicated is the Ministry of Instrument
Making and the resources allocated to it for the five-year plan. then the
Ministry of the Electronics Industry. Ministry of the Radio Industry and
other executors.

It is important for the plan to stipulate allocations for the development and
final stages of work associated "ith mastery and series production of a new
product. This order will make it possible to avoid those difficulties that
are now encountered by the developers at the stages of production and intro-
duction of innovations where for 1-2 years they have to include the develop-
ments in the production plan through sector departments of the USSR Gosplan.

The state plan for financing scientific and technical programs which will
become an integrated financial document should determine in advance. accor-
ding to the active technique. the dimensions of the deductions to the fund
for economic stimulation of the enterprises and organisations from the profit
obtained from realizing the product. created according to the program. and
deductions to the funds for economic stimulation which are included in the

estimated cost of work.

It is expedient for the main ministry to be charged with the obligation of
controlling the coapilation (co-executors) of local estimates for individual
stages of work or assignment. summary estimate of outlays for the program.
control of the observation of economic discipline by all participants of the
financing. In necessary cases (with regard for the actual fulfillment of
the work). the main ministry can make its suggestions for the change in
schedules and volumes of financing. as well as material incentive for the
collective-exectors for examination of the ministries (departments)-coexecu-
tors. If discrepancies develop for the suggestions made. then the main
ministry can appeal to the higher agencies the GKNT and USSR Gosplan. Each
ministry(department) which participates in the fulfillment of the work for
intersector scientific and technical programs will compile its draft of the
f ive-year plan for financing intersector scientific-technical programs which
should be formulated in the directed periods.

At the first stage of creating the financial mechanism for scientific and
technical programs it is important to precisely define the sources of
financing in the functional section depending on the nature of the work done
and to make them stable for the entire period required for full completion
of the appropriate stage 0. type of work. This measure is especially neces—
sary in those cases where the periods for fulfillment of the work. especi-

ally. the concluding. exceed a year.

The programs of the llth Five-Year Plan stipulate as concluding the work

[or series production of new equipment and the introduction of progressive
technology. This means that the set of program measures must include the
technical preparation of production. expansion. reconstruction of shops and
sections. sometimes new construction. etc. Expansion of the spectrum for
program work also increases the number of sources for their financing. defined
by the active statutes on financing work for new equipment in the sectors.

in particular. the amortization deductions. funds for development of pro-
duction and their reserves. and credit should be used for financing the
programs more actively and more purposefully.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For organizations which have been switched to a system of payment for complete-
ly finished and accepted work. an important source of financing scientific
research in addition to the unified fund for scientific and technical work

is the bank credits. The decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR
Council of Ministers for improving the economic mechanism has set up favorable
conditions for expanding the use of the credit-calculation mechanism. The
current outlays of organizations up to the full period of completing the work
are covered by means of bank credit in limits of the resources freed up by

the customer. In addition. the USSR Gosbank presents to the ministries and
departments loans for scientific research on programs in the case of non-
correspondence during the year of income into the unified fund for scientific
and technical work (YeFRNT) and the sizes of outlays from it.

The associations and enterprises of the USSR Gosbank can issue loans for payment
of work financed through the resources of the YeFRNT) if it is done in shorter
periods than outlined by the plan. as well as the implementation of highly
effective measures for new equipment not stipulated by the plan (on the
condition that credit and precentages have been liquidated in the space of

2 years from the day of issue through YeFRNT resources).

Expansion of the sphere of credit for work on the new equipment will make it
possible. in our opinion. first of all to realize the principles for target
financing of planning and organize economically harmonious activity of the
main organization and the organization-co-executors working on a unified order
and credit-financial plan; secondly. guarantee in practice equal economic
conditions and responsibility of the developers and customers for the new
equipment.

Formation of an interrelated system of integrated plans for financing inter—
sector scientific and technical programs with indication of the resources
allocated to each sector for specific target programs and for definite types
of work for them will considerably improve the order of planning the financial
resources at all levels of control of the national economy. In this case.

the program section will be isolated in the state budget and in the credit
plan in the areas of science and scientific services. capital construction
and production. This will considerably improve the system of control and
calculation of the target outlays and the effect from the scientific and
technical programs.

The proposed centralization of planning financial resources on the state and
sector levels. of course. does not solve all the questions of overcoming

the departmental barriers in realizing programs and reducing the number of
financing sources. It must be supplemented with another series of measures.
The system of financing intersector programs can become more efficient if.
first. the allocated resources are concentrated in the hands of the agency
which is responsible for scientific and technical policy in the country. and
secondly. the levels of responsibility of the managers of the financial
resources are clearly defined and the rights of the main organization are

expanded.

Centralized resources for financing intersector scientific-technical programs
should he set up on two levels: on the upper level of control. an intersector
unified fund can be set up to provide for scientific and technical programs

(HYeFONTP). and on the lower. financial resources allocated from the MYeFONTP
to the main organization. It is expedient to form this fund in each planned

9
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
Hm UPPUZIAI. USE ONLY

five—year plan from the resources of the state budget. capital investments and
credits of the State Bank and the Construction Bank. YeFRNT. funds for
development of production and their reserves. amortization deductions and
their reserves. deductions from the net cost of products and other sources

of the participants in fulfillment of the programs for the corresponding
enlarged standards.

The manager of the HYeFONTP, in our opinion. could be the GKNT which implements
centralized planning. control and calculation of the spending of resources
allocated by the state for scientific and technical programs. It is expedient
for each program to open up a special account with the number of the program

in the institutions of the USSR Gosbank and the USSR Construction Bank. and

to transfer to it the resources from the HYePONTP according to the proposed
approach to financing the intersector programs.

The main organization should be given the right to dispose of the resources
transferred to the special account oftheprogram. and its responsibility

should be increased for observance of the financial discipline. compilation and
spending of the estimates. calculations with the co-executors-of the ful-
filled work. and payment of credit. that is. make this organization the

main manager of resources from the special program account. It should also be
given the right to redistribute the financial resources in limits of the
approved estimate between the executors with regard for the actual course of
work regardless of their interdepartmental subordination. as well as the
volumes and periods for income of resources deducted by the ministries and
departments for the HYeFONTP for the corresponding types of work.

it is important for all the ministries and departments involved in fulfilling
the integrated programs to establish a unified order for deducting the resources
to the HYeFONTP from the active sources of financing work for new equipment

with regard for their target purpose according to the corresponding plan.

It is expedient to set up in the MYeFONT? a centralized strategic reserve of
resources and to use it for financing the previously unforeseen work. as well
as for maneuvering the resources in order to guarantee the assigned rates of

work done by different sectors and departments. This reserve can be used

even for target stimulation of the results which considerably exceed the
planned. etc. The creation of reserves of financial resources can become an
important condition for improving the efficienty of control of scientific-
technical programs. the timelybringingof innovations to practical application.
These reserves are especially necessary in developing programs for new

trends in the development of science and technology which are at the junction
of different sciences and are based on discoveries. inventions which can be
widely used in different sectors of the national economy.

After approval of the estimated cost of the program. the main ministry com-
piles an expanded financial plan of the program which indicates for all
stages. assignments and work the responsible executors and co-executors.

volumes of financing. periods for the beginning and end. The financial
resources allocated for the fulfillment of program assignments should then

be included as a separate line with indicate of the numbers of the program and
the model stages of work in the budget and credit plans. the plans for

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
financing scientific research and experimental design work. capital invest-
ments and capital construction of the main sector and the remaining executors.
say for the program for creating a small computer system. in the plans of

the Ministry of the Electronics Industry. Ministry of the Radio Industry. etc.

The estimated cost of the work for the program should stipulate an operational
reserve for financial resources. It can be used to cover the gaps in
financing planned work and those measures which it became necessary to ful—
fill after the approval of the financing plan. for accelerating work at the
most strained sections. since an important element of program control is that
acceleration of work associated with a unified technological chain which
guarantees the most effective achievement of namely the final result of the
program. The right to manage this reserve should be given to the main organi-
zation which is responsible for the fulfillment of the entire program.

The expediency of forming an operational reserve should be determined by the
main developer in the preparation of the draft of the scientific and

technical program with regard for its scales and complexity. degree of tech-
nical preparedness of the problem. technical level of production facilities
and other technical and organizational factors. Analysis of the estimated
cost of a number of scientific and technical programs indicates that the

size of the operational reserve can be established on the level of 6-82 of the
cost of the program.

Scientific-technical programs of two types have been outlined for the llth
Five-Year Plan. target integrated and programs for the solution of important
scientific-technical problems. a total of 170 programs. of them bl are
target scientific-technical programs to improve the technical-economic level
of production based on mass production andthe introduction of new. as well
as previously developed highly efficient equipment. It is recommended that
the target programs. in addition to the assignments for the creation and
development of innovations. according to the new method instructions for the
development of state plans. include measures for the technical preparation
of production for industrial development. expansion and reconstruction of
the active industries. and for the introduction of new facilities.

The list of these programs which cover individual trends in technical develop-
ment of the sectors was defined in the formulation of the integrated program
for scientific and technical progress for 20 years. In the selection and
development of target programs. in a number of cases their continuity

with the programs of the 10th Five-Year Plan was observed. For example.

in machine construction this continuity is traced in the development of a

target program for the creation and production of technical resources for
mechanization and automation of the lifting-transport. loading-unloading

and warehouse operations in industry. agriculture. construction and trans-
portation.

With the development of intersector programs for the resolution of the most
important scientific-technical programs. it becomes possible to organically
combine planning of the development of science and technology. production

and capital construction. Apparently. further development of the methodology
of program-target planning should occur in a direction so that integrated
scientific-gechnical programs become the real basis for the formation of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC1AI.US£1DNLN

plans for the technical development of sectors. accelerated updating of
the production apparatus on a leading technical base. observation of the
conservation regime in all spheres of scientific-technical and production
activity. Centralization of the functions of financial planning of
scientific-technical programs and control of the target consumption of
resources. creation of reserves. etc. will promote this to a considerable
measure.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekononiki". 1982.

9035
cso: 1814/71

12
Flﬂl(lﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EFFECTIVENESS OP SGT PROGRAMS REFLECTED IN ECONOMY
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 6. Apr 82 pp 36-66

[Article by V. Fel'zenbaum, E. Yefimova, and V. Parbirovich: ”The Effectiveness
of Science and Technology Prograns")

[Text] The 26th CPSU Congress pointed out the need to develop and carry through
target programs to solve the key scientific-technical problems. During the llth
Five-Year Plan they are to be used to develop 6.000 types of new equipment and

new technological processes. Enormous resoarces are being appropriated for carry-
ing out scientific-technical programs.l Needless to say. the society is concerned
with how effectively the capital allocated is used and what contribution imple-
nentation of the programs willlnlne to d‘lecountry's economic potential. Unfortun-
ately, neither planning agencies nor economic science can give a reliable answer
to this question because a methodology for determining the effectiveness of the
programs has not been developed.2

The term scientific-technical program refers to a system of scientific-technical.
production, organizational-economic. and social measures directed to resolving
certain scientific-technical problems. They result from the occurrence of a gap
between the level of the material-technical base of labor in a particular sphere
of activity and the level dictated by the needs of the national economy. Various
elements of the national economy are joined together in the program to solve
these problens. The progran is completely or partially (within the limits of the
planning horizon) subject to inclusion in the future plan of economic and social
development. The moment that the program is included in the plan and the way in
which it is included are very iaportant for its realization.3 In principle they
do not change the approach to detersining the effectiveness of the program, even
though they do give rise to one more aspect of this problea, the need to work
out plan indicators for effectiveness.

The uniqueness of the target program method of planning scientific-technical
progress is that the object of planning is not a unitary measure assigned to a
definite elenent of the national economy, but rather the scientific-technical
problem as a whole. Unitary measure here means concrete assignnents for con-
ducting scientific research. development, and incorporation of new technological
processes and means and objects of labor. Such assignments are planned separ-
ately as part of plans for the development of science and technology which were
worked out by appropriate economic elements.

13
F0.(Nﬂﬂ€hllllﬂ£0NL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the standpoint of the systems approach the scientific-technical program is
a large system with several distinctive features: purposefulness and controllao
bility: complex multilevel structures; integration; complexity of ”Behavior" and
large dimensionality.“ For example. the target scientific-technical program to
develop progressive technology and industrial methods of construction which pro-
vides this sector with a reduction of 25 percent in labor-intensiveness and 10
percent in mmterials-intenaiveness has 2.936 aubgoals. assignments. and measures
arranged at six levels of the "program tree." There are 651 performing parties
taking part in it. including 216 pure and applied scientific research institutes.
135 planning—design organizations, 75 comprehensive planning-research institutes.
and 225 science-production and production associations. enterprises, and construc-
tion sites.

First of all we must establish what the term effectiveness of a scientific-
technical program means. In practice and theory the concepts of the effective-
ness of scientific-technical programs and the effectiveness of new technology

are often equated, which is incorrect. In the first case we are referring to
special planned development work leading to fundamentally new technology. while in
the second we are referring to the effectiveness of the new technology itself.
This difference makes the program as an object for measurement of effectiveness
more complex and gives rise to a number of new. fundamental aspects.

Solving methodological problems of evaluating the effectiveness of programs de-
pends significantly on the content, structure, and nature of the goals of the
programs themselves as well as the information available in them. Therefore.

the methods of determining their effectiveness must be considered together with
the questions of the "technology" of target program planning. For this reason it
is useful to consider the structural characteristics of scientific-technical pro-
grams beforehand.

When working out methods of determining the effectiveness of scientific-technical
programs it is important to consider the practice customary in planning of divid-
ing them into types depending on the final results: programs to solve key
scientific—technical problems and comprehensive target programs. The former end
with the testing of new technological processes. pilot models of machines. or
preliminary batches of new output. The latter contemplate the use of new techno-
logical processes and implements and objects of labor on some particular scale
and correspond more to the principles of target program planning. Realization of
programs of the first type produces a scientific-technical effect (growth in
scientific and technical knowledge) and only potentially permits a socioeconomic
effect. When programs of the second type are carried out the scientific-
technical effect is converted into a socioeconomic effect whose dimensions are de-
termined by the scale of introduction of the particular scientific-technical
advance.

Hhcn defining the methods of calculating program effectiveness it is important to
consider ways of expressing its goals. The goal of a program must be clearly de-
lineated and localized to insure target orientation of the program and successful
monitoring of its implementation. The goals and assignments of a program are
expressed in definite quantitative indicators ("target norms"). But if the goal
of a program is given in the form of a list of general objectives facing the

15
IIHICNWHCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sector (for example, increase production, broaden assortment, and insure com—
prehensive mechanization and automation of production) and does not contain a
quantitative measure, the effectiveness of the program cannot be determined

and its performance cannot be monitored. Experience with the development of
scientific-technical programs testifies that by no means do they always include
target norms. For example. an analysis of 180 of the 208 (87 percent) scientific-
technical programs in effect in the 10th Five-Year Plan showed that target norms
were reflected in the formulations of the names of only one-third of the pro-
grams surveyed.s

Equally important for determining program effectiveness is the method adopted for
breaking down goalsimtosubgoals. subgoals into assignments. assignments into sub-
assignments and so forth. 0n the basis of generalizing programs we have singled
out two ways of Breaking down a goal: technological, in which each subgoal is a
sequential step in realization of the goal and assures a contribution to the tar-
get result only in its interrelationship with the other subgoals; and subject.

in which realization of each subgoal by itself contributes to the results of the
program.

An example of the first method of breaking down a goal can be the program to de-
velop and incorporate highly productive varieties of sugar beet with a sugar
content of 17.5.18.5 percent. The following subgoals were identified in this
program: refining plant breeding methods and development of new seed varieties:
refining and introducing a technological process for raising seeds; developing
and introducing a technological process and mechanical means for raising sugar
beets. It is obvious that if no varietal seeds for such beets are received. it
is unnecessary to build equipment to cultivate and harvest them. An example of
the second method is a program for the development and production of technical
means of mechanizing and automating hoistingetransportation, loading-unloading.
and warehouse work. It is broken down into 10 subgoals by types of machinery.
In this case realization of even one or two subgoals makes a definite contribu-
tion to attainment of the goal, although it will not be completely attained.
With the technological method of breaking down the goal it is easier to evaluate
effectiveness of the program by the final result, but with the subject method
the final results must be added together.

These two principles of breaking down a goal are the main ones. but they do not
exhaust the structural description of programs. Analysis of scientific-
technical programs which were used in the last five-year plan and contained 1.103
assignments showed that almost every program had both types of breakdowns. but
one of them clearly predominated. Overall 85 percent of the goals and 81.3 per-
cent of the assignments were separated out by the subject principle.

What are the guiding methods and indicators to use in determining program of-
fectiveness? According to the Methodological Instructions for development of
state plans. the economic effect that will be obtained upon use in the national
economy is determined for all types of machinery and technology included in a
scientific-technical program.6 The annual economic effect on volumes of produc-
tion (application) of the machinery in 1985 and 1990, figured in accordance with
the principles of the Methodology (Fundamental Principles) for determining the

15
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEINNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economic effectiveness of the use of new machinery in the national economy (1977)
is used to substantiate the program. This effect is determined for each assign—
ment included in the plan, and then theeffectsof all the assignments are

added together. To reflect the effect of a program in plans at different levels.
indicators of growth in profit at the enterprise that manufactures the new
machinery and reduction in prime cost of output for the consumer enterprise are

used in conformity with the same Methodology. The shortcomings of this
methodology are apparent.

In the first place, the indicators of economic (not socioeconomic) effects are
often suitable for evaluating scientific-technical programs.

In the second place. adding together the annual economic effect for particular
assignments of the program does not answer the question of the effectiveness of
reaching the program goal itself, but rather evaluates the "quality" of program
writing. Sun-ing up by subgoals identified by the technological principle leads
to double counting of the effect. For example, in different blocks of the above.
mentioned comprehensive target program for the development of progressive
construction technology twofunctionally interrelated assignments are handled
separately: the first is to develop and incorporate production of mechanized
electrical tools and finishing machines, while the second is to conduct research
and develop new technology processes for finishing work using these tools and
machines. According to the Methodology for determining the effectiveness of use
of new machinery the effect of both assignments was figured by the use sphere (in
construction) and was doubled when they were added together. This same kind of
double counting often occurs when the effect is added up by stages of its
scientific-technical cycle. This creates the danger that greatly exaggerated
figures will be included in the plan for the effect. which may lead to imbalance
in corresponding sections of the plan.

in the third place. neither growth in profit nor reduction in the prime cost of
output can serve as cost accounting [khozrsschet] indicators of the effect at
enterprises that are participating in realization of the program. The indicator
of growth in profit exaggerates the cost accounting effect for the manufacture
of the new machinery because it does not consider real deductions from it: the
payment for production capital, fixed payment, and interest on credit. It pro-
vides incentive to increase the already enormous enterprise requests for capital
investment. The reduction in prime cost of output for the consumer of new

machinery is also expressed in growth in profit and. therefore, the indicator of
reduction in prime cost has these same shortcomings. The cost accounting ef-
fect for both the manufacturer and the consumer of machinery is more reliably
reflected through the indicator of net profit (or growth in it).7

In view of the specific nature of the object of measurement, the problem of de-
termining the effectiveness of scientific-technical programs. we believe.
comprises at least five different tasks:

1. determining the effectiveness of attaining the program goal

itself, that is, developing and using fundamentally new
machinery in the national economy;

16
FORiOFFﬂJAI.USE(M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. determining the effectiveness of the program method of
planning attainment of the given goal cowarsd to tra-
ditional, nonprogrem methods. Formulating this task
presupposes an evaluation of what is called the ”program.
ability effect";

3. conversion of the indicators of the effectiveness of the
scientific-technical program as an integrated system into
cost accounting plan indicators of the effect of the indi-

vidual program performers (scientific research institutes,
planning-design bureaus, and enterprises);

6. in the course of cospiling the program. determining the con-
tribution of individual subgoala (assignments and subassign-
mente) to realizing the target norm of the program so that
the given norm will be obtained as the result of cowiling
the program;

5. determining the effectiveness (cowerative) when choosing
alternative ways of achieving the same subgoals. assign-
ments. and subassignments in order to shape an optimal
functional structure for the program. Adding the indi—

esters of the effect of such a choice together will answer
the question of the quality of program development.

The main task is determining the effectiveness of attaining the program goal it-
self . that is of solving the particular scientific-technical problem. Other
tasks are partial in relation to it. The level of effectiveness of attaining
the program goal depends on how socially necessary it is to realize it pre-
cisely by a target program, not by traditional planning. The point is that the
number of scientific-technical problems awaiting solution significantly exceeds
the "capacities" of target program planning. Therefore, the most significant
problems. those multifaceted intersectorial problems whose realization demands
major structural changes in the national economy and capital investmeny policy.
are subject to program development. Determining the progra-ability effect

also peraits an assessment of the necessity of a program solution to the par-
ticular program.

Realization of the program depends on its inclusion in current and future plans
of economic and social development. In this case it becomes necessary to con-
vert the indicators of program effectiveness into traditional indicators of the
planned effect of the performers (the third task). The fourth and fifth tasks
are related to evaluating the "quality" of program writing. It is recognised
that the best model of a program to make control of it easier is the critical
path schedule. It is possible to shape an optimal program structure, that is to
insure strict correspondence between individual eubgoals (assignments and sub-
assignments) to the goal itself expressed as a target norm (the fourth task) and
to do this with minimum expenditures (the fifth task) on the basis of an alter-
native critical path model.

The necessity of determining the socioeconomic effectiveness of programs arises
in different stages of the process of developing and realizing them, and each

17
MOMMUSEONLY
F0!‘0FFK]AI.USE(NVLY

such stage has specific features for calculating effectiveness. We can iden-
tify four sequential stages:

1. substantiating the goal of the program for future develop—
era and performers (the target stage);

2. working out a draft of the program. done on assignment from
directive agencies by particular departments. scientific re-
search institutes under the direction of a head department
(organization), and concluding with adoption of the draft
by the directive agency;

3. inclusion of the program in the plan by USSR Gosplan or the
state planning colmdttees of the Union republic:

4. realization of the program, involving participation by the
scientific research institutes. planning institutes. and
enterprises which are the performers of the given program,
under the direction of the head department (or organization).

Definite requirements with respect to methods of calculation and indicators of
program effectiveness arise in each stage. For the first stage it is most
important to resolve the first and second tasks: determining the socioeconomic
effectiveness of attaining the program itself and determining the magnitude of
the progrsmability effect. In this stage calculations are preliminary in char-
acter. In the program development stage almost all the above-listed tasks of
determining effectiveness must be accomplished (with the exception of converting
indicators to cost accounting plan indicators of effect). The results of the
calculations are in the nature of a planned effect. When the program is in-
cluded in the plan it becomes necessary both to determine the composite (for

the entire program) national economic plan indicators of effectiveness (the first
task) and to convert them to cost accounting plan indicators for each program
performer (the third test). Finally. in the last stage the results of realisa-
tion of the program (actual effect) must be summarized within the limits of these
two tasks.

Let us consider possible methodological approaches to determine the effectiveness
of the program goal itself and the program method of planning its achievements as
compared to the traditional approach. Because scientific-technical progress is a
means of accomplishing society's economic and socialobjectives.the goals of
scientific-technical programs themselves help to attain certain "supergoals,"
that is. essentially socioeconomic goals. The social consequences of realiza-
tion of a program are usually more significant than the consequences of a unitary
scientific-technical measure. Evaluation of the economic effectiveness of a
program only is often inadequate because there must be a transition to indica-
tors of socioeconomic effectiveness. The contribution of a scientific-technical
program to realization of society's socioeconomic goals is the final result.

and comparing this result to its expenditures characterizes its effectiveness.

The necessity of determining socioeconomic effectiveness is dictated not only
by the more marked social orientation of program measures but also By the

18
I‘llflﬂﬂ(lAl.lﬁiB(HVLY
l-‘Oll OMCIAL USE ONLY

character of the ohject of scientificv-technical programs. This object and physic
cal result of program realization is usually fundamentally new technology. For
example. among the scientific-technical programs that are to he carried out he-
tween 1981-1985 using target programs are progress for the development of fast
neutron atomic power plants. development and broad use of a set of techniques

to increase layer petrolem yield to 55—60 percent, and development of powder
metallurgy.

The calculation of program effectiveness can be based on the principles of de-
termining the socioeconomic effectiveness of scientific-technical progress
worked out at the Institute of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sciences.8 The
socioeconomic effectiveness of new tedmology is considered as a cowosite cate-
groy that encoapaases the. economic and social aspects of the production and use
of tectumlogy in their interrelationship. The overall result of the use of new
technology is socioeconomic because it consists of two comonents (economic and
social): the increase in production of necessary products (services) and in-
provement in the conditions of vital human activities.

The socioeconomic effectiveness of new technology is a comparison of its socio-
economic result against expenditures to achieve it. Because the socioeconomic
result is the aggregate of various material and nonnaterial benefits to human
beings, they are objectively incompatible, like different use values. and can-
not be reduced to one benefit. "A comparison of such use values as an apart-
nent. a car. or a trip." Academician T. S. Khachaturov writes. "seem comletely
imossible at first glance. But in practice they are regularly cowared. At
the same time, because of inadequate study of the methods of such cowarisons
and the lack of necessary data, these questions are often answered superficially
and mistakenly. He must work out the objective bases for making decisions on
the priority of different needs in the interests of socialist society."9

A rise in the socioeconomic efficiency of new tedmlogy cowered to the technology
existing today is the socioeconomic effect of the new technology Therefore, just
like the result of using the new techmlogy, its socioeconomic effect is a factor,
but it contains one additional element: savings of expenditures for the given
result. The evaluation of the effectiveness of scientific-technical program is
also conditioned on the tine factor. Because of its large scale. realization of
a program takes a long time. For exalple. the scientific-technical programs
ratified for the 11th Five-Year Plan are figured for 5-8 years. It we consider
here that most of them conclude with production ofa pilot model or test run. it
is obvious that large-scale introduction of new machinery and technology developed
under these programs will go beyond the current five—year plan. For this reason.
the savings of expenditures for realization of programs must be determined on a
dynamic scale, that is, by a calculation of the cumulative effect for the en-
tire period of operation of the program. The cleex problem of adding effects
together arises when determining the socioeconomic effectiveness of programs.

In the first place, it is necessary to add together the effect of realization of
the program in the sectors that produce and use the new technology. For exanla.
the production and use of metal powders gives a savings of expenditures, elimi-
notes accumulations of metal shavings that are harmful to human health in machine
building. and eliminates the noise of metalworking machines, but leads to the

19
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production of metallic dust in metallurgy. ﬂow can the different results which
have social significance be compared?

In the second place. it becomes more important to add together the effects of
using technology created under a program in different spheres of social ac-
tivity and different sectors of material production (for example. the areas of
application of laser technology are very broad).

In the third place. it becomes necessary to ado together the effects from
realization of subgoals or subprogrsms by the subject principle of breaking down
the goal (for example. the effect of different types of machinery under a pro-
gram for development and production of technical means to mechanise and automate
labor-intensive jobs).

The difficulties of adding effects together increase with the conversion of the
economic effect of new technology to a socioeconomic effect because the latter
is expressed by a vector (an ordered set of numbers). rot by a scalar quantity
(number). For example. the vector of the socioeconomic effect of new models of
tractors designed to replace base models will include the following elements:
growth in productivity in hectares of standard plowing; reduction in specific
fuel expenditure in grams per horse power; increase in service life in years;
savings of expenditures in rubles; and. reductions in frequency of vibration in
hertz. noise level in decibels, and concentration of dust in the cabin depending
on the content of silicon oxide in milligrams per cubic meter of air. and so on.

The fundamental principles of adding up the socioeconomic effects of different
types of technology or the same technology used in different spheres amount to
the following. Only the savings of expenditures is qualitatively similar so
that the corresponding vector elements can be directly added together. Some
vector elements which are formally similar. for example increase in produc-
tivity and service life of various machines. cannot be added together because
they relate to different use values (these elements can be added togethc:

only for one machine used in different spheres). Other vector components with
similar names, those which are not directly merged with the use values being
produced and whose usefulness (harmfulness) consists in an influence on human
beings. can be added together when it is necessary to consider the effects of
their interaction with one another.'°

Given the specific character of the output of a program, fundamentally new
technology whose development involves heightened risk and uncertainty. the
methods of considering risk and uncertainty in calculating preliminary and
projected effectiveness become especially important. Expenditures and re-
suits for most programs that envision the development of fundamentally new
technology cannot be unambiguously forecast as a definite figure; it is

only possible to determine an interval of values within which there is a
given probability that they will fall. This was reflected in the fact that
the target norms of most of the ratified programs were set in the form of
(for example raising the petroleum yield of layers to 55-60 percent. raising
sugar content of sugar beets to 17.5-18.5 percent, development and incorpor-
stion of open-cut coal mining processes with labor productivity surpassing
the present level by 3-6 tons. and so on). In addition. although programs
are developed after the completion of pure research. uncertainty in relation

20
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the feasibility of accomplishing the subgoals as such is not eliminated in
some of them.

A typical example is the target scientific-technical program for the develop-
ment and wide use of the set of techniques and technical means for raising the
petroleum yield of layers to 55.60 percent. The first subgoal of this program
is to develop, refine, and incorporate new methods of physicochemical and
thermal influence on petroleun layers. It envisions parallel development of
several technological methods of achieving this goal: incorporating tech-
nology for use of surface active agents; developing technology for pumping
polymer solutions into petroleum layers; developing a technological process for
forcing petroleum out with micellar-polymer solutions; and working out the
theoretical foundations and conducting a search for microbiological methods of
extracting residual petroleum after a layer is flooded, and so on. Although
these techniques can be used for different petroleum regions and sectors, for
some of them they are alternatives.

Realization of each of these techniques. of course, demands different expendi-
tures whose quantities vary depending on the location and nature of the petroleum-
bearing sections. Thus, the problem of selecting the optimal combination of
techniques arises. Unlike "subject" and "technological" programs, in these
"alternative" programs it arises and is decided not only during formulation of
the program but also in the process of its realization. For this type of pro-
gram. therefore. calculations of effectiveness must be refined constantly during
the realization process. The contribution of the particular technique to at-
taining the goal or subgoal, that is the result of realization of the program,
and the expenditures required for this must also be refined. During the

process of carrying out an alternative program the probability of attaining the
goal (subgoal) for each of the alternative techniques must be evaluated and the
program adjusted on the basis of such evaluations. The probability of success-
ful development of a particular technology in the assigned tine can be evalu—
ated by efperts or by usingwell-knownformalised methods of technological fore-
casting.

The effect of programability, a concept which has been little developed in the
economic literature. deserves special treatment. Determining the programability
effect is not a purely academic problem. The fact is that developing scien-
tific-technical programs and building them into plans of economic and social
development complicates the ”technology" of planning, poses the problem of
insuring realization of programs and thus increases social costs for management.
For this reason, identifying the progranability effect would make it possible,
by comparing it with additional expenditures. to establish the effectiveness of
applying the target program method of planning to the particular scientific-
technical problem. Because the target program method involves the use of the
systems approach in planning while the scientific-technical program itself is a
"system" the organized interaction of elements of this system produces the spe-
cific system effect of program organization.

The occurrence of an additional effect as the result of the interaction of
program elements has already been noted in the economic literature.12 This kind
of effect of ”systen organization” (positive or negative) arises objectively in

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI¢MHHCJAL.US£(NVLY

any system as the result of interaction of its elements. Becoming aware of it
and singling it out as a definite variation and part of the overall effect in-
volves development of the systems approach. This type of effect is called the
synergetic effect or the effect of system organization.

K. Marx gave the methodological foundations of analyzing the effect of system
organization in "has Kapital." Thus, analyzing cooperation as a form of labor
organization in which many people work together in a planned manner and inter-
act with another. Marx wrote the following: "Just as the force of an attack by
a cavalry squadron or the force of resistance by an infantry regiment differ sig-
nificantly from the sum of the forces of attack and resistance which individual
cavalry men and infantry men are capable of developing. so also the mechanical
sum of the forces of individual workers differs from that social force which de-
velops when many hands participate simultaneously in performance of a single
undivided operation. when for example it is necessary to lift a weight, turn a
winch, or remove an obstacle from the road. In all these cases the result of
the combined labor either could not be achievadatall through individual ef-
forts, could be achieved only over a much longer time, or only on a minute
scale."

The fundamental objective of comprehensive target programs as a crucial form of
planning is to improve cooperation among different types of activity, phases of
the reproduction cycle, regions, and participants in social production. The
effect of system organization is a part of the overall socioeconomic effect,
measured by the difference between the effect of its functioning as an inte-
grated system and the sum of the effect of the isolated functioning of its
elements on the assumption that there is no interaction. In the particular case,
if such an assumption has no meaning because the isolated activity of system
elements does not produce any useful results, the entire socioeconomic effect
of the system is synergetic. Therefore, the programability effect as a mani-
festation of synergy in planning is part of the socioeconomic effect of at-
taining the program goal. It is measured by the difference in effects when the
goal is realized under the program and when it is done by traditional planning.

But what are the sources of the programability effect? To answer this question
we may use the scheme proposed by corresponding member of the USSR Academy of
Sciences L. M. Gatovskiy for formulating the "effect of comprehensiveness."1“
According to this scheme, comprehensiveness presupposes, in the first place,

a coordinated combination of all the types of technology necessary to realize
the final result and, in the second place, a coordinated combination (in the.
plan) of all participants in the cycle "science - technology - production‘—
consumption" for each type of technology.

Indeed. comprehvnsivcncss is the fundamental trait of scientific—technical
programs. But in addition to it the occurrence of the programability effect re-
sults from the target orientation. In large part this determines the necessity
of bringing together different performers in a program of action. If each of
them were to seek its own partners by the trial and error method and set up
interaction with them on the basis of cost accounting relations, expenditures

of time and capital to attain the goal would increase substantially.

22
FOIWOFIICJAI.U§E¢NNLY
MWMONLY

‘l'he aevinge that occura in alto one of the enurcee of the progrenhility effect,
to eey nothing of the fact that the prograaamahe it poaeihle to realise goals
which ieolated perforate could not even he aumre of and uhich could not he at-
tained without adopting a centralized decie-ion. furthermre, joining ieolated
performers together in a program producee an additional effect hecauae the
general and particular optimus do not coincide. An increaee in the dimeneion-
ality of the ayatem producee an additional optimization effect: the value of
the eye-tea functional in alveya leae (if expenditurea are minimized) or more

(if reeulta are maxi-ind) than the corresponding euae of the functionala for
iaolated optimization of ita auheyeteme.

An equally iwortant characterietic of the program in concentration of the re-
eourcee neceeeary to realize it, vhich ie aleo done on a centralized haeie.
Therefore. the eource of the program effect ie not only comprehensiveneee but
aleo the target orientation. Both the one and the other are aecured by central-
izing planning decieione. Therefore. in terae of ite organiaational-economic
eeaence, the program effect ia a centralization effect.1

The problem of coneidering the program effect arieee not only for interaction
among the meaaurea of a particular program (we will call it intraprogram), but
also when different programe interact (interprogrem). The program effect at
the objective reeult of interaction during iqlementation of programe or pro-
gram neaeuree ehould not he confueed vith repeated counting of the effect or
undercounting of it ae the reeult of eubjective mietakea in the calculation

methodology which often occur in adding the effecte of particular meaeuree or
programe.

Methods for eingling out the properly eynergetic part of the overall aocio-
economic effect of aolving ecientific-technical problema deaervea further
etudy. h‘ethoda have not been developed yet for eolving thie prohlen in the in-
veree formlation: adding together the effecte of particular program meaeuree
and finding the overall eocioeconomic effect of a acientific-technical pro-
gram with the aid of the eize of the energetic coqonent.

It ie poeaihle to find the neceaaery beeae to calculate the eynergetic effects
of many economic ayeten. for male. if a production aaaociation ie formed
on the haaie of eeveral enterprieea, the reeulte of ite activity can still be
cowared uith the reeulta of the eeparate functioning of theee enterprieee.

Aa for management aethode, here there ie ueually no kind of general haaie for
calculating the effect. Therefore. it ie only poaeihle to measure the pro-
gramability effect if a aolution to the particular acientific-technical problem
in developed outaide the progrea ae a baeie uithin the economic euhetantietion
of the program. Thin may increaae the aetimated coat of coQiling the program
itaelf. but at the name time it makee it poaeihle to eetahlieh the liat of pro-
gram goale in a more profound and euhetantieted menu. which will pay off
ultimately uhan they are realized.

Hathode of modeling program that make it pouihle to reduce such additional
expendituree to a mininue are not being developed. Ie are referring to alterna-
tive critical path module in which the magnitude of the programehility effect
in determined directly during the eelection of the optimal program alternative.16

23
”WNW?
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alternatives that are not included in the optimal program variation nay he the
basis for determining the prograaability effect. In addition to results of op-
tinizing the system (progran) as a whole on a critical path schedule. there rill
be variations forned for separate optimization of euhsyetens (euhgoals, assign-
nents, and subassigmnents). This is essential intonation for a quantitative
evaluation of, for aanple, the additional effect froa increasing the dimen-

sionality of a system. that is. fron coordinating these assign-ants into a
single integrated program.

The nethodological problems of deterdning progran effectiveness have in my
respects not been solved yet. Econoeic science should concentrate its efforts
on working out these new and cowl“ problens which are extremely timely in
practical affairs. The approaches presented here to nethods of daternining the
effectiveness of scientific-technical prograu do not exhaust all issues. but
they can be a definite step forward in study of this prohlen.

room-nous

1. Total expenditures for carrying out program in the llth Five-Year Plan will
be 38 billion rubles. including 11.5 billion for scientific research and
experinentsl design work and 5.3 billion for building experimental indus--

trial installations (see Ya. Ryahov. "Questions of Developnent of Coepre-
hensive Target Progress." PLANOVOYB KBOZYAYSTVO, No 10, 1981, p 5).

2. The nature of target progress leads to certain features of calculating their
econonic effectiveness which have been little studied. This prevento us
from achieving essmialresults (see V. Krasovsldy, "The Effectiveness of
Target Econoeic Progress." VOPIOSY aroma No 12. 1976, p 60).

3. Experience with 208 nationwide scientific-technical prograas and 11 re-
gional programs in the Latvian ssa during the years 1976-1980 showed that
the eain reason for failure to fulfill than ens that they were not fully

converted into assignments in the plan for econonic and social develop-
mt.

10. See 3. A. Rayzberg, Ye. P. Golubkov, and L. S. Pekarskiy, "Sistelnyy
Podkhod v Perspektivnoe Planirovanii" [The System Approach in Future Plan-
ning], Itdatel'atvo "Bkononika". 1975. p 36.

5. The analysis was node by junior scientific associates of the Institute of

Econonics of the USSR Academy of Sciences V. s. Parbirovich and 1.. A.
Denidova.

6. See "uetodicheakiye Ukaaaniya It Rurabotka Gowdarstvennykh Planov
Ekononicheakogo i Sotsial'nogo Barvitiya $881" [liethodological Instructions
for Davalopnent of Plans of Econonic and Social Development of the USSR].
Irdatel'stvo "Eltononih". 1980, p 13; ”Ras‘Ma po Zapolnaniyu Kartochek
Nauchno-Tekhnicheskilh Problen 0Uauchno«-Tehhnicheskikh Program)
Gosudarstvennogo Pyatiletnego Plans Monicheakogo i Sotsial'nogo Barvitiya
SSR" [Explanatory Notes to Filling out Cards on Scientific-Techs. :al Prohlans
(scientific-Technical Prograns) of the USSR State Five-Year Plan of Econoeic
and Social Development], Hoscov, 1980.

MWWMY
9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.
16.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Substantiation of the indicator of net profit an the coat accounting effect
of nor technology it contained in the sonograph manehnod‘elhnicheetiy
Progreaa i mono-ita Soteializna" [Scientific-Technical Preston: and the
Bconoqy of Socialites], Iedatel'etvo M". 1979. pp 27-30. 185-196.

See "Oenomm Ketodicheehye Polozheniya Opredeleniyt Soteial ‘no-
nonoaicheekoy Bffektivnoetii lovey Tekhniki" [Tundaneuel Hethodological
Principlee of Determining the Effectiveneee of Net Technology], macaw. 1980.

See '1'. s. Khachaturov. "Intenaifihteiya i Bfiektivnoet' v Unloviyakh
Ranitogo Soteialina" [lnteneification and Effectiveneee in Conditiona of
Developed Socialiea], Indetel'etvo "mm", 1978. p 29.

The problen of adding together the vectora of the eocioecononic effect in net
forth in greater detail in the book "Ranchnoo‘rekhnicheakiy Progreu:
Progra-Iyy Podkhod” [Scientific-Techie“ Proxreaa: The Prograa Approach],
Irdatel'etvo ”nyel'". 1981. pp 115-137.

Sec V. A. Liaichkin, "Otraalevoye Rauchno-Tekhnicheakoye Prognorirovaniye"
[Sectorial Scientific-Technical Forecasting]. Iadatel'etvo "Rania", 1971;

Dzh. Martino. ”Tekhnologicheekoya Propoairovaniye" [Technological Pore-
ceetins]. ledatel'atvo ”Progreae", 1977.

See "Nanchno-Tekhnicheekiy Progreaa i Elena-ita Soteialirna" [Scientific-
Technical Progreee and the Econoq of Socialian]. Izdatel'etvo "Ekanonika".
1979; H. Vilenekiy, "Technical Progreaa in the 10th Five-Year Plan."
VOPROSY EKONOMIKLNo 11, 1976; V. Kreaovekiy, ”The Bffectiveneee of Target
Bconoaic Program," VOPBOSY Bowman, No 12, 1976.

K. Marx and P. Engele, "Soch." [Uorka], Vol 23, p 337.
See "Nanchno-Tekhnicheekiy Proxreea..." op. cit. 1m 12. pp 3941.

In hie analyaie of cooperation K. Marx noted that ita advantagee are not
realized automatically. A neceeeary condition for it to be effective is con-
trol vhich "perforae the general functiona that ariee tron the novenent of
the entire production organiaa ae diatinct fro: the novenent of ita inde-
pendent organa" (K. Her: and I. insole, "Sean”, vol 23, p 362).

See, for angle. "Soverehenetvovaniye Hatodov Opredeleniya Effektivnoeti
Nauchno-Tekhnicheakogo Progreea" [Refining the Hethode of Deter-lining the
Effectiveneae of Scientific-Technical Progreee]. Tam AR 85511, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: lrdatel'atvo "Pravda", "Voproey ekonoaiki", 1982.

11.176

680:

1814/ 78

25
I70. ovum US! ONLY
MWWONLY

UDC 001.89
OVBRCMING OBSTACLES I]! ”MG-“0006:1101! CYCLE

Moscow VBSTNIK M9111 NAUK $833 in Russian No 3. Her 82 pp 62-67

[Article by Academician of the UkSSl Acadeuy of Sciences In. 8. Lipatov and
L. V. Denisenko: "Science-Production: Efficacy of Mutual Ties"!

[Text] As analysis has shown. we still have lengthy periods for the realisa-
tion of the achieve-ants of science. According to a special study asde by the
authors in the Department of Chemistry and Cheeical Technology (01mm of

the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. 62! of the finished research and develop-
nent does not have practical application for a long tine. despite the high
potential efficiency of the completed work. Therefore the institutes of the
O'KhKh‘l'. like the entire UkSSR Acadeny of Sciences. have advanced to the fore-
front the questions of accelerating theuse of the results of scientific
research in different sectors of the national econon. search for new and
iaprovuent in the existing form of ties between science and production.

The detailed exanination ads by the authors of the efficient activitiy of
the institutes of the OKhIh‘l' to realise scientific develop-eats has shovn
that often the obtained results are introduced at one-two enterprises and are
not widespread in the sector (works of the Institute of Organic Chenistry.
Institute of General and Inorganic Cheaistry and Institute of Colloid Cheaistry
and Chenietry of Water). It is obvious that this introduction dose not lead
to a noticeable ieprovenent in the efficacy of a certain industry as a whole
and does not permit concentration of resources on solving strategic questions
of developing enterprises. associations. sectors. although a lot of attention
sad forcesar'e required iron the scientific collectives and production
engineers.

At the sane tine. purposeful developesnts as applied to specific sectors of
the national econoey and in close contact with the interested organisations
(for exaaple. the work of the Institute of Chsaistry of High-Molecular
(Jo-pounds for the Oil. as well as the fishing Industry. the Institute of
Organic Cheniatry for medical. the Institute of Physical Cheeistry and the
Institute of Colloid Chesistry and the Chemistry of water for the oil
extracting. Institute of Gas for the metallurgical industry) ude it possible
to significantly accelerate the ”science-production” cycle and expand the
scalea of introduction. For crawls, the introduction of "Sprut" and "Styk"
type glues developed in the Institute of Chemistry of nigh-holecular Coupounds
for repair of ship decks. decking and bulkheads asde it posssible to reduce
the tine that the ships are in repair. diainssh the outlays for materials by

65. labor intensity by 60. and tota1_c'ost of repair~ operations by'6l percent.

26
“MUSEONLY
IDIOFHCIALUSEONLY

Consequently. the output to a specific sector nust becone decisive for the
acadenic science in setting up its ties to production and met encoQass an
ever greater nunber of sectors of the national econoey. however. the specific
nature of research done by acadenic institutions is such that one cannot
always state in advance which sector the results will be used in. because
of its multiple-plan nature. the ease work can be realised st enterprises of
different einistries. This begins the nost difficult stage of introduction:
it is necessary to "penetrate" into the ninietry. which often takes nore

tine than the developnent itself. The tie between the institute and the
ninistry plays a special role in this case. Its efficiency can be inproved
by target financing. as well as by setting up certain internsdiate links
(pereanent or teeporary) which connect the acadenic science with applied.

The intersector laboratories which are set up in the acedenic institutes for
coepletion of target developnents and technical assistance to the enterprises
in eastering innovations nay be one of these links. In addition. the
appropriate applied work should be sinultaneouely in the plans of both the
scientific institution and the enterprise of the interested ninistry.

The probability nature of scientific research does not allow us to raise

the question of introducing its results on all topics without exception.
however there are frequent cases where the institutes refuse to recognise the
incupediency . of using certain developnents and fron year to year continue
to suggest then for realisation in the national econony. There are also

frequent cases where during the basic research the scientist obtains unfore-
seen vsluable results of an applied nature which nay not be considered in

the integrated progress and coordination plans which have already been approved.
often for a lengthy period. The inderdeperteentel emissions which include
representatives of institutes and interested ninistries could objectively

and with econonic substantiation solve'the fate of”the work proposed for
introduction. and annually review and correct the coordination plans and
progress. excluding not very pronising work fron then.

Many tasks of introduction can be solved especially successfully if there is
initiative on the part of the enterprises thenselves who have placed their
tasks before the scientists or who have suggested using the results obtained
in the scientific institutions. This cooperation will be fruitful of course
if the tasks set by industry have sufficient scale and are well substan-
tiated with regard for the outlook for develop-eat of this sector. One can
cite corresponding exsnples fron the practice of creative ties of a nunber
of institutes of the MT and the industrial enterprises.

The composites developed in the Institute of Chemistry of high-Holecular
Coqounds based on large-capacity polyners have been used at the Sysran'
plastics plant to sake sheet iteee of thernoplests for autonotive manufacturing
(without considerable outlays and change in the existing production processes).
The econoeic effect froe introducing then has been obtained by increasing

the strength indicators by 10-201. conserving the nain eaterial by 822 and

in 1978-1979 was 3 800.000.

The scientists fro. the Institute of Gas of the MS! Acadeny of Sciences have
been involved in cooperation by the leadership of the Kaunass plant "Pirnunas"
where in 1978 the first shop in the USSR for drying and roasting of enamel

27
MWWONLY
liII|JIIIC1Al.llBE¢OhﬂJV

coetings wee opened. All the heating equipeent of the shop wee nede fron
developments of the institute.

however the eppeels of production to science often heve e perticuler neture end
ere detereined by tssks of the present moeent end the striving to eliminste
tight pleces in its production insteed of setting long-tern problees for its
develop-eat. Experience hes shown thet fulfilleent of the nejority of these
essignesnts is within the cepebility of the workers of the ectuel industriel
enterprises who often heve first-close scientific equipment end their own
highly skilled specielists with scientific degrees.

An inportsnt fector in the fruitful tie between production end science is
also the crestion by the enterprises of fevoreble conditions for solving

the tesks set for then. This is prinsrily the presentetion of en industrisl
bese for mejor experiments. equip-snt end specielists. Although this syste-
of interreletions hes not yet been widely used. however. even now there ere
excellent exeeples of reelizing this type of ties between science end pro-
duction. This is. for example. the integretsd progren "Ukssn Acedeey of
Sciences-sssocietion 'AvtoZIL'." A whole series of the nest ieportent pro-

duction tesks hes been effectively solved in e short period es s result of
fulfilling it.

It should be noted thet the integreted progress ere one of the new fores of
creetive cooperetion between the institutes of the UkSSR Acsdeey of Sciences
end industry which enconpess the production process of the sector es s whole.
the enterprise or its eein subdivisions. Experience hes shown thet for

eore efficiency of these progrees. the rights of their leeders should be
brosdened. terget finencing of the promising work end eeteriel encoursgement
should be provided for their timely coepletion end high-quelity execution

The difficulties of the ecedeeic institutes in reelising their developments
ere often expleinsd by the fsct thet the fulfilleent of the plens for the
development of new equipoeent is controlled euch less et the enterprises then
the fulfillment of plens for the eein production. In eddition. in e nueber
of ceses. the use of en innovetion is econoeicslly unprofiteble for the
enterprise. The interest of the enterprise in using new progressive develop-
eents whose economic sdvsnteges ere evident on the sceles of the netionel
econony cen be increesed by improving the systee of economic indicetors of
the enterprises sssocieted with introducing the new equip-eat.

The snelysis mede by the euthors hes indiceted thet in the period of 1971-1979.
the chenicsl scientists of the UkSSR Acedemy of Sciences suggested 1218 in-
ventions of which only 31 percent were introduced et the country's enters

prises. it turned out in this cese. in perticulsr. thet over 80 percent of the
indiceted inventions reeeined unused in the netionel econoey 6-5 yeers efter
completion of the work on then. The eestery of highly efficient inventions

is very often deleyed for meny yeers. lowever objective enelysis of ell the
espects of utilising the inventions in the netionel sconoey is difficult since

in the eejority of ceses when en invention is introduced the enterprises
do not et ell report on the set fern. end the work does not figure in the

eccounts es en introduced invention. For sxeeple. the Institute of Cheeistry
of High-Holeculer Compounds esked the Csntrel Scientific Reseerch Institute

28
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USI(HNLY
IIIICIIWCIAI.IENE(MNLY

of Patent lnforaation and Technical-Econoaic Research for information on the
use by the enterprises of the inventions of the institute scientists. It

was found that in 1978 nine enterprises had reported on the set form about the
introduction of five inventions with economic effect of R 275.800. However it
followed from the docuaents that were given to the institute by the enter-
prises themaelves that during this year 38 inventions were introduced at 68
enterprises with econoaic effect of R 9.6 sillion. The enterprises do not
bear responsibility for distorting the account data. They also do not allo-
cate the necessary resources for rewarding the authors of the inventions.
Responsibility of the enterprises that'have introduced the inventions should
be increased to supply timely and correct accounts on the set form. It is
also necessary for the enterprises to be obliged to report to the authors
about the use of their work in production.

The conditions for econoaic contracts for the fulfillnent of scientific
research concluded between the scientific organization and the enterprise

also do not stipulate either specific duties of the parties or responsibility
for inconplete introduction. 0n the average. of the 60 contracts concluded
per year by esch institute of the OIhKhT. 75 percent stipulate completion of
work with the introduction into production of the scientific results. but only
30 percent of then end with introduction.

Thus. the ties has come to change the contract relationships between the
research organizations and industry. The object of the contract must be

not only the topic of the study. but also efficiency froe introducing its
results gusranteed~by the enterprise if they correspond to the technical
assign-ant. It is expedient to consider the end of the research work not the
compilation and delivery of a report. but the achievesent of the economic
effect stipulated by the contract. The site of this effect aust be confirmed
by the act of introduction. It is also necessary'for’the departmentc to
control the use by the enterprises of the results of econoaic contract work.
as well as sanctions for violation of the introduction schedules.

He note in addition that the sites of bonuses now depend to s sasll degree on
the real contribution of the workess in the sphere of science to technical
progress. The degree of rewarding the colleagues from the research insti-
tutes for successful completion of a contract topic is not defined anywhere.
The development and introduction of e systen for additional rewarding of the
participants of the work done on the basis of economic contracts for their
successful and tiaely introduction will also improve the efficiency of
introducing the develop-ants of scientific organisations into the national

economy.

It is also expedient to dissesinate the available experience of contract
relations of the institutes froa the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy
of Sciences with the ninistries and directlquith the enterprises. The
systen introduced into the Siberian Depart-ant creates a guarantee for broad
introduction of a new scientific idea into the sector and must be used

along the other academic institutes.

Such a form of cooperation as the fulfillment of contracts for the transfer
of scientific and technical docuaents makes it possible to consider the
features of a specific enterprise and to bring the process of introduction

29
IOI¢OIIICIALII§EIMTLY
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at it to completion. however. the responsibility of the enterprises
stipulated by the legislation for the failure of individual points in the
conditions of this contract is currently insignificant. for example. the
enterprises in order to reduce the size of the reverd to the developers of

the documents underestimate the volumes of product output in the first 2 years
of use of the development. and refuse to introduce it altogether. while the
institutes are deprived of any levers for influencing the enterprises. In
addition. sometius the customers avoid paying the bonuses stipulated by

the condiitons of the concluded contract.

The introduction of developments of the institutes implemented in accordance
with the contracts for creative cooperation is not included in the current
plans of either the scientific institutions or the enterprises. Lacking
juridical force. these contracts do not completely eliminate such negative
phenomena as prolonged periods for agreeing upon developed problems. cases
of interruption in the program. etc.

Questions of the industrial mastery of results of scientific research are
closely tied to evaluating the efficiency of work of the scientific insti-
tutions. especially academic. '

The institutes of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences introduced a new form of
accounting starting in 1977. the so—called percentage economic effect. How-
ever definition of this indicator until now has remained one of the most
complicated and least worked out problems of evaluating the economic

efficacy of scientific research.2 Determination of the percentages of
economic effect between the institutes and plants by agreement is now be-
coming more widespread. These percentages are most often selected equal.
Certain institutes of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences. for example. the
Institute of General and Inorganic Chemistry and Institute of Organic
Chemistry define their percentage for certain developments as 90 or 100 per-
cent. This distribution of the percentage participation has a purely formal
nature and does not reflect the real contribution of the participants to the
introduced development.

In the opinion of the authors. in order to evaluate the economic efficiency
of the work of the academic institutes for which funds of economic stim-
lation have not been provided. it is necessary to take into consideration only

 

lSee: "Metodika opredeleniya ekonomicheskiy effektivnosti nauchno-issledova-
tel'skikh rabot v uchreshdeniyakh Akademii nauk Ukrainskoy SSR" [Technique of
Determining the Economic Efficiency of Scientific Research in Institutions of
the UkSSR Academy of Sciences]. Kiev. Naukova dunks. 1978. p. 22

ZSee: Kurenkov. Yu. "Experience of Evaluating and Stimulating Scientific
Research in the Textile and Light Industry.""Upravleniye. planirovaniye i organi-
zatsiya nauchnth i tekhnicheskikh issledovaniy" [Control. Planning and
Organisation of Scientific and Technical Research] (Proceedings of International
Symposium of cm Member Countries and the Socialist Federated Republic of
Yugoslavia). Vol 4. Moscow. VINITI. 1970; pp 238-261; Golcsovskiy. S. I."Eko-
nomicheskaye effektivnost' ismledovaniy i rasrabotok"[Economic Efficiency of
Research and Development]. Moscow. hoskovskiy rabochiy. I973; Dobrov. 6. EL;
Zadoroahnyy. E. 1.; Shchedrina. T. I. "Uprevleniye effektivnost'yu nauchnoy
deyatel'noeti"[Control of Efficiency of Scientific Activity]. Gen. ed. Dobrov.

G. H” Kiev. Naukova dumka. 1978. p. 2100.

30
MOMCIALUSEONLY
madenaatmovm

the total national economic effect from introducing the research results. while
it is insxpedient to conpute the percentage econonic effect. In fact. if the
production engineers are very interested in some development. then they can
develop it even without the help of the institute. Consequently. the per-
centage effect of the institute will formally be equal to sero or will be

an insignificant pert. while this will actually indicate the increased value
of the development. further. the plants generally on their own initiative
do not report to the institute what econonic effect was obtained as a result
of the introduction of its developnent. and noreover. what percentage goes to
the institute. ‘lhey are not interested in this because the enterprises are
rewarded for the new equipment completely and not by the percentage econonic
effect. There has not been a single case in the m1- of the UhSSR Acedeay
of Sciences where the plant appealed to the institute with a request to
agree upon their percentage in the econonic effect. finally. if three and

note partners participate in work associated with introduction. it becones
especially complicated to agree upon the sites of the percentage econonic
effect.

Difficulties arise in confining the percentage economic effect by the

ministry which: can hardly determine the degree of participation in introduc-
tion of its subdivisions on the one hand. and the developing institutes on
the other hand.

As a result. deternination of the percentage participation in introducing
innovations has a conditional nature. The forms for statistical accounting
of the enterprise indicate the actual econonic effect. The authors there-
fore believe that it is more expedient to consider the total national
economic effect obtained fron introducing the developaents of the institute
in the repoarts of the academic institutes without consideration for the
percentage participation of the executors. but with nandatory indication of
the total number of organizations involved in the work on the topic and in
its introduction.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Nuke". "Vestnik Akadenii neuk $883". 1982

9035
C30: 1816/73

31
summon“
POIOFFICIALIJSEONLY

UDC 378.23

LEGAL RW‘HM 0P SCIMIFIC worms means ”SEARCH QUALITY
Hoscow VBSTNIK M3411 “All! 888! in Russian No 1. Jan 82 pp 61-66

[Article by head of the juridical depath of the USSR Acadesy of Sciences.
Candidate of juridical sciences L. P. Petrenko: "Cognition and Certifi-
cation of Scientific Cadres"]

[Text] Since the first years of Soviet power. in addition to general norne
for labor legislation which have covered the scientific workers. a broad
circle of special norss has been active which set a special order for the
development. change and halting of legal relations of scientific workers.
their wages. pension payaents. etc. In analysing the legislation on the
labor of scientific workers it is inossible not to note that any of its
features are governed by objective prerequisites. and prissrily. the inpor-
tance of science and the transfornation of it into a direct productive force.
The specific nature of the legal position of the scientific vorkers is also
tied to the creative. research nature of their work.

Features of the legislation regarding the labor of the scientific workers

are very clearly sanifest in the developnsnt of labor. legal relations between
then and the scientific institutions. There is currently an active unified
order for selecting scientific cadres in all the scientific research institu-
tions regardless of their departsental subordination. According to the decree
of the CPSU Central Coalittee and the 0888 Council of Hinisters of 12 Hay 1962
No “I "On neasures for Further Isprovenent in the Selection and Training of
Scientific Cadres" and with the instruction approved by agreenent with the
AUCCTU by the decree of the Preaidiun of the USSR Acadely of Sciences of

15 Deceaber 1962. vacant positions of the scientific workers of the
scientific research institutions of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. academies
of sciences of the union republics. sector acadenies. ninistriee and depart-
nents are filled only by conpetition.

The competition serves as an additional condition which precedes the energence
of labor legal relations. In this case the decision of the scientific
council (eliciting definite juridical consequences) is the chief and unda-
tory act for the administration in the coqutitivs systen of selecting
cadres. The labor legal relations with the participant of the conpetition
nust only be set based on the decision of the scientific council and in

accordance with then by the adninstration of the scientific inetitution.

32
”WWONLY
IIIICIHHCIAI.USI¢DNLY

The mandatory nature of the decision of the scientific council for the competi-
tion for the legality of establishing legal relations with the scientific
workers is confiraed by the requirement of observing this juridical act in
relation to resolving the question of awarding the scientific titles according
to the statuteon the order for awarding scientific titles. Consequently. only
the observance of the competition guarantees complete rights of the scientific
workers. The scientific workers who have been included for the position in
violation of the active legislation without competition do not have the right
to participate in the competition.

Before the selection by the scientific council. the scientific workers are
considered temporary representatives in their offices. and the peridd for
temporary execution of their duties cannot alter their legal position. however.
these individuals may he discharged only because they were hired without the
competition. According to the explanation of the State Committee of the USSR
Council of Ministers on Questions of Labor and "ages and the AUCCTU Secretariat
ofr 29 December 1965 ho 30/39. an acting official (appointed to a vacancy) can
only be released for grounds stipulated by the legislation. References in the

order for temporary execution of the duties do not provide the grounds either
for announcement of a competition or for discharge.

The competition for filling positions of scientific workers is aimed at
guaranteeing the selection of the most qualified personnel for the work in
scientific research institutes and laboratories. Observance of the competi-
tion procedure must create guarantees for an objective approach to evaluating
the business qualities of the scientific worker and his correspondence to the
occupied position.and exclude subjectivism in this matter. Many years of
practice have confirmed the effectiveness of this systen: competition as the
main form of selecting scientific cadres proaoted the attraction of skilled
scientific workers to the scientific institutions of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. But. unfortunately. the competition system is not sufficiently
utilized in some scientific research institutions. This often results in
hiring of random personnel for the positions of scientific workers. Hiring
without competition also entails a violation of the labor rights of the
acientifid workers.

I recall that according to the existing legislation. the hiring of temporary
workers for a period of up to 2 months. including retirees. is done not for

a vacant position but for a temporarily absent scientific worker (because of
leave of absence. business trip. illness. etc.). Without announcement of a
competition. individualltre also accepted to replace workers who have been sent
for a lengthy business trip abroad. Acceptance for work in thsee instances

is done on the condition of an emergence labor contract according to point 2 of

article 10 of the Fundamentals of Legislation of the USSR and the union republic
republics on labor.

In holding competitions. proper attention is not always given to the procedure
for evaluating the cadres. At the same time. the observance of this procedure
is necessary for the implenentation of the Leninist principles of selecting
and placing cadres. The lack of clearly formulated and juridicslly decreed
requirements for each category of scientific colleague complicates the
solution of problems associated with the hiring of scientific colleagues. It

33
FOR4OFFKJA1.UBI(IVLY
FOIiOFFKJAl.USE(NNLY

is therefore necessary to supplement the instructions on the order for
replacing the positions of the scientific workers with a list of basic require-
ments made for the competition participants. This needs to be done because
in a number of scientific institutions attempts are made to stipulate these
requirements by orders and instructive letters.

The system for evaluating the activity of scientific colleagues which exists
in our country generally has a common nature, is limited to listing the number
aaount of work done and statement of its brief contents. The official
qualification characteristics approved by a decree of the State Committee of
the USSR Council of Ministers for labor and social questions of 8 February
1978 No 38 only plays an auxiliary role in the competition process. It would
be more correct to link the development of official qualification charac-
teristics with the updating of legal norms regarding the order for replacing
the offices of scientific workers.

Taking into consideration the positive experience of the competitive system
of selecting cadres. it is time to pinpoint and expand the list of positions
which must be filled by competition. A number of scientific research insti-
tutes have introduced positions of leaders of groups of scientific research
subdivisions. The time of working in this position is counted in the length
of service of scientific research work. The leader of the group very often
heads the collective of senior and junior scientific colleagues. The question
of the order for appointing to the position of the leader of the group. his
election or recertification has not been answered in any one of the standard
acts. It seems that this leader should be elected by competition. For
these reasons. the instruction on the order of replacing the offices of
scientific workers in scientific research institutions must be supplemented
with the following statute: the list of positions subject to election by
competition must include positions of leaders of the groups of scientific
research subdivisions.

The list of positions of scientific workers that are filled by competition
should also be pinpointed because in recent years (after the publication of
instructions on competitions) in order to strengthen the material interest of
the scientific workers in improving the efficiency of scientific research

in individual scientific research institutions of different departments. new

systems of paying the scientists were introduced as an experiment. (Us are
speaking of the Scientific Research Physical-Chemical Institute imeni L. Ye.

Karpov, the All-Union Scientific Research Institute for Organization.
Control and Economics of the Oil and Gas Industry and other institutions).
Consequently. a number of scientific research institutions have introduced
additional titles for positions of scientific workers: head of the section.
head of the sector. chief specialist. leading researcher. senior researcher,
scientific colleague. junior scientific colleague. etc. In this case. the
positions "chief specialist." "leading researcher." "senior researcher."
"scientific colleague" are not stipulated in any of the standard acts which
define the order for hiring and firing scientific workers.

By a decree of the USSR Council of Ministers of 22 March 1967 No 237. the
leaders of the scientific research institutions are given the right to

. 36
FOIiOIFKJAl.UBB(HNLY
FilltlﬂﬂC1A1.lEﬂE(HVLY

formulate and confirn the structure and staff of the scientific-research
institution as applied to the model structures and staffs. In the decision
(order) on reorganisation. the da for elimdnating and organising subdi-
visions or individual positions are indicated (with complete listing of their
titles). The fact of selecting scientific workers according to the old
(eliminated) structure loses its juridical value from the date of reorganisa-
tion (eliaination of the given subdivision or position) and does not provide

the grounds for noncoapetitive filling of vacant positions of the scientific
workers according to the new structure.

The scientific colleagues of the eliminated subdivisions (positions) which
during reorganisation will not be accepted in the competition for vacant
position inr the new structure are released to cut down on the staff (point 1
of article 33 of the RSPSR Code of Laws on Labor) with paynent of two-week
severance pay. The release of scientific workers to cut down on the size of
the staff is done with observance of the norms of labor legislation. Dis-
solution of the labor contract for point 1 of article 33 of the ISTSR Code of
Law on Labor is not permitted without preliminary agree-ant of the local

trade union committee. and the offer to participate in the competition equals
an offer for specialised employnent.

The 26th Party Congress has set high assignments for 1981-1985 for the develop-
ment of science and technology. The USSR Gosplen. State Committee for

Science and Technology, and USSR Academy of Sciences have formulated 160
scientific and technical programs. including 30 target intregrsted programs
which stipulate large-scale realisation in the national economy of the most
significant achievements of science. It consequently becones necessary to
rapidly change the structure and staffs of the scientific research institu-

tions. Increase in work efficiency of the scientific organisations without
increase in the number of scientific cadres is of especial importance.

It has been proven long ago that the successful development of scientific
research depends not on the simple increase in numbers of scientific workers.
but prinerily on their correct selection. optimal placenent and the most
expedient use. This also determines the task of re-exsmining the formed
principles of competitive selection of scientific cadres and their certifi-
cation in order to convert this system into an efficient tool for improving
the efficient of work of the scientific research institutions. This nesns
the establishnent of a clear order for changing the orgsnisstional structures
of the scientific institution to bring them into correspondence with the
changing subject matter. for elimination and reorganisation of small and
inefficient subdivisions. for concentration of scientific forces on the main.
key trends in scientific and technical progress.

It is expedient to change the periods for selecting the scientific workers
and to take them on for a period that coincides with the planned period for
fulfilling the scientific work.

The active instructions for the order of filling positions of the scientific
workers of scientific research institutions have established that every

5 years these workers (junior scientific colleagues every 3 years) should be
appointed for a new period by the scientific council. The decision of the

35
FOI1OIFKJAI.UBIIINLY
FIHICHHHCJAI.1N§E(N§LY

council in this case has the same juridical force as the decision on the
results of the competitions. Thus. the individuals who have been hired
without competition and who have passed selection at the scientific council
acquire the right of the scientific workers hired by competition. (The
agreement of the scientific worker for selection is not required; if he does
not want to observe the order of selection (certification) established by the
legislature. he can file for release or switching to another position where
certification is not held).

The procedure of selecting for a position significantly differs from the
holding of the competition. The competition is only held to fill a

vacant (not occupied by anyone) position. and several applicants for one
position generally participate in the competition. The selection of
scientific workers for a new period is done by a schedule approved by the
administration with the agreement of the local trade union committee and

the higher organization. The schedule is approved in the beginning of each
year and the scientific workers are informed. In addition. the leader of

the scientific institution is obliged to notify in advance. but no later than
10 days before the meeting of the scientific council (section) the individuals
selected for the new period. the date and place of the council (section)
meeting. It is not recommended that more than five-seven scientific workers
be selected at one meeting of the scientific council.

Before the scientific workers are selected to a position. they must report on
the results of their scientific activity in the past period (five-year or
three-year for the junior scientific colleagues). The headsofthe scien-
tific departments. laboratories. sectors report at the meeting of the
council. the senior and junior scientific colleagues report in the

scientific department. laboratory or sector. The scientific worker provides
a report in written fonmfor the period indicated by the administration. In
addition. the meeting of the council or scientific subdivision hears his
‘reporr: ‘The'hature oftheoral report is determined by the scientific council
which may be limited to answers of the scientific worker to individual
questions.

The council of the scientific institution makes a decision about selecting
the scientific worker for the position for a new period by secret vote. The
decision is considered effective if no less than two-thirds of the council
members participated in the voting. The scientific worker is considered
selected if over half of the council members who participated in the selection
voted for him. The scientific workers who are selected for the new term -
have the right to be present at the meeting of the scientific council to
discuss their questions. If the scientific worker is absent from the meeting
without valid reasons. the question of selection can be examined in his
absence. In this case. the council hears a report of the leader of the
subdivision where the scientific worker works . and makes a decision by
voting.

The scientific worker can ask for a secondary examination by the council of
the question of his selection to a position if he was not present at the
meeting of the council for a valid reason (for example. sickness. leave of
absence. business trip) or if he was not notified of the time and place of
the council's examination of the question of his appointment to the position.

36
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(”VLY
FOR‘OIIICLKLIJSEGN‘LY

s

The scientific workers that are not selected by the council for the new tern
are released from work in the scientific institution or are transferred to
lower offices (nonconpetitive). The following is entered in the work book
of the released workers: "Released because of lapse of work tern set by the
legislature on cospetitions."

It would have been useful to make the statute standard which states that
during the selection for s new tern. as the suitability of the scientific
colleague for the next higher position is clarified. the scientific council

could sake a suggestion about transferring his to this higher position. This
requires the introduction of several ranks both for junior and for senior

scientific colleagues with a difference in the position salaries.

The active instructions for the order of filling positions of scientific
workers also stipulate a special. exceptional case for release: the leader
of the scientific institution has the right to fire or denote a .
scientific worker before the end of the five-year or three-year period if he
has not shown a positive side in its scientific work. The basis for this
firing or denotion is the decision of the council about the noncorrespondence
of the worker to the occupied position nade by secret vote. The resolution
of the question nust generally be preceded by verification of his work by

a special cosmission appointed by the director of the scientific institution
fron the nesbers of the council. as well as representatives of the social
organizations. The con-ission provides the council with its motivated con-

clusion, and the workers must be acquainted with its contents and the materials
of the check before the nesting of the council.

The order for firing a scientific worker because he does not fit the
position also needs pinpointing. It is extrenely important to define the
ssaple list of grounds for firing a scientific worker. including cases where
he did not show a positive side in scientific work, and also when his non-
correspondence is determined by amoral behavior. especially in educational
functions (supervision of post-graduate students or scientific subdivisions).

According to the decree of the CPSU Central Connittee and the USSR Council

of ministers of 2b Septenber 1968 No. 760, a nunber of neasures were adopted
to improve the results of scientific activity. The USSR Acadeny of Sciences.

sector academies. academies of sciences of the union republics. ninistries

and departments have been entrusted with evaluating no less than once every

3 years the activity of the scientific research institutions under their
jurisdiction. The results of this evaluation aust be used to sake a decision
on their further development. additional saterisl incentive for the
collectives. The evaluation of the activity results of the scientific insti-
tution should be considered in the certification. and material stimulation

should be sore widely used to increase the efficiency of the scientific work.
It is necessary to considerably strengthen the efficiency of the economic
levers and stinuli. having placed material incentive in direct dependence on
the efficiency and quality of work and the fulfill-ant oftheplsnned assign-
seats.

Legal regulation of the labor of the scientific workers is one of the nost

inportant sethods of state supervision of science. From here we have the
need to improve the order for filling positions of the scientific workers and

other statutes on their labor. The legal grounds for training and certifying

37
FOI<0IFKJAI.USI(M‘LY
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE¢MNL¥

need to inprove the order for fulfilling the positions of scientific workers
and other statutes on their labor. The legal principles for training and

certification of scientific cedres must be secured in legislation and et
the same tine promote an improvement in the efficscy of scientific research.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Ranks", "Vestnik Aksde-ii nsuk SSSR". 1982

9035
C80: 1814/76

38
MWUSEONLY
FOI‘OIFKJAI.U8E¢N¥LY

'uoc 207.2
SOVIETS ACTIVELY PARTICIPATE IN INTERNATIONAL 'HAN AND BIOSPEERB' PROGRAM
Moscow VESTNIK AKADIHII nan: $883 in Russian No 6. Apr 82 pp 77-86

[Article by Academician V. Ye. Sokolov and Candidate of biological sciences
G. V. Nirhnik: "In the Soviet Committee on the Program_'Han and the Bio-
sphere'"]

[Text] In 1970 the 16th Session of the General Conference of UNESCO adopted
the international program "Han and the Biosphere" (HA3 fron the English Han
and the Biosphere). This progras which was instituted by UNESCO because

of the ever increasing effect of man on the environment was called upon to
guarantee on the basis of comprehensive basic reaeardh the production of
scientific data needed for the efficient use of natural resources and con-
trol of processes occurring in nature.

The program stipulates the use of the experience of certain other interna-
tional programs. in particular the International Biological Program. But in
contrast to it. the new progran. in addition to studying the changes in the
natural processes occurring in the biosphere under the influence of human
activity. also focuses attention on investigating the effect of these
changes on man hinself. Specialists of the most diverse fields of knowledge
have been involved in the work. including representatives of the humanities
(sociologists. economists. etc.). that is the progrsa has a clearly pronounced
interdisciplinary nature. It stipulates the organisation and conducting in
different regions of the world of comprehensive studies on the investigated
problems. Supervision of the work and observation of its fulfillment has
been entrusted to the International Coordination Council which includes
representatives of 30 states. including the USSR. At the last Seventh
Session of the council which took place in Paris fro. 30 September to

2 October 1981. the following were elected to its staff: chairman Balls
Keyts (Ivory Coast) and four vice-chafrnen V. Ye. Sokolov (USSR). D. King
(United States). R. Neto (Brasil) and Ian nanshi (Chinese People's Republic).

The first session of the council in Noveeber 1971 suggested 13 projects for
international cooperation. and in 197‘ upon the initiative of the Soviet
scientists the program was supplemented with a'léth project: "Study of
Environmental Pollution and Its affect on the Biosphere." In addition.
according to the recommendations of the first conference on coordinating the
activity of the national committees on the program "Han and the Biosphere"
(Moscow. March. 1977). four working groups were additionally set up: for

39
FOI!OFFKJA1.USI(N‘LY
IKHICMﬂﬂCJAl.USElNVLY

environmental protection education and training of cadres; for socioeconomic
problems of the interaction of man and the biosphere; for systems analysis
and mathematical modeling; for scientific and technical information.

The UNESCO program "Man and the Biosphere" currently includes the following
projects.

Project l--"Ecological Effect of Increasing human Activity on the Tropical
and Subtropical Forest Ecosystems." Project 2-"Ecological Effect of
Different Types of Land Use and Management Practice on Forests in the
Temperate Zone and Mediterranean" (subproject Zao-"Ecological Effect of Man
on Taiga Ecosystems"; subproject 2b-—"Effect of Human Activity on Vegetation.
Environmental Protection Properties and.Productivity of Forest Ecosystems of
the European Sector of the USSR.") Project 3-"Effect of Human Activity and
Methods of Land Use on Pasture Land: Savanna and Grassy Landscapes (from
Moderate to Dry Regions".) Project 6--"Effect of Human Activity on Dynamics
of Ecosystems of Arid and Semiarid Zones. Including Use of Pasture Lands and
Consequences of Irrigation." Project S-"Ecological Effect of Human Activity
on Resources of Lakes. Swamps. Rivers. Deltas. Estuaries and Coastal Regions."
Project 6--“Effect of Human Activity on Mountain and Tundra Ecosystems"
(subproject 6a--"Effect of Human Activity on Mountain Ecosystems"; sub-
project 6b--"Effect of Human Activity on Tundra Ecosystems.") Project 7--
"Ecology and Efficient Use of Island Ecosystems." Project 8-»Preservation

of Natural Regions and Genetic Material Contained in Them " (subproject 8a--
"Biospheric Preserves“; subproject 8b-"Species and Its Productivity in the
Geographic Ranges.") Project 9-—"Ecological Evaluation of the Control of
Agricultural Pests and Use of Fertilizers in Surface and Hater Ecosystems"
(subproject 9a--"Ecological Evaluation of the Consequences of Using Ferti-
lizers in Surface and Fresh Uater Ecosystems"; subproject 9b--"Ecological
Consequences of Systematic Use of Pesticides and Other Means of Controlling
Harmful Organisms in Surface and Fresh water Ecosystems.") Project 10--
"Effect of Main Types of Engineering Operations on Man and His Environment."
Project ll--"Ecological Aspects of the Municipal Systems with Special
Emphasis on the Use of Energy (”Ecological Aspects of Settlement").” Pro-
ject 12--"lnteraction between Transformations of the Enviroment and Adaptive.
Demographic and Genetic Structure of the Population." Project l3-"Under-
standing of the Condition of the Environment." Project 16--"Study of Environ-
mental Pollution and Its Effect on the Biosphere."

Over 100 countries participating in the work on the program have set up
national committees which select the most urgent trends in research for their

countries and guarantee international cooperation for their implementation.
work was done 2 years ago on 396 scientific topics. but now the number of

developed topics has risen to 906 and a considerable number of them cover
the effect of human activity on the main types of natural communities: tundra.

forests of the temperate zone. subtropics. tropics. savanna. steppe and
desert. islands and mountains, basins and coastal regions. Rays are also

being sought for preservation of the different natural regions and geno-
fund of animals and plants. The effect is being established of pesticides.
herbicides and mineral fertilizers on the environment. reasons are being

specified for the decreased efficiency of chemical control of agricultural
pests. etc. As a result of the studies. scientifically substantiated fore-

casts should be made for changes in the biosphere and recommendations should

60
FINItNﬂﬂCJAI.USE¢MVlY
POROFHCIALIJSEONLY

be nade ained at guaranteeing wise econonic activity of nan and permitting
the conbination of material and spiritual welfare of people with normal func-
tioning of the biosphere.

The Soviet conittee on the UNESCO program "Han and the Biosphere" was set
up at the end of September 1975. But it actually began to operate in 1976.
therefore [98! becane sort of an anniversary for it since the consittee
su-srised its activity for 5 years. This article should present an idea
about these results. but a journal article is not a report. therefore it
will only name individual results as era-plea characterizing the co-ittee‘s
activity.

The basic tasks of the Soviet conittee on the UNESOO program "Han and the
Biosphere" are to coordinate and direct the scientific research on this
program in our country. and also provide a link to UNESCO and other inter-
national and national organisations involved in probless of studying and
protecting the biosphere and the efficient use of its resources. The
co-ittee consists of an office. secretariat. scientific coordination
council. working groups and republic co-itteee which directly organize work
for the program. The chief institutions for almost all projects on which
work is done in the Soviet Union are the institutes of the USSR Academy of
Sciences and the acadenies of sciences of the union republics. and only for
two projects (I and 16). as well as for one working group (for education
and training of cadres) the institutions of other departments (USSR State
Co-ittee on Forestry. USSR State Co-ittee on Rydronsteorology and the
Moscow State University respectively). The organisational support for work
of the cos-ittee has been entrusted to the Institute of Evolutionary
Morphology and Ecology of Animals imeni A. N. Severtsov of the USSR Acadeny
of Sciences.

A total of 22 working groups have been forned and are actively working. They
plan and monitor the fulfillment of research in the Soviet Union in the
framework of their project or problem. and sons guarantee cooperation and
coordination of research on a regional level for all the countries of
socialist cooperation: they develop nodel research programs. pinpoint the
technique. hold neetings of experts on the most urgent problems. The
republic co-ittees set up in all the union republics and working on in-
house prograns of scientific research prograna under the supervision of the
Soviet couittee play an inportant role.

In the past period. neny regions of the USSR have evolved comprehensive
studies which investigate the changes occurring in the biosphere and its
components under the influence of hunan activity. It should be said that
only 2 countries are working on all 16 international projects. the USSR

and Australia. UNESCO took an inventory in July 1979 of the scientific
research topics whose development had begun in 1976. Our country registered
266 of these topics that referred to all No projects. This is the greatest
number of topics for one separate country. Australia. for exanple. regis-
tered 64 topics and the other countries considerably fewer.

bl
MWWMY
IMNICHWNCJA1.USEINVLY

The projects which are included in the program cover the most diverse
problems. For example. the main task of the project "Ecological Effects
of Different Types of Land Use and Practice of Management on the Forests in
the Temperate Zone and the Mediterranean" (we have 65 topics) is to formu-
late fundamentals for the efficient use of the taiga and mixed forests and
to establish ways to increase their productivity. and special attention is
focused on creating methods for forecasting the nature of the response of
the forest ecosystems to anthropogenic interference.

According to this project. the USSR has completed the first stage in

studying the cedar forests of the Urals and the West Siberian plain. The
basic laws have been revealed which cover the restoration and age dynamics.
The ages of maturity of the cedar forests of varying biological and

economic importance have been defined. Basically new statutes have been
preliminarily formulated for managing the cedar forests with regard for their
restorative-age dynamics. There are a number of suggestions and developments
for efficient use and restoration of the taiga ecosystems. In particular,
methods have been suggested for studying the poet-fire dynamics of forests
with the use of serial and space photographs. as well as a technique for
mapping this process. The results of studying the water protection role of
forests of the Lake Baykal basin have been the basis for forestry manage-
ment in this region.

A no less amount of work has been done in relation to the mixed and broad-
lesved ecosystems. Information is primarily accumulated and generalised
regarding the productivity of the forest ecosystems in the European sector

of the USSR depending on their composition. age. type of forest. etc. Ranges
of fluctuation in the most important environmental factors have been
revealed. and correlations have been defined between them and the horti-
cultural composition. structure and productivity of the communities. Pro-
cesses of differentiation and falling of adult trees in the climax taxons
havebeen studied in special detail as a reaction to the high population
density, and as a result of competition for solar energy. water and food
resources of the ecosystem. The nature has been revealed of adaptive re-
arrangements in the structure of the assimilation apparatus and suction roots
of spruce‘stock in critical weather situations.

The materials of these and other studies were the basis for a flowsheet and
practical measures for protecting the spruce forests of the large state
sanctuary Verkhenvol'zhye (Central Forest State Preserle of the USSR
Ministry of Agriculture) where a system was set up for sample reference
areas to organize studies on the program of biospheric preserves.

An important part of the work is to evaluate the effect of meliorative systems
on the productivity of forest types. It was found that decrease in the

level of subsoil water during meliorative operations to 0.5 m in the maaority
of cases does not reduce the productivity of forests. but can cause

temporary reduction in their growth. "ith a decrease in the level of

subsoil waters in limits of 0.5-1 m. the change in productivity can.depending
on other conditions. be positive. neutral and negative. with a decrease in
the level of subsoil waters by more than 1 m. the productivity of tree

stocks diminishes. As a result of the conducted studies. an approximate

scale has been compiled for the effect of reclamation on the productivity of

‘2
I1)!<0i1ﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂl(ﬂ€LY
FOI1OIFKJA1.USEilNLY

phytocenoees and recs-endatiens have been worked out for the establishment
of biological productivity ob forest com-unities depending on their vater
supply. Reconnendations have been dravn up for isolation and preservation
in the natural state of valuable landscapes and objects of vegetation (land-
scape sanctuaries. botanical sanctuaries and menu-ants of nature)during
asliorative construction.

Work has also been active for the project "Effect of Human Activity and Methods
of Land Use on Pasture Land" (seven topics). Scientific fundamentals have
been formulated for the efficient use of pasture land in different climate.
social and economic conditions. In particular. the econonic processes have
been investigated in the Ukrainian steppea. the role of human econoaic
activity in the evolution of nodern biogeocenosea has been evaluated. and
specific suggestions have been nade for improving the natural steppe vege-
tation and its protection. Procedures for radical and surface inprovenent
of the natural feed crops of the Donbass have been developed and introduced
using local species and forms of perennial feed plants and those from other
regions.

Recommendations have been introduced into' practice for the efficient use
and improvenent in pasture lands vhich stipulate the regulation of cattle
grazing by seasons. standardization of the load. introduction of fellow
pastures. planting of valuable feed grasses. application of fertilizers.
irrieation of the steppe plots. etc.

A technique has been forsulated for evaluating the degree of anthropogenic
degradation of the ecosystens. This is of great practical importance.
Maximum permissible loads have been set for individual categories of eco-
systene. Studies have been nade of the structure. dynamics and anthropo-
tolerance of populations of a number of endemic plants in the Orsls and

Ural region. Scientific fundamentals have been formulated for protecting
rare plants in these regions (the materials have been included in the
regional "Red Book"). A series of forecasting charts have been prepared for
the forest-steppe Ural region on changes in the nature of the vegetation

in the next 20-50 years under anthropogenic loads of: varying strength. In
the development of the procedures for improving productivity of the nountain
pasture lands and hay fields of Tajikistan it was established that the
surface use of ninersl fertilizers improves the productivity of low—grass
and large-grain aemisavannas. mountain steppea. meadovs and prickly grasses
Z-A-fold. It has been shovn that each plant species has a unique reaction
to the application of fertilizers and as a consequence the structure of

the herbage changes.

The vork on the project "Effect of ﬂunan Activity on the Dynamics of the
Ecosystens of Arid and Senierid Zones. Including the Use of Pasture Lands
and the Consequences of Irrigation" (22 topics) is very inportent for our
country. Basic research on the project is aimed at clarifying the lava
governing the structural-functional organisatinn of the desert biogeo-
cenoses. dynenice and evolution of their main conponents. as well as the
development of fundamentals for the efficient use of the desert resources
and iaprovement in its productivity. In particular. the noophological
differentiation and multiple-year dynanics of the landscapes in the east
Karakumy have been investigated.

‘3
BO. OFFICIALIUSEGDNlﬂ
IIIICHHNCIA1.U881MNLY

Hithin the framework of the project. experiments are successfully being
carried out to use space equipment to investigate the natural conditions

of the desert. It is understandable shat importance the space methods have
for studying territories of the desert of difficult access. especially if
one considers that an increase in the rates of development of new lands

and intensification of the anthropogenic effect on the nature of the desert
requires an effective system of rapid monitoring of the changes in these
territories and control of their natural processes.

Studies of the spectral reflectivity of the vegetation. soils and other natural
components in different regions of Turkmenistan made it possible to determine
the optimal seasonal periods and informative spectral intervals for scrap

space photographs to solve a number of scientific and practical tasks.

A lot of attention is focused on the development of basic method conclusions
for mapping the natural processes from large-scale aerial photographs. These
maps make it possible to qualitatively evaluate the condition of the
environment and obtain quantitative data on the intensity of certain pro-
cesses occurring in it. New thematic maps have been compiled: landscape

map of Turkmenistan (scale l:2.500.000). soil (l:l.000.000) and map of
vegetation in the zone of influence of the first phase of the Karakum canal
and the adjoining territories. These maps are viewed as the first stage in
implementing the ecological monitoring of desert ecosystems.

Scientific fundamentals have been formulated for enriching the existing
natural and creating artificial desert biogeocenoses. work is undervay to
improve the methods of securing moving sands and comprehensive development
of low-productive sandy soils. A total of #26 species and types of feed
crops have been introduced from the‘countries of Asia. Africa and Latin

America. Ten: of them proved to be the most stable under the harsh conditions
of Karakumy and yield high harvests of grain for silos.

 

 

Social and economic studies of the consequences of the effect on arid eco-
systems of anthropogenic factors. including those associated with irrigation
and interbasin redistribution of run-off are becoming more widespread. Cal-
culations have been made for this purpose to determine the economic efficiency
of transferring part of the run-off of the Siberian rivers into the central
region. According to preliminary data. implementation of the first phase of
run-off transfer developed by the planning organisations will not result in
considerable changes in natural conditions on large-regional scales. although
it will significantly affect local features of the environment. and the

nature of local changes may vary in fairly broad limits depending on the
specific technical solutions. local natural and economic conditions.

It should be said that the problem of transferring part of the run-off of
the northern rivers of the country occupies a large place in the studies on
the project "Effect of Main Types of Engineering-Technical ﬂork on Man and
His Environment“ (14 topics). At the current stage of development of
productive forces. this complicated ecological-economic problem is an
important part of the general problem of efficient use of nature. uhile its
resolution is aimed. in particular. at scientific substantiation for the
measures to control water resources of the dry land as the most important
component of the biosphere and element of productive forces of society.

6k
I‘lI‘OFIIClAL UGI:(NVLY
mammoutv

A coaprehensive analysis has been nade in the project of the negative conse-
quences of territorial redistribution of water resources and specific racon-
mendetions have been drawn up for their narimm possible prevention. Engin-
eering-economic solutions have been analysed for the project of territorial
redistribution of run-off free the vievpoint of guaranteeing protection of
nature. inpnovament in the use of natural resources and iaprovenent in the
living conditions. state of health and activity of the population. The
appropriate reco-endstiona have been formulated.

One of the projects especially covers the prohlens of veter resources. "Ico-
logical Effect of human Activity on the Resources of Lakes. Swamps. Rivers.
Deltas. Estuaries and Coastal Regions"(16 topics). Primary attention here
was aissd at investigating the biology of aquatic organises and the effect
of pollution on the conposition and production processes of aquatic bio-
cenoses. Recording has been done and a csdsster has been compiled for 616
of the largest lakes in Belorussia and this was the basis for recnnendstions
for their efficient use and improvement in their water regime. The results
of these studies were considered in the development of a unified network of
protected territories of Belorussis and organisation -of lake sanctuaries.
It has been shovnthat the effect of economic activity has been felt by the
absolute majority of lakes of Belorussis. end this entails the developnent
of processes of eutrophication because of the influx of biogenic substances.
priaarily phosphorus and nitrogen. Practical recouendstions have been
prepared for decreasing the rates of eutrophication ofthe republic‘sbssins.

Hethod principles have been foraulsted within the project for forecasting
the changes in the resources of surface waters of Belorussia. the Ukraine
and Moldavia. and a quantitative evaluation has been ends of these changes
for the calculated levels of 1980. 1985. 1990 and 2000.

New criteria have been fornulated for removal and use of water resources
with regard for the hydrological features of the water objects. In addition
to this. a survey has been ends of the Soviet and foreign experience for
coaprehensive evaluation (bonitation) of the natural resources of the river
ecosystems for their most efficient econonic use. The bonitation was
carried out for the balance of phosphorus and nitrogen. and based on an

estimate of the nain natural elements of the river ecosystens: lowland
seadovs. fish resources and consercial hunting fauna. The results of this

work have been transferred fron practical use.

The Soviet scientists have done a lot on the project "Reservation of the
Natural Regions and the Genetic Haterisl Contained in Thea" (25 topics).
The asin goal of the project which is quite new and has not figured in the
previous programs of work is to create a world network of biospheric sanc-
tuaries and to guarantee protection of the genofund of the main types of
ground and fresh water ecosystsns.

Biospheric sanctuaries are a conponent part of the systen of global ecological
monitoring. Their tasks include the preservation of the genofund of living
organises and reference ecosystens. observation of the condition of the
ecosystens and their individual components both on territories whose natural

65
MWMONLY
IND! OFTICJAl.lEH!(MULY

resources are not exposed to direct economic use. and on territories which
are under anthropogenic influence. development of methods for predicting
the changes in the condition of the environment. forms and strategies for

controlling natural processes. as well as methods of ecological education.
that is. training in a correct attitude towards nature.

In the past period. the USSR has created the first phase of biospheric
sanctuaries (Caucasus. Repeteksiy. Central Chernosem. Sikhote-Alin'skiy.
Prioksko-Terrasnyy. Bereainskiy and Sary-Chelekskiy). which have been included
in the world network by a UNESCO decision. The first samples of the

future unified monitoring system have been successfully set up on the basis.
of some of these preserves. In order to fulfill the monitoring program in
each biospheric preserve. not only are studies made which are common for all
sanctuaries which clarify the effect of pollution on the environment. but
regional tasks are solved which are associated with clarifying the effect

on certain ecosystems of different types of economic activity. This trend
in the work will considerably foster the conducting of zonal-regional
measures for environmental protection, and at the same time provide the
most important material for development of the most effective ways of
realizing complicated and multiple-plan tasks associated with the observance
of the condition of the environment. its protection and efficient use.

Improtant studies are being made in the framework of this project on the
problem “Species and Its Productivity." It is .proposed.in particular. that
the solution to the tasks of environmental protection and the efficient use
of biological resources be based on data obtained from studying individual
animal species. Thus the studies of the earthworm of the species Eisenia
nordenskioldi indicated that it may prove promising for settlement in isolated
foci of farming in the European northern USSR where there are practically
no dead organic residues in the arable lands because of the lack of earth-
worms. The species of pincher tick Nothrus paluatris will probably prove
suitable for bioindication of industrial and radioactive pollution. The
species Chironomus plumosus L. (midges) are a convenient subject for
studying the effects of an anthropogenic factor on the environment: it was
found that the adaptation of this species to changes in the environment is
accompanied by the appearance in its karyotype of additional chromosomes.
Investigation of the distribution and ecology of the roe deer Capreolus
capreolua will significantly improve its hunting.

The introduction of a unified system for collecting. processing. accumulating
and issuing data on species of animals and organisation of "banks" of
biological information will have great significance for solving questions

of preservation and efficient use of resources of the animal world. A‘proto-

type has currently been set up in the Institute of Zoology and Parasitology
of the Lithuanian SSR Academy of Sciences. the main institute for work in

this area.

Finally. it is impossible not to stress that the initiators for including
into the project such a project which is exceptionally urgent in our time
as "Study of the Pollution of the Environment and Its Effect on the Bio-

sphere" (19 topics). the Soviet scientists. made a weighty contribution to
its realization as well. For example. mathematical models were formulated

EN)! OIIHC1A1.llﬂE(NVLY
Fill(lﬂﬂC1Al.UBllHHlY

for the dispersal of pollutants. several levels of pollution of basins. soil.
vegetation and atmospheric air of populated areas were established. for the
first time in the practice of hygienic studies a systematic characterisation'
was made of the main types of industrial sources of environmental pollution
with carcinogenic hydrocarbons, measures have been formulated to decrease
the degree of pollution of the atnosphere. soil and water in regions of

a number of major industrial facilities. etc.

It is already obvious from the listed diverse angles that the author of
this article had to be limited to that the research conducted on the program

generally not only has great scientific. but also practical importance. This
is characteristic for the work of the Soviet scientists on all the projects.

and many results of the work have already been introduced or are being intro-
duced into practice.

The Soviet scientists continue. expand and deepen studies on the international
program "Man and the Biosphere." It should be noted that they take an active
part in the work on all aspects of the program. including economic. socio-
logical. legal. cultural. etc. The nain feature of this progran is that
specific prohlens are resolved in its framework which meet the requirements

of the participating countries. The Soviet cc-Iittee for the program "Han
and the Biosphere." in fomlating plans for activity of our scientists.
started from and start from the decisions of the 25th and 26th 0950 Congresses

who have set the ecological problem. the problem of environmental protection
and the efficient use of natural resources anong the nost important state
tasks.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR“. 1982

9035
050: 1816/”

‘7
MWWMY
POI NHCIAI. USI: ONLY

000 001.89
means 01' SCIENCE AND “PUBLIC WZ'S 1‘0 arm rm

Hoecow V3811!!! W11 WK 888! in Iueaian lo 12, Dec 81 pp 32-35

[Report by Academician A. a. Logunov, vice-preeident o! the 0883 Lcadely of
Sciencee, preeented by Acadenician l. c. laaov: "Concerning the further Develop-
neat and Strengthening of Relationships between the Union-Republic Acadeniea of
Sciencea and Higher Educational Inetitutiona”!

[Text] “the 26th CPBD Congreae laid out a vitally inortent progra- for the econonic
and racial developnent of our country for the 11th Five-Year Plan and for the period
up to 1990. In hie report at the congreae. Made 1.. l. brerhnev eepecially
etreaeed that, for the eucceeeful ilplenentation of thie progra- and the fuller
developoent of our econony in the 1980'e, it ia neceaeary to accelerate ecientific-
technical progreee in every way poeaible and, coneequently, increaae the output of
Soviet ecience even acre. The ”beaic Directione for the lcononic and Social
Develop-eat of the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period to 1990," adopted by the
congreee, aleo planned for increaeing the effectiveneea of utilizing the acientific
potential of the country'e m'e. along with the develop-cut oi ecience within the
ayeten of the 0883 and union-republic acedeniee of acienoee.

Our country'a higher echoole at preeent have a large acientific potential. In then
there are over 30,000 depart-onto, 60 ecientific-reeeareh inetitutea, about 1500
laboratoriee oriented toward problem or econonic aectore, and about 450 ecientific-
reeearch eectore, conputer centera. botanical gardene. obeervetoriee. mum. and
experinentel deeign bureaue. The atafta include over 500 acadeniciane and corre-
sponding nenbera of the 0888 and union-republic acade-iee of aciencee who actively
participate in the training of apecialiata and in the organisation and conduct of
ecientific reeearch. About 60,000 etudente of feral poetgraduate prograne and a
aigniiicant nuﬁer of undergraduatee are actively engaged in acientific reeearch in
higher echoole.

The USSR Acade-y of Sciencee attachee a great deal of eignificance to interaction
with VUZ'e and to the developnent of creative relationehipe with then. Hith cloae
contact with the 038! and l8”! hiniatriee of higher and Secondary Specialized

Education, the preeidiun of the 08811 Acadeny of Sciencea for nany yeare haa given
practical aeeietance to mm in training apecialiate and her given methodological

aaaiatance in developing acientitic reeearch in the noet urgent areaa of preeent-
day ecience.

68
POROFI’ICIALUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to a plan approved by the prasidiun of the 0888 Academy of Sciences, over
400 scientists go out to “12's around the country every year to give lectures and
provide aid in scientific-nethodological work. Just during the years of the 10th
Five-Year Plan. about 2000 scientists. including over 200 acadenicians and corre-

sponding were of the 088! Acadeuy of Sciences, went out to the country's “12's.

Fruitful relationships in the training of specialists and in the cultivation in than
of scientific-research work habits have been established between the 0883 Acadaav of
Sciences and the lbscow Physical-technical Institute. The distinguishing feature
of these relationships is provision by the academy to the Physical-Technical Insti-
tute of institute facilities where students of senior courses obtain deep speciali-
zation and the possibility of nastering new areas of science.

A special depart-ant, organised jointly with the Physics Institute inani P. N.
bebedev of the 088! Academy of Sciences. has operated at the Moscow Engineering-
Physics Institute for over ten years. this depart-ant prepares undergraduates and
graduates. using current echievanants of acadeny physics institutes in individual
program with consideration for the interests of the institute that sent the student
there.

Experience in creative relationships between the USSR Acadeuy of Sciences and the
Moscow Physical—Technical and the Moscow Ingineering-Ihysics Institutes could be
usefully transferred to the union republics. In a nudar of acadenies of sciences
it is already in use to a certain degree.

An inportant role in the further develop-ant of science in republic higher educa-
tional institutions was played by the decree of the mo Central Co-ittee and
0388 Council of Ministers lo. 271 of 6 April 1970 "On Increasing the Bffectiveness
of Scientific-Research Dork in higher lducational Institutions.“ A large auount of
attention is being given to this probleel also by directive bodies of union repub-
lics' reflecting this in special decisions. In nany republics, councils or emis-
sions for relations with higher schools have been created under the acadenies
(A2883, ArSSR, 6889.. user, user, nasal, and nut).

The neasures that have been introduced have nade it possible for creative relation-
ships between republic Wz's and republic acadenies of sciences to grow and
strengthen significantly. At the present tine, forns of creative cooperation have
evolved and proved the-selves. such as W! participation in joint research with
acadeny institutions in the natural and social sciences, agreenents for creative
cooperation, work according to unified coordination plans and inter-V02 special-
purpose scientific-technical progress. joint publication of scientific works and
teaching aids, and conduct of joint scientific conferences. hany scientists fron
the republic acadanies take part in the training of specialists at vuz'u, give
special courses of lectures, and provide scientific-nethodological assistance.
About 300 scientists fron republic higher schools are active neders or correspon-
ding nenbers of republic acadanies of sciences and. in a nunbar of republics, their
nunber reaches 20 to 30 percent of the total War of aesdeny warship. Hany
V02 scientists work actively in problea councils. ‘lhe practice of joint projects
between M‘s and academy institutions on inortent scientific and scientific-
technicel problems has begun to expand: the nuier of m projects in coordination
plans of ecadenies has increased; and certain m's have begun to participate in

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIHICHHHCJAL,USE(NVLY

the development of long-term complex programs. Thus, the coordination plan of the
Kazakh 88R Academy of Sciences at the present time has up to 300 research projects
of republic VUZ's; the Latvian 381 Academy of Sciences plan has over 120 projects;
and the Lithuanian SSR Academy of Sciences plan has 240 projects (which constitutes
about 501 of all projects in the coordination plan of this academy). Scientists of
Moldavian VUZ‘s are co-performers in 15 republic multi-sactor scientific-technical
problems and 20 problems in the natural and social sciences. The lasakh 883
Academy of Sciences is having good results in joint research with V02 scientists in
projects in the fields of chemistry, metallurgy, biology, and mining. The Turk-en
SSR Academy of Sciences is successfully conducting complex research in cooperation
with soil-science personnel from the Leningrad and Tashkent Agricultural Institutes
in developing measures directed toward the effective use of land resources,

espe cially deserts. The Uzbek 883 Academy of 8eiances has developed practical
measures for joint utilisation with VUZ's of unique scientific equipment. During
the last three years. it has transferred scientific equipment and instruments

worth a total of about 500,000 rubles to vuz'. without compensation.

Scientists of the Latvian SSR Academy of Sciences are cooperating successfully with
republic VUZ departments in urgent projects in organic synthesis, physics of solids,
problems in machine building, and in other fields of research.

The program for scientific cooperation for 1980-1981 between the Holdavian Academy
of Sciences and the republic Hinistry of higher and Secondary specialised Education
provides for joint work on 70 scientific developments, 53 special lecture courses by
academy scientists, and more then 20 joint conferences and meetings; proposals are
being developed for joint creation and operation of scientific-experimental
facilities and nonstandard equipment.

A large amount of attention is being given to the development of creative relation-
ships between academy institutes and VUZ's by the presidiums of the academies of
sciences of the Ukraine, Belorussia, and Tajikistan. 1n the Armenian 88R Academy
of Sciences, this question has become a subject for discussion at a special session
of the republic Council for Coordination.

The transition to special-purpose-program planning of scientific developments has
had a positive influence on the development of cooperation between republic acad-
emies of sciences and republic VUZ's. As a result of this, creative relationships
between academies and vuz'o in individual republics have acquired a long-term basis,
concentration of forces and resources on the most important areas of scientific-
technical progress has been intensified, and the degree of complexity and level of
research has been raised. As an example. one can cite the nelorussian 888 Academy
of Sciences where, under the 10th Five-Year Plan, over 20 VDZ’s took part in the
development of 20 most-important republic complex programs. In Kirghiria, republic
vuz'a accomplished, together with the Academy of Sciences, the development of feur
complex programs as well as 116 topics in the general coordination plan.

Close scientific cooperation between institutions of the union-republic academies
of sciences and vuz'o was planned also for the 11th Five-Year Plan and undoubtedly
will facilitate the further development of fundamental and applied research.
increase its effectiveness and, at the same time, fulfill the directives of the
26th CPSD Congress.

50
FOR OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
IND! OFFICIAL UEI:(HVLY

In evaluating the atatua of creative ralationahipe between higher achoola and
union'republic academiee of aoiencee, it Iuet be recognized that, in thin important
matter, far from all exiating reaarvea are being exhausted.yet.

vuz'. in the republica do not aufficiently utilize the capabilitiee of republic
academiea for training, eapecialiy apecial-purpoae poatgraduate training programa.
The capabilitiea of the USSR Academy of Sciencea alao are not fully need for thin
purpoae. 0n the other hand, acientiate of republic academiee atill do not partici-
pate aufficiently in educational-teaching work in VUZ'e and give apecial lecture
couraee too infrequently. Coneidering the rapid development of ecience and ite
practical application, it aeema important that the content of educational programo
and lecturea in VUZ'a reflect the maximum in lateet acientific achievement. Thin,
in turn, preeuppoaee aerioua work in ayetematic examination and renewal of
curricula, progrema, lecture couraea, and laboratory work. In correapondence with
thia, the aubject matter of atudente' couree and diploma projecta alao ahould be
changed. hence, it followa that conetant direct participation by leading acien-
tista from republic academiea in the ecientific-educational preceaa and in the
preparation of textbooka and teaching aide ia extreaely neoeeeary. Speaking of
educational work and, eapecially, of inculcating etudente with the intereat in and
habits of reaearch, it would be edviaable to recommend to VUZ'a and union-republic
academies of eciencea that they utilize more widely the experience of the 0883
Academy of Sciencea and the hoacow Phyaicel-Technical lnatitute, the Hoecow
Engineering-Phyaice Inetitute and Ilovoaibirek Univeraity, and alao the M81! end
BSSR Academiea of sciencee, for coabining the teaching proceaa with ecientific-
reaearch work at inatitutee of the academiea of aciencea. At the Ukrainian 883
Academy of Sciencaa, at aeverel academy inatitutea, departmenta of the Hoecow
Physical-Technical Inatitute have been created that allow the training of
apecieliate for new, growing areaa of acience and technology. Up to 500 atudente
annually undergo production practice in inetitutee of the Uk883 Academy of Sciencea.

Aa for creative acientific relationehipa between union-republic academiea of
aciencee and VUZ’e, it ahould be noted that. although auch relationahipa have
achieved a rather high level (UkSSR, B888, La88l, Li88k, H883, and othere), they
cannot be called aatiafactory aa a whole. vuz'. of union republica are atill not
aufficiently enliated in active participation in the acientific reaearch process of
republic academiea, and the capabilitiea of VUZ'a, their intellectual and scienti-
fic-technical potential is inaufficiently utilized. lnauffioient also is the
interaction between acientific proble. councile of the academiee of aciencea and
the correaponding V01 departmenta. Scientiata of the academiea of aciencea do not
participate actively enough in the ecientific reaearch of VUZ'a, eapecially on thoae
problema for which VUZ'a are the head organicationa. The right forma have not been
aet up for the cooperation of librariea, patent aervicea, and acientific-technical
information between union-republic academiee and VUZ'a. Academy‘VUZ joint reaearch
related to fulfillment of apecial-purpoee complex programa ia atill rare in the
republica; inaufficient alao ia cooperation on apecific develop-ante between
departmenta of higher echoola and correeponding acientific inatitutiona of their
republic academiea, and alao coordination in planning and conducting joint topical
conferencea and eyupoaia.

The improvement of creative and practical relationahipa between academy inatitutee
and republic VUZ'a and raiaing the level of reaearch conducted by them alao

Sl
FOI4OFFTC1A1.USI¢0NIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

require the unification of their efforte to develop collective utilization of

expensive end unique equipment, end, in this connection, eyetene for ecquiring
this equip-exit without unnecessery duplication.

Thue, in eu-nry, it lust egein be steted thet the expeneion, deepening. end
inprovenent in the creetive reletionehips between republic ecedenies end higher
schools ere extrenely urgent et the present tine, since they represent e powerful
hidden reeerve the: we should utilise to increeee the effectiveness of science

under the llth Five-Veer Plen end to eccowlish the tests pieced before science
by the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGR‘I‘: lzdetel'etvo "Neuke". "Vestnik Akedeaii neuh SSSR", 1981

96105
CSO: 1816/58

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢0IFHJA1.USE(M¢LY

NEH BDITIOR 0F 'HULTILATERAL COOPERATIOI 0? TH! ACADIHIBS OP SCIBICES 0? TE!
SOCIALIST COUNTRIES' ISSUED

Moscow VESTNIK AKADIHII NAUK SSSR in Russian ”0 4. Apr 82 pp 112-115

[Review by s. c. Kara-Horse. candidate of chenscal sciences. of book "Mnbgé-
storoneye sotrudnicheatvo akademiy.nauk dotsialisficheskikh stran“[Kulti-'
lateral Cooperation of the Acadenies of Sciences of the Socialist Countries],
collection of articles and documents edited by Acadenician C. K. Skryabin,
Moscow. Izdatel'svto "Nauka." 1981. 2000 copies. 368 pages]

[Text] The strategic principle of a coordinated scientific policy of the

socialist countries to guarantee a solid front of research in all directions
of scientific and technical progress has becone urgent as never before in the

recently developed international situation. A task of this scale can only
be solved by the joint efforts of the states. and therefore requires all

possible activation of scientific cooperation among the countries of socialist
cooperation. This also determined the interest of the researchers. workers
of the sdninstretion and broad circles of scientific public in works treating
methodological and organisational problems of scientific cooperation which
generalize the accunulated experience.

The Adndnistration of Scientific cooperation with the Socialist Countries of
the Presidium of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences and the Institute of the History
of Natural Science and Technology of the USSR Acedeny of Sciences recently pre-
pared a second. considerably revised and supplemented edition'of a collection
of articles and documents "Multilateral Cooperation of‘the Acadenies of
Sciences of the Socialist Countries" (first edition in 1978). The need for

the revision was explained by the fact that in the last 5 years; the ties be-
tween the acedenies have significantly deepened. New agreenents were con-

cluded. the circle of their participants was~expanded and the rrogram for
Multilateral Cooperation of the Acadenies of Sciences for 1981-1985 and

the draft of the Long-Term Program for Multilateral Cooperation in the Atea
of Natural Sciences to 1990 were approved.

By tradition. the nain fund for basic research in the socialist countries goes
to the academies of sciences. and the ties between them essentially deternine
the condition of cooperation in the sphere of basic sciences. These ties are
an organic part of the entire system of international scientific and technical
cooperation in the framework of socialist cooperation. and at the seas tine.
they reflect the specific nature of the academies of sciences as a special
form of organisation of science.

53
FOI‘OIFIJAI.U§B(NVLY
FTIICIHNCJAL USEimﬂly

The circle of questions touched upon in the collection is very broad: the
principles for development of science and the scientific cooperation under
socialism. the history of cooperation of the academies, extensive information
about the exchange and mutual help in specific scientific areas. we find rich
factual material in the documents which show the real practice of organising
multilateral scientific cooperation based on the use of a developed complex of
original methods and resources. This material which is diverse in its nature
was successfully united into a comparatively small book ard it was successfully

presented in a compact form because of the well-thought out structure of the
collection.

The first section presents the text of the speech of L. l. Brezhnev at a
meeting with the leaders of the academies of sciences of the socialist coun-
tries on 17 February 1977. where the modern concepts regarding the role of
science in the socialist and communist construction. and the tasks and prin-
ciples of scientific cooperation (f the socialist countries which are the basis
for Soviet scientific pelicy were formulated. The basic statutes of the
Communique on the Conference of Presidents of the Acadmies of Sciences of the
Socialist Countries (15-18 rebruary 1977) presented here are in common with
these concepts.

The next section is articles which cover the specific areas of multilateral
cooperation of the academies and development of its organisational for-s.

The authors of a number of materials are major Soviet scientists who have
participated in the establishment and the deepening of cooperation. It is
apparent from their stories how the formation of the scientific ties occurred.
how the selection of the organizational forms was influencedbv’the cognitive
situation in a certain trend of research or in a discipline. the presence of

a scientific stockpile. condition of the infrastructure of research of the
partners. how the initiative and potentialities were considered not only of
individual scientific schools. but even the individual prominent researchers.
In fact. even with a unit of that organisational-legal basis on which inter-
national scientific and technical cooperation is built among socialist
countries. each specific international community of scientists which developed
in a specific area of science is an unrepeatable social organism. The descrip-
tion of the history of formation and develop-ant of these communities is
successfully supplemented by documents collected in the third section regarding
the multilateral cooperation of the academies. The publication of these
documents is of scientific-cognitive importance. and in the context of the
book. the indifferent articles of the agreements and the charters acquire a
new sound: they convincingly show the fraternal and equal-rights nature of
the relationships between the partners in the area of scientific cooperation
based on socialist principles of international solidarity. This is the great
merit of the collection.

Comparison of the facts of specific history of cooperation of the academies

of sciences of the socialist countries with organisational-legal documents
generates interesting methodological questions. The long-established concepts
acquire new content. especially the concept of mutually advantageous coopera-
tion. It is known that from the very beginning of multilateral cooperation in

FOR OFF1C1Al.lEﬂ£(MULY
IIIICHﬂﬂ(1A1.lIIl(H'LY

the sphere of basic research. the 0883 Academy of Sciences has made such
investments of material-technical and cadre resources to the common business
that they have become a systole-forming factor which creates the basis for
further joint activity. 0f great importance. for example. was the transfer

of a first-class experimental base to the United Institute of Nuclear Research.
This made it possible in short periods to guarantee a high level of research in
nuclear physics and elementary particles. and for the scientists of all the
socialist countries offered the possibility of participating in the develop-
ment stone of the most important trends in scientific and technical progress.
The technical resources presented by the Soviet Union permitted cooperation in
another sphere of science, space research.

The countries who are participating intheprogram "Intercosnos" do not make
nutual payments and calculations. The USSR is offering gratuitous resources
of space rocket equipment and services of the command and neesuring complex
to its partners in cooperation. The USSR Academy of Sciences takes upon it-
self comprehensive testing of the satellites with the apparatus of the
interested organisations and conducts preliminary processing of the tele-
metering information from on board the satellites. It is then sent for analysis
to the countries participating in the experiment. Intensified work to study .
space has joined the large international collective of scientists. engineers.
cosmonauts and workers. The effect of each joint experiment is not limited to
the "scientific advantage" of each of the participants, but creates a common.
indivisible value. When the satellite "Intercosmos-Copernicus-560" was put
into orbit in honor of the 500th anniversary of N. Copernicus with scientific
apparatus developed by the Polish scientists. the entire socialist community
expressed its respect for the great scientist; There is also an immeasurable
effect from the manned flights of citizens of the socialist countries in
international crews on Soviet spacecraft and stations which was suggested by
the USSR.

The organisation of international cooperation in nuclear and space research.
which. as is known is distinguished by great specificity associated with the
unique technical base. is sufficiently coepletely covered in the collection.

In addition. the history and current state of cooperation of the academics of
sciences of the socialist countries are shown in a broad spectrum of disciplines

and scientific trends that are not strictly tied to the unique and expensive
equipment.

The book reports on the different "centers of crystallisation" which developed
as a result of the unification of scientists of different fields of science.
the mutually supplementing cahbination of efforts of different scientific
schools. and the coordinated study of the object with the help of different
approaches. An eloquent example of this. nolecular biology. is an area where
because of the successful harmony of the joint efforts of a very large number
of scientific institutions of eany countries. significant results have been
achieved in a short time. They are determined a great deal by the extensive
scientific-organisstional experience accumulated from the moment that the
international problem coamission "Chemistry and Biochemistry of Nucleic Acids"
was set up in 1962. the authority it has won in the scientific community.

and the convincing demonstration of efficiency of multilateral cooperation.

55
ll!!(ﬂﬂl€1A1.USE(NVlY
FCNRCIHHCIAI.USIIOBHJ!

The problem commission for the comprehensive problem "Molecular Biology" was
set up in 1975. Now there are 30 institutes of the USSR and about 70 scien-
tific institutions of the socialist countries participating in multilateral

cooperation coordinated by this couission. They are jointly working out
over 20 topics.

The project "Revertase" (leadem of the work Academician V. A. Bngel'gardt and
Doctor of biological sciences L. L. Kiselev) indicates the enormous potentia-
lities which have been afforded during the joint studies. The main purpose of
the project is to master synthesis of the genetic material by the so-called
reverse transcription (synthesis of DNA on the IRA matrix by the revertase
enzyme). Studies on the project expand the concept regarding the basic
features of living systems. and at the same time afford new paths for work in
the field of genetic engineering which have great applied importance for
medicine and agriculture.

A large number of organisations of the Third world countries participated in
implementing the project. The administerial experience indicates that in order
to coordinate such a complicated system. strong administrative and economic
levers are needed, however the project "Ravertase" was implemented without the
creation of any supranational agency which possessed such levers. Common
interest. mutual confidence of the participants and high scientific authority
of the leaders proved to be sufficient factors to guarantee close cooperation.
and in compressed schedules implemented a major scientific and technical pro-
gram. The group of scientists led by Academician V. A. Bngel'gardt was
awarded the USSR State Prize for this in 1970. Among the laureates were
Academician of the Czechoslovakian Academy of Sciences I. Rrhiman and Acade-
mician of the GDR Academy of Sciences 2. Rosenthal.

The cooperation of the academies of sciences of the socialist countries for
basic scientific problems implemented within the framework of the problem
commissions is supplemented by work done under the aegis of the coordination
centers. These centers coordinate the efforts on an interdepartmental basis
and unite different stages of the scientific and technical Cycle. from
forecasting to experimental-design developments. In recent years the func-
tions of the coordination center have been place more on the academic institu-
tions. In particular, the Institute of Biophysics of the USSR Academy of
Sciences coordinates the research in the area of biological physics of 137
organization-executors from the socialist countries. The collection demon-
strates well the combination of the most important forms of organizing

the cooperation in academic science and the methods of including this

cooperation into the general system which unifies the institutions and organi-
zations of all types.

A lot of space in the collection is given over to the area of social sciences.
The features of these studies, the continuity of basic knowledge and its direct
use in controlling social processes. political-educational work and the
ideological struggle. and the need for a fast response to the urgent questions
which the complicated and rapidly changing political situation in the world
raise--all of this has governed the special forms of coordinating the coopera-
tion of social scientists. The collection covers the role and the activity

of the permanent management agency. the Conference of Vice-Presidents of the
Academies of Sciences of the Socialist Countries for Social Sciences from the
moment of its signing in 197l.of the Agreement on Multilateral Scientific

$6
POI<0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY
IOI1DIFKJA1.UIIIMNLY

Cooperation. Retrospective analysis of this cooperation shove a trend towards
increase in it of the specific weight of the ssjor "sonograph" studies. This
has been organizationally reflected in the transition to the five-year planning
and the adoption of long-tern progress which unite a nuaber of target programs.

They have been devalOped by international research groups set up on a tesporsry
basis.

Major joint neasures are also being taken in the sphere of setting up scientific-
inforlation servicing of the scientists. A special article in the collection
covers an analysis of the joint efforts of the socialist countries to set up

the International lnforsation Systea for Social Sciences (HISON). The

Institute of Scientific lnforsation for Social Sciences of the USSR Acedeay
of Sciences has become the leading agency in the HISON.

0n the whole. fanilisrity with the collection makes it possible to conclude that
its authors and editors did extensive and useful work. It only remains to be
hoped that this book has opened up a whole series of works on the problem of

the cooperation of socialist countries in the area of fundaaental science at

the current stage which is urgent in a practical and theoretical sense.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "ﬂanks". "Vestnik Akadesii nauk SSSR", 1982

9035
630: [816/75

57
IIIICIﬂﬂCJA1.UBIGMVLY
mmmmv

851' POLICY BBING WIZBDINCDIA COUNTRIES
Moscow VOPROSY mm: in Russian No 12. Dec 81 pp 83-92

[Article by c. Vlsskin. Yu. Nsido end 0. Yurygin: "Trends of Scientific-Technical
Policy in cm Countries (Survey)"]

[Text] In the transition to intensive type of economic development. scienti-
fic-technical policy begins to play a larger role in the economic policy of
the socialist countries. The measures taken in the framework of scientific-
technical policy for state power snd.control are aimed at:

selection of ways for optimal development of national scientific-technical
potentials (financing of scientific research and experimental design develop-

ments. SILEDR. their structure. formation of the cadre potential of science
and its staff . strengthening of the material-technical base of science);

accelerated introduction of results of scientific research and development
into the national economy and their ssxiwn dissemination (improvessnt in
planning. control and economic stimulation of scientific and technical
progress. 811’. questions of organisational and economic unification of science

and production. etc .);

improvement in the efficiency of the country's participation in the interna-
tional separation of labor in the area of science and technology (scientific-
technical cooperation. S‘l‘C. of the socialist countries among thsuelves. with
the developed capitalist and with the developing countries).

Financing of sum is viewed in the cm countries as the most important con-
dition for mending the scale and intensifying scientific research and
development. increasing capital investments to the material and technical base
of science. acquisition of foreign licenses. etc. In the l960's-1970's. the
growth rates for expenditures for science and technology considerably out-
stripped the growth rates for the national income. As a result. in the
countries of socialist cooperation there was a continuous rise in the percentage
of expenditures for sum in the national income. In the second half of the
1970's. the indicated percentage for the European countries of the cm
(sinus Romania) was in limits from 2.2 to 6.6!. and in the Socialist Republic
of Romania. 1.351. This means that for this indicator. the socialist states
currently occupy the leading place in the world. This refers in the first

place to the USSR. CSSR and 60R. The expenses for sum in all the CM
countries reached an impressive amount. about R 60 billion. 1

50
POIOI'I'ICIMJJSEONLY
MWUIIONLY

In the last 20 years. the cm countries have focused a lot of attention on
the fornation of cadre potential for science. Now the total nunber of those
involved in the sphere of science and scientific servicing has already
exceeded 5 million people. of then 1.6 nillion are scientific workers.

Roughly 80! of the total potential of scientific cadres in the cm comtries
is in the USSR ($.35 million people). The can countries now occupy one of the
leading positions in the world for this indicator as well.

The process of forning the cadre potential for science in the countries of
socialist cooperation was accompanied by the creation of a developed network
of scientific research institutions of both academic and sector profile (cur-
rently over 10.000). The scientific workers of the higher educational insti-
tutions of the fraternal countries have also made a considerable contribution
to the developnent of the scientific problens.

An important result of the develop-ant of scientific and technical potentials
of the socialist countries was the growth of inventor activity (see table 1).
In 1978. the cm countries recorded over 86.000 inventions. including 54.600
in the USSR. There was also a considerable growth in the effect froe intro-
ducing inventions into the national economy. Thus. in 1970-1978.. it increased
in Bulgaria 8-fold. in the 0883 6.6. and in the USSR $.6-fold. The average
anount of econonic effect for one invention rose in the sane period in
Bulgaria 2.5-fold. in Czechoslovakia 2.8 and in the USSR by nore than 3-fold
(see table 2). On the whole. the cm countries considerably surpassed the
countries of the EEG and the United States in the number of inventions.

Table 1. Dynamics of Patenting of Inventions in the European Countries of the
cm

 
   
   
  
   
 

People's Republic of Bulgaria

Hungarian People's Republic 1.529
608 5.017
Polish People's Republic 5.865
Socialist Republic of Romania 7.838
USSR $4.593

CSSR

The scientific-technical policy conducted by the countries of socialist coopera-

tion has as its goal the further davelopnent of national scientific-technical
potentials. Their primary focus is high-quality improve-ant. increase in

the output of those involved in the scientific-technical sphere. Problens
associated with an inprovenent in the structure of the cadre scientific

potential. structure of financing of the sum. etc. acquire especial urgency.

One of the most important questions is improving the fund- and technical-
equipping of those involved in the sphere of science and scientific servicing.
In the USSR. for example. in l950-l977.the specific weight of the wages fund
for the paynent of labor rose roughly 10-fold with a rise in allocgtions for
technical equipping of the scientific research institutes 50-fold. There is
a sinilar situation in the other CM countries. Nevertheless. the problea of

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWUSEONLY

improving the fund supply and the technical equipping in the sphere of $830"
continuasto renain urgent and requires further change in the structure of their

financing in support of an increase in the percentage of capital investaents.

Table 2. Bcononic Effect of Introducing Inventions in Certain GINA Countries

    

'eop e s 'epu~

Bulgaria 2.5
USSR 3.15
CSSR 2.85

Modern 81? places before industry higher requiresents fron the viewpoint of
the technical level and quality of the aanufactured product. It is obvious
that satisfaction of these requireaents will become inpossible without inte-
gration of science and production. However. as noted at the CPSU congresses
and congresses of other fraternal coanunist and vorters' parties. in the chain
connecting science and production. the weakest link is the introduction of
scientific and technical achievements into industry. Consequently the general
trend of the scientific-technical policy conducted by the socialist states is
beconing more effective introduction at the current stage of scientific and
technical achievenents. and namely. this is primarily associated with the
resolution of tasks of intensifying the econony of the fraternal countries.

The CEHA countries for a number of years already have been inpleaenting a
set of various econoaic experiments aimed at realising this conplicated,
multifaceted problen. In the l960's-l970's they accumulated rich collective
experience in this area which resulted in positive shifts.

The efforts of the socialist states have been primarily focused on the con-
vergence of science and industry. Thus. in the framework of the scientific-
technical potential. a mass ransition has been observed in all the countries
of $880" to cost accounting. In the last fun-three Give-year plans in all
European countries of the CEHA there has been a significant reduction in

the percentage of budget financing of $383" with a rise in the percentage of
capital from the special funds of the sectors and enterprises. The transfer
of the scientific research institutes to the subordination of the sectors has
become widespread. Considerable attgntion is concentrated on the creation

of an experimental base for science.

In a more specific examination of the scientific-technical policy of the
socialist countries it is necessary to prinsrily isolate the main trends to
improve the planning. control and economic stimulation of 81?. During the
solution of these problems in individual CEHA countries a national specific
nature appears which enriches the joint experience. At the sane tine. this
specific nature primarily concerns the specific nethods of realising indi-
vidual measures. vhile the main trends have mainly a cannon nature.

60
FOR(IHHC1ALIEEIONLY
FOR‘OITWC1A1.US£(MULY

Planning and Control of ST?

The basis for integrated control of ST? in a planned economy is the agreement
of a plan for development of science and technology with the other sections

of the national economic plan. The transition to program-target method in
which attention of the research organizations was oriented on the solution

of specific scientific—technical tasks promoted the improvement in the metho-
dology of planning ST? in the socialist countries. This strengthens even more

the "start-to-finis " planning in the cycle "research-production" and
guarantees synchronization and mutual correlation of the processes for the
development of science, technology and production at different levels. The
main link in planning science and technology becomes the target integrated
programs for the most important scientific-technical problems.

The plan for development of science and technology in the GDR began to

include questions of introducing the results of SREDH into production in 1972.
and in 1973. the section "Science and Technology" was introduced into the
national economic plan for the first time. For the integrated preparation
and realization of the assignments in the state plan for 1976-1980, coordi-
nation plans were compiled for this section which encompass the entire pro-
cess. from research to practical use of scientific-technical results. The
basic form of planning science and technology in the GDR has become the five-
year plan. The annual planning is limited to assignments for the intro-
duction of scientific-technical results into production.

In the CSSR, starting in 1973. the plan for realisation of the concluded

SKEW was included as a mandatory part of the national economic plan and
production plans of industrial enterprises. Romania compiles detailed annual
plans (schedules) for introducing SREDU results into material production. The
ST? is controlled in Bulgaria through a unified plan of socioeconomic develop-

ment of the country. The section of this plan "Science and Technical Progress"
covers the entire eycle "research-production."

The Soviet Union in the l960's-l970's developed roughly the same general
trends in planning and control of ST? as in the other CEMA countries. These
questions acquired especial importance because of the decree of the CPSU
Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers on improving the economic
mechanism. The basis for the formulation and the component part of the USSR
national economic plan for [0 years is the integrated STP program developed

by the GRNT. Gosstroy and USSR Academy of Sciences which is designed for 20
years and which is subject to revision every 5 years. As in other CEHA coun-

tries. in the Soviet Union the importance of integrated target scientific-
technical programs is rising. They gust conclude with the introduction of
SREDH results in the optimal scales.

The organizational forms of controlling STP are also being improved. They
foster a strengthening of the tie between science and production and accelera-
tion of the introduction process. The most effective form is the large

associations and combines set up in the CEHA countries. They have a powerful
scientific-production. cadre and material-financial base. The process of

integration in one economic complex of scientific research institutes. planning

61
FOI‘OIWHCJAI.USE!DNLY
INJR CH“WCIAI.IJSEI(NNLY

offices. technological and experimental enterprises included in these
complexes is continuing to evolve.

In the USSR. merging of science and production in the form of scientific-
production associations has become the most popular. These associations
began to be set up in 1969. There are currently about 200 of them. and in
the next 2-3 years. according to estimates. there is the possibility of
setting up another 200-250 associations of this type. The Institute of
Electric Arc Holding imeni Ye. 0. Paton of the 01553 Academy of Sciences has
verified and confirmed the high efficiency of the new form of organizing
research. academic scientific-technical associations which include institutes.
large design offices. experimental production and experimental plants. The
USSR is also testing other forms of combining science and production, for
example. complexes of design offices and scientific-technical institutions
of double subordination (ministries and departments solve organizational-
financial questions. while the academic institutes provide the scientific
supervision). educational-scientific-production associations. territorial
scientific-production associations. etc.

The most popular form of combining science and industry in the 601! is the
combines. There are currently 129 of them. The GDR also has interesting
experience of creating within the framework of the Academy of Sciences a
"potential of introduction" which includes facilities for the production of
scientific apparatus and experimental plants. There are organisations of
this type in one-third of the institutes of a natural-science profile. and
in the next 5-10 years. it is planngd to set them up in another one-third of
the scientific research institutes.

Other CEHA countries have accumulated fairly diverse and useful experience

on solving problems of combining science and production. Despite the specific
nature of these countries. it is common that in all countries. the scientific
research. planning design and technological organizations which are included

in the associations are directly involved in the sphere of material production.

Economic Stimulation of ST?

In the socialist countries. the questions of planning and control of ST? are
viewed together with economic stimulation. This problem has not yet been
properly resolved. However. a broad and intensive economic search is underway
which has already been crowned with many positive results. This problem

is being resolved in the CEHA countries from the viewpoint of economic stimu—
lation both of science and production.

As for science. the transition of scientific research organisations to the
contract form of fulfilling work played an important role here. This form
is being developed especially intensively between the scientific-research
institutions and the enterprises that are organisationally separate.

In terms of economic stimulation of production. in addition to the funds for
development which have primarily an investment nature. the associations and
enterprises of the socialist countries have set up special funds for technical

62
FOI‘OFINCJAL.USIICHVLY
F0810FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

development (new equipment). Although the methods of forming these funds is
not the same in different socialist countries. their general economic function
consists of compensating for the increased outlays during the development.
aastery and introduction of new equipsent and technology intooproduction. In
addition. these funds finance SREDH associated with new equipment.

The most important means of stimulating ST? in all countries of socialist
cooperation is improvement in price formation. Using prices. the develop-
ment of technically more improved products. removal from production of outdated
items. compensation for outlays for improving quality and the technical level
of the manufactured products are encouraged. The main task of price formation

is to guarantee the interest of the producers in the output of leading equip-
ment and the consumers in using it.

The trends noted here and the new aspects of planning. control and economic
stimulation of ST? in the CEHA countries far from completely reflect the diver-
sity of the practical measures in this area. At the sane time. they indicate
that the scientific-technical policy of the socialist countries is constantly
being developed and improved and promotes the subordination of the internal
resources of the countries totthe resolution of tasks for reconstruction of

the structure of production in accordance with the requirements of STP.

At the same time. one of the most important trends in the modern scientific
and technical policy of the socialist states. as previously noted. is the

improvement in efficiency and degree of participation of the country in the
international division of labor in the area of science and technology. The

modern structure of production in the CEHA countries is characterized by a
very broad range. For example. Czechoslovak a which produces 70-802 of the
world nomenclature of machines and equipment has only 1% of the world
scientific-technical potential. This significantly complicates the task of
maintaining a high technical level for the entire range of nomenclature of
the manufactured products. The most important condition for the growth in
rates of ST? for the socialist countries is the conducting of a selective
production policy with simultaneous increase in the degree of participation
in international division of labor. Complete utilization of its advantages
in the sphere of science and technology will improve the efficiency of

the total scientific-technical potential of the CEHA countries as a whole

by roughly 301. and in certain socialist states several times. The inter-
national factors of intensifying the economy of the socialist states in their
potentialities are no longer merely comparable to the national. but in a
number of cases even surpass them. Consequently. under modern conditions.
the role of the "foreign" aspect of scientific-technical policy is immeasurably
rising.

In the last 10 years. the volume of joint SREDH in the CEHA countries has
risen 5-6-fold. Over 3.000 scientific research and planning design organiza-
tions. VUZ's. including about 200 scientific institutions of the acadaeiea
of sciences of the countries of cooperation participate in them on a eulti-
lateral and bilateral basis.

63
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEINNLY
FIHICHWNCJAI.[EHE(NVLY

The development of STC of the CEHA countries is accompanied by qualitative
changes. whereas in the 1950's-l960's the leading form of STC use free
exchange of technical documents and experience, subsequently intensification

of STC occurred through the transition to multilateral and bilateral coordina-
tion of research. contract cooperation. joint research and exchange of the
results of scientific research with the use of elements of cost accounting.

The holding of mutual consultations by the CEHA countries on the main

questions of scientific-technical policy in order to determine problems for

the current five-year period. development and agreement of plans of multilateral
and bilateral cooperation has firmly entered the practice of cooperation.

New forms in the development of STC were: the formulation of a coordinated

plan of multilateral integrated measures. including in the area of science

and technology for 1976-1980. where 600 million transfer rubles vere invested;
compilation of plans for the long-range future (several five-year plans) in

the framework of DTaPS [expansion unknown]; transition from the sector principle
to comprehensive resolution of the major tasks of ST? (STC program for envi-
ronmental protection and efficient use of natural resources. program to

solve fuel and energy problems. etc.); development of direct ties betueen the
ministries and departments of the CEHA countries. among whom about 600
agreements and contracts for STC have been concluded.

About 3000 scientific research institutes and planning design organizations and
VUZ's participate in measures for the fulfillment of the comprehensive program
for integration. and about 200 academic scientific institutions and 1600
organizations cooperate on 800 topics on a multilateral basis.8 About 6,000
problems and topics are being worked out on a bilateral basis.

An important trend in the development of scientific-technical ties is the
international cooperation in the area of standardization. Fifteen sector
permanent commissions of the CEHA and 11 international organizations of the
cooperating countries participate in the standardization9vork. A total of
2726 standards of the CEHA have currently been approved.

The cooperation of the socialist countries in the area of science and tech-
nology made it possible to solve a number of major national economic problems.
The CEHA countries have attained considerable success in the area of power
engineering. Thus. the unit power of electric generators in these countries
rose in the last 20 years S-B-fold. and today they have blockn with power of
500 NW. The USSR has made the world's largest turbo-unit with power of 1200 H"
and is designing one vith power of 1500 M". For specific consumption of fuel
for the generation of electricity. the last 10-15 years have been characterized
by a trend for its rapid decrease. The USSR and other CEHA countries are

on the level of a number of leading capitalist countries for this indicator.
and even outstrip them.

The CEHA countries occupy one of the first places in the world for the trans-
mission of large quantities of energy superlong distances. The USSR was the

pioneer in the area of ultrahigh-voltage power transmission lines, and new
power transmission lines are being built here for 1500 RV for distances of

66
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
IIIICIHWCJAI.llﬂi(ﬂULY

2600 and 5300 km which are unprecedented in world practice and power
transmission lines are being designed fro 2000 kV. Based on the unified
energy system and the central dispatcher control of the CEHA countries. a

ring power system has been set up which is unique in the world. It unites

21 power transmission lines (PTL) with voltage from 220 to 400 kV. The intro-
duction of the PTL Vinnitsa-Al'bertish with voltage of 750 kv which is the
largest in Europe will liberate the CIHA countries from building additional
power plants with total power of almost 2000 MB.

In the area of superhigh-voltsge equipment. progressive developments have
appeared in recent years: for the first time in the world. high-voltage
thyristor valves were used for the PTL transformer stations of superhigh-
voltage, and an original laser system of control and regulation was made.

The CEHA countries occupy leading positions for a whole series of trends in
the realisation of alternative and nontraditional energy sources. Here they
are making joint studies to create and develop power units with water-cooled
reactors with power of 1000 HR, breeder reactors on fast neutrons (the USSR
operates the world‘s largest reactor of this type). The Soviet Union is also
building the world's largest uranium-graphite channel reactor for 1500 HR and
plans for 2400 NH. Among the prominent achievements in this area. one

should include the creation of the world's first unit of the type "Tokamak"
with superconducting magnetic system and the world's largest “MD-generator
for open type power plants (this is the world's only industrial MED-unit).

A great step forward has been taken on a collective basis in the area of
electrical technology. For the first time in the world. the specialists

of the USSR and GDR have made a plasma furnace with capacity of 30 T for
smelting high-alloy steel. in which a temperature of 15.000 'c is reached.
This made it possible to bring the degree of assimilation of the alloyed
elements almost to 1001. As one of the last successful joint developments.
one should name the unified semiautomatic unit "lntermigmag" for arc welding
by melting electrode in a mediun of protective gases that was made by the
specialists of the Socialist Republic of Bulgaria. GDR and USSR. One should
also make mention of the units of electron-beam welding "Paton-tsis/TT" that
were developed jointly by the CEHA countries. The CEHA countries are
responsible for roughly one-third of the total world flow of scientific-
technical information on questions of welding science. equipment and pro-
duction.

One can name a whole series of examples where. by uniting their efforts on
an integration basis. the CEHA countries were able to solve the moat compli-
cated national economic tasks. Thus, the method they created for obtaining
high pressure polyethylene "Polimir" exceeds the best technological processes
abroad,and the largest chemical concern in the PRC "Zsltsgitter". having
bought a license for it. even now proposes organising the marketing of

the appropriate technology in the Third world countries. 0

Considerable advances have been made by the OSHA countries in the area of
metallurgy. It is enough to name if only those universally recognised.
basically new technologies as casting with counter pressure and technology of

65
INDI10IGNC1Al.l£§ll(NULY
FOR‘0FI1C1AI.lEﬂECﬂWLY

shiny copper plating (People's Republic of Bulgaria), the technology for
producing forged crankshafts (Polish People's Republic). evaporation cooling
of blast furnaces, production of multilayer pipes for gas pipelines. production
of tungsten-free solid alloys (USSR).

The unification of scientific and technical potentials of the countries in the
areacﬁ computers was very important. According to expert estimates. in 5-6 years
years. advances were made here which are equivalent to the previous activity in
countries in 25 years. An intergovernmental agreement united the potential

of 300 enterprises and 350,000 employees. As a result. the percentage of
jointly developed computer equipment in the total computer stock of the CEHA
countries rapidly rose: in the CSSR. for example. in 1971-1975. 660 computers
entered the national economy (of them 160. that is 361. from the "Ryad" system).
and in 1976-1980. 880 computers 880 computers (of them 750 of the system "Ryad"
that is, vlready 85%).

Prominent results were obtained in certain areas of basic research. among which
research on the program "fntercosmos" occupied an important place. The CEHA
countries occupy leading positions in the world in the area of synthesis of
drugs and antibiotics. and the formulation of theoretical fundamentals for
gene engineering.

At the same time, in recognizing the undoubted advances in the development of
STC of the CEHA countries and strengthening of their scientific-technical
potentials. it should be stated that the reserves of international division of
labor in science and technology are still not being completely utilized. The
main content of cooperation of our countries is still the resolution of a
certain problem according to the development of a new design. and the intro-
duction and assimilation of results of joint research and development are done
at the discretion of each cooperating party. At the same time. cooperation

at the concluding stages of the cycle "science-technology-producrich-marketing"
exactly makes it possible to realize the necessary effect of joint scientific
and technical developments. According to the available estimates. already in
the 1980's. the ratio of outlays for SREDW and introduction will change from
l:l0 at present to 1:12. and even 1:15. that is. the percentage of costs for
SREDH in the total volume of expenditures for scientific research. develop-
ment and introduction will not be 102 as occurs now. but 6-82 with an increase
in costs for introduction from 902 to 92-9‘1. Consequently. today. and

the more so in the future. cooperation of the CEHA countries not on indivi-
dual stages of the cycle "science-technology-production-marketing" will be-
come promising from the viewpoint of the national economic effect. but for
the entire cycle with emphasis on the last stage. on the condition of a
comprehensive approach to this problem. It is precisely for this reason

that inCEHAcountries there is s clearer trend towards concluding comprehen-
sive agreements in which questions of STC are closely linked to questions

of international specialization and cooperation of production. As indicated
by a whole series of positive examples. international division of labor which
begins from the stage of joint SREDW with the creation of new types of machines
and equipment. and concludes with the joint development of production and
post-sale servicing of this equipment, permits each country to reduce by 50-70:
the expenses that it would carry alone. and results in the reduction in the
periods for development from 6-7 to 3 years. In this case if the line for

66
FOR OFIWCIAI.IMSIICHULY
F0310FFKJA1.USE(NNLY

effective international separation of labor. started at the stage of creating
the equipment finds the appropriate continuation in production in the form of
a well-thought out system of specialization and cooperation, then labor produc-
tivity can be improyed 3-5-fold, series production 6-8-fold. and the net cost

Within the CEHA framework, there are currently 120 multilateral agreements in
effect for international specialization and cooperation of production, in-
cluding 90 in the area of machine construction. radio engineering and electrOe

nics industry. as well as over 1,000 bilateral. These agreements on the whole
encompass about 10.000 types of items.

CEHA countries was stressed at the 35th meeting of the CEMA session (July 1981).
the countries of cooperation concentrate their scientific-technical potential
on priority trends in scientific and production cooperation for the resolution
of the most important national economic problems: automation of production
processes based on the use of promising resources of computer equipment and
primarily, micro- and minicomputers. development of systems of program control.
creation of a unified element base; introduction of robot-manipulators and
other means of mechanizing labor-intensive processes; creation of complexes

their transporting; development of machines and equipment which guarantee
economical use of fuel and energy; updating of the machine construction stock
by highly productive precision equipment; creation of comprehensive unified
series of hydraulics and pneumatics. These general priorities in the
structural and scientific-technical policy of cooperation as a whole are

policy of each CEHA country, which. by guaranteeing its needs as a result of

within the framework of the scientific-technical policy conducted by the
socialist countries. the development of STC with nonsocialist states occupies
an important place.

The USSR and other socialist countries are invariably in support of expanding
scientific-technical ties with the developed capitalist countries. At the

endtf the 1970's. over 1000 agreenents were concluded between the organizations
of the CEHA countries and Western firms for scientific-technical and production

cooperation. Currently about 402 of all the contracts for cooperation are
for license agreements and 201 are agreements on cooperation for the purpose
of transferring technology.13 At the same time. in recent years the scientific

Production cooperation is'beginning to have a definite effect on the improve-
ment in the structure of East-West trade. Thus. in machine construction, about

102 of‘all the trade is done on the basis of scientific-technical and pro-
duction cooperation.14

67
FOR‘OFFK]A1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many modern problems generated by SIP are common for all countries and

require collective international efforts. In this respect. the CEHA countries
have always supported the expansion and deepening of international cooperation
with all countries of the world. For erample. the initiative of the USSR

to convenelgll-European conferences for transportation and power engineering
is urgent. In the future. the economy of Europe could be developed to a
greater degree on the basis of mutual supplementing of the structures of
individual national economies and their scientific-technical potentials. and
not only on the sector. but also on the intrasector level.

Among the prerequisites for organizing cooperation among the CEHA countries

and the developing countries. the primary is the mutual supplementing of the
economic resources and industries available in both groups of countries.

The production and scientific-technical potentials of the CEHA countries are
capable of providing organization of production in the majority of sectors at
the modern level. At the same time. many developing countries. possessing

not only large reserves of fuel and raw materials needed by the CEHA countries.
but also resources of unemployed work force and not completely utilized
production facilities. still remain insufficiently developed both in an
economic and scientific-technical sense (although 70% of the world's population

lives in them. they have only 3-52 of all the world's expenses for SREDH and
10-152 of all the scientific workers).

The objective interest of the developing states in SIC with the CEHA countries
is explained not only by the potentialities of the latter from the viewpoint

of transferring technology. It is our opinion that those advantages which

are characteristic for cooperation with CEHA countries in general are no less
important. In particular. the cooperation with socialist countries promotes the
the creation in the developing states of a material-technical base of inde-
pendent development.

According to the estimates based on 0.x. publications and individual states.
over 300 cooperation agreements have been concluded between the CEHA countries
and developing states which stipulate the transfer of technology as a component
part (they include. according to the data of UNCTAD. over 140 agreements on
trilateral cooperation). In the beginning of 1980. the CEHA countries had
agreements with the developing countries for construction of 4600 facilities.
of which over 3.000 have been put into operation. According to the data of
UNIDO. the developing countries have over 100 mined enterprises with parti-
cipation of CEHA countries.

A significant contribution to the development of the economy of the
developing countries is the training of national scientific-technical cadres.
their education and placement in the educational institutions of the CEHA
countries. Currently over 00.000 saudenta from 100 developing countries are
being trained in the VUZ's of the CEMA countries. Over 30 higher and second-

ary educational institutions have been built and are unger construction in
these states with the help of the socialist countries.

One of the types of multilateral ties between the countries of different
socioeconomic systems is trilateral scientific-technical and production coopera-
tion which involve firms and enterprises from the socialist, capitalist and
developing countries. According to the data of the UNCTAD Secretariat. in

68
FOIIOFFKJAI.USEioNLY
ﬁDI‘OFIIC1A1.lEﬂ£(lUL¥

the middle 1970's already 53 countries had become participants in #53 tri-
lateral projects with total cost of $29 billion (in current prices). The
Soviet organigotions participated in the realization of 21 projects in a
certain form.

Thus. the CEHA countries are actively participating in international scientific-
technical cooperation. At the same time. in this area there still remain a lot
of unused reserves. and they are especially great in cooperation with the
developed capitalist and developing countries. However. their more complete
utilisation depends not only the the scientific-technical policy conducted by
the socialist states. but also the good will of the other countries in the world.

FOOTNOTES
1. Recomputed according to the official rate.

2. See. V. I. Duzhenkov. "Problemy organisatsii nauki" [Problems of Organizing
Science]. Isdatel'stvo Nauka. 1978. p. 165; PRAVDA. 4 January 1979.

3. In the Hungarian People's Republic in 1966. in the Socialist Republic of
Romania and the People's Republic of Bulgaria in 1967. the sector scientific
and planning organisations were removed from the budget financing and
switched to complete cost accounting.

6. In the national economy of the USSR. there are over 5.000 experimental
.F industries in operation (Ministry of Chemical and Oil Machine Construction
annually allocates about 81 of the capital investments for construction of
experimental bases and experimental industries).

5. The USSR has already accumulated definite experience in the area of develop-
ment and realization of scientific-technical programs. In the state plan
for 1976-1980, the basic assignments were approved for programs to solve 200
of the most important scientific-technical problems. general of an inter-
sector nature. It was planned to create about 2.000 new types of equip-
ment of production purpose and consumer goods total for these programs. of
which 60% was planned for the 10th Five-Year Plan. For the remaining
objects. a stockpile was created for concluding in the next five-year plan
and further (thus, in the programs for the 10th Five-Year Plan, a large
volume of scientific research was provided for problems of using the
principle of superconductance. creation of MED-generators. new types of
gas transportation, development of pneumatic container transportation,
and protection of metal from corrosion). The development of about 1.000
new production processes. over 900 names of economical materials and about
700 automated control systems was also stipulated.

6. See, R. S. EKONOMIKA PROHYSHLENNOSTI. No 2. 1981. abstract No 28“; PRAVDA,
23 March 1981.

7. See. VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No 6. 1976. p 92.

69
FOIIOFFICIA1.lEﬂE(HVLN
10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

IS.

16.

FEMICNNWCJAI.IEHE(HNLY

During the realization of the comprehensive program, over 16.000 theore-
tical and applied works were completed, over 1600 new designs of machines.
nechanisns and instruments were made. over 1200 production processes. and
over 1300 types of new materials. products and preparations.

In the USSR, about 151 of all the 0081's [state standard] are developed
with regard for the CEHA recommendations. This permitted a 10-121 reduc-
tion in outlays and 30-602 in the periods of their development. The

total economic effect from introducing the CEHA recommendations into the
national economy of the USSR exceeded R 750 lillion (see VOPRDSY EKONOHIKI.

No 8, 1979. pp 100. 102; noumncsnsxon so'munmcmas'rvo smN-cnmov czv.
No 3. 1981. p 102).

See. PRAVDA. 28 June 1980.

See. "Agrarno-pronyshlennaya integratsiya stran SEV" [Agrarian-Industrial
Integration of CEHA Countries]. Izdatel'stvo Nauka. 1976. pp 99-100;
PRAVDA. 31 October 1978 and 19 March 1979.

For exanple, the CSSR in accordance with this coordinated policy for
specialisation of scientific-technical potentials could send to research on
nuclear energy in the second half of the 1970's over 201 of all the capital
for SREDH. while in the 1960's. it only allocated slightly more than 11

for research for all power engineering (see, EKONOHICHESKOYB SOTRUDNICHB-
STVO STRAN-CHLENOV SEV. no 2. 1976. p 21; "Veroffentlichungen des Osteuropa-
Institutes." Munich. Reihe: Hirtschaft und Gesallschaft. Heft 16. "For-
schung und Bntwicklung in socialistischen Staaten Osteuropa" von Osers,
Duncker und Buablot. Berlin, 1976).

According to the evaluation of the experts from the U.N. ECE. 831 of all the
contracts on cooperation have been concluded in scientific sectors. in-
cluding 23.8! in the chemical industry (of the total number of contracts
between the East and Rest). 22% in machine construction (including machine
tool nanufacture--25.SX). in the electronics and electrical engineering
industry-l3.51. in transportation equipment-12.61. in netsllurgy-7.9Z.
Agriculture. food industry. construction, tourisa and other spheres of
economic activity account for 171 of the concluded agreements (ECE/Trade/R
Document, 355/Add. 2. table 1; see also VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, No 6. 1977. pp
83.88).

See. HIROVAYA EKONOHIKA I HEZHDUNARODNYYE OTNOSHENIYA. No 3. 1979. p 102.

For purposes of a more efficient use of energy resources of the countries
of East and West Europe and setting up of cooperation in exchange of
electricity. it was acknowledged that it was necessary to set up in the
framework of the world Energy Conference a working grOup to study the
problems of unification of the power systems of these countries. that is,
those problems in whose realization the CEHA countries have accunulated
unique experience. The sane goes for the successful resolution of
ecological problems on an integrated basis.

See, A. N. Bykov, D. A. Lebin. "Sotsialisticheskaya integratsiya i
nauchno-tekhnichekaya revolyutsiya" [Socialist Integration and the Scien-
tific-Technical Revolution]. Izdatel'stvo Nauka. 1981. pp 330. 296.

70
FOR OII1C1AI.USE1MNLY
17. The min value of help of the cm countries is associated with sectors
of material production. end three-fourths is for industry and power
engineering (nee mm. 17 December 1979).

18. See. VOPIDSY m1. No 11. 1979, pp 81-83; mm, 17 Decenber 1979.

19. A. ll. Bylaw. D. A. Lebin. "Soteielieticheekeye integrateiye i neuchno-
tekhnicheekeye revolyuteiye, p 302.

20. 11.11. Docu’nt. TAD/SDI. 1/2, pp 11-13.
COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Pravda". “Voproey ekononiki". 1982.

9035
(:80: 1814/72

71
FOIOI‘FIGALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEH ACADEMY 017 80131638 mans PROFILES
Hoscov VBSTNIK AKADMI NAUK 8588 in Russian No 4. Apr 82 pp 122-163
[Articlez "Nev Members of the USSR Academy of Sciences"]

[Text] On 25 September 1981. the USSR Academy of Sciences announced the
selection of active members (academicians) and corresponding-members of the
USSR Academy of Sciences. For the announced and additionally isolated
vacancies by the councils of scientific institutions and higher educational
institutions. state and public organisations. active members and corresponding
members of the academies of sciences. the USSR Academy of Sciences advanced
and recorded 183 candidates for active members (academicians) and 909 candi-
dates for corresponding members of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

At the general meeting of the USSR Academy of Sciences on 28 December 1981.
according to its Charter. lob active members and 91 corresponding-members of

the USSR Academy of Sciences were elected.

Active Members (Academicians) of the USSR Academy of Sciences
Department of Mathematics

Mikhail Mikhaylovich strent'yev (mathematics)

lie was born in 1932, and is a specialist in the area of mathematical physics.
deputy director of the Computer Center of the Siberian Department of the
USSR Academy of Sciences.

The results that H. H. Lavrent'yev obtained in studying incorrectly stated
tasks of mathematical physics are widely known. He suggested effective

numerical algorithms for solving such problems as evaluating stability for
linear and nonlinear operator equations.

M. H. Lavrent'yev has obtained a number of prominent results in theh theory of

multidimensional inverse problems for differential equations. including for
the inverse problem of the theory of the potential. These studies afforded the

possibility of creating new methods in geophysics to study the structure of
the earth which have great national economic importance.

M. H. Lavrent'yev is a Lenin Prise laureate.

72
FOR omau. USEONLY
FOR 0511C1A1.USEI(NULY

   

H. H. Lavrent'yev V. A. Hel'nikov N. A. Boriaevich

Cl

s

v
I

        

S. P. Novikov Yu. Ye. Nesterikhin

Vladimir Andreyevich Mel'nikov (mathematics. including applied mathematics).
he was born in 1928 and is a specialist in the field of computers.

V. A. Hel'nikov developed a device for control and a system of commands for
computers in the series BESH which practically all the computer centers in
our country are equipped with. The most famous is his development of the
BESM-6 computer whose structure and architecture included promising solutions
widely used in the creation of modern computers.

The module principle of constructing information-computer complexes realized
under the supervision of V. A. Mel'nikov. his basic theoretical developments

73
FOI.OFFKJAL USEIONIY
MWLUSEONLY

in the field of ideology of architecture and technology of computers. and
the construction of operatin systeas and programing systens deternined
a great deal the current direction of the develop-ant of powerful domestic
computers.

V. A. Hel'nikov is a two-time laureate of the USSR State Prize.
Sergey Petrovich Novikov (mathematics, including applied mathematics).

He was born in 1938 and is a specialist in the field of nodern geometry and
topology of manifolds. including the related sections of algebra. theory og
dynamic systems. variational calculus and asthenatical physics; he is head
of the sector of the Institute of Theoretical Physics ineni L. 1.. Landau of
the 0581! Academy of Sciences.

8. P. hovikov created the method of classifying single-bond snooth manifolds
and established the topological invariance of basic topological characteristics
on single-bond manifolds. Together with his students. he developed alge-
braic methods for computing honotopic groups. as well as methods of so-celled
stable algebra. he created the qualitative theory of layers of codinen-

sionality alone and proved the theorem on the existence of closed solutions
of the tore type.

Involved in studies in different fields of modern mathematical physics. S. P.
Novikov developed a qualitative theory of spatial-homogeneous solutions to
Einstein's equations (cosnologicsl sodels) around singularity (at the early
stage of evolution). constructed techniques for finding period solutions to

the Korteveg-de Frieze. developed the spectral theory of Shroedinger's opera-
tor in periodic fields. obtained an analog for variational calculus on the

whole for multivalent functionals needed for qualitative study of the peri-
odic orbits of a nunber of systens of classic and modern mathematical physics.

5. P. Novikov is s Lenin Prize laureate.
Department of General Physics and Astronou
Nikolay Aleksandrovich Borisevich (general and applied physics).

He was born in 1923. is a specialist in the field of nolecular spectroscopy
and luminescence. quantum electronics and infrared technology. and is presi-
dent of the Belorussian 888 Academy of Sciences.

N. A. Borieevich developed a new scientific trend. spectroscopy of free com--
plex nolecules. He constructed a statistical theory for photophysicel
processes in these molecules. introduced new spectral characteristics of
molecules, and suggested methods for their experinental detereinetion. He
found and investigated thermally activated and laser radiation-initiated,

slowed-down fluorescence of complex nolecules in a gas phase. and solved the
problen of sntiStokes' luminescence.

In the area of inter-olecular interactions in gas phase systems. he discovered
the phenomenon of stabilisation-labiliration of electron-excited mutliple-
aton molecules by outside gases which is used in spectroscopy. photochenistry

7b
MWUSEONLY
MWWONLY

and quantum electronics. U. A. Borisevich was the first to obtain generation
of radiation of complex molecules in the gas phase and to develop a new type
of laser with smoothly adjustable radiation frequency. Based on the study

of the scattering of radiation by dispersed systems. he created cut—off,
wide-band and narrow-band dispersion and dispersion-interference infrared
filters which are widely used in different areas of science and technology.

N. A. Borisevich has been elected an outside member of the Czechoslovak Academy
of Sciences and the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts. Us is a-
Uero of Socialist Labor. laureate of the Lenin Prize and the USSR State Prise.

member of the Belorussian Co-Iunist Party Central Co-ittee and deputy of the
USSR Supreme Soviet.

Yuriy Yefremovich Nesterikhin (physics).

he was born in 1930 and is a specialist in the area of experimental physics.
physics of plasma and automation of scientific research. .lle is the director
of the Institute of Automatics and Blectrometry of the Siberian Department of
the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Ilia research was the basis for a number of effective methods for diagnosing
plasma. Jointly with R. z. Sagdeyev, he found and studied "noncolliding"
shock waves which defined a new direction in plasma physics. With the help

of the physical methods he developed. a basic change was made in the technique

for studying rapidly occurring processes in space physics. gas dynamics and
plasma.

Yu. Ye. Nesterikhin developed optic-electronic and laser systems which are used
in physical experiments. lie has major achievements in the development of
structural methods of integrating resources of computer equipment in the
construction of automated experimental complexes. Under his supervision. and
based on mar. standard problem-oriented systems were created both for
scientific research and for the needs of the national economy.

Among the works of Yu. Ye. Nesterikhin are study of thesproblem of the develop-
ment of hydrodynamic turbulence. discovery of the photogalvanic effect in
crystals. light-induced drift of atoms and molecules. and selective photo.
modification of biological molecules

Yuriy Andreyevich Osip'yan (general and applied physics. including astronomy.
radio astronomy and astrophysics).

lie was born in 1931. and is a specialist in the area of solid state physics.
in particular the physics of dislocations. and is the director of solid state
physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Yu. A. Osi'yan theoretically studied the affect of quantum effects on the
kinetics of nondiffusion phase conversions at low temperatures. The experi-
ments he conducted to study the mechanical properties of filiform monocrystals
indicated that their real strength approaches the theoretically computed values.
heading the development of a new basic scientific direction in solid state
physics. the study of the interaction of dislocations and electrons in crystals.

75
FOIOFFICIALIBEONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080032-3

“a FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘ g

Yu. A. Oaip'yan A. M. Baldin

 

 

V. V. Sobolev

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080032-3
FOI<DFHKJAI.USEINNLV

he discovered and studied the effect of the significant effect of light on
plastic deformation of semiconductors which he celled the photoplaetic effect.
he further found the reversible effect of an electric field on plastic
deformation of seniconductors. as well as the development of an electric

current during their plastic deformation. In experiments to study the effect
of diaolocations on electric properties of semiconductors. Yu. A. Osip'yan
discovered the specific electrical conductivity along dislocations. as well
as inversion of the type of conductance with the introduction of dislocations
of varying polarity which is very important for technology. He experimentally
found and comprehensively studied electronic resonance on dislocations in

semiconductors. as well as the effect of dislocations on optical properties
of semiconductors.

Viktor Viktorovioh Sobolev (general and applied physics. including astronomy.
radio astronomy. astrophysics).

He was born in 1915. is a specialist in the area of theoretical astrophysics
and is the head of the department of Leningrad University.

In studying the physics of gas nebulas and stars with shells. V. V. Sobolev
proposed a method for determining the temperature of the nebulas and clarified
the role of light pressure in their dynamics. He created the theory of
luminescence of a moving medium. providing the basis for interpreting spectra
with emission lines. He formulated the theory of nonstationary field of

radiation and applied it to an explanation of the phenomena occurring in
flares of novss and supernovas.

He created new methods in the theory of radiation transfer which mad it possible
to solve many important astrophysical problems. He explained the formation of
spectral lines in the redistribution of radiation by frequency (development

of this work by Soviet and foreign astrophysics resulted in the construction

of the modern theory of stellar spectra). He solved the problem of multiple
scattering of polarized radiation. He developed a general theory for aniso-

tropic scattering of light and applied it to the optics of planetary atmospheres
and optics of water basins. The methods he proposed are widely used not only
in astrophysics. but also geophysics and other areas of physics.

Department of Nuclear Physics
Aleksandr Mikhaylovich Baldin (nuclear physics. including applied).

He was born in 1926. is a specialist in the area of nuclear physics. high
energy physics. elementary particles. and accelerators. and is the director
of the high energy laboratory of the Unified Institute of Nuclear Research.

A. H. Baldin created the method of envelopes. the theory of almost periodic

movement of charges in random magnetic fields. Re participated in the
physical substantiation for the technical project of the Dubno synchrophaso-
tron. Under his supervision. the synchrophasotron was transformed into the
first and world's largest accelerator of relativistic nuclei. He developed
a program and technology for creating superconducting synchrotrons.

77
FOI‘OUIICIAI.1EHE(”ULY
FORflﬂﬂKJAl.USE(INLY

A. H. Baldin constructed the theory and predicted all the main laws governing
near-threshold photoproduction of pions. studied coherent photoproduction of
mesons. The work of A. H. Baldin jointly with colleagues of the Physics
Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev was the basis for the development in our country
of the physics of electromagnetic interactions of adrons. he and his colleagues
have two discoveries: electric and magnetic polarissbility of elementary
particles and direct transition of the photon-vector aeson.

Among the scientific achievements of A. H. Baldin are the development of the
theory of tensor electric polarizability of nuclei. prediction of the optical
anisotropy of atomic nuclei. discovery of a new‘direction in high energy
physics. relativistic nuclear physics. He predicted. and together with his
colleagues discovered the cusulative effect of the formation of particles.
revealed and studied a number of universal laws governing the extreme behavior
of nuclear matter. manifestations of multiquark states and quark plasma.

A. H. Baldin is a USSR State Prise laureate.

Georgiy Timofeyevich Zatsepin (high energy physics. physics of elementary
particles).

he was born in 1917. is a specialist in the area of the phsyics of space rays
(in the aspect of interactions at high energies) and neutrino astrophysics.
and is the head of the department of the Institute of Nuclear Research of the
USSR Academy of Sciences.

6. T. Zatsepin developed and constructed a unit which is based on a new
principle for correlation detectors. and conducted a study of broad atmospheric

showers (BAS). The results he obtained compiled the generally acknowledged
cbncept of the pheyics of space rays and elementary particles. 6. T. Zatsepin

participated in planning major Soviet units to study 3A8 in Moscow State
University and at the Pamir station. and later headed the conducting of
experiments on the physics of mu-mesons in cosmic rays.

In the area of theory. he has the prediction of the phenomena of high-energy
cut-off of the spectrum of metagelactic protons which is the basis for the
modern theory of the origin of space rays of superhigh energies. new ideas

in the area of neutrino astnophysics of high energies. etc. Under his super-
vision. experimental methods were developed for recording cosmic neutrinos

of low energies. and s set of work was done associated with the construction
of the Baksan Neutrino Observatory. a unique complex of underground labora-
tories and giant neutrino detectors.

6. T. Zatsepin is a USSR State Prise laureate.
Department of Hechanics and Control Processes

Oleg Konstaninovich Antonov (theoretical and applied mechanics. machine
construction and mechanical engineering).

he was born in 1906 and is a specialist in the field of aircraft construction.

78
FOHIOFFICLALIJSEGMVLY
FOI‘OllﬂtlAl.UﬂliﬂNlY

The directions of research activity of 0. K. Antonov are the development of
scientific fundanentals for planning nedium and heavy transport airplanes.
scientific principles for aerodynamic and design layout of nultivheeled
chassis of high passability. methods of iaproving reliability and the
service life of airplanes, methods of air landing of monoloads, designs of

wings node of unique monolithic elements. he is the direct executor and
scientific leader of a number of projects which concluded with the introduction
into series production of the airplanes in the series ”An."

0. K. Antonov is a Hero of Socialist Labor. Lenin Prise. USSR State Prise.
Ukrainian 883 State Prise laureate. member of the Ukrainian Communist Party
Central Committee and deputy of the USSR Supreme Soviet.

Rostislav Apollosovich Balyakov (theoretical and applied mechanics. machine
construttion and mechanical engineering).

He was born in 1919 and is a specialist in the area of airplane construction.

The scientific and technical activity of R. A. Belyskov is dedicated to the
creation of new aviation complexes and airplanes of varying purpose. The
studies he made are associated with the investigation of aerogas dynamics.
control systems. strength. aerial strength and different systems of on-board
equipment of flying vehicles, design materials and technological processes
of aircraft construction.

Under the leadership of R. A. Belyakov. tasks have been solved in the area of
control systems for supersonic aircraft. the creation of designs operating
under high temperature conditions at great flight speeds. the use of wings
with sweep changeable in flight. considerable inrease inithe pouer-to~ueight
ratio and maneuverability of airplanes, and highly economical power units
and effective complexes of on-board equipuent have been worked out.

R. A. Belyakov is a two-time Hero of Socialist Labor. Lenin and USSR State
Prise laureate and deputy of the USSR Supreme Soviet.

Georgiy Sergeyevich hyushgens (theory of control. computers).

He was born in 1916. is a specialist in the field of stability, controllability

and applied aerodynamics of flight craft. first deputy head of the Central
Asrohydrodynamic Institute imeni N. Ye. Zhukovskiy. head of the department

of flight mechanics of the Moscow Physical and Technical Institute.

the basic directions for scientific research of c. S. Byushgens is the
dynamics of jet airplanes and other flight craft. automation of control of

the airplane and applied aerodynamics. he has created methods for calculating
and has studied the basic structures of autonated control for near-sonic and
supersonic aircraft. investigated aerodynamic characteristics of stability

and controllability of the jet airplane and conducted studies on the formation
of its appearance. he has done work on the outlook for the develop-ent of
aviation.

G. S. Byushgene is a hero of Socialist Labor and Lenin Prise laureate.

79
FOI‘OFHKJA1.USI(NVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080032-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

1 (h

C. S. Byushgens A. D. Nadiradze

   

S . N. Kovalev

 

G. G. Chernyy

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500080032-3
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sergey Nikitich Kovalev (theoretical and applied mechanics. machine con-
struction and mechanical engineering).

He was born in l9l9 and is a specialist in the area of ship-building.

Under the supervision of S. N. Kovalev and with.his direct participation.
scientific research was conducted and design developments were made which
concluded with the creation of ships which meet modern requirements. The
creation of these ships became possible because of the solution to a number

of complicated scientific-technical problems in the area of construction
mechanics. general planning. propulsive performance. controllability. vulnera-
bility. habitability. and power engineering of ships. as well as in the area
of navigation and automation of basic operations.

Aleksandr Davidovich Nadiradze (theoretical and applied mechanics. machine
construction and mechanical engineering).

He was born in 1914 and is a specialist in the field of applied mechanics and
machine construction.

The main trend in the scientific research of A. D. Nadirsdze is the mechanics
of flight craft. He has developed theoretical and technical principles for
constructing complicated systems of flight craft . has proposed the appro-

priate planning and design solutions. and has organized their collective
development and introduction into the national economy. The scientific

research and experimental design work of A. D. Nadiradae and the collective
he heads in cooperation with other organizations represents major scientific
and technical achievements.

A. D. Nadiradre is a two-time Hero of Socialist Labor and Lenin prize laureate.
Vladimir Semenovich Pugachev (theory of control. computers).

He was born in 1911. is a specialist on the theory of control. head of the

laboratory.of the Institute of the Problems of Control (automatics and tele-
mechanics). and head of the department of the theory of probabilities and
mathematical statistics of the Moscow Aviation Institute imeni S. 0rdzhoni-
kidze.

The sphere of scientific interests of V. S. Bugachev is the statistical theory
of the processes of control. mechanics and applied mathematics. He has
created the fundamentals for the statistical theory of systems which are
described by differential equations. the satistical theory of linear systems
and systems which lead to linear. the general theory of optimization of linear
and nonlinear systems.the theory of conventional-optimal evaluation in sto-

chastic systems. V. S. Pugachev has developed methods of studying the dynamics
of controllable flight and the theory of accuracy of control of flight

apparatus. The methods he has created are widely used in many fields of
science and technology. in particular in the designing of systems for control-
ling the production processes and flight craft.

V. s. Pugachev is a two-time laureate of the USSR State Prize.

FIIICIﬂHCIAa.USB(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gorimir Gorimirovich Chernyy (theoretical and applied mechanics. machine
construction and mechanical engineering).

He was born in 1923. is a specialist in aerodynamics and gas dynamics. and
is director of the Institute of Mechanics of the Hoscow University.

In the area of aerodynamics ofwhigh velocities, c. c. Chernyy has proposed

a method for integrating equations of gas dynamics which was the foundation for
establishing the main qualitative laws in'aerodynamics of hypersonic velocities.
The generalization he made of the classic theory of the boundary layer in

the case of currents when there is a surface of rupture within the layer served
as the theoretical basis for solving many technical problems of gas dynamics.

In the theory of detonation and combustion. G. G. Chernyy studied the asymp-
totic laws of dispersal of detonation waves. theoretically studied the question
of stabilization of detonation waves and stationary supersonic fluxes. and
experimentally confirmed the possibility of this stabilization.

G. G. Chernyy is an active memeber of the International Academy of Astronautics.
He is a two-time USSR State Prise laureate.

Department of General and Technical Chemistry
Khristofor Stepanovich Bagdasar'yan (physical chemistry).

He was born in 1903. is a specialist in the field of photochemistry. radiation
chemistry and kinetics of radical reactions. and is the head of the laboratory
of the Scientific Research Physical-Chemical Institute imeni L. Ya. Karpov.

Kh. s. Bagdasar'yan developed experimental and theoretical methods for
studying elementary stages of radical reactions. He suggested a general
theory for the dependence of the rate of these reactions on the structure of
the molecules and radicals. He made a very significant contribution to the
theory of radical polymerization. In the area of radiation chemistry. he was
the first to prove the existence of ion processes and on this basis. explained
the protective action of aromatic additives against radiation destruction.

The most important achievement of the scientist in the field of photochemistry
was the creation of the fundamentals for a basically new section of this
discipline. two-quantum photochemistry. His laboratory proved the existence
of two-quantum photochemical reactions which occur as a result of absorption

of a light quantum by a molecule which has already absorbed one quantum and
which is in an excited state. This results in the formation of ghighly

excited molecules which enter into the reactions which are impossible in
standard. one-quantum photochemistry.

Vitaliy Iosifovich Gol'danskiy (physical chemistry).

He was born in 1923. is a specialist in the field of nuclear chemistry and high
energy chemistry. and is the head of the sector in the Institute of Chemical
Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

His works provided the beginning for nuclear chemistry as a new field of
physical chemistry. He developed new nuclear and radiation methods for

82
IKIICNﬂﬂCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR WHOM. USE ONLY

studying the chemical structure and properties of matter. kinetics and
mechanism for chemical reactions. lie made an important contribution to the
development of a method for chemical ga-a-resonance (ﬂossbauer) spectroscopy
which is successfully employed in various areas of science and practice. Por
the first time in radiochemistry, he made a comprehensive quantitatige study

of the chemistry of positronium and created a method of early diagnosis of
radiation damages of solid states that is a record in sensitivity.

The studies of V. I. Gol'danskiy had decisive importance for the creation of
quantum kinetics of lov-tesperature chemical reactions. The most popular
was his discovery of the quantum lov-teqerature limit for reaction rate. as
cell as the subsequent cycle of work to describe the solid phase chemical
reactions as nonradiating electronu' transitions and analysis of the role of
these reactions in the chemistry of interstellar space. he also found the

phenomenon of mechanochemical explosion of irradiated mixtures of solid
reagents initiated by their brittle destruction.

V. I. Col'danskiy is chairman of the Cosmission on Synchrotron Radiation in
the Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences. chairman of the Scientific
Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences on high Energy Chemistry. and the

chief editor of the journal mm vrsom man. he is a Lenin Prize
laureate.

Yuriy Nikolayevich Holin (chemistry).

He vas born in 1936. is a specialist in the field of chemical physics. and
director of the Institute of Chemical Kinetics and Combustion of the Siberian
Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

In the field of chemical magnetic radiospectroscopy. Yu. K. Holin developed
the application of the method of electron paramagnetic resonance (m) to
study the radical stages in the radiation-chemical reactions. The result of
the large cycle of his studies was the detection of general laws governing
the transfer of spin interactions in molecules, free radicals. in complexes
of transitional metals. as well as the development of methods for the use of
the phenomena of spin exchange for studying the elementary act of interaction

of particles in solutions. He use one of the initiators of the development
of work in the area of infrared laser photochemistry.

Yu. N. Holin :made a fundamental contribution to the investigation of a new
phenomenon. the effect of magnetic fields on chemical reactions. Together
with his colleagues. he discovered the effect of an external magentic field
on the reaction of free radicals in solutions and explained this phenomenon.
He observed the magnetic isotope effect, and on the basis of these studies

developed highly sensitive methods for recording spectra of aagnetic resonance
of short-lived particles in solutions.

Yu. N. Holin is the chief editor of the journal ZHURNAI. STRUKTURNOY=RI|IH1L

Vladimir Stepanovich Shpak (teclmical chemistry).

lie was born in 1909. is a specialist in the field of technical chemistry. and
the head of the Leningrad Scientific-Technical Center for coordination of
scientific research on chemistry of the USSR Hinistry of the Chemical Industry.

83
MWWONLY
run urn-u ML um. UNLY

   

Yu. N. Molin V. S. Shpak A. M. Kunayev

   

N. A. Vatolin V. A. Legasov

The basic and applied studies made under the supervision and with the
participation of V. S. Shpak made it possible to set up the manufacture of

a number of substances. as well as to guarantee the issuing of data needed to
create new equipment. The extensive study of new representatives of different
classes of chemical compounds. oxidizers. elastomers, surfactants. made it
possible to isolate the most effective of them. develop the technological

processes for their production and organize industrial production of these
compounds .

V. S. Shpak is conducting research in the field of direct transformation of
chemical energy into other types. His major success is the results of studies
in the field of chemical synthesis of different amino acids. The technical
solution of the task of separating optic isomers of these products afforded
the possibility for industrial implementation of this process.

8“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFFKJAI.USElHVLY

Department of Physical Che-istry and Technology of Inorganic Materials

Nikolay Anatol'yevich Vatolin (physical chemistry and technology of inorganic
materials).

He was born in 1926. is a specialist in the field of physical chemistry of
metallurgical processes. deputy chairman of the Presidium of the Ural Scientific
Center of the USSR Academy of Sciences. and director of the Institute of
Metallurgy of the Ural Scientific Center of the 0883 Academy of Sciences.

The scientific activity of N. A. Vatolin is linked to the investigation of
physical and chemical properties and the detection of the structural features
of liquid metals and alloys at high temperatures in order to improve the
corresponding technological processes. he has made a significant contribution
to the main sections of the theory of liquid metallurgical state: model

lattice theories. statistical method of correlative functions. method of pseudo-
potentisl. and has used the method of machine modelingcf this state.

N. A. Vatolin and his school made a vast cycle of experimental studies on
the structure and physical-chemical properties of liquid metals and alloys
based on iron. manganese. palladium. silver and silicon. Bis fundamental
works comprised the scientific basis for creating a number of materials with

assigned properties and made it possible to explain more deeply the nature of
high-temperature melts.

Under the supervision of N. A. Vatolin. a series of work was done which con-
cluded with the creation of physical-chemical fundamentals for new metal-

lurgical processes. which include. in particular. the processes of compre-
hensive use of raw material in ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy. complex

alloys; metallized and wustite—magnetite pellets. as well as hot leading of
steel sheet were obtained.

Askar Hinliakhmedovich Kunayev (physical chemistry and technology of inorganic
materials)

He was born in 1929. is a specialist in the field of metallurgy of ferrous
and nonferrous metals and the comprehensive use of mineral raw materials.
president of the Academy of Sciences of the Kazakh $88. and director of the
Institute of Metallurgy and Enrichment of the Kazakh SSR Academy of Sciences.

A. H. Kunayev made basic research in the field of physical-chemical funda-
mentals of metallurgy of nonferrous and rare metals. he showed the

possibility of using electrochemical methods to investigate the compoundscof
rare refractory metals.

Based on theoretical studies under the supervision of A. H. Kunayev. a number
of highly efficient processes were created for reprocessing mineral raw
material of Kazakhstan. the majority of which have been introduced into
production. They include a basically new hivtsetnyy process of smelting

polymetallic raw material. process of electrothermal reprocessing of inter-
mediate‘products of lead production. as well as comprehensive production

processes making it possible to involve the largest fields of balance ores of
a number of nonferrous metals in the sphere of industrial use.

85
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USI(HVLY
IOI(Nﬂﬂ(1A1.USEIMNLY

A. H. Kunayev is the chief editor of the journal of the USSR Academy of
Sciences and the Kazakh SSR Academy of Sciences KOHPLEKSONOYB ISPOL'ZOVANIYB
HINERAL'NOGO SYR'YA. He is a candidate for membership to the CPSU Central
Co-ittee. member of the Coulunist Party of Kazakhstan Central Conittee.
deputy of the USSR Supreme Soviet and USSR State Prise laureate.

Valeriy Alekseyevich Legasov (physical chemistry and technology of inorganic
materials).

He was born in 1936. is a specialist in the'tield of physical. inorganic
chemistry. and is deputy director of the Institute of Atomic Energy imeni
I. V. Kurchatov.

The scientific activity of V. A. Legasov is tied to solution of important

chemical and chemical-technological processes or nuclear power engineering.
He made a fundamental contribution to the creation of the latest section of
inorganic chemistry. the chemistry of rare gases. He developed industrial

methods for the production of some of the compounds of these gases which
have found practical application.

V. A. Legasov developed a new direction in the technology of inorganic
materials which made it possible to use highly intensive atomic fluxes to
produce a broad class of effective inorganic oxidizers. synthesize a number

of new compounds with high molecular weight. as well as compounds of chemical
elements in anomalously high degrees of oxidation.

Under his supervision. extensive studies were made in order to determine the
areas of most expedient use of the sources of nuclear energy in energy-inten-
sive sectors of industry. he studied a number of thermochemical and combined
electrothermal cycles for the breakdown of water and carbon dioxide in

order to study hydrogen and carbon monoxide.

V. A. Legasov is the chief editor of the journal ATOHNAYA I VODORODNAYA ENER-
GETIKA and the annual AIOHNO-ENERGETICEBSKIYE PROTSESSY I TEIHNOLOCIYA. He
is the USSR State Prize laureate.

Department of Biochemistry. Biophysics and Chemistry of Physiologically
Active Compounds

Dmitriy Georgevich Knorre (chemistry of natural compounds).

He was born in 1926. is a specialist in the field of chemical kinetics. bio-
organic chemistry and molecular biology. and head of the department of the
Novosibirsk Institute of Organic Chemistry of the Siberian Department of the
USSR Academy of Sciences.

The extensive use of spectroscopy of NHR of 31? allowed D. c. Knorre and his
colleagues to reveal a number of important intermediate compounds in the

reactions of phosphorylation used in chemical synthesis of oligonucleotides
and in the production of their derivatives. study the reactivity of these

intermediate compounds. record certain side products and evaluate their effect

INJR OIWHCLAL [EHEIUVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080032-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

P.

 

-- D. G. Knorre N. P. Bekhtorova

     

I. A. Terskov

 

L. P. Tatarinov

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080032-3
eves venues. use ONLY

on the accumulation of target products. and to outline a number of ways to
overcome the side conversions. He obtained a broad set of reaction-capable
derivatives of transport ribonucleic acids. oligonucleotides. he suggested
a simple universal method for synthesizing derivatives of nucleoside trie
phosphates. developed the theoretical fundamentals for the kinetics of
affine modification with the help of reagents forming active intermediate
particles. and modified the nucleic acids withintheeell. The results of
work on affine modification of the most important components in the system
of biosynthesis proteins-ribosomes and aminoacyl-tINA-synthetases mades it

possible. in particular. to localise a number of sections of therribosomes
which are responsible for bonding of transport and messenger ribonucleic
ac ids .

Under the supervision of D. G. Knorre. fundamentals were developed for the
technology of producing monomers for chemical synthesis of oligonucleotides.

Ivan Aleksandrovich Terskov (biophysics).

He was born in 1918. is a specialist in the field of controllable biosynthesis
and biophysics of populations. and is director of the Institute of biophysics
of the Siberian Department of the USSR Acadeey of Sciences.

The studies of I. A. Terskov made it possible to theoretically substantiate
and experimentally implement stably functioning systems to continuous control-
lable biosynthesis for populations of a varying level of complexity: single-
celled algae. hydrogen bacteria. photobacteria. Protozoa. cellular cultures
of tissues and organs of animals. and higher plants.

Based on the theory of control of biosynthesis developed by I. A. Terskov.
experimental ecosystems of a high degree of closure were set up. A new
direction is successfully developing under his supervision; biophysics of
ecosystems based on the detection of exchange bonds and physical-chemical
analysis of mass- and energy exchange in natural and artificial ecological
systems. Methods and apparatus have been formulated for remote determination
of the productivity of aquatic and ground ecosystems from mobile carriers

(ship. airplane) on large territories and water areas. A number of processes
have been proposed for industrial biotechnology. including chemosynthesis

of feed protein which is close in composition to animal.

1. A. Terskov is the editor-in-chief of the journal IZVESTIYA SO AN SSSR.
SERIYA BIOLOGICHBSKIKH NAUK.

Department of Physiology'

Natal'ya Petrova Bekhtereve (human and animal physiology).

She is a specialist in the field of physiology of the human brain. and
director of the Institute of Experimental Medicine of the USSR Academy of
Medical Sciences.

N. P.. Bekhtereva is the author of the comprehensive method for studying‘hbe
human brain. Based on experimental-clinical work. she advanced the concept

68
FOI*OFFKJAI.US£(NVLY
FOI‘OIFHJM1.USE(NULY

of the development during chronic cerebral diseases of a stable pathological
state which is maintained by definite changes in the long-term memory. and as

a result of interpreting the premised aidscomponents of this state.ehe
proposed new methods for treating cerebral diseases aimed at activation of

its latent reserves, formation of new links in the cerebral systems and
strengthening of its protective mechanisms.

The concept of N. P. Bekhtereva regarding the physiological foundation for

the human thinking process as a dependent systen of rigid and flexible neuron
links made it possible to reveal the mechanisms fo reliability and optimization
of work of the human brain. This is of great importance for medicine and

pedagogy.

N. P. Bekhtereva is the chief editor of the journal PIZICLOCIYA CEELOVEKA,
chairman of the Scientific Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences on Problems
of Applied human Physiology and the Scientific Council of the USSR Academy of
Medical Sciences on Physiology and Pathology of the Nervous System. as wll
well as the Commission for Psychophysiology of the International Union of
Physiological Sciences. She is a foreign member of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences and has been awarded medals of Berger (OUR). McCullough (United
States) and Mario Negri (Italy).

Department of General Biology
Artemiy Vasil'yevich Ivanov (zoology)

He was born in 1906. is a specialist in the field of comparative anatomy.
embryology. phylogenetics and systematics of invertebrate animals. and head
of the laboratory of the Zoological Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

A. V. Ivanov has a number of major scientific discoveries and generalizations.
He substantiated and made a detailed investigation of a new type of inverte-
brate for science. pogonophor. and developed the science of A. N. Severtsov
on modes of procedure of evolution of organs. He revealed the laws governing
the transition to parasitism (in the example of parasitic mollusks). Bis
theoretical works regarding the origin of multicslled animals developed and
reinforced the hypothesis of I. I. Hechnikov on the phagocytelles The concept
he advanced on the origin and phylogeny of flat worms provides new grounds

for a resolution of the problem of the evolution of lowest invertebrates.

A. V. Ivanov analyzed the organisation and origin of the primitive repre-
sentative of Hataaoa. trichoplax. Based on the studies he made. he suggested
his system of the animal world.

A. V. Ivanov is an active member of the German Academy of Naturalists "Leo-
pol'dina."

Leonid Petrovich Tatarinov (zoology).
he was born in 1926. is a specialist in the field of zoology, paleontology

and evolutionary biology. and director of the Paleontological Institute of
the USSR Academy of Sciences.

89
FOR OFFHJA1.US£GNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic direction for the scientific activity of L. P. Tatarinov is
research dedicated to the origin and early evolution of the largest groups of
vertebrates. amphibians. reptiles. and especially manuals. Analysis of the
vest paleontological and zoological material permitted his to reconstruct
many previously unknown features of biological organisation of the precursors
of these animals. reveal the role of parsllelisma in their evolution. governed
not only by the similarity of adaptations. but also the commnlnature of the
morphogenetic mechanisms of closely related forms. Re examines such general
questions of evolutionary theory as morphophysiological progress. monophily
and polyphily. different aspects of the correlation of classification and
evolution.

The paleontological work of L. P. Tatarinov is important for formulation of
a stratigraphy of continental deposits of the Permian and Triassic in the
Russian Platform.

L. P. Tatarinov is chairman of the Scientific Council of the USSR Academy of
Sciences for the problem ”Rays and Laws Governing the Historical Development
of Animals and Plant Organisms." and chief editor of the PALEONTOLOGICHESKOGO
ZHURNAL. He is a USSR State Prize laureate.

Department of Geology. GeOphysics and Geochemistry
Hikhail Ivanovich Agoshkov (mining sciences. development of minerals).

He was born in 1905. is a specialist in the field of working mineral fields.

and head of the department of the Institute of Problems of Comprehensive
Development of the Depths of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

H. I. Agoshkov is the creator of the scientific school in the field of
optimizing the development of ore fields. His scientific works have had a
great influence on the improvement in equipment and enhancement of the
economic efficiency of working ore fields. promoted a considerable improvement
in the indicators for complete extraction of minerals from the depths. the
creation of the scientific fundamentals for planning mining enterprises.
generation of a numerical evaluation for technical and economic consequences
of losses and measures to reduce them, creation of methods for national
economic evaluation of the efficiency of geological exploration and the cost
of estimating mineral fields. H. I. Agoshkov proposed a scientific classifi-

cation of systems for working ore fields which has received general recogni-
tion.

M. I. Agoshkov is the chairman of the Scientific Council of the USSR Academy
of Sciences on Problems of the Kursk Magnetic Anomaly. Re is a USSR State
Prize laureate.

Vladimir Vasil'yevich thevskiy (mining sciences. development of minerals).

He was born in 1919. is a specialist in the field of open pits of coal. ore
and nonore fields. and is head of the Hoscow Mining Institute.

FOR(Mﬂﬂ(1Al.UBE(NVLY
MWLUSIONLY

The basic trends in the research of V. V. Rehewskiy are the theory of the

regime of nining operations. theory of stripping working levels of quarries

and freight flow of rock, theory of the systens of cowrshensive nechanisation
of open pitndnengtdpesations. study of physical and technological processes

of the ﬁning industry and extraction of solid ninerals fro. the botton of seas
and oceans. lie has proposed thmprinciples of the fornation of nining operations.
systena of working. stripping deep levels. cowletion of nodsrn thick quarries
with eining and transport equip-sot. as well as the use of physical phsnonena

(acoustic. physical-cheeical. etc.) for intensification of the processes of
lining.

Lev Vladinirovich ‘l'auson (geophysics. zeochsnistry).

lie was born in 1917. is a specialist in geochenistry of endogenous processes
and scientific fundanentals for geochenical nethods of searching for and
evaluating ore fields. geochenistry of rare elenents. and director of the
Institute of Geochenistry ineni A. P. Vinogradov of the Siberian Departnent
of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences.

The studies of 1.. V. ‘rauson treat the investigation of lava governing the
geochenical history of rare elenents in the processes of crystallization and
differentiation of the granitoid nagnas. Be lads an inportant contribution to
the concepts regarding the for-s of finding elegants in rocks and the theory
of isonorphisn. He was the first to establish that the structure of a mineral
is one of the nein factors of the:isonorphous distribution of rare elenents

in the processes of crystallization of nag-atic pelts; -le created the first
geochenical classification for granitoids and basaltoids and the theory of
their potential ore-content. and also revealed the prinary petrogenetic and
eetallogenetic role of potassiun basaltoids (latites) which significantly
expands the outlook for nsny regions in terns of their ore content.

Nikolay Vssil'yevich Cherskiy (nining).

he was born in 1905. is a specialist in the field of geology. exploration and
working of gas and oil fields. technology of drilling and testing of wells,
mechanics of the earth's crust. chair-an of the Presidiun of the Yakutsk
branch of the Siberian Departeent of the USSR Acade-y of Sciences. and
director of the Institute of Mining of the North of the Yekutsk branch.

Together with other scientists. N. V. Cherskiy discovered the capacity of
natural gas to be present in the earth's crust in the solid phase in the form
of gas hydrates and fornulated the scientific fundanentals for working gas
hydrate fornations which should becone an ilportant source for hydrocarbon
fuel. he is one of the authors of the technique for industrial exploration
and evaluation of the reserves of gas fields based on the drastic difference
in physical properties of oil and gas. Jointly with other researchers. he
developed basically new nodels for the transfornation of the extracted
organic natter under thednflusncerof natural seisnotectonic processes. As a
result of this work. a previously unknown natural factor was.~.revealed which
determines and controls the processes of oil and gas fornation. This

91
MWWONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080032-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

N. V. Cherskiy V. I. Il'ichev A. 1".

   

V. Ye. Zuyev P. I. Mel'nikov A. M

 

92
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500080032-3
supplements the theory of organic origin of oil. corrects and expands the
concepts on oil and gas content of the little-studied regions.

N. V. Cherskiy is a Hero of Socialist Labor.
Department of Oceanology. Physics of the Atmosphere and Giography
Vladimir Yevseyevich Zuyev (physics of the amotphsere).

He was born in 1925. is a specialist in the field of atmospheric physics and
atmopsheric optics. and director of the Institute of Atmospheric Physics of the
Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

The basic directions in the scientific research of V. Ye. Zuyev is the
dissemination of laser radiation in the atmosphere. laser spectroscopy of the
atmosphere of high and superhigh resolution. laser sounding of the ataosphere.
He has resolved the problem of a quantitative determination of the energy
losses of laser‘radistion disseminated in random directions in a real

atmosphere under different meteorological conditions. A characteristics
feature of—the work of V. Ye. Zuyev is a comprehensive approach to solving
the probles of interaction of laser radiation and the atmosphere which in
combination with the development of the appropriate theories and unique

complexes of apparatus promoted the obs-II‘QIEOI important results both in
basic and in applied research.

V. Ye. Zuyev is a deputy of the USSR Supreme Soviet.
Viktor Ivanovich Il'ichew (oceanology).

He was born in 1932. is a specialist in the field of oceanology. hydro-
acoustica. hydrology of the sea. and director of the Pacific Ocean Oceano-

logical Institute of the Far East Scientific Center of the USSR Academy of
Sciences.

V. I. ll'ichev received basic results which are of primary importance for
hydroacoustics. physics of acoustical and hydrodynamic cavitation. hydro-
dynamics of fields of perturbations. as well as for a comprehensive study

of the hydrophysical fields of the ocean. Among these results are the dis-
covery of laws governing the distribution of cavitational strength of a

real liquid, development of statistical theory of hydrodynamic cavitation.
study of the mechanism and creation of the theory of variability in spatial-
temporal and informative characteristics of acoustic fields of the ocean
with the use of methods of pattern recognition. creation of .models for
recognition automatic machines. and modeling the phenomenaoon a computer.

Pavel lvanovich Hel'nikov (geocryology).
He was born in 1908. is a specialist in the field of geocryology. and director

of the Institute of Geocryology of the Siberian Department of the USSR
Academy of Sciences.

93
IIHICIHNIIA1.USIICHVLV
FlilC”ﬂﬂC1Al.lEﬂi(MVLY

The scientific interests of P. I. Hel'nikov are concentrated on questions of
general and regional geocryology. groundwater in the frozen zone. geothermy.
and the interaction of frozen rocks with foundations of structures. Based on
these studies. he made major theoretical generalizations and isolated the
laws governing the development of penmafrost rocks which made it possible

to introduce into the national economy of the north new advanced methods for
stable construction on permafrost ground. as well as methods of searching for
and operating groundwater of the frozen zone. One of the results of theore-
tical generalizations of P. I. Hel'nikov is the first geocryological map of
the territory of the Yakutsk ASSR. As a result of analyzing geothermal con-
ditions of the Siberian platform and the Verkhoyanskiy mountain-folded region.
he discovered one of the largest positive frozen-geothermal anomalies
confined to sedimentary rocks of the Predvekhoyanskiy marginal trough and

the Vilyuyskiy syneclise.

P. I. Mel'nikov is the chairman of the Scientific Council of the USSR Academy
of Sciences for Cryology of the Barth.

Aleksey Fedorovich Treshnikov (oceanology).

He was born in 1916. is a specialist in the field of oceanology and geography
of the World Ocean. and head of the department of Leningrad University.

Under the supervision of A. F. Treshnikov, many large polar expeditions were
made which brought major scientific results and discoveries. In all the
expeditions, he conducted field studies, analysis of the obtained materials,
and on this basis developed practical recommendations for the needs of the
national economy and science. He has discovered and made a detailed study of
the penetration of Pacific Ocean.wacer into the region of the North Pole,

shown the dissemination of deep Atlantic water, given their hydrobiological
characteristics,ss well as an evaluation of the circulation of water and its

effect on the ice regime and navigational conditions of the route of the
north sea passage.

Under the supervision of A. F. Treshnikov, a comprehensive program was
developed "Polar Experiment" aimed at studying the interaction of the ocean
and the atmosphere. and representing a component part of the international
program for studying the southern ocean which is currently being implemented.

A. F. Treshnikov is the president of the Geographical Society of the USSR. He
is a Hero of Socialist Labor. and USSR State Prize laureate.

Department of History
Aleksandr Hikhaylovich Samsonov (history of the USSR).
He was born in 1908, is a specialist in the area of the history of Soviet

society and military history, and the senior scientific colleague of the
institute of History of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

9‘
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE10NLY

The works of A. M. Samsonov study the problems of the history of Uorld Her 11.
esepcially the decisive critical stages of the Great Patriotic war. provide

a critique of the antiscientific conventions of the bourgeois authors.
comprehensively show the decisive contribution of the Soviet Union and its
Armed Forces to the defeat of Hitlerite Germany and imperialist Japan. cover
the activity of the Soviet rear. and reveal the laws which governed the
historical victory of the Soviet Army and people in the Stalingrad battle.

A. H. Samsonov is the chief editor of the journal ISTORICHESKIYE ZAPISKI.
Sergey Leonidovich Tikhvinskiy (general history).

He was born in 1918. is a specialist in historiography. source study. history
of international relations in the Far Best. new and latest history of China.

Japan and other countries of the East. and is head of the Diplomatic Academy
of the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

S. L. Tikhvinskiy is the initiator of the development of problems associated
with the history of formation of the Chinese nation and ideology of nationalism.
movement for reform in the Tsin empire in the early 19th century. bourgeois-
democratic revolutionary movement under the leadership of Sun Yet-sen. the
ideology of the national-liberation movement. S. L. Tikhvinakiy has consider-
able merit for his critique of the Maoist concepts of historical development of
China which have been called upon to "substantiate" the great power hegemo-
nistic course of the modern leaders of the People's Republic of China.

He made a major contribution to the study of the history of Japan. Russo-
Japanese and Soviet-Japanese relations. questions of the policy of the USSR.
national-liberation movement in the developing countries.

S. L. Tikhvinskiy is the chief editor of the journal NOVAYA I NOVEYSHAYA ISTORI-
YA. and chairman of the National Committee of Historians of the USSR.

Department of Philosopy and Law
Viktor Grigor'yevich Afanas'yev (philosophy).

He was born in 1922. is a specialist in the field of the theory of scientific
communism. theory of control and methodology of systems study. and is the
chief editor of the newspaper PRAVDA.

Many works of v. G. Afsnas'yev have covered the problem of systems and control
of a socialist society. They give special importance to the development of
ways to solve the historical task set by the CPSU. unification of the achieve-

ments of :he scientific-technical revolution and the advantages of socialism.
The works of V. G. Afanss'yev contain an analysis of the concepts of the
system. its composition. structures, functions and dynamics. They study

the systems nature of the forms of knowledge. as well as the means of knowing
systems. They analyze ways to improve control and in this case special
attention is focused on program-target planning and control. V. G. Afanas'yev
made a significant contribution to the development of problems of dialetical

materialism and philosophical problems of biology.

95
FOR OFFICIALIﬂiECﬂULY
0. 'I‘ . Bogomolov
FOI1OFFNJAI.UBEINVLY

V. G. Afanas'ysv is a member of the CPSU Central Conmittee and deputy of the
USSR Suprene Soviet.

Teodor Il'ich Oysermen (philosophy).

He was born in 1916 and is a specialist in the field of the history of
philosopy. dialectical materialism. general theory of the historical-philo-

sophical process. and head of the sector of the Institute of Philosopy of
the USSR Acadely of Sciences.

T. I. Oysermen has deeply analysed the structure of historical forms of
dialectics and materialism. and made a comprehensive and systematic analysis
of the philosophical concept of alienation. as has made a detailed study of
the basic stages in the historical establishment of the philosophy of Marxism.
His works in the field of the theory of historical-philosophical process are
a new trend in the research process. his numerous studies covering the
teachings a: lent. Fichte and Hegel.

T. I. Oyserman is a foreign member of the SDI Academy of Sciences.
Department of Economics
Oleg Timofeyevich Bogomolov (economics).

He was born in 1927. is a specialist in the field of problems of the develop-
ment of the economics of socialism and the world socialist system. and is
director of the Institute of Economics of the Horld Socialist Systen of the
USSR Academy of Sciences.

0. T. Bogoaolov made an important contribution to the development of theore-
tical and methodological fundamentals for the study of the development of

the world socialist economy and socialist economic integration. Under this
supervision. a number of urgent scientific directions were developed. in par-
ticular. comprehensive study of the economic. political and ideological

processes in socialist countries. study of the general economic and sector
probleas of socialist integration. generalisation of experience oftthe

countries of socialism inthe development of socioeconomic strategy. and
study of the role of socialist countries in the reconstruction of the world
economic relations.

0. T. Bogomolov is the chief editor of the Journal IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. SERIYA
EKDNOHICBESKAYA.

Tat'yana lvanovna Zaslavskaya (economics).

She is a specialist in the field of econonics and sociology of labor. and the
head of the department of the Institute of Bcononics and Organization of
Industrial Production of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of
Sciences.

97
FOI‘OFFKJAI.UBI(HNLY
F0!!NNWC1A1.USEIMULY

The works of T.I. Zaslavskaya treat the theoretical problems and methods of
systems study and forecasting of socioeconomic processes. as well as the
practical investigation of mechanisms for the distribution by labor. laws
governing the migration of a population. mobility of the labor resources.
development of the city and village. These works made it possible to con-

struct a systems variant forecast for the socioeconomic development of the
agrarian sector of the USSR up to the year 2000. reveal possible contradic-

tions in the future and disproportions in a certain variant of development.
and make a comparative evaluation of the efficiency of various variants.
T. I. Zaslavskays also developed methods of a typological analysis of

developing social objects. Using the procedures of pattern recognition. she
constructed a generalized multidimensional typology for regions of the USSR

which can be used to formulate long-term forecasts for the development of
the agrarian sector which are differentiated by zones of the country.

Abram Gerssimovich Hileykovskiy (economics).

He was born in 1911. and is a specialist in the field of worl economics and
international relations.

The basic trendainthe scientific research of A. G. hileykovskiy is the world
capitalist economy and international relations. the basic aspects of the
political economy of state-monopolistic capitalism. problems of deepening
inthe general crisis of capitalism. critique of bourgeois economic theories.
the leading trends in the development of the economy of the main capitalist
powers. militarization of the economy of the capitalist countries. structural
shifts. and problems of reproduction and cycles in the economics of
capitalism.

A. G. Hileykovskiy is a USSR State Prize laureate.
Department of Literature and Language
Georgiy Vladimirovich Stepanov (linguistics).

he was born in 1919. is a specialist in the field of general and Roman

linguistics. literary criticism. and is director of the Institute of Linguis-
tics of-the USSR Academy of Sciences.

The works of G; V. Stepanov treat urgent problems of linguistics and literary
criticism. linguistic theory. history of language. sociolinguistics and
stylistics. history of literature and poetics. He has developed the theory
of language variance. including historical-cultural. social. structural and
functional-stylistic parameters needed to characterise the forms of existence
and functioning of languages. for the discovery of the laws governing their
historical development. He substantiated the new solution to the problem

of the systematic nature in language by introducing the concept of an
external system which interacts with the internal language structure. and has
proposed a new technique for describing it.

98
FOIIHHHCJAI.UBE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

G. V. Stepanov has significantly enriched the principles for describing
languages which function outside the territories of their initial dispersal.
and has constructed standard aodels for the fornation of a nusber of national
literary languages.

6. V. Stepanov is the chief editor of the Journal IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. SERIYA
LITERATURX I YAZIKA. Re is a foreign lambs: of the Spanish Royal Acadely
and the Lisbon Academy of Sciences.

comment: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka". Westnik mac-11 nauk sss ", 1982

9035
C80: 1814/77 8ND

99
ltlltﬂﬂﬂC1A1.UBli(H‘LY