FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10058
19 October 1981

Translation

SOVIET SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]

_or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apes L/10058

19 October 198.

SOVIET SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY

This non-serial report contains selected translations of Russian
articles on the planning and administration of Soviet research

and development and the introduction of scientific achievements
into industry.

CONTENTS

Fedoseyev Report at USSR Academy of Sciences' Annual General ﬂeeting
(P. N. Fedoseyev; VESTNIK AKAIEAII NAUK 8583, Jul 81) ...........

Selecteo Speeches From 1981 General Annual Meeting of USSR Academy
of Sciences

(VENIK W11 “Aux 35$, Jul 81) 000.000.000.000...0000.00... 1

Markov on Department of Nuclear Physics, by H. A. Markov
Velikhov on Academy Work, by Ye. P. Velikhov
Vinogradov on Information Transfer, by V. A. Vinogradov
Belyakov on Basic Research, by V. P. Belyakov
Zhavoronkov on Incomplete Research, .by ll. H. Zhavoronkov

Glebov on Interdepartmental Coope'ation, by I. A. Olebov

Increasing Effectiveness of VUZ'S in SEE Hark
(3. Y8. SV1r5k1y; MIX WI "AUX m, Jun 81) sentence... 3

AzSSR Acadcnw of Sciences Scientific Research Development
(mIK W11 “AUX SSS, H” 81) OOOOOOOOOOOIOD00.03.000.000.

-a- [I-USSR-OFWO]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 300.53
PEDOSEYEV REPORT AT USSR ACADEMY OF SCIBNCES' ANNUAL GENERAL mum
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK $883 in Russian No 1, Jul 8l pp 11-27

[Report by Academician P. N. Pedoseyev, vice-president of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences: "The 26th CPSU Congress on the Tasks of Science in the New Five-Year Plan")

[Text] The 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which took
place under circumstances of great political enthusiasm, was a notable event in the
life of our party and of the Soviet people, of the fraternal socialist countries,
and of the international communist and workers' movement. The general party forum
of the CPSU was a phenomenon of true epochal significance, which will have a power-
ful and favorable influence on the course of future historical development.

All progressive mankind followed the work of the congress with profound attention
and hope; the eyes of all champions of freedom and happiness among peoples, of
peace and detente, and of friendship and cooperation among nations were turned
toward the Kremlin Palace.

A vivid demonstration of the enormous international authority of the CPS!) and the
vitality of principles of internationalism was the attendance at the congress of
delegations from 123 comnunist workers’ and national-democratic parties and organi-
zations from over 100 countries of the world and speeches at the congress by repre-
sentatives of these parties and organizations.

The work of the 26th CPSU Congress demonstrated with special force the indestructible
unity of the party, its solidarity behind the Central Coal-ittee headed by the dis-
tinguished leader of our party and of the international com-mist movement and the
faithful successor of the great work of Lenin, the General Secretary of the CPSU
Central Committee, Comrade Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev.

‘Ihe report given at the congress by l.. I. Breahnev received unanimous approval by
the delegates of our party and the Soviet people and all Soviet scientists and has
roused extreme interest all over the world. This is a party document of program
significance, a notable contribution to the theory and practice of scientific cannu-
nism. The congress resolved wholly and fully to approve the report by Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev -- the Report of the CPSU Central Couittee -- and to make this report the
basis for the work of all party organizations.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The report by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev provided comprehensive elucidation on the
activities of the party in realizing the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress, general-
ized the experience in building communism, pointed out the vast achievements of our
country during the last decade, deeply analyzed the economic changes and social pro-
cesses that took place during this period, vividly depicted the prospects for the
future movement of our country on the road to building communism. The report gave a
Marxi.t-Leninist analysis of the present international situation and the world revolu—
tionary process, defined the tasks in the struggle for peace, detente, and coopera-
tion among nations and for social progress.

"Today," said Leonid ll'ich, "the world situation requires new, additional efforts to
eliminate the threat of war and to strengthen international security." And it is
quite natural that these efforts proceed above all from our party and from the first
country of socialism in the world, which is putting into practice the principles of
Leninist external policy. Evidence of this are the new, exceptionally important
proposals made by Comrade L. l. Brezhnev from the high rostrum of the 26th CPSU
Congress. These proposals represent the further development of the Program for
Peace, developed by the 24th and 25th CPSU Congresses and express the will and
aspirations of the Soviet people.

Soviet scientists fully share and warmly support the genuinely humanistic Program
for Peace proclaimed by the party. The general meeting of the Academy of Sciences
unanimously approves L. I. Brezhnev's proposal to create an authoritative interna-
tional committee which could show the vital necessity for averting nuclear catas-
trophe. It can be said with satisfaction that many noted foreign scientists also
welcome this proposal. We must make all effort for the world community to bring
this about.

I would especially like to speak about the truly creative and profoundly optimistic
atmosphere in which the 26th CPSU Congress took place. We all understood the
unusual enthusiasm and fervor which greeted Leonid ll'ich‘s report and the excite-
ment and pride when the delegates spoke of the vast accomplishments of the party and
the people during the past period and about the successes achieved in all sectors in
the building of communism. At the same time, the reports and speeches, with all the
directness and frankness that is the custom of our party. dealt with shortcomings,
ommissions, and unsolved problems -- so that effective measures can be taken for
overcoming the difficulties that arise in the path of our movement toward the great
goal.

The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress, which can quite rightly be called historic,
have embodied the basic principles of the party's internal and external policies and
have provided a comprehensive and specific program for the economic and social
development of our country during the llth Five-Year Plan and the period to 1990.
These decisions continue the basic strategic line set by the Zkth and 25th CPSU
Congresses and express the continuity of our movement from five-year plan to five-
year plan on the road to communism and the consistent course toward the steady
improvement in the people's well-being. At the same time, they reflect the special
features of the present stage of developed socialist society and also new demands
being placed on the management of the economic structure and social development.

All the work of the 26th CPSU Congress provides the Soviet people with the orienta-
tion that the chief tasks of the new five-year plan and of the whole ten years

2
FOR OFFKJAL.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ahead can be accomplished only on the basis of intensifying social production and
increasing the effectiveness and quality of work, of accelerating scientific—techni-
cal progress, of improving labor productivity, and of raising the level of social and
labor activity of the Soviet people.

In examining the questions relating to intensification of civil production, one can
distinguish three decisive areas. First, strict economy of all kinds, more effective
utilization of all materials and energy, and elimination of waste in the economy,
including agricultural products. V. l. Lenin said that economic work requires
"thriftiness." This thought was stressed by L. I. Brezhnev, who said. at the con-
gress, that economics must be economical. Secondly, there must be fuller utilisa-
tion of productive capacities, the elimination of waste of workers'time, and better
organisation of production and labor. ‘l'hirdly, there mat be more improved, more
productive machines, mechanisms, assemblies, and automatic systems, and the develop-
ment and application of more effective technology.

The 26th CPSU Congress paid a great deal of attention to the tasks of further devel-
oping science and, on this basis, accelerating scientific-technical progress. “The
party of coumnists," Comrade l... I. Breshnev stressed in his report, "proceeds from
the assumption that building a new society is simply inconceivable without science."
The congress indicated the necessity to move all economic sectors to the advanced
frontiers of science and technology. This goal of the congress is the concretiza-
tion of the historic task of organically uniting the achievements of the scientific-
technical revolution with the advantages of socialism.

The scientific-technical revolution is expanding under the circumstances of a
heightened struggle between two world systems when, on the one hand, the power and
world influence of the forces of socialism, national liberation, and social pro-
gress are growing and, on the other hand, the general crisis of capitalism is
intensifying and all its contradictions are deepening while, at the same time, the
aggressiveness of imperialism is strengthening.

Under present conditions, imperialist strategists are putting especially large
stakes into the utilization of scientific-technical achievements and an arms race.
The successes of the scientific-technical revolution are themselves being directed
more and more toward creating monstrous means for mass annihilation of people and
toward the incitement of war hysteria. Under these conditions, the question of
increasing the effectiveness of our civil production on the basis of utilizing all
possible achievements of the scientific-technical revolution is the pivotal problem
not only for the development of socialist society but for all of human civilization.

The imperialists calculate that, by relying on a developed production base, on a
high scientific-technical potential and qualified personnel and by intensifying their
robbery of economically poorly developed countries and exploiting the workers of
their own countries, and by increasing their military power, they can occupy a
dominant position on the fronts of the scientific-technical revolution and achieve
economic and military supremacy over the whole world.

American imperialists intend to use their scientific-technical base and military

force for purposes of leading the capitalist world and as a pressure lever on young
national states to interfere with their movement toward social progress, applying

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all means, even up to armed intervention, against liberation movements. But the

main intent of American imperialism is to build up armaments and scientific potential,
particularly military scientific potential, to surpass the defense potential and
retard the economic growth of the Soviet Union and countries of the socialist frater-
nity, to undermine the historic worldwide achievements of real socialism, and to turn
back the course of the historical process.

Allotting increasing financial resources, technical equipment, and qualified person-
nel to the development of scientific-technical potential, the American imperialists
are trying at the same time to slow down the development of Soviet science in the
most important areas. Under various pretexts (sometimes under the banner of pro-
tecting "human rights" and sometimes under the pretext of the "Soviet military
threat" or "0.8. national security"), American rulers limit and roll back scientific-
technical relations with the Soviet Union on those problems in which they think that
the scientific achievements of their country are more advanced than the achievements
of Soviet science are. As is known, American authorities have placed an embargo on
the sale to the USSR of many types of scientific-technical equipment and various
materials. In the same vein, they have put pressure on other capitalist countries,
trying to bring about the isolation of Soviet science from the overall progress of
world science and technology and to establish a kind of scientific-technical blockade
against our country and the countries of the socialist concord.

It can be stated with confidence that all Soviet scientists will take active part in
the solution of the main tasks in the two basic areas which Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev
spoke about in his speech to the 26th CPSU Congress -- the creation of communism and
the strengthening of peace on Earth.

Scientific-technical progress in our country has as its highest goal a steady rise
in the material and cultural level of people's lives and serves their fundamental
interests. Scientific-technical progress is a powerful force for the growth of
modern productive capabilities; it creates favorable new conditions for building the
supply and equipment base for communism, and for lifting the people's well-being and
improvement of the social structure and social relations, for improving labor condi-
tions and everyday life for the people and the comprehensive development of the
personality, and also for improvement in the natural environment in which man lives.

Characterizing the achievements of the Soviet people in building the supply and equip-
ment base for communism and the role of science in the development of productive
forces, L. l. Brezhnev stressed: "The scientific-technical revolution is developing
in depth and breadth, changing the appearance of many factories and whole economic
sectors. Soviet science occupies a leading position in the most important fields of
knowledge."

Scientific achievements have been the basis for the further development or new
creation in such fields as atomic machine building, space technology, electronics and
microelectronics, the microbiological industry, laser technology, the production of
artificial diamonds and other synthetic materials; the utilisation of natural resources
and the distribution of productive forces have been improved; and social relations
have been made better.

Without the very active and direct participation of science and without acceleration

of scientific-technical progress now in the more complex conditions of the 1980's, it
is not possible to successfully develop the economy and to accomplish large social

h
FOR OFl-TCIAL USE ONLY
FOR(MWHC1AL.USE(NVLY

tasks. Therefore, the acceleration of scientific-technical progress is truly a key
problem in the development of our country under present conditions. ”The country
has a serious need," said Comrade L. I. Brezhnev in the Sunny Report of the CPSU
Central Committee, "for the efforts of 'big science,’ along with work on theoreti-
cal problems, to be concentrated on the solution of key economic questions and on
discoveries that can introduce genuinely revolutionary changes in production." This
is a clear program for the development and practical utilization of the achievements

of science, including fundamental science, which is the chief source of technical
progress.

The achievements of science and technology can and must compensate for the growing
additional expenditures of labor and resources in the economy that are related to
having to use fuel and energy and raw materials from remote places that are difficult
to reach. The accomplishment of this economic task is becoming a matter of first-
priority importance, because the effective exploitation of the new eastern regions

of the country is dependent upon it. Scientific-technical progress is called upon to
overcome still another difficulty -- to provide high rates of growth of production

in the face of a noticeable reduction in growth of labor resources caused by un-
favorable demographic shortfalls in the next few years.

At the 262h CPSU Congress, L. I. Brezhnev stressed that "the development of science
is the basic of basics for scientific-technical progress."

The documents of the congress note the growing significance of the scientific-techni-

cal potential of the country and outstanding achievements in fundamental and applied
research.

A review of the development of science during the past five-year plan was given in
the address of the congress by the president of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
Academician A. P. Aleksandrov, and in the speeches of a number of delegates. The
most important results were reflected in the messages of greetings to the 26th CPSU
Congress from the USSR Academy of Sciences and the union republic academies of
sciences and in the many reports by scientific institutions. Reading these materials
one can graphically visualize that significant forward progress is being achieved
over a broad front of science. Scientists reported to the congress about fuller and
more precise understanding of the objective development patterns in nature and
society, about deeper penetration into the bowels of the Earth, into the fabric of
the social organism, and into cosmic distances and the structure of the atom, and
about successes in learning of the galaxy and elementary particles, the life of
living cells and the growth of crystals.

Social scientists reported about research on centuries past and prospects for the
future, on the basic moving forces and successive stages of the historical process,
on the intensifying crisis of the outdated capitalist system and the laws for build-
ing the ascending communist structure, and on the structure and functioning of the
new social organism -- from material production to political and ideological super-
structure and to literature and art.

Reports of fascinating interest were given on new data that scientists have gained
about energy from the sun and the atomic nucleus, new methods for treating and
welding metals, the creation of artificial materials, on the development of new
computing methods and equipment, on the improvement of machines to replace physical

- 5
son omml. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

labor and to make intellectual labor easier, on the application of lasers and glass-
fiber light carriers for the transmission of information, on new chemical reagents
and biotechnology, on the creation of highly productive plants and wonder-working
drugs, and on the protection and rational utilization of the environment and world
oceans. In short, we have a rich, meaningful scientific accumulation and good
prospects for future progress in science.

Socialist society, vitally interested in expanding the scientific- technical revolu—
tion, can and must create more favorable conditions to make it possible. As was
noted at the congress, however, we do not always exploit the advantages of socialism
for the development of science, for increasing its effectiveness, or for accelera-
ting scientific-technical progress.

The proposition that science is a direct productive force has become a literal
truth. But this proposition must necessarily be tied with the understanding that
science becomes a direct productive force only when it is embodied in the means of
production and in technological developments and, subsequently, in the production
of material wealth. "The close integration of science and production," stressed
L. I. Brezhnev, "is an urgent requirement of the present epoch."

Unfortunately, in the implementation of scientific achievements and in the intro-
duction of innovations into mass production, many difficulties arise. The Soviet
Union has enriched the world with many discoveries which have foreordained basic
improvement of the techniques and technology of production, but we ourselves, in a
number of instances, are backward in the timing and the scales of application of
these progressive technological methods. The congress commissioned an analysis of
the reasons for the intolerable sluggishness in assimilating prospective develop-
ments.

In analyzing the reasons for such a situation, it is necessary to consider a number
‘of circumstances, including technical-economic ones. It often happens that develop-
ments of new technology do not provide obvious technical and economic advantages in
comparison with existing techniques and technology. In large part, this is caused
by imperfections in the cost-accounting system, under which it is unprofitable for
erterprises to make products cheaper because this leads to worsening of production
indicators for the evaluation of their activity. The Summary Report by the Central

Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress pointed out this circumstance with complete
definity. In a number of instances, new technology causes an increase in the cost
of manufactured items insofar as expenses for the production of new machinery and
equipment increase substantially but their productivity increases less than the
price increases. As a result, this leads to unjustified growth in the cost of end
products in all the sectors that employ such technology. Intolerable lack of
coordination also exists in the methods and criteria for evaluating the effective-
ness of capital investment in new technology.

The analysis of these kinds of problems has long occupied a large group of economic
scientists. A substantiated answer, however, has still not been given to the basic
economic questions of scientific-technical progress.

Under present conditions of our country's economic development, enterprises should
be vitally interested in utilizing the achievements of science and technology. The

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

central planning and administrative bodies and the USSR State Committee for Science
and Technology, as indicated to the congress by L. I. Brezhnev, "should clearly
formulate practical tasks that require maximum attention from scientists. At the
same time," continued L. l. Brezhnev, "science itself should be a constant 'disturber
of tranquility,’ pointing out the sectors where stagnation and beckwardness have
been noticed and where the present level of knowledge provides an opportunity to move
forward rapidly and successfully. How to turn this work into an integral part of

the management mechanism must be thought through."

Exceptional importance must be attached to the assignment by the congress to the
USSR Academy of Sciences, the USSR Stats Committee for Science and Technology, and
the ministries to conduct an evaluation of the scientific and design bases of various
sectors of the economy and to make proposals for certain regrouping of scientific
forces.

As is known, the USSR Academy of Sciences and the republic academies give a large
amount of attention to the search for new methods and forms for introducing the
results of scientific research into the economy. During the course of this work,
new forms are arising for cooperation by academy scientific institutions with
ministerial institutes and industrial enterprises and organizations. The Siberian
Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences has achieved significant successes in
uniting science and production. Valuable experience has been accumulated at the
Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, the scientific institutions of which concentrate
their efforts on the purposeful development of those fundamental and applied
research projects that provide the basis for creating conceptually new technology
leading to fundamental transformations of production processes. The experience of
the Siberian Department and the Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences have been approved
by the CPSU Central Cmmmittee.

The improvement of forms for relations between science and production must be
constantly in the sphere of attention of the USSR Academyof Sciences and of its
departments and scientific institutions.

Experience shows that difficulties in implementing the achievements of science can
be overcome by improving the organisation and control of scientific research and
the system and mechanism for interaction among science, technology, and production.
During the past two decades, much has been done for the solution of these problems.
and effective forms have been found for integrating science and production. Con-
tinuous special-purpose program planning is being implemented with the aim of
uniting science and production. The drafting of special-purpose complex programs,
as was stressed at the congress, will provide the possibility to unite the efforts
of scientists, producers, and ministry workers in solving the most important
scientific-technical problems and to reduce the time-lengths for creating and
assimilating new technology.

During the last five-year plan, the USSR Academy of Sciences took active part in
work on lll scientific-technical programs out of 209 programs approved by the USSR
State Committee for Science and Technology for 1976 to 1980. The Academy of
Sciences was the head agency, responsible for the fulfillment as a whole, for such
important programs as "world Oceans," "Molecular Biology," "Scientific and Technical
Information," and "Seismology snd Earthquake-Resistant Construction)‘ The USSR
Academy of Sciences conducted a large amount of work on the energy program.

7
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR 0FF1C1AL.USE1DNLY

Under the llth Five-Year Plan now beginning, it is intended to implement 160
scientific-technical programs. Projects under joint programs and plans with many
ministries and agencies are being conducted by scientific institutions of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. Academician A. P. Aleksandrov, the president of our academy,
covered this well in his speech to the congress. Research on special-purpose programs
must constantly be at the center of attention of our scientific institutions, depart-
ments, presidiums of scientific centers, and affiliates of the Academy of Sciences.

One of the effective forms of science-production integration are scientific-produc-
tion associations. The experience of the best .f these, which operate in large
industrial centers of the country, shows that they al'ow more rapid introduction in-
to practice of scientific achievements and engineering developments. Representatives
from Leningrad, Sverdlovsk, Belorussia, and many other delegates spoke about this.
However, things are not always like this everywhere. One reason for this is,
evidently, that the economic aspects and questions of interaction have still not

been fully adjusted with respect to the scientific, planning-design, and production
units that have entered into scientific-production associations. There are often
instances where ministries obligate the enterprises that enter into an association to
fulfill their usual production program that is unrelated to the tasks of introducing
the achievements of science into production. The congress asked for an end to such
practice. Every scientific-production association, said Comrade N. A. Tikhonov, the
chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers, at the congress, should become a large

center for creating and manufacturing new high-quality products and for improving
technology and the organization of production.

The USSR Academy of Sciences and the USSR State Committee for Science and Technology
tugether with the economic ministries should examine and resolve questions relating
to the improvement of work of scientific-production associations and should deter-
mine the mechanism for utilizing the results of fundamental research.

The institutes of the Department of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sciences and
the Institute for State and Law of the USSR Academy of Sciences, in turn, must give
practical scientific-methodological assistance to the USSR State Committee for
Science and Technology, to the USSR Ministry of Finance, and to the economic minis-

tries in the improvement of the legal-economic mechanism for the functioning of a
scientific-production association.

Improvement in the organisation of scientific research largely depends on its
rational and efficient coordination. As is known, the 25th CPSU Congress gave a
responsible assignment to the Academy of Sciences to coordinate all scientific work
in the country. Such an assignment to the USSR Academy of Sciences, as the center
for theoretical and fundamental research was related, first of all, to the growing
significance of fundamental science as the basis for scientific-technical progress
and, secondly, to the increasing role of special-purpose program planning. After the
25th CPSU Congress, the coordination of scientific research was strengthened and
relations were improved with the specialised academies of science, with higher
schools, and with ministerial scientific-research institutions. The topical sessions
of the general meeting of the USSR Academy of Sciences had important significance in
this regard. One was a session of the general meeting of the USSR Academy of
Sciences (December 1978), with participation by the All-Union Academy of Agricultural
Sciences imeni V. I. Lenin and the USSR Ministry of Agriculture, at which there were

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OF?WCIAL.USE(NVLY

discussions of the tasks of Soviet science in implementing programs for the further
development of agriculture in the country. Another was a joint session of the
general meeting of our academy and the general meeting of the Academy of Medical
Sciences (November 1980), which examined questions relating to the development of
fundamental research for medicine and public health. Extremely useful in the
context of coordinating scientific research was a session of the December general
meeting of the USSR Academy of Sciences, at which there were discussions of the
tasks of science in solving urgent problems in the development of the economy. This
work should be continued and should be improved.

Significant work has also been done on the coordination of scientific research
performed at the country's higher educational institutions. In a joint decision of
the presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the board of the USSR Ministry of
Higher and Secondary Specialized Education "On Improving Relations Between Higher
Schools and the USSR Academy of Sciences," measures were outlined for the further
development of research in VUZ's and for expansion of the practice of joint scienti-
fic research by academy institutes and VUZ's.

The 26th CPSU Congress pointed out the necessity for more effectively using the
scientific potential of higher schools and for reducing the gap in material support
between academy and VUZ science. At the same time, it is necessary to improve the
training, raise the qualifications, and improve the certification of scientific and
scientific-teaching personnel, and provide all possible support to the development
of mass scientific-technical creativity.

The transition to the intensive path of development relates not only to production,
but also to science. Intensification of research activity has become an imperative
necessity. Calculations and verifications conducted in connection with the drafting
of the Complex Program for Scientific-Technical Progress to 1990 and 2000, show the
inevitability of retardation of the growth in numbers of scientific associates and
in the total number of all workers in the sphere of science. The material and
financial resources for science are also limited. Therefore, today, two inter-
related problems stand out with special sharpness: the intensification of scienti-

fic research and the guarantee of priority to the development of the decisive areas
of science.

The intensification of scientific research presupposes improvement in technical
support to science and wider use of computers. Decisions of the congress provide
for strengthening the experimental and experimental-production base for scientific-
rcsearch and planning-design organisations. It is planned to significantly increase
the production of instruments, equipment, automation hardware, reagents, and
preparations for the condtct of scientific research.

Putting the principle of priority into practice is acquiring decisive significance.
This means that provision must be made for concentrating scientific efforts and
resources on the main areas on which depend the progress of science and the solution
of key problems in social-economic development and for specialising the activities of
the republic academies and scientific centers on the areas of scientific development
that hold the most prospects. The concentration of scientific resources is necessary
also for the attainment of world levels, especially in those areas where our back-
wardness would be particularly intolerable. In other words, the whole system of

9
FOR OﬁTWCJAl.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Scientific research mat, as L. I. Brezhnev pointed out at the 26th CPSU Congress, be
" . significantly more flexible and mobile, intolerant of fruitless laboratories
and institutes . . . The CPSU Central Comittee," he said in his Sin-nary Report to
the congress, "is in favor of further increasing the role and responsibility of the
USSR Academy of Sciences and improving the organisation of the whole system of
scientific research. " Constant improvement is needed in the network and structure
of scientific institutions, in accord with the requirements of scientific-technical

progress as well as tinely determination of trends and changes in the direction of
research and development.

In view of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress, it is necessary to make re-
search programs and planned tasks for scientific developments more concrete and to
put the priority principle into practice. In this regard, the USSR Academy of
Sciences should keep the whole front of science within its purview, should not allow
backwardness in any area, and should not overlook the possibility for creative

breakthrough in some sector which, at a given time, may not seem hopeful but in the
long run could yield good results.

As is known, according to a decision of the CPSU Central Cosmittee, the draft

"Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981 to
1985 and for the Period to 1990" was published at the beginning of December 1980 for
national discussion. This discussion took place all over the country with extreme
livoliness. A large number of criticisms and suggestions to the text of the docu-
mcnt were expressed. This is clear evidence of the broad development of democratism
in our country and of the practical participation of the popular masses in the
resolution of important state questions.

The scientists of the country, including those of the USSR Academy of Sciences and

the academies of sciences of the union republics, actively participated in the
discussion of the Basic Directions.

in the final text of the "Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Develop-ent
of the USSR for 1981 to 1985 and for the Period to 1990," which was approved by the
26th CPSU Congress, a large number of criticisms and additions proposed by the

USN Academy of Sciences were taken into account. Thus, the necessity for pushing
ahead the development of fundamental research was stressed; of important signifi-
cancc in this regard was the addition concerning the necessity to assure the
development and implementation of the Complex Program for Scientific-Technical
Progress, which obligates the Academy of Sciences to increase attention to this
extremely responsible work. The draft basic Directions were also amended to
include the thesis concerning the strengthening of interaction among the social,
natural, and engineering sciences. The importance of this thesis is related to the
growing scale of scientific problems and to the necessity for their complex treat-
ment, to the prospects fpr research on the edges of various fields of science and,
finally, to the strengthening integration of science and productioa.

As experience shows, in the drafting of the Complex Program for Scientific-Technical
Progress. substantiation of prospects for the solution of great economic problems

is possible only with agreement between the social-economic and scientific-technical
aspects. On the one hand, the existing build-up in the development of science and
technology largely predetermines possibilities for solving social and economic

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIHC1A1.USE1)NLY

problems; on the other hand, the progress of science and technology itself,
especially in the long run, must be subordinated to the requirements for the social-

economic development of the country and must make possible the solution of large
economic problems.

A number of proposals by the USSR Academy of Sciences were taken into account in the
formulation of areas for scientific research in the natural and social sciences

and also in sections pertaining to the development of industry, agriculture,
distribution of productive forces, and others.

Indeed, not all of the proposals could be included in the Basic Directions, but they

should be taken into consideration in work practice. The appropriate decisions were
adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress.

We all gave attention to the purposeful determination in the Basic Directions of the
tasks in science and technology during the period before us. The development of
science and technology must be, in still greater measure, subordinated to the
solution of the most important problems in the future progress of Soviet society and
to accelerating the transition of the economy to the road of intensive development.

The documents of the congress fully and specifically defined the chief areas in the
development of the fundamental sciences and also the tasks relating to the solution
of the urgent problems of scientific-technical and social progress on which the
efforts of the workers of science should be concentrated. It is intended, first of
all, to assure the development and implementation of special-purpose complex pro-
grams for the solution of the most important scientific-technical problems, to
substantially reduce the time involved in creating and assimilating new technology,
and to strengthen mutual relations between science and production.

Among the basic scientific areas is foreseen the development of mathematics and an
increase in the effectiveness of its use for applied purposes. One of the basic
problems of modern scientific-technological progress is the development and improve-

ment of computer technology, with which is tied a whole complex of automation and
control problems.

Knowledge of the microstructure of matter has been and remains one of the chief
fundamental problems of science. A deeper understanding of the structure and
characteristics of the interaction of elementary particles, undoubtedly, would be

a very great step in conquering the forces of nature, like those that resulted from
the discovery of the structure of the atomic nucleus.

Broad experimental and theoretical research is foreseen in the physics of the
atomic nucleus and nuclear reactions. A large amount of attention will be given to

the development of accelerator technology, research facilities, and automation of
nuclear physics experimentation.

To increase the effectiveness in the use of large experimental facilities such as
research reactors and accelerators, it is necessary above all to reduce as much as
possible the time it takes to install them. Delay in construction sharply reduces
the scientific value of the experimental data produced on such facilities.

11 -
FOR OFFICIAL ‘USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Decisions of the congress plan for the further development of the fuel-energy
complex. They provide for improvement in the structure of the fuel-energy balance
and rapid development of nuclear power, including the creation of atomic electric
stations with fast-breeder reaction, which allow more effective use of nuclear fuel.

As Comrade L. I. Brezhnev said in the Summary Report of the CPSU Central Connittee
to the 26th CPSU Congress, "Life requires continuous searching for conceptually new
sources of energy, including the creation of the bases for thermonuclear power."
Therefore, in the five—year plan that is beginning, we must achieve the intensive
development of research on high-temperature plasma and on the problem of controlled
thermocuclear synthesis. Projects also will be continued on laser and electronic
thermonuclear synthesis and also on solving important engineering problems of
thermonuclear power. Science, including fundamental science, is called upon to
play an important role in improving methods for transforming energy and also for
improving existing methods and developing new methods for energy transmission.

Having made proposals for research in physics of solids, quantum electronics, optics,
and radiophysics, the Academy of Sciences must increase its attention to these
problems and successfully implement its proposals. Research on the physics of semi-
conductors must provide for the development of the physical and technological bases
of microelectronics and for the improvement of existing semiconductor instruments
and the creation of new ones. A large amount of attention must be given to

research on the complex of problems in the physics of solids, which opens up
increasing new prospects for many sciences and production.

Comrade L. I. Brezhnev's report to the party congress stressed that it is machine
building, first and foremost, that flings open the doors for what is new and
advanced in scientific and engineering thought and embodies what is new and advanced
in highly effective, reliable machines, instruments, and technological production
lines. Machine building is the main base for bringing into reality the achievements
of science and technology. At the same time, machine building is the field in which,
to a greater degree than in any other, a technical base will be created to produce
the equipment of the future. Therefore, in the five-year and ten-year periods, a
large complex of problems will be developed to improve the quality, reliability, and
productivity of machinery and to reduce their materials content and energy consump-
tion. Great hopes in this regard are being placed on the scientific institutions of
the Academy of Sciences.

In the general theory of machines, wo;k will be done on problems relating to the
creation of automatic manipulators, including industrial robots. work is to be
broadened on the theory of automatic-action machine systems.

Research on control problems will receive intensive development. significant
attention should be given to the development of the scientific bases for the auto-
motion of scientific research and experimentation.

In the five-year period now beginning, important tasks in chemical science must be
accomplished. A large amount of attention must be given to the development of the
theory of chemical structures, reactive capability, and chemical kinetics. The first
priority problem will remain the problem of producing new polymers, physiologically
active substances, composite materials, and other products with given complexes of
properties. Special significance is being acquired by the development of technologi-

12
IN)R OFFTCIAL USEICMULY
POI OETWCJAI.USEl0NLY

cal processes that provide complex and full maximum use of raw materials and which
prevent the pollution of the environment, and the development of methods for pro-
ducing liquid fuel from solid fuels. Increasingly important significance is being
acquired by the service time of various materials in manufactured items and by the
protection of metals from corrosion and polymers from aging.

The Basic Directions stress the necessity for further understanding of the mechanism
for physiological, biochemical, and genetic processes of living things, the improve-
ment of methods for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of common diseases.

and the development of new remedies, preparations, and medical equipment.

Successes of fundamental research in the biological sciences, especially its physi-
cal and chemical areas, have provided intensive development of traditional applied
areas such as technical biochemistry, technical microbiology, synthesis of biologi-
cally active compounds, and have opened up conceptually new possibilities for
solving a large number of practical problems. Genetic engineering has come about
and is already providing its first practical results. Biotechnology, an area with
important future prospects, has been formed, with orientation toward the use of
biological agents and processes for practical purposes. The Basic Directions pro-
vide for the concentration of efforts on the development of biotecnnical processes
for production of products used in medicine, agriculture, and industry.

In the five-year period now beginning, work will be developed for introducing highly
productive varieties of plants, strains of livestock, and cultures of microorganisms

and for creating new physiologically active substances for the needs of agriculture
and medicine.

The development of research is envisaged in the fields of the rational utilization
and conservation of the country's land and water resources and the chemicalizstion,
mechanization, electrification, and automation of agriculture. Long-range programs
have been drafted in these very important areas. New academy scientific institu-
tions have been created: The Institute for the Social-Economic Problems in the
Development of the Agrarian-Industrial Complex of the USSR and the Institute of

Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Hicroorganisms are beginning operation in
Saratov.

Scientists of the USSR Academy of Sciences are participating in the development of
the USSR food program for 1981 to 1985 and for the period to 1990, which is being
implemented according to the decision of the October (1980) plenum of the CPSU

Central Committee and the 26th CPSU Congress. The fulfillment of research related

to the implementation of this program is a most important task for academy scientific
institutions.

Research will be developed in the fields of geology, geophysics, geochemistry, and
mining sciences. This research is directed toward explaining the geological struc—
ture and history of the development of the Earth and earth's crust and also toward
evaluating the conditions for the origin, distribution patterns, and rational means
of utilizing in the economy of important groups of useful minerals.

During the new five~year plan, there will be a continuation of the study and mastery
of cosmic space in the interests of developing science, technology, and the economy.

13
FOR 0F!NC1AI.USE()NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the aid of space technology, research will be conducted on a larger scale on
natural resources and on processes in the atmosphere and Earth's surface.

A characteristic of mature socialism, as Comrade L. l. Brezhnev has pointed out, is
the closer interrelation between the development of the economy and the social-
political progress of society. And this requires further intensification in the
development of social sciences and significant strengthening of research in the
humanities.

Being guided by the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress, Soviet social scientists in
the last five-year plan concentrated efforts on the development of urgent problems

in Marxist-Leninist theory, the patterns and trends in the development of our
society, construction of the supply and equipment base for communism, improvement

in production relations, changes in the social structure of society, and the consoli-
dation of the socialist form of life. A large amount of attention has been given to
working on urgent problems in the further development of Soviet democracy, the
improvement of nationality relations, and fraternal cooperation of nations under the
conditions of mature socialism. Social scientists of the USSR Academy of Sciences
have taken active part in the analysis of theoretical problems relating to the new
USSR Constitution and in work on the development of legislative activity based on it.

In their research, social scientists have made a definite contribution to the
development of the concept of developed socialism. During the past five years.
serious scientific works have been created that are devoted to the history and

theory of socialist society, illuminate the experience of world socialism, and reveal
the patterns of the world revolutionary process. As noted in L. I. Brezhnev's
report, there is some good research on the history of the international workers'
movement, the present stage in the general crisis of capitalisatand the development
of state-monopoly capitalism. Serious steps have been made in the study of present
international relations. In a word, as L. I. Brezhnev has said, a large amount of
work has been done and it deserves recognition. Far from everything is satisfactory,
however, in the field of social sciences. Unfortunately, the tendency toward
scholastic theorization noted at the 25th CPSU Congress has not been fully overcome.
Works in philosophy frequently repeat and prove well-known truths instead of
analyzing the new phenomena of life. Often, research by social scientists is re—
placed by contrived “innovations" and by the construction of different variants of
systems of categories that often differ only in the sequence of presentation. Much
time and effort are wasted on fruitless discussions surrounding some conceptions and
definitions in philosophy, sociology, political economy, and in some other fields too.

At the same time, new events and trends in socialist economics and in the political
life of society are being inadequately analysed, and the task bequeathed by Lenin of
working out a theory of materialist dialectics as a total world-view and methodologi-
cal system is being accomplished too slowly, and public opinion is being studied
poorly. A large amount of attention is required by the problems of the social
consequences of the scientific-technical revolution and of communist mass education
in close relationship with the social-economic policies of the state, and many others.

The Suunmry Report by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev is a notable model of the enrichment
and further creative development of Marxist-Leninist theory. In it, the paths for
the further overall progress of the society of developed socialism are outlined, its

12:
ron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics are provided integration, and specificity is given to such funda-
mental problems as the features and prospects for the development of the supply and
equipment base for developed socialism, with consideration of the requirements for
the intensive type of growth in production and in achievements of the scientific-
technical revolution, of the dialectics of the interaction of economic, social,
political, and spiritual processes, and of the sequence of stages of developed
socialism and communism.

0n the basis of the generalization of the experience of developing the social-

class structure of our society during the last decade, the Summary Report of the
CPSU Central Committee to the 26th 0980 Congress pointed out the real possibility
that the formation of a classless structure of society will take place largely and
basically within the historical framework of mature socialism. A substantial
theoretical contribution will be made thereby to Haraist-Leninist teaching on the
correlation of the two phases of the formation of co-unism from the point of view
of the development of their social structure. Pith consideration of this perspec-
tive, largely new analysis should be done on problems such as the convergence of the
two forms of property, the wiping away of differences between city and country and

between intellectual and physical labor, prospects for the development of the
political system of socialism, and so forth.

In our multinational state, science must carefully consider nationality questions
and the strengthening of friendship among peoples. The dialectics of nationality
relations during the stage of developed socialism consists of moving toward the full
integration of nations and nationalities, not through ignoring or wiping out their
national-cultural distinctions, but on the basis of their gradual convergence and
the development of each of them on the basis of fraternal cooperation and mutual
understanding.

Many new positions are contained in the sections of the Summary Report of the CPSU
Central Committee that speak about strengthening the material and spiritual bases of
the socialist form of life and the forming of the new man and about the development
of the world socialist system.

of principal importance is the idea of the close interrelation between social-
economic policy and party mass education work and of the necessity for building all
work for improving the socialist form of life and for overcoming negative manifesta-
tions in people's conduct on the solid foundation of social-economic policy.

The congress stressed with new force the international character of socialism and
gave attention to the necessity for countries of the socialist fraternity "to learn
from one another." Characterising the dynamics and basic directions of development
of the world socialist fraternity, after pointing out that both in the internal
development of each socialist country and in the development of their cooperation
with one another new tasks and problems constantly appear, L. I. Brezhnev noted that
it would be incorrect "to paint a picture of the present socialist world in solid,
holiday colors. There are alsw complications in the development of our countries."
The 26th CPSU Congress gave a profound and scientifically based answer as to the
reasons for and the ways of overcoming these complications.

L. I. Brezhnev's report and the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress have given a
scientific analysis of new phenomena in the world of capitalism, the features of the

15
roe omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

present stage in the general crisis of capitalism, the growing political role of
developing states in the world arena, and urgent problems in the international
communist and workers' movement.

The totality of the problems on which the efforts of social scientists need to be
focused was formulated in concentrated form in the Summary Report of the CPSU
Central Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress and in the "Basic Directions for the
Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981 to 1985 and for the Period to
1990." A number of important tasks suggest the generalization of the experience
of the revolutionary-rtorganization activity of the CPSU and the international
conmmnist and workers“ movement. The completion of fundamental works on the
history of the CPSU and on the theory and history of the international workers'
movement have important significance in this regard.

At the center of theoretical activity, there must be work on the problems of
dialectical and historical materialism, scientific communism, and political
economy. The lagging work on fundamental works on these problems must be speeded
up. Research activity must be raised to a new level at institutes of the humani-
ties, especially at institutes of philosophy, sociological research, and a number
of others also. The All-Union Conference on the Philosophical Questions in the
Natural Sciences in April should be conducted at a high scientific level; it should
generalize and advance work on basic world-outlook and methodological problems in
contemporary science. We attach much significance to the philosophical and method-
ological seminars which involve hundreds of thousands of scientists and carry out
important research and mass-education functions.

Research should be continued on the theoretical questions and prospects in the
development of socialism, the creation of the supply and equipment base for
communism, improvement in production relations, the intensification of the economy,
and the increase in effectiveness of civil production for the purpose of achieving
high end economic results.

One urgent arcs of scientific investigation in the next few years remains the
development of ways to raise further the level of management in the economy, the
introduction of advanced methods for socialist administration, fuller combining of
centralized control with economic independence and initiative of enterprises, and
more effective interaction between ministerial and regional planning and control.
It is necessary to speed up work on creating an organizationally smooth mechanism
for complex special-purpose planning, for the elimination of agency barriers, and
for assuring the needed level of responsibility for the fulfillment of the planned
measures by appropriate ministries and agencies and the timely support of programs
with efficient management and supply and equipment resources.

Conceptually important significance is being attached to research on problems of
communist mass education and the comprehensive and harmonious development of the
personality and of the socialist form of life.

For national education, mass education, and cultural construction, there is great
significance for the development of the whole complex of historical sciences and

research in the fields of psychology and ethics and literature and language.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF1C1AL USEZCMVLY

In a number of basic areas of scientific research, there are proposals for studying
the pattern of deVelopment of the world socialist system, the problems of socialist
economic integration, and external economic relations. In accord with the direc-
tives of the congress, it is necessary to activate substantially the study of the
experience and the most important trends in the internal political life of the
brother countries of socialism and of prospects for strengthening socialist inte-
gration and the development of international and socialist division of labor.

The complication of the world economic situation, the strengthening interrelation
and mutual influence of economic and political processes in world development, and
the persistent attempts by the aggressive imperialist circles to poison the inter-
national atmosphere and to intensify confrontation and military hostility in inter-
national relations attach paramount importance in the research work of social
scientists to deep and specific study of various aspects of world economic develop-
ment, to the economies of capitalist and developing countries, and to the further
development of methods and methodologies for forecasting social-economic and
political world trends. There must be analysis of class movements and internal
political contradictions in the citadels of imperialism and specific explanations of
the reasons for the intensification of its aggressiveness. The significant
strengthening of the role of developing countries in international life requires the
uniting of the efforts of international specialists of various types in complex work
on the problems of the social-economic development of "third-world" countries,
questions relating to the democratization of the international economic order, and
negative effects of neocolonial practices of multinational corporations.

Social scientists, in their research activity, should keep in mind the decisions of
the 26th CPSU Congress on introducing necessary changes and additions to the CPSU
Program now in force. This has to do with generalizing new experience in the
building of socialism and communism and with giving deep scientific characteristics
to the development of socialist society as a historically necessary, natural stage
in the formation of the communist structure, and with reflecting the conceptually
important phenomena of international life. All of this requires active research by
social scientists on the real problems in building communism and the world revolu-
tionary process.

The urgent task of social scientists is to intensify criticism of anticommunism, of
bourgeois and revisionist concepts of social development, and to unmask the falsi-
fiers of Harxism-Leninism and all possible anti-Soviet fabrications in hostile
propaganda.

L. I. Brezhnev's report directed attention to the noticeable intensification of the
ideological struggle in the present world. "For the West," he said in the Summmry
Report of the 6980 Central Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress, "it is not just the
opposition of ideas. It sets in motion a whole system of means calculated to under-
mine the socialist world and break it apart. The imperialists and their accomplices
are systematically conducting a hostile campaign against socialist countries. They
blacken and pervert everything that takes place in these countries. For them the
most important thing is to turn people away from socialism."

Scientific analysis of and propaganda on the advantages of socialism, the socialist
form of life, and socialist culture, mass education in Soviet patriotism and devo-

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tion to communism, the development of the bases for world outlook, and methodologies
for ideological work and struggle -- are the paramount obligation of scientists,
especially of our institutes of the humanities. He cannot allow and must persist-
ently overcome underevaluation of this work and passivity in this matter.

In the fulfillment of the tasks placed before Soviet science, scientific cooperation
with foreign scientific institutions, first of all with the scientists of socialist
countries, can be a substantial reserve. The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress
provide for all possible development of scientific-technical relations with socialist
countries. The utilization of the advantages of the international division of labor,
the total scientific-technical potential of the countries of the socialist fraternity,
and the organization of joint research on urgent problems have great significance
both for our country and for other socialist countries. Valuable experience has been
accumulated in this regard. It is necessary in the future to develop and improve

the forms for cooperation, to develop and implement joint programs in the natural

and social sciences, and to increase the effectiveness of research.

Proceeding from principles of peaceful coexistence of states with differing social
Systems, the decisions of the congress provide for bringing absut scientific-techni-
cal relations with capitalist countries. We will continue the implementation of
existing agreements for scientific cooperation and to develop cooperation in work
on global scientific problems such as environmental protection, research on and
peaceful exploitation of space, the study of world oceans, and others.

The discussion of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and of the conclusions and
actions of the USSR Academy of Sciences, of course, are not limited to the present
session of the general meeting of the USSR Academy of Sciences. It apparently would
be advisable to discuss questions relating to the development of "big energy" in the
light of decisions by the 26th CPSU Congress, at a special session of the academy.
The proposals for conducting sessions in the not too distant future on questions
relating to new engineering and technology and also on mineral resources, and on
environmental protection and ecological problems deserve attention.

It is necessary also to conduct scientific conferences jointly with other scientific
institutions on such important topics as "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Development
of Marxist-Leninist Theory" and "Urgent Problems in Education and Mass Education in
the Light of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress."

Our publishing activity and the work of our numerous journals, Various scientific
societies, and councils must be subordinated to the fulfillment of the decisions of
the congress.

All ranks of Soviet scientists unanimously assure the CPSU Central Committee and the
General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee, L. I. Brezhnev, personally, that

they will devote maximum efforts toward the fulfillment of the historic decisions of
the 26th CPSU Congress and will always wholeheartedly serve our socialist Motherland,

the consolidation of her power and authority, and the strengthening of peace through-
out the world.

COPYRIUHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nsuk SSSR", 1981

961.5
cso: 1816/“

18
FOR 0FT1C1AI.USE¢0NL~
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

SELECTED SPEECHES FROM 1981 GENERAL ANNUAL MEETING OF USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
Markov on Department of Nuclear Physics
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII “AUX $553 in Russian 80 7, Jul 81 pp 62-64

[Speech by Academician M. A. Markov to the annual general meeting of the USSR Academy
of Sciences]

[Text] In my speech I would like to touch only on several problems that face the
Department of Nuclear Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences during the current five-
year plan.

During the five year plan, the Leningrad "Pl!" research nuclear reactor will be put
into operation; it is analogous to the French reactor at Grenoble, which is operated
by the FRO, France, and Britain -- that is, we have a national center of enormous
importance which requires new forms for organising scientific research. For this, it
is necessary to create an appropriate coordination council, to have a housing fund
for taking care of specialists coming from other cities for various time periods, and
so forth.

Also during this five-year plan, another unique facility will begin to go into opera-
tion -- a meson factory, analogous to one in the United States, which is operated by
more than 200 institutes. This facility will be of interest to many of the natural
science departments of the academies of sciences. In the operation of such a multi-
purpose facility, important scientific organisation problems will also arise, and they
are of the type with which we still do not have much experience,

The third large structure that will be completed during this five-year plan is the
Baksan neutrino station.

Thus, the Department of Nuclear Physics is faced with huge scientific-organization
tasks. One of then, following the directives of the 26th CPSU Congress, is the
maximum compression of the periods for finishing the above-mentioned structures. The
department hopes for substantial aid in this from the presidium of the USSR Academy
of Sciences.

As for research that is being conducted in the department, it can be reported that
about 50 cases have been registered in which neutrinos come from the other side of
the Earth, that is. passing through the whole globe.

l9
FOIIOFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are not many statistics, but still they give interesting results, particularly
with respect to so-called neutrino oscillation. Research at this station permits
making a conclusion about the lifetime of a proton: T > 10" years.

Leading scientists working in the field of theoretical physics are now engaged in
building a fundamental theory that unites all interactions into a principle. In this
connection, in a number of theories the result appears as a corollary that the
proton is unstable and its lifetime is less than 103° years. The unique result
produced at the Baksan station shows substantial influence on the theory, canceling
out a number of theoretical schemes.

Modern science is characterised, on the one hand, by narrow specialization and
differentiation of scientific areas and, on the other hand, by the introduction into
these narrowly specialized fields of the results of often very broad research. The
introduction to other fields can take place through the methodologies that arise in
nuclear physics and then turn out to be unusually effective for these narrow areas.

For example, is it an accidental circumstance that the Academy of Sciences originated
the idea of creating a united council of the Academy of Medical Sciences and our
academy for the utilization in medicine of the fundamental research produced in many
fields of science? This applies not so much to fundamental research of recent times
but to results produced over the long history of these sciences.

A story of Academician A. L. Hints' comes to mind, about the improvements and the
instruments he made on his own initiative for medical scientists on the basis of
results long known in a given field but not known to the medical scientists.

It seems to me that we are obligated to medical scientists. Using our achievements.
they can raise medical equipment and work conditions in medicine to a level that
could make the possibilities of medicine phenomenal. This also pertains to other
fields of science.

A Scientific Council for the Application of the Methods of Nuclear Physics in
Related Fields has been created in our department. The possibilities and conse-
quences of applying nuclear methods in other fields are almost unlimited and the
effects of application, tremendous.

The results that nuclear research has produced and continues to produce should be
valued. Although it began as abstract and fundamental research, not having practi-
cal connections, it permitted the creation of mechanisms and possibilities for
observations that have turned out to be effective in many fields of science.

At the same time, in examining the work of the council, the regular session of the
department concluded that the efforts made were insufficient, considering the tasks
and possibilities opened up by nuclear methods in various fields of science. In this
connection, there seems to be interest in the proposal by the president of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, Academician A. P. Aleksandrov, to use specialist personnel from
various institutes to work directly for this council. In this way, the possibilities
of the council could be significantly broadened and its activities could be made
more effective. The appropriate departments of the Academy of Sciences should
support this initiative and select qualified and enthusiastic workers who would
accomplish this responsible and very serious task.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Neuka”, "Veatnih Akademii nauk 388R", 1981

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEi3NLY

Velihhov on Academy Work
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No.7, Jul 81 pp 70-72

[Speech by Academician Ye. P. Velikhov to the annual general meeting of the USSR
Academy of Sciences]

[Text] The pledge of success for Soviet science is the deep mutual understanding and
mutual confidence that has existed traditionally among scientists, the party, and the
government from the beginning of the Soviet state and was demonstrated in the very
clear Summary Report by the CPS“ Central Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress. The
report, as is known, mentioned questions that pertain to the internal development of
Soviet science. These will be discussed at special sessions devoted to the develop-
ment of power, machine building, and other questions posed in the Sin-ary Report of
the CPSU Central Committee.

1 would like to dwell on several particular problems related to the internal develop-
ment of science and pertaining primarily to academy projects. The report by the
chief scientific secretary of the academy, G. K. Skryabin, sets forth the activities
of the Academy of Sciences, but I would like to add one stroke to the list of recent
achievements of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

1 am speaking of thermonuclear research, particularly about the fact that at the
beginning of the 1970's, TOKAHAR, a new scientific area began to develop, the
concept for which was worked out under the direction of Academician L. A. Artsimovich
at the Institute of Atomic Energy imeni I. V. Kurchatov. It must be stated that at
first several trends developed simultaneously for the magnetic containment of plasma
but, by the end of the 1970's, tohamak projects reached the level that now the
International Atomic Energy Agency (a rather conservative organisation because it
includes many physicists from small countries that have cautious policies) recog-
nized that the scientific foundations actually existed for entering into the
construction of the first technological thermonuclear reactor. Such work was begun
and is being conducted under the direction of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in Vienna. This reactor is based on the TORAHAK concept.

Finally, in September 1980, the United States passed a law on the development of
controlled thermonuclear synthesis. It is foreseen that in 1990 a demonstration
facility will have been created and, by the end of the century, the first experiment-
al industrial facility which, according to an estimate, will cost 20 billion dollars.
And it can be stated with satisfaction that, in this instance, one of the largest
national scientific programs of the United States is based on the TORAMAK concept,
which was proposed by Soviet science.

Returning to our urgent matters, we must discuss a question that relates to the
effectiveness of research, first of all, of that which fully lies within the juris-
diction of the Academy of Sciences. It is very important to support the research of
leaders. we talk much about the need to support those that lag, but we a.so must
not forget the leaders.

I will introduce some examples from among the projects of the Section for the Physi-
cal, Engineering, and Mathematical Sciences of the USSR Academy of Sciences, in

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As is known, in earth astronomy, we have had somewhat modest successes that are
related to the difficulties of creating instruments for space research. But there
is one very important area -- the so-called gamma bursts -- in which clear proof
has been produced that gamma bursts are related to neutron stars, and s number of
physical parameters have been defined. The Physico-Technical Institute imeni A. P.
loffe and the Institute for Space Research have produced significant information on
neutron stars. Thus, with relatively modest expenditures, thanks to the inventive-
ness of the scientists, our country has preeminence in this area. Some other

areas can be named. They include the very interesting work by the Institute of

Physical Problems imeni S. I. Vavilov on quantum crystals; we also have preeminence
in this area.

A large ampunt of attention should be given also to an area of research that is
developing in the Academy of Sciences and in higher schools (the Institute of the
Physics of the Earth imeni 0. Yu. Shmidt, the Institute of Crystallography imeni

A. V. Shubnikov, and Moscow State University) -- the study of gravitational waves.
It is based on the works of Professor V. B. Brsginskiy and on achievements of the
Institute of Crystallography in producing sapphire crystals. In this field, one of
the greatest discoveries of our time could occur and, even if negative results were
achieved, it is still very important and interesting work which must be supported,
the more so since expenditures on it are fully within reach.

We should turn our attention to still another important project being done at the
Physics Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev of the USSR Academy of Sciences (PIAN). At
the very beginning of research on thermonuclear synthesis there were two concepts -
tokamak and the stellarator, which American scientists started to develop. But,
having met difficulties, they closed down this project and, despite warning by
Academician L. A. Artsimovich about the good prospects for such work, they switched
completely to tokamsk. And only at FIAN was it shown that if you really analyze

the topology of magnetic fields in complex physical phenomena, then this area does
not yield bad results. Later, this was confirmed by research conducted in the F89
and Britain. FIAN work in this area is also worthy of large support.

Very important research, the idea for which came from Academician L. A. Artsimovich,
is being conducted at the Leningrad Physico-Technical Institute on a small "Tuman"
tokamak. This, evidently, is one of the quickest ways to create plasma in small
volume for studying hot thermonuclear reactions. These projects lie within the
range of the economic capabilities of the academy, and financing for this special
purpose must be supported.

In addition, the Academy of Sciences can create a large experimental base that will
allow solution of the problems relating to support for the work of the large
telescope.

In the future five-year plan, large experimental facilities, such as the Baksan
neutrino observatory and the PIK reactor in leningrad, will go into operation. The
Institute of the Physics of High Pressures has created a large press, but it must be
stated that this facility and the support of its projects require quite large
budgetary expenditures.

1 want to touch on the question of computer technology. We have a Coordination
Committee on Computer Technology, but the Academy of Sciences must pay more attention

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

to the development of projects in this field. Important projects related to the
physical principle of creating elements are conducted in three of our institutes:
FIAN, the Institute of Radioelectronics, and the Leningrad Physico-Technical
Institute. But we need to turn our attention to two circumstances. First, the
projects need to be coordinated so that scientists engaged with this problem are
tied in with those who are developing the architecture of the machine. Academician
B. N. Petrov has taken steps in this direction, and we need to carry this work
through to the end.

Secondly, it is necessary to create in the institutes their own technological base
for implementing the tasks in developing instruments. It is important that a
technological base be created and centralized for these projects.

Let me say a few words about machine building. A decision should be made on the
question proposed by Academician A. I. Taelikov, that is, following the example of
the coordination center for computer technology, to create a coordination center

for machine building, which would unite the work of the Department of Mechanics and
Control Processes, the Department of Physical Chemistry and the Technology of
Inorganic Materials, and the Department of General Physics and Astronomy. In
addition, it must rely on large industrial institutes that are prepared to cooperate
with the Academy of Sciences.

Finally, as noted at the 26th CPSU Congress, insufficient attention is being given

in the Academy of Sciences to the development of the material base, particularly to
design bureaus. The situation must be corrected during the current five-year plan.
The solution of this important problem will allow overcoming the difficulties related
to the introduction of new technology into production which now affect the sale of
licenses and, correspondingly, the acquisition of necessary instruments abroad.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

Vinogradov on Information Transfer
Moscow VBSTHIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 76-78

[Speech by V. A. Vinogradov, corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
at the annual general meeting of the USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] A. P. Aleksandrov, in his opening remarks, and P. N. Fedoseyev, in his
report, clearly and thoroughly dealt with the characteristic features of the new
stage of development of Soviet science related to the needs of the country under the
conditions of mature socialism; they showed the large scale of the tasks put before
the Academy of Sciences in the documents of the 26th CPSU Congress, especially in
the program report by the General Secretary of the CPS!) Central Couittee, Comrade
L. I. Brezhnev, which has historical significance.

In the "Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR for
1981-1985 and for the Period to 1990," attention is given to the necessity for
improving collection means and systems and the transfer and processing of information.

The necessity for automating information systems and networks in the field of
social sciences is dictated by the growing role of these sciences, and by the

23 2
FOR omaAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

necessity for operationally processing ever increasing volumes of primary informa-
tion both in the conduct of scientific research and in decisionmaking at all levels
of management.

Information systems and networks are a part of the economic structure with which the

country will enter the 21st Century. He met keep this in mind today as we lay the
foundation for their development.

The presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences, in recent years, has done mach for
improving information in the social sciences, which have become an important condi-
tion for raising the theoretical level of scientific research, for improving the
teaching of social sciences, and for strengthening the effectiveness of ideological
work.

The Institute of Scientific Information for the Social Sciences of the USSR Academy
of Sciences published 4676 titles of information publications with 25 thousand
printed pages from 1976 to 1980. These publications contained bibliographic informa-
tion on 1.2 million Soviet and foreign books and articles, over 45 thousand detailed
abstracts of current Soviet and foreign works in the social sciences, and about one
thousand review materials.

During the last two years, just with respect to the problems "Developed Socialist
Society" and "The International Revolutionary Hovement of the Working class," over
120 information publications were put out. The institute as a whole purposefully
provided information for research and development on 55 current, primarily complex,
problems in Soviet social sciences.

me institute undertook efforts to provide information to representatives of the
natural sciences and a wide scientific cos-vanity. Information publications have come
out on the social and ideological problems of ecology, philosophical questions in

the natural sciences, problems in the organisation of science in foreign countries,
the effectiveness of scientific research, and questions of scientific creativity.
These publications are well known to members of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

The institute is working on a program for expanding and deepening information
activity steaming from the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

The institute is actively developing international relations with countries of the
socialist fraternity. A special place here is occupied by the International Informa-
tion System for the Social Sciences of the Academies of Sciences of the Socialist
Countries (MISON), an agreement for the creation for which was signed in 1976.

within the framework of this system, joint abstract and bibliographic publications
are put out; progressive forms and methods for information work are being developed;
and automated information systems are being devised.

This work was evaluated positively by the Conference of Vice-Presidents of the
Academies of Sciences of Socialist Countries on the Social Sciences, which took
place in June 1980 in Prague. The secretary of the Czechoslovak Conunist Party
Central Connittee, Josef Gavlin, highly praised the significance of HISON in an
article, "The Growing Role of Social Sciences," published in 1980 in the journal
"Problems of Peace and Socialism."

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0F1ﬂCJAl.US£1MNLY

One of the results of our activity during the last five-year plan was the forma-
tion in the country of a system of infatuation with distributed data banks. Along
with the Institute of Scientific Information on the Social Sciences of the USSR
Academy of Sciences (INION) as the chief all-union center, this system includes
several national ministerial centers, particularly on cultural problems, republic
centers of scientific information on the social sciences created under the presidiums
of the union-republic academies of sciences, and also information services of
scientific and higher educational institutions. Thus, the necessary preconditions
have been created for effective functioning and interaction of the central data bank
at INION and specialised data banks that accumulate data according to their spheres
of activity.

The task for 1981 to 1985 will be to put into full operation an automated informa-
tion system for the social sciences. However, on the basis of existing technology,
this is not possible -- all our resources have been exhausted. The planned capacity
of the INION system is calculated for the processing of 300 thousand documents a
year, but the capacity of magnetic disks that the institute has permit the intro-
duction of only 50 thousand;the storage in the data base available to consumers in

a regime of direct computer interaction is only 12 to 15 thousand documents. The
picture is approximately the same with display units.

The 26th CPSU Congress paid special attention to the necessity for concentrating

efforts and resources under the llth Five-Year Plan on the main areas and on the

trigger points. P. N. Pedoseyev stressed in his report that the concentration of
resources in science must first of all be in areas with the best prospects.

In our opinion, it is necessary in the shortest time (one or two years) to fully
equip large information centers that have shown a capability to accomplish tasks at
the current world level.

The presidium of the USSR Academy has created the Joint Information and Library
Cour~il of the USSR Academy of Sciences, under the chairmanship of Academician

Yu. A. Ovchinnikov, vice-president of the USSR Academy of Sciences. The first
meeting of the council showed what a large number of questions need to be resolved
in the near future. It seems to us that all of the electronic technology available
to the academy should be distributed with consideration of this council's recom-
mendations.

Work on creating present-day automated systems for social sciences is a complicated
complex of scientific-technical problems. We are counting on growing assistance
from the presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the USSR State Committee for
Science and Technology. The solution of this problem will help achieve more
successful development through Soviet social sciences of important theoretical and
practical tasks put before us by the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "ﬂanks", "Veatnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

25
son omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Belyakcv on Basic Research
Moscow VBSTNIK AKADEMII NAUK 8883 in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 82-83

[Speech by V. P. Belyakov, a corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
to the annual general meeting of the USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] The report by P. N. Fedoseyev has already pointed out the great significance
of implementing fundamental research in practice.

Among the fundamental sciences whose successes directly influence scientific-
technical progress in various economic sectors and in various technology sectors,
there is a relatively young science, cryogenics, which is engaged with methods for
producing cold at temperatures from 0 to 120 K and with research on processes that
take place at these temperatures.

It must be said that this science has become the basis for the development of
cryogenic and, to some degree, vacuum technology, and cryogenic technology has

played a large role in the creation of new technologies in metallurgy, chemistry,

and power, and, of course, it will also play this role in the future. In the
economy, especially in metallurgy and chemistry, there are more than 500 air-
fractionating facilities, which support the production of steel, iron, and nitrogen,
and help significantly to reduce expenses and raise labor productivity at metallurgi-
cal enterprises.

But are we fully using the existing achievements?

In metallurgy today we use very advanced oxygen convertor methods to smelt, in all,
about a third of our steel, at the same time that, for example, in Japan, they use
it for 100 percent and, in other developed capitalist countries, for over 90 percent.
It is important to make wider use in metallurgy of the new highly effective method
for producing steel. The Academy of Sciences and the State Gummittee for Science
and Technology must have a substantial influence on this.

Let us take the food program. Here, it has already been stated that it is important
not only to create, but to store and preserve what has been grown. A powerful

means for providing long storage of food products is the application of liquid
nitrogen. A great deal of attention is being given to this means for storing,
transferring, and transporting. In our country, analogous projects are only in an
initial stage. In recent years, they have begun to use this method in the Ukraine,
but the efforts of scientific workers and practitioners and workers in the food,
meat, and dairy industry are needed to disseminate this method as widely as possible.
This will permit the reduction of losses.

Cryogenic technology permits the accomplishment of completely new tasks. Today, a
cryogenic superconducting facility is operating successfully. But it is perfectly
clear that definite efforts are needed for maximum introduction of automation at
these facilities. It is necessary to replace the insense control systems which
operate them with systems that are smaller and more convenient to operate.

I think that cryogenic technology will make a large contribution to the development
of power and to the improvement of processes related to superconductivity. This per-

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJA1.US£GDNLY

tains not only to MED-generators, superconducting electrical transmission lines,
electrogenerators, and high-power cryoengines. but also to hydrogen power engineer-
ing. Undoubtedly, cryogenic technology will help produce liquid hydrogen with
relatively small energy capital expenditures. '

PUrther, V. P. Belyakov dwelled on the problems of scientific-production associa-
tions. Such associations effectively aid the rapid creation and introduction of the
newest technology. The problems in introduction of new technology that used to
exist when scientific institutions and production enterprises were isolated, do not
exist today. but the economic conditions in which scientific production associations
operate today in themselves can undermine the basis for association activities.

ﬂow is the work of scientific-production associations planned? The same as the work
of any series-production factory: with indicators of profit and volume of production.
How are the prices of manufactured goods determined? by the sum of the cost and
standard profit. But for new technology, we need to "forget" for a while about cost.
Cost for new technology is a drag on its development. A new manufactured item

should be evaluated not by how much material has been put into it, but by how much
better it is than the items made before.

Academician N. P. Fedorenko has said that various methodologies for calculating the
effectiveness of identical manufactured items come out differently. The Department
of Economics must turn its attention to the development of pricing methods that
would stimulate the creation and diffusion of new technology.

The second question is how to evaluate the activities of scientific-production
associations. Planning not by gross output but by normative net output in itself
does not answer the question for scientific-production associations or for enter-
prises engaged in the introduction of new technology. In essence, you see, the
volume of profit is planned as before. And to make profit, it is more advantageous
to produce expensive items with large materials content.

These small examples show how important and vital the problem is in creating new
technology -- not only how to embody an idea in practice rapidly but also how to
stimulate this embodiment with the correct system of pricing and the correct system
for planning and evaluating the activities of an enterprise engaged in creating new
technology.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", “Vestnik Akademii nauk 5853", 1981

Zhavoronkov on Incomplete Research
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK $588 in Russian No 7. Jul 81 pp 83-86

[Speech by Academician N. H. Zhavoronkov to the annual general meeting of the USSR
Academy of Sciences]

[Text] V. I. Lenin said that Marxism is not a dogma, but a guide to action. The
documents and decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress, about which Academician P. N.
Fedoseyev spoke vividly in his report. are such a guide to action. as well as an
invaluable creative contribution to the treasure-house of Harxist-Leninist teachings.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

High evaluation of the role of science and its contribution to the building of
communism and to material and technical progress causes a feeling of pride and a
feeling of gratitude to the party and government for their concern for its develop-
ment. In this regard, a well-known speech by Academician I. P. Pavlov is recalled;
at the International Physiological Congress in 1935, he said that so much attention
was paid science in our country that it forces us, the managers of science, to be in
constant uneasiness as to whether we can justify the confidence given us.

Such a rigorous attitude on the part of scientists toward their own work and such a
high degree of responsibility are still necessary in our time, when the scales of
scientific-technical research and allotments to science have grown immeasurably. In
1940 these allotments amounted to 300 million rubles, and in 1935 - the year of

I. P. Pavlov's speech -- they were somewhat less. As is known, they have been set
for 1981 at the huge sum of 22.6 billion rubles. Scientific research has become more
costly. This obligates us to be concerned constantly about raising its effective-
ness. The decisive sector today, as stressed in the documents of the 26th CPSU
Congress, has become the introduction of scientific discoveries and inventions into
production. The integration of science and production is a vital necessity. Mean-
while, questions about the introduction of new technology up to now have been
literally "the talk of the town.“

In his report, Academician G. K. Skryabin recalled how an engine with a forechamber
ignition was introduced; it took nearly 30 years. A number of similar examples
could also be introduced. But there are also instances where new developments are
introduced that later turn out to be worse than the old ones. Therefore, the
distribution of the enormous sums being allotted for scientific research must be
very well thought out and there must be concern for the correct structure of alloca-
tions and expenditures for science. Experience in foreign countries and the
experience of many of our scientific institutes, particularly those like the Insti-
tute of Electric Welding imeni Ye. 0. Paton of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and the
All-Union Scientific-Research and Planning-Design Institute for Metallurgical
Machine Building, has shown that about one-third of all allocations should go to

fundamental and applied scientific research and two-thirds to experimental and design
work .

We understand very well that fundamental scientific research not only permits con-
stant improvement in technology, but also can lead to revolutions in production.
However, if fundamental and, especially, applied research is not carried through
with experimental and design work, then the efforts are wasted, research results
remain on the shelf and, consequently, after some time, these results won't be

needed by anyone because at the present rates of scientific-technical progress they
soon become outdated.

A few years ago, on an assignment from the USSR State Committee for Science and
Technology, I became acquainted with the status of scientific research in one of our
industrial ministries and I found that there a total of 18 percent of all allotments
for science was spent on experimental and design work and 2 percent on fundamental
research; all of the remaining funds went to applied research. It is perfectly
natural that the results of this research were not, and could not be implemented
because of the backwardness of the experimental and design work.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWJR 0F11C1AI.US£13NLY

In this connection, I would like to support those comrades who have spoken here
with proposals to create a material base at scientific institutes for testing the
results of research projects on an increased scale.

A few years ago, Academician A. I. Tselikov wrote an article, "Give the Institute a
Factory." It must be said that this call did not meet with understanding everywhere
and a number of objections were raised against it. But there is no doubt that such
a measure was necessary, at least for those institutes that conduct projects on the
synthesis of new substances, develop new materials, investigate new technological
processes because, without sufficient study of a process on a large scale, intro-
duction into production, if it takes place at all, involves great difficulties.

He often blame workers in industry for sluggishness and lack of interest in new
methods, new production processes, and so forth. But I think that these indictments
are far from always just. Of course, there is inertia in industry that slows the
process of introduction, for both objective and subjective reasons. But we must
regard with self-criticism what we, the scientists, propose for introduction. Under
careful examination, it turns out that many of our proposals are incompletely worked
out, are economically infeasible, or insufficiently tested, and many examples can be
introduced where, on the recommendation of scientists, new processes were introduced
that proved worse than the old ones and led to losses and to a reduction in produc-
tion effectiveness, and so forth.

For example, at one time, the aluminum industry, according to scientists' proposal,
transferred from precalcined anodes to continuous self-annealing ones, and they
talked about this as a great achievement. Actually, such anodes work well in
electric furnaces for producing calcium carbide, where the temperature of the
process exceeds 2000’0. But, in aluminum baths, the temperature is 950 to lOOO'C,
which is insufficient for graphitization of the electrode mass, and the anodes dis-
charged unevenly in cross-section and, as a result, significantly increased the
expenditure of energy and worsened shop working conditions. Now, the industry is
again returning to precalcined electrodes.

Similar instances are not at all sure. Ihey just result from poorly thought-out
proposals and indicate that we seriously need to verify and substantiate our pro-
jects before sending them to industry, and we need not blame the ministries for
sluggishness when there are any difficulties with introduction.

In this regard, an example for us should be L. Pasteur, 40 years of whose research,
in the words of K. A.‘Timiryasev, gave medicine more than did so centuries of
practice. Each of his new discoveries he handed over to the judgment of friends

and foes and only after this did he propose it for practical use. Essentially, this
is characteristic of every real scientist.

The Department of Physical Chemistry and the Technology of Inorganic Materials
devoted two days to a discussion of the results of work by the institutes and other
scientific institutions that it watches over during 1980 and the 10th Five-Year
Plan as a whole, and also of the tasks in the 11th Five-Year Plan in the light of
the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. But this is only the beginning. It is
necessary, in a very serious way, to again examine all the designated problems and
to concentrate effort on developing the more needed ones and the most hopeful ones
from the scientific and technical-economic viewpoint.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF11C1AL.USEIDNLY

A special feature of our department is that over half of the institute managers are
tied directly to industry, just as the department as a whole is closely tied with a
number of ministries and with scientific institutions oriented toward the economic
sectors. Tasks of the department, along with fundamental research projects, are
the synthesis of new chemical compounds and the study of their properties and the
study of new inorganic materials: metal alloys, silicates (cements, glass, and
ceramics), materials with various useful physical or chemical properties -- semi-

conductors, superconductors, piezoferroelectric crystals, materials for quantum
generators, fiber optics, and other materials.

The Department of Physical Chemistry and the Technology of Inorganic Haterials works
in close contact with the Department of General Physics and Astronomy, and this is
natural: materials for new technology are created as the result of joint work in
the fields of chemistry, physics, mechanics, technology, metallurgy, and other
related sciences. Such interaction largely determines the many successes achieved
in Our work. It would be incorrect, however, to be limited to what has been

achieved. In evaluating our achievements, we need to ask ourselves: Can we say
that we have done everything that we could?

I would like to say a few words with respect to agricultural science. We have had
great successes in introducing high-yield varieties of wheat, cotton, and sunflowers.
however, an undeservedly small amount of attention has been given to such crops as
rice, millet, buckwheat, oats, soy beans, and certain other food and forage crops.
The result of this is their low yield and the large gap between the record and the
average yields. As examples, let me refer to the l333-centner-per-hectare potato
yield achieved by the team of kolkhoc worker Anna Yutkina in Novosibirskaya Oblast
during the war years, which exceeded the average by a factor of more than 10, and
the 203-centner-per-hectare millet yield achieved by the Kazakh farmer Chogonak
Bersiyev, which exceeded the average by a factor of 25. Their experience must be

utilized both by scientists of the All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences and
directly by the Ministry of Agriculture.

CC?TRISHI: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

Clebov on Interdepartmental Cooperation

Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 95-97

[Speech by Academician I. A. Clebov to the annual general meeting of the USSR
Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Speaking about the necessity for reaching the advanced frontiers of science
and technology in all sectors of the economy, Comrade L. l. Brezhnev, in his report
to the 26th CPSU Congress, said: "The CPSU Central Committee is in favor of
further enlarging the role and responsibility of the USSR Academy of Sciences and
improVing the organization of the whole system for scientific research." The
chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers, Comrade N. A. Tikhonov, stressed in his
report the importance of more flexible combinations of ministerial and regional

management and the concentration of efforts on the fulfillment of special-purpose
programs.

The Interagency Coordination Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences in Leningrad
was set up precisely for uniting the creative efforts of scientific-research institu-

FOIIOFHKJRI.USE(NVLY
FI”!(MNNC]AI.USEGDNLY

tions and higher educational institutions in the Northwest Region under the aegis
of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Coordination must embrace fundamental and the most
important exploratory research with respect to both national and regional programs
and problems.

Within the framework of the Intersgency Coordination Council have been created lb
scientific councils on areas in which Northwest scientists can make the largest
contribution to science and technology and, in first priority, to the fulfillment
of special-purpose programs and programs for scientific-technical progress of the
State Committee for Science and Technology and the USSR Academy of Sciences.

He attach great significance to the interaction of the Interagency Coordination
Council with the presidium and committees of the Leningrad Oblast Council of
Scientific-Technical Societies, and also with the central administrations of the
all-union scientific-technical societies that are located in Leningrad. The Inter-
agency Coordination Council has also concluded an agreement for cooperation with the
Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialised Education. Joint work by scientific
councils and the corresponding comaitteas of scientific-technical societies, and
also with councils for economic and social development of oblast party committees
open up great possibilities for utilising the results of scientific projects in the
economy.

Re have been successful in conducting a large volume of preparatory work on problems
in the fuel-energy complex. Almost half of our scientific councils participate in
this work. The implementation of developments is accelerated by close interaction
with the oblast staff, which operates under the Leningrad obkom of the CPS”, with
respect to the complex program for Leningrad organisations, "Increase in Effective-
ness of the Fuel-Energy Complex of the Country. The coordination of solutions to
scientific problems is under the direction of the Interagency Coordination Council,
while production organization tasks are under the direction of the oblast staff.

Participating in fulfillment of this complex program are 165 organisations, includ-
ing over 50 academy and ministerial scientific-research, design, and technological
institutions, over 50 production enterprises and associations, about 30 planning and
prospecting organizations, and 10 higher educational institutions.

The program, which includes a broad totality of intricate, mutually related scienti-
fic, engineering-technical, and production-organisational measures, has been broken
up into separate subprograms for specific areas: thermal energy and atomic machine
building, hydroelectric power, the transmission of electric energy, the rational
utilization of fuel and energy resources and the improvement of energy-consuming
technological processes, new means for producing energy, the strengthening of the
country's raw material base, generator building, turbine construction, boiler
construction, and other fundamental research. This research is conducted in close
interaction with the Department for the Physical and Technical Problems of Power
Engineering of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

In connection with the conduct of work on this complex program, attention must be
given above all to problems relating to the solution of one of the most important
state problems -- the exploitation of the Isaak-Achinsk Coal Basin.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because of the low calorie content of the lanak-Achinsk coal, a complex problem has
arisen in the creation of boiler systems for turbine units with a capacity of

800 thousand kw. The use of traditional means for igniting fuel leads to the
necessity of installing boiler systems about 120 m high. As a result of research,
boiler systems of conceptually new design were developed, with a new means for
igniting fuel. The new solution permits reducing the height of boiler systems to

42 m. It is extremely important to accelerate work in this area, so that the use of
_ the old, cumbersome versions will be eliminated.

The transmission of electric energy from the first two electric power stations in
the Kansk-Achinsk Basin with the capacity of 6400 kw each can be accomplished by one
direct-current transmission line of 2250 kV. But the projected rates of development
for this line are patently inadequate. The current five-year plan proposes to

limit it to technical-economic substantiation, when there is a real possibility to
move significantly further along: to complete the research and draw up a technical
plan.

To raise the efficiency of electric power stations and reduce environmental pollution,
it is necessary to develop research on gas-vapor equipment with the goal of creating
a gas-vapor system with a capacity of 1 million k", with internal-cycle gasification
of hard fuel.

In the field of generating electrical energy, there have been a number of important
achievements. 0n the basis of fundamental research on electromagnetic, thermo-
physical, and mechanical processes in generators that employ the phenomenon of super-
conductivity, success has been achieved in creating and testing the first super-
conducting turbogenerator in the world with a capacity of 20 thousand kﬂ and with
liquid-helium cooling of the rotor coils. 0n the basis of this work, a turbogenerator
with a capacity of 300 thousand kw will be created during the current five-year plan.
By 1990, a machine with a capacity of 1 million k" is foreseen.

It must be stated that superconducting generators will solve two contradictory tasks:
they will reduce weight by about half and simultaneously raise efficiency to 99.3
or 99.6 percent. in addition, the capacity of such machines can be increased to

f

) million k" or more, which is not possible on the basis of traditional solutions.

There is a second problem in the field of power generation. While working on the
development of traditional large-capacity turbogenerators, a conceptually new scheme
for cooling turbogenerators was successfully implemented. In this scheme, the water
is supplied for cooling the rotor coil, omitting the shaft of the machine, which
radically simplifies the design and sharply increases the operational reliability of
the machine. This class of machine opens up the possibility of eliminating the use
of mineral fuel and hydrogen. These machines offer extremely good prospects for our
power engineering. At the present time, one such machine with a capacity of 800
thousand k“ is undergoing final testing at a GEES. The production of a second
machine of this type is planned.

I would like to note further that for atomic electric power stations, there is great
significance in the research and development being conducted under the current five-
year plan for creating steam turbines with a capacity of 1 million k" with the
rotating frequency of 3000 revolutions per minute.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion, I. A. Glebov eupported the proposal by P. N. Fedoeeyev on the
advisability for discuuione at union. of the general meeting of the 088! Academy

of Sciences of urgent problem in the development of the economy, such ac power,
technology, mineral resources, and machine building.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "IIauka","VutniIt Aludenii nauk $883", 1981

9645
C50: 1815/51

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICNHNCJAL.USEGDNLX

UDc 001.89
INCREASING EFFECTIVENESS 0F VUZ'S IN SST NOR!
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK $383 in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 71-73

[Article by 8. Ya. Svirskiy, doctor of philosophical sciences: "The VUZ Department
and the Academy Institute"]

[Text] In "The Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR
for 1981-1985 and for the Period to 1990," the necessity is noted for improving the
higher educational system and for utilising more fully the potential of higher
schools for accelerating scientific-technical progress. The party and_government
have given these problems a great deal of attention. It is sufficient to recall the
decrees of the CPSU Central Comaittee and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n Measures
for Further Improvement in Higher Education in the Country" (18 July 1972), "On the
Further Development of Higher Schools and Improving the Quality of Specialists'
Training" (29 June 1979), and "On Increasing the Effectiveness of Scientific Research
in Higher Educational Institutions" (6 April 1978). Documents of the 26th CPSU
Congress put new tasks before higher schools that demand, particularly, increasing
the effectiveness of scientific research by 902 scientists and fuller "utilisation of
the scientific potential of VUZ's, in which almost half of all our doctors and candi-
dates of sciences are concentrated."*

Actually, the scientific potential of higher schools is extremely impressive. There
are 30,500 departments, 60 VUZ scientific-research institutes, and over 1500 problem
laboratories and laboratories oriented toward economic sectors and, in addition,
about 2 million students have been involved in scientific uork.** However, reproaches
are often addressed to VUZ scientists to the effect that neither the volume of
scientific research, the rates of development of this research, nor its effectiveness
correspond to its potential. It is also said that one of the chief reasons for the

 

* "Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress and the Ensuing
Tasks of the Party in the Field of Internal and External Policy." PRAVDA, 1981,
24 February.

** See "Tasks for Higher Educational Institutions in the Implementation of the CPSU
Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers Decree 'On Further Development of
Higher Schools and Improving the Quality of Specialists' Iraining'? Report by

V. P. Yelyutin, USSR minister of higher and secondary specialised education, in the
book "All-Union Conference of workers of Higher Educational Institutions in Moscow
6-8 February 1980. Moscow, "Vysshays shkola”, 1980, p. 53.

3h
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

low effectiveness of VUZ research and development is the disconnectedness, its

petty subject matter, and insufficient concentration of effort on the most important
problems of science. The reproaches are justified, but their chronic character
itself indicates that the roots of these shortcomings are quite deep. While not
pretending an exhaustive analysis of the performance of scientific research in
higher schools, let us try to examine the situation that has evolved in departments
of many VUZ's (with their impressive number of scientific-research institutes, prob-
lem laboratories, and other unite of VUZ science, the departments themselves are

the "basic scientific units of higher schools" *).

0n the average, in a VUZ department, there are 10 to 15 people, including instructors
that are engaged mainly in accumulating pedagogical experience -- an adaptation that
takes three years. The department itself represents first of all a collective of
teachers and its chief duty is to conduct education at a high professional and
political-ideological level. Scientific work here is not the chief or final goal as
in a scientific-research institution. Accordingly, the chief criterion in the
competitive selection of department associates is the capability of the competitor
to provide the necessary lecture courses. Ability for scientific-research activity
and talent for teaching and lecturing rarely coincide and, at a VUZ, as a rule, the
preference is for the latter.

Further, there is a completely valid preference in a VUZ department for people with
experience in scientific work. But such teachers, before coming to the department,
have acquired a specialization and a definite kind of scientific work and they do
not wish to change it ~- and this would also be inadvisable.

Thus, in the best instance, the V02 department represents a scientific mini—
collective, often a multi-type one besides, covering a number of mixed specialties
and disciplines; the base, as a rule, is the teaching laboratory and only sometimes
is it a scientific laboratory that exists because of contract work.

All this basically differs from the situation in a large scientific-research insti-
tution, especially in an academy institute, where there are scientists of world
reputation and where laboratories and sections cooperate and have a first-rate
material base, their own computer center, and maintain continuous contacts with
similar scientific institutions abroad, and so forth.

It is in such places that modern science is more successfully created, and the
advantages of such a collective in comparison with the double or triple number of
VUZ teachers are obvious. It is also obvious that under present conditions, making
and conducting an integrated scientific policy within the framework of a V02 depart-
ment is a task that is more than complicated and is sometimes unattainable. (Of
course, in large central VUZ's -- such as Moscow State University, Moscow Higher
Technical School, and Leningrad State University -- the conditions for scientific
work do not differ from those in the best research institutes, but there are not
many such VUZ's. )

however paradoxical, the cooperation today between VUZ's and academy institutes only
aggravates this problem. As is known, one of the basic forms of assistance by such

 

* lbid.

35
son omcm. use onu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

institutes to VUZ's is the training of teaching personnel in special-purpose post—
graduate programs. But a postgraduate's dissertation topic is determined, as a rule,
not by a scientific problem at the VUZ department that sent him there, but by the
problems of the scientific institution where he studies. Subsequently, the young
scientist who has completed study at an academy institution, often finds it difficult
to abandon his topic and switch to a new one. At the same time, conditions for work-
ing on the former topic may simply not be present at the VUZ.

That is why it seems quite necessary not simply to continue to strengthen ties as
actively as possible between higher schools and academy and ministerial scientific-
research institutes, but to search for new, more flexib le forms for such ties.

The urgency of the answer to this question was defined in an instruction by Comrade
L. I. Brezhnev in a report to the 26th CPSU Congress on the necessity of increasing
the role and responsibility of the USSR Academy of Sciences in improving and organiz-
ing the whole system of scientific research. "This system," stated L. l. Brezhnev,
"must be significantly more flexible and mobile . . . "

In this context, the thought of Academician Ye. P. Velikhov, vice-president of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, seems extremely fruitful; he speaks of the desirability of
creating basic VUZ departments and branches which would conclude agreements with
scientific centers (including institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences) that hate
the appropriate material base, the tradition, and significant scientific capabilities
"to allow attracting specialists working at the advanced frontiers of science to

enter teaching. Thereby, the possibility would be created for a definite ‘rotation'
of teachers in departments, that is, a planned exchange of teachers and researchers."*

Thus, it is possible, in many instances, that it would be useful to send VUZ depart-
ment members as nonstaff associates to appropriate scientific-research institutes
according to the subject matter in which these teachers work, instead of organizing
scientific work within the framework of the department. The scheduling of lecture
work can easily be planned so as to free the teacher from one to three days a week
for work in an institute laboratory as if he were a member of the scientific collec-
tive. The activities of such an associate should be considered as VUZ department
scientific work, being reflected both in department plans and in teachers' individual
plans. The fulfillment of a plan would be determined by reports from appropriate
sections or laboratories of the institute.

Contact between VUZ teachers and an institute can be even more fruitful in the case

where the VUZ department as a whole works on one topic. In this case, it is all the
more useful to strengthen contact with an academy or ministerial institute as if it

were a section or other unit but also it is essential to formulate it organisation-

ally, to implement the management of its scientific activity in the same form as in

the institute's own collective, to control and to include VUZ department work in the
institute plan, to provide appropriate material opportunities, and so forth.

I: is possible that such organization of VUZ research opens a path that will permit
further utilisation of the chief component of the scientific potential of higher

-—|,——-———.—'—'-— . . . . .
* The All-Union Conference of Workers of Higher Educational Institutions in Moscow,

6-8 February 1980, p. 161.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

schools -- the large numbers of highly qualified personnel - and partly conpeﬁ‘ate
for the lack of supply-and-equipnent support and organisational support in vuz
science.

Finally, with such a form of cooperation between scientific institutions and V02
departments, the selection of an institute for sending VUZ graduates and young
associates of departments for special-purpose postgraduate training would be made
easier and, at the same time. after its completion and dissertation defense, the
teacher would not experience difficulties in conducting department scientific work,
as is now the case, but would fruitfully continue it in the same collective. VUZ
department teachers who are granted sabbatical leave to couplets doctoral disserta—
tions would find themselves in the same favorable situation.

All this, undoubtedly, would significantly strengthen the effectiveness of the
assistance given today by scientific-research institutes in the training of highly
qualified personnel for higher schools.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "ﬂauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk 8883", 1981

9665
080: 1814/50

37
FT”!(HWHCJAI.USE‘0NHJ’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AzSSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES SCIENTIFIC ENC}! DEVEIDPHENT
Moscow VESTNIK AKADHHI HAUK SSSR in Russian No 5. May 81 pp 3-11

ﬂirticlex "Basic Trends and Pres ts for Development of Scientific Research
by the AzSSR Academy of Sciences"

[Text] The AzSSR Acadeay of Sciences is the country‘s major scientific center.
Guided by the dooments and decisions of the CPSU Congresses conceming the devel-
opnent of Soviet science. technology. and culture. and by the directives and reco-
nendations of the republic's executive organs. they have carried out a great deal
of work on further developing basic research. increasing the effectiveness and qua-
lity of scientific studies, strengthening and improving the ties between science
and production. The basic trends and prospects for the developent of scientific

research by this republic's acadeny were discussed at one of the sessions of the
Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Delivering the report at this session of the Presidiul was the president of the

Azssa Academy. corresponding mesber of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. 0. B. Abdul-
layev.

The rapporteur dwelt on the successes achieved by the AzSSR in the developent of
mononics and science. Motioning at present in Azerbaijan are more than 100 sci-
entific research institutes; sore than 22.000 scientific workers are uployed here.
including approximately 1.000 doctors of science and 8.000 candidates of science.
This republic'e VUZ's have an enrollment of lore than 100,000 students.

Created in January 19%. the “881% Academy of Sciences includes 30 scientific in-
stitutions; among the are 25 institutes as well as a network of design bureaus

and experimental plants. working in the Academy's institutions are more than
12.000 persons. including 270 doctors of science and more than 1.800 candidates of
science. About 600 graduate students are enrolled in graduate work at the academy;
1&0 probationary graduate students of the acadeny are undergoing tuning u, “1“.
tific institutions in Moscow. Leningrad. Kiev. and other scientific centers. The

annual budget of the “881! comprises approxinately 40.6 million rubles, including
20 eillion for projects in accordance with economic agreanents.

The principal problems confronting the Academy have derived from the tasks as-

signed by the 25th CPSU Congress and the 29th Congress of the Commist Party of
Azerbaijan.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE O ’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, .

Of the 550 topics which were being worked on in 1979. 3?? were of All-Union is-
portance. They were very carefully exasined in the USSR Acadeay of Sciences and
were approved by the USSR State Conittee for Science and Technology. During the
last few years the Academy's institutions have carried out important basic and ap-
plied research studies in the fields of astronony. mechanics. electronics. and
other physical and mathematical sciemes. geolOgical-geographical and biological
research. along with important projects in the areas of the agricultural sciences.
social sciences. economics. and culture. Also being developed are such new scien-
tific trends as the neurophysiology of the brain. aolecular genetics. and molecu-
lar biology. Broad prospects are opening up for the develop-eat of chemical re-
search and the study of natural resources. Basic research is being conducted in

the sphere of the social sciences. linked with the radical changes in all spheres
of Azerbaijan's life.

Speaking at the ceremonial session. devoted to awarding the Order of Lenin to Ba-
ku. the general secretary of the CPSU CC and chair-an of the Presidiua of the USSR
Supreme Soviet, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev noted the following: "...today Azerbaijan
is not only a region of oil derricks. Also developed here are machine building.
chemical, electrical-engineering. electronics. and radio-engineering industries.
along with non-ferrous metallurgy and other sectors.” This has becoae possible.
to a considerable extent. thanks to the achievements of science in the republic.

During the past 10 years many developents by the AsSSR Acadeny of Sciences have
been introduced into the national econoay. The over-all econoaic effect no. such
introductions has exceeded 510 million rubles. During this sane period the _Acede~
my's scientists acquired 1.100 authorship certificates for inventions; moreover.

on 57 of then 200 patents have been obtained in 3b of the world's countries.

Three licenses have been sold (in the United States. Italy. and Bulgaria). An in-
crease in the effectiveness of NIB [scintific research work] and OKR [experieen-
tal design worlg/ has been facilitated by the creation of new scientific and produc-
tion associations within the body of the Acedeny of Sciences. The annual volune
of operations has reached 15 million rubles.

The Academy is the leading and coordinating organisation in the country with re-
spect to research on selenium and tellurit- and instrusents based on then. as well
as with respect to magnetic seaiconductors. developing aedical theme-electric
apparatus. and synthetic naphthenic acids.

Institutions of the AzSSR Acadeny of Sciences actively participate in internation-
al scientic cooperation anong the socialist countries. Joint projects are being
carried out on in topics. It is coordinating the sub-satellite range studies
which are being conducted in the socialist countries on the problem of studying
the Earth from outer space.

G. B. Abdullayev further enumerated certain very iaportant research trends being
carried out at the Academy. One such trend is the physics and technology of crys-
tals. Obtaining semiconductors. studying their properties. utilising and creating
new transducers has attracted the attention of a large group of the republic's '
physicists and chenists. A great deal of attention is being devoted to the study
of seleniuauthe only polymeric saloonductor in the Henddeyev Table which plays
an important role in the vital activities of plant and animal organisms. In con-
Junction with their colleagues from the Institute of Biology of the USSR Academy

39
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Sciences. Azerbaijan's biologists have succeeded in establishing the selective

inhibitory effect of admin on the activity of m [ribonucleic acidJ-polymerase-
1 in isolated nuclei.

The basic research studies which have been conducted have allowed us to work out a
technology for obtaining new layered. including anisotropic. semiconductors. based on
selenitn and tellurium. by means of a well-targeted synthesis of crystals and their

nneling of current carriers and for the creation of new transducers. We have dis-
covered previously unobserved effects. which have allowed us to create and put into
industrial production new decoders. modulators of laser radiation. memory elenents.
receivers and sources of coherent radiation. as well as micro-coolers for receivers
of infra-red radiation.

Projects are being actively carried out in the field of metallurgy. New types of
economic steel alloys are being created and put into production. A new method has
been developed for obtaining iron powder at temperatures below 1000’ C. Such rela-
tively low temperatures allow us to avoid adherence and. thanks to the convection of
natural gas. we can obtain a good quality of powders. This method is utilized for
the manufacture of parts for refrigerators and air conditioners.

The Academy's chemists are working on the creation of the scientific foundations of
the comprehensive refining of petroleun and raw materials. on creating effective ca-
talysts for the processes of oil refining and petrochemistry. and for obtaining the
products of "small-scale“ chemistry. The Academy's organic metallm-gists have
worked out a method for imposing on the surfaces of metals and ceramics coatings
made of such refractory metals as tungsten. by means of the thermal disintegration
of these metals‘ organic compounds. By using low-temperature. electro-cheaical me-
thods, they have succeeded in setting up production. under ordinary conditions. of
pure arsenic. tellurium. selenium. menial. and their compounds.

0: great importance for oil extraction and refining and enVironmental protection is
the chemical reagent “Azerbaijan-14." which was created at the Academy; it is des
signed to purify water from oil and to soften it. In a concentration of 25 g/m
this reagent allows us to reduce the oil content in polluted water from 100 to 3 g
per liter. The reagent is pmped into an oil stratm in order to increase the oil
yield and to avert pollution of the environment by oil.

Another modification of the reagent allows us to reduce water hardness from 5.5 g of
salts per liter to 1 mg per liter. The technology has been developed and introduced
for utilizing the reagent in purifying drill-well water and seawater. In particu-

lar. we have succeeded in oil refineries in creating a circulating water supply and

in bringing seawater up to conditions good enough to be used in thermal. electric
power stations.

studies in the use of hydrogen energy engineering. utilising solar ener . and wind
power. Already at present in the Caspian Sea, units are in operation. converting
solar and wind energy into electric power. By means of utilizing solar energy we
have succeeded. in particular. in preventing corrosion on marine structures.

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON ’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the traditional trends of basic research at the republic’s Academy of Sci-
ences is the study of the geological structure of the Earth's crust. the role of
depth processes in the formation and distribution of minerals. The geologists have
provided a new. scientifically grounded forecast estimate of the oil and gas re-
sources on the republic's territory. and they discovered the tones With the great-
est accmulation of hydrocarbons. Large-scale. geomor-phological and landform maps
of Azerbaijan have been compiled. as well as maps of the quaternary deposits and the
dissemination of radioactive eleaents in the ploughed layer of the soils.

with regard to the Biological Sciences Department the principal future trend is re-
search on the laws of formation and development of Azerbaijan’s flora. the appear-
ance of valuable plants and their introduction into cultivation. the study of the
problems of the physiology, biochemistry. biophysics. and genetics of plants as the
theoretical basis of agriculture. working out the theoretical fundamentals of the
heredity and mutability of plants and anisal organises.

The Academy's scientists have evolved new and productive species of agricultural
plants. hard and soft "heats, cotton plants. and mulberry trees. A new. high-yield
soft wheat has been created and adopted to grow within this republic. A new. fat-

and-milk-producing breed of Caucasian buffalo has been created and introduced for
livestock raising. '

The biochemistry of Azerbaijan‘s flora is under active study. In particular. there
has been a successful introduction into ophthalmological practice of the use of saf-
fron for improving the activity of the organs of vision in cases of the disease of
dystrophy. The technology has been worked out for obtaining a nmber of biologically
activanedicinal compounds derived from the waste products from processing neat and
fish. and their production has been set up. This is all the more important inasmuch
as certain compounds up to now have been successfully obtained only from Caspian
sturgeon--the fish in other regions evidently has other biochemical characteristics.

working out general theoretical and methodological problems of social sciences, as
well as the urgent problems of building coemunise; Azerbaijanian and Caucasian stu-
dies as a whole; and the study of the history. culture, and economy of the countries
and peoples of the Near and Middle East.

G. B. Abdullayev further informed the session that, with the aid of the USSR Academy
of Sciences. construction has begun on a scientific-research vessel with a displace-
ment of 1,130 tons. And he emphasized the need to speed up work on solving fuel-
and-energy problens, on utilizing the latest methods of discovering. extracting. and
refining oil and gas from deep deposits. on making use of the energy of the Sun and
the wind. on developing hydrogen-energy engineering.

Delivering a co-report was a vice~president of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Acadui~
cian Yu. A. Ovchinnikov. who headed up a comaission of scientists. acquainting them-
selves Vith the work of the A2881? Acadny of Sciences.

After mentioning the successes achieved in the development of Aserbaijan’s economy,
Yu. A. Ovchinnikov noted that the development of science in this republic corresponds
to the high growth rate of its economy. Azerbaijan's scientists occupy good posi-
tions in many fields of physics. especially solid-state physics; chemistry is

bl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

traditionally strong here. particularly petrochemistry; renowned far beyond the bor-
ders of Azerbaijan are the works of Aaerbaijanian biologists connected with the de-
velopent of medicine and agriculture; the achievuents of scientists working in the
field of Earth sciences are considerable. The rapporteur also noted the broad con-
plex of projects being conducted in the area of the social sciences. The AzSSR Aca-
demy of Sciences. in. A. Ovchinnikov continued. is a scientific center comparable in
scale with the Far Eastern or Urals Centers of the USSR Academy of Sciences. It is

natural that it should be called upon to make a very serious contribution to scien-
tific and technical progress.

One of the most important characteristics of the A2881? Academy of Sciences is the
presence of numerous design bureaus and experimental centers within its institutes;
this allows a sharp acceleration in introducing scientific achievements into prac-
tice. A particular strong experimental-design center exists in institutes engaged
in the study of chemistry and chemical technology; great possibilities for creating
such a center also exist and are already being utilized in the field of physics. Si-

milar institutions are being created and have already begun to operate successfully
at biological institutes.

This aspect of the A2883 Academy of Sciences' work is particularly important at pre-
sent inasmuch as the seall-series production of equipment and the low-tonnage output
of various chemical coepounds has taken on special significance these days. In par-
ticular, the Commission recommended that the A2853 Academy of Sciences concentrate
special attention on the output of itess of the so-called stall-scale chemistry--
products of low-tonnage chemical production. These principally comprise substances
such as additives, stabilizers. inhibitors. compounds for agriculture. pesticides.
biologically and physiologically active substances for medicine. There exists a ge-
nuine possibility for creating in Azerbaijan an important center for producing such
products for the entire Soviet Union.

Subsequently Yu. A. Ovchinnikov dwelt on the shortcomings in the work of the AsSSR
Academy of Sciences, noting. first of all. the prevalence of petty topics. the lack
of coordination between the operational profile of certain sub-divisions to the pro-
file of the institutes which include these sub-divisions. as well as the low number
of individual laboratories, including those working on extremely important problems.
There should be a strengthening of the ties between Azerbaijan's scientific institu-
tions with the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences; in the new trends of re-
search it would be feasible to train large groups of young scientists simultaneously
in the country's leading scientific centers. A top-priority task is strengthening
the Academy‘s links with the republic'e VUZ's--these links detenine the possibili-
ties for the progress of science and its future.

Then ‘tu. A. Ovchinnikov informed the session about the achievements of the “SSH Aca-
demy of Sciences in developing specific fields of science.

The republic's scientists have had considerable successes in developing the complex
of biological sciences. One of the country's foremost centers in the field of soil

science and agrochemistry has been formed here; important results have been attained
in the area of plant and animal genetics. particularly in solving the problems of
remote hybridization. in physiology and in certain other branches of biology. Yu. A.
Ovchinnikov emphasized, however. that new trends in biology must be intensively de-
veloped. There are possibilities for this. In particular, important projects are

1:2
FOR OFFICI ’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

being conducted in the Molecular Biology Department of the Institute of Physics.

It is high time that we should convert this department into an independent insti-
tute of physical-chemical biology, which could become an important center for de-
veloping new trends in biology. Yu. A. Ovchinnikov noted the work of the Design
Bureau of Biological Machine Building. which functions within this department, where
models have been created of quite simple-to-produce instruments which are fully ca-
pable of replacing analogous instruments being imported from abroad. In Yu. A. Ov-
chinnikov's Opinion, it would be feasible to request the “$83 Acaduy of Sciences
to expand their work in the field of biological machine building and to specialize
in the output of certain types of equipment. bringing them up to the level of world
standards. in order to guarantee that scientific institutions throughout our entire
country be supplied with this equipent. and. perhaps. even to begin exporting it.

Under Azerbaijan's conditions great importance has been asmed by the developsent
of a complex of social sciences. most of all, the study of the history and culture
of the peoples of the Middle East. as well as the socioeconomic processes taking
place in this region. It is also necessary to expand economic research. using up-
to-date techniques and to strengthen the printing centers of institutions engaged in
studying the social sciences.

In conclusion. the rapporteur gave high marks to the work of the A2583 Academy of
Sciences and noted that it has genuine possibilities for gaining a truly leading po-
sition in many important branches of scientific developent.

A number of questions were then put to the rapporteurs.

In answering a question from the president of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Acadani-
cian A. P. Aleksandrov concerning the scope of the introduction of applied projects
into production. Yu. A. Ovchinnikov noted that at the “581? Academy of Sciences more
scientific results are being introduced than at most of the other republic-level
acadanies. According to this indicator, the AzSSR does not fall behind the Acade-
mies of Sciences of the Ukrainian $83 or the Belorussian SSRuand this is a high le-
vel of introduction. HoweVer, we have not managed to obtain data on the economic
effect with regard to many things which have been introduced. since sufficiently se-

rious economic analyses and appraisals have not been conducted in the “388 Academy
of Sciences.

In answer to a question by A. P. Aleksandrov concerning the development and use of
substances to increase the extraction of oil from strata. G. B. Abdullayev informed
the session that intensive work was being conducted within the AzSSR on creating ac-
tive reagents. based on surface-active substances obtained from the waste products
of oil refining and other chemical production facilities. By utilizing these re-
agents under laboratory conditions, we have succeeded in raising oil output by 20
percent. A decision has been adopted to utilize these substances under industrial
conditions.

A. P. Aleksandrov remarked on the importance of this work both for the republic and
for the country as a whole. and he recommended that these substances be tried out
both at the deposit sites and in other regions of the country.

Academician H. A. Styrikovich stressed the importance of the projects of the Baku
school of hydrodynamics on exploiting complex deposits of oil and gas condensate in

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a natural system. i. e.. in a system with reduced pressure. At the A2883 Academy
of Sciences programs and calchlations have been drawn up for developing complex de-

posits in Western Siberia, which at present cannot be developed by traditional
methods.

Academician A. A. Bayev posed a question concerning the prospects for converting the
Department of Molecular Biology of the Institute of Physics of the A2883 Academy of

Sciences into an independent institute. G. B. Abdullayev informed the session that

during the last few years the material and staff potential of the department had be-
come significantly stronger, and the Presidium of the AzSSR intended to submit a pe-
tition to organize an independent institute, based on this department.

Academician N. H. Zhavoronkov expressed an interest in the quality of oil additives
which have been developed in the Academy's institutes. G. B. Abdullayev inforled
the session that the additives being produced on the basis of the Acadeny's devel-
opment are enjoying great demand. The effectiveness of their utilization has grown
considerably during the last few years in connection with improvement in the puri-

fication of the oils, inasmuch as the capability of these latter to accept additives
depends on the purity of the oils.

In opening up the discussion of the reports. Academician-Secretary of the General
Biology Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Academician H. S. Gilyarov no-
ted the great achievements of the AzSSR Academy of Sciences in working out problems
of soil science. Research which is new in principle is being conducted there. In
particular, corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences V. R. Volobuyev
has developed a system of evaluating the mathenatical characteristics of the inter-
related factors of soil forlation. Especially interesting are recent studies on
the energy engineering of soils; these allow us to characterize the various types
of Azerbaijan's soils with the utilization of precise methods. These results are
being widely used in the national economy. Research is being conducted on a rela-
tively high level in the classic fields of bioloSYs however, it is feasible to ex-

pand these studies. particularly in the field of zoology. and. above all. that of
entomology.

The work in nycolcgy which is being conducted in this republic is extremely impor-

tant; it is being headed up by Academician of the AzSSR V. I. Ul'yanishchev. who
has been awarded the Lenin Prize for these projects.

There has been very good organization of projects for the study of plant cover;
these studies. however, could be considerably more productive if the institutes
conducting them were better equipped. As regards the training of large groups of
specialists from Azerbaijan at the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences, at
the present time, M. S. Gilyarov emphasized that do not have the right conditions,
nor. above all, the places. for such a program.

Academician-Secretary of the Department of Biochemistry. Biophysics, and the Che-
mistry of Physiologically Active Compounds. Academician A. A. Bayev, Joined in the
high harks which H. S. Gilyarov had given to the research on soil science and agro-
chemistry which is being conducted in Azerbaijan. The weakness of biological re-
search in the AsSSR Academy of Sciences is the lack within the system of biologi-
cal institutions of institutes of a physical-chemical type. At the Institute of
Physics. however. there is an operational sector of molecular biology in which a

successfully operating group has already taken shape and important results obtained,
in particular, models of instruments have been created.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. A. Bayev remarked further on the work of the microbiology section. which is
studying primarily the micro-organisms which are destroying petroletm: and petro-
leum products. These projects are important both for environmental protection.

for the struggle against its pollution by petroleum and petrolem products. as well
as to avert the spoilage of the petroleum products themselves. Furthermore, A. A.
Bayev emphasized the importance for present-day biology of the projects being con-
ducted in the AzSSR in the field of “small-scale" chemistry. the creation and pro-
duction of small-series equipment.

Academician-Secretary of Physical Chemistry and the Technology of Non-Organic Ha-
terials. Academician N. H. Zhavnronkov noted the general high level of the work of
the chemical-type institutes of the A7583. including projects with regard to the
theoretical problems of chemical technology as well as the creation and output of
additives to lubricating materials. These projects must be continued and developed
because. despite the successes which have been achieved, in our country. due to the
shortage of additives and their insufficiently high quality. the expenditure of
lubricating oils in internal-combustion engines is still too great. The improve-
ment of additives and organizing their production is one of the principal tasks con-
fronting Azerbaijan's chemists.

Academician-Secretary of the General Physics and Astronomy Department, Academician
A. H. Prokhorov. awarded high marks to the condition of physics research in the As-
SSR, above all. in the field of semiconductor physics and solid-state physics. He
remarked on the good connections which exist betueen this department's institutes
and the institutions of the AzSSR. and he expressed the desire that these links be
develoPed even further. In the name of Academician R. Z. Sagdeyev, who could not
take part in the session. A. H. Prokhorov expressed a great deal of satisfaction
with the cooperation with the institutions of the A1833 Academy of Sciences with
regard to the creation and operation of the automated information center with its
satellite link.

Academician-Secretary of the Department of General and Technical Chemistry. Acade-
mician N. H. Emanuel'. proposed to support the initiative of the AzSSR Academy of
Sciences in creating scientific-production associations in the field of "small-
scale" chemistry. He noted the insufficient attention being paid by the produc-
tion organisations to the chemical methods of increasing the petroleum yield from

a stratum and the feasibility of creating. on the basis of the AeSSR Academy of Sci-
ences. a center to engage in the development and coordination of appropriate
projects.

In concluding the discussion. the secretary of the CP of Azerbaijan cc, K. H. Ba-
girov, expressed great gratitude and recognition for the attention to the develop-
ment of Azerbaijanian science on the part of the USSR Academy of Sciences. having
mentioned the economic successes achieved by this republic during the 10th Five-
Year Plan. he underscored the important contribution made by science to the devel-
opnent of Azerbaijan's economy. Thus. from 1971 through 1979 the scientific instio
tutions of this republic's Academy of Sciences introduced into the national econo-
my projects with an anticipated economic effect exceeding by a factor of 15 the in-
dicators for the preceding 10 years. K. H. Bagirov noted that the Communist Party
cc and the Azerbaijanian government have exhibited constant attention to the acti-
vities of the Academy, concerned themselves with strengthening the material and
technical base of science. improving the comprehensive administration of scienti-
fic research, planning-design and experimental-industrial organizations, improving

1.5
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the everyday conditions of staff members, and. in turn, they expect from the repub-
lic's scientists even more strengthening of basic research. further deepening of '
the study of the socioeconomic and political aspects of the scientific and techni-
cal revolution, increasing the effectiveness and quality of scientific developments.
improving the training of highly skilled personnel, more extensive introduction of

achievements into the national economy. and perfecting the ties between science and
production.

In the name of the Conunist Party of Azerbaijan CC K. M. Bagirov expressed confi-
dence that the discussion of the activities of the A2851? Academy of Sciences by the
Presidiu: of the USSR Academy of Sciences will facilitate the solution of those re-

sponsible tasks which the Communist Party has assigned to Soviet science and, in
particular. to the AeSSR Academy of Sciences.

In conclusion. the president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Academician A. P.
Aleksandrov noted those serious achievements which have been attained by the A2583
Academy of Sciencesin many substantial trends of scientific research. and he pro-

posed the approval of the basic directions of its activities. as well as wishing
new successes for the AsSSR Academy of Sciences.

In its adopted decree the Presidiua of the USSR Academy of Sciences notes the suc-
cesses of the AzSSR Academy of Sciences in developing many areas of research. In
this republic a major scientific school has been created in the field of functional
analysis and its applications. new, complex semiconductors have been developed. as
well as semiconductor compounds and their structures; a sub-sattelite intonation-
measuring system has also been created. The technology has been worked out for
high-strength. economical steel alloys which do not contain any deficit admixtures;
also developed is the theory and technology of the process of obtaining multi-lay-
ered. reinforced shells. and this has allowed us to work out designs for high-
strength. flexible hoses for the oil and gas industry. as well as the technological
principles for the comprehensive processing of alunites and the accompanying petro-

tne industrial wastes from petroproducts. a highly effective process for obtaining
aromatic nitriles by the oxidizing ammonolysis of hydrocarbons and a catalyst for
producing them; all of these are of great importance for the national economy.
Production has been set up of individual types of especially pure materials which
are in short supply; a new, highly productive system has been proposed with a mov-
ing stream of a catalyst for the highly exothermic processes of obtaining ethylene
oxide. formaldehyde. maleic and phthalic anhydrides, and allyl chloride.

In the field of Earth sciences an estimate has been conducted of the forecast re-
sources of oil and gas. maps have been drawn up of prospective oil-and-gas-bearing
areas, reconmendations have been formulated for exploratory drilling. a new classi-

Lesser and Greater Caucasus. and experinental models have been created of the mo-

bile information-measuring ”Nature" complex for gathering meteo- and geophysical
data.

In the field of the biological sciences research has been conducted on drawing, up
an inventory of Azerbaijan's flora and plant introduction; processes have been de-
veloped for obtaining valuable products from plant resources; measures have been

recommended for protecting the forests. increasing the capacity of winter pastures.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on preserving and reproducing rare and disappearing Species of animals, increasing
the biological productivity of the Caspian Sea, developing fishing, on the biologi-
cal methods of combatting plant pests and animal parasites: important results have

trends which have been approved for them. a multiplicity of topics and a dispersal
of staff members, insufficient concentration of forces and funds on solving the
most important problems. and insufficient participation in Ali-Union problems.
There is excessive slowness in using the results of exploring for Mesozoic petro-
leum. in studying plant resources. and in projects for creating production lines
without waste products. Hork with regard to the biological study of the Caspian
Sea has been too weakly developed. There is insuffiently activity in developing
the problems of socioeconomic forecasting and the comprehensive utilization of the

republic's productive forces. too little use has been made of mathematical-economic
methods and computer technology; also being developed too slowly are problems of the

republic's history. problems of the socioeconomic development of the countries of
the Near and Middle East. and the role of ideological currents in the national‘
liberation struggle. Insufficient use is being made of the possibility of attaching
scientific staff members of the AzSSR Academy of Sciences to the scientific insti-
tutions of the USSR Academy of Sciences in order to increase their skills.

The Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences has decreed the following:

to approve the scientific and scientific-organisational activities of the AzSSR Aca-

demy of Sciences. directed at developing the republic's science. econoay, and
culture; .

to approve the principal trends of scientific research at the institutions of the
A2553 Academy of Sciences;

structure of individual scientific institutions and sub-divisions in line with

their basic directions of scientific research. to activate the work of the repub-
lic-level Council on Coordinating Scientific Research in the fields of the natural
and social sciences. and to adopt aeasures to inprove the training of highly skilled
scientific staff members. particularly with regard to specialties which are in

short supply, at the leading institutes of the USSR.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Nauka”. "Vestnik Akadeaii nauk SSSR". 1981

2381:
cso. 1800/619 END