FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10248
1 January 1982

USSR Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. ﬂcrds or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. GoVernment.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NOTICE

This new JPRS publication, USSR REPORT: SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY POLICY, will appear approximately once a
month and will conaiat of tranalationa iron the Soviet
central and regional preaa on the organization and
administration of Soviet science and technology.

The report vill include articles on planning, alloca-
tion of funda and raaonrcea. nanasenent. training,
introduction of new technology and eatebliahins
economic effectiveneee, international cooperation.

and regional cooperation and development.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USSR REPORT
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY
(rouo 1/82)

CONTENTS

Planned Management of Scientific-Technical Progreu
(Yu. Yakovete; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, Aug 81) ..........................

Problems in Organizing Scientific Research in Siberia
(v. A. Koptyug; VOPROSY PILOSOHI, mg 81) oooeeoooeeeeeooeeeeeeoeee

Reports Pron L'vov Conference on Integrating Science and Production
(VBSTNIK AKADMI NAUK SSSR, Aug 81) ...............................

Introduction and Background, by V. A. Kotel'nikov

Dobryk on Party Leadership, by V. P. Dobryk

Sytnil: on Coordinating Reeearch, by K. M. Sytnik
Podetrigach on Progral-Goal approach. by Ya. s. Podetrigach
Taksir on Regional Efforts, by K. I. Tabir

Sun-cries of Participnnte' Speechee

- a - [III - USSR - 210 851‘ 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PLANNED MANAGEMENT OF SCIENTIFIC-TECHNICAL PROGRESS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 15-23
[Article by Yu. Yakovets: "Planned Management for Scientific—Technical Progress"l

[Text] Acceleration of the rate and increase in the effectiveness of scientific-
technical progress provide the key to the solution of central probltﬂl in the
economic and social development of the country in the 1980's. In the Summary Report
of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress, L. I. Brezhnev noted: "The
conditions under which the economy will develop in the 1980's make the acceleration
of scientific-technical progress still more urgent . . . The decisive, most critical
sector today is the introduction of scientific discoveries and inventions into produc-
tion." The introduction of new, highly effective engineering and technology is the
chief precondition for accomplishing the transition of the economy to a primarily
intensive path of development, for increasing the effectiveness of civil production,
for providing high, stable rates of economic growth, and for strengthening the
material bases for steady growth in the people's well-being.

To provide an organic union between the achievements of the scientific-technical
revolution and the advantages of the socialist economic system, it is necevsary to
increase substantially the effectiveness of planned management of scientific-techni-
cal progress. This requires working out scientificielly substantiated long-range
concepts and strategies for managing the development of science and technology, for
utilizing their achievements in the economy, and for consistent implementation of
this strategy with the aid of an effectively operating mechanism for managing
scientific-technical progress.

The chief elements of strategy for managing scientific-technical progress in the
1980's, in our view, are: a sharp turn toward the development and assimilation of
conceptually new technology; qualitative progress in the proportions and rates of
development of individual constituent elements of the "acience--technology-produc-
tion--consumption" system; increase in requirements for economic effectiveness

in new technology and reduction of absolute and relative prices for machines.

The development and assimilation, in compressed time periods and with maximum effec-
tiveness, of conceptually new technology and new generations and systems of machines
that reflect the essence of the new stage of the scientific-technical revolution and
that respond to the changing conditions for technology application, are tied to the
acceleration of the rates and increase in the effectiveness of scientific-technical

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

progress. "The turn toward effectiveness and quality," noted N. A. Tikhonov at the
26th CPSU Congress, "is organically related by the party to improving production on
the basis of up-to-date science and technology. The 11th Five-Year Plan poses the
task of accelerating the technical re-equipping of production and of conducting a
policy for the most rapid creation and widespread introduction of conceptually new
technology and materials and for the application of highly productive energy- and
material-saving technology on a broad scale."

The theoretical basis of the policy for assimilating conceptually new technology is
the systematic exploitation of the regularity of the scientific-technical cycle.
Progress in science and technology is movement, a total struggle by new, rising
scientific ideas and technical solutions against old, obsolescent ones subject to
replacement, and changes from evolutionary periods of development, when already-
known scientific ideas are improved and embodied in all new varieties of technology,
to periods of revolutionary breaks with the past and of the establishment and rapid
diffusion of new generations of machines and technological principles.

A periodic change between revolutionary and evolutionary periods can be observed in
the development of technology: the appearance of a new technical idea, its realisa-
tion in initially expensive forms of new technology and assimilation into the sphere
of production and consumption; rapid, spasmodic growth, increase in the scale of
production, the envelopment of new spheres of consumption, and the rapid lowering of
production costs and prices; a period of maturity and relatively stable development;
and a period of obsolescence and replacement by new, more progressive trends in
technology.

The cyclical renewal of technology is accomplished in the form of change in machine
generations. Each successive generation employs conceptually new technical ideas
and technological principles and provides the possibility for more fully satisfying
the industrial or individual consumption with relatively less expenditure of labor.
The change in generations is distinctly observed, for example, in computers, lasers,
robots, electrical equipment, and so forth.

Scientific literature has thoroughly analysed in detail the leap in the development
of production forces that has resulted from the scientific-technical revolution.

It began in the middle of the 20th Century with a breakthrough into the "next
storey" of science and technology. The first stage of the scientific-technical
revolution was characterized by the rise and fast development of a number of new
scientific-technical areas - atomic energy, electronics, lasers, computers, rockets,
space technology, polymer chemistry, and so forth, which made possible the spasmodic
growth of labor productivity and sharp expansion in the assortment of use values.
However, by the end of the 1970's, the potential of the first stage of the scienti-
fic-technical revolution was basically exhausted, and conditions for the application
of technology largely changed.

Gradually, the signs of the next revolutionary turnover in science and technology
began to accumulate -- a new stage of the scientific-technical revolution, which
broadens the horizons for the development of productive forces. "Genuinely revolu-
tionary possibilities," noted L. I. Brezhnev at the 26th CPSU Congress, " are opened
up by the creation and introduction of miniature electronic control machines and
industrial robots. They must receive wide application. Today, looking forward for
five or for ten years, we cannot forget that it is in these years that the economic
structure will be planned and created with which the country will enter the 21st
Century."

2
FOR10FFKJA1.USE(MVLY
By the end of the 20th Century, we can expect the transition to new generations of
machines with mass application of microprocessors and industrial robots, which will
provide a sharp reduction in the application of heavy and monotonous labor and a
manyfold increase in the productivity of social labor. Great progress will take

place in the production and consumption of energy, which will permit greater economy
in the utilization of energy resources, the mastery of nontraditional sources of
energy, the creation of preconditions for a power revolution, the core of which

-- already visible within the bounds of the present century -- will be the industrial
assimilation of energy from thermonuclear synthesis. Broad diffusion of waste-reduced
and waste-tree technology and biotechnology will make possible the fuller utilization
of the substance of nature, its transformatioa by more economical means, and the

change as the result of a wide range of conceptually new everyday machines and
istrunents and broad application of everyday electronic technology.

It is necessary that the development and assimilation of new generations of machines
in shortened periods of time be made the basic contents of special-purpose scientific-
technical programs. They should be distinguished by the following: first, by a

high technical level, based on the realization of scientific discoveries and great
inventions, which permit expanding the types and improving the quality of use values
being created, the satisfaction of new needs, and the competitiveness of domestic
goods on the world market; secondly, by a substantial economic, social, ecological,
and external economic effect and by a manyfold increase in labor productivity and in
economics in fuel~energy and raw-material resources. It is important that each such

(including the necessary amounts of capital investment) and high-priority supply and
equipment support, and that there be competent single management. An example is the
system of measures on the organization of the development and introduction of indus—
trial robots prov1ded for in the decree of the CPSU Central Committee "On Measures
for Increasing the Production and Ride Application of Automatic Manipulators in
Sectors of the Economy in View of the Instructions of the 25th CPSU Congress."

The implementation of the caurse of strategy for assimilation of conceptually new.
highly effective technology is tied to changing the proportional rates of development
of individual elements of the "science--technology--production--consumption" system.
Science and technology determine the "growth curves" in productive forces that pave
the way for progress in the structure of production and for replacement of obsolete
technology by new, more effective technology. Fundamental scientific research
creates a backlog for the development of applied research and experimental-design
developments which, in turn, are the basis for accelerating the development of
production of technology in comparison with the rates of increase in the production
of the total social product.

The growth rates of expenditures for science from the budget and from other sources
are outstripping the growth of the total social product (the average rates of yearly
growth for 1951 to 1979, respectively, are 10.9 and 7.5 percent). Such a trend is
observed in the correlation of growth rates of the number engaged in the sphere of
science and science services in comparison with the numbers of workers in the whole
economy (o.& and 2.1 percent, respectively, for the same period). At the same time,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one can note a trend toward a slow—down in rates of growth under the 10th Five-Year
Plan: from 1976 to 1979, the average yearly growth in expenditures went down to
3,8 percent, and the number engaged in this sphere to 3 percent.‘

The all-out development of fundamental scientific-technical research is not always
provided for. The proportion of those working in the USSR Academy of Sciences and
union-republic academies of sciences in the total number of scientific workers was
cut back from 12.1 percent in 1960 to 7.8 percent in 1965 (a large pert of the
general engineering institutes were transferred from the USSR Academy of Sciences to
the administration of ministries and agengies) and thereafter remained basically
stable, constituting 7.0 percent in 1979. In the USSR Academy of Sciences, the
number of institutes of the general engineering type is not large, and the ministries
are orienting the scientific organisations subordinate to then primarily toward
applied research and give little attention to exploratory research, especially that
of interest to more than one economic sector. The development of an erperimental
base has also legged. As a result, prototypes of new technology often enter produc-
tion without thoroughly developed designs because they did not undergo comprehensive
testing, and this leads to large losses.

The disproportions that have evolved in the sphere of scientific-research and
experimental-design work are holding back scientific-technical progress and the
introduction of its results into mass production and are engendaring undesirable
trends in the dynamics of the end indicators of development in the sphere of scien-
tific-research and experimental-design work - the number of prototypes of new
technology that have been created and also the number of inventions and rationalisers'
proposals that have been introduced into production. The average yearly number of
prototypes of new technology from 1961 to 1965 grew relative to 1951 to 1955 by a
factor of 5.3 (including instruments, automation hardware, and computer technology -
by a factor of 17), and during the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan compared with
1961 to 1965, the number fell off by 20 percent (including instruments - by 30
percent). Rates of growth in the quantity of inventions and rationalizers' proposals
used in production slowed down: from 1951 to 1960, the number increased by a

factor of 3.9, by 35 percent in the next ten years, and by 17.7 percent from 1971 to
1979; the average yearly rates of growth were 16.5, 3.0, and 1.8 percent, respec-
tively.

To create a reliable and extensive scientific and technical reserve, it is necessary
to overcome backwardness in the development of a number of areas of fundamental
scientific-technical research and experimental bases and to provide for their all-out
development. In order to set up the production of new generations of machines in a
short time and to create conditions for massive replacement of outdated technology
being used in the economy, it is necessary to accelerate the development of machine
building.

In recent years, the development of a number of machine-building sectors has slowed
down. Thus, there has been a reduction of the average yearly rates of growth in
products in power machine building, the electrical equipment industry, chemical and
polymer machine building, and in lifting-transporting, tractor, and agricultural
machine building. As a result, the possibilities are narrowing for replacing
obsolete technology, and ineffective capital repair is expanding excessively. For
example, the proportion of written-off machines and equipment (in percentage of
their cost at the beginning of the year) in industry was reduced from 3.1 percent in

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1965 to 2.6 percent in 1979 (including machine building and metal working, from

2.3 to 2 percent). Amortization deductions for capital repair for the whole
economy grew by a factor of 2.9 and reached 27.8 billion rubles, with the total sum
of capital investment in the development of machine building of 11.1 billion rubles

in 1919.~

A ;re t deal of attention was given to the expansion of machine building, to the
renewal of basic stock, and the technical re-equipping of various spheres of the
economy at the October (1980) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee and at the 26th
CPSU Congress. "The union of science and production," said L. I. Brezhnev at the
Plenum, "and the influence on it of progressive ideas takes place through a machine
or a technology. Hence, there is nothing comparable with the role of machine build-
ing in the development of the economy or in raising labor productivity."

The natural result of scientific-technical progress is expansion in the assortment
of products and improvement in their quality -- the means of production determine
the objects of consumption -- for the satisfaction of the growing demand from
society. This process flows unevenly: it grows stronger in periods of revolution-
ary leaps in the development of technology and becomes somewhat slower in periods of
evolutionary development.

The end result of technical progress is the economy of social labor "The aim of
introducing machines," wrote Marx, "is in a vary general way, the reduction of cost
and, consequently, the price of goods, and its lower price, that is. the reduction
of workers' time, is necessary for the production of units of goods."5 This aim is
achieved by two methods: by lowering the costs and prices of technology already
being manufactured (absolute price reduction) and by replaczng it with new, more
effective technology and therefore costing less per unit of manufactured products
(relative price reduction).

Absolute price reduction with respect to machines takes place as the result of
lowering the costs of production and list prices of technology being manufactured

in proportion to expansion in the scales of its production (up to the optimum), rise
in the level of workers' qualifications. and utilization of reserves for growth in
production effectiveness.

The essence of relative price reduction for machines was revealed by K. Marx as
follows: "By relativa price reduction for machines, I mean a situation where
absolute cost of an applied mass of machines increases but not to the same degree as
the mass of these machines also increases its effectiveness."6 In relative price
reduction is found the expression of the effectiveness of technology renewal.

The rates of relative price reduction, as also of absolute price reduction, differ
according to economic sector and subsectors and are uneven in cycle phases. They
are higher during periods of replacement of old generations of machines by concep-
tually new ones and slow down during periods of smooth evolutionary diffusion of a
given technology generation.

The need to lower price levels in calculating units of useful effect based on
utilization of scientific and technical achievements was formulated in the "Basic
Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981 to 1985 and
for the Period to 1990," adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress: "To increase the

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

individual capacities of machines and equipment to optimum limits with simultaneous
reduction in their size, metal content, energy consumption, and lowering of the
cost per unit of useful and effect."

Absolute and relative price reduction for machines are inseparably linked. Lowering
the prices of technology being manufactured causes relatively lower price levels of
new technology for two reasons: first, the lowest priced analog or lowered level

of prices of similar items of a parametric series is assumed as the basis in calcu-
lating price limits; secondly, as a result of lowering the price of constituent
subassemblies and components used in creating new machines. At the same time, the
appearance of new, more effective and cheaper (per unit of useful effect) machines
forces more rapid lowering of production costs and prices of technology being manu-
factured. Through relatively lower pricing of machines, a two-fold result of
scientific-technical progress is expressed: raising the technical level and
quality of products being manufactured is effective when it is accompanied by lower-
ing the expenses and prices in calculating useful effect per unit.

The trends in the dynamics of economic effectiveness of scientific-technical progress,
which are reflected in the rates of absolute price reduction for machines and, to a
certain extent, in changes in return on funding, are contradictory. On the one hand,
list prices for machines, instruments, and equipment are periodically revised on the
lower side. On the other hand, there are data that indicate slowing rates of
absolute and relative price reductions for machines and, in a number of instances,
their price increase.

According to data of the USSR State Committee on Prices_ in 1973 the wholesale
prices for products in machine building and metal working were lowered by 8 percent.
The total sum of the reduction of wholesale prices for 1969 to 1978 (with deductions
of their increase for products of light industry, ferrous metallurgy, coking coal,
and iron ore) was 27.5 billion rubles, primarily on account of an absolute price
reduction of technology being manufactured. The index of warehouse prices for enter-
prises in machine building and metal working estimated by the USSR Central Statisti-
cal Administration and reflecting only changes in list prices, went down from 1967
to 1979 by 25 percent.7 At the same time, from 1970 to 1979, additional profit from
the introduction of measures for new technology in industry per 1000 rubles' expen-
ditures went down by 14 percent, and the number of workers hypothetically released,
by 16.3 percent; in the calculation for one released worker in 1979, the expenditure
was 15.000 rubles. For comparison, let us remember that the average yearly money
wages cf an industrial worker that same year was 2164 rubles.‘ 'The rates of abso-
lute and relative cost reduction for machines are slowing down in a number of in-
stances as a consequence of price incre-ses in raw materials, other materials, and
energy, and also of relatively high rates in the growth of wages, which sometimes
surpass the rates of growth in labor productivity.

The lowering of return on funding also indicates the lack of effectiveness in techni-
cal progress. Thus, in the economy as a whole from 1970 to 1980, in comparable
prices, the cost of basic production funds grew by 116 percent, the gross social
product by 67 percent, and the national income, utilised for stockpiling and consump-
tion. by 55 percent. For each rubla of basic funds now there is 28 percent less
national income. If the return on funding had stayed at the 1970 level, there could
have been an additional 166 billion rubles more national income to use for consump-

tion and stockpiling, which exceeds by 26 percent the total sum for capital invest-
ment for that year.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
One of the reasons for reduction in the return on funding is the inadequate effec-
tiveness of new technology and its frequent price rises in calculations per unit of
productivity. In addition, such factors as decreased effectiveness and growth in
cost of capital construction must also be noted. Thus, from 1965 to 1979, uncom-
pleted construction at state and cooperative enterprises and organizations increased
by 76.8 billion rubles ( a factor of 3.6) with a growth in capital investment by
67.7 billion rubles (a factor of 2.A). The index of actual cost of construction and
assembly work, which went down between 1966 to 1975 by 5 points, went up during four
years of the 10th Five-Year Plan by 2 points. The profit of contractor construction
organizations increased frOm 1651 million rubles in 1965 to 8&87 million in 1975 and
decreased to 7907 million rubles in 1979, but its ratio to cost, went from 6.1 per-
cent to 17.9 and 12.5 percent, respectively.’ Increase in profit and increase in
profitability took place in many instances because of rising estimated construction
costs

It must also be taken into account that the methods used for determining the effec-
tiveness of new technology are oriented basically toward cost-accounting effect,
which is reflected in the costs and warehouse prices of enterprises. This does not
take into account the additional effect received by society as a whole as a result
of economies in labor and natural resources and expansion in the export of technol-
ogy that is competitive on world markets. As a result, effectiveness is reduced and
the economic boundaries are narrowed in the application, first of all, of concep-
tually new technology which. in large mes-ere, reflects changing conditions in the
application of machines.

Under the conditions of the transition to a new stage of the scientific-technical
revolution, requirements are sharply growing for economic effectiveness in new
technology and for rates of absolute and relative price reductions for machines.
The effectiveness criterion must be decisive in the economic incentive system for
the evaluation of long-range trends in the development of science and technology,
for verifying plans and special-purpose programs, and for determining price. for new
items. Preference must be given to engineering and technology that provides sharp
reduction in the expenditure of manual, heavy, and monotonous labor, multiple
increases in labor productivity, energy economies, complex processing of natural
raw materials, the introduction of waste-reduced and waste-free technology, and
prevention of environmental pollution.

The growth of economic effectiveness must also find expression in substantial rise
in the technical level of machines. equipment, and instruments that are being
assimilated and manufactured. There should be an orientation toward surpassing the
highest world levels in a number of areas of technology and in short time set up
mass production and expand export of pioneering technology and, on this basis, to
raise significantly the proportion of machines. equipment, and transportation hard-
ware in the export structure: in 1975 it was 17.5 percent in the USSR (as against
21.5 percent in 1970), 55.7 percent in Bulgaria, 34.2 percent in Hungary, 55.8 per-
cent in the GDR, 26.2 percent in Romania, and 51.1 percent in Czechoslovakia.‘°

The system for the management of scientific-technical progress is being reorganized
to conform to new strategic tasks. The basic areas of this reorganization were

formulated in the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers
"0n Improving the Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Mechanism
on Increasing Production Effectiveness and Work Quality;“ In consideration of the

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

measures outlined in this decree and adopted in the decisions of the 26th CPSU
Congress in the field of scientific-technical progress, a number of first-priority
tasks must be accomplished. First of all, the goal-directed character of manage-
ment for scientific-technical progress must be strengthened, with consistent
orientation of all links and levers of management toward the implementation of
special-purpose complex programs that provide for the assimilation of new, highly
effective generations of machines and technological processes.

It is necessary to concentrate resources on the b sic, decisive areas of scientific-
technical progress, to make them the basis for special-purpose programs and planning
tasks, to intensify the motivation, and also sense of responsibility, of planning
and management bodies, scientific-research institutes, design bureaus, enterprises,
and associations and their workers, for the achievement of and results, and to
strengthen planning discipline in this field. The llth Five-Year Plan provides

for the implementation of 160 complex and special-purpose scientific-technical
programs. They should become the basis for goal-directed management of the develop-
ment of science and technology and the introduction of their achievements into the
economy.

A differentiated approach must be provided for the management of scientific research
and for the assimilation of new technology, with consideration for the degree of
their novelty and economic effectiveness. In planning, in financing, and in statis-
tical accounting for scientific research and technical developments, it is necessary
to clearly distinguish the following: fundamental, exploratory research, directed
toward the discovery and mastery of new laws of nature and means for their technol-
ogical application; applied research, including and detailing new engineering ideas
and technological principles; experimental-design and introduction work, which
materialize these ideas and principles in prototypes of new technology, in machine
systems and technological processes.

Distinguishing the stages of scientific-research and experimental-design work during
planning, in our View, allows substantiated proportions among them not only at
academy institutes and VUZ's, but also at ministerial institutions. This requires
the development of clear criteria for categorizing research and development as to
type and specific indicators that characterize the end results at each stage.

In planning, statistical accounting, price formation, and the establishment of
economic incentives, a differentiated approach is needed toward new items with
consideration for the degree of the novelty and technical level, distinguishing the
following: conceptually new technology that represents new generations of machines
and that makes use of scientific discoveries and important inventions and that
provides, with time, for a rapid growth in effectiveness (pioneering technology that
surpasses the world scientific-technical level deserves special attention); improved
technology -- new models that permit more effective use of already known scientific-
technical ideas with consideration of the experience of producing and applying
existing generations of machines (here the expenditures are less and the effect is
achieved more rapidly, although it is relatively smaller than in the previous case);
modernized items, in which some parameters are improved.

The calculation of time and effectiveness in this are not identical. It is necessary
to give attention to the difficulty of development and assimilation of conceptually
new technology and to create more favorable economic conditions for its developers,
producers, and consumers. Effectiveness in this case can usefully be determined by

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR “Tl-10A]. USE ONLY

consideration for the results of lowering expenditures that result from increasing
the scale of production and consumption during the period of rapid diffusion of a
given technology.

An important task is the complex coordination of all the links and levers in the
management of scientific—technical progress. For this, the following should be done:
expand the role of special-purpose program planning as the core of management;
provide for special-purpose financing and high priority supply and equipment support
for scientific-technical programs and tasks: strengthen the interaction between the
plan and prices in creating favorable economic conditions for assimilating and ex-
pending the production of conceptually new technology in combination with strict and
timely sanctions (lowering prices, discounts) for output of obsolescent or outdated
products; intensify material incentives and sense of responsibility on the part of
collectives and workers of scientific-research and planning~design organizations,
enterprises, and associations, for the development and assimilation of new, highly
effective technology and removal of old technology from production; and to improve
statistical accounting and analysis of the rates, proportions, and effectiveness of
scientific progress in all economic sectors.

The emergence of contradictions and the lack of coordination among individual links
in the system for managing scientific-technical progress lowers the effectiveness of
management. Fundamental research and development (especially that pertaining to
more than one sector) does not have steady sources of financing. It seems advisable
to form, from the state budget at the disposal of the State Comittee for Science and
Technology, a special-purpose fund for fundamental scientific-technical research and
inter-sector development, using it basically for financing special-purpose complex
programs. The problems of all-out development of scientific instrument making, the
provision of up-to-date instruments, equipment, and materials to scientists are not
solved. Considering the specifics of this type of activity and the rise of new
demands, the existing supply system needs to have a separate subsystem of supply in
the sphere of scientific-research and experimental-design work, to guarantee its
priority, and to make it more flexible and efficient.

In the substantiation of price limits and warehouse prices, the degree of novelty
of an item is not considered sufficiently, and prices for old machines are lowered
too slowly. The formation of funds for economic incentives and rewards are poorly
related to the fulfillment of planned tasks in the field of scientific-technical
progress and to its effectiveness.

The economic incentives for the development and assimilation of new technology must
be accomplished with consideration of its novelty and economic effect. A number of
measures in this direction are being carried out in accord with the decree on
improving the economic mechanism: increments to warehouse prices have been increased
for highly effective items, especially if they have been based on discoveries and
inventions; discounts have been increased on prices for old items; and prizes have
been increased for important achievements from the united fund for the development of
science and technology. Ministerial scientific-research institutes are being trans-

ferred to the cost-accounting system of planning and stimulation with consideration
for the end result.

It is advisable to develop scientific bases for the economic mechanism that provide
real incentives and sense of responsibility to collectives and workers operating

a

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

under cost accounting for lowering expenditures and improving the quality of products
on the basis of continuous improvement in the engineering and technology of produc-
tion and the introduction of highly effective innovations. The theoretical basis for
this mechanism can be the revelation and distribution of differential scientific-
technical income (loss) -- the size of deviation of an individual cost from social
cost under the influence of technical progress. Collectives that have achieved
lover individual expenses than the socially necessary ones (fixed in prices) as a
result of utilizinr scientific and technical achievements, can receive a guaranteed
share from the additional effect.

Scientific-technical progress must be given a leading role in planning. This means,
first of all, enlarging the role of the summary pian for the development of science
and technology within the structure of the economic plan and in the plan system

at all levels of management. Proceeding from the task of accelerating and increasing
the effectiveness of technical progress, the following should be distinguished: the
structure of capital investment, progress in balancing among economic sectors
(providing all-out devalopment to more progressive sectors), tasks for the growth of
production effectiveness and labor productivity, economies in materials and natural
resources, and financial plan indicators.

The economic mechanism for managing the development of science and technology must
create a "green light" for the accelerated introduction of more effective technol-
ogy, reflecting the highest achievements of the scientific-technical revolution.
This is the most important precondition for successful realisation of long-term
economic and social strategy of the party formulated at the 26th CPSU Congress.

FOOTNUI'BS

1. Calculated from the statistical yearbook "Narodyoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1967 g."
[The National Economy of the USSR in 1967]. "Statistika," 1968, pp. 55, 491,
647, 649, and 888; "Narodnoye khozyrystvo 888R v 1979 g." [The National Economy
of the USSR in 1979], "Statistika? 1980, pp. 510, 312, 387-388, and 555.

2. "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1960 g." [The National Economy of the USSR in 1960],
Cosstatizdat, 1961, pp. 782 and 787; "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1965 g."
[The National Economy of the USSR in 1965], "Statistika," 1966, pp. 709 and 715;
"Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979 g." [The National Economy of the USSR in 1979],
pp. 107 and 109.

3. Calculated from the statistical yearbooks: "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1965 g."
[The National Economy of the USSR in 1965], p. 67, and "Narodnoye khozyaystvo
SSSR v 1979 g." [The National Economy of the USSR in 1979], p. 111.

4. "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979 g." [The National Economy of the USSR in 1979];
pp. 159, 368, and 552.

5. K. Marks and F. Engel's, "Sochineniya" [Works], vol. 47, p. 351.
6. K. Marks and P. Engel's, "Sochineniya" [Works], vol. 26, part III, p. 228.
7. Calculated from the. statistical yearbook "Narodnoye khozyaystvo 888R v 1979 g."

[The National Economy of the USSR in 1979], p. 164.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8. Ibid., pp. 112 and 393.

9. Ibid., pp. 363, 375, 382, and S39.

10. See "Sntiutichukiy yozhegodnik stun-«111mm Seven Bkononichukoy Vul-
nopomoohchi, 1980 3." [Statistical Yourboak for cm-Henbor Countries, 1980],
"Statiocih," 1980, pp. 337- 339.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Pravda". "Voproay ekononiki", 1981

9645
(:80: 1816/8

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROBLEMS IN ORGANIZING SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN SIBBRIA
Hoscow VOPROSY FILOSOFII in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 21-35
[Article by V. A. Koptyug (Novosibirsk)l

[Excerpt] The Siberian Department was created for the purpose of broadly expanding
fundamental research and work on applied problems with priority for Siberian inter-
ests. But how can academy and regional interests be tied together? Research on the
basic laws of the movement of matter at various levels of its organization is of
general significance. But in itself the selection of fundamental research topics,
the institutes' ties to individual regions, and the choice of objects on which to
conduct the study and verification of natural laws that are discovered, permit the
reflection of regional characteristics and interests. Indeed, in examining the
scientific orientation of many institutes of the Siberian Department of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, one sharply senses the responsibility and motivation of our
scientists in developing the Siberian region, so important for the whole country.

Thus, the Yakutsk Affiliate of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of
Sciences is investigating the flow of cosmic particles and their interaction with
the Earth's magnetic field and upper layers of the atmosphere. Why is it useful to
conduct such research at Yakutsk? Because astrophysical phenomena occur at high
latitudes more clearly and because they have a substantial effect on radiocommunica-
tions over a wide territory of the North. Or, for example, the study of the behavior
of materials under low temperatures: this is an extremely general scientific task
and it is of interest to many fields of science. But in the North this problem is
felt every day and very intensely; for in deep cold, metal becomes brittle; this
leads to breakage and accidents and causes machinery to stand idle. The Institute
of the Physical-Technical Problems of the North, which was created in Yakutsk, works
on the accomplishment of tasks relating to this problem.

An important means for concentrating attention and effort on Siberian tasks and for
forming a unified complex of research has been the large-scale "sibir'" program,
within the framework of which central scientific problems relevant to balancing the
development of this immense region are being solved. The first stage of formulating
the program consisted of scientific-technical and party-management conferences and
meetings in 1977 and 1978 of leaders from the oblasts, krays, and autonomous

republics of Siberian, at which were discussed economic and scientific-technical
tasks that were urgent for these regions. During the next stage, analyses were
conducted of existing scientific work at academy institutes, ministerial organisa-

12
non omcw. USE ONLY
tions, and higher educational institutions that corresponded to these tasks. Coordi-
nated plans were then drafted for scientific research and for utilization of its
results in the economy. Thus gradually evolved a complex of 30 special-purpose
scientific programs devoted to problems in the study and effective utilization of
fuel-energy, mineral raw-material, and biological resources, environmental protec-
tion, and the complex engineering and technology problems of Siberia.

Work on the "Sibir'" program, the framework for which presently unites the efforts of
specialists from over £00 scientific-research and experimental-design organizations

of various agencies, primarily of the Siberian region, brought about during the 10th
Five-Year Plan a new step in strengthening relations between science and the economy.

Work is now being completed on the submission of the "Sibir'" program to the State
Committee for Science and Technology for inclusion among the important scientific-

technical programs in the complex long-term program for scientific-technical progress
of the country.

Comparing the results of our work with the tasks posed by the party to the country
for the next five-year plan and for the long term, we can state that the basic areas
of research of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences, including
that within the framework of the ”Sibir'" program, are in the mainstream of the
strategic areas of development of the country and its eastern regions. At the same
time, in a number of important areas, our fundamental and applied work must be
substantially strengthened and expanded. This pertains, for example, to the problem
of producing liquid fuel from coal and gas and to the social aspects of transferring
part of the drainage from Siberian rivers to southern regions of the country.

In the process of the work, a deepening of purpose took place in the program:
whereas at the beginning it was oriented basically toward the utilization of exist-
ing developments, it gradually became clear that some kind of additional scientific
base was necessary for the solution of some large problems. In conformity with this,
the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Science is taking measures for the
expansion of fundamental and applied research, even the creation of new scientific
institutions. Thus, the Institute of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering has been
organized in Krasnoyarsk; its purpose is to provide the scientific base for creating
new technology in the fields of nonferrous metallurgy and coal chemistry in close
relationship with the development of the kray's productive forces. A new Institute
of lining in the North is operating successfully in Yakutsk and, in Kemerovo, the
foundation has been laid down for a complex institute, the work of which should aid
in accomplishing the mining-geology and chemical-ecological tasks of the Rusbass
region and partly of the Kansk-Achinsk Fuel-Energy Complex. The problems of the
Uaokan deposits will be central for the complex institute being created in Chita.
New "extension" sections and laboratories have been created in Omsk, Barnaul, and
Kysyl.

However, the formation of the network of academy units cannot be considered complete.
An urgent necessity has arisen for the creation of a strong academy scientific base
in Tyumen'; large investments are required by the Altay Experimental Farm (Genetic
Center) being organized; new units that have already been organized are in need of
personnel, financing, and equipment support. The strategic policy of the Siberian
Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences in the next few years is to strengthen
its affiliates and new academy units as much as possible.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1DFFKJAL USEiONLY

The 26th CPSU Congress has posed the task of sharply reducing the time required in
the introduction of scientific achievements into practice. "The decisive and most
urgent sector today," noted Comrade L. I. Brezhnev in the Summary Report of the
Central Committee to the party congress, "is the introduction of scientific discov-
eries and inventions into production."*

The Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences possesses a large potential
for developments that have good prospects from the point of view of the economy.
Ministerial scientific-research institutes and industrial enterprises are introduc-
ing the following works created by the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of
Sciences: applied program packages and automatic control systems, a number of new
up-to-date instruments for various purposes and hardware for the automation of
research and technological processes. microelectronics systems, means for making
catalysts, substances with predetermined characteristics and medical preparations,
methods for useful-mineral exploration, progressive labor-saving technology for
metal processing, and much more. The USSR Council of Ministers has noted the work
by our scientists in the interests of industry by two prizes in 1981.

A multilevel system of interaction between science and practice has evolved during
the past years in the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences. The
"highest" level is the submission to USSR Gosplan of technical-economic reports on
larger developments that promise significant economic effect on a national scale.

At the end of 1979, the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences entered
that level for the first time and submitted about 20 such reports to Gosplan. As
the result of work conducted in sections of USSR Gosplsn and the State Committee

for Science and Technology and also in the respective ministries and agencies,
noticeable progress was achieved with a number of proposed developments toward their
introduction into the economy. -

The submission of technical—economic reports to USSR Cosplan on larger developments
by the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences opens up the possibility'
for an outlet into the economy of the cauntry as a whole, which is especially
important for problems that have significance for more than one economic sector. No
less important is the circumstance that the inclusion of the respective tasks in

the economic plan can be assured.

The second level consists of coordinated programs with 22 ministries and agencies
for research and introduction of innovations into production. Here, the Siberian
Department has been successful in developing many new forms, finding a number of

new channels for interaction with economic sectors, and creating an efficient system
for conducting surveys and developing new plans and for exchanging new information
on the achievements of science and the needs of the respective sectors of industry.
These ties are very important and fruitful.

The Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences is continuing to form
mutual ties with the belt of ministerial scientific-research institutes and design
bureaus around the Novosibirsk Akademgorodok. As a whole, this is a very effective
form for carrying .he results of fundamental research from academy institutes
rapidly into industry. The economic effect from the introduction by these organisa-

* "Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress." Moscow, 1981, p. 43.

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tions of joint developments has been over 250 million rubles during the 10th Five-
Year Plan. But we still have not completely worked out many aspects of our joint
work both in the area of scientific-technical and personnel policies and in the area
of solving social questions in the life of Akademgorodok. Here a further search is
necessary for mutually acceptable solutions.

One of the most important links in the system for introducing new technology con-
sists of direct ties between the Siberiln Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences
and Siberian industrial and agricultural enterprises. A large amount of aid in this
work is given us by councils for the support of scientific-technical progress that
have been organized under a number of Siberian obkoms and kraykoms. We were very
pleased that L. I. Brezhnev, in his sptech to the congress, noted the work of the
Novosibirsk party obkom in increasing the effectiveness of relations between science
and production. A plenum of the Novosibirsk party obkom that took place recently
stressed again the necessity for the broadest utilization of the achievements of
science and technology, including that of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, in the oblast's industry and agriculture.

Novosibirsk industry has given a start in life to many of our scientists' develop-
ments. Examples are automated control systems and automated systems for technologi-
cal process control, welding and explosive punching, the manufacture of complex

types of products by pressing sheet metal in a creeping mode, the creation of
vibration-resistant tools and machines, and many others. We will expand and strength-
en such ties wherever possible in all our scientific centers, widely depending for
this on the assistance of the Councils for the Support of Scientific-Technical
Progress under the oblast and kray party cannittees.

Moreover, within the framework of programs of cooperation with ministries and ties
with enterprises, problems of interest to a single economic sector will still be
successfully dealt with. At the same time, the introduction of works of interest

to more than one economic sector, the proportion and significance of which are
constantly growing, are encountering very great difficulties, since often no
ministerial organizations undertake them. To accomplish such tasks, it is especially
important for academy institutes and scientific centers to have their own experi-
mental production base. lf the Institute of Nuclear Physics had not had its own
first turn at experimental production, we would hardly have today the institute's
accelerators in several sectors of the economy. Therefore, heeding the instructions
of the congress on the necessity of developing experimental-production bases for
science, we will give this area very serious attention.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatelstvo TsK KPSS "Pravda", "Voprosy filosofii", 1981.

9645
050: 1814/3

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unc 001.83
REPORTS FROM L'VOV CONFERENCE ON INTEGRATING SCIENCE AND PRODUCTION

Introduction and Background
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAG! 8883 in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 35-37

[Introduction, including opening remarks by Academician V. A. Kotel'nikov, vice-
president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, to an all-union seminar organized by the
USSR Academy of Sciences, the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and its Western Scientific
Center, and the L'vov obkom: "The Integration of Science end Production Under the
Conditions of Developed Socialism"l

[Text] The fact that science in our day has become a direct productive force creates
an imperative need for close interrelationship between science and production. Their
more complete integration will be one of the basic means for exploiting the possi-
bilities of developed socialism and for uniting its advantages vith the achievements
of the present scientific-technical revolution. The "Basic Directions for the
Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981 to 1985 and for the Period to
1990,“ approved by the 26th 0980 Congress, states the following: "In the llth Five-
Year Plan, the development of science and technology should be still more subordinated
to the solution of the economic and social tasks of Soviet society, to the accelera-
tion of the transition of the economy to the path of intensive development, and to
increasing the effectiveness of civil production."

The decisive and most complicated sector of this work is the real embodiment of
scientific discoveries and inventions in life. It is important to provide for the
most rapid utilization of the results of finitned scientific developments and to
shorten the time for creating and assimilating new technology. "Scientific-research
and planning design work must come together more closely - economically and organi-
zationally -- with production,“ said CPSU Central Conmdttea General Secretary L. I.
Brezhnev at the 26th CPSU Congress. "Everything must be eliminated that makes the
process of introducing what is new difficult, slow, or unhealthy. Production must
be vitally interested in more rapid and better assimilation of the fruits of the
thought and the fruits of the labor of scientists and designers."

The documents of the congress point to the necessity for improving the organization
of the whole system of scientific research, for making it flexible and mobile, and
intolerant of unproductive laboratories and institutes. A large role here is

played by the coordination of scientific work, which the USSR Academy of Sciences
has been called upon to bring about. Substantial steps have already been taken in

e

this field. The activities of the Union republic academies of sciences are being

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
systematically coordinated. The USSR Academy of Sciences has conducted joint
sessions with the Academy of Medical Sciences and with the All-Union Academy of
Agricultural Sciences imeni V. I. Lenin, as the result of which ostensive plans for
scientific research have been drafted. Academy institutes are improving their
interaction with ministerial institutes and are strengthening ties with VUZ science.

The unification of efforts and the delineation of prospective areas helps increase
the effectiveness of scientific investigation and its practical yield both in the
country as a whole and on the scale of individual regions. In this connection, first
and foremost, comes the task of optimum combination of the economic-sector and
regional principles of managing scientific-technical progress. Experience of this
type has been accumulated by many scientific and production organisations working in
various regions of the country: in Moscow, Leningrad, Novosibirsk, SverleVsk,
Belorussia, Moldavia, and the Ukraine. The study and generalisation of the experience
and improvement in the forms, methods. and directions for the development of inte-
gration processes of science and production were the subject of the All-Union Seminar
held in L'vov 13 to 15 January and organized by the USSR Academy of Sciences, the
UkSSR Academy of Sciences, its Western Scientific Center, and the L'vov obkom of

the Ukrainian Coammnist Party. Over 200 people -- leading scientists, managers of
party, state, and public organizations, and workers of enterprises and VUZ's partici-
pated in the seminar. Vice-President of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Academician

V. A. Kotel'nikov, opened the seminar.

In his introductory remarks, V. A. Kotel'nikov dealt with the existing possibilities
for accelerating scientific-technical progress that are offered by the socialist
system of management. he also thoroughly analyzed the deficiencies in this sphere,
especially stressing the slow implementation in industry and agriculture of the
latest achievements of science and technology, the presence of barriers between
economic sectors in the diffusion of advanced experience, and the poor coordination
of the activities of various scientific and administrative organizations in the
solution of the urgent problems relating to increasing the productivity of civil
labor. The USSR Academy of Sciences, he said, is very concerned about this situation
and is taking measures to correct it. In 1980, the academy presidium discussed the
work of the Western Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences in increasing
the effectiveness of scientific research and utilizing its results in practice and

in improving methods for regional management of scientific-technical progress. The
discussion showed that the Western Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences
had achieved certain successes. It was decided, therefore, to hold a seminar in
L'vov, inviting participation by representatives of other republics where other

means for solving urgent problems are being applied.

After pointing out the broad significance of the work undertaken, V. A. Kotel'nikov
noted, at the same time, that it is not intended that a single prescription will be
worked out for all regions. There should be an exchange of opinions as to what
could be obtained from whom and who specifically should adopt something from others.
with all the difficiencies in the known organizational forms for integrating science
and production, however, we have something in acumen. Hhere party organisations
participate actively in the work of councils, cmumissions and other bodies that are
created locally for the coordination of scientific research and for accelerating
scientific-technical progress, things go well. In a number of instances, these
bodies were even created on party initiative.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Four reports were heard at the seminar, and a discussion of them also took place.
All of these materials, in abridged form, are printed in this issue of VESTNIR.

In the recommendations adopted by the All-Union Seminar, it was noted that the mutual
exchange of information that took place at L'vov and the utilisation of the accumu-
lated experience will help to strengthen further the relationships between science
and production and will permit more successful accomplishment of the tasks placed
before Soviet science by the 26th CPSU Congress.

It was recognized to be expedient to organize a regular exchange of experience in the
work of republic academies of sciences, scientific centers, and branches of the USSR
Academy of Sciences on questions of regional management of scientific-technical
progress and, no less often than once every two or three years, to conduct conference-
seminars in various regions of the country.

The Seminar proposed that the Council for the Coordination of the Scientific Activi-
ties of the Union-Republic Academies conduct work on generalizing and disseminating
the experience of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, other republic academies of
sciences, the Siberian Department and scientific centers and branches of the USSR
Academy of Sciences on the interaction of academy scientific institutions and
production organisations of ministries and agencies.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981
Dobryk on Party Leadership
Moscow VESTNIR AKADEMII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 37-41

[Report by V. F. Dobryk, first secretary of the L'vov obkom of the Ukrainian
Communist Party: "Party Management of the Science-Production Integration Process of

the Region"]

[Text] L'vovskaya Oblast has been known for its successes in the development of
industry, science, and culture. Owing to the continuous concern by the party and
government and with active assistance from the fraternal peoples of the Soviet Union,
one of the once backward outposts of Polish fiefdom has turned into an industrial
oblast of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Here are a few statistics: the territory of the oblast is 21,800 square kilometers,
the population is 2,592,200, the population density is 118.9 persons per square
kilometer, and the city population is 54 percent.

Before 1939, 80 percent of the enterprises around L'vov consisted of small, semi-
primitive shops where only one out of seven workers was employed. Every third or
fourth person -cpable of working was unemployed. Out of the 9 million people
populating the western oblasts of the Ukraine, only 250,000 were employed in indus-
trial production.

Today, this is a region of instrument making, machine building, petroleum refining,
and chemical industry. Industrial giants have been built here, such as the Rosdol
and Yavorov "Sara" industrial associations, 12 mines in the L'vov-Volyniya Coal

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
basin, the Nikolayev Cement-Mining Combine and the Stsbnik Potash Plant, the Sokal'
Artificial Fabric Factory, and many other enterprises. The whole country is
familiar with the products of the L'vov "Elektron," “Kineskop” imeni V. I. Lenin,
"SO-Letiye Oktyabrya" and "Hikropribor" associations.

0n oblast territory, there are over 300 large industrial enterprises, including 60
associations, which are responsible for 66. 3 percent of the total gross output.

In all, 5.5 billion rubles' worth of industrial goods are turned out in a year. The
L' vov area occupies the leading position in the republic in the production of fork-
lift trucks (1002). crane trucks (98. 81), busses (96.71), overhead conveyors (100%),
light bulbs (92. 82). television sets (b7. 5!), gas ranges (64. 91), and press-forging
equipment (38. 41).

Oblast industry fulfilled its plans under the 10th Five-Year Plan by 12 December of
last year. Over 300 million rubles' worth of products above the plan were realized
and their output rose by 30.2 percent. Today, oblast enterprises put out products
of only the first and highest category of quality, and the proportion of the latter
grew from 8.7 to 27.1 percent during the 10th Five-Year Plan.

Higher and secondary special schools are on the rise. There are 74,500 persons stud-
ying in 12 VUZ's and 48,600 persons studying in 52 tschnicums and other schools.

The board of the USSR Ministry of higher and Secondary Specialized Education approved
the work experience of the L'vov VUZ center for the development and introduction of a
complex system for training quality—control specialists.

Problems in the development of fundamental and applied sciences occupy 36 of our
scientific-research institutions, including 12 institutions of the UkSSR Academy of
Sciences, 12 VUZ' s, and 19 planning-design units, where a detachment of scientists

10, 000 strong are fruitfully laboring, including 15 active and corresponding members
of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and specialized academies, 325 doctors of sciences,
and over 3200 candidates of sciences. New laboratory buildings are being constructed;
the laboratories are being furnished with up-to-date scientific equipment, and the
housing and living conditions of scientific workers are being improved.

All this taken together will also allow dealing widely with the question of uniting
the advantages of socialism with the achievements of the contemporary scientific-
technical revolution really widely and practically.

The accomplishment of the task of putting the economy on the intensive development
path requires the unification of the creative efforts of scientists and producers.
Even in the process of developing and introducing complex product quality control
we have encountered widespread separation of their interests and actions, with
barriers among agencies and among economic sectors. There has been no body in the
oblast that could solve questions of interaction between sectors in the interests
of scientific-technical progress.

Mutual relations between scientific institutions and production organizations based
on so-called cooperation agreements, and this is no secret, have not turned out to

be very effective. We often have discussed this problem at the party obkom bureau
at its plenums and meetings of party leaders, and we have come to the conclusion
that, to increase the effectiveness of production, the party obkom and party

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

committees should actively include in this process the coordination and direction of
scientific and production collectives.

This is the prehistory of the question of improving the management of scientific-
technical progress in the region on the basis of combining the principles and
interests of regions and economic sectors.

We began by working out a complex plan for the development of science and supporting
scientific-technical progress in L'vovskays Oblast for the 10th Five-Year Plan. In
1976, the party obkom bureau approved this plan, which was prepared by the western
Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and the council of rectors of the
V02 center. At this stage, we were successful in coordinating the operations of
academy and ministerial scientific-research institutions and higher educational
institutions and in directing their efforts toward the accomplishment of important
tasks in machine building, instrument making, exploration and extraction of mineral
raw materials, and agriculture.

For practical implementation of the plan, we started to form, on the basis of social-
ist cooperation, interagency special-purpose scientific-production associations and
complexes that were based on carrying out scientific-technical programs. In this way,
we achieved the expansion of inter-sector and interegency cooperation, and this
allowed improvement in the mutual exchange of scientific developments, acceleration
in introducing the most progressive of these into production, and support of a
unified technical policy at enterprises of appropriate econoeic sectors in the oblast.

At the beginning of the five-year plan, four complexes were created -- machine
building, instrument making, geological-geophysical, and agricultural -- which
brought together 12 scientific-production associations. The associations included

6 institutions of the URSSR Academy of Sciences, 17 ministerial scientific research
and planning-design institutes, 5 VUZ'e, 25 production enterprises , and 12 organiza-
tions of other oblasts of the republic. In addition, we had educational-scientific
production associations (UNPO) marked out at VUZ's.

Scientific-technical councils of the associations and boards of the complexes began
to direct the functional activities. leading scientists became the heads of the
scientific-technical councils and boards. To provide aid to these bodies and
increase their authority, we considered it essential to bring into them the heads
of party obkom sections for economic sectors as deputy chairmen of the boards.

Created also was a council of the secretaries of the party organizations of scienti-
fic institutions, VUZ's, planning-design organizations, and production organizations
that make up the associations and complexes. Komsomol and trade—union organizations
also found their place in determining scientific-technical programs. Socialist
competition was organised among associations and complexes, banners and pennants
were approved, and positions on incentives for collectives and individuals were
developed.

The experience of oblast party organizations and the western Scientific Center of the
UKSSR Academy of Sciences in organizing inter-sector scientific-production associa-

tions and complexes and in further improving the management of scientific-technical
progress in the region received high praise from Comrade L. I. Brezhnev at the

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

October (1976) plenum of the CPSU Central Committee. The Ukrainian Communist Party
Central Committee, having approved our activities, adopted in l979 the decree "0n

the Experience of the L'vov Obkom of the Ukrainian Communist Party and the Bureau of
the Western Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences in Accelerating
Scientific-Technical Progress at 0blast Enterprises.“ A large amount of aid is being
given us by the presidiums of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the UKSSR Academy-of
Sciences and by the presidents of these academies, A. P. Aleksandrov and B. Ye. Paton.

To be sure. the new form of joint activity by scientific and production organiza-
tions has significant advantages. It creates favorable conditions for agreement on
the solution of the complicated problems relating to the manufacture of machines.
instruments, and equipment in which many enterprises participate, and it helps
utilize the whole scientific-technical potential. This form provides the academy,
academy -nstitutes, and VUZ's the opportunity to be more active in introducing the
results of fundamental and applied research into production; it provides scientific-
teaching workers of VUZ's, who often do not have the necessary scientific supply

and equipment base, with access to laboratories of scientific—research institutions
furnished with the latest equipment; it provides design and technological organiza-
tions with the broad opportunity to implement scientific ideas and their develop-
ments, with faster application of the latter; and it provides industrial enterprises
with the creation of conceptually new technology, the assimilation of modern technol-
ogy, and better quality and reliability in the products manufactured.

The utilization of the scientific-technical potential of the oblast has been signifi-
cantly intensified: whereas, at the beginning of the 10th Five-Year Plan, 462
scientific-technical workers participated in the activities of the complexes, there
were 1651 in 1980. The financing of scientific research for complex programs also
increased: during the five-year plan it grew to 6 million rubles, or by a factor

of 10.

A number of important scientific-technical solutions were achieved. Among them, the
following must be noted.

In the machine building complex, there was the creation of induction equipment for
heat treatment of high-strength heavy balanced drill pipe, which was introduced at
the Drogobych Experimental and Mechanical Special Equipment Plant, which allowed the
reduction of time required for organizing large serial pipe production by seven years
and reduction in the volume of capital investment by 7.5 million rubles. The output
of pipe using the new technology just in two years saved the plant 39 million rubles.

As a whole. the activities of the machine-building complex helped in tne introduction
of 8 new technologies and 10 types of new products, and authors' certificates were
received for 150 developments.

In the instrumentmmaking complex, there was an original, updating of the design for
the 6ILKZTs color kinescope which, calculated for 1 million items, provided an

economy of 1000 tons of glass, enough for the production of 100,000 kinescope tubes;
at the same time, there was a 10 percent increase in output of good items.

In the geological-geophysical complex, there was the discovery of natural gas
deposits and the introduction of new effective technology for extracting residual
petroleum from depleted strata. '

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the agricultural complex, there was the development and introduction of a shop-
flow system for milk production and of effective methods for livestock breeding and
reproduction; and the creation of new breeds, pedigreed groups, and strains of
large-horned cattle in response to the needs of highly mechanized farms and complexes.

In the social~economic complex, there was the reduction of manual labor, the mechani-
zation and automation of high labor-content processes (the “Trud” association), the
planning of organized recreation using the natural resources of the Carpathians and
the Carpathian Piedmont (the "Rekreatsiya" association), and the creation of complex
systems for quality control over training (the "Education" association).

In the "Health" complex, there was the creation of a large cardiological center (the
"Kardiologiya" educationsl-scientific-production association), the synthesis of new
medical preparations and their transfer tc the pharmaceutical industry (the "Sintea"
educational-acientific-production association), the use of lasers in medicine (the
"Later" educationsl-scientific-production association), and the development of up-to-
date medical equipment (the "Medelektronika" educational-acientiiic-produation associa-
tion).

But perhaps our greatest success was in the creation of stable collectives of
scientists and producers of various scientific and technical areas, in the achieve-
ment of mutual understanding by the partners united by a single purpose, in their
joint discussions of prospective problems, and in the break-up of barriers between
agencies and economic sectors.

At the same time, we do not consider these forms of science-production relations or
the mechanism for controlling them to be perfect or complete. They need further
revision and development.

Improvement in the management of scientific-technical progress must be continued
under the llth Five-Year Plan. A plan has already been formulated for the develop-
ment of science and the support of scientific-technical progress in the oblast in
1981-1986; a number of new scientific-production and educational-acientific-produc-
tion associations have been created; and the sphere of their activities has been
expanded .

Many problems must still be solved. In particular, the problems have not been
solved that relate to the allotment by individual ministries and agencies, production
associations, and enterprises of specified funds for long-range complex research
and for the creation or appropriate problem laboratories and laboratories oriented
toward economic sectors. To further improve the forms and methods for managing
scientific-technical progress in the region, the level of planning and developing
regional programs should be raised and the existing methodologies for forecasting
scientific-technical progress should be improved. It would be useful to introduce
scientifically based recommendations relative to further development of the forms
tor regional interagency scientific-technical cooperation and to do more work on
existing standardizing and methodological documents to provide for the standard
functioning of special-purpose interagency scientific-production associations and
complexes.

Difficulties in coordinating our work with a number of ministries and agencies that
are still insufficiently informed about the functions of complexes and associations
and about the problems being worked on, bring about the necessity for attracting to

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
it the attention of USSR Gosplan, the USSR State Connnittee for Science and Technol-
ogy, and all-union, union-republic, and republic ministries and agencies.

A high evaluation of the work by party organizations, scientists, and producers
of the ohlast obligates us in the future to allot unremitting attention to the
questions concerning the training of scientific personnel, the development of
science, and the improvement of the mechanism for managing scientific-technical
progress. The accomplishment of these tasks is a guarantee for the successful
fulfillment of the five-year plan and the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akadenii nauk SSSR", 1981 -
Sytnik on Coordinating Research
Moscow VESTNIK AKADBHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 41-45

[Report by K. M. Sytnik, vice-president of the Ukssn Academy of Sciences and an
academician of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences: "‘lhe Coordination of Scientific
Research in the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences"l

[Text] In speaking of the organization and coordination of scientific work, one
must keep in mind the large complex of questions having to do with improVing the
effectiveness and quality of research and accelerating the utilization of its
results in the economy. The most important component of the complex is provision
for the optimum combination of fundamental and applied research. In this connec-
tion, one must assume that without fundamental research, the development of which
represents the chief task of academy scientific institutions, we cannot count on the
appearance of scientific discoveries and scientific advances that are really signi-
ficant in their consequences. Fundamental research allows one to see more clearly
what the future of production will be and it opens up new opportunities for
scientific-technical and social progress. And finally, the active participation of
scientists, including associates of the M83 Academy of Sciences, in the solution
of today's practical problems is the result of the development of fundamental
research in recent years and recent decades. '

The UkaR Academy of Sciences utilises various forms of relations with production.
First of all is the participation of its institutes in the fulfillment of scien-
tific-research programs confirmed by the USSR Sate Connittee for Science and Tech-
nology and the republic Gosplan. These programs reflect the urgent requirements
for progressive types of products, complex automation of production processes in
industry, agriculture, construction, and transportation. Substantial presence in
these programs, as a necessary element, is the stage of introduction into produc-
tion; this makes them a real instrument'fer accelerating the practical utilization
of the latest scientific-technical achievements.

In the 10th Five-Year Plan, scientific institutions of the academy, together with
ministerial research organisations and industrial enterprises, participated in the
fulfillment of 94 programs and 10 plans for scientific research and experimental-
design work. For five of these, UkSSR Academy of Sciences institutes were head
organizations in the country. Advanced positions in the solution of scientific-
technical problems on a national scale were occupied by the institutes of electri-
cal welding, problems of materials sciences, casting problems, cybernetics, and
superhard materials.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂew forms of relationships between science and production, which have also

appeared at our academy, are directed toward reducing the length of time between
the origin of an idea and its introduction into production; they have a-;eady
achieved positive results in practice. One of these forms is the organisation of
joint work by the academy and individual ministries on complex plans for scientific
research and introduction of new technology. After careful study of the substance
of a task and elucidation of mutual capabilities, a plan is put together which
permits specifying both timely completion of scientific research and the prepara-
tion of the necessary plant conditions for introduction (the appropriate capacities,
supply and equipment support, personnel, and calculation of consumer needs) and
permits substantially raising the level of mutual responsibility on the part of
scientists and producers.

Such plans have now been put together and are being successfully implemented jointly
with the republic ministries of ferrous metallurgy, geology, health, food industry,
and others. Almost 700 tasks were planned. A significant portion of them have
already been fulfilled.

The successful influence of science and the acceleration of its technical re-equip-
ping is aided significantly by a form which is arising on the initiative of the
UkSSR Academy of Sciences and the AvtoZIL association for organising applied
research and introduction of tew technology, such as work on complex scientific -
technical programs of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, ministerial scientific insti-
tutes, and production collectives. Academy scientists are participating in the -
fulfillment of 20 complex programs of interest to large production associations

and enterprises, such as the "Artemugol'" association, the L'vov "Koneskop" scien-
tific-production association, the Krivoy Rog mining-enrichment combine, the
Chernomorskoye shipping industry, and others. In the course of work on these-
programs, there have been created conceptually new technological processes, machines,
instruments, equipment, and materials, the practical utilization of which made a
noticeable contribution to the improvement in quality and reliability of manufac-
tured products, the reduction of their materials content, and an improved level of
mechanization and automation of production processes.

The development of tundamental research in areas needed by the economy and the
growth of effectiveness and quality of production are aided by the organization
within the academy of scientific-research problem laboratories oriented toward
economic sectors. They are created at an academy institute or institute or enter-
prise of a USSR ministry. Their activities are financed by a ministry, but the
scientific and methodological management is accomplished by an academy institute.
lhere are 40 such laboratories of 22 USSR and republic ministries functioning under
institutions of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences. The organization of these labora-
tories is usually related to the lack in ministerial scientific resources of a
capability in certain areas of fundamental and applied research developed in the
academy. This form of relationship between science and production is especially
important in case of the necessity for mass introduction of highly effective
scientific developments.

The academy is not trying to aggressively expand the number of these laboratories
and makes their creation dependent on institutes' achievements in fundamental
research that has to be developed in applied research and experimental design
development and then effectiVely introduced into separate sectors of the economy.

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Agreements for socialist cooperation with individual enterprises are widely used
in the academy. Over 1300 of these agreements have been concluded.

In selecting prospective scientific areas, we take into consideration the previous
results and the presence of specialists and an experimental base. As has been
stressed many times, our academy is not trying to duplicate the USSR Academy of
Sciences, but is concentrating scientific efforts and material resources on those
problems, in the solution of which we occupy or can occupy the leading position and
can bring the greatest benefit. With this aim, necessary changes are made in the
subject matter of the work; nonpriority research is curtailed; and the released
resources are transferred to more promising areas. The formulation of scientific
and scientific-technical programs at various levels provides for clear statement
of tasks, the selection of optimum ways and means for their implementation, the
organization of operational management of the research process, and an efficient
system of control over its fulfillment.

An important role in correctly choosing areas for scientific research is played by
the 78 problem councils of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, which coordinate research
in their respectinve branches of science and analyse plans for scientific research
done by academy and ministerial institutes and VUZ departments. The councils also
give a significant amount of attention to the introduction of the results of
completed projects in the natural and social sciences. They have submitted over
1300 recommendations to the directive bodies of the republic, and to appropriate
ministries and agencies, for the utilisation of the results of scientific research
in the economy.

A new impulse was given to the work of problem councils by the creation in 1977 of
the Republic Council for the Coordination of Scientific Research in the Natural and
Social Sciences, in which the academy was allotted a leading role. The Council
delineates prospects for the development of scientific research in the ministries
and agencies of the republic, forms complex scientific programs and complex plans
for fundamental research, accomplishes control over their fulfillment and, jointly
with the presidium and departments of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, directs the
work of problem councils. It regularly hears reports by republic ministries and
agencies on the development status of complex scientific research and practical
utilization of its results.

The purposeful and systematic work of the Republic Council with ministries and
agencies, VUZ's, and ministerial scientific-research institutes has led to the
improvement in the coordination of research between agencies and within agencies and
to the increase of their share of complex scientific projects; this has permitted
increasing the meaning of the latter in fulfilling the tasks of the republic five-
year plan for the most important projects in the natural and social sciences. Now,
a number of republic ministries and agencies fulfill these projects along with the
UkSSR Academy of Sciences.

To provide for scientific research in the economic regions of the republic on the
most important problems in the natural and social sciences and to strengthen the
relationship between science and production, and to improve the coordination of
scientific research conducted by institutions of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences,
ministries, agencies, and VUZ's, six scientific centers have been created within
the academy system. These centers comprise 56 institutions of the UkSSR Academy

25
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Sciences (together with departments and branches of institutes and the like),
and they spread their influence to 156 ministerial scientific-research institutes,
162 planning-design organizations, 112 VUZ's, and a significant number of indus-
trial enterprises.

The scientific centers have become a dependable support for Ukrainian Communist
Party obkoms and oblast councils of people's deputies in the solution of the
scientific-technical tasks most essential for a region and in establishing new
forms for uniting science and production. In a majority of the oblasts of the
republic -- even in those where there are no academy institutions -- scientific-
coordination councils (branches) of scientific centers have been organized with the
help of the obkoms. In this way, relying on the high scientific authority of the
republic Academy of Sciences and with active support by party obkom bureaus, the
bureaus and councils of the scientific centers of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences have
actually taken on the functions of interagency bodies for scientific coordination
which have been allotted extremely broad powers. They are practically engaged

in the formation of special-purpose scientific-technical programs being fulfilled
in the interests both of individual industrial enterprises and of regions as a
whole, and they formulate complex plans for cooperation with producers among the
collectives of academy and ministerial institutes, as well as of VUZ's, and they
exercise control over progress in implementing plans. 0n the basis of organising
cooperation between science and producers, the scientific centers are developing
new effective forms for such cooperation.

The successful accomplishment of tasks for the increase of effectiveness of science
depends to a significant degree on the coordinated operations of the republic
academies of sciences. For many years, there have been fruitful scientific
relationships among the academies of sciences of the Ukrainian, Belorussian, and
Moldavian SSR's. lnterrepublic coordination councils are being created, which
formulate programs for joint work and provide for their fulfillment. Already
created and being implemented are seven interrepublic programs for the development
of atomic energy; the search for useful minerals; the loss of agricultural products
during storage, transportation, and processing; the rational utilization and conser-
vation of the waters of the Dnepr, Pripyat', and Dnestr river basins; and a number
of others. An important feature in the coordination of the work of the three
academies has been the regular meetings of their presidents.

We think that the further development and deepening of cooperation among republic
academies is a real factor in the progress of the whole of Soviet science. An
important role in expanding this interrelationship belongs to the 0883 Academy of
sciences' Council for the Coordination of the Scientific Activities of the Union-
Republic Academies.

Practice shows that individual aspects of the application of the special-purpose
program method in science is still insufficiently worked out. Certain difficulties
arise in the formulation of programs and in their supply and equipment support; in
a number of instances, there seems to be a passion for creating scientific and
scientific-technical programs without the necessary substantiation of their
advisability. Therefore, it seems useful to organize, under the direction of the
Council for Coordination, a regular exchange of information, the generalisation of
practice in applying the special-purpose program method, and the working-out of
certain practical recommendations.

.\

26 .
roe omcut use our
It is known that the successful organisation and coordination of scientific
research in a very direct manner depends on supply-and-equipment support. In the
system that has evolved for supporting science, its needs for experimental
facilities and materials are far from being fully satisfied. In our academy, we
have been forced to find the way out of this difficult situation by increasing the
volume of contractual work: we had to watch out, however, lest these projects
negatively affect the fulfillment of fundamental research.

Especially large difficulties in supply-and-equipment support are experienced by
the academy organisations that operate under cost accounting, where scientific-
technical innovations are carried forward to the stage of serial production. They
generally do not enjoy the advantages of centralised supply and are forced to go
the self-support route of direct ties with interested enterprises, which often also
do not have the required materials and constituent parts. It seems expedient for
the Council for the Coordination of the Scientific Activities of the Union-Republic
Academies of Sciences, on the basis of a comprehensive study of the situation that
has evolved, to develop specific proposals for the improvement of support for
scientific research in the union republics.

Life shows that it is necessary to give a great deal of attention to the study and
exchange of experience in the work of republic academies. Good opportunities for
this are opened up by seminars like ours, which should be conducted regularly. And
the main role in their preparation should be played by the USSR Academy of Sciences'
Council for the Coordination of the Scientific Activities of the Union-Republic
Academies of Sciences.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Aksdemii nauk SSSR', 1981
Podstrigsch on Program-Goal Approach
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 46-b9

[Report by Ya. S. Podstrigach, chairman of the Western Scientific Center of the UkSSR
Academy of Sciences and an academician of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences: "The Special-
Purpose Program Method for Managing Scientific-Technical Progress in a Region")

[Text] Our region has a rather large scientific potential, but it is dispersed
among various agencies. It can be utilized effectively only if efforts and
resources are concentrated on those areas where it can have the maximum effect. All
large contemporary scientific-technical problems have a complex character that
requires the uniting of highly qualified specialists of various kinds, and this can
be provided only within the framework of interagency cooperation. Thus, interagency
scientific and scientific—technical cooperation serves as a basic precondition for
forming a regional system of managing scientific-technical progress.

what are the principles that lie at the base of our system?

The preservation of the administrative and legal independence of the organizations
that build up mutually advantageous cooperation on a nongovernmental basis. The
Coordinated utilisation of the supply-and-equipment and personnel resources for the
development of the most important scientific-technical problems. The special-
purpose program approach, which provides for interagency planning, continuous

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

through all phases, of scientific developments and introduction into production.
Optimum utilization of existing organizational links and forms that earlier had a
positive influence on the development of scientific-technical progress. All-round
strengthening of party influence and activation of societies in the solution of
problems relating to the management of scientific-technical progress.

The basic components of our regional system and its structure are as follows.

General regional management is accomplished by the council of the Scientific Center,
which is composed of leading scientists of the region, independent of their
subordination, including managers of councils of rectors of VUZ zones, and also
responsible workers from oblaat party and Soviet bodies, and managers of large
enterprises. In each oblast, there is a branch of the council of the scientific
center, which organically merges with oblast councils for scientific-technical
progress that are headed by secretaries of party obkoms; the directors of branches
of the council of the scientific centers are members of the bureau of the
scientific center. Subject-matter management of fundamental research has been
taken over by the sections of the scientific center; and for scientific-technical
developments, by the interagency special-purpose scientific-production associa-
tions (HTsNPO), which operate on a nongovernmental basis, and complexes.

The aim of management is the development and fulfillment of complex plans for the
development of scientific research and the support of scientific-technical progress
for the five-year plan for the oblasts of the region. These plans are developed

on the basis of proposals from scientific-technical institutions, production enter-
prises, scientific-technical societies, are examined and approved at bureaus of
Ukrainian Communist Party obkoms, and have an interagancy character. In them are
represented the basic areas of fundamental and applied research of interest to the
oblast and to the region as a whole and tasks for training scientific personnel

for organizational and material support to the development of science, for the
exchange of experience, and for the popularization of scientific achievements.

For the fulfillment of the applied tasks of complex plans, special-purpose scien-
tific-technical programs are formulated and, to provide for their implementation
organizationally, HTsNPO's are created. The organizational and legal bases for

the association are the Agreement and Regulations on the HTsNPO. The Agreement,
which is concluded between organizations that participate in the development of the
program, determines the purpose of the association, as well as the head organiza-
tions for scientific-research, experimental-design development, and introduction
into production. The Agreement, the Regulations, and the special-purpose program
are approved by the ministries and agencies of the association's head organizations.
The activities of the association are managed by the scientific-technical council.
It decides questions relating to material and scientific-technical support,
continuous planning of projects from scientific research through the introduction
into production, it creates joint laboratories for the solution of urgent program
problems, and it organizes the work of scientific-technical seminars and meetings.

An HTsNPO sets as its goal the integration of efforts for the solution of urge .
complex scientific-technical problems of interest to one or several enterprises

under the jurisdiction, as a rule, of a single ministry. During the 10th Five-

Yesr Plan, 15 scientific-technical programs were fulfilled within the framework

of the associations including, in particular, "The Quality of Electron-Beam

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Instruments," "The Quality, Reliability, and Durability of Items in the Motor
Vehicle Industry," "Increase in the Effectiveness of Geophysical Research for
Petroleum and Gas," and "The Development and Industrial Introduction of Electric
Thermometer Equipment." All of these programs have a complex character; therefore,
their implementation involves the participation of many scientific-research and
planning-design institutions, VUZ departments, and production organisations of
various types -- over 60 participants, in all.

A number of scientific-technical developments for large industrial, construction,
and other organizations are fulfilled by VUZ' s within the framework of educational-
scientific-production associations, of which there are about 30 in the region. They
work effectively at the Polytechnicsl Institute and the Forestry Technology Insti-
tute in L' vov, the Institute of Petroleum and Gas in lvana Franko, and the Ukrainian
Institute for Engineers of Water Management in Rovno. This cooperation, on s
nongovernmental basis, is also accomplished, as a rule, in the interests of
individual enterprises.

within the region there are enterprises of various ministries that, however, have
closely related scientific-technical problems. Therefore, proceeding from the
general tasks of scientific-technical progress and by characterizing economic
sectors on the basis of related problems of scientific-production and educational-
scientific-production associations, interagency scientific-production complexes are
being created. Their boards are composed of representatives of scientific institu-
tions and VUZ's, managers (or chief specialists) of industrial enterprises, and
representatives of party bodies and society organizations. The board is headed by
a member of the bureau of the scientific center, a leading scientist, and his
deputy is the head of a party obkom economic section.

The board of the complex develops a strategy for scientific-technical progress in a
given economic sector, determines special-purpose programs for individual groups of
enterprises, creates associations for their fulfillment, and coordinates their work.
Overall coordination of the activities of interagency scientific-production
complexes and associations is accomplished by the bureau of the Western Scientific
Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences; the bureau approves all documents that
regulate their work as well as the composition of the management bodies, approves
the special-purpose scientific-technical programs, exercises periodic control over
their fulfillment, and makes decisions on the creation of new associations and
complexes.

Analysis of the work done by us under the 10th Five-Year Plan provides a basis for
considering that the above-mentioned organizational forms have proven themselves
applicable and rather effective under conditions of the Western Ukraine. Complex
plans for the development of scientific research and support of scientific-technical
progress within oblasts of the region have been successfully fulfilled. By the

end of the five-year plan, the quantity of introduced developments increased by a
factor of more than 3. In individual academy institutions, these indicators were
even higher. At the Physical-Mechanical Institute of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences,
the base institution of the machine-building complex, the quantity of developments
introduced into the machine-building sector in the region increased from 6 in 1976
to 23 in 1980, and the economic effect from the introduction of new technology
increased by a factor of 6. As it had been supposed, the gainer turned out to be
not only the region, but the whole economic sector.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lISE ONLY

What kind of factors for increasing the effectiveness of scientific research have
been activated successfully with the help of the new organizational forms?

First of all, it is the strengthening of the problem content and the concentration
of scientific potential on the chief areas of research. The complex approach to
scientific-technical problemshasshown evidence of efficiency.

One must also speak of the shortening of the cycle from a scientific-technical idea
to its introduction into production insofar as, under the conditions of complexes and
associations, comprehensive planning of developments, corresponding to the require-
ments of the special-purpose program approach,bas acquired sure ground. This is
aided by the presence of interagency laboratories, the possibility for effective
solution of problems of project financing, the organization of stage-by-stage
testing of research results under production conditions, the creation of a sector
of science at the plant and, relative to this, the release of scientists from
inappropriate functions in the process of introduction, the precise definition of
duties and responsibilities, when production has already become a less passive
subject for the introduction of scientific achievements and, as a partner. suggests

tasks, participates in development, and takes on functions related to its implemen-
tation.

A stability of relations between science and production is being achieved, based

on joint programs. Economic agreements are becoming long-term (for two or three
years), and agreements for socialist cooperation are being packed with more meaning-
ful contents, and educationsl-scientific-production associations are also under-
taking development of complex programs. The presence of joint management bodies -
boards of complexes that include representatives of party obkoms - helps to
neutralize the negative influence of interagency barriers. The boards of complexes
can effectively bring urgent problems to the attention of a group of related
enterprises and mobilize efforts for their solution.

And, finally, there is the activization of the efforts of societies. The activities
of complexes and associations have receiVed active support from trade-union organi-
zations, which have expanded socialist competition among complexes and within them.
The adoption of joint obligations by collectives of scientific-research institutions
and industrial enterprises that belong to associations is becoming a good tradition.
Komsomol organizations have included questions relating to the implementation of

the complex programs of associations within the sphere of activity of coun ils of
young scientists and specialists and have organised komsomol-youth collectives for
the development of individual topics. Complex creative teams have been connected

to the programs through the mechanism of scientific-technical societies. All of

this has aided in the creation of the proper psychological atmosphere for uniting
science and production.

It is necessary to stress continuous attention to the activities of complexes and
associations on the part of party organisations -- from oblast organisations to
primary organizations. They aid in setting up relations among scientific, VUZ, and
production collectives, increase citizens' activity and people's sense of responsi-
bility, and form cadres of organizers for scientific-technical progress. Primary
party organizations undertake the control over fulfillment of complex programs,
joint socialist commitments, and the organization of competition. At the meetings

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the secretaries of party organizations of institutions that are a part of an
association, recurrent tasks in managing relations between science and production
are discussed. These same questions have been the subject of attention of the

continuously operating methodological council of the secretaries of party organisa-
tions of scientific-research institutes. which was created under the L'vov obkom.

Naturally, success in the work of associations is determined also by the interest
in them on t.e part of the ministries.

To further raise the level of activity of interagency complexes and associations,
in our view, the following is necessary:

To improve the mechanism for forming oblast complex plans for the development of
scientific research and support of scientific-technical progress. To develop

a single methodology for drafting scientific-technical programs and also methods
for controlling and analysing the results obtained. To expand the function of
complexes and associations, particularly, to enlist them in the formulation of
scientific-technical plans for the development of the appropriate sectors of the
region's economy. To improve the supply-snd-equipment, financial, and personnel
support in the implementation of complex special-purpose scientific-technical
programs, to more actively direct the means of economic sectors toward the creation
of joint laboratories and the construction of working space for them on a shared
basis, and to strengthen plant science sections by creating branches of VUZ depart-
menta at enterprises and at scientific-research institutions. To develop socialist
competition among associations and complexes for high end results.

The region has developed complex plane for the development of scientific research
and support of scientific-technical progress for the llth Five-Year Plan and
scientific-tet.nical programs for interagency associations, which already number

18. A number of urgent problems of various economic sectors have found expression
in the "Complex Plan for Scientific-Technical and Social-Economic Projects of the
UkSSR Academy of Sciences with Enterprises and Organizations of the Western Oblasts
of the Ukrainian SSR for 1981 to 1985," which permits more active utilization of the

scientific potential of republic academy institutes in the interests of the region.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo "Nauka“,"Vestnik Aksdemii nauk SSSR", 1981

Takeir on Regional Efforts
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 50-54

[Report by K. I. Taksir, deputy chairman of the Scientific Council on the Economic
Problems of Scientific-Technical Progress of the USSR Academy of Sciences: "The
Effectiveness of Regional Forms of Relationships Between Science and Production"]

[Text] The acceleration of scientific-technical progress, as practice has shown,
is possible only under conditions of optimum combination and coordinated solutions
of problems between economic sectors, within economic sectors, and within regions.
In this complicated system, the strongest and most persistent is the system for
managing scientific-technical progress within an economic sector. The functions of
USSR Cosplan and the USSR State Committee for Science and Technology are primarily

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oriented toward this system. But experience shows that ministries and agencies
often ignore problems that arise between economic sectors. They also do not pay
enough attention to regional problems of scientific-technical progress. Meanwhile,
the necessity for improving regional management of scientific-technical progress is
dictated by many factors. One of them is the need to utilize local labor and
natural resources. It is a matter of taking into consideration regional peculiari-
ties iu the development of productive forces, in solving problems in the complex
development of cities and villages, and of reducing the fluctuation of personnel
and disorganized movement of work forces. The ever increasing scarcitics of natural
resources and the flow of natural resources in individual regions requires rational
planning and utilization of local reserves of raw materials and other materials

commensurate with what is necessary for the advantages received.

In recent years, entirely new organizational forms for integrating science and
production and for organizing and managing them have appeared in many regions of the
country. Let us name, for example, the Dnepropetrovsk complex system for product
quality control and effective use of resources, the Krasnodar system for increasing
the effectiveness of production, the experience of the Zaporozh'ye and Iher'kov
areas in the development of complex systems for increasing the effectiveness of

machine building, and the Ural Scientific Center, with its continuously operating
oblast scientific-practical conferences.

One of the organizational fc:ms of relations between fundamental science and prac-
tice that deserves attention is the creation, on the initiative of the Siberian
Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences, of the so-called "innovation belt“ for
the implementation of applied scientific and technical developments. The idea in
creating it was to provide for a process of bringing into being the capacities of
scientific research, design bureaus, and experimental bases for conceptually new
scientific-technical developments. Now, the innovation belt, which has spread
directly around the Novosibirsk Akademgorodok, includes ll such organizations. Their
scientific management is fulfilled by academy institutions, and the administrative-
economic management is accomplished by economic ministries. This initiative
undoubtedly has played a positive role. However, as time goes by. the administra-
tive and economic pressure by the economic ministries on their subordinate scientif-
ic-research institutes and design bureaus that enter into the innovation belt has
intensified. Attempts have been made gradually to isolate the Siberian Department
from some of them. As a result, the problem of creating a permanently operating base
with dual subordination for systematic work in utilizing the latest achievements of
fundamental science has still not been solved completely.

On the initiative of the Krasnoyarsk party kraykom and the Donetsk and Voroshilovgred
party obkoms, regional complex plans and plans for scientific-technical progress have
been developed. These plans serve as instruments for qualified and effective manage-
ment of scientific-technical progress in the hands of oblast and kray organizations.
This process is not peculiar to our country. There have been rather interesting ex-
periences in developing regional programs for scientific-technical development in
Burgas and Lovich (Bulgaria), and also in Hungary.

By what means is the effectiveness of integrating science and production achieved,
particularly in interagency special-purpose scientific-production associations?
First of all, by utilizing all factors for intensifying civil production. The

32

FOR OFFKJA1.USEGDNLY
factors that operate are those that support the growth of labor productivity and
funding pay-off, lower resource-content of products, and increase their quality,

and improve other technical economic indicators of enterprises and organizations
that participate in program implementation, and also the enterprises and organise-
tions that use the products. Organisational factors are beginning to "work," which
affect the volume of production, the degree of its concentration and specialization,
the strengthening of relations among scientific, design, and project-planning
organizations and enterprises, the structure of management, its methods, principles,
and functions, and so forth. The joint operation of all these factors leads to
acceleration in the utilization of the latest scientific results and the introduction
of the latest scientific results and the introduction of new technology, the conduct
of all stages of the cycle, and the reduction of its length by matching stages and
phases in time.

The effectiveness of this cycle from the economic point of view can be usefully
looked at as the overall effectiveness of the entire process, including development,
creation, and utilization of technical innovations. In this connection, the effect
from conducting research and development can be received only in production and

in the course of utilizing new items. How, then, can an evaluatiOn be made of the
effectiveness of research and development within the framework of interagency
special-purpose scientific-production associations [HTsNPO's]?

As a result of accelerated development, tne means mobilized for solution of some
specific technical problems are being returned in the form of completed technical
solutions, new instruments, and so forth, sooner than was foreseen. The scientific-
production collective has the opportunity to conduct a larger number of developments,
and this leads to an increase in labor productivity. By accelerating the turnover,
an economic effect is achieved. On the average, as the experience of operating
associations shows, the reduction achieved in the length of time for development and
assimilation is from one and a half to two years, including from six to eight months'
reduction for development. Obviously, these time-lengths also can have an effect

on acceleration; this is a very, very large hidden reserve that can, to a signifi-
cant degree, help intensify our economy. With such consideration of effectiveness,
we assume that the acceleration in assimilation of the Output of new items is
equivalent to a corresponding application of capital investment at other times

that may have led to a comparable type.

At the present time, there is great urgency in the question of transforming applied
research into technical development and accelerating the process of transforming
fundamental research into applied investigations. The creation, in regions, of
various scientific-production complexes headed by academy institutes has opened up
the possibilities for planning the scientific build-up of fundamental research that
has direct entry into material production. Very much is being done in this connec-
tion. However, unfortunately, there is still an absence of legal and economic
regulation of the relationships between institutions of the USSR Academy of Sciences
and the union-republic academies of sciences, on the one hand, and ministerial
scientific-research institutes, design bureaus, and industrial enterprises, on the
other hand. In a number of instances, the ministerial scientific-research insti-
tutes and design bureaus acquire authorship rights to the research results and
include the results of contractual work in their own reports without any reference to
the academy institutions. Often there is no objectivity in evaluating the role of

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fundamental reseerch. He still have not attained the position where plans for intro-
ducing fundamentsl research results become a basis for the subject plans of minis-
terial scientific-research organisations.

The experience of Holdavia, Belorussia, and the Ukraine is well known with respect to
their creation at academy institutions of various laboratories that specifically help
transform fundamental research into applied. Evidently, at head ministerial scientif-
ic-research institutes, where there is no possibility for creating such special
laboratories, it makes sense to create groups of scientists who could permanently
follow the achievements in fundamental research, detect signs of areas with growing
prospects, and be informed of all new results achieved in closely related branches of
tundamental science. In the selection of subject matter for fundamental research,

the most important criterion should be its significance for overlapping sciences and
its potential value to the economy.

There is a need for improving instructions for the transfer by scientific organiza-
tions of the USSR Academy of Sciences and union-republic academies of sciences to
economic ministries and agencies of materials on inventions created in these organi-
zations. Essentially,economic ministries and agencies do not bear any responsibility
for examining these materials or utilising them.

Meanwhile, in a number of union-republic academies of sciences, the number of inven-
tions that are not introduced, including many large and highly effective ones, is
increasing. The necessity has arisen to establish e procedure that would increase
the responsibility on both sides - not only academy and applied science, but also
ministries and agencies. In our opinion, it would be advisable to create an inter-
agency commission, under USSR Gosplan, to examine and solve problems in the timely
implementation of the larger inventions and discoveries of academy institutions that
have important economic significance; it would include high-level representatives
from the USSR Academy of Sciences, the State Committee for Science and Technology,
the State Committee for Inventions and Discoveries, the Ministry of Finance, the
State Committee for Labor and Social Questions, and USSR Gosplan. It would be
advisable to develop and consolidate the procedures for selection, examination,
accounting, planning, and control relating to the introduction of the most important

research results .

It must be said that in recent years we have had a tendency to reduce the proportion
of fundamental science in some union-republic academies, in the Ministry of Higher
and Secondary Specialized Education as a whole, and in certain ministries. Under
any circumstances, including during the examination of regional aspects of the prob-
lem, it should not be forgotten that fundamental science is our future and that it
is creating now what in 15 to 20 years can be realised and provide colossal economic
effect. It is essential that this aspect be considered in the planning of scientif-
ic-technical progress on a country-wide scale and by individual regions.

The etfectiveness of science-production relations cannot but be affected by
deficiencies in the system for financing contractual projects being fulfilled by
academy institutes. Academy institutes do not have the opportunity’to use the means
received from contracts to enlist additional staff personnel for the fulfillment of
contract work. At VUZ's, this has been solved: it is possible, for exanple, to
send associates on trips relative to contractual subject matter, to provide material

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

incentives to performers who make substantial contribution to the fulfillment of
contracts, and to acquire new equipment needed by the institute, Out of contract
funds; 25 percent of contract funds going into the fulfillment of scientific
research can go into wages to pay professorial-teeching staff at half rate for
dual-position holding. This procedure is not available to academy institutes.

Serious difficulties arise in organizing the work of joint laboratories and sections.
These units, as a rule, are financed out of production and fulfill special-purpose
tasks of ministries. However, up to the present time, the system for allotting and
submitting appropriate work limits has not been simplified. The existing procedure
is very complicated. It is tied to various types of agreements and decisions by
numerous bodies. Much time is spent on this, sometimes a year and a half. Even
within a union republic it is not possible to solve the problem of submitting work
limits without agreement by an ell-union or union-republic ministry. Ior revision,
a large number of documents and normative statements are needed in this field.

Interesting experience in economic incentives has now been disseminated in the
Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences. In 1972, three of its insti-
tutes -- mining, semicouductor physics, and hydrodynamics -- were given the right
to create funds for economic incentives out of consumers' contract funds. The
amounts of these revenueswereestablished independently of the size of the economic
effect received from the introduction of the institute‘a developments. True, huge
difficulties innediately appeared. First, ministries and enterprises were inter-
ested in hiding the economic effect that could be received in a number of instances.
Secondly, the position and character of the work of the academy institutions in the
technological chain of new-technology introduction were not defined with sufficient
clarity. And thirdly, complications arose in connection with the status of matters
in the introduction of new technology by the consumer. The introduction of many
new developments was delayed for several years and the economic incentives for
workers also suffered from this.

The policy on forming and using economic incentive funds that operates in the
Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences now substantially approaches that
which exists in industrial ministries. Fund formation is based not on the effect
from introducing new technology, but on the guaranteed economic effect, which is
charged to and included in the estimated cost of contractual work. For academy
institutions, this sum serves not as a supplementary, but a basic source of incen-
tive. Contract funds go to an'academy institute in accord with the guaranteed

effect regardless of whether a development is introduced into production. This is an
additional economic factor in managing the development of research and utilizing its
results in production. The Siberian Department still uses this method as an
experiment, but in the near future a typical statement will be prepared which can be
used by all academy institutions. Recently, an experiment in creating a system of
material incentives dependent on the guaranteed economic effect received by the
consumer was introduced at the scientific institutions of the UkSSR Academy of
Sciences.

In connection with the implementation of measures for strengthening the integration
of science and production, appropriate documents should be prepared for standards

and methodologies. These should include a Methodology for Technical-Beenomic Sub-
stantiation for Creating HTsNPO's, Policy on HTsNPO's, Methodology for Planning the

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Whole Cycle from Research to Production Within an MTsNPO, the Methodology for
Determining the Social and Economic Effect from HTsNPO's, and also the Policy on
Socialist Competition among HTsNPO's and Complexes. It would be advisable to
create, under the L'vov department of the Institute of Economics of the UkSSR
Academy of Sciences, a scientific-methodological center to provide aid to scientific
and practical workers in this matter. It would be advisable, once every two years,
to conduct seminars on specific topics -— planning for the whole research-production
cycle, financing experiences, development of special-purpose programs in HIsﬂPO’s,
meshodological questions for determining the social-economic effect and incentives.
an so orth.

A few years ago, a section for the regional problems of scientific-technical progress
was created in the USSR Academy of Sciences' Scientific Council on the Economic Prob-
lems of Scientific-Technical Progress. This section has now issued the "Methodology
for Regional Planning of Scientific-Technical Progress” and has held a series of
conferences in Donetsk, Krasnoyarsk, and Moscow. It is apparent that we need to
unite efforts and to utilize existing experience to more advantage in organization-
al-economic and scientific-methodological support to all participants in the inte-
gration of science and production.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nsuka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

Summaries of Participants' Speeches

Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 54-62

[Report: "Forms for Integrating Science and Production"]

[Text] V. V. PANASYUK, director of the Physical-Mechanical Institute imeni G. V.
Karpenko of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and an academician of the UkSSR Academy of
Sciences, talked about the organizational work of the board of the L'vov Interagency
Scientific-Production Complex. he reported that the complex included four scientific-
'production associations: "Avtoprom," "Khilmaash," "Nsdra," and "Sara." In the
interests of developing machine building in the western oblasts of the Ukraine,
special-purpose programs have been formulated for each of these associations for
improving technology, equipment, and product quality, and also for increasing labor
productivity. Programs for the activities of each association are being developed

by the scientific-technical councils of the associations. The board of the complex
determines the strategy for the development of a given economic sector of the region,
designates the chief tasks for individual groups of scientific-research organizations
and enterprises, creates new associations, coordinates their work, and controls the
fulfillment of special-purpose programs. It is accountable to the bureau of the
Scientific Center.

All organizational and practical activities of the complex and associations are
directed toward providing assistance to industrial enterprises for the most rapid
utilization of scientific and technical achievements. V. V. Panasyuk stressed this

thesis with specific examples, particularly that of the improvement in the design
and technology of bussss at the L'vov Bus Plant and that of the manufacture of a
highly effective rock-crushing tool at the Drogobych Bit Plant. The economic effect
from introducing scientific-technical developments in the complex as a whole during
the 10th Five—Year Plan exceeded 60 million rubles; relations between science and

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
production became stable; and capable scientific-production collectives were formed,
which now have been included in the fulfillment of the tasks of the new five-year
plan.

H. I. DOLISHNIY, head of the L'vov section of the Institute of Economics of the

W851! Academy of Sciences, in his speech, discussed the organizational and economic
factors in the creation and functioning of interagency scientific-production complexes
and associations.

It is perfectly clear, he said, that scientific-technical potential of the region
depends not only on the number of scientific-research institutions and scientific
workers found within it, but also on the presence of flexible organizational forms
that help mobilise creative thought for the solution of the tasks facing production
and on a whole complex of economic, social, and other factors. The creation of such
a potential is helped by transforming the structure of mutual relationships among
scientific organizations, by intensifying scientific research, and by the most rapid
possible movement of scientific ideas into the economy. It is not accidental, and
this is shown by the facts, that the participation of enterprises in interagency
special-purpose scientific-production associations promotes the constant renewal of
products being manufactured, the technical re-equipping of production, and the growth
in numbers of qualified workers.

Now that the new fora of science-production integration has achieved recognition, it
is necessary to focus attention on its organizational, economic, and legal reinforce-
ment and on deepening its principles. It is a matter of careful and comprehensive
diagnostic analysis of the activities of associations and complexes, first of all on
the level of correlating the scientific, technical, economic, and social interests
of the region that are reflected in the association's activities with overall public
interests which, unquestionably, must be given preference. Further improvements

are required in the organizational structure of new formations. Optimum correlation
must be found in the rights and obligations of all management workers of associations
and complexes, so as to reduce to a minimum the time spent on all kinds of agree-
ments and on the exercise of control over the fulfillment of accepted obligations.
Bringing complex special-purpose scientific-technical programs into being requires
the development of a united system of economic regulation of HTsNPO activities that
should cover the planning and financing of programs, material incentives for
scientists and producers, the safeguarding of the cost-accounting interests of all
participants, the protection of nature from harmful consequences of scientific-
technical progress, and so forth.

Speaking of the necessity for improving the new forms of science-production relations,
M. I. Dolishniy singled out such questions as creating a methodology for selecting
urgent scientific-technical tasks within the framework of work on the Complex
Program for Scientific-Technical Progress, the substantiation of optimm alternatives
for the program, using a broad standard-information base, and others. For the
solution of the above-mentioned problems in the L‘vov section of the Institute of
Economics of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, a special scientific unit has been
created -- the section for regional problems of science-production integration.
Together with the Institute of Economics, the Central Mathematical Economics Insti~
tute, and the Institute of State and Law of the USSR Academy of Sciences, and the
Institute of Industrial Economics of the URSSR Academy of Sciences. the section has

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

started to develop the topic, "Research on the Social—Economic Problems and
Development of Methodological Bases for Managing Interagency Scientific-Production
Complexes and Associations." It was planned for 1981 to develop methodological
documents for the economic, organizational, and legal regulation for the formation
and functioning of regional interagency scientific-production associations and
complexes.

N. G. HAKSIMOVICH, chairman of the council of rectors of the L'vov VUZ center and
the rector of L'vov University, devoted his speech to the complex system for quality
control in training specialists for the economy and for activities of educational-
scientific-productior associations (UNPO's). He sai. that UNPO's conduct work
together with scientific institutions, design institutes, and industry. Their aim
is to improve the educational process by improving students' practical training,
basing course and diploma projects on tasks of enterprises, enlistment at VUZ's of
associates from scientific institutions and leading specialists from the economy,
the utilization of the unique equipment of scientific institutes and production
laboratories for educational purposes, and the improvement of the quality and
effectiveness of scientific developments carried out at VUZ's. The successful
experience of inculcating in students the habits of creative scientific-research work
is confirmed by the award of the Lenin Komsomol Prize to the student planning-design
bureau of L'vov Polytechnical Institute.

V. A. ANDRUNAKIYEVICH, vice-president of the Moldavian Academy of Sciences and an
academician of the M883 Academy of Sciences, speaking at the seminar, said that

his republic created a Council for the Coordination of Scientific-Tbchnical Problems
Between Economic Sectors and, under the republic academy of sciences, its working
group. Problem scientific councils have been formed in the academy. Now, they are
working on the implementation of 15 republic interagency complex scientific-techni-
cal programs. These progrems cover questions relating to the rational utilization
and conservation of natural resources, the development of biological foundations

for adaptive agricultural systems, the creation of new materials and instruments,
and so forth. This implementation involves participation by 1? scientific institu-
tions of the MSSR Academy of Sciences, 8 vuz's, 23 ministerial scientific-research
institutes, and 27 scientific-production associations. The head scientific-research
institutes are supported by 303 base enterprises.

To concentrate the scientific potential of the republic for the implementation of
complex programs, on the initiative of the academy and the Republic Council,

ll inter-sector sections, laboratories, and groups have been organized; in particu-
lar, these units have implemented the development and introduction of new technologi-
cal processes for increasing the reliability and durability of machines and the
rationalization of systems for irrigation of agricultural lands under the conditions
of complicated local topography. Together with the republic Council of Kolkhoses,
interagency laboratories have been created for the development of the physiological
bases for mineral supplements for fruit trees and fruit crops. The problems of
increasing the juice yield in processing the products of plant cultivation and of
decreasing the loss of agricultural products during transportation and storage are
nOw being solved on an interagency basis.

A form of relations between science and production that has entered into practice is
the conclusion of contracts by the academy for scientific-technical cooperation with
individual regions, enterprises, and organizations.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The coordination of scientific research with ministries and agencies, ministerial
institutes, scientific-production associations, and VUZ‘s, in the interests of the
republic economy, has brought about new scientific areas of investigation and has
required improvement in the structure of scientific units and the strengthening of
their supply-and-equipment base. In the academy, a center was created, on a cost-
accounting basis, for the automation of scientific research and metrology, and a
specialized design-technological bureau for solid state electronics; the construction
of an experimental factory is being completed. A decision has been made to create
at the center for automation, a republic system for collective utilisation of
expensive and unique scientific equipment.

To improve financial support for projects in inter-sector programs and to improve
existing procedures for concluding contracts for conducting scientific-research,
experimental-design, and technological projects in special-purpose programs, an
appropriate position has been developed and approved.

The transition to the special-purpose program method for planning scientific research
is now expanding and deepening in all parts of the M83! Academy of Sciences. This
process is spreading to ministerial and VUZ science, and this is perfectly natural,
since it determines the increase of effectiveness in research on a wide front of
science.

In playing its role as the coordinator of fundamental sciences in the republic, the
BSSR Academy of Sciences, under the 10th Five-Year Plan, headed work in the fulfill-
ment of 20 of the most important complex programs in the natural, engineering, and
social sciences, according to L. l. KLSELBVSKIY, the chief scientist-secretary

of the presidium oi the BSSR Academy of Sciences and an academician of the BSSR
Academy of Sciences. Fifty coperformer organizations from various ministries and
agencies and 21 VUZ's participated in this work.

in the last five years, scientists of the academy headed research on programs
directed at the creation of new methods for increasing the effectiveness of civil
production through its intensification, at the development of practical measures for
protecting nature in the republic, for new means of forecasting reliability of
machines, for new polymer materials and structures, and so forth. Significant
practical results have been achieved in the work. Over 1000 developments, with a
yearly economic effect of about 350 million rubles, were introduced into the economy
by the academy as a whole and, already in 1980, this effect is j35 million rubles,
which exceeds the volume of contractual financing by a factor of 4.3 The accelerated
introduction of the results of scientific research into practice has been aided.by
the development in Belorussia of new forms for integrating science and production
which are close to those developing in the Ukraine. An important place among them

is occupied by long—term direct program agreements concluded by the academy
prosidium, on the one hand, and economic ministries and large production associations,
on the other hand. So-called units with dual subordination have also appeared in
Belorussia. Representatives of ministerial and VUZ sciences work on commnn problems
in these units, and practical utilization of the results of the work are planned

from the very beginning.

A certain amount of assistance to academy institutions in introducing their develop-
ments into production is given by base enterprises, which are attached to individual
institutes and make available part of their production capacity for the final develop-
ment stages of technical innovations proposed by scientists. Much has been done

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL UQE ONLY

within the academy itself to create the supply-and-equipment base to pave the way
for carrying scientific developments forward to the stage where they already can
be applied at enterprises. The Belorussian Academy of Sciences has the Central
Design Bureau (TsKB) with an experimental plant, which has as one of its tasks the
creation of experimental models of instruments and equipment. Several sections of
the TsKB operate directly at academy institutes.

All of this has allowed a significant rise in the level of scientific and technical
developments and a rise in the significance of the Belorussian Academy of Sciences
in the matter of intensifying production and in improving people's lives.

For the llth Five-Year Plan, said L. I. Kiselevskiy, 36 republic special-purpose
complex programs have been confirmed in fundamental research, in the conduct of
which there will be participation by all scientific institutions of the 3553 Academy
of Sciences, 32 VUZ's, l9 ministerial scientific—research institutes, three large
production associations, and other organizations. In addition, academy efforts are
concentrated on the fulfillment of 21 all-union and 37 republic programs for the
solution of the most important scientific-technical and economic problems, and

nine institutions of the 3883 Academy of Sciences have been designated head insti-
tutions for these problems.

A. V. BUGATSKIY, chairman of the Southern Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of
Sciences and an academician of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, discussed the concen-
tration of VUZ and academy potential. After raising the question of increasing the
contribution made by VUZ workers to the accomplishment of urgent tasks in integrating
science and production, he said, the bureau of the center assumes that the deter-
mining factor in the achievement of this aim is the concentration of scientific
efforts on large complex problems. For this purpose, the center has created two
academy VUZ scientificoomplexes: in physical and chemical foundations and problems
of organic and bioorganic chemistry, in astronomy, and in astrophysical instrument
making, that is, in those areas in which scientists of academy organizations and

VUZ's already have had or can have definite success.

Another promising form of science-production integration that allows VUZ's to
accomplish their specific tasks more effectively while simultaneously increasing
their real contributions to scientific-technical progress, is the widespread
cooperation that has been achieved in the region between VUZ's and enterprises
within the framework of educationsl-scientific-production associations. There are
now 15 such associations operating in the region on a nongovernmental basis.

Havzng studied the experience of the Western Ukrainian Scientific Center, the
Southern Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and the Council of V02
Rectors of the Odessa Zone started to organize interagency scientific-production
complexes. Five of them were created: food, chemical and medical, machine
building, machine-tool building, and poultry farming. In all, these complexes are
working on 130 topics and a number of special purpose programs directed toward the
development of the economy of the Southern Ukrainian Economic Region. The expec-
ted economic effect should be 25 million rubles. From the work done, it is possible

to conclude that, with careful planning, all of the forms discussed for organizing
scientific work can be a reel factor in the mechanism for managing scientific-
technical progress.

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Southern Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences has developed a
complex plan for cooperation between the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and oblasts of
the Southern Economic Region for 1981 to 1985. In formlating the plan, special
attention was given to research directed toward the solution of problems in the
chemistry of high-purity substances, the development of sea transportation and
related types of transportation, the economic substantiation of the Danube-Dnepr -
canal project, the fight against loss of metal from corrosion, and so forth. In the
fulfillment of the projects in the plan, there is participation by 56 institutions
of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, 18 sz's, and 195 enterprises and economic organi-
zations.

Under management by the Southern Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences,
10 complex special-purpose interagency programs are being formulated at the present
time for the llth Five-Year Plan. In all of the oblests of the region, complex
plane are being drafted for the development of scientific research and the accelera-
tion of scientific-technical progress; these plans should reflect the decisions of
the 26th CPSU Congress and the 26th Ukrainian Communist Party Congress on questions
relating to the development of science and expansion of its relationships with
production.

For the successful development of large regions of the country, existing local scien-
tific resources must be utilised to the maximum extent but, also, the scientific
potential of central institutes should be more widely enlisted in the solution of
regional problems. This thesis was heard in a speech by V. G. BAR'YAKETAR, chairman
of the Donetsk Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and an aoademician
of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences. In 1979, an agreement was signed for scientific-
technical cooperation between the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and enterprises and
organizations of Donetskays and Voroshilovgradskaya Oblasts. In accord with this
agreement, a complex plan has been prepared for scientific-technical and social-
economic research by the UkSSR Academy of Sciences directed toward increasing the
effectiveness of production and work quality in industry and agriculture of the
Donbass for 1981 to 1985. The formulation of the plan was preceded by a large

amount of work done by the bureau of the Donetsk Scientific Center together with
oblast party bodies and including the preparation of special standards and reference
materials. As a result, agreements were concluded for the conduct of 255 scientific-
research projects for 141 enterprises and organizations by 30 scientific institutions
of the academy. This is research in the creation of new technologies, equipment, the
organization of production, labor, and management in the coal industry, ferrous
metallurgy, machine building, chemical industry, food, construction, and agriculture.

The Donetsk Scientific Center together with the Ukrainian Communist Party obkom
formulated four regional programs within the framework of the complex plan. In
particular, one of these provides for work on environmental protection and reducing
the pollution of air and water basins by harmful wastes, and the revitalization of
ecological conditions. This includes the development of measures for maximum
utilization of mineral wastes and by-products in industry and construction. Inde-
pendent programs have been allotted to metallurgy, to metal conservation and its
better utilisation, and to coal mining and the improvement of coal-mining technology.

Nevertheless, despite the urgency for the region's economy of these types of plans
and programs, said V. G. Bar'yakhtar, they often do not have clear focus and needed

41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

success rates. The main difficulty in introducing program sethods is caused by the
predominance of planning and management by economic sectors. The majority of the
programs developed lack organizational unity based on the utilization of centralised
funds for special purposes. Most often, the coperformars finance individual sections
of a program, and this practice leads to its own specific problems. The forms of
production management that predominate in large econcnic regions, oblaste, and
industrial cities do not help the implementation of regional programs for scientific-
technical and social-economic purposes.

The experience in the work of the Donetsk Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of
Sciences shows that the needed form for coordinating and directing the efforts of
scientists and specialists for the solution of basic regional problems can be
successful with the creation in oblasts of a single system of nongovernmental bodies
for management of scientific-technical progress. Under the conditions that have
evolved, all coordination activity and control over the fulfillment of scientific
research plans are accomplished by local party bodies. The Donetsk obksm of the
Ukrainian Communist Party has made a decision to create a system for regional manage-
ment of scientific-technical progress. One of the elements of the system is the
development of complex plane for scientific-technical progress by regional cross-
section. A Complex Program for Scientific-Technical Progress in Bonbass Industry

to the Year 2000 has been developed on the initiative of the Donetsk Scientific
Center. It will be updated every five years and will serve as a good orientation for
creating five-year plans for all scientific-research institutes, VUZ's, enterprises,
and associations.

The implementation of regional plans and programs should help the underlying organi-
zational reinforcement of this program. Toward this aim, the party obkom of
Donetskays Oblast and also gorkoms and raykoms of the Ukrainian Cosmaist Party have
created councils for increasing the effectiveness of production and work quality,
and the oblast, city, and rayon ispolkoms of the Councils of People's Deputies have
created commissions for scientific-technical progress.

In accord with the USSR Constitution, it is advisable to expand more widely the
authority of local organs of Soviet power so that they can manifest their own organi-
zational feundation for managing scientific-technical progress.

The chief scientist-secretary of the presidium of the Ural Scientific Center of the
USSR Academy of Sciences. 6. N. KOZHBVNIKOV, characterized the work of his center

in part as the arrangement of close, creative relationships with production.
Socialist-cooperation agreements and economic agreements are being concluded. Train-
ing of highly qualified specialists for industry is being conducted. Plant exhibits
of scientists' works are being organised. Long-term contracts have been concluded
with the large "Uralmash" and "Uralkhimmaah" associations. These leaders in their
respective economic sectors have become a kind of proving ground for developments by
Ural scientists. From there, these developments are disseminated not only to the
enterprises of one economic sector but also to enterprises of other sectors. The
creation of laboratories with dual subordination has also turned out to be an
extremely fruitful form of cooperation. As a result, during the 10th Five-Year Plan,
about 100 scientific developments were introduced into the economy, with a total
economic effect of over 200 million rubles.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Scientists and producers have started to implement the regional complex programs,
"Mineral Health of the Urals," "Ferrous Metallurgy of the Urals," "New Materials,"
"Haters of the Urals," "The North of the Urals," and others. Gammon to these

programs is the uniting of the efforts and resources of vuz'n, ministerial scientific-
research institutes, and enterprises of the region under the management and with the
participation of the Ural Scientific Center of the 053! Academy of Sciences. Just

to fulfill the "Kineral Wealth of the Urals" program, 65 organizations have been
enlisted.

All these relationships between science and production will be improved during the
new five-year plan. The scale will be broadened, for example, by strengthening
cooperation between academy and medical institutions. Better use of the experimen-
tal bases of various agencies in the fulfillment of special-purpose programs is
being provided for. This pertains particularly to the food program.

During the years 1981 to 1983, the scientific center, as the head organization, will
begin to implement the special-purpose complei program, ”The Intensification of
Industrial Production in the Urels," on which a majority of the scientific institu-
tions of the region have been working. Of important significance for the develop-
ment of science-production relationships is the fulfillment of recommendations adopted
by the Ural Scientific Center of the USSR Academy of Sciences for scientific-
practical conferences, which have been conducted under four five-year plans on the
initiative and under the management of the oblast party organization.

Contacts by the Bashkir Affiliate of the USSR Academy of Sciences with VUZ's, minis-
terial institutes, and enterprises of the autonomous republic were characterized by
the deputy chairman of the presidium of the Bashkir Affiliate of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, 6. A. TOLSTIKOV.

Experience in conducting scientific research jointly with one of Bashkiria's largest
VUZ's, the Aviation Institute, showed scientists of the affiliate that maximum
effectiveness of scientific relationships with_VUZ's cannot be provided by episodic
contacts. It is necessary to have unified plans for research, development, intro-
duction into production, and publication, which are possible only with the organiza-
tion of joint laboratories. To date. there are eight such laboratories, which
include researchers from the Physics and Mathematics Section of the Affiliate and
also from the Ufa Petroleum Institute and the Aviation Institute. Because of these
laboratories, a number of large developments have been introduced into production.

A computer center and a laboratory of ferromagnetism haVe been created jointly with
the Bashkir State University. The Laboratory for the Synthesis of Antiparasitic
Preparations for Livestock Breeding has been created jointly with the Agricultural
Institute. The volume of research is being increased under agreements for creative
cooperation in chemistry, biology, pharmacology, physics, cybernetics, and so forth.
Chemists have a leading role in this work. Bashkiria can rightly be called the
republic of chemistry. The Institute of Chemistry of the Bashkir Affiliate of the
USSR Academy of Sciences is the largest institute in Baahkiria. It applies the
classical three-link scheme for introducing the results of scientific research --
academy institute, ministerial institute, and plant -- and the two-link scheme --
academy institute and plant. The first scheme, undoubtedly, is the more justified
from the point of view of rational distribution of efforts. It is even more

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

justified because it permits the utilization of experimental facilities of minis-
terial institutes otherwise unavailable to academy scientists. The most fruitful
relationships have turned out to be those with NTIneftekhim and Nllneft’.

What precisely do the scientists of the affiliate offer to the economy of the repub-
lic? There are the results of fundamental research, projects fulfilled on request
from enterprises, and proposals for the improvement of technology based on deep
study of technological processes. Scientists of the affiliate, particularly
chemists, spend a great deal of time on production, and this explains the decision
to move certain laboratories of the Institute of Chemistry to the area of the
enterprises. However, the process of establishing contacts between Bashkir academy
science and vuz'a and industrial organisations does not always go smoothly for both
objective and subjective reasons.

The L‘vov experience has taught us much, said 6. A. Tolstikov, and it will be used
to a still greater degree by the Bashkir Affiliate of the USSR Academy of Sciences
in future practice.

Data on large-scale cooperation between institutes of the Siberian Department of the
USSR Academy of Sciences and enterprises of the economy were introduced in the
speech of V. YE. ZUYBV, chairman of the presidium of the Tomsk Affiliate of the
Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Science and a corresponding-member of

the USSR Academy of sciences. This cooperation has permitted the doubling of labor
productivity at the "Sibsel'mash" plant without using any additional material '
resources. The Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences has a reputa-
tion for its complex coordinated plans for introducing the achievements of science
and technology into production, drafted and implemented jointly with many all-union
ministries. Joint meetings of the boards of the ministries and the presidium of

the Department are held periodically, with the discussion of plans for and the
results of cooperation, including the introduction into production of very promising
and revolutionary fundamental science results.

The Council for the Coordination of Scientific nesearch has been working for

10 years in Tomsk under the party obkom. Its composition includes managers from all
of the scientific-research institutes of the city, the prorectors for science of
all VUZ's, the directors of large plants, and the chairman of the oblest Council

of Young Scientists and Specialists. The Council has 10 sections. each of which
conducts one large complex scientific-technical special-purpose program, providing
methodological and operational management of its implementation. As an example,

V. Ye. Zuyev referred to the programs, "The Automation of Scientific Research and
Technological Processes" and “Powder Metallurgy." The aim of the first of these is
-- through fundamental research and applied developments by united efforts -- to
create and introduce into both science and industry, mass automated systems based
on the KAHAR standard. The second program poses the task of raising the wear
resistance of punches, presses, and other machine components by a factor of 5 to 10.
The working group for this program is headed by the second secretary of the party
obkom.

The CPSU obkom has adopted a decision according to which experimental sections for
mass introduction of scientific achievements will be created during 1981 at a
number of large industrial and construction organisations.

44 r." .

INDRGDFFKJAI.USEZONLY
Having published this materiel on the integration of science end production under
the conditions of developed socialism, the editors propose to continue, on the
pages of this journal, e discussion of the questions rsised.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Neuke","Vestnik Akedelnii neuk SSSR", 1981

9665
080: 1816/16 END

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY