APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00060R000100010040-7
I-UR OH'ILHIL USE ONLY

JPRS [/8241
24 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

'FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

Jl'RS publication» curtain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but nlao from news agencv
transmissions and broadcasts. tiaterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrndng and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are ~upplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
ur [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was a‘mrited or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion lurk and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itee originate with the source. Titles within iteas are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Govermnt.

.. i"-'.‘:lCdT LAHS AND REGULATIONS 60131041356 masun' 0F
.“A'TEEL‘LS REPRODUCED “Elam REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
éﬁlS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPEICIAL USE ONLY.
. LR N . 3.! ' A

. n r an \uth r 'Cpoﬂ are

No.
TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - PNYSlCAL 24 Jamie 197
SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY, (POUO 5/79)

 

 

7. Autumn) 0. swimming ngaeluuon Kept.
0e

. I‘eiimmng (hen-ration Kane and Haven 1-. Ptoleu/Teehl'oah Um: No.
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Gleho Road ll.Coeleeel/0iaai Ne.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

l1. Sponsoring ngaaisaeien Name and Address 13. Type ol Report a. Peiied
. Coveted

As above

l3. Supplementary Notes

to. Absmus

The report contains infomtion on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics;
atmospheric sciences; chemistry; earth sciences and oceanography: electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; mathematical
sciences; cybernetica. computers; nechenical. industrial. civil, and marine
engineering; methods and equipsent: missile technology: nevigetion,
cmmications, detection. and countermeasures. nuclear science and technology;

ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels; space technology; and scientists
and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

 

. Key tends and Deeusiest Analysis. e- Descriptors

USSR Electronics Missile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Engineering Navigation and
Astronomy Energy Conversion Commications
Astrophysics Materials Detection and
known!“ Scum”! Hathesatics Countermeasures
Che-istry Mechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Cosputers Civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics Industrial Engineering Ordnance
Earth Sciences Marine Engineering Physics
lhoﬁztngffgey-EMM tens :30“ Propul.1°n .nd PM“
' pleat Space Technology

    
  

  
 
 

in C06"! Field/6m, Ol,03.0b.O7,00,09,lO,11.12.13.lb,l6.l7,18,19.20.21.22
l . Security Class (This 2t. .‘o. el Pages

runs rout an or nrpaooucso ”"°""°‘ "'”""

II. Availability aisle-est

For official Use Only. united
Nmber of Copies Available From JPRS

000' as"? I, IICv. I-Ilv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\

3PM 1/8241

2‘ January 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(F000 5/79)

Coureurs
CYDERNSTICS, COMPUTERS AND AUNMKTION TECHNOLOGY

All-Union Conference on Technology of Programing
(Klumm' seP/oc: 78) OO...0......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Sympoaiun on Artificial Intelligence, Automation of
Mathematical Reaearch
(Klwmm, SOP/0“ 78) OOODOOUOOOOOOOOOOICOOOOC000......

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

The Mutual Impedance of Dipole Radiatora in an Antenna
Array With a Multilayer Dielectric cover

(Ye. A. Steriopolo, G. T. Vae‘ko; IZVESTIYA W2
”DIGELRTMNM' ”o 7, 1978) OCC.OOOOOOOOOCOOOCOOOOOOOOOCO

The Calculation of the Operating Characteriatice of a Channel
for Protecting Againet Croaatalk Interference in a Doppler
Speed Meaeureaent Set

(A. a. Yeliaeyev, at al.; Izvasrna vuz mmnmrmum,

No 7' 1978) 00.000.00.00U0.000......OOOOOOOOOOOOOUOOOOOOOOO

A Standard Microwave Noiae Generator '
(c. C. Petroayen, 1.. P. Yemel‘yanov; IMMTEL'NAYA
mmm. Ans 78) OOOCOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOO

CWI'IIYSICS, ASTMNOHY AND SPACE

Salyut 6 Orbital and Attitude Control Syatea Deacrihed
(80:8. “’8‘ AIR & I COWS, 9 DOC 78) aeaeeaeeaeeeeeaeeeeee

PHYSICS

Dynastic llolograna With Stimulated Light Scattering
(A. I. Sokolovakaya, c. I. Drekhovakikh; DOKIADY

mnmi MW sssn' 21 NW 78) 0.00000COOOOOOOOCOOOOOQCOOOO

PAGE

ll

16

22

27

- a - [III - USSR - 23 S 8 T P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

Cooperetlon Hlth Sclmtlﬂc Eetebllehmente of the
Soclellet Countn «o
(A. A. Kulekov; VESTNIK ARADMI NAUK 8833, Sep 78) ..

Aoedeay of Science. Sclentlflc “Operation ﬁlth Scienttete
1n Cepltellet end Developing Countrlee
(A. A. Kulekov; VESTNIR AKADmII NAUK 888:, Oct 78) ..

ObltIIery of Veevolod Vledlmlrovlch Pedynekly
(IZVBSTIYA Amnmt Wk 8888, PIZIKA M1,

N0 11' 1978) 0....OOOIOOOOOIOOOIOOOOCCOOOl00.0.0000...

PUBLICATIONS

Peso

33

46

62

Heeeurenent end Control of the Permetere of rechnlcel Coupler”

(v. p. Yekhlekov, 1.. v. mm 13333"!!! 1 mm!
mm'mv mmcnssxm minnow, 197a)

Croeeed-Fleld Htcroveve Anpllﬁere
(H. B. Teeytlln, et el.; svnmmsoxoausmm
USILITELI so sxnssmmm POLYAHI, 1978) ...........

lntegreted Circulte of Anelog-Dlgltel end Dlgltel-Auelog
Convertere
(V. G. Belekey, et el.; INTEGHAL'W 8mm ANALOG)-
TSIFROVYIOI I rsnnomm mmzrmmr,

1978) OOOOOOOOOOOCIDOOOOOCI0.0...0.0000000000000000...

Antes-me Guldence Syeteae of Setelllte Berth Stetlone
(A. H. Pokree, et el.; 313nm NAVEDENIYA mm
mm STANTSIY smnwvoy W21, 1978) ...........

ﬂeet Trenefer During Cooling of bleeocleble ﬂeet
Cerrlere In Atoelc Blectrlc Payer Plente
(Alekeendr Nikoleyevlch Devoynorﬂmm P81
mummn DISSOTSIIWSHOIM TEMMSI‘IBLEY A28,

1978) 0......C.0...O0......OOCCOOCOOOOOOOOOOCOOOIOOOOO

Treneurleeion of relevlelon Signele Over Coexlel Ceblee
(Aron Kleel'yevlch Okeeen: 93m mtvzzrom
8104va 1'0 xoexsm'm RAM, 1978) ..............

Subecrtber Equipment in Urben Telephone Syete-e
(Yevsenly Petmlch Dubrvvekly; mum-sum
UWYSTVA c'rs. SPMWIK, 1978) ..................

ob-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

66

72

75

77

82

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued) Page

The Zoyentron-385 Automated Electronic Calculating Machine
(V. l. Tikhomirov; ZOMKJN-BSS : RSPMUATATSIYA,
Pmmmlmvmlrt (POSOBIYA DLYA mnomncov
MSHMWYK“ EWM), 1977) OOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 89

Optimal Synthetic of Linear Electronic Circuite
(Artur Abremovich Lanne; OPTIMAL'NYY SINTEZ
LINEYNYK}! ELEKTRONNYIO! SKBBM, 1978) .................. 92

Automatic Controle in Radio Receivere

(Sergey Nikoleyevich Krixe; AVNNATICHBSKIYE
REGULIMVKI V RADIOPRIYEENDWG‘I, 1978) ............... 94

Theory of Electromagnetic Field Coherence
(V. A. Potekhin. V. N. Tetarinov; TEORIYA
KOCEWSTI ELI-XTROMCNITNOGO POLYA, 1978) ......... 98

Liet of Soviet Articlee Dealing with Composite Hateriale
(OOSUDARS‘NENNYY Komm SOVETA MINISTROV sssn P0
NAUKE I momma. AKADEMIYA NAUK sssn. SIM'NAYA
INEORHATSIYA. KOMPOZII‘SIONNYYE MATERIALY, No 7, 1978) 102

New Book Diecueeee Stabilization of Measuring Devicee
(S. s. Rivkin; STABILIYATSIYA Imm'm
081110st HA KACIMYUSHCHMYA OSNOVANII, 23 Jun 78) .. lOS

Breeding spring Hheet
(N. V. Turbin; SELEKTSIYA YAMVOY PSHENITSY, 1977) ... 109

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBERNB‘I‘ICS, COMPUTERS AND AU'IOHA'I‘ION TECHNOLOGY

ALL-UNION CONFERDICB 0N TECHNOLOGY 0E PROGRAMMING
Kiev KIBERNBTIKA in Russian No S, Sep/Oct 78 p 65
[Article by the Program Comittee]

[Text] The Main Administration of Computer Technology and Control Systems
of the USSR State Comittee on Science and Technology, the Presidium of
the Academy of Sciences Ukrainian SSE. end the Institute of Cybernetics
of the Academy of Sciences Ukrainian SSR will hold the first All-Union
Conference on "Technology of Programing" in Kiev during the second
quarter of 1979.

The goal of the conference is to generalize existing methods of program-
ming and to formulate recounendetions for the industrial development of
programs. The conference's Program Committee is planning a broad dis-
cussion of the problems of programing technology divided into the
following sections:

1. Design methods which will insure high operating qualiﬁer-reliability.
stability. proof of accuracy. stc.-in easedly systems [progrenyys
aistemy];

2. Rays and means of controlling the production of assembly systems:
organization of personnel, supervision. fixing labor norms, resource
planning. training, price-setting. programsrs' wages, legal relation-
ships;

3. Architecture and software of modern electronic coaputers and their
influence on the technology of progra-ing by the broad masses of users ;

4. Standards in programing. The technology of establishing library
holdings of essedly systems and methods of utilizing then:

5. Program documentation and ways to produce it automatically;

6. instrumental technological systems of progra-ing;

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH’ICIAL USE ONLY

7. The technology of preparation, verification, storage. and processing
of data files:

8. Problems in organizing the operetion of modern conputsr centers.

those wishing to take pert in the work of the conference nust send sun-
neries of their pepers no nore then one to two pages in length to the
following-“dress no later then 25 December 1978: 252207, Kiev, prospekt
bo-letiys Oktysbrye. 162/1106. Ix AN Ukssn. Progrenmyy konitet konferentsii
"Tekhnologiye progreueirovsniye." The sun-series of the pspers must be
accompanied by the following generel infornetion: nunber of the section

to which the psper belongs, lsst name. first nene, pstronynic (in full),
ecedenic degree. place of work. position of the author(s). and address

for correspondence. Requests to chenge the wording of the sections pro-
posed ebovs or to edd new ones should be conunicsted in writing. Questions
may be eddressed vie telephone to I. V. Vel'bitskiy et 66-00-89 or 66-00-78.

Since the progrsn for the conference will be drawn up from the contents of
the suneries of the pspers. generel phrases should be avoided when writing
then. Pacts (quelitetive enslyses) end the substantive aspects of the
report should be eephesised.

The Progren Couittee for the conference will couunicate the results of
its review of the su-eriee to the suthors by 10 March 1979. Pepere which
are accepted by the Progren Comittes end put in the appropriate forut

will be published in the journsls USiM [Uprsvlysyushchiye Sisteny i
Hashiny], rmnmumvmm, end K138831311“.

”WRIGHT: IZDATBL'S‘NO "NAUKOVA DUN". "KIBBRNBTIKA", 1978

CSO: 1870

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBSRNBTICS, COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TSCHNOIDOY

SYMPOSIUM ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE. AUTMTION OF MATUBHM'ICAL 338m
Kiev KIBIRNETIKA in kueeien No 5, Sep/Oct 78 p 1107

[Text] A Synpoeiun on Artificiel Intelligence end Autonetion of Nethe-
neticel Reeeerch 9111 be held in Kiev on 16-16 Novenber 1978 by the

Inetitute of Cybernetice. USSR Acndeny of Sciencee.

'lhe eyepoeiun will be organized eccording to the following ereee of
reeeerch:

l) weye of eutoneting netheneticel reeeerch

2) nethode of eutonetic eeerch for corolleriee

3) coeputetione for lethemeticel proofs

lo) nethode for enelyzing progrene

5) epeciel eyeteee oriented to the proceeeing of netheeeticel texte

It it planned to publish the neteriele fron the emoeiue in ieeue No 2,
1979, of the journel KIBBINETIKA (Cybernetics), which will be devoted to
reeulte of the reeeerch on ertificiel intelligence being certied out
within the frelework of the Ukrainien Regionel Council.

COPYRIGHT: IZDAIEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DNA", "KIBWIM", 1978

650: 1870

- 3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 621.396.67

THE MUTUAL IMPEDANCE OE DIPOLE RADIAIORS IN AN ANTENNA ARRAY HIT“ A MULTI-
LAYER DIELECTRIC COVER

Kiev IZVESTIYA VUZ RADIOELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 7, 1978 pp 45-50

[Article by Ye.A. Steriopolo and G.T. Vas'ko, manuscript received 24 Sap 76,
following revision 22 Aug 77]

[Text] A method of calculating the mutual impedance of
the dipole radiators of an antenna array with a multi-
layer dielectric cover is analyzed, where the cover

is located in the near field of the dipoles. The method
takes into account the influence of the currents induced
in the fastening elements of the dipoles. Some calcula-
tion results are given.

Phased antenna arrays (FAR) frequently incorporate different kinds of di-
electric covers, which play the part of antenna housings and are also used

to improve the matching of the radiators. In this case, the cover is located
in the near field of the radiators and can substantially change their inter-
action.

As a rule, the radiators in dipole-PAR's are mounted above a conducting
screen, as shown in Figure la, and the dipoles are driven by rigid coaxial
feeders, which simultaneously play the part of posts which support the ra-
diators at a specified spacing from the screen. The posts are likewise
located in the near field of the dipoles, because of which, parasitic cur-
rents are induced in them which participate in the overall radiation of the
PAR. The circumstances indicated here lead to the design configurations
shown in Figure lb, where the presence of the conducting screen of the PAR
is taken into account in the form of a mirror image of the radiators and the
dielectric covering them.

A problem close in nature was solved in [l], where the interaction of strip
dipoles, presrnd between flat dielectric layers, was treated. However, the
results of [l] are not suitable for radiators positioned perpendicularly to
the dielectric layer, where the currents in the support feeders are such as
in this case. Given below is the derivation of formulas justified for both
orientations of the dipoles, and some calculation results are presented.

I.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mutual impedance between two linear so..ces with an arbitrary distri-
bution of the currents is described by the formula of [2]:

—— l ‘ 1
Z... W S E... (a) In (u) du. ( )

r

where I:(u) is the current distribution in the n-th source: Eu(u) is the
field intensity produced by the n-th radiator at the surface of the n-th
source; A“ is the resonance circuit used by the n-th current.

In accordance with Maxwell's equations, the field Bn(u) can be written in
terns of the vector potential Rh in the form:

E. =- -- dun/T. + 35-; grad div}...

In-Tlu-JI(U)(°-,m +v..,)du:

r is the distance between the point source and the observation point.

(2)

where

 

In the expression for the vector potential, the function ‘otp [9 ef] describes
the potential of the field reflected from the dielectric cover when a spher-
ical wave e‘ikrlr falls on it. To find *ref' we write the expansion of the
spherical wave in terns of plain waves. something which permits the use of
the well-known results concerning the reflection of any plain wave from a

'l

plain dielectric plate:
a»

. bk '7’: -
[7'1- ‘2; g 53“‘r”‘s§ﬂt” sin 6 «10:49. (3)
o

 

s 5

Figure 1. General View of the aperture of a dipole phased antenna array (a)
and the configuration for calculating the mutual influence of the
radiators(b) where a dielectric cover is present.

Considering the fact that each expansion wave of (3) is reflected from the
dielectric having a coefficient of "(0), we obtain the function Wref in the
form [3]:

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in 7"
9”.- F5 5 (mﬁwmmenmededa-

r
—u 5 J.(Izsln9V'-x'+y')’e‘“"+MU(9)an9. (a)

where J00. sin 0 ha 4- yz) is a zero order Bessel function.

If the dielectric cover is a multilayer one, then the resulting reflection
coefficient 0(0) assumes the fore [3]:

z:.—w
we)”. 2“.” , (5)

liere H is the impedance of free space, while ﬁx [2;] is the input

impedance of cover, consisting of n layers. e quantity :2“ is found
from the recurrent formula:

4-W, (5)

Zu-‘RF Maud.)
where Zn - 22/ cos 6 for perpendicular polarisation of the incident wave;

 

Zn - 22 cos 6 for parallel polarization; 2: I ’“nhn is the characteristic
impedance of the n-th layer.

Thus. the desired reflected field is found from formula (2) where expression
(lo) is substituted in it. taking into account (5) and (6). Considering the
geometry of the antenna array (Figure lb), the resonant circuit current in
the radiators is expediently represented in the form of the sun of two linear
currents: parallel and perpendicular to the dielectric cover. In this case,
the problem of finding the reflected field is broken down into two simpler

‘ ones, in which it is necessary t) find only one component of vector (2).

Carrying out the differentiation, we obtain in the case of parallel current
radiation:

E‘n—mlfl(x){£-[ k +-l—r(x—i’ r)—
4 r W M '

I
cw. T

k l '
_T[W+Er(x—i.r.)]—2ﬂz) U(6)sin6x

 

xoos(2kho059)[l.(krsin6)lz(sin36(x—£)'(° r' II.)—

-_(T§F)' (C’M‘u— l))+l.(kr sin 6) sine (e

 

 

—% dale.

I

(7)

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where f” 3
r(x-x'.r)~(x-x‘)‘(3lk-—Ic°r+-’-)-I(MI+ I);

real/G «EN-+15: r.n_- (h-FF-l-F—HF‘:

D is the spacing between dipole centers; :0 corresponds to the point source:
at is the observation point.

For the case of perpendicular current radiation, the field 3‘ hns the form
“W.
o

i.
I-J‘u-30l51(x){£;—r(zml!.r)- FﬂH-MAH-
-L

I

7
+ 2» \‘ J.(kr.sln 0)U(9)e“""sln26eo:6x (

0 a)
x a» (2». cos a) 3!» mm ewe} dx.

"“9" r.-VF—?r+ﬁ+(a—H:r-VE-W+5+lt+71')'z
r.-m.

torsules can be derived for the ether cosponanta of the electrical intensity
vector in a similar nanner.

Formulas (7) and (8) are justified for an arbitrary current distribution in
the radiators. In this case. the field is described by a double integral,
sosething which requires rather voluninous calculations. particularly in the
case of an antenna array with a large number of radiators. The calculations
can be significantly simplified if we limit ourselves to the generally ac-
cepted nodal of a phased antenna array. i.e.. we neglect the influence of

the currents in the support features, and also take into account the iact
that tuned dipoles are usually eaployed in the arrays, where the distribution
of the currents in the dipoles is detareinad with high accuracy by the fol-
lowing sinusoidal function:

"MW. m

Such a model is inadequate for an exhaustive description of the operation of
array [lo], but in the absence of "blind spots" in the radiation of an PAR
eletaent, it yields good practical results [5).

The field at the current (9) in free space takes the fore of the superposition
of three spherical waves. outgoing from the ends and the center or a dipole

[2]:
a- 3“, ‘M «We .4‘
where 5' . a (T. +T—qu).

I'B
R.-V(I—F_E-x + :R.-Vm+x'+ :n-V—‘W . (10)

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To find the wave reflected from the dielectric cover, one con use (3) - (6)

without changes, in which case the result is the desired field directly, and
not a Green function, something which eleeinetes the need of additional in-

tegretion operations and differentiation thereafter.

In totsl. the coeplete field produced by the first dipole at the surfece of
the second dipole has the for:

sou c"‘"’" 6"“?- ‘M
B't"mf[(T+T-W*L°Tr)+
I
r
+ an; [J.(kR. sin e) 44. (main 6)—

— likcosku.(kR.aln 6)]U(6)e“‘”"‘°cos(h9llcoe 6)sln eds} . (11)

Pornule (11) contains only e single integral, end obviously, is significantly
simpler than expressions (7) or (8).

Sane of the results of calculations of the eutuai inpedances based on (1).

(9) end (ll) for the case of two parallel half-wove dipoles are shown in
Figures 2a end 2h. The grephs depict the resistive end reactive coeponents

of the eutual impedance as a function of the spacing between the dipoles.

The different curves correspond to the different thicknesses of the dielectric
layer, the remaining parameters of which are chosen as: c - &.2, h - 0.276 A.

  

(e)

 

Figure 2. The resistive (a) and reactive (b) coeponents of the mutual il-
pednnce as a function of the spacing between dipoles:

l. d e 0.11);

2. 0.06:

3. without a dielectric;
‘0 0.02.

For comparison. shown with the dashed-dotted line is the mutual impedance
in the absence of a dielectric. It can be seen from the grephs of figures
2a and 2b that with an increase in the thickness of the dielectric layer,
the lutuel inpedances initielly fell off, in which cese the curves retain

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

their character. and thereafter. beginning at a value of d - 0.06 l. on '
opposite change is observed in the size of the nutual iepedsnca. which is
accoepanied by a nhift of the graph along the spacing axis.

P. (“I P. «‘3

degrees

 

Figure 3. Partial directional patterns of the center (a) and and (b) radia-
tors.

The degree of influence of the dielectric cover on the characteristics of

a phasci antenna array aperture can be assessed iron the variation in the
partial directional patterns of different radiators neking up the M3.
Shown in Figures 3a and 3b are calculated patterns for the center and edge
radiators. included in the coeplensnt of an aperture with a site of ll 8 ll
dipoles. The directional patterns without a dielectric cover are indicated
uith a solid line. and with the cover. by a dashed line.

For these calculations. the dielectric cover was chosen in the fore of a thin
glees-textolite plate. uith a thickness of d - 0.0!. h.

The dipoles in the array were positioned at the corners of a hexagonal grid
with a spacing of 0.52 A between the dipoles. The directional patterns uere
conputed for the case of the excitation of one dipole of the array (the cen-
tral or end one in the h-plane). taking into account the currents induced in
all the remaining dipoles. The induced currents vars found by leans of
nunericslly converting the eutuel inpedence netrix [2].

The graphs shoe that the shape of the partial directional patterns in the
presence of a dielectric plate changes insimificently. however, a different
level is observed for the position of the directional pattern as e uhole
with respect to acne particular canon clasp. This circunstance gives evi-
dence that thin dielectric plates can be successfully 'enployed to eatch

9

FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMLY

radiators while insignificantly distorting their radiation, something which
contirns the wall-known recommendations obtained experimentally [61.

1.

2.

3.

6.

5.

6.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Caleje J., "Mutual lnpodance of Linear Antennas in the Presence of
Stratified Dielectrics", 1233 Trans., 1966, AP-la, No 2, p 195.

Markov 6.0., Setonov D.M., "Antenny" ("Antennas"), Moscow, Bnorsiye
Publishers, 1975.

Brekhovekika L.M., ”Volny v sloistykh arodnkh" ["Wavns in Layered Media"l,
USSR Acndeny of Sciences Publishing Mouse, 1957.

Stark L., "Microwave Theory of Phased Array Antennas", P1383, 197A, 62,
No 12, p 1661.

“Shaniruyushchiye antennyye sistcny SVCh” ("Microwave Scanning Antenna
Systone"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1969, 2.

01iner A.A., Knittel G.H., "Phased Array Antennas", New York, 1970.

COPYRIGHT: ltvastiyn vuzov sssa - deioelektronika, 1978

8225
CSO:814b/501

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 611.391.292

TUE CALCULATION OF TNE OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS OP A CHANNEL POR PROTECTING
ABAINST CROSSTALK INTERPERENCE IN A DOPPLER SPEED MEASUREMENT SET

Kiev IZVESTIYA VUZ RADIOELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 7. 1978 pp 84-87

[Article by A.A. Yelissyev, V.N. Yakovlev. A.K. Yenovitskiy. ".6. Sokolov
and 6.6. Get-anenko, nanuscript received 22 Feb 77. follovina revision.
9 Jan 78]

[Text] The operating detection characteristics of the
tinevise superposition of Information signals at the
input of an onohoard speed nessurenent set are treated.
Functional curves are plotted fron the results of the

analysis.

In radio electronic systens. operating in an asynchronous infer-scion ex-
change node with e frequency on the order of several fractions of a Beret.

the seasurenent of the rate of travel of loving objects is scconplished us-
ing the Doppler shift of the signal frequency of the information trans-ission.
The trans-lesion itself takes the fore of a sequence of radio pulses. the
tine position of which contains the exchange infornation. As a result of
couplets or partial tinevise superposition of the radio pulses. caused by
the overlapping of the signals at the system input. the instantaneous fre-
quency of their additive nixture carries distorted infornation on the rate

of notion, and the data of the neterins channel should he elininated fro.

further processing. '

(7)

” 5‘ Yes
H I] H H “0
am“

Pun!" Is

Key: 7. Pine tuning to zero;
8. Threshold.

II

POE OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most probable is the superpostion of two information transmissions.
where this superposition is the basis for the entire subsequent analysis.

The configuration of the radio engineering system being studied is shown in
Figure l, where the receiving device 1 is understood to be the entire radio
channel, operating in a linear gain mode. Pull-wave rectifer a converts the
bipolar video pulses incoming from the output of frequency discriminator 3
into unipolar ones and feeds them to adder-store S and then to threshold
unit 6. It is assumed that by using "fine tuning to zero" of the frequency
discriminator, the value of its transient frequency coincides with the value
of the frequency of the radio pulses being receivod, which do not overlap

in time the information pulse trains. Amplitude limiter 2 suppresses the
amplitude modulation of the input signal mixture.

The presence of a multisection nonlinear channel precludes the possibility
of using spectral-correlation analysis of the passage of the signals and
noise through it, however, the assumption that there is no response lag in
the processing channel permits the determination of the points in time of
the random process at the output of the full-wave rectifier, vhile the
adder-store brings the output process closer to a normal process where there
is a rather large number of overlapping pulses at the system input.

It is difficult to use a one-dimensional probability density expression for
the instantaneous frequency of the steady state normal random process (1] to
vrite down the compostion of the lava governing the distribution of the in-
stantaneous frequency of the additive mixture of the cue information pulse
trains in the internal noise of the receiver. and for this reason, it is

expedient to make use of an approximating, one-dimensional normal probability
density of the form [2]

V (as)- VI?‘ exp {— W}. (1)

where A - 0.85 As; be is the width of the power spectrum of the random
process. '

If the transient frequency of the discriminator is equal to an, then by tak-
ing into account the laws governing the interaction of the instantaneous
frequencies of the processes being added and the rules for the conversion of
the probability densities for inertiallces systems [1]. one can derive the
probability density for the instantaneous values of the voltage at its output
in the following form

I
W”HM/Wu ~07'+ 3'5"?- ogu x

(II-$0.0?
" ”km-mm ' ‘2’

"M“ m'-- (0:10;) 005' 9’: D— i (— I)“ r teens:
on!

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

U. is the anplitude of the radio pulses at 'he input to the processing channel;
0 [on] is the envelope of the noise voltage; 05 [0%] is the dispersion of

t e approximating distribution of the probability density for the instant-
aneous noise frequency: k is the ratio of the asplitudes of the overlapping
radio pulses; e is the difference in the instantaneous initial nhsses of the
radio pulses being added; 9' is the difference in the instantaneous initial
phases of the sixture of radio pulses and the noise voltage; 3 is the slope

of the frequency discrisinator characteristic; na [ad] is the Doppler fre-
quency correction.

The first two initial points in tins of the distribution of the instantaneous
voltage values at the output of the full-wave rectifier with a transmission
factor y for the case of the joint action of two superimposed pulse trains
or the action of one of then. are defined by the following expressions re-

Mﬂ-“lv: «w— 5)+%[”(%W)- 11:.

M.lU'l.,.-e’l-i-—%cxp(—I 2-5;)4— 5411-5 V!) x

x [1—565 Vi)]—72:%us(--§)[2r(£- V9).— 1]}.
M. [0'] '73: M.[v']- “ﬁg-J.

where c + s is e subscript which indicates that the given point in tile is
associated with the case of the action of two pulse trains:

c - ”Si/W. ﬁ-NADI.

7x is a Laplace integral.

(3)

The resulting nonents of the distribution are randon quantities because of
the stochasticel nature of the parameters a. B and n2. which are included
in then. For this reason. we shall first average the randon pereneters of
the expressions (3) taking into account the laws governing the distribution
of the tendon quantities included in then. The working characteristics
which are subsequently plotted in this way, although they are not averaged
in a strictly nethenstical sense. they nonetheless physically yield weighted
values of the correct detection prohsbility [3]. Considering the fact that
the fluctuating, superi-posed radio pulses of the interaction pulses of the
infornation pulse trains can have both coherent and random coeponente, we
shall lake use of s Raysowskiy distribution of U . Only a rsndoe couponent

is present in the composition of the internal noise. and consequently. "n
has a Rayleigh distribution.

13

FOR OPPICIAL USE outr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After deriving the truncated distribution
for their ratios under conditions where the
systen operates in a finite range of the
power ratio 03/03, bounded by values of

0 - q, we average the paraneter n with
respect to the random ratio 03/03 and

 

cos 6'3. ,
s o |
R °' exp(_°') ln(l— -'-) -——1—-|

Panel. -if 5E a” +h+q%
Key: 1. Correct detection a?

probability; (6)

2. P”, I false alarm
probability;

He also carry out sinilar averaging for the
parameter 6. assuming that the difference
phase 9 and the Doppler shift a of the re-
ceived carrier have a uniform d stribution
in the corresponding intervals. We shall consider two cases for the coef
ficient k included in the expression for 8:

3e Ptarsec/P'. dBe

e) A determinative signal coeponent and a random interfering pulse train, the
amplitude of which is governed by a Rayleigh distribution;

b) The anplitudes of the radio pulses of both pulse trains are rendon and have
s Rayleigh distribution.

Omitting the intermediate transformations, one can derive:

9. - 35%;)...” [at/ion - H59)! — lﬂgiﬂi’].
2n-l

’0' *5!- (Qs‘al) [7% +4.“ ‘8 5%]:

where 02 and a are the maximum and nininun Doppler shifts of the carrier fre-
quency respectively.

Taking into account the feet of the normalization of the voltage at the output
of the adder-store. we obtain the following expression for the correct de-
teetion probability of the superpostion of the radio pulses of the pulse trains:

 

tat pcor. det. ' P,,,.—l—F(U).
.___ (5)
amen/manage]: ~

e'nﬁ; I. is the number of pulses being added.

The working characteristics shown in Figure 2 for the following values of the
parameters were computed from the relationships derived here:

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L - 303 379-26010": oi/otm 10‘;
(ta—0W2 - 12.5: oe/VZ — 71.5.

From the analysis given here, one can cone to the conclusion that u detec-
tion channel for the tineuise superposition a: the s ;;o p ‘s.4 of pulse
trains permits eliminating with a rather high probability the erroneous
readings of velocity meter.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Tikhonov V.I.. “Statisticheskeye radiotekhnika" ("Statistical Radio
Engineering"). Moscow. Sovctshoye Radio Publishere, 1966.

2. Gonzin V.N.. Yeliaeyov A.A., "0b approksinateii plotnoati reepredeleniye
nsnovennoy chestoty nor-al'nyn rekonou" ["On the Approximation of the
Distribution Density of an Instantaneous Frequency by a Normal Distri-
bution"). RADIOTBKHNIKA I BLEKINONIKA [RADIO ENGINEERING AND ELECTRONICS],
1973, 18. No 6, p 1289.

3. Vaynehteyn L.A., Zuhekov V.D.. ”Vydeleniye eignalov ne fone alucheynykh
ponekh“ ("The Discrimination of Signals Against a Background of Random
Interference“), Noscou, Sovetekoye Radio Publishers, 1960.

COPYRIGHT: Itveetiya vuaov 858R - Radioelektronika. 1978

8225
65038164/0500

IS

FOR OFFICI‘L USE ONLY
FUN OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 621.317.765.8
A STANDARD MICROWAVE NOISE GENERATOR
Moscow IZHBRITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA in Russian No 8. Aug 18 pp 69-71
[Article by 0. 6. Petrosyan and L. P. Yemel'yanov]

[Text] Unit excess spectral noise power density (SPHSh) is reproduced by
means of a device consisting of two thermal noise generators. The thermostat
of one of these is maintained at a temperature Thot'7°°° K, and that of the
other at room temperature Tcold‘ the excess SPMBh produced by the device is
then expressed by the formula

6 . k(Th°t-Tco]_d) “v

where k is the Boltzmann constant; and, a is a coefficient which accounts for
losses in the hot waveguide between the radiator and the output connector of
the generator.

The overall error in reproduction of unit 8PMSh consists of the folloving
components:

d1, the error in certification of the standard platinum thermocouple and the
apparatus for measuring thermal EMF;

d2. the error resulting from deterioration of the thermocouple in the period
between certifications;

d . the error resulting from a difference between the radiator temperature and
tge temperature in the hot waveguide;

dh. the error resulting from nonuniformity of temperature along the radiator;

d5. the error resulting from a reflection coefficient greater than zero in the
radiator;

d6. the error resulting from instability of the temperature difference
Thot"Tcold during the measurement period as a result of changes in room tem-
perature and power supply voltage;

16
FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
(1-,, the error in determining the shape of the temperature distribution curve
in the hot waveguide between the radiator and the load;

d3. the error reuniting from a difference between the temperature Tcold of the
radiator and the generator output connectors and room temperature;

d9. the error of determination of room temperature;
410‘ the error in determination of losses in a new cold waveguide;

dil’ the error resulting from change in losses in the cold waveguide as a
result of deterioration of the material;

dlz, the error in determining changes in losses in the waveguide during heat-
ing to the temperature That; and

d”, the error of measurement of waveguide losses as a function of frequency.

in order to increase the accuracy of reproduction of unit SPlBh, we have con-
ntructed a new thermal generator device and have taken measures to decrease
moat components of the error.

In order to decrease errors d and d2, the thermocouples used in the thermal
generators are certified at the same time. inediately before use. combining
them into a single block for testing. ‘

In order to decrease d3, d), and d . the radiator is made of silicon, whose
heat conductivity is close to the; of metal. Silicon has a large loss tangent
and a fine-grained structure, which makes it possible to decrease the radiator
conditions considerably while improving its characteristics. The parameters
of the spa-10 silicon radiator are: wedge length. 10 mm; wedge width, 3 In;
sz- 1.01-1.03; hear conductivity, 100 ﬁlm-deg; temperature variation along
the wedge, : O.25° K. We give for comparison the parameters of a silicon car-
bide radiator: wedge length, 90 us; wedge width, 23 an; KstU'1~°5‘1'085
heat conductivity. 10 ﬁlm-deg; temperature variation along the wedge, : l.0°
K. Thus the thinness of the silicon sheet and its good thermal conductivity
result in more even heating.

In order to decrease error d6, the generators are of identical design and
accordingly have identical drift, so that the temperature difference Thot‘Tcold
depends only slightly on the ambient temperature. In addition, because of

the identical design the generators are interchangeable, making it possible to
use them alternately at the high temperature.

In order to decrease d8. an array of solid copper radiating plates with dimen-
sions 180:: 1801:? In are attached close to the output connections of the gen-
erators. In order to improve heat transmission between the waveguide and the
radiating plates, a layer of K'i'P-B heat-conducting paste is applied.

In order to decrease error ‘10. losses in the hot and cold waveguides were
measured by three methods with different sources of systematic error.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. In the first method a "movable short" (Fig. l) was used, with K“ cal-
culated frm the breadth of the "double minimum" [1, 2]. In Fig. l, g is
a microwave generator in the modulation mode; 2 and 5 are decoupling isol-
ators; 3 is a power regulator; 1: is a polarizing measuring attenuator;

6 is a decoupling attenuator with KstU E 1.03; 7 is the measuring line;

8 is the waveguide under study. with the movable short; and 9 is a super-
heterodyne measuring receiver [3] or type V8-6 gage.

The measurement error resulting from the losses of the short itself was de-
creased by using a specially-constructed short with KstU a 1000 [’4], whose
design is shown in Pig. 2. In the figure. 1 indicates cylindrical inserts
6.9 m long (a quarter of the wavelength of the wave in the dielectric wave-
guide) made of flouroplastic; 2 indicates cylindrical brass insets 5.8 u
long (a quarter of the length of the wave in the dielectric coaxial line):

3 is the fluoroplastic plunger; and h is an absorbing plug of polyiron.

. a

Pig. 1. Fig. 2.

7'2: 0

In order to decrease errors resulting from variation in the KstU of the short,
measurements were made at 1:00 points in the waveguide.

      
  
 

    
    

  

’ ‘0? '.\\\\‘!a\‘2020

. Q's-Eda 1*. ‘5

{‘29Z9XMWa'a‘ '

   

ljs

 

 

The measurement error resulting from losses in the connector between the meas-
uring line and the waveguide was decreased by careful lapping of both contact
surfaces of the flanges immediately before the measurements. The criterion
of connector quality was the sinusoidal amplitude observed while measuring
ng of the short at several successive positions in the waveguide.

In order to eliminate errors resulting from losses at the flange and in the
measuring line, additional measurements were made by the "fixed probe" method.
For this purpose, a l-sn opening was drilled in the waveguide under study at
a distance of 50 u from the flange, and the measuring line probe was attached
above it. The breadth of the ”double minimum" was measured by a micrometer
screw which was used to move the short; the probe was at a standing-wave
minimum, which decreased the error resulting from shunting. -

The error resulting from imprecision in manufacture of the polarizing atten-
uator used to "double" the minimum was decreased by careful calibration in the
0-10 dB range. The calibration was done in combination with the decoupling
lsolntors; at the 70-dB point the error did not exceed : 0.05 dB. During
measurements the attenuator was only used at the 0- and 3-dB points, where its
error was negligibly small.

The remlnlng systematic error in the first method and in the apparatus used
tailspleaent it mes t 0.006 dB/m. The random error of measurement was
seduce“)!!! dB/m with n- 25.

18
FOR OFFICIAL [38E OXLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

2. The second method was direct measurement of induced losses: the waveguide
was connected to a measuring circuit and removed from it [h].

In order to decrease the error resulting tram imbalance. the waveguide length
was chosen as an exact integral number of half waves; at the measurement fre-
quency an for the decoupling attenuators did not not“ 1.02.

The error resulting from losses in the additional connecting flange when the
waveguide was connected into the circuit war. not eliminated but corrected for;
it amounted to -0.0051 0.003 dB.

The non-excluded systematic error or the second method and the hardware used
to implement it was 9,, < 3 0.006 dB/m (including the error resulting from the
flange). The random measureme"? error was Jov17<20902 (13/: with n= 25.

3. The third method of loss measurement was the "resonance" method. In addi—
tion to measurements using the system described in [5]. additional measurements
were made in which one of the resonator diaphragms was located within the wave-
guide under study. This made it possible to eliminate the error resulting
from losses at the flange connection.

The remaining systematic error in the third method and the apparatus used to
implement it was a. s 3 0.003 dB/m; the random error was amkmm dB/m
with n s 25.

Measurements were conducted on three identical aluminum waveguides. Loss meas-
urements were made at a frequency or 8.920 MHz (1 z 50 m). The measurement
results are shown graphically in Fig. 3. The absc’issa gives the distance 1
from the short plane to the measuring line probe and the ordinate gives the
loss [I in the section or the waveguide between the probe and the short (ﬂ:
8.68/k3w) [as published]. At rm: all three waveguides were studied with-
out additional treatment. Their losses were identical and are shown in Pig.
3. line 1. which is drawn through the minima of an experimentally-determined
sinusoid with an amplitude of 0.010 dB. Next one or the waveguides was heated
to 700° K {or 100 hours, while another was etched in an alkali bath for 5
days. The results of measurement or losses in both or these treated wave-

guides were identical (1ine 2, Fig. 3).

Am '
w
m
w

' so av :04»:
Pig. 3

It can be seen from the graph that the losses in the waveguide after treat-
ment decreased: the cooling constant was 0.118 dB/m in the untreated wave-
guide and 0.158 dB/m in the treated one. Next, measurements of losses in the

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
heated waveguide were made ten times at intervals or 100 hours of operation;
the cooling constant remained at 0.158 dB/m.

The fact that heating and etching produced identical changes in losses leads
to the hypothesis that the cause or the decrease is smoothing of microscopic
surface irregularities. With a skin-layer thickness ~ 1 micron and a height

of irregularities ~ 2 microns for the untreated waveguide. this hypotheses in
quite possible.

The results of measurement of the cooling constantly 1 for the treated waveguides
by three independent methods are practically identical:

the first method gives 0.158 dB/m, the second 0.157 dB/m (after correction for
the flange). and the third 0.156 dB/m. The calculated value for the propaga-

tiog constant was 1 0-0.152 dB/m (with a direct-current resistivity or 2.6::
10' ohm-cm for aluminum [6].

Close values of 1; 1 and 1 0’ indicating identical resistivities to microwaves
and to direct current for a 23x 10 mm waveguide. were obtained by Morgan [7].
where «f 1/10- 1.01-1.03.

In order to decrease error dn. the waveguides in the generators were manufac-
tured of variety AMts aluminum. with a stable oxide which assures the long-term
stability of electrical conductivity.

In order to decrease error ‘12 we determined the temperature coefficient of
resistivity of the waveguide material by comparing losses in the waveguide
under two conditions: with the temperature along the waveguide constant and
equal to the room temperature, and with the temperature along the waveguide
not constant but conforming to a mnction T(x) as shown in Fig. 10. The losses
under both conditions were determined by the same method, measurement of the
movable short located at a point corresponding to the thirtieth minimum of
the standing wave field (the distance from the short was ~ 650 mm). The
measurement results were “cold - 0.112 dB and Nhot'153 as.

r:
on
aw

”V
ﬂ'

’ I” "WA/IN
Fig. 1:.

when the quantity "cold’ the dependence of the resistivity of aluminum -on
temperature for direct current (Pig. 5) and the function T(x) are known, we
can calculate the losses in the hot waveguide: Knot-0.1516 dB/m. The neg-
ligible difference between the experimental and calculated losses in the hot
waveguide indicates that the functional dependence of resistivity on temper-
aturc is the same for microwaves as for direct current. This result is of
considerable importance, since it frees the researcher from time-consuming

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-I ONLY

microwave measurements and enables him to use data from handbooks based on
direct-current mcunurcmcntc.

Thus the OVeran rounining systematic error or the generators was decreased to
g 0.003 dB. resulting in increased precision of the emu standard.

3:
‘y‘:

I Mt?
Fig. 5.

smuoonmr
1. [-2. L. Oinzton. manure-ems on Centimeter waves. Hoecov. 111.. 1960.
2. r. J. Scale. moo. 1m inseam... Vol. 30, No 1 (1967).
3. v. A. Gol’ba', and v. n. Voinov. moor vunmr. lo 33 (63). 1971.
’a. H. Larson; and R. D. ﬂunter. NBS. USA. Technical Note lo 602. 1971.
s. v. 9. ’i‘uryanekiy; and v. u. Sokolov. mum mmx. no 33 (63). 1917.

6. Dan. Key; and T. Lebi. Tables of Clinical and Physical Constanta.
GITI‘IL. 1962.

7. s. 9. Morgan. J. mu. Pars” Vol. 20 (191.9). N 352.
COPYRIORT: Izdatel'stvo Standartov, 1376.

M80
080: 1870

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USN ONLY

OEOPNYSICS, ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

smear 6 03mm. AND Aﬂl‘l‘ODB comm. srsrm ntscnisto
Peris an o cosms in French 9 Dec 78 pp “-45
[Article by Serge Berg]

[Text] New infatuation has been provided by the Soviet periodical AVIATZIA
l KOSHONAUTIKA (No 11 of Noveaber 1978) concerning the orbitel and attitude
control systea of the Sslyut 6 Soviet orbiting station.

This systea ”Co-nences to operate as soon as the station is injected into
terrestrial orbit in order to suppress the disordered notions of the station
which occur when the Saiyut 6 is separated free the booster rocket." states
N. Pavlov. the article's author.

The systea includes first of all, sensors (Figure l) which are sensing
eleaents of the station which detersine its position in space relative to
terrestrial or celestral reference points. as well as the angular velocities
of the station's eoveeents about the three axes whose origin is the station's
center of gravity. In the case of Selyut 6 the X-axis is the longitudinal
axis of the station. and the other two axes are perpendicular (Pisure 2).

22

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

    

Itnooeuo otooecooern

:E‘é‘. M727..." :ggmrmwm
Figure l. Orbital and altitude control eyeten of tho Salyut 6 orbiting
ctation.
1. solar tensor 2. longitudinal acceleration integrator
3. (rec gyro-cope unit 6. engular velocity cenaoro
S. stabilization unit 6. altitude notor control unit
7. optical night unit a. vertical indicator

Shown in continuous linca: flight reginc controle: in dotted linea: pro-
gre-Iod naneuver controls: in dot and dash linea: Innual piloting controla;
and in daeh lino-z altitude notor diaconncction controle.

 

Iigure 2. Orientation of the otetion in autononoua flight
(a) control by neane oi the IKV and solar aencor; (b) position of tho oration
after a prograI-ed orientation changing nancuver (by an angler! of the

Xoaxia with rcnpcct to the initial poaition. X1) 1. Direction of solar
redietion 2. colar aennor 3. orbit of the station

23

'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orrtctat USE ONLY

The altitude of the station in space is determined by means of orientation
sensors. The station is equipped, in particular. with an "infrared indicator
of the vertical" (lKV): this sensor. fixed to the exterior of the Salyut 6
working cabin and directed along the Y-axis. is sensitive to infrared radi-
ation emitted by the earth and its atmosphere. When the Y-axis deviates from
the vertical the intensity of the received radiation varies, which produces
deviation measuring signals serving to actuate the notors.

The orientation of the station upon the other axes is determined by a solar
sensor and an ”ionic sensor” (sensitive to the flux of ions in the atmos-
phere). It can also utilise an ensemble of "free gyroscopes" which in par-
ticular serve in prograamed maneuvers. for example. to point the station in
a given direction. The angular velocities of the station about the three
axes are measured by sensors (velocity gyroscopes) located in the interior
of the working cabin. The system also includes a "longitudinal acceleration
integrator” utilising a "heavy gyroscope" to limit the accelerations during
maneuvers. as well as a "stabilisation unit” to disconnect the motors when
it is desired to modify the station's altitude.

The system also includes a logic for processing the data from the sensors
upon the basis of which are elaborated the commands transmitted to the
station's orientation and altitude motors which use liquid fuels from the
same tanks. The motors operate continuously if the station must be rapidly
maneuvered through a large angle. or in short impulses if the maneuvers are
limited. The operation of the orbital and altitude control motors located
on the exterior of the service module (at the rear of the station) is con-
trolled by ”the combined motor ensemble" (00?). A group of motors enables
the altitude of the station to be controlled or modified while two other
motors (slightly inclined with respect to the X-axis) provide control and
modification of the station's orbit. The motors of the Soyuz and Progress
vehicles can also be used (as has already been done) to maneuver the station
while conserving its fuel reserve.

The control of the station's orbit and altitude can be effected in accordance
with three different nodes; active acaulllsation in autonomous or manual
flight regimes and passive stabilisation by gravity gradient.

The autonomous flight regime (Figure 2) can use. for example, the lKV and

the solar sensor. In such case the Y-axis is aligned upon the vertical and
the z-axis upon the sun (2a). Control is effectuated by means of the angular
velocity sensors and the motor control unit. when the station is aligned
along the Y-axis and z-axis controls is effected by the free gyroscopes (2b).
A velocity variation of 1 meter per second results in an altitude variation
of 3 to e kilometers in the orbit at the antipode of the point of interven-
tion. The station also has a "Cascade" automatic system which enables the
station to bc stabilised with precision during long periods with a minimum
expenditure of fuel.

i 24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

The manual flight rcgine (Figure 1) is utilized when the crew is aboard the
station; it can be placed into operation from any of four cos-and posts in

the station. Thus. if the eission consists. for example. of photographing

the earth, the cosnonaut neneuvers the station upon the three axes froa coe-
snnd post No l by scans of an optical eight unit. The pilot of the station
has in front of his u grid screen which enables hie to control the orientation
upon the three axes: by means of a control lever he aust produce the iasge

of the earth upon the screen and keep it periectly sylnetrical vith respect

to the reference grid; this suffices to orient the station upon the vertical
in place.

 

figure 3. Stabilization upon the three axes of the Selyut 6-Seyus ceebin-
ation. l. photographic coverage 2. orbit

Stabilization by gravity gradient is utilized for certain experiaents This
stabilisation Icthod has the advantage of consuming no fuel at all. Once
the longitudinal axis of the station is oriented upon the terrestrial ver-
ical (Figure 4) this position is sutoeetically asintsined by kinetic eonents
of the forces of return which bring the X-axis back to the vertical whenever
the station deviates from it under the effects of various celestrsl and at-
enspheric peturbetions.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’OR OPl’ICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pisura lo. 8tabi1itation by gravity sradiant of the Salyut 6-80yut carbin-
ation. The kinetic sonata of the forcea P1 and P2 auto-aticany raturn
tho atation to the tarraatrial vertical. 1. Canter of Iaaa of tha codin-
.‘t°n 20 03bit.

OOPYRIGR‘I‘: Air 8: Corona. Paria, 1978.

11. 706
080: 3100

26
NR OPHCIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS

UDC 535.375.”
DYNAHIO iiOLOORANS iii'i‘ii STIMULATED LIOii'i‘ SCATI‘ERIM

Moscov DOKMDY AKADMII NAUK 888R in Russian V01 2H3. No 3. 21 Nov 78
pp 613-633

[Article by A. I. Soholovshaya and 0. i. Brekhovskikh. Physics Institute
ineni i’. ii. Lebedev. Acadeay of Sciences USSR. iioscov]

[Text] when laser emission passes through a liquid in vhieh Raaan scattering
has been stimulated. self-focusing of the human-scattered light develops
independently in the scattering substance alongside the self-focusing of the
stinulatinr. radiation. In Ref. 1 an investigation vas uade of the distri-
bution of the field of stimulated Raaan scattering in the scattering liquid
close to the rear and front faces of the cell. and the distribution of the
gunning field close to the front face. In all investigated cases. aggregates
of regions of self-focusing of light vorc observed that vere not identical to
each other. Our studies shoved that regions of self-focusing are also
observed in a field of stimlated Mandelstan-Brillouin scattering.

According to existing concepts. the presence of regions of self-focusing
should lead to distortion of the vave front of light emanating from a non-
linear nedius. increasing divergence by many times, reducing brightness and
changing the distribution of intensity of radiation. In contradiction to

this it vas shown in Ref. 1 that upon reaching the necessary density of
warming power and a certain thickness of the liquid layer, the ”bachscattered"
stiaulated Rasan been. in leaving the cell differed little from the pumping
been incident on the cell in the coabination of such parameters as brightness.
distribution of intensity and divergence. A comparison of the given paran-
ctcru in the case of single-node pinning in Ref. 1 shoved that a nearly

plane vave is restored on the vavelength of the "backseattered" Rattan been.

iiy minr this effect and retaining the experimental setup of Ref. 1 while
introducing a three-dimensional transparency into the stimulating light

hem, n vnlmetric inane of the transparency was produced in the Reman-
:wntturmi light hens lhei‘. 2]. it is interesting to note that the part of

:an sh,|cct is also played by the end face of a ruby rod. the iaage in the

case M stimulated Mandelstan-Brillouin scatterin being located at the see:
distance free the cell as the ruby itself [Ref. 3 . vhile in the case of Raaan
scattering it is shifted closer to the cell.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'nie purpose of this paper is to present experimental results showing that

the position and transverse magnification of the volumetric image recon-
structed in the case of stimulated scattering conform to the laws of
holography. while the phnne and amplitude distortions introduced into the
light beams by the medium are compensated in the case of stimulated scattering
of light propagating in the direction oppositi to the atinulnti I8 emission

-- "backwards."

The setup of the Enntullntion is analogous to that used in Ref. 1-2. The
scattering was stimulated in liquid nitrogen. carbon disulfide. acetoae and
piperidine by means of a giant ruby laser pulse and the second harmonic of a
neodymium laser. 'ihe frequency shift in the ease of stimulated iiaman
scattering was 2330. 656. 2921 and 2910 cm" respectiVely. 'lhe three-
dimensional obJect consisted cf two grids separated by a certain distance
and covering different parts of the pumping beam. The real images of the
grids (Fig. l. 10. so) reconstructed in beams of "bacitscattered" Raman anes
and stimulated handelstam-Brillouin scattering after the lens were experi-

   

«been
++¢++M
47-1 uses»
.1 ....= “a“:
+ l.- ‘:.;:::i§i-.....' g
+ "L/L’LL'H"
+ I I7 s _.‘1..v I I
-": I welde- I l I 1

Fig. l. Diagram of reconstruction of the image of an object with stimulated
light scattering; 1. 2--transparencies of the grid. [Tn-rotating glass plate.
Jlo-lens. Kneell with scattering substance, lo. lsnstimulating and
scattered radiation; 1'. 2'--images obtained by means of lens II in the
pumping beam; M. M-imaginary images reconstructed with stimulated
Mandelstam-arillouin scattering (a) and stimulated Raman scattering (b);

id. ado-real images with stimulated Mandelstam-iirillouin and Raman scattering
obtained by means of lens ll

mentally determined. The photographic plate was sequentially placed at

di fferent distances from the cell for registration of the best plane of
focusing of real image. if the part of the beam leaving the cell is
cultured. we can convince ourselves that the real image of the object is
formed in "backzzcattered" beams thanks to reconstruction in the scattered
light of the beam diffracted on the edges of the grid wires. These recon-
:ttructvd hem form distinct outlines of the cells (Fig. 2. right part).

in this connection the inner fields of the cells remain unilluminated since
they cornezgnad to the light beam reconstructed in stimulated scattering
after seeming through the obJect without deflection. Knowing from the

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formula the parameters of the corresponding
imaginary images (M. an) that are the sources.
as it were. of the reconstructed waves. it was
found that the image on the wavelength of stimu-
lated Raman scattering is shifted relative to
the image of the obJeet in the pumping beam and
altered in transverse scale. whereas the lease
Pig. 2. Distribution of for stimulated Mandelstam-Brillouin scattering

blackening on the photo- practically coincides with the image of the

graphic plate in the image obJeet 0n the pumping anelength. and has the
plane of the obJeet grid same scale.

reconstructed with "back-

 

ucattering"; the right After calculating the spatial interference
l-hr'. corresponds to the pattern of the pumping and the stimulated
covered beam of stimulated scattering leaving the cell for different
Raman scattering: positions of the ohJeet. we found that the

magnification of the reconstructed image is
always such that these interference patterns coincide close to the back face

of the cell. He obtained expressions for the longitudinal and transverse
magnification of images reconstructed with stimulated scattering [Rein lo. 5].
image reconstruction of an object with stimulated Raman ”backseattering”

and stimulated Handelstaa-Brillouin scattering is described by the formulas
as if the hologram were standing at the location of the back (input for
pumping and output for Roman ”backseattering") aperture of the cell. and as
if the reconstructing source were placed at the focus of the lens that
focuses the pumping radiation into the medium. Actually. the experimental
data are in good agreement with the formulas

- "
,,- 2. u) .
0. ll.

,, (I)
weed-01 .

aha-re uo. V“. v“ are the distances from the focus 1", from the real image
ur the object (1'. z") on the pumping wavelength. and from the iaaginary
inane of the obJeet on the stimulated scattering vaVelength (M. as) re-
spectively to the aperture of the cell (Fig. l), peas/lo. Formulas (l) are
analogous to those that describe image reconstruction by means of a hologram

The location of the plane of the hologram clone to the outlet aperture of the

cell implies that displacement of the back aperture of the cell. relative to

the pimping interference pattern should lead to a change in magnification of
29

FOR OPPICUJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE‘. ONLY

the ”inlet-i. reconstructed with .iLlinuiltiu-(i linnnh "iviekuentterhipt," whereas for
stimulate-l Mantlclntmn-iiriliouin scattering the magnification is always clone
to unity (see (1)). Our experimental mc-usurenrntn showed that the magnifi-
cation and shift of the image with displacement of the cell are in good
agreement with the theoretical values. Thanks to the possibility of wide
variation of the wavelength of the scattered emission. it is with stimulated
human scattering that w- can demonstrate satisfaction of the principal laws
of holography for images reconstructed with stimulated scattering.

'lhe thickness ol‘ the layer in which the interference patterns of stimulated
scattering and pumping can coincide is determined by the wavelength of stimu-
lated scattering and the distance between the sources of interfering waves.

if the object is placed close to the focus of the lens. and consequently the
distance between the sources in great. the thickness of the layer of coinci-
dent interference patterns (e. g. stimulated Raman scattering of nitrogen)
does not exceed 1 m. Coincidence of the interference patterns of stimulated
scattering and pumping in such a thin layer shows that the stimulated
scattering beams that form the image of the obJect cannot arise only as a
result of amplification of stimulated scattering in the maxima of the pumping
interference pattern. it is natural to assure that these beams arise as a
result of diffraction of the stimulated scattering wave whose imaginary
source coincides with the focus of lens II in the plane of the output aperture
or the call on amplitude (nor. 7) and phase holograms. Phase holograms in

the medium may arise in connection with the change in the index of refraction
of the substance due to the Kerr effect. electrostriction and so forth [Ref.
lo. 8. 9]. Reconstruction of a sharp image of the object with stimulated Ramon
scutterfmg having magnification and position corresponding to coincidence of
the interference patterns of the stimulating and scattered light only in the
plane of the output aperture of the cell shows that in any other planes

inside the cell there is no effective diffraction that leads to reconstruction
of images with spatial position and magnification corresponding to these
planes. his theory developed in Ref. lo needs radical reexamination. ‘lhe
absence of effective diffraction inside the cell, as shown by our studies.

is associated with amplitude and phase distortions of the pumping beam as it
passes through a nonlinear medium (Ref. 1. ll]. 'ihe extent of the distortions
depends on the intensity of the pumping beam.

in the case of "forward" stimulated Raman scattering as opposed to ”back-
uenttering," the image of the object was reconstructed only when the real
image (1) in the pumping beam was located outside of the cell with the
scattering, medium. The uncertainty in the position of the reconstructed
image in space within limits of 3) mm. as opposed to stimulated Roman ”back-
.zcatterinit." where this uncertainty is less than 5 m. shows that in the case
of‘ "forward" stimulates Ranan scattering there is no single plane of the

imlnnrmn within the median where the interference pattern of the pumping team
in most effectively reconstructed. A comparison of results with ”forward”
stimuluhl‘d Raman scattering. stimulated Ramon ”hackscattering" and stimulated
Manuiclstnm-iirillnuin scattering showed that in the latter two cases there is
nearly total compensation of static and dynamic inhomogeneities in the

30
FOR 037(0th USE ONLY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

medium. For instance the sharpness of the image reconstructed with stimulated
Mandelstam-Brillouin scattering is Just as good as that of the image on the
pumping wavelength without the scattering liquid. however. our studies showed
that when the threshold of stimulated scattering is considerably surpassed the
effect of reconstruction may be disrupted as a consequence of self-focusing
of the stimulated‘scattering' light. There are optimum values of the coef-
ficient of amplification and the site of the nonlinear contribution to the
index of refraction where reconstruction of the wavefront is fairly effective.
while self-focusing of stimulated scattering does not yet disrupt the effect
of reconstruction.

in discussing the way that the characteristics of beam of stimulated Raman
scattered light depend on the parameters of the stimulating laser emission.
one should not confuse the effect of wavefront reconstruction in stimulated
Raman scattering with the effect of "repetitions" (Ref. 10] since the dis-
cussion in Ref. 10 was in application to the relation of spectral width and
anwlar directionality of ”forward" stimulated Raman scattering and the
unuhiftcd component after the scattering substance. and no consideration is
given to problems of the phase relations in the stinailating light beam
preceding the substance with the phase relations in the stimulated Baman
scattering beams.

Reconstruction of the three-dimensional image of the obJect and the identical
reconstruction of the wave front with stimulated scattering is the only
effect that is BOIIIOI'I to stimulated Raman and Handelstam-Brillouin scattering
(Ref. ll]. In the special case of equality of the wavelengths of the refer-
ence and reconstructing beams. reconstruction of the wavefront of the light
in the "backward" direction denotes its inversion: rays of the reconstructed
light beam coincide with rays of the beam incident on the cell in different
directions. For stimulated Raman scattering the longitudinal and transverse
magnification differs appreciably from unity. the Raman scattered rays and
pumping rays do not coincide, although this difference is smaller than in

the case of reflection from a mirror [Ref. 2]. The images of the obJect that
are reconstructed with stimulated Roman ”backseattering” and stimulated
ﬂandelstam-Brillouin scattering are displaced relative to one another and
have different scales. For an obJect located close to a lens. its image. and
in particular the image of a glass plate etched in hydrofluoric acid (Ref. 12]
is shifted by 5-10 cm for the investigated media. ihe fact that the data
found for stimulated Raman scattering under the given conditions are iden-
tical to the data found for stimulated Mandelstam-Brillouin scattering shows
that the method used in Ref. 12 is unsuitable for studying reconstruction of
a wavefront in stimulated Raman scattering. In a strict sense. the concept
of wavefront inversion is not applicable to stimulated Raman scattering.

1h..- results of our work show that in addition to the dynamic hologruas
obtained by menas of nonlinear crystals and dye solutions [Ref. 8. 13].
with stimulated scattering of light one can also get volumetric images of
three-dimensional objects that conform to the laws of holography.

31
FOR OFI’ICIIJ. USE ONLY
1.

2.

8.

9.
10/

11.

12.

13.

FOR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY

REPERENCEQ

A. D. Kudryavtnova, A. I. Sokolovokaya. M. H. Sunhchinakly. ZHURNAI.
mmmmnmuov I ﬂoamcumxov nzm. Vol 59. 1970. p 1556; in:

"Krukiyo aoobohchoniya po nuke" [Brief Reports on Physical, No 2,
1971. p 32.

A. I. Sokolovakua. 0. L. Brekhovskikh, A. D. Kudryavtaova. DOKLADY
AKADDIII NARC 888R. Vol. 233. No 3. 19‘”. p 356'. Vol 237. No 3. 1977.
p 557.

'1‘. A. Higgins. ’I‘. ‘l‘. Sulto ct. 51., APPL. OP?” Vol 9. 1977. p 2177»

c. L. Brekhovskikh, A. I. Jokolovokwa. in: "Kratktyo aoobahchontyo.
m “11MB." “0 12. 1917. P 320

A. I. sakolovokwa. 0. L. Brokhovokikh. A. D. Kudryavtoevo. 0PT. comm.
Vol 28.. No 1. 1978 p 7».

I'. Kol'ycr. K. Iturkkhnn. l.. LIN. "Optlcheskwa gologruﬂya" [Optical
Holography], Moocov, Mir. 1973.

V. G. Sidorovich. ZRURRAL TEKHNICHIKOY FIZIKI. V01 “6. 1916. p 1&6;
OPTIKA I SPEKTRNKOPIYA. Vol 352, No h..1977o P 693.

p. A. Apumevxch. A. A. Amu'yev. A. r. unmovich. KVAWAYA nac-
mzexxA. Vol. 2, 1975. p 2m.

8. Ya. ch'dovtch. V. V. Bhlmnov, 11:16.. V01. ’0. No 5. 1977, p 1090.

H. M. Sushchimkiy. "Spektry koabinouionnogo runyaniya nolekul 1
krégtnnov” [Rum Spectra of “01»qu and much]. noncov. louko,
19 .

Zh. Gaunzhel'. A. L. Kudryavtocv CL 01.. ZHURIAL MPEIMMAL’IOY I
TEORETICRBKOY PIZIKI, Vol 17. No 11. 1976. p 17108.

0. Ya. Zel'dovich. M. A. Mel'nikov CL 0.1., PIS'M V ZHURNAL BKSPERIMEN-
TAMMY l TEORETICHI’IIKOY HZIKI. Vol 25, No 1. 1977. p 51. -

A. A. Borohch. N. 8. Brodin at $1.. “MAYA MMNIKA, Vol ‘5,
N0 3. 1977. p 6’46.

cuwmuwr: lzdotcl'ntvo ”ﬂanks”. "Dokluly Nude-u unit 3888”. 1978

6610
C30: 81MI0570

32
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’FICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIMTIONS

. IH' Jl- 3“l.'n")l‘.ii 0.1 In .::._‘-J;.-'~ pg; "u
.-"vun:'. ' Vat-hint. ﬁ-‘h‘iL' 16.. 9c .‘Ifmur. , ', . ‘ - \

UDC: 001.89 (100)
WOPBRATION WITH SCIENTII’IC ESTABLISHKBNI‘S OF THE SOCIALIST COUNTRIES

Moscow vesmr mm: mm scan in Russian No 9. Sep 78 pp 120-129

'[Articls by A. A. Kulakov, chief of the External Relations Administration.

Presidiue of the USSR Academy cf. Sciences: "USSR Academy of Sciences - In-
ternational Cooperation in 19:7: 1. Cooperation with Scientific Establish-

nents of the Socialist Countries"). ‘ '

[Text] The Soviet Union's vigorous foreign policy. the successes of Soviet
science and its growing prestige throughout the world are promoting the
expansion and strengthening of our country's international scientific ties.
Cooperation along the scientific establishments of the socialist nations is
developing particularly rapidly. based on the principles of proletarisn in-
ternationalism. supported by ideological unity. political solidarity. sc-
celerating economic integretion and the eighty production potential of the
brother nations.

In 1977 the USSR Academy of Sciences. embodying the plane specified at the
historic 25th CPS" Congress end guided by the decisions of CPSU Central Con-
mittee plenum and speeches by CPSU Central Col-litres General Secretary

1.. I. Brezhnev. Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet. devoted
constant attention to development of ties with the academics of sciences and
other scientific establishments of the socialist countries, as well as im-
provement in the ferns of cooperation and improvement in its effectiveness.

The year 1977 wee marked by an important event for our country and the entire
world socialist systee -- celebration of the 60th anniversary of the Great
October Socialist Revolution. The Academy of Sciences and the scientific com-
Iunity of the socialist nations extensively honored this important date.
Official meetings were dedicated to discussion of the great contribution made
by the scientific establishnents end scientists of the Soviet Union toward
the genesis and developnent of science in the brother countries and the suc-
cesses achieved as a result of the Joint efforts of the scientists of the
socialist comnity. menty-three USSR Academy of Sciences displays were
exhibited in Bulgaria, Vietnam, the 6011. the Demcretic People's Republic

of Korea, Mongolia. Poland. Czechoslovakia. and Yugoslavia. Four and a half
nillion visitors to these exhibits became acquainted with the achievements

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIClM. USE ONLY

of our science in the area of space exploration. quantum electronics. solid-
state physics, scientific instrument engineering, computer technology.
archeology. and the development of metallopolymers.

Delegations of the academies of sciences of the socialist nations took part
in n jubilee sessiOn of the General Assembly of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
in an international theoretical conference on the topic "The Great October
Revolution and the Contemporary Bra," in an all-union scientific-theoretical
conference on the topic "historical Experience of the CPSU in the Campaign
for Peace and friendship Among Peoples," and in conferences on the topics
”The Great October Socialist Revolution and the National Liberation Movement
of the Peoples of Asia. Africa and Latin America," "The Great October
Revolution and the Literary Process of the Contemporary Era." and "The Great
October Socialist Revolution and the Nationalities Question."

Participation by the USSR Academy of Sciences in multilateral Cooperation

In 1977 the USSR Academy of Sciences and the academies of sciences of the
union republics actively participated in implementation of long-term co-
operation plans and programs: a comprehensive program for further deepening
and improvement of cooperation and development of socialist economic integra-
tion of the CEHA member nations; a coordinated plan of multilateral integra-
tion measures in the area of science and technology for the period 1976-1980;
a consolidated plan of cooperation by the CEHA member nations in performing
scientific and technical research of mutual interest, for the period 1976-1980;
program- of multilateral cooperation among the academies of sciences of the
socialict countries for the period 1976-1980. The USSR Academy of Sciences
sent to the socialist countries more than 5,000 Soviet scientists for the
conduct of joint research and participation in scientific and scientific-
organiaational measures on the basis of multilateral and bilateral coopera-
tion plans, international and national congresses, conferences, and symposia.
and accepted an equal number of scientists from these countries to its sci-
entific establishments.

An important role in development of multilateral cooperation was played by

a conference of presidents of academics of sciences of the socialist countries,
held in Moscow in tebruary 1977. The conferees focused primary attention on
increasing the effectiveness of scientific research and further development of
cooperation in the area of the social sciences. Academy officials were
received by CPSU Central Committee General Secretary L. I. Brezhnev. In the
course of the discussion there was an exchange of views on development of
cooperation among the academics of sciences of the brother nations, further
enhancement of the role of science in accomplishing the tasks of building
socialism and communism, and on the role of the scientists of the socialist
nations in the campaign to strengthen world peace.1 '

_ In 1977 the academies of sciences of the socialist nations cooperated in work-
ing on 18 problems, including 118 topics in the area of the natural sciences
and technology, and 80 topics in the area of the social sciences.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At a conference held in Sofia in March. representatives of problem coe-
eissions on the natural sciences discussed ways to improve organisational
forms of cooperation. Recon-endations vere adopted on determining the most
inportant topic areas for cooperation. on reducing the number of organisa-
tional measures. strengthening ties betveen problem col-lesions and CBMA
agencies. and on speeding up practical adoption of scientific results.

Pursuant to these recouendations. effective contacts were established in
particular between problea comaissions and the corresponding coordination
centers of the CRMA eeaber nations on the problems "High-Molecular Compounds."
”Kinetics and Catalysis," and ”Planning and Management of the Economy of

the OSHA Meeber Nations.”

In the area of the natural sciences. researchers proceeded froa simple co-
ordination of scientific research to international division of labor. A
new form of cooperation has become widespread: organisation of base

laboratories. which in the future can serve as a base for forming inter-
national scientific teens.

The activities of three international centers for upgrading qualifications
of scientific cadres have continued: the s. Banach Mathematics Center (Polish
People’s Republic). centers on problem of heat and mass exchange (USSR) and
on electron microscopy (00R). as well as an International Laboratory of
Strong Magnetic Fields and Lou Temperatures (Polish People's Republic) and
an International Information System for the Social Sciences.

The 10th Conference of Representatives of the Academies of Sciences of the
Socialist Nations was held in Sofia in Moveab er. A delegation from the

USSR Academy of Sciences took active part in the conference; the delegation
was headed by Chief Scientific Secretary of the Presidium of the USSR Acedew
of Sciences Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of Sciences 6. K.
Skryabin. Academician Yu. V. Sromley presented a paper entitled "The Great
October Socialist Revolution and Implementation of the Leniniet Nationalities
Policy in the USSR."

Ihe report of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences -- cooperation coordinator

for the period 1976-1977 - gave good marks to the problem coniesions headed
by Soviet scientists. the International Center for Most and Mass Rxchange in
Minsk, the International Information System for the Social Sciences (co-
ordinator--IMION [Institute of Scientific Information for the
Social Sciences] of the USSR Academy of Sciences), and

participation by scientific establishments of the USSR Academy of Sciences in
the work of other problem couissions. Representatives of the USSR Academy of
Sciences informed the conferees on progress in implementing the recouenda-
tions of the conference of presidents of academics of sciences.

At the proposal of the USSR Academy of Sciences. s recoanendation was adopted

on elaboration of a long-term program of multilateral cooperation in the area
of the natural sciences.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The USSR Academy of Sciences proposed holding the next. llth Conference of
Representatives of Academies of Sciences in Moscow in 1979. and in connec-
tion with this assumed the duties of coordinator for 1978-1979.

Cooperation among the social scientists of the socialist nations developed
extrenely vigorously in 1977. A long-term program of multilateral coopera-
tion in the area of the social sciences. discussed at the Second Conference
of Vice-Presidents and at a conference of presidents of the academies of
sciences of the socialist nations. was included as a cosponent part of the
Progras of Multilateral Cooperation for 1976-180.

Joint work continued on seven problems of the social sciences included in the
progron. on problems under the topics "Study of European Security." "Slavic
Linguistic Atlas" and sessral others. no well as cooperation within the
framework of the International intonation System for the Social Sciences
(HISON).

The multilateral cooperation division of the Scientific Cooperation with
Socialist Countries Adsinistration of the USSR Academy Sciences. with the
participation of the Council on international Cooperation in the Area of
the Social Sciences of the USSR Academy of Sciences. held in April an annual
conference of representatives of Soviet components of problem commissions
in the area of the social sciences. Topics discussed included the tasks of
the cousissions in the area of inlenenting the long-term program of multi-
lateral cooperation among the scientific establishments of the socialist na-
tions in the area of the social sciences.

The proolem conissions devoted considerable attention to preparation for
and conduct of jubilee events dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the
Great October Socialist Revolution. A jubilee collected volume of articles an plb-
lished within the framework of H1808. entitled ”60-letiye Velikoy
Oktyabr'skoy sotsialisticheskoy revolyutaii" [60th Anniversary of the Great
October Socialist Revolution]. containing articles by leading Soviet sci-
entists and scientists from other socialist countries dealing with important
probleas of Marxist historiography of the October Revolution and its in-
fluence on the world historical process. A problem conission was es-
tablished, to handle the topic "The World Socialist System." and prapara- '
tions were made for the constituent session of the problem couission
"Patterns of Development of Horld Literature."

A conference was held in Moscow in October, gathering together representa-
tives of scientific establishments of the socialist countries. on preparation
for publication of a mass scientific-popular work entitled "Kretltaya istoriya
vtoroy mirovoy voyny 1939-1965 gg." {A Concise History of world War II. 1939-
1965]. The mediership of the international editorial board and the publica-
tion plan were approved.

Scientific establishments of the 0888 Academy of Sciences and the academies
of sciences of the union republics took active part in programs of sci-
entific cooperation within the framework of OSHA. The following coordination

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OPVlCIAL USE ONtY

centers eutnblinhud under the auspices of academy scientific establishments
continued operations: "Research in the Area of Biological Physics" (USSR
Academy of Sciences institute of Biophysics); “Study of Chemical. Physical.
Biological and Other Processes of the Major Regions of the World Ocean"
(USSR Academy of Sciences institute of Oceanology); "Development of New
industrial Catalysts" (institute of Catalysis of the Siberian Department of
thuJiSSRluademyiof..ScienceaM d‘neyelopment' of the Scientific Principles

and Elaboration of New industrial Processes of welding. Surfacing and Thermal
Cutting of Various Materials and Alloys" (Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences
institute of Electric welding). and "Group of Scientific Research and Sat--
perimental-Design Projects Requieite for Developing Gaseous, Liquid and
Solid Fuel HID Electric Power Stations" (USSR Academy of Sciences institute
of high Teaperatures). Regular meetings of councils of representatives

and scientific-technical councils on all these problems were held: coordinated
proposals were drafted on utilisation of the obtained results and on deepen-
ing specialization and cooperative efforts in research.

IA list of probleoa of the coordinated plan of nultilateral integration
measures by the can master nations for 1976-1980 was drawn up. which con-
tained 17 major scientific-technical problems.

Considerable attention was focused on mutual exchange of scientific and tech-
nical information, increasing the qualifications of scientific cadres, orga-
nization of joint consultations. schools and symosia: information bulletins
were published. The ”Holding" coordination center. jointly with the Interna-
tional Scientific-Technical Information Center. published a catalogue of
velding equipment which is series-manufactured in the cm meter nations.

The USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of liigh Temperatures. in canformity with
the resolutions of the -let Session of the cm Executive Oomaittee and the
17th Session of the CEHA Cousittee on Scientific and Technical Cooperation.
drafted a long-term specific program of cooperation up to 1990 on the prob-
lem ”Coulee of Scientific Research and Experimental-Design Projects Re-
quisite for Developing min Electric Powc' Stations." The draft plan was dis-
cussed at the Second Session of the Corn: of Representatives on this prob-
lem (October. Bulgaria).

Considerable work was performed by scientific establishments of the USSR
Academy of Sciences on the problems “iialignant Tumors." "Elaboration of the
Scientific Principles of Ergonomic Stendards and Requirements." ”Protection
of Ecosystems (Biogeocenoses)." and "SocioeconOmic and Organisational-legal
Aspects of Nature Conservation."

bilateral working plans have been drawn up and agreements on exchange of
specialists have been signed within the framework of the working group on
automation systems for planning-design and engineering in the branches of
industry and construction.

Scientists of the USSR Academy of Sciences are mothers of many agencies of
the OSHA co-ittee on scientific and technical cooperation and are

37
FOR OFHCIAL USE OSLY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

participating in creation and operation or the International Scientific and
Technical information System and in scientific projects of the OSHA per-
manent commissions on geoloBY. agriculture. utilization of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes. and on standardization.

USSR Academy of Sciences Bilateral Cooperatitn With Scientific Establishments
of the Socialist Countries

In 1977 scientific establishments of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the
academies of ncienees of the union republics did a good deal of work on
carrying out five-year problem-topic plane or scientific cooperation with
the academies of sciences of the brother nations.

Scientific cooperation between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Bulgarian
Academy of Sciences was conducted in conformity with the Protocol on Sci-
entifie Cooperation Between the USSR Academy of Sciences and Bulgarian
Academy of Sciences for 1976-1980 and the Problem-Topic Plan for 1976-1980.
which specifies joint efforts on 62 problems of the natural and social
sciences.

Ties between Soviet and Bulgarian physicists have become strengthened. A
delegation of Soviet scientists headed by Academician A. H. Prokhorov

visited Bulgaria in September on the invitation of the Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences. Delegation members vinited establishments of the Bulgarian Academy
of Sciences. Sofie University, the Ninistry of Electronics and Electrical
Engineering of the People's Republic of Bulgaria. exchanged work experience
with their Bulgarian colleagues. and presented their observations and
recommendations on development of physics in Bulgaria. A regular meeting of
the Commission of historians of the USSR and the People's Republic of
Bulgaria and a scientific session dedicated to the centennial of the Russian-
Turkish war and the liberation of Bulgaria from the Ottoman yoke were held

in Kishinev in April. A representative delegation of Bulgarian scholars was
headed by Academician D. Kosev. Vice-President of the Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences and meaber of the Central Committee of the Bulgarian Communist
Party.

Scientific establishments of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences widely
celebrated the 60th anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution.
The Bulgarian Academy of Sciences held a scientific session entitled "The
Great October Socialist Revolution and Its influence on Development of
Social Progress." which included participation by a delegation from the
USSR Academy of Sciences. headed by Academician N. V. Hel'nihov. member of
the Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Scientific cooperation between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences was carried out in conformity with the Protocol and prob-
lem-topic plan for scientific cooperation in 1976-1980. the plan specifies
joint efforts by institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences and Hungarian
Academy of Sciences on 36 problems in the natural and social sciences.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE OBLY
FOR Ol-‘P‘ICIM. USE ONLY

The Bilateral Commission of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the hungarien
Academy of Sciences en Solid-State Physics successfully coordinated joint
scientific research in the area of solid-state physics and quantue electronics.
The current session of the Soviet-hungarien Commission on Cooperation in the
Social Sciences (Septeeber, hungarien People's Republic) was an important
event. The commission discussed the results of execution of the Consolidated
Problem-Topic Plan for Scientific Cooperation in the Area of the Social Sci-
ences and noted successful work by Soviet and hungarian scholars on the
majority of the joint research topics. Academician P. N. Pedoseyev. leader

of the Soviet delegation. was received by Comrade J. Radar. Pirst Secretary
of the Central Committee of the hungerian Socialist Uerkers'Party, who gave
high praise for the work done by the commission. The need for all-out deepen-
ing of ties between Soviet end Rungarien social scientists was emphasised.

There was continued publication of Seviet-hungarien journals! four issues

of the journal PROBLEM? UPRAVLENIYA I T80R11 INPORHATSII [Problems of Control
and Information Theory] were published, as well as two volumes (eight issues)
of the Journal SOOBSRCRENIYA P0 KINETIKB l KATALIZU [Reports on Kinetics and
Catalysis). and four issues of the journal HATEHATICHESKIY ANAle [Mathemati-
cal Analysis].

The hungerien Academy of Sciences officially honored the 60th anniversary of
the Great October Socialist Revolution. A scientific session of the General
Assembly of the hungerien Academy of Sciences. dedicated to this iaportent
date. was held in October. Participants at the session included a delega-
tion from the USSR Academy of Sciences, headed by Academician A. H. Prohhorov.
member of the Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Scientific ties between the USSR Academy of Sciences. the State Science and
Technology Committee of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and the Social
Sciences Committee of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam were implemented in
conformity with the Protocol on Scientific Cooperation Between the USSR
Academy of Sciences. the State Science and Technology Conittse and Social
Sciences Committee of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in 1975-1977.

Completion of construction in Renal of the Combined Scientific Research In-
stitute. erected by Vietnamese organizations on the plans and with the
assistance of the USSR Academy of Sciences. was an important event. A
delegation from the USSR Academy of Sciences. which included vice-presidents
of the USSR Academy of Sciences Acedemiciane P. R. Pedoseyev and A. V.
Siderenko. Academician A. A. Dorodnitsyn. and Corresponding Member of the
USSR Academy of Sciences 0. T. Iogomolev. took part in the festive events
dedicated to the official opening of the Combined Scientific Research In-
stitutc. At the same time preliminary talks were held on further development

of scientific cooperation between the AS USSR and scientific establishments
of the SRV.

A protocol was signed in Moscow in November on scientific cooperation in the
period 1978-1979 between the AS USSR on the one hand and the Scientific

39
POR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
?OR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

Research Center and Social Sciences Colnlttec of the SRV on the
other.

Scientific cooperation between the AS USSR and the Acedaey of Sciences of

the CDR developed pursuant to the Protocol and Problee—Topic Plan for Sci-
entific Cooperation in 1976-l980 on 59 prohlsas in the natural and social

sciences.

A conference of rcientiet-experts of the AS USSR and COR was held in Berlin
in April. at which results of cooperatch efforts in 1075-1976 were eun-
narired, and working plans for scientific ctoperation in l977-l978 were co-
ordinated.

A conference of experts from :h. AS USSR and AS CDR was held in hovosibirek
in May. dedicated to cooperation in the area of the biological sciences. In
particular. it was noted that cooperation is beeoning increasingly diVersi-
fled: an exchange of infatuation, reagents and preparations is taking place.
and joint publications and reports are being published. For exasple, in
1975-1976 journals in the USSR and the CDR as well as international journals
published lore then so pint papers produced by scientists of the USSR and
COR. and more than 20 joint papers were presented at conferences.

The Con-lesion of historians of the USSR and COR onrkad its 20th anniversary
in 1977. In connection with this anniversary. Conrado 3. honecker. General
Secretary of the Central Cos-ittee of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany.
sent to the connission nenbere a eeseage of greetings in which he highly
praised :tn activities and expressed thanks "for the scientific contribution
toward ;esearch on and publicity of the progressive and hueane traditions

of our peoples. the revolutionary traditions of the worker eoveeant of our
countries. and the traditions of the fighting alliance between the Socialist
Unity Party of Ceroany and the CPSU."

This counisaion'a 26th Scientific Conference was held in Berlin in Septeeber.
on the topic "The Crest October Socialist Revolution and the world Revolu-
tionary Process.”

The Seventh Scientific Session of the Con-lesion of Philosophers of the USSR
and the CDR was held in Kiev in May. One of the neetings was dedicated to
the 60th anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution and the
developeent of Marxist-Leniniet philosophy in the post-October era. In the
course of the session a synposiue was organised. on the topic "Dialectice of
Develop-eat of the Socialist Society." and a progress report was presented
on preparation of a joint study entitled "Marxist-Leninist teaching on
Ideology and Philosophical Problems of the Contemporary Ideological
Struggle."

The Third Scientific Session of the Coeoission of Scone-lets of the USSR and
60R. on the topic "Economic and Social Problees of Scientific and Tech-
nological Progress and Changes in the Social and Econoeic Structure of the
Developed Socialist Society" (Dace-bar. hoscow). was conducted on a high
theoretical and eathodologicel level. Preparations were coopleted for a

60
FOR OPFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gzint monograph entitled “Scientific and Technological Progress and the
cialist economy."

Literary scholars of the AS USSR and AS GDR completed work on a collective
study entitled “Under the badge of Unity. 0n the Development of a World
Literatuta~of Socialist Realism. 1917-19s5.“

Scientific establishments of the AS ODR widely celebrated the 60th anniver-
sary of the Great October Socialist Revolution. scientific colloquia were
held with the participation of Soviet scientists. and the results of social-
ist coepetition in honor of this important date were summarized. Officials.
party and trade union organisations of scientific establishments of the

AS ODR sent congratulatory letters to their partner-institutes of the AS
USSR.

Scientific ties between the USSR Academy of Science and Academy of Science
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea developed pursuant to the plan
of scientific cooperation between the two academies for 1976-1977.

The USSR Academy of Sciences sent two geologists to the DPRK to study the
tectonics of sedimentary and deep-lying strata of the earth's crust and
upper mantle in the world Ocean. and a botanist to familiarise himself with
the work of botanical gardens. forest-park and park development in the DPRR.

four Korean specialists in technology of peat extraction and utilization and
wood chemistry and three specialists in satellite observation were sent for
training to the USSR Academy of Sciences. Rive Korean scientists took part
in conferences held by the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Cooperation between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Academy of Sciences
of the Republic of Cuba took place pursuant to a five-year program of co-
operation between the two academies. In May 1977 a delegation from the USSR
Academy of Sciences. headed by Academician V. A. Kocel'nikov. Vice-President
of the AS USSR. visited Cubs and held talks with officials of the Cuban
Academy of Sciences. A plan of cooperation in the area of the natural sci-
ences for 1977-1978 was signed. Joint projects will be conducted on 16 prob-
lems in computer technology. astronomy, geophysics, physics. chemistry.
marine biology. botany. zoology, geography, geology. oceanography, scientific
information, and other fields.

Meetings dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Great October Revolution
were held at scientific establishments of the Cuban Academy of Sciences.

Scientific cooperation between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Academy
of Sciences of the Mongolian People's Republic was conducted pursuant to
the Plan of Scientific Cooperation between the AS USSR and AS NPR for 1976-
1980.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As in previous years. joint expeditions -- geological. paleontological.
biological. historical-cultural -- continued active operations.

A joint Soviet-Mongolian scientific research geological expedition suc-
ceeded in substantiating the existence in thr southern part of Mongolia of
volcanoplutonic rocks containing carbonatites. A model of the structure
of the earth's crust and upper asntle to a leprh of lac-1&0 he has been
constructed for Central Mongolia. Three volumes of expedition results
have been published. A scientific conference and exhibit entitled
”Principal Accoaplishnents of the Expedition in the Last 10 Years” were
held in Ulsn-betor in September.

A joint Soviet-Mongolian paleontological expedition obtained unique aaterials
froa Mesozoic end Cenozoic continental sedisents. which are of great sig-
nificance for solving probleas of Cretaceous and Paleogene biostratigraphy

in Hongolie. Representative collections of nerine invertebrates (trilobites.
brachlepods. corals. bryozoans. etc) were gathered for study of the
paleontology. biostretigrephy and psleogsogrephy of iiongolia's ancient lend-
“8's

A joint Soviet-Mongolian coabined biological expedition organized a new
per-enent facility in an ultrearid desert environ-ant .. the first facility
of its type in Central Asia. work is in progress on four other peresnsnt
facilities in all of hongolia's natural tones. Proposals were drafted on
protection of wild ungulates in the NPR.

a Sevret-Hongolian historical-cultural expedition continued field research
activities. Dozens of new nonunents of Mongolie's antiquity were discovered
and exaeined; the obtained scientific results are asking it possible to
solve many key probleas of Hengolie's ancient and aedievel history.

Joint projects were also being conducted on sany probleas of astronoay.
astheastics. physics. cheniatry, history. scone-ice. law. literature. and
language.

The HPR Acadeay of Sciences extensively celebrated the 60th anniversary of
the Great October Socialist Revolution: aeetinge were held at the Presidiun
of the Acadeay of Sciences and at scientific establish-ants.

Scientific cooperation between the USSR Acedeay of Sciences and the Polish
Acadeay of Sciences was conducted pursuant to the protocol and problea-
topic plan for scientific cooperation between the AS USSR and the PAS in
1975-1980 which specifies the conduct of joint projects or coordination of
research on $6 probleae in the natural and social sciences.

"Soviet Science and Technology Days" were held in Poland in April. with
the participation of a representative delegation fro. the AS USSR. which in-
cluded Academician 6. l. Marchuh. Vice-President of the AS USSR. Acadeaiciens

62
FOR OFFXCKAL USE 0le
FOR OI-‘HCIM. USE ONLY

A. C. Agenbegyan. N. G. Rnaov. S. V. Voneovskiy. V. R. Clushkov. R. z.
Sngdeyev. V. D. Sadovskiy. V. i. Spitsyn. and corresponding eeebers of the
AS USSR N. A. Vetolin. Ye. M. Savitekiy and h. A. Sergeyev.

A couission of historlnns of the USSR and Polish People's Republic held a
conference in Moscow on the topic "historical Significance of the Great 0c-
tober Socialist Revolution. Changes in the Structure of the worker Class

of the USSR and PPR in the Process of Building Socialise and Colmunise." A
collected voluee of joint articles was published. entitled "Rul'turnyye
svyesi nerodov voatochnoy Yevropy v XVI v." [Cultural Ties of the Peoples of
Eastern Europe in the 16th Century]. and a collected voluae entitled "Russia,
Poland and the Black Sea Coast Area in the l6th-l7th Centuries" was prepared.

A comeission of philosophers of the USSR and PPR readied for publication the
proceedings of the Second Session of the Coenission "Tasks and Developeent
Prospects of harsist-Leninist Philosophy in the USSR and PPR in Light of the
Resolutions of the 25th CPSU Congress and Seventh Congress of the Polish
United workers Party.” A regular neeting of the cosnission of econoeists of
the USSR and PRP was held in Hareaw, as was a theoretical conference on the
problees of developeent of relationships of socialist property and ieproveeent
in sanegeeent of the national econoey.

Numerous events were held at establishments of the Polish Acadely of Sciences
dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution.

A scientific conference on the topic "Influence of the Great October Social-

ist Revolution on Revolutionary Processes in the Conteeporary Uorld" wee

held in Warsaw in November. The conference was attended by a delegation

from the AS USSR led by Academician i. l. hints. who presented a paper en-

titled "The Uorld-Historic Experience of the Crest October Socialist Revolu-
tion."

Scientific cooperation between the USSR Acadeey of Sciences. the Academy of
the Socialist Republic of Roeanie and the Academy of Social and Political

Sciences of the SRR was carried out pursuant to a protocol covering the
period 1976-1980.

in connection with the earthquake on 6 March 1977. a group of eels-ologists
free the institute of Earth Physics of the AS USSR was sent to Roeanie. The
USSR Acedeey of Sciences supplied the Romanians with earthquake-recording
instruments and auxiliary equipsent.

Attaching great importance to the developeent of scientific cooperation
between Soviet and Roeanian scientists in the area of the social sciences.
in hoveeber the USSR Academy of Sciences invited for discussion of these
matters the president of the SRR Academy of Social and Political Sciences,
H. Georghiu.and General Secretary C. lonescu.

The bilateral Soviet-Romanian Commission of historians continued its activi-
ties. A regular com-lesion meeting was held in Bucharest in Deco-her

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLX
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

on the topic ”The historical prerience of the October Revolution and build-
ing the Poundstions of Socialism in Romania.

Scientific cooperation between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Czecho-
slovak Academy of Sciences was conducted pursuant to the Protocol and Problem-
Topic Plan of Scientific Cooperation between the USSR AS and Czechoslovak

AS for 1976-1980. on 18 probleas of the natural and social sciences.

Bilateral problem commissions continued their activities. Reports on topics
of cooperation in the last two years were discussed and concrete areas of
research for the period 1978-1980 were designated at meetings of the Soviet-
Czechoslovak commissions on high-molecular compounds (Kiev) and single
crystals (leningrad). A conference of a team of experts from the USSR
Academy of Sciences and the C:.;hoslovsk Academy of Sciences on the problem
"Plasma Physics and Physics of ﬁlamentary Particles.” held in Prague. sum-
marized progress made by scientific establishments of the USSR AS and
Czechoslovak in in 1976-1977 and agreed on a working plan for 1978. A
regular session of the Commission of historians of the USSR and Czechoslovakia
was held in Prague.

The AS USSR institute of Geology of Ore bodies. Petrography, Hineralogy and
Geochemistry. jointly with the geological institutes of the Czechoslovak and
Slovak academics of sciences. published a volume of collected articles en-
titled ”Opyt korrelyatsii magmaticheskikh i metamorficheskikh porod
Chekhoslovakii i nekotorykh rayonov SSSR" [Tentative Correlation of Hagmatic
and Hetesorphic Rocks of Czechoslovakia and Some Areas of the USSR) - the
first substantial work presenting a comparative study of magmatic and
setsmor:hic rocks of mobile belts and areas of ancient consolidation on the
territory of the two countries. This study is of great significance for
establishing the fundamental patterns of evolution of the earth's crust and
upper mantle and for mineral prospecting.

The USSR Academy of Sciences and the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences held
their regular awards ceremony honoring the best joint research projects
by Soviet and Czechoslovak scientists.

Czechoslovak scientists extensively celebrated the 60th anniversary of the
Great October Socialist Revolution. A general meeting of the Czechoslovak
Academy of Sciences was held. dedicated to this important date. The meeting
was attended by a delegation from the USSR Academy of Sciences, led by
Academician A. V. Sidorenko. Vice-President of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Scientific cooperation between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Council
of the Academies of Sciences and Arts of the Socialist Pedereted Republic of
Yugoslavia was carried out pursuant to a protocol covering the period 1976-
lSSo and a problem-topic plan specifying joint research on 35 problems of
the natural and social sciences.

66
FOR OFFXCIAL BSE OSLY
170R ORIGIN. USE ONLY

During tellta betveen delegetione of the USSR Atedeny of Sciencee end the
Council of Acedeniee of Sciencee and Arte of the am held in Hoecov in
hey. the subject utter of joint reaearch vae apecified, end the ecope of
ecientiet exchange in l977 vee deter-ined.

‘l‘hua in 1977 cooperation along the ecadeeiee of ecieneee of the aoeieliet
natione continued to develop on e eteble. organieed haeie. Scientific-
orgenieetional eeeeuree conducted by the ecedeaiee were directed toverd
leproving organieetionel force of cooperation. increeaing the eitectiveneee
of joint reeeerch end unifying the efforte of ecientiete for eolviag ieportent
ecientific and technical problem. lepeneion and etrengthening of ecientific
cooperation conatitutee en ieportent contribution of the ecedeeiee of
eciencee. ecientific eeteblieheente, end ecientieta oi the 08811 and the other
eocieiiet countriee coverd developeent of the world eocieliet eyetee and
toward etrengthening ite unity and eoliderity.

P001170?!

1. For eore detail on the conference of preaidenta of the ecedeeiee of
eciencee of the eocieliet countriea. eee VBS‘I'NIK All 888R. No S. 1977.
pp 5-70.

COPYRIGI‘I‘: lrdetel'etvo ”Neuke", ”Veatnih Altedelii Nauk 889R". 1978

302d
6808 1870

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIWISTS AND SCIBN‘I‘II-‘Ic ORGANIMTIONS

UDCi 001.89 (100)

ACADEMY OF SCIENCES SCIENTIFIC COOPERATION HIT“ SCIENTISTS IN CAPITALIST
AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Moscow VSSTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 10. Oct 78 pp ill-12‘

(Article by A. A. Rulakov. chief of the External Relations Administration.
Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences: “USSR Academy of Sciences - ln-
ternarional Cooperation in 1977: II. Cooperation Uith Scientific Establish-
ments in Capitalist and Developing Countries"*]

[Text] The principles of peaceful coexistence of nations with differing
social systems were proclaised by the Soviet Republic on the very first

day of its existence. in the historic resolutions of the 26th and 25th

CPSU Congresses these principles were reflected in the Peace Program and the
Prograa for Further Struggle for Peace and international Cooperation. for
the Freedom and Independence of Peoples. These principles are playing an
increasingly inportant role in international affairs; their influence en-
compasses the entire eggregate of international relations of nations. includ-
ing the international ties of the USSR Academy of Sciences with scientific
establishments in capitalist and developing countries. These relations exp
perienced further development in 1977.

International ties of the USSR Academy of Sciences were affected on the
basis of 30 agreements and protocols concluded with scientific organizations
in capitalist and developing countries, as well as $0 intergovernmental
agreesents, progress and protocols on cultural. scientific or scientific-
technical cooperation.

In 1977 approximately 2.500 scientists and specialists from scientific es-
tablish-ants of the USSR Academy of Sciences visited capitalist and
developing countries. and an equal number of scientists and specialists free
these countries visited our academic establishments.

Soviet scientists took part in the activities of asny important foreign
scientific forums. including the Congress of the International Federation of
Information Processing (Canada); the Fifth International Congress of

' The first part of A. A. Rulahov's article appears in VISTNIK. Re 9.

66
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Economists -- "Sconomic Growth and Resources" (Japan); the 18th General
Conference of the International Union for Study of Population Problems
(Mexico): the 10th Congress of the World Energy Conference (Turkey): the
Asassbly of the International Association of Biochemistry and Space
Cheaistry (trance); the 27th International Conference of the Physiological
Sciences (francs): the 20th International Linnological Congress (Denmark):
the llth Conference of the federation of European Biochemical Societies
(Denmark): the 12th International hegel Congress (Austria): the 12th Inter-
national Congress of Linguists (Austria); the 15th International Congress
on the history of Science (Great Britain): the General Assembly of the In-
ternational Union of Social Sciences (France). plus other scientific forums.

In turn scientists from 33 capitalist and developing countries attended

many congresses. conferences and symposia organised by the USSR Academy of
Sciences. These scientific forums included the 8th International Congress
on Organic Geochemistry (Moscow): the llth Congress of the Csrpstho-lehan
Geological Association (Kiev); the International Sysposium on Proteins. Poly-
peptides and Amino Acids of the Brain (Yerevan): an international synposium
entitled "Philosophy and Social Progress" (hoscow): the Fourth International
Conference on Perroelectricity (Leningrad); the Seventh International Con-
ference on Atomic Collisions in a Solid Body (Moscow): a symposium of the
International Astronomical Union on the topic "Structure of the Universe and
the forming of Galaxies" (Iallin); a conference of European information and
documentation centers in the area of the social sciences (Moscow), plus
others.

An important place in the system of international ties of the USSR Academy
of Sciences is occupied by cooperation with 0.5. scientific establishments.
This cooperation is carried out both on the basis of agreements between the
USSR Academy of Sciences and U.S. scientific establishments and on the basis
of intergovernmental agreements.

The U.S. National Academy of Sciences is one of the principal partners of he
the USSR Academy of Sciences. In 1977 both academies continued active
cooperation on coordinated projects and programs dealing with the problems

of extremely long-base rsdiointerferometry. solid-state physics, new areas
in biology. experimental psychology, and ion implantation in semiconductors.
New Joint programs were specified last year: comprehensive study of promising
inorganic materials. and study of defects in solids.

Joint work within the framework of the intergovernmental program of coopera-
tion experienced further development, particularly in the area of physics,
chemical catalysis. has energy conversion. politics of science. and en-
vironmental protection.

The second session of the intergovernmental Soviet-American commission on
cooperation in the field of energy (Moscow, December 1977) noted effective
work by Soviet and American scientists in the area of has energy conversion,

“7
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and stated that last year work was completed on preparation of a joint
basic study on the technical and economic aspects of Man energy conversion.

The Soviet-American working group "Stimulation of Development of Basic
Research" completed an exchange of materials on system of fostering

basic scientific research in the USSR and the United States and proceeded
with preparing publications on this subject. In July-August 1977 a seminar
was held in Aspen. Colorado for the research group on joint elaboration of
problems of theoretical physics. entitled "Frontiers of Solid-State Theory."
A seminar on cosmic x-Ray sources was held in August in Protvino (USSR).
Joint work continued on a number of projects in the area of study of the
world Ocean and environmental protection.

A program of exchange of stimulate in the social sciences, specified by an
agreement between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the American Council of
Learned Societies (ACLS). was successfully carried out. The second Joint
session of the USSR AS and ACLS Cousission on Cooperation in the Social
Sciences was held in Hoscow in 1977. There also occurred meetings of in-
ternational economists. specialists on Asia problems. ethnographers, his-
torians. and psychologists. A program was coordinated on joint research in
the area of international relations, economics, history. sociology. law.
psychology. literature. ethnography and anthropology. Here than 500 sci-
entists and specialists from the AS USSR visited the United States in 1977.
and more than 700 American scientists visited our academy establishments.

0f great importance for further development of cooperation with the scientific
cstabli..hments of Great Britain was signing of an agreement on exchange of
scientists in the area of the social sciences between the USSR Academy of
Sciences and the British Academy of Sciences. as well as a visit to the

USSR by a delegation from the London Royal Society. led by its president.

Lord A. Todd (September 1977). During this visit a new agreement was signed.
on scientific cooperation and exchange of scientists between the AS USSR and
the Royal Society.

A third meeting of civic leaders. representatives of science. culture and
business from the USSR and Great Britain was held in London in November
1977. at which current political and economic problems of Anglo-Soviet
relations. European and world politics were discussed.

The Sixth Session of the Joint Anglo-Soviet Commission on Scientific and
Technical Cooperation was held in Moscow in May, at which was noted the
usefulness of scientific ties (involving the participation of the AS USSR)

in the field of radio astronomy, structural crystallography. synchrotron
radiation, heat and mass exchange. protection of metals against corrosion.
friction. wear and lubrication. new areas of scientific cooperation were
specified -- electron optics, optoelectronics, and control of cowlex systems.

A total of 167 scientists and specialists from the AS USSR visited Great
Britain in 1977. while 220 British scientists and specialists visited academy
establishments in the Soviet Union.

198
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the course of cooperntlnn between the USSR Academy of Sciences and
French scientific establishment» in 1977. principal attention was focused
on honoring the pledges specified in the program for expanding Soviet-
Frsnch contacts in the area of science and technology over a 10-year period.
The principal areas of this cooperation include space exploration. studies
in the area of controlled thermonuclear synthesis. low-temperature physics.
semiconductor physics. chemical catalysis. chemical physics, the physico-
chemical principles of life. information science. scientific instrument
engineering. synchrotron radiation. quantum electronics. and nonlinear
optics.

The Fourth Session of the Working Group on Cooperation in the Area of Sci-
entific Instrument Engineering was held in September 1977. at which progress
on joint projects was discussed. and plans for further cooperation were
outlined. That same month a bilateral symposium entitled "Physics-
chemical Principles of Life" was held in Tashkent. A meeting of special-
ists participating in work on the topic "Dynaeica of Interaction Between the
Natural Environment and Prehistoric Societies" wee held .‘n France in Sep-

tesber. at which problems of paleography and archeology of the Lower and
Riddle Pleistocene in France were discussed.

There was continued cooperation between scientists at the Institute of
Petrochemical Synthesis imeni A. V. Topchiyev of the AS USSR and the French
companies (Ron-Pulenk) Industries and Air-Liquids on the topic ”Research on
the Medical and Industrial Application of Polyvinyltrimethylsilane Film."
as well as with the French Petroleum Institute on motor fuel additives.

In conformity with the quota of the protocol of the Mixed Cos-lesion on Sci-
entific and Technical Cooperation. in 1977 the AS USSR sent 72 scientists to
France and received 109 French scientists. On the basis of the exchange
specified by an agreement between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the
National Center for Scientific Research. 21 Soviet scientists visited France.
and 28 French scientists visited academy scientific establishments.

Scientific ties with scientists of the PRC were effected last year both on
the basis of an agreement between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the

German Scientific Research Society in Bonn (NNIO). and on the basis of separate
agreements on joint projects.

Joint research continued in the field of uessbeuer spectroscopy. heliomsg-
netic and ionospheric observations. The Third Symposium on gamma-resonance
spectroscopy was held in Yerevan in October 1977. The first phase of the
large-scale "Porcupine” project has been successfully completed (March 1977).
This project included. in particular, a Soviet experiment involving injec-
tlon of a stress of xenon plasma. and a West German experiment involving in-
jection of a stream of barium. It also included optical observations con-
ducted with the aid of ultresensitive Soviet equipment carried on board a
YaK-loo airborne observatory. There was also an exchange of scientists with-
in the framework of cooperation on the problea "Radio Astronomy." within
the framework of the agreement with mm the USSR Academy of Sciences sent
32 scientists to the PRC and received 27 West German scientists.

49
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ties between the USSR Academy of Sciences and ltalian scientific establish-
mentu experienced further development. At .ut Third Seanlen of the Mixad
Connlsalon on Scientific and Technical Cooperation Between the USSR and

ltaly (hoscuw. May 1977). a "long-Range Program of Development of Scientific
and Technical Cooperation Covering a [0-Year Period" was signed. specifying
the conduct of joint researrn on l6 problems involving the AS USSR iniha

area of the phyuicoihvn.cu1. autheluticul. chemical engineering and biological
sciences.

in implementation of this program. 17 scientis a from the AS USSR visited
ltaly in 197?. A total of 63 academy sclenziuts and npecielists traveled
to ltnly within the framework of the agreement between AS USSR and the
ﬁctional Center for Scientific strarch. The as USSR in turn received 30
ltalian scientists.

The Seventh Conference of Soviet and ltuliun historians was held in Moscow in
May. and a hiiaternl Pushkin Colloquium for Literary Scholars was held in
Rome in June.

At the invitation of the Academy of Sciences, a delegation of Italian sci-
entists led by Professor E. anliariello. president of ltaly's National
Research Council. visited the USSR free ll to 23 November. The delegation
visited scientific establishments in Moscow. Pushchino. and Novosibirsk.

Cooperation with Austrian scientific establishments was carried out on the
basis of an agreement between the AS USSR and the Austrian Academy of Sciences.
Fifteen 'cientiata of the AS USSR visited Austria in 1977. while Austrian
ucivntl‘ts visited Soviet academy scientific establishments.

within the framework of cooperation with the Science and Research Division of
the Swiss Department of Internal Affairs. the USSR Academy of Sciences sent
nine scientists to Switzerland. and three Swiss scientists visited the USSR.

Successful scientific cooperation between scientists of the AS USSR and
Finnish scientists took place in an atmosphere of constantly growing friend-
ship and nutual trust between the peoples of the two countries. and extensive
economic. scientific and cultural ties between the USSR and Finland.

Further development of Soviet-Finnish scientific ties. successful activities

of working groups in the area of cybernetics. physics. zoology and experi-
mental biology. geology. geophysics. economics, archeolosy. history. ethnography
and anthropology. psychology and sociology. literature. folklore. and
linguistics were noted at the 23d Session of the Soviet-Finnish Commission on
Scientific and Technical Cooperation, held in Moscow in Hay 1977.

within the framework of the long-range program. aymposia on economics. Pinne-
Ugrlc studies and linguistics. a biological symposium entitled Control of
Cell and Tissue Differentiation" were held in Finland in 1977. Symposia on

physics and evolution of stars. cybernetics. and history were held in the
USSR.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within the framework of the long-term program and the protocol on coopera-
tion with the Pinniwh Acnduny. 61 Soviet scientists were sent to Finland
and 71 Flnnluh uciontlwtw were sent to tho USSR.

Cooperation with Swedish scientific establishments was carried out on the
basis of an agreement between the AS USSR, the Royal Swedish Academy of
Sciences and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences. as wall as
on the basis of an intergovernmental cultural and scientific exchange
program. Hithin the bummnrhofthe Agreement and Program. 19 Soviet scientists
were sent to Sweden. and so swedish scientists were sent to the Soviet Union.

Fruitful scientific contacts continued in the area of astrophysics and
plasma physics.

Scientific ties with Norwegian scientists area were affected on the basis of an
intergovernmental cultural end scientific cooperation program.

Cooperation began in the preceding year between scientists of the AS USSR
Institute of Earth Physics imeni 0. Yu. Shmidt and the Norwegian Polar
Institute. in the area of geomagnetic observations. Soviet research equip-
ment was placed on Norwegian islands in the North Sea. Scientific research
by the AS USSR continued on the Spitsbergen Archipelago, where a glaciologi-
cal. a geological and on astronomical expedition were working.

Cooperation between Soviet and Danish scientists is governed by an agreement
between the AS USSR and the Niels Bohr Institute of Theoretical Physics and

a program of cultural and scientific cooperation between the USSR and Dan-
mark.

Nine scientists from the AS USSR visited Denmark, while eight Danish sci-
entists were received at Soviet academy scientific establishments.

A long-term program of Soviet-Danish scientific cooperation on basic re-
search in the natural and applied sciences was signed at the Eighth Session
of the Intergovernmental Soviet-Danish Commission on Economic and Scientific-
Technical Cooperation (Moscow, June 1977).

Contacts with Belgian scientific establishments were based on an inter-
governmental agreement on cultural and scientific cooperation and the
Protocol of the Fifth Session of the Mixed Commission on Economic and Sci-
entific-Technical Cooperation. on the basis of which eight scientists

from the USSR Academy of Sciences visited Belgium and five Belgian sci-
entists were received by the Academy.

Two scientists from the AS USSR visited the Netherlands on the basis of a
cultural and scientific cooperation agreement. while three Dutch sci-
entists visited the USSR. There was continued cooperation between the

as USSR institute of Chemical Physics and the Dutch company (AKZO) on
study of the chemical properties of 2.6-diaryl phenols and the general
patterns of destruction and stabilization of polymers; the third symposium
on these problems was held in Moscow in November.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A combined geological-geophysical expedition of the A5 USSR. a party of 17.
continued work in Iceland from July through october 1977. This expedition
has worked in Iceland each year. beginning in 1971. In 1977 the AS USSR
received three visiting Icelandic scientists.

Scientific ties with Cen1diaa scientists were iffacted on the basis of an
agreement between the AL USSR and the Canadian National Research Council
(in the area of the natural sciences) and an intergovernmental program of
cultural and scirntific cooperation (in the area of the social sciences).
within the framework of both agreements. the as USSR sent 26 scientists to
Canada and received 21 Canadian scientists in the USSR.

In June 1977 a delegation from the AS ussa leit for Canada for talks on
development of further cooperation with Canada's National Research Council.
The A3 USSR submitted proposal: on development of joint research on a
number of scientific problems which are currently being studied in Canada.

Cooperation with Australian scientists underwent further development in
1977. Thu contractual-legal basis for this cooperation is an agreement on
scientific and technival cooperation between the USSR and Australia dated
15 January 1975. and programs of cooperation in the area of radio astronomy.
entomology and the earth sciences, an intergovernmental program of cultural
exchanges specifying exchange of specialists in the social sciences. as
well as an agreement for exchange of scientists from the Institute of
Eastern Studies and the Institute of World Economics and International
Relations of the AS USSR and the Australian National University (AND).
elaborated on the basis of the Agreement.

In 19/7 scientists from the as USSR Institute of State and Law and the as
ooSR Institute of world Economics and International Relations (IHBND) left
tor the Australian National University. 0n the invitation of IHEHO.

Dr R. O'Neill. director of de ANU Center for Strategic Studies. visited the
USSR.

e

within the framework of the intergovernmental program of cultural coopera-
tion. Australia was visited by the deputy director of the AS USSR Institute
of Eastern Studies. K. V. Halskhovskiy. while Dr S. (Dreyer). an ANU scholar.
visited the Soviet Union.

Cooperation with Japanese scientific establishments took place on the basis
of an agreement on exchange of scientists between scientific establishments
of the AS USSR and Japanese Government establishments and universities. a
program of cultural and scientific exchanges between Soviet and Japanese
organizations through the Union of Soviet Friendship Societies (3800) and
the Japanese Association for Cultural Ties Hith Foreign Countries (YaAKS).
as well as protocols on cooperation between the AS USSR Institute of Eastern
Studies. (Ritsumeykan) University. and (Rhosey). International Relations
House (Japan).

Three symposia were held in Japan within the framework of cooperation with
YaAKS: the Third Symposium on Problems of Collective Security was held in
Tokyo in October. and the Third Symposium of historians and Iourth Sym-

posium on Electronics in December. Other events included: in Japan - the

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fourth Seminar on Catalysis. the Sixth Synposiun on the Physicochenical
Principles of Metallurgical Processes; in Moscow - the First Sesinar on
Corrosion of Metals. a synposius entitled "Peace and Security in Asia.” and
in Pushchino -- the Pirst Seminar on Permentation.

In 1977 138 Soviet scientists visited Japan. and 123 Japanese scientists
visted the Soviet Union.

Scientific ties with Indian scientists continued to develop as before on

the basis of the Program of Scientific Cooperation Between the AS USSR and
the Indian National Academy of Sciences (IRAS). an Intergovernmental Progras
of Cultural and Scientific Exchanges Between the USSR and India. an Agree-
ment on Cooperation in the Area of the Applied Sciences end Technology (in-
volving the USSR State Coasittee for Science end Technology). end an Agree-
nent Between the AS USSR end the Indian Statistical Institute on publication
in Indie of translations of the works of Soviet scientists.

within the frasework of cooperation with IRAS. the Second Soviet-Indian
Symposius on Plant Sebryology was held in Leningrad in August 1977. Joint
research continued on topics contained in the Long-Tare Cooperation Progress
low-tesperature physics. deep seissic probing. plasoa physics. plant genetics
and selection, mathematical statistics. and chemistry of natural cospounds.
First steps were taken toward establishing cooperation in geotherssl studies.
crystal growth. and neutrino astronomy.

Seventeen Soviet scientists were sent to India in 1977 in connection with
the interacedesy cooperation program. and 13 scientists were sent on the
progres of cultural and scientific exchanges.

The A8 USSR Institute of High Tesperatures. in conforsdty with the agreement
on cooperation in the area of applied sciences. continued assisting India
in designing and building in India an HID installation. In connection with
this 11 Soviet specialists were sent to India and 12 Indian specialists
visited the USSR.

Soviet-Indian ties in the area of the social Sciences continued to develop.
The holding of a number of bilateral symposia and other events in 1977-
1978 was specified at a meeting in New Delhi in April of the Soviet-Indian
Cosniasion on Cooperation in the Social Sciences.

Three synposia were held in 1977: "Modernisation of Traditional Institutions"
(New Delhi). "Study of the Ancient Civilizations of Central Asia" (Dushanbe).
and a symposium on probless of international law (Moscow).

The Indian Statistical Institute Press published in 1977 the following books
by Soviet authors: a monograph by Acade-ician S. H. Kedrov entitled

"Hateriya i yeye dvizheniye" [Hatter and Its Motion]. a book by A. D. Lit-an
entitled ”Pilisofshaya lysl' nesavisisoy Indii" [The Philosophical Thought of
Independent India), and a collected voluse entitled "Istoriya Indii” [History
of India .

55
FOR OFFICIﬁL "Si ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL "SE ONLY

In Afghanistan a Soviet-Afghan archeologicel urpedition. including nine
Soviet scientists. continued operationn In 1977.

A delegation of Soviet sciontosts traveled to Afghanistan to attend an in-
ternational ncninnr hennrlna the 80th annIVersary of the death of the

fanous philosopher Jrun‘~ad-dinn al-Afghanl \Kubul. March 1977).
Representatives of the USSR Academy of Sciences took part in an internatiOnal
seminar on the topic "Pushtu Erinted Works in the Last Two Centuries" (Kabul.
August 1977) and a seainer honoring the nesory of the poet "akin Sanai
Gatnevi. Pour Afghan scientists visited the Soviet Union in 1977.

Scientific ties between scientists of the As USSR and Iraqi scientists were
effected on the basis of a 1972 protocol on cooperation with Iraq‘s Scienti-
fic Research Organisation. Last year the text of a new protocol between

the As USSR and this organization was agreed upon and was signed at the
beginning of Jtnuury 1978.

v. c. herezhin. laboratory chief at the USSR Academy of Sciences Institute
of Petrochenicsl Synthesis. traveled to Iraq within the progran of coopera-
tion with the Scientific Research Organization; he delivered a series of
lectures on the fundamentals of gas chromatography to Iraqi specialists.

An archeologicel expedition of the AS USSR continued operations in Iraq in
[977.

Scientific exchanges with Turkey are based on a cultural and scientific
cooperation progran for 1976-1978.

'he As USSR sent to Turkey a scholar free the AS USSR Institute of Eastern
Studies, B. h. Potskhvcri. to study problena of Turkish foreign policy. as
well as the director of the Scientific Inforsation Center for the Social
Sciences of the Acadeny of Sciences of the Asarbaydshsn SSR, A. A. Zargarov.
At the invitaion of the school of forestry at Istanbul University. E. A.
Kurbanov. laboratory chief at the Botany Institute of the Acadeny of Sci-
ences of the Aserbsydshsn SSR. visited Turkey to present lectures on
cytoesnryology. Doctor (Pars Tukladshi). chairaan of the editorial and
publishing council of the Great Turkish Encyclopedia. was a guest of the
Institute of Eastern Studies and the Institute of Scientific Information on
the Social Sciences of the AS USSR. Pour scientists free the As USSR took
part in international events held in Turkey.

R. H. hunchayev and N. Ya. herpert. scientists free the AS USSR Institute of
Archeology. visited Jordan.

Scientific ties with the countries of the Near East weakened sosawhst in
1977. which is connected chiefly with deterioration of the political situa-
tion in that region as a consequence of continuing Israeli aggression.

As a result of the unfriendly policy of the Egyptian Governnant. scientific
cooperation with the scientists of this country has practically cone to s

56
FOR OFFIClhl USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

standstill. Scientific contacts in 1977 were effected only through
AstrosoVet. which is conducting photographic observations of satellites
free a station located in Egypt. Three specialists went to Egypt to con-
duct observations. A total of 31 scientists from the AS USSR visited
countries in the Near East in 1977.

The volume of scientific contacts with the African countries was eeall in
1977. A Soviet delegation to the UM international Conference in Support
of the Peoples of Naeibio and zimbebwe, held in Mozambique. included

L. V. Concharov. deputy director of the AS USSR Africa Institute. he also
attended the world Conference of Actions Against Apartheid. which was held
in Lagos (Nigeria).

Soviet scientists attended the Second Congress of the African Political
Science Association in Morocco.

A satellite photographic observation station continued operating in the
Republic of Chad. Equatorial Africa's first planetarium was opened under
the auspices of this station on 1i October 1977. with Astrosovat personnel
delivering sore than 20 lectures for the local populace.

At the present tine the USSR has cultural and scientific cooperation agree-
eents with eight Latin American countries. on the basis of which progress
of cultural and scientific exchanges are being elaborated.

In 1977 a working program of exchanges (in the area of the social sciences)
was signed only with Mexico. Alongside this program there was also in
operation a program of scientific and technical cooperation. Under the
auspices of this letter pregrae. two specialists from the AS USSR All-Union
institute of Scientific and Technical Information visited Mexico for the
purpose of becoming acquainted with organization of scientific and technical
information in that country and determining areas of cooperation in the in-
formation field. while two scientists free the institute of Evolutionary
Morphology and Animal Ecology imeni A. N. Severtsov of the AS USSR traveled
to Mexico to present lectures and draft proposals on cooperation in the
area of marine biological resources. and a scientific worker from the in-
stitute of Problems of Control (Automation and Remote Control) visited
Mexico to present lectures on theory of optinal control esthods.

Astronoaical stations for performing photographic satellite observations
continued operations in Bolivia and Ecuador.

Scientists free the As USSR attended international scientific conferences:
in brazil -- the 18th International Conference on Coordination Chemistry:
in Colombia - the Pirst International Congress of Latin Aaerican
Geographers: Peru - the llth Peruvian Cheaical Congress.

This past year was characterised by continuing stepped-up activities of
the USSR Academy of Sciences in international scientific organizations.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "Si: ONLY

1hr AS USSR joined three new organizations: the Federation of European
Microbiological Societies. the International Organization for crystal Growth.
and the Scientific Committee of the International Council of Scientific
Unions (MSNS) on Genetic Experimentation. As of 1 January 1978 the total
number of organizatiouq of which the AS USSR is a member was 102. Nina
Soviet scientists have burn elected president of inzornntiunal scientific
organizations. A? haVe been elected vice-president, and 112 have been
elected member of executive bodies.

in 1977 scientists of the AS USSR participntvd actively in carrying out

such international programs. projects and research as "Exploration of Space."
"ﬂorid Ocean." the international Geological Correlation Program (MGK),

"Man and the Biosphere," the Uni ed Nationu Environment Program (UNEP). the
Global Atmospheric Proteuses nesearch Program (PICAP). the global "Inter-
national Mngnetospherie Studies" project, the International Ceodynamic
Project (MOP). and others.

Currentiy 62 projects proposed by scientists from various countries are be-
ing elaborated within the fraaework of the international Geological Cor-
relation Program. An international working group has been established for
each project. Soviet scientists were placed in charge of five projects and
are members of the working groups on 15 projects.

Soviet scientists are continuing to participate in projects on the topic
"international Studies of the Hagaetosphere" and in the International
Geodynamic Proiect.

I: 197; research continued on the international project entitled ”The Great
Chord." Twenty-six earth satellite observation stations located in the
countries of Asia. Africa and Latin America are presently working in thio
prograa.

Scientists of the AS USSR are making their contribution toward the UNESCO
program "Han and the Biosphere." Academician V. Yo. Sokolov, chairman of
the Soviet national committee on participation in this program. was in 1917
reelected vice-president of the ”Han and the Biosphere” (NAB) International
Coordination Committee.

Specialists from the As USSR are actively participating in the UN program

on environmental problems (UNEP). 0n the instructions of the UNBP Secretariat.
they began drafting an international program of study, utilisation and con-
servation of the planet's natural resources.

Processing of the materials of the International Biological
Program (MB?) is continuing. information on the various parts of the
program is being sent to the Soviet Union from various countries.

Within the framework of the European (Vienna) Center for Coordination of
Research and Documentation in the Social Sciences. scholars from humanities

56

FOR OFFICth USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8% ONLY

institutes of the AS USSR completed work in 1977 on two major programs:
"Automation and industrial workers." and ”Criteria of Selection Between
Market and Extramarkct (Public) ways to Meet the Needs of the Population."
Soviet scientists are working on two new programs: "Cultural Development
Trends in the contemporary Society. interaction of National Cultures"

(AS USSR institute of Ethnography). and ”Cooperation Among European Social
Sciences Information end Docunentation Centers" (as USSR institute of Sci-
entific Information in the Social Sciences).

A conference of UNESCO consultants was held in Paris in 1977. on the topic
"Quality of Life indicators and the Environment" (within the framework of
implementation of the long-term UNESCO program to study the problems of
quality of life indicators).

in 1977 scientists and specialists of the AS USSR participated in more then
30 scientific measures conducted by intergovernmental organisations. in-
cluding conferences of UN and UNESCO consultants. visits by experts to
developing countries. scientific trips on UNESCO stipends. etc. Represen-
tatives of the AS USSR also took part in all major UN and UNESCO conferences
and in many measures conducted by "Mo (world health Organization). HMO
(world Meteorological Organization). lASATE (International Atomic Energy

Agency). UNIDO (UN Industrial Development Organisation). plus other organiza-
tions.

Molding in this country of the first conference of European social sciences
interaction and documentation centers (Moscow. June 1977) was a major
positive event in the development of international cooperation in the

area of the social sciences. This event was organised by the Vienna Center
for Coordination of Social Sciences Research and Documentation on the
instructions of UNESCO, in execution of the provisions of the Final Act of
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The results of the
conference received considerable international response. and its success was
ensured by protracted organisational and scientific preparation. performed

for the most part by the Soviet Union in close cooperation with the other
socialist countries.

The 22d Gaguosh) Conference of Scientists (PRO. August 1977) was a central
event of 1977 in the Paguosh Movement. In all working groups and at the
plenary sessions of the conference considerable attention was focused, at
the initiative of Soviet scientists. on discussion of questions connected
with 0.8. intentions to produce the neutron bomb. The summary documents at
the conference rang out with stern condemnation of this new mass destruction

weapon and contained appeals to the 0.8. Government to refrain from producing
the neutron bomb

In l977 lunar soil samples taken by the Luna-24 automstic station was
transmitted to scientific organisations in the United States. Great Britain.
France. and indie. Sharing of lunar soil with other countries not only
promotes consolidation of the efforts of scientists of different countries

in studying the matter making up the universe but is also of great importance
for strengthening the prestige of Soviet science abroad.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL FSB OhLY

One channel for acquainting people in other ”"uulrlca with the achieve-ants
of Soviet science. just as in preceding vznrs. was voyages by the USSR
Academy of Sciences research vessels "Vityaz'." "Akademik Kurchatov."
"Dmitriy Mendeleyev." "Mikhail Lomonosov." "Akademlk Vernadskiy." and
"Professor Bogorov." when our vousels would put into ports in capitalist
and developing countrien. contacts would be established with the scientists
of these countries. Foreign scientists and foreign civic leaders inspected
the research vessels. their equipment. scientific laboratories. organisa-
tion of research and became acquainted with the life oi the expedition
scientists.

Scientists of the USSR Academy of Sciences take active part in acquainting
their ioreign colleagues and the public abroad with the socioeconomic
achievements of the peoples of our country as well as achievements in the
area of science and culture.

Particularly indicative in this regard was this past year. 1977 - year of
the 602h anniversary at the Great October Socialist Revolution and year of
adoption of the new USSR Constitution.

Activities dedicated to these events were held in many countries through-
out the world, including the United States, Prance, the PRC. Italy. Canada.
Japan, Australia, india. and other cauntries.

in France. for example. in October 1977. in connection with the 60th an-
niversary of the Great October Revolution. Soviet Science end Technology
have were held. which invoked the participation of many Soviet scientists,
including Academichas V. A. Kotel'nikov, M. A. Markov. A. A. norodnitsyn.

P. 6. Kostyuk. R. z. Sagdeyev. A. U. Severnyy. N. M. Emanuel'. Corresponding
Member AS USSR V. V. Migulin. and others. Lectures by A. A. Uorodnitsyn
entitled "Mathematics and Problems of the Environment." by R. 2. Sagdeyev
entitled "Space Exploration Today and Tomorrow" and other lectures by Soviet
scientists demonstrated the vast superiority of socialism in utilisation of
the achievements oi scientific and technological progress for the good of
mankind and the great successes of Soviet science.

Unhhutlu confines of a journal article it is impossible to enumerate all
the jubilee events which took place abroad in 1977. Nor can we list the
names of all the Soviet scientists who took part in these events. He shall
cite only a few examples attesting to the broad scale of celebration of
this great date.

Academician U. P. Pedorcnko delivered lectures: at Tokyo University -
"Achievements oi Soviet Economic Science in the 60 Years of Soviet Rule."
and at Kyoto University - "Employment of Economic-Mathematical Methods in
Planning and Management of the Economy of the USSR." Corresponding Member
As USSR Yu. A. Polyakov attended a scientific conference in Meat Berlin
dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Great October Revolution.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR orncm. USS ONLY

In June-July 1977 U. .. Orlov. e sciontiot st the A3 USSR Institute of Sci-
entific Infornstion on the Social Sciences. delivered s series of lectures
in tho FRO on USSR foreign policy or the invitation of the University of
Bonn. G. A. rrukon. o scholar st the AS USSR Institute of history of the
USSR. presented e psper entitled "The Greet October Revolution end the Ivonts
in Russio in 1917" or e Soviet-rinnish eyspooius in Teopere (finlend). In
Soptonber 1977 c. N. Sevost'yenov, s echoler et the AS USSR Institute of
Gonerel history. attended scientific eyeposis hold in Austrelis end Nev
Zoelsnd in connection with tho 60th snnivorsery of the October Revolution.
He presented s series of lectures on tho echieveoents of our people during
the yesrs of Soviet rule end on USSR foreign policy.

Scientists Eros the AS USSR Institute of world Sconoeics end Internstionel
Roletione took ective port in Jubilee events held in tho United Stetos.
Prsnce. Australia. Iraq. end other countries. Their lectures stressed tho
enoreous significenco of tho resolutions of tho 25th CPSU Congress for

develop-en: of tho netion's econosy end oxpsnsion of oxternel politicsl
relations of tho USSR.

Scholars fro- the AS USSR Institute of Sestern Studies presented lectures in
I977 in Austrio. Suitsorlend. Jopen. Indie, Suden. Tunisie, Horocco snd .
other countries on the Soviet voy of life, sociolist democrscy. tho echievo-
nonts of our people in the sociel. oconooic. scientific-toehnicel end cul-
turol erees. end on the foreign policy of the Soviet Union.

Scholsrs free the As USSR Institute of Sthnosrephy psrticipeted extensively
in Jubilee events ebroed. Institute director Acedenicisn Yu. V. Srosley
presented a psper entitled "Soviet Ethnogrsphy end Sociel Anthropology”

at s Soviet-Anericsn oyoposiun (United Stetes. October 1977). Institute
echolere T. A. Zhdenko end H. K. Kudryovtsev presented pspers on the
historical experience of the Soviet Union in building s new society st e
Soviet-Indien synposiuo entitled "Trsditionsl Institutions in the Process

of Hodernisstion of Society: the Experience of Indie end the Soviet Control
Asian Republics."

V. s. Sonenov, e scholor or the As USSR Institute of Philosophy. presented
a series of lectures in Sweden on the development of Hsrxist-Leninist
philosophical science during the 60 yeers of Soviet rule.

Scholors free the AS USSR Institute of the Internstionsl worker Hove-en:
presented lectures in the United Stotes, Censds. Itsly. Pertussl. snd
Ireland. dediceted to the 60th snniversery of the Greet October Revolution.

Scholars free the AS USSR Institute of Sociologicsl Resoerch treveled to the
United Stores: 0. V. Osipov -- to present s three-week series of lectures on
theory and history of Soviet sociology, end I. V. Sestushev-Lsde - to

present lectures on the Soviet any of life, contenporsry problons of socisl
forecasting, scientific-technicel revolution end its eocisl consequences.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Scientists from the AS USSR Central Scononirn~Msthenatics institute
presented lectures abroad on the economic achieVements oi the USSR and
the development of Soviet economic science.

Scholars from the AS USSR Africa institute presented lectures on the
proceedings of the 25th nrnu Congress and the 00th anniversary oi the
October Revolution. in Syria. Jordan. Zsabia. Tsnssnia. Ethiopia. and
other countries in Africa and the Near Best.

in connection with the 60th anniVersary of the Great October Revolution.
exhibits were held in many capitalist and developing countries. exhibits
telling of our country’s achievements during the years of Soviet rule.
The USSR Academy of Sciences oryinised a number of exhibits and also took
part in USSR national exhibits abroad.

Sixteen exhibito on the achievements of Soviet scientists in various
iields of science were held in the United States. Canada. France. the PRC.
Japan. Turkey. Venezuela and other countries.

A large. interesting USSR Academy of Sciences exhibit was displayed at the
USSR National Exhibit which opened in November 1977 in Los Angelos (United
States). The exhibit told of space exploration conducted by our country in
recent years and utilization of its results in the nation's economy.

An exhibit entitled "Space Serving Peace and Progress" was held from March
through September 1977 in Vancouver and Ottawa (Canada). The exhibit was
visited oy 600.000 Canadians and residents of U.S. northern states.

An exhibit entitled ”Achievements of Science and Technology in the USSR"
was held in France in October-Noveaber 1977, during Soviet Science and Tech-
nology Days; this exhibit contained. in particular. displays presented by
the AS USSR.

A large and interesting AS USSR exhibit relating the major achievements in
various fields of science was displayed at the "60th Anniversary of the
Soviet State" exhibit organised by the USSR Chanber of Trade and Industry
in Tokyo and Osaka (Japan) and in Caracas (Venezuela).

AS USSR exhibits graphically demonstrated the superiority of the developed
socialist society. attested to the high level of development of Soviet
science. and showed the ever increasing influence of science on development
of the economy of the Soviet Union. They promoted further strengthening
of friendship and cooperation betveen peoples and nations and made a con-
tribution to the cause of the struggle for peace throughout the world.

Scientists free the USSR Acadeay of Sciences took active part in publiciz-
ing the new USSR Constitution. Scholars from many institutes presented
lectures on this historic document.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Approximately 100 lectures on the Fundamental Law of the USSR were
presented abroad by scholars from the AS USSR Institute of State and Law.
M. A. Krutogolov presented lectures in France, Greece, and the Netherlands;
V. A. Tumancv -- in France. the PRC. and Austria; M. M. Boguslevskiy. in
Switzerland. The USSR Constitution was the subject of a TV appearance in
the United States by S. L. Zivs. Yu. A. Tikhomirov, the institute's deputy
director, S. L. live, 3. N. Topornin and V. M. Savitskiy spoke at a press
conference set up by the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs for foreign
journalists and dealing with the main problems of the draft USSR Constitu-
tion. Articles by Corresponding Member AS USSR V. N. Kudryavteev, director
of the Institute of State and Law. and M. A. Krutogolov on our country's
new Fundamental Law were also published abroad.

Soviet scholars attending the World Congress of the International Association
of Legal and Social Philosophy (Australia, August 1977) - Corresponding
Member As USSR 0. A. Kerimov, B. N. Topornin, and V. V. Laptev - presented
a proposal calling for holding a scientific seminar within the framework of
the congress, dealing with the draft new USSR Constitution. The scholera'
proposal was adopted. D. A. Kerinov presented a paper on the draft new USSR
Constitution. 3. N. Topornin and V. V. Leptev also spoke on the draft
Fundamental Law of the USSR. The seminar was attended by approximately

200 foreign scholars. In the course of the seminar the Soviet scholars were
asked more than 70 questions, most of which dealt with guarantees of the
rights and freedoms of Soviet citizens, functioning of the political sys-
tem, forms of ownership and control of socioeconomic processes, the status
of the union and autonomous republics within the USSR, and possibilities

of monitoring and criticising the actions of officials.

The seminar helped refute slanderous anto-Soviet interpretations-of the
draft USSR Constitution and promoted a more correct understanding of genuine
socialism in practice.

A great many scientists of the AS USSR were awarded international and
national honors in 1977 for their contribution to the development of world
science. Many were elected honorary members of foreign scientific orga-
nizations and societies, were awarded honorary doctorates by universities,
and appointed to the editorial boards of foreign scientific publications.
This is one more evidence of the steady growth in the prestige of Soviet
science.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii Nauk SSSR", 1978

3024
650: 1870

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

OBITUARY 0F VSEVOLOD VLADIMIRWICII FEDYNSKIY

Moscow mes-rm unseen max ssss, nznu. 2mm in Russian No 11, 1978
pp 108-110

(Article by a group of comrades]

[Text] Communist Vsevolod Vladimirovich Fedynskiy, a prominent soviet
geophysicist, corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, doctor
of physical and mathematical sciences, professor, director of the geophysics
department and department of geophysical methods of study of the earth's
crust of the Geological Faculty of Moscow State University, died suddenly

on 17 June 1978. In him, soviet science lost a most important scientific
organizer, scientific innovator and a wonderful teacher.

With his name we associate many and diverse investigations into the dif-
ferent areas of geophysics, and primarily gravimetry. we most particularly
note his renowned, almost 50-year journey in exploratory geophysics. It
was precisely in this field that his brilliant gift was developed. Having
begun his own work at the beginnings of petroleum geophysics, he promoted
its widespread and explosive developments in production as well as its
being a subdivision of scientific research. He was active for many years
in the petroleum industry and, for two decades in the USSR Ministry of
Geology, in the vanguard of progressive ideas, he energetically promoted
the achievement of scientific technological progress in exploratory geo-

phys ice .

Ilia great talent for scientific organization, tremendous energy, widespread
knowledge, exceptional capacity for foresight and the ability to unite and
lead large groups in resolving giant tasks of great importance primarily for
the national economy was always evident during this feverish activity.

He made use of his great authority abroad. He actively participated in a
series of congresses and international arrangements. For many years he
actively participated in the efforts of the Comittee of the International
and Geodesical Union to study the earth's crust and upper mantle.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he was full of energy, creative daring, plans for large-scale studies in
the institute of the ussR Academy of Science. A sudden death cut off his
feverish activity, but the rich inheritance he left will be highly valued.

lie was born 1 May 1908 in the Verkhnyaya Bogachka settlement of Poltavskaya
Oblnst to the family of a Zemstvo section doctor.

Upon graduating from secondary school he entered the physics and mathematics
department at Moscow State University in 1925, finishing in 1930 with
specialties in astronomy and gravimetry. while still a student he began

to work in the gravimetric group. and upon graduation from the university
he worked in exploratory geophysics, which became the principal occupation
of his life. From 1929 to 1936 he directed separate gravimetry groups in
Azerbaijan, Dagestan. Turkmeniya, on the Caspian Sea and in Povolsh'ye.
From 1936 to l96l he directed the gravimetric work in the petroleum in-
dustry. During the war he became chief engineer of the affiliated branches
of (GSGT) in Azerbaijan and Turkmeniye, and in l96b he created the Central
Scientific-Research laboratory of applied geophysics in Moscow, later
changed to the "All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Geophysics."

In 1952 he became chief engineer, and then head of the Geophysical Central
Directorate of the Ministry of the Petroleum Industry. Later on he worked
for a while by directing one of the branches of the Institute of Earth
Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, and then came to the USSR Ministry
of Geology as chief of the Administration of Geophysical Work, as a member
of the Collegium of the Ministry. here he worked for 20 years (to the
middle of 1977). At the same time he carried out considerable teaching
duties at Moscow University. where he headed the department of geophysics
of the geological faculty.

Naturally, it is impossible to dwell in more detail on his work in this
organization. we merely note a few directions of his work.

Conducting large-scale work in industry, as an important scientist he had
close ties with scientists of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR and
Union Republics, and also the country's leading institutions of higher
education.

As a young man he fruitfully worked under the direction of Academician

A. D. Arkhangel'skiy on the creation of the fundamentals of geological
interpretation of regional gravitational and magnetic anomalies. These
classical studies are widely known because. to a significant degree,

they are the bases of the new scientific specialization, regional tectonics.
Association with important academic geologists furthered his explanation

of the organic connections of geology and geophysics to them and this, in
particular, was clearly shown in the creation and growth of regional

systems of geophysical research in various geological conditions.

His creation of the first soviet gravimeters and development of the
methods of gravlmetric observations while in motion were very significant

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’OR (ll-'PICIAI. USE ONLY

contributions. He was awarded the Government Prize. in the presence of
other executives, for his work on domestic gravimeters.

All or his activities were characterized by a constant attention to the
worldwide development of the tools of geophysical research. he gave
exceptional significance to carrying out on a large scale, under his
direction, the scientific and technical reequipment of the country's
geophysical exploration service; in particular. the conversion to
numerical techniques, significantly raised the quality of geophysical
studies and their geological efriciency.

He gaVe considerable importance to his research in marine geophysics,
which he first became interested in as far back as the beginning of his
scientific and industrial ac.ivities. Now marine geophysical studies,
which were changed with his direct participation into a powerful complex
of methods well provided with equipment and facilities, are being con-
ducted in great numbers in all the seas and on the shelves of our country
and in the oceans. 'ﬂrrough his initiative and under his immediate direc-
tion the department of Geophysics of the Geological faculty of Moscow
State University has already been preparing specialists in marine physics
for many years.

The wide range of interests, characteristic of modern major scientists,
of the researcher in the earth sciences explains the great attention paid
to the study of the structure of the earth's crust and upper mantle by
Vsevolod Vladimirovich. in these studies he and the collective directing
then maintained close ties with scientists of the USSR Academy of Sciences
1nd union Republics. Similar contacts to them were developed through the
applications of computers to the processing and interpretation of geo-
physical data, the use of holographic methods, the growth of space geology
and the study of the structure of the shelves, sea floor and oceans.

And finally. one must separately mention his many years of work in the
study of meteorites and meteoric matter. During recent years he was
assistant to the chairman of the committee on meteorites under the USSR
Academy of Sciences.

he was the author of more than 150 published works on the various problems
of geophysical and astronomical studies. His monograph "Exploratory Geo-
physics" which culled the theoretical and methodic knowhow and basic
results of geophysical studies, has already been republished several times.
The collected works, shown at international geological congresses, offer
great value.

Together with his great scientific, industrial and pedagogical activities
he focused much energy and attention on public work. He was a member of
the (Military and Administration Committee). a member of a series of

_scientific councils of Moscow institutes, a member of the editorial staff

6b
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a number of journals, chairman of the geophysical section of the scien-
tific and technical council of the USSR Ministry of Geology. a member of the
I’residium of the Scientific and Technical Society of Mining. a methodical
leader of theoretical seminars on different scientific, philosophic and
economic questions and leader of the propaganda lecture work.

For great services in geophysical science and production he was awarded

four order of the (Labor Red Banner). the order of the (Mark of Honor)
and a ember of medals.

His considerable culture, wide range of scientific interests and knowledge,
versatile, significant and fruitful work, responsivene- and benevolence
gained him the deep respect of his comrades, scientists and all who came
into contact with him during his many-sided activities.

‘lhe fond memory of the prominent soviet seophyaicist Vsevolod Vladimirovich
Pedynskiy will remain in our hearts for a long time.

COPYRIGHT: ltdatel'atvo "Nauka." "Itveatiya AN sssa. i-‘izika zemli," Moscow,
1978

\

9351
cs0: 1870

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

unc 621.396.6640 (024)
msmm AND COMO]. 0? m PM” 01’ HOMO“. CWBS

Hoecov Imam I mow PARAMETROV nmcmsnm mum (Voproey
netrologii) [heeeurenent and Control of Perenetere of Technical Coupleree
(Problem of Hetrologyﬂ in Rueeian 1978 eigned to preee 26 Apr 78 p 2, 127-

128

[Annotation and table of contente iron book by V. l’. Yekhlakov and 1.. V.
Mekov. Voyenirdet, 6200 copies, 128 pegee]

[‘l’ext] Thie book exeminee in en ecceeeible torn the nein theoretical propo-
eitione of netrology. Fectore effecting the accuracy of neeeurenenta are
evaluated on their baeie, vaye of reducing errore are ehoun, recounendetione
are given for improving the accuracy and certainty of Ieaeurenente, beeic
principlee of checking meaeuring inetrunente are given, the organisation of
the netrological service in our country ie explained, and brief information

ie given on the netrologicel inetitutione of the USSR and international metro-
logical organitetione.

Ihie book ie intended for engineere and techniciene operating technical con-
plexee of varioue purpoeee end cen be ueed at e textbook for training inapec-
tore of the checking egenciee.

Contenta

Pege
Introduction 3
chapter 1. Heaeurenenta end Hetrological Organitetione 5
l. Hetrology -- Science of Heaeurenent S
2. Historical Hetrology 6
3. Legisletive Hetrology 9
lo. Metric Heeeuree ll
5. International Hetrological Organizatione 110
Chapter 2. Phyeicel Quantitiee and Their Unite 18
1. Physical Quantity. Size of a Phyeical Quantity 18
2. Unite of Physical Quantitiee 20
3. Reletive end Logarithllic Unite 21
lo. Advantagee of the International Syeten of Unite (SI) 22

5. Plain, Suppleuentary, and Derived Unite of SI. Extra-
eyetenic Unite 24

66

FOR Oﬂ‘ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Dinenaionality of a Phyaical Quantity
Chapter 3. Methoda of Measurement
1. Pundanantal Equation of Mcunurenunt. Types of Measure-ante
2. Methoda of Meaaureeent. irect Evaluation Method
3. Methods of Conpariaon with a Mauure
Chapter It. haeurenent Prrura
l. 0n Accuracy of Meaaurement. Claaaitication of Errora
2. Syatenatic Errors
3. Elements of the Probability Theory

lo. Random drrore
5. 0n the Maximum Poaaible Accuracy of Direct Maaaurenenta

6. Random Brrora of Indirect Meaaureuaent
Chapter 5. Meana of Meaaurenenr
1. General Information on the Meant of Meaaurenent
2. Claaaification of the Meana of Meaaurement
3. Structural Clemente of the Means of Meaaurenent
lo. Prowrtiea of the Meana of Meaaureuent
Chapter 0. aneuring the Unity of Meaaureraent
1. Unity of Meaourenent. Metrological Chain of the
‘l‘rananiaaion of Maaauretaent Unite
2. Standarda and Model Meana of Meaaurenent
3. Content and Purpoaea of Metrological Facilities
lo. Metrological Service of the 088R. Metrologicel
lnapection
5. Checking Meaauring Devicea and Checking Schenea
Chapter 7. Meaauring the Parametera of technical Couplexea
l. '.he Concept of Paranatera and “their Control
2. Heaaurenent of Nonelectric Quantitiea by Electric
Methoda
3. Automation of Meaaureoent
6. Measuring Informational Syatm
S. Metrological Reliability of Meaauring Devicea
Chapter 8. Meaaurenent Procedurea
l. Reconcndationa for Manure-ant Procedurea
2. Meaaurenent of Electrical Quantitiea
3. Special Characteriatica of nigh-Frequency and Pulae
Meaaureaenta
‘0. Checking Radio Engineering Unite by Reaiatance and
Voltage Charta. Taking Oacillograuaa
5. Recounendatione for Selecting Blectric Meaauring
lnatrunenta and Meaaurelent Methoda
6. Meeaureuent of Main Para-ate" oi' Receiving Devicaa of
Radio Blectronic Technical Conplexea
7. Meaauring Main Paranatera of Trenenitting Devicea of
Radio electronic technical Coqlexea

Bibliography
comraur: l’oyenirdat . 1978

10,233
cso: mo

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICAIIONS

UDC 621.385.6

CROSSBD-PIBLD MICROHAVE AMPLIFIERS

Hoacow svnnxnvrsoxocnasrorurvr USILITBLI so SKRBSBCHBNNYHI POLYAHI (Groaned-
Pield Microwave Anplifiera) in Rueeion 1978 oigned to preee 2‘ Dec 77 p 2-3,
278-280

[Annotation, foreword, and table of contenta from book by H. I. raeytlin.
M. A. Furaayev, and 0. V. Botakiy, Sovatakoya radio, 5500 copiea, 280 pagea]

[Text] The authora explained the nothode of the calculation and anelyaie or
croaeed-fiold microwave anolifiera (H-type). They examine bean-type anpli-
tiers (with the electron-optical eyaten beyond the interoction dietnnce) and
enplitrone -- anplifiere with the cathode within the interaction dietonco.

In addition to the general theory of the interaction of an electron flow with
a olow electronagnotic wave in the large-aignal node, Inch attention in given
to the investigation of new circuite and varioua operation nodoe of been-type
devicoa. The aection on tho anplitron given on analyeie of tho principal
electrical characteriatica, eo well an calculetiona of the output parenotera
of tho anplifier.

Thin book it intended for enginooro and aciontiata working in the area of
microwave electonica and radio phyeica. ea well no for teachere and atudenta
of voter. It can be uaed an a teaching aid (or deaign pnojecte in coureeo
and in preparation for dogreoe.'

Piguree -- 157, tables -- 8, bibliography -- 17$ iteno.
Foreword

This book treeto the nethode of calculation and analyeie of the loot wide-

aprend end proniaing magnetron-type microwave anplifiore -- anplitrone end
beau-type onplifiera.

At the preeent tine, neny typee of onplitronn operating in tho puleed and
continuous nod. and covering tho docinetric, centinetric, and oven milli-
netric wavelength benda have been developed. However, there otill in no gen-
ernlitod Iatorial on the theory and analyaie of the elplitron operation.
Theee problene ere diecuaeed only in nuneroue erticleo in journnlo.

68.
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In recent years, much attention has been given in the Soviet Union and
abroad to H-type beam devices (with the electron-optical system beyond the
interaction distance). There have appeared a number of articles investigat-
ing the new tendencies in the design of beam-type amplifiers and discussing
tho possibilities of improving the main characteristics of this class of
microwave devices.

Since there are no monographs on crossed-field microwave ampliers. it is of
scientific and :ractical interest to generalite the vast material on the
theory of the M-type been devices, as well as on the analysis and computation
methods of the anplitren in one book. The book consists of two parts.

Part 1 (Chapters 1-5) treats the theory of beam-type amplifiers. Chapter 1
gives a survey of the main t;,:s of microwave amplifiers. In Chapters 2 and
3. nonlinear theory equations are derived and the operation of amplifiers

in the node of large amplitudes is analysed. Chapter 4 analyses new circuits
of beam-type ucwicea with higher amplification factors. Chapter 5 discusses
the interaction of the electron beam with higher time harmonics of the micro-
wave field.

Part 2 (Chapters 6-9) analyses the operation of amplifiers with the cathode
within the interaction distances (amplitrons). Chapter 6 discusses the phys-
ical principles and special characteristics of the operation of amplifiers
with the cathode within the interaction distance, and Chapter 7 gives the
methods for analysing amplitron operation. The analysis of electrical
characteristics of the amplitron is treated in Chapter 8. Chapter 9 discusses
the opc:etion of the amplitron with consideration for the excitation of per-
usitic types of oscillations.

the material of the book is based, chiefly, on works published in journals
in recent years.

The introduction and Chapter 1 were written by 0. V. letskiy; Chapters 2 and
3 .- by h. B. Tseytlin; Chapters 6 and S -- by ".3. Tseytlin and 0. V. Bet-
skiy; Chapters 6.9 9- by H. A. Purseyev; the conclusion was written by the
authors jointly.

The authors express their gratitude to I. V. Lebedev for discussing a number
of sections in the book and his valuable observations, to the reviewer. 2. 8.
Chernov, for his useful criticisms, as well as to I. T. Tsitsonya for per-
forming certain numerical computations on an electronic computer.

Contents
Page
Foreword 3
Introduct ion lo
Part 1. H-Type Beam Amplifiers 7
Chapter 1. Main Types of Crossed-Field Microwave Beam Amplifiers 7
1.1. introduction 7
1.2. Operating Principle and Characteristics of Crossed-

Pield Beam Amplifiers 7

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.3.

1.4.
Chapter

Chapter
3.1.
3020
3.3.
3.4.

3.5.
Chapter

4.1.
‘02.

4.3.
4.4.
4.5.
4.6.
4.7.
Chapter
5.1.

5.2.
5.3.

mum
0

ova
0

Part 2.

a

Chapter
6.1.
6.2.

FOR OPPICML USE ONLY

Interaction (Amplification) Mechanisms in Croeeed-

Eields

Main Types of Crossed-Field Seem Amplifiers

2. Fundamental Equations of the Nonlinear Theory of
the Interaction of an Electron Beam vith a Travel-
ing Electronagnetic wave

Introduction

Derivation of Fundamental Equations for a Model of Device
uith an Infinitely Thin Beam

Linearieetion of Fundamental Equations

LSVM [Traveling-Rave Magnetron-Type Tube] Model uith e
Beam of Einite Thickness
3. Analysis of the Operation of a neempType Amplifier

in the Nonlinear Mode

Introduction

Monlinear Theory of Space Charge Waves

Basie Results of the Computation of the Nonlinear
Characteristics of e Beam-Type Amplifier

Effects of the Space Charge and the Seem Thickness on
the Main characteristics of the Amplifier

Approximate Methods of Analysis
4. Analyeis of New Circuite of M-Type Microwave Seem

Devices

Introduction

Problems of Raising the Amplification Factor in Beam-
Type Devices

Desic Circuits of Sectionalieed Step Amplifiers and
Some Studies in the Small-Signal Mode

Analysis of e Two-Section Step Amplifier in the Large-
Signal Mode

M-Type Cascade Amplifiers with Two Electron Beams in
the Mode of Large Amplitudes

Backward-Have Sectionalieed Amplifier with Stepped
Changes in the height of the Interaction Distance
Analysis of the Operation of a Hybrid Device of the
IDVM [Magnetron-Type Backward-wave TubeJ-LBVM Type

5. Investigation of the Interaction of an Electron Beam
with higher Time harmonics of the Microwave Pield

Introduction

Derivation of Fundamental Equations

Analysis of the Operation of an M-Type Amplifier in the
Multifrequency Mode

Excitation of Higher Harmonica in an M-Type Amplifier
Frequency Multiplication in MdType Devices
Experimental Studies on a Frequency Multiplier

M-Type Amplifiers with the Cathode Within the Inter-
action Distance

6. Main Types of Amplifiers

Introduction

Operating Principle and Special Characteristics of
M-Type Amplifiers with the Cathode within the Inter-
action Distance 70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.3.
6.5.

6.5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Main Types of Magnetron Amplifiers

Special Characteristics of the 0pc'1tlon of Magnetron
Amplifiers in a Circuit with an Anode Peed Source
Operation of Magnetron Amplifiers in the Mode of

Input Signal Control

Chapter 7. Methods for Analysis of Amplitron Operation

7.1.
7.2.
7.3.

7.k.

Introduction

Self-Consialant Pield Method

Principles of the Analysis of the Amplitron by the
Method of Equivalent Magnetrons

The Simplest Theory of the Anplitron

Chapter 8. Analysis of the Electrical Characteristics of the

8.1.
8.2.

8.3.
80‘.
8.5.

Amplitron
Introduction
Equations of the Steady Conditions of an Equivalent
Magnetron
Relations for Computing the Output Parameters of the
Amplitron and Analysis of Its Electrical Characteristics
Analysis of the Possibilities of Increasing the
Amplification Factor of the Amplitron
Analysis of the Phase Characteristics of the Anplitron

Chapter 9. Analysis of Anplitron Operation with Consideration

9.1.
9.2.

9.3.

9.6.

for the Excitation of Parasitic Types of Oscillations
Introduction
Analysis of the Anplitron Parameters Characterizing
the Intensity of the Excitation of Low-Voltage Reso-

nance-Type Parasitic Oscillations
Calculation of the Power of Parasitic Oscillations of

the Amplitron at the Pront and the Decay of the Modu-

lating Pulse
Calculation of Amplitron Parameters in the Mode of

Excitation of Carmatron-Type Oscillations

Conclusion
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'atvo "Sovetekoye radio," 1978

10,233

650: 1870

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVIGIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 681.3b:621.3.059.77
INTEGRATED CIRCUITS OP ANALOG-DIGITAL AND DIOITAL’ANALOC CONVERTERS

Moscow Imam'ms 3mm mmco-rsnmwm I TSIPRO-ANAW mo-
BRAZOVATELSY (Integrated Circuits of Analog-Digital and Digital-Analog Gon-
verters) in Russian 1978 signed to press 15 May 78 p 2-4. 257

[Annotation, foreword, and table of contents from book by V. c. selakay, I.
P. Kryuk. and L. H. Luk'yanov, Energiya. 20,000 copies. 257 pages]

[Text] The authors discuss basic problems of the creation of integrated
analog-digital and digital-analog converters. They classified the main in-
tegrated circuits of converters and described the techniques of their manu-
facturing. They discussed monolithic integrated circuits for the amplifica-
tion, comparison, and switching of analog signals, as well as hybrid circuits
of precision units and the entire converters.

The book is intended for broad sections of specialists working on the devel-
opment and application of analog-digital equipment and for students of these

fields.
Foreword

The present period of scientific and technological development is character-
ised by a wide use of computers in automatic systems. The main factor in
this process is the rapid development of the element resources which ere based
on integrated circuits (IS) of small (HIS). medium (SIS), large (BIS) and
superlerge (8318) levels of integration. Integrated designs are used in pro-
ducing various sets of functional memory, signal converters and commutators,
linear $18 and DIS, various types of memory devices, and, finally, micropro-
cessor sets which will play a leading role in creating automatic systems

both for new and old areas of application of computers. The introduction of
digital computing machinery and microprocessors into automatic systems poses
an important problem of connecting them with objects whose peremeters in
most instances are characterized by values which are continuous time func-
tions. It is impossible to use and process such functions directly in digi-
tal devices, and it is necessary to convert analog signals to digital sig-
nals. This operation is realized by the analog-digital converter (AIsP).

In order to withdraw the results of information processing from the proces-
ear and send them to the controlled object, it is necessary to convert

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

digital signals into continuous output signals suitable for work with analog
devices and instruments of automatic contrc. systems. This is accomplished
by means of digital-analog converters (TJAP).

The advantages of the digital methods of information processing can be real-
ised only when the ATaP and TsAP do not introduce any limitations in this
processing with reaper: to the accuracy and high-opeed operation. These
limitations can be reduced to a minimum when integrated ate? and ATsAP are
used. The intrgrstion of the circuits of the converters did not only in-
prOVe substantially the economic and reuliability indices of ATsP and TsAP
and reduce their dimensions with simultaneous improvement of their designs,
but also improved duaoporation speed and the metrological characteristics
by reducing stray coupling and by using mutual compensation and identity of
individual 18 elements. it ux: impossible to realise many theoretical cir-
cuits before (chiefly because it is extremely difficult to combine a large
number of analog elements and resistors in a small casing), but now it has

become possible due to the development of complex technological processes.
All this has expanded sharply the area of application of integrated are? and

TsAP.

This book examines the present state and tendencies of the development of the
technology and element resources of integrated AIsP and rear, and shows the
level of their parameters which has been achieved and special characteristics
of circuit techniques in design and in solving problems of increasing their
accuracy and operation speed.

The material of the book refers to converters of signals of direct (current)
voltage which are used most widely for transmitting information regarding
the parameters of objects in automated systems.

The authors tried to describe new and advanced ideas of the realisation of
integrated are? and rear vhich have appeared in recent years in literature
in our country and abroad.

The authors are grateful to the reviewer and the scientific editor, Candidate
of Technical Sciences V. B. Kravchenko for his advice and suggestions which
determined thesystemetization of the material in the book and made it pos-
sible to improve its quality considerably.

Contents

Page

Poreword 3

Chapter 1. General Information on Integrated Analog-Digital

and Digital-Analog Converters 5

1-1. Types of Integrated Converters S

1-2. Parameters of Integrated Ale? and Tea! 8

1-3. Structures of Ten? Based on 15 lb

1-“. Structures of ATsP Based on IS as

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 2.
2.1a
2'2e

2'30
2".
Chapter 3.
3‘le

3.20

3-3e
3-6.
Chapter 6.
b.1e

“'2.

6-3 a
Chapter 5.

5-1.
5-20
Chapter 6.
6-1.
6.2e
6-3.

6-6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Integrated Circuits for Amplification and Comparison of
Analog Signals
Parameters of Integrated Operational Amplifiers and
Their Performance Characteristics
Optimization of the Characteristics of the 18 of OU
[Operational Amplifiers]
Composite Operational Amplifiers
Comparison Circuits
Keys and Switches of Analog Signals
Parameters of the Integrated Switching Circuits of
Analog Signals
Integrated AX [Analog Keys] Using Diodes and Bipolar
Transistors
Integrated AK Using Field-Effect Transistors
Multichannel Analog Commutators Using 18
Precision Analog Circuits of ATsP and TsAP
Integrated Sources of Reference Voltages and
Currents
Sawtooth Voltage Generators and Selection and
Storage Circuits
Hicrocircuits of Resistive Matrices
Conjugation Circuits and Optoelectronic Assemblies
in ATsP and TaAP
Conjugation Circuits in ATsP and TsAP
Optoelectronic Assemblies in ATsP and TsAP
Integrated TsAP and ATsP
Converters of wide Application
high-Speed TsAP and ATsP
Converters with Improved Accuracy and Operational
Characteristics
Hultichannel TsAP and ATsP Using 18 of Medium and
high Levels oflntegration

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT:

10,233
cso: 1370

Izdatel'stvo "Energiya," 1978

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80
82

97
116
119
129

129

132
146
151
155

155

166
175

179
180
186 '
196
197
212

226

266
251
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 621.396.956

ANI‘ENNA GUIDMIZ SYSTEMS 0P SATELLITE BARN STATIONS

lioscov SIS'I‘EMY NAVBDBNIYA W3 23mm STANTSIY SPUTNIKDVOY SWAZI [Anten-
na Guidance Systems of Satellite Earth Stations] in Russian 1978 signed to
press 7 Dee 1977, p 2, 153

[Annotation and table of contents from hook by A. H. Poltras, V. ll. 'l'sirlin,
and G. N. Kudeyarov. "Svyas'" Publishers, 3300 copies, 153 pages]

[Text] This book examines the systems for guiding antenna beams of earth
stations of satellite cosnunication lines toward artificial earth satellites.
It describes antenna devices with various axes of rotation. It analyses the
methods of forming direction-finding radiation patterns for nonopulse systems
and systems with conical been scanning for various antennas, including the
antenna equipped with a bean mode guide.

The book is intended for engineers and technicians working in the area of
satellite radio cousunication and will be useful to students of votes.

Contents
Page
Introduction 3
1. Systems of Progranned Guidance
1.1. Types and Parameters of 182 [Artificial Barth
Satellite] Orbits Used in Satellite Communication
Systems 5
1.2. Programd Control Devices 7

2. Analogue-Type Autotracking Systems (Conical Scan Hethod
and Honopulse Method)
2.1. The Concept of the Goniometric Autotracking System
as an Automatic Control System. Methods of Analysis 14
2.2. General Principles of the Autotracking System on the
Basis of the Conical Scan Method. Equation of Direc-

tin-Finding Characteristic 31
2.3. Selection of the Angle of Crossing of Partial Patterns 37
2.6. Surbifference Hethod of Angle Autotraclting 60
3. Autotraching Systems on the Basis of Extreme Control Methods
3.1. General Principles 44
3.2. Analysis of Tracking Accuracy 51
75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Principles of Formal Designing of Logic Devices

4. Supporting and Rotating Devices

4.1.
“.2.
6.3.

‘a‘a

Introduction
Types of Suspensions
Analysis of the Characteristics of Suspensions of

Various Types
Examples of the Realization of Supporting and Rotat-

ing Devices

5. Monopulse Method

5.1.
5.2.

5.3.
5.4.

5.5.
5.6.

5.7.

Introduction

Formation of Radiation Patterns for Direction Finding
by the Monopulse Method

Pour-Horn Peed with Independent Optimization of the
Sun and Difference Channels

Tuelve-norn Monopulse Peed

Thirty-Two-Rorn Monopulse Peed

Methods of the Optimization of Patterns of a Single
Monopulse Feed Based on the Use of waves of higher
Types

Monopulse Morn Peed with a Corrugated Structure of the
Halls and Rectangular Shape of the Aperture

6. Conical Scan Method

6.1.
6.2.
6.3.

6.4.

Introduction

A System with Scanning by Swinging a Counterreflector
A System with Eccentric Rotation of the Central Part
of the Counterreflector

Scanning by Eccentric Rotation of a Phase-Shifting
Element in Front of the Feed Aperture

7. Examples of the Realization of Devices Forming Direction-
Finding DR [Radiation Patterns]

7.1.

Receiving Antenna with Scanning by the Rotation of
the Shifted Central Part of the Counterreflector

7.2. System with a Resonance Scanner
7.3. Receiving Antenna with Scanning by Swinging Counter-
reflector
7.6. Ensuring Autotrscking in an Antenna with a Dean
Mode Guide
Bibliography
COPYRICRT: Izdatel'stvo "Svyaz'," 1978
10,233
CSO: 1870

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 536.!“

“SAT TRANSFER DURING COOLING OF DISSOCIABLE NEAT CARRIERS IN ATOMIC ELECTRIC
POWER PLANTS

Minsk TEPLOOBNBN PRI OKNLAZNDENII DISSOTSIIRUYUSNCNIKN TEPLONOSITELEY A88
in Russian 19/8 signed to press 6 Dec 77 pp 2-6. 167-168

[Annotation. table of contents and foreword free book by Aleksandr
Nikolayevich Devoyno. lzdatel'stvo "Ranks 1 Tekhnika." 1,000 copies.
168 pages]

{Text} in connection with the development of atomic electric power plants
using a diasociable gaseous heat carrier. problems in design and optimiza-
tion of plant components such as regenerators are an important consideration.
Solution of these problems requires a knowledge of the laws governing the
heat transfer during cooling of the disaociable heat carrier. The book
presents original results of a study made concerning these laws. The heat
transfer coefficients which characterize the cooling of a gaseous stress
have been found to be much higher when the letter is chemically active
than when it is not chemically reacting. This suggests new possible ways
to substantially reduce the size of heat exchanger equip-eat and to lower
the total cost of an atomic electric power plant.

The book is intended for scientists, engineers and graduate students engaging
in research on dissociable heat carriers and in development of atomic electric
power plants with such heat carriers. It has been reviewed by doctor of
technical sciences I. T. El'perin and candidate in technical sciences

B. Ye. Tverkovin. Tables 21. Figures 36. References 157.

Contents Page

Foreword 3

Chapter I. Overall State of the Art in Treating the Problem of Heat
Transfer and Hydrodynamics Involved in Cooling of Heat
Carriers in an Atonic Electric Power Plant

1.1. Peculiarities of heat transfer during cooling of inert heat
carriers. Effect of the direction of heat flow on the
heat transfer 7

77
roe orrrcm. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
1.2. Hydrodynamics of the flow of heat carriers through pipes
under conditions of cooling 16
1.3. Heat transfer during cooling of superheated steam
turbulently flowing through a pipe 23

1.6. Basic aspects of the problem of heat transfer and hydro-

dynamics during turbulent flow of chemically reacting
heat carriers 27

1.5. Trends of studies pertaining to heat transfer and hydro-

dynamics in the case of dissociable heat carriers under
conditions of cooling 33

Chapter 2. Heat Transfer During Cooling of a Turbulent H20 $ 21102:: 2H0+02
Stream in a Pipe Hith the Second Stage of This hamical
Reaction "Frozen" Into the Laminar Sublayer

2.1. Procedure and apparatus for experimental study 65
2.2. Results of an experimental determination of the heat transfer
coefficients $9
2.3. Effect of the chemical composition of the gas on the reactive
component of the enthalpy drop from gas to pipe wall 53
2.6. Dependence of the heat transfer on the gas flow rate. the
gas pressure and the gas temperature 56

2.5. Some anomalies in the mechanism of heat transfer during
cooling of a turbulently flowing and chemically reacting
"206:: 2N02;3 2H0+02 system at low pipe wall temperatures 81
Chapter 3. Heat Transfer and Hydraulic Drag During Cooling of a
Turbulent and Chemically Reacting nzoa:: 2hoziﬁ=2ﬂo+02
Stream at High Pipe Hall Temperatures

3.1. Procedure and apparatus for experimental study 88
3.2. Hydraulic drag during turbulent flou of a cooled chemically

reacting N206 gas stream 100
3.3. Mean-mass temperature of an N204 stream in a pipe 105
3.6. Analysis and generalization of data on heat transfer during

cooling of a chemically reacting N205 stream in a pipe at
high wall temperatures 107

3.5. Common characteristics of heat- and mass-transfer during
cooling of a turbulent and chemically reacting
N204:— 2N02;3 2N0+02 stream in a pipe 117

Chapter 6. Basic Recommendations Hith Regard to Design of Regenerators

for Atomic Electric Power Plants Using Dissociable Heat
Carriers

6.1. Limits of applicability of the proposed calculation methods 120
6.2. Principle of designing high-temperature steam superheaters

for atomic electric power plants with dissociable heat
carriers 123

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
Appendix I 126
Appendix 2. Estimation of the Measurement Errors in Experiments with
N205 and Steam at High Pipe Hall Temperatures 150
Bibliography
FOREHORD

The basic directions of national economic growth in the USSR for the
1976-1980 period, as defined by the 25th CPSU Congress. include adding

67-70 million kw of installed electric power, with 13-15 million kw of it

in atomic electric power plant capacity. by the end of the current five-year
plan period. An accelerated construction and installation of fast reactors
has been recommended in connection with it. This is essential to any
prospects of developing atomic power as a crucial source of energy in the
future. Installation of fast reactors will make it possible to include

in the fuel cycle also uranium-238. which occurs abundantly on Earth and yet
is unsuitable for use in existing atomic electric power plants with thermal
reactors. Furthermore, fast reactors have the ability to breed atomic

fuel by converting. for instance, uranium-238 to plutonium-239 usable as a
fuel in "second generation" reactors. All this makes the task of installing
fast reactors in atomic electric power plants as soon as possible all the
more urgent. One decisive factor contributing to the excellent economy and
reliability of such atomic electric power plants is the proper choice of
heat carrier.

The results of basic research done at the Institute of Nuclear Energy
(Academy of Sciences of the Belorussian SSR) have scientifically established
the feasibility of using the diasociable nitrogen tetroxide “20‘ as an
effective heat carrier in atomic electric power plants.

The thermophysical properties of this heat carrier, which are excellent owing
to the occurrence of chemical dissociation reactions, ensure a high intensity
of heat transfer in components of an atomic electric power plant so that
such processes as heat regeneration and condensation in compact heat ex-
changers become realizable.

Studies made at the Institute of Nuclear Energy (Academy of Sciences of the
Belorussian SSR) have shown that a gas-liquid cycle with intermediate heat
regeneration works very efficiently in atomic electric power plants using
N204 as the heat carrier. The low latent heat of evaporation of dissociable
N20“. namely 5.5 times lower than thrt of water. makes it feasible to
simplify the heat regeneration process in the gas-liquid cycle with N20“,
inasmuch as the heat available in the turbine flue gases suffices not only
for heating and evaporating the liquid but also for superheating it further
to the gaseous state in the regenerator before entrance to the reactor.
Occurrence of the "206’: ZNOZ dissociation reaction on the high-pressure

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE-ONLY

side of the regenerator, the heat of this chemical reaction being loser than
that of the 2N0+02;: 2N02 recombination reaction on the low-pressur. side,
contributes to a more nearly complete heat recuperation in gas-liquid cycles
with N20 than in such cycles with water or 002 and thus contributes to
better thermodynamic performance indicators.

When calculating the parameters of flow in the thermodynamic cycle and the
parameters of heat transfer processes in components. especially regenerators,
of an atomic electric power plant using dissociable N 0 as the heat carrier.
one must account for the kinetics of the chemical react one. i.e.. the time
characteristics of dissociation and recombination processes.

According to estimated lengths of time of chemical relaxation, the first
stage of the N20 dissociation reaction (N 0 :3 2N02) proceeds at equilibrium
over the entire range of practical tem ragu es and pressures: the time of
chemical relaxation here is short (10 -10'6 s). but is long in the second
eta e of the dissociation reaction (2N0 -"2N0+O ) and can vary here from

1 -10‘3 to 0.1-1 s so that this seconi'Ezag. 1% many cases proceeds at
nonequilibrium.

The rates of N 06 dissociations are proportional to the pressure squared
and the rates f recombinations are proportional to the pressure cubed.

The rate constant of the 2N0+02;s 2N02 recombination increases, furthermore,
with lower temperatures.

The proper choice of parameters for the gas-liquid cycle. taking into
account the temperature range peculiar to the chemical reactions. will
almost completely eliminate the effect of reaction kinetics and will yield

a strong thermal effect by including the heat of these chemical reactions.
For instance, the composition of the gas at the reactor entrance under a
pressure of 170.105 N/m2 and at a temperature of «60 K is no percent N02

and 60 percent 820‘. Beating the gas in the reactor to 720 K completes

the first stage of the chemical reaction. vith 15 percent N0 dissociated
into N0 and 02. In the process 70 percent of the heat available in the
reactor has been expended on chemical reactions and, as a result. the
effective specific heat of the gas increases appreciably. On the lou~
pressure side (p«;20'105 N/m ) of the regenerator the gas coming from the
high-pressure turbine is cooled from 600-620 K to 370-390 K and recombina-
tion reactions occur in it. with the 2N0+02:&-2h02 reaction almost completed
and the first-stage 2N0 :2 N20 reaction proceeding to the 50 percent level.
At the high-pressure 3139 of the regenerstor enters pumped liquid N 0 .
which then by heating is brought to the gaseous state with thermal aiésocis-
tion "206;; 2N02 to the 60 percent level. In the process 70 percent of the
heat is transferred to the heat carrier by way of the chemical reactions

and thus a high regeneration efficiency is achieved.

Hithin the flow channel of the high-pressure turbine there occurs an expan-
sion of the gas from 150-10S to 21-105 him2 and the gas temperature drops
from 720 to 570-620 K. The net effect of this process is a drop of the

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2N““)2;: 2N02 recombination from 15 to 8-9 percent within the turbine flow
channel and. as a result. 40 percent of tht neat loud convertible to actual
turbine work appears as the heat of chemical reaction.

In the low-pressure turbine. located behind the regenerator in the thermal
loop. the gas composition is determined by the first-stage chemical reaction
and 50 percent of the turbine work is attributable to the heat of the
chemical recombination reaction zuozesuzoa.

All this indicates that. along with heat transfer during heating and phase
transformations. heat transfer during cooling with attendant chemical
recombination reactions plays a significant role in components of atomic
electric power plants. particularly in regenerators. using a dissociable
gas as the heat carrier.

The complexity of this process has compelled us to undertake experimental
studies of heat transfer during cooling of a turbulently flowing and
chemically reacting Nqobci 2N0 ¢=ZNO+O system in a pipe. These studies
are important as a baSis for vgrificati of existing theoretical models
and as a basis of recommendations with regard to a design of regeneraters
for atomic electric power plants which takes into account the kinetics
of chemical reactions.

The results of these studies are presented in this book. The experiments
were performed by the author together with V. s. Higrorodshiy and
V. N. Stepancnko.

The author acknowledges with thanks the useful advice and the systematic
assistance in preparing this monograph given to him by dettor of technical
sciences V. B. Nesterenhe, corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences
of the Belorussian SSE. and by candidate in technical sciences

B. Ye. Tverhovkin.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka i Tekhnika." 1978

2015
C50: 1870

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 621.391.8i621.397.l3:621.315.212

TRANSMISSION OF TELEVISION SIGNALS OVER COAXIAL CABLES

Moscow PERBDACNA TBLEVIZIONNYKH SICNALOV P0 KOAKSIAL'NYM RABELAH in Russian
1978 signed to press 26 May 78 pp 2-4, 277-279

[Book by Aron Kisel'yevich Oksmen, Iadatel'stvo Svyaa'. 6,200 copies,
279 pages]

[Text] Principles of designing and constructing systems for long-distance
transmission of television programs are examined here. Forms of distortion
and interference occurring during transmission of video and audio signals
are analysed. expressions for calculating the interference are derived.

and methods of reducing interference as well as distortion are presented.

A procedure is established for defining the requirements which linear
amplifiers must meet. -

The book is intended for engineers and technicians engaging in development,
design and operation of television channel equipment. It can also be of use
to specialists in transmission of video-telephone and other pulse signals.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Black-snd-Hhite and Color Television Signals S
1.1. Basic information about a television video signal 5
1.2. Spectral composition of and power distribution in real

video signals 12

1.3. Frequency band required for high-quality transmission of
video signals 17

Chapter 2. Transmission of Television Signals in Communications
Systems 19
2.1. Brief information about coaxial trunk cables 19
2.2. Transmission systems with a single television channel 21

2.]. Transformation of the spectrum of a television signal in
systems with a single television channel. Structural
schematics of signal conversion equipment 27

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
2.6. Signal shaping in the equipment of terminal stations 38
2.5. Transmission systems with several television channels 62
Chapter 3. Effect of Linear Distortions in the Channel on the Quality
of Television Images Transmission 68
3.1. General comments 68
3.2. 'rranoient characteristics and rest signals 50
3.3. Transient processes in an ideal channel (effect of limiting
the frequency band) 56
3.4. Transient characteristics oi channels with an ideal phase
characteristic and rmplitude-frequency distortions 61
3.5. Transient characteristics of a channel with phase distortions
but wlthout amplitude-frequency distortions 77
3.6. Transient characteristics of a channel with phase-frequency
and amplitude-frequency distortions 85
Chapter k. Effect of Nonlinear Distortions on the Quality of
Television Images Transmission 89
Chapter 5. Effect of Interference on the Quality of Television Images
Transmission 97
5.1. General comments 97
5.2. Periodic interference 98
5.3. Fluctuation interference 106
Chapter 6. Modulation and Demodulation of Television Signals 111
6.1. Modulation of signals at the transmitter end 111
6.2. Demodulstion of signals at the receiver end 118
6.3. Modulators and demodulators of television video signals 135
Chapter 7. Nonlinear and Fluctuation Interference in a Linear Channel
and in the Equipment of Terminal Stations 168
7.1. General comments 168
7.2. Interference due to coupling between components of the
television signal 150
7.3. Interference due to nonlinear coupling between the multi-
channel signsl and the television signal 157
7.6. Interference in television channels due to nonlinear coupling
between components of the multichannel signal 167
7.5. Nonlinear interference during transmission of several
television signals and during simultaneous transmission
of television and multicnannel signals 172
7.6. Fluctuation interference in a linear channel 176
7.7. Nonlinear and fluctuation interference in the equipment of
terminal stations 177
83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ovrtcw. use mm

Page
Chapter 8. Methods of Improving the Interference Immunity of

Television Channels 179
8.1. Predistortion of television signals 179
8.2. Optimum percentage modulation of television signals 193
8.3. Transmission of the d.c. component of the video signal 197
8.6. Choice of exact carrier and pilot frequencies 206

Chapter 9. Determining the Linearity of Amplifiers and Calculating
the Interference Immunity of Video and Audio Channels 206
9.1. General comments 206

9.2. Determination of the optimum amplifier loading for trans-
mission of audio signals over the entire linear frequency
spectrum 207
9.3. Calculation of the aignel-to-noise ratio and determination
of the television transmission level in communication
systems with a single television channel
9.6. Determination of the television transmission level and
calculation of the interference in video and audio
channels of a system with two television channels 226

Chapter 10. Correction of Linear Distortions in a Television Channel 229

Chapter 11. Equipment of Terminal Television Stations 238
11.1. Equipment of system K-1920 for transmission of television
signals 238
11.2. Equipment of system K-3600 for transmission of television
signals 248
Chapter 12. Transmission of Television Signals Over a Coaxial Cable
in Foreign Communication Systems 254
Appendix 1. Requirements Imposed on Television Channels and on
Equipment of Terminal Stations 259
Appendix 2. Derivation of Certain Formulas 266
8ibliography 270
Subject Index 276

FOREWORD

Communication trunklines in the USSR extensively use coaxial cables. Opera-
tion of coaxial-cable transmission systems over a rather wide frequency range
provides the possibility to carry on thousands of telephone conversations, to
transmit telegraph and facsimile messages. to telecast newspapers and also
television programs. Coaxial and radio-relay lines of communication
facilitate organization of the widely spread network of interlinked tele-
transmission centers. facilitate coverage of the very large territory of the
USSR with television broadcasts, and facilitate television program exchanges
with other countries. 86

m9 "PPYI‘TA' "Q? MTV
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

installation of the improved K-l920U system and the new K-3600 system as
well as construction or new trunklines will increase the number of special-
lsts concerned with transmission of television, video-telephone and other
pulse signals carrying information. Development of systems with the linear
spectrum extending to 60 NH: will make it feasible in the future to organize
simultaneous transmission r: television proprams and video-telephone
messages.

This book is the second edition of an earlier one published in 1966. It
deals with a set of problems pertaining to long-distance transmission of
black-and-white as well as color television signals over coaxial cables.
Included are methods of equipping television channels in already operating
transmission systems and in still developmental ones. The effect of
electrical characteristics of the channels on the quality of signal
transmission is analyzed. Distortions occurring during modulation and
demodulation of a signal are examined in detail, also possible ways of
eliminating them. The basic parameters of modulators and demodulators are
calculated. Much attention is paid to methods of improving the interference
immunity of transmitted signals, to establishment of the optimum transmis-
sion levels for television and telephone signals, and to calculation of
the interference immunity of channels. Essential information is given
about Soviet-made equipment for television stations and about foreign
coaxial-cable television transmission systems.

All these problems apply in some measure to transmission of video-telephone
and other pulse signals as well.

The book is intended for specialists engaging in development, design and
operation of equipment for television transmission over communication lines.

The author is very grateful to the reviewer. Yu. S. Hilevskiy, for the
helpful comments made during reading of the manuscript.

Comments about the book are asked to be sent to the editorial offices of
"Svyaz'," Moscow 101000, Chistoprudnyy Bul'var 2.

COPYRIGRT: Izdatel'stvo "Svyaz'," 1978

' 2415

680: 1870

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

unc 621.395.7(083.3)
susscntasn moment In URBAN ntsraous svsrms

Moscow ABONBNTSKIYE USTROYSTVA GTS: SPRAVOCHNIK (Manual of Subscriber

Equipment in Urban Telephone Systems) in Russian 1978 signed to press
20 Apr 78 pp 2. 271-272

[Annotation and table of contents from book by Yevgeniy Petrovich Dubrovskiy.
lzdatel'stvo Svyaz', 15,000 copies. 272 pages]

[Text] Extensive reference material is presented here pertaining-to tele-
phone sets and their component parts, coin telephones, equipment at
subscriber terminals, pole and rack line equipment. and protective equipment
in urban telephone systems. Ways and means of hooking up telephone sets are
described. faults in telephone equipment_sre examined in subscriber wiring
as well as along the lines. also methods of fault detection and clearing
are outlined.

The book is intended for electricians and electromechanics engaging in
technical operation maintenance of equipment in urban telephone systems.
for technicians and installers employed by Hire-communication systems
enterprises, also for instructors and students at professional engineering

colleges and technical schools of communications.
Contents ' . Page

Introduction 3

Chapter 1. Component Parts of Telephone Sets

1.1. Telephone 5
1.2. Microphone 8
1.3. Hicrotelephone . 11
1.4. Bell 13
1.5. Transformer 15
1.6. Capacitor l6
l.7. Lever switch 18
1.8. Dial 19
1.9. Shell and chassis 23
86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.10. Telephone rosettes 24
1.11. Cords 27
1.12. Circuits included in telephone sets 31
1.13. Acoustic shock absorber 34
Chapter 2. Telephone Sets and Auxiliary Devices

2.1. General information 35
2.2. Telephone set TA-68 39
2.3. Telephone set TA-72 52
2.4. Telephone set TAN-70 54
2.5. Telephone set TASt-70 65
2.6. Telephone set "Tesla" T-66Sa 68
2.7. Telephone set "Astra" 75
2.8. Telephone set "Yasktr-VO” 81
2.9. Telephone sot TA-4100 82
2.10. Industrial telephone sets suitable for urban telephone

systems 87
2.11. Equipment for connecting party lines 89
2.12. High-frequency subscriber hookup 91
2.13. Auxiliary devices 94
2.14. Faults in telephone sets 112

Chapter 3. Coin Telephones
3.1. Basic technical data on coin telephones and type of service 118

3.2. Faults in coin telephones 127
3.3. Alarm buzzer 128
3.4. Desk coin telephones 129

Chapter 4. Pole Linea
4.1. Types of pole lines in urban telephone systems, structure

of poles and attachments 131
4.2. Hires and hardware 135
4.3. Pole fittings 140
4.4. Routing of pole lines 145
4.5. Digging holes for erection of poles 149
4.6. Erection and reinforcement of poles 152
4.7. Suspension of wires 162
4.8. Number coding of poles and circuits 170
4.9. Impregnation of poles by the wrapping method 170
4.10. Norms for expenditure of materials on construction of

overhead communication lines 173

Chapter 5. Rock Lines

5.1. Types of rocks and rack fittings 174

5.2. Mounting of racks 176

5.3. Suspension of wires 180

5.4. Outlet porthole, protective wire and trap 184
87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OYPICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Protection of Communication Lines and Subscriber Terminals
Against Hazardous Voltages and Currents
6.1. Sources of hazardous voltages and currents. Proximity of

communication lines to high-voltage lines - 186
6.2. Protection of communication lines 187
6.3. Protective equipment for subscriber sets 195
Chapter 7. Subscriber Terminals
7.1. Equipment in subscriber terminals 196
7.2. Equipment in subscriver coin-telephone terminals 201
Chapter 8. Technical Operation of Subscriber Equipment
8.1. General propositions 205
8.2. Routine maintenance 205
8.3. Major overhaul * 207
8.6. Repair of telephone sets 208
8.5. Clearing of faults in subscriber equipment 208
8.6. Performance of repair work 220
8.7. Norms for expenditure of materials and availability of tools 225

Chapter 9. Automatic Telephone Offices, Distribution Cabinets and
Cable Terminations 235

Chapter 10. Electric Measurements Along Lines and in Equipment of
Urban Telephone Systems

10.1. Parameters of line segments 261
10.2. Modes of electrical measurement and electrical standards 262
10.3. Measuring instruments 269
Chapter 11. Mechanization of Labor Done on Subscriber Equipment
in Urban Telephone Systems 251
Chapter 12. Safety Techniques
12.1. Extracts from safety rules 257
12.2. Labor safety standards 262
Appendix 1. Conventional Symbols 264
Appendix 2. Units of the International System 266
Appendix 3. Duties and Qualifications of the Electromechanic on
a Subscriber Equipment Servicing Team 267
Appcndix A. Duties and Qualifications of the hookup Electrician
' Servicing a Subscriber Set 269
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Svyaz'," 1978

2615
C80: 1870

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

TNE ZOYBHTRON-385 AUTOHATED ELECTRONIC CALCULATING MACHINE

Moscow ZOYEHTRON-38S: EKSPLAUATATSIYA, PROGRAMMIROVANIYB (POSOBIYA DLYA
RABOTNIKOV MASHINOSCHETNYKB BYURD) (Zoyemtron~385: UseI Programming--
Textbooks for Employees of Machine Accounting Bureaus) in Russian 1977
signed to press 28 Oct 77 pp 2-3, 110-111

(Annotation. forewnrd and table of contents from book by V. I. Tikhomirov.
Statistika. 25,000 copies, lll pages]

{Text} The textbook presents the possibilities for using the Zoyentron-
385 electronic calculating machine, the function and rules for programming
commends by utilizing punches and reading units, and also variants of pro-
gramming.

The book is intended for employees in machine accounting bureaus, machine
accc;nting stations. and computer centers. It can also he used as a text
book for training programmers and designers.

Foreword

In modern conditions the role of accounting as a function of management
providing for development and improvement of socialist production is grow-
ing. The requirements for accounting information. the volume of which is
constantly increasing. are being raised. The basic direction for improving
accounting is its mechanization on the basis_of application of keyed, punch,
and electronic calculating machines.

The widespread installation and effective use of the technical means of
data processing is an urgent task of the national economy. and its success-
Eul completion to a large degree depends on qualified application and
technically literate service of conputer technology.

At the present time the Zoyemtron—382, 383, 386, and 385 electronic comput-
ing automatons are widely distributed in the machine accounting installa-

tions of the country. being used to mechanize various parts of accounting
and computational work. while the Zoyemtron-383, 386. and 385 automatons

89
FOR O?PICIAL USE ONLY '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are used in addition as peripheral machines for the collection of alpha-
numeric data on punched tape or cards with its subsequent processing on
computers.

One of the decisive factors in the rational installation and application
of computing technology is preparation and improvement of the qualifica-
tions of specialists in the educational combines of the system of the
Main Administration for Personnel Training (GUPK) of the USSR Central
Statistical Administration. as well as directly under production condi-
tions in machine accounting bureaus. stations, and computer centers.

The present textbook is a logical continuation of the textbook on the use
and programming of the Zoyemtron-382 and 383 electronic computing automa-
tons. It can be used in training programmers, designers of keyboard
computing machines. operators who use electronic calculating automatons,
and mechanics in repair and maintenance of keyboard computing machines

in the educational establishments of the system of the Main Administration
for Personnel Training of the USSR Central Statistical Administration.

The book is arranged so that it can be of use of those who are improving
their job qualifications or are independently studying the use and pro-
gramming of Zoyemtron-385 automated machines in computer centers, machine
accounting stations and bureaus.

Contents Page

Foreword 3
Section I. Possibilities for Use and Additional Functions of the
Zoyemtron-385 Automated Electronic Calculating Machine 4
General Concepts
General characteristics of the Zoyemtron-385 4
Preparation of the zoyemtron-385 for operation 8
General Questions of Programming 9
Stages of programming 9
Control questions for review 11
Programming Additional Functions of the Computing Device 15
Partitioning the AC Registers 16
Automatic connection of a program 20
Column selection with the T2 automatic function 22
Logical decisions 22
Section II. Additional Devices
Paper-Tape Punches

Use and technical characteristics of punches 28
Keyboard for controlling punches 30
General qualities of punched paper-tape 32
Peculiarities of data and program punched paper-tape 36
Information coding 37
Elements of Programming for Punching Al
Activating and deactivating punches Al
90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R0001000100‘0-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0%.?

Commands for nuitchlng'nff carriage tabulation and
output of the TAB code on pap-r-tape
Punching code for commands to centre: a typewriter
Punching code for carriage return
Punching alphanumeric and conventional signs
Elininativn ur punChCH of codes for printed conventional
signs
Punching codes for commands to control input and output
of Numbers
Punching code for commands for arithmetic operations
and duplicating operations
Calculating Devices
Use and technical characteristics of calculating devices
Keyboard for cont..;ling calculated devices
Punction and development of control progral punched tape
Preparation of control punched tape
Preparation of program punched tape
Elements of Programming for Calculating Devices
Activating and deactivating calculating devices
Programming shipping of data being calculated
Selection (retrieval of data on punched tape)
Duplicating punched tape
Switching programs by command from punched tape
Control of activation of punches and calculating devices
by the Law coamand
Reference Table of Commands
”eference Table of Program Symbols

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'atvo ”Statistika"

8562
cso:

1870

91
FOR OFFICIAL "£3 ONLY

62
as
58
b9

52
59

66
69
69
71
72
76
73
79
79
86
89
95
97

99
102
107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UM 621.372
ORIHAL swarms OP LINEAR ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS

Moscow OHIHAL'NW 31m: LINEN!!! run-mom 3101:“ (Optimal Synthesis
of Linear Electronic Circuits) in Russian 1975 signed to press 29 Jun 78 p 2,
336-333

[Annotation and table of contents from book by Artur Abramovich Lanna. Svyaz',
6000 copies, second edition, revised, 336 pages]

[Text] This book treats the optimal synthesis of electronic circuits. Pri-
mery emphasis is placed on stationary linear circuits vith concentrated param-
eters (passive 813-. nc-. and active RC-filt-rs, correctors, selective ampli-
fiers, shaping circuits. etc). Por these circuits, the procedures of optimal
synthesis are brought to the level of algorithms, and in the most important
cases -- to standard programs. This monograph is characterized by the desire
of the author to construct global optimal solutions.

This book is intended for scientists and will be useful to graduate students
and engineers specializing in the areas of combination coupling, electric
conductive coupling, radio physice, automatic control, measurements, etc.

Contents
Page
Introduction 2
Chapter 1. Basic Principles of the Theory of Synthesis of
Electronic Circuits 7
1.1. Some Information on Punctional Analysis 7
1.2. Space Density and Problems of Approximation 16
1.3. Synthesis of Electronic Circuits. Statement of
the Problem 29
1.6. Linear Plectronic Circuits. Conditions of Physical
Realizability A7
1.5. The Problem of the Bxiotence of a Solution 55
Chapter 2. Nathematical Principles of Dneigning Physically
Realiuble Operators 72
2.1. The Problem of Mathematical Programing 73
2.2. Necessary and Sufficiont Conditions of the liinimum 86
2.3. Minimization of Smooth Punctions vithout Limitations 103
2.6. Minimization of Smooth Punctions with Limitations ll?
92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
50‘.

$0,.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Methods of Chebyahev'e Approximation. Linear Problems
Methods of Chebyshav's Approximaion. Nonlinear
Problems
Optimal Synthesis of Quadripolen with Prescribed
Amplitude-Frequency or Phase-Frequency Characteristics
Synthesis of Qundripoles with Prencribod AChKh
[Amplitude-Frequency Cheructeriatico]
Formlicntion of the Conditions of Physical Realis-
ability
Examples of and Reconnendations for Designing Transfer
Functions vith Prescribed ACth
Traditional Algorithms of the Renlitetion and Examples
of the Synthesis of Quadripolea with Prescribed ACth
Synthesis of Quedripoles with Prescribed FChlh [Phase-
Frequency Characteristics ]
anmples of and Recommendations for Designing Optimal
Transfer Functions of Phase Circuits
Algorithms for the Reslisation of Fhaae Circuits
Optimal Synthesis o! Electric Filters
Statement of the Problem. Conditions of Optimalness
Algorithms for Designing Optimel Filtration Functions
Design of Optimal Transfer Functions of Passive RC-
Filters
Design of Transfer Functions of Active Rc-Filtars
Standard Methods of the Realization of the Operators
of Electric Filters
Design of Locally Optimal Physically Realitable
Operators by the Methods of Nonlinear Programming
Design of Locally Optimal Transfer Functions of
Amplitude-Phase Correctors
Design of Locally Optimal Time Functions of Electronic
Circuits
Design of Physically Realirable Operators in the Space
of the Parameters of the Elements
Parametric Synthesis of Certain Types of Microvave
Circuits
Some Special Characteristics of the Design of locally
Optimal Physically Realirable Operator

Supplements
Bibliography

COPYRIGRT:

10,233
cso: mo

ltdatel’stvo "Svyat'," 1978

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orncuu. us's ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 621.396.62
AUTOMATIC CONTROLS IN RADIO RECEIVERS

Moscow AVTOHATICNBSKIYE RECULIROVXI v RADIOPRIYEHNIKARH in Russian 1978
signed to press 3 Apr 78 pp 2. a, 86-87

[Annotation and table of contents from book by Sergey Nikolayevich Krise.
lzdatel'stvo Svyss'. 55.000 copies. 8? pages]

[Text] The book outlines in concise and popular form the operating principles
of automatic control systems widely used in radio receivers: automatic gain
control and automatic control of the heterodyne frequency by frequency or by
phase. Some schemes for automatic control of receiver bandwidth are also
shown. Host attention is paid to the physical aspects of operation of these
systems. which are built with diodes. transistors and integrated micro-
C‘rclI‘t. e

The book is intended for radio mechanics and students of engineering colleges
or professional schools. also for qualified radio amateurs.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Introduction 6
Chapter I. Basic Information Rrom the Theory of Automatic Control.
Some Components of Automatic Regulation Circuits 7
1. General information about automatic control systems 7
2. Functional components of automatic control systems 9
3. Transient process in automatic control systems in radio
receivers 13
6. Concept of stability applicable to automatic control systems.
Nyquist stability criterion 14
Chapter 2. Automatic Gain Control in Radio Receivers 15
5. Causes of voltage variation in the input signal 16
6. Types of A60 and their structural schematics 16
96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

a.

9.
10s
11.
12.
13.
16.
15.
16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Requirements imposed on AGC systems

Characteriutics of ACC uyutemu

Detectors for ACC

Pilter in the AGC circuit

Electronic gain-control schemes

Recommendations on selecting the circuit components for ACC
Design of detector and filter for ADC

Plotting the characteristics of ACC systems

Special features of ADC schemes for television signal receivers
Use of integrated circuits in ACC systems

Chapter 3. Automatic Control of the heterodyne Frequency

17.
l8.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
26.

Need for APC in superheterodyne receivers

Structural schematic .nd operating principle of AFC systems

Residual error in APC systems. Automatic-tuning index

Discriminators

Control devices t

Diacriminntors with a selective stage and a matching
narrow-band filter

Special design and performance feature of AFC systems for
pulse signal receivers

AFC by phase

Chapter 5. Automatic bandwidth Control

25.

26.
27.

28.

Performance of a radio receiver under conditions of inter-
ference

Manual bandwidth control

Hethode of forming the voltage signal for automatic bandwidth
control

Automatic-bandvidth-control schemes

Chapter 5. Outlook for Development of Radio Broadcast Receivers

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

Hain development trends

Automatic tuning

Sensor control

Electronic control

Problems in reception of radio broadcast programs transmitted
via sntellites

Appendix General Information About Microcircuite

Desic definitions and classification

hybrid integrated microcircuits. Components of hybrid
integrated circuits

Thick-film hybrid integrated microcircuits

Bibliography

95
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Page

19
19
2i
22
23
28
29
30
31
32

35
35
36
38
39
63

47

49
52

53

53
56

56
59

66
69
72

75

78
78

79
81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POREHORD

Raising the material standard of the Soviet people in every way. according

to the historic decisions of the 25th 0980 Congress.‘includes a further
increase in the production of electronic home appliances with better quality
and reliability. A successful solution of this problem is impossible without
extensive use of various automatic controls in these appliances: gain con-
trol. bandwidth control. control of the heterodyne frequency. etc. The
operation of the basic types of automatic control in radio receivers is the
subject of this book. Only a small portion of the large problem is. of
course. dealt with here. Highly effective automatic control systems are

also used in other areas of radioelectronics. Managing the modern produc-
tion processes. workshops. means of transportation. plants and even entire
branches of industry without the aid of automatic control systems would be
inconceivable. This fact. although not directly bearing on the problems
considered here. clearly indicates the immensity of the task which control
systems on the whole are called on to perform. Solution of problems on such
a grand scale is possible only with highly developed instrument manufacturing.
electronic and radio engineering industries through universal development

of means of automation.

The object of this book is much narrower in scope: to examine the basic types
of automatic control in radio receivers. Even then. however. the implications
of the analysis are in many cases broader. The book does not claim to
exhaustively and completely cover the many problems touched upon. It is not
intended to serve as an aid in designing the details of automatic control
systems for radio receivers. although some mathematical material is given.

It should not be regarded as a methodical textbook on radio receivers. It
thus is. naturally. intended for readers familiar with radio reception
techniques. At the same time. a brief outline of the physical principles
underlying the operation of the most essential components in automatic

control systems (amplifier stages. filters. etc.) for various applications
could not possibly have been avoided.

The simple formulas presented in the text are adequate for calculating the
basic parameters of automatic control systems. Their proof is not given
here. Appropriate bibliographic references are listed for more thorough
calculations. if such should be necessary.

Knowledge about automatic control has been built up over many decades.

Hnny Soviet and foreign scientists have contributed to its growth. An
important role in developing the theory of automatic control in radio
engineering devices was played by the works of H. R. Kaplan and '
V. A. Levin. 8. Kb. Krivitskiy. I. H. Simontov. N. I. Chistyakov.

V. V. Shakhgil'dyan and well as many other authors. And new this progres-
sive branch of engineering still continues developing.

The author thanks lecturer V. S. Mestyko for his participation in writing
the fourth chapter. The author also thanks Prof N. I. Chiatyakov for writing

the fifth chapter. reviewing the book and offering many useful suggestions
for improvement.

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The author will be grateful to receive any commealn about this book. They

should be addressed to the odltorlal office cf "Svyaz" Moscow 101000.
Chloroprudayy Boulevard 2.

COPYthﬂTz Iadatol'atvo "Svyaz'." 1978

2615
080: 1870

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUELICAIIONS

UDC 621.391
THEORY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD COHERENCE

Moscow TEORIYA ROGERENTNOSTI ELEKTROMACNITNOGO POLYA (Theory of Electromag-
netic Field Coherence) in Russian 1978 signed to press 20 Jan 78 p 2, 205-207

[Annotation end table of contents from book by V. A. Potekhin end V. N.
Tsterinov, 8vyss', 3000 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] The authors analyse the coherence properties of en electromagnetic
field subjected to random spatial end temporal distortions on the basis of
e general theory of coherence developed within the framework of the clesei-
cal electrodynemics and correlationsl theory of vectorisl fields. The ob-
tained results make it possible to evsluete the effectiveness of chennel-fornn
ing equipment, to find statistical characteristics of signals at the output

of receiving antennas, end to synthesise antennas which extract information
from a random field most fully.

The book is intended for scientists end engineers specialising in the theory
of communication and applied problems.

Contents
Page
Foreword 3
Introduction 9
1.1. Brief Outline of the Development of the thoery of
Partial Coherence and Partial Polarization. Pre-
requisites for the Development of Methods of Statis-
tical Electrodynamics 9
1.2. Topical Plan of the Monograph 13
Part 1. Statistical Electrodynamics of the Random Electromagnetic
Field
Chapter 1. Characteristics of the Random Electromagnetic Field
1.1. Complex Amplitudes - 27
1.2. Potential end Solenoidal Random Electromagnetic Fields 31
1.3. Spatial-temporal Spectral Representation of the Field 35
1.5. Correlation Tensors and their Spatial-temporal Spectral
Representation 38
98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l.5. Mutual Correlation of the Potential and Solenoidal
Conponents

Chapter 2. Fundamental Equations of Statistical Electrodynamics
and Some Auxiliary-Relations

2.1. Generalized Maxwellian Equations

2.2. Generalised Continuity Equations

2.3. Boundary conditions for Correlation Tensors on an
Ideally Conducting Interface

2.6. Differential For-n of Lorents's Loans for Correlation
Tensors of a Randosn Electromagnetic Field

Chapter 3. Electrodynnnic Potentials of the Tensor Field 0!
Correlations and Have Equations

3.l. Electrodynanic Potentials

3.2. The Principle of Constructing Projection Operators
in the Coordinate Representation and the Expansion
of Correlation Teneors

3.3. Have Equations for the Vector and Tensor Potentials
of the Correlation Field

3.h. Have Equations for the Correlation Tensors of a Rando-
Electronagnetic Field

Chapter lo. Statistical Electrodynaaics of a System of Rando-
Currents

14.1. Generalised lismllian Equations in the Presence of
Fictitious Magnetic Currents and Charges

(hi. Electrodynanic Potentials of the Correlation Field
in the Presence of Random Magnetic Sources

6.3. Structure of the nivortex of the Tensor Potential
in the Spherical Systea or Coordinates

6.6. Analysis of the Structure of the Correlation Field
in the Far Zone of the Sources

Part II. Correlational and Spectral Theory of Partial Coherence
of the Transverse Electrouagnetic Field and Sane of
Its Applications to the Prohleas of Statistical Theory
of Cos-unication

Chapter 5. Plane Correlation Haves and the Universal Characteristic
of Coherence

5.1. (3 x 3)-Matrix of Coherence of a Plane Quasi-Honochronatic
Wave

5.2. Generalized Hamellian Equations in the Space of
wave Vectors

5.3. Analysis or the Eigen-Values of the (3 x 3)-liatrix
of Coherence

5.6. General Form of the (3 x 3)-llatrix of Coherence

5.5. Some Consequences of the Degeneration of the
Coherence Matrix

99
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

68

55
56

58

62

66

67
71
73
77

83
86

87
90

92
5.6.
5.7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pure State in the classical Electrodynamics
Pure and Mixed States in Statistical Electrodynamics

Chapter 6. Factorization of the Coherent Polaritational Hono-

- 6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
6.6.
6.5.

structure of the Blectromagnetic Field. Polarisational
Structure of a Plane Arbitrarily Oriented Quasi-Mono-
chromatic wave
Factoriration of the Coherent Polarisational Mono-
structure of the Field
A Nonpolarited Component and the Statistical Isotropy
Condition
A Totally Polarized Component; Generalized Expression
for the Degree of Polarisation
Coordinate Representation of the Pointing Vector of an
Arbitrarily Oriented Rave
Problems of the Description of Arbitrarily Oriented
Haves with the Aid of Stokes' Parameters

Chapter 7. Coherent Honostructure of a Random Electromagnetic

7.1.
7.2.

7.3.
7.4.

7.5.
7.6.

7.7.

7.8.

Field and Its Limiting Cases
Coherent Characteristic of a Nonpolarired Field
Coherent Characteristic of a Fully Polarized Field;
Integral Degree of Polarization
Indicators of the Degree of Polarisation of a Random
Electromagnetic Field
Limiting Cases of the Coherent Honostructure of the
Electromagnetic Field
General Form of the (2 x 2)-Hatrix of Coherence
Representation of the Interference Law of a Plane
Quasi-Monochromatic wave by Means of the General
Form of the (2 x 2)-Matrix of Coherence. Degree of
Polarization
Expansion of the Interference Law of a Partially
Coherent Linearly Polarized Field. Degree of
Coherence
Factorization of the Space-Time Coherent Properties
of a Random Field

Chapter 8. Polarisational Structure of the Sum of Radiation

8.1.
8.2.
8.3.
8.6.

Fluxes and the Formation of Fluxes with a Given Degree
of Polarization
Polarizationnl Structure of the Sum of Dncorrelated
Radiation Fluxes
Formation of a Radiation Plus with a Prescribed Degree
of Polarization
Parametric Description of the Sun of Correlated Flute.
with the Use of a Dirac matrix System
The Degree of the Polarisation of the Sum of Correlated
Radiation Fluxes

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 9. Direct and Inverse Problems in Statistical Electro-
dynamics of Microwave Antennas

9.1. General Remarks

9.2. Transformation of Coherence Tensors of a Random
Electromagnetic Field by Microueve Mirror Antennas

9.3. The Principle of the Degree of Reciprocity and
Eifectivonas: of Microwave Antennas

9.9. The Problem of the Interpretation of the Data of
Experimental Studies on Random Electromagnetic Fields.
A Mathematical Model of the Process of Measuring in
a Linearly Polarised Field

9.5. Integral Equation of Interpretation and Its Solution

9.6. Statistical Model in the Problem of Interpretation.
Restoration of Spatial Autocorrelational Functions
of the Fluctuations of Informational Parameters of the
Field in the Antenna Aperture

Chapter 10. A Brief Survey of the Traditional Methods of Analysis
of the Transformation of the Coherent Polarization
Structure of a Random Electromagnetic Field
10.1. Special Problems of Antenna Statistics in the Communi-
cation theory
10.2. Traditional Methods of the Analysis of the transfor-
mation of the Coherence Matrix by Simple Devices
10.3. Transformation of the Stokes vector of a Plane Have
by a Diffractionally Limited Antenna
10.5. On Aperture Approximation in the Statistical Electro-
dynamics of Microwave Antennas

Supplements. Some Operations of Vector and Tensor Analysis
Rotations of Indicss
Agreement on Summation
Symmetric and Antisymmetric Objects. levi-Chivita Symbols
Utilisation of the Levi-Chivita Symbols

Bibliography

Subject Index

COPYRIGHT: ledatel’stvo "Svyas'," 1978

10,233
080: 1870

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

153
15k
157

162
165

168

172
173
186
190
192
192
193
195
197

201
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

LIST OF SOVIET ARTICLES DEALING WIT“ COMPOSITE MATERIALS

macaw MOW WIM sovm HINISTROV 8381! PO mom I WIRE.
mam "AUX 888R. SIGNAL'NAYA INPOMTSIYA. xaoozmzommz “RWY
in Russian Vol 3, No 7, 1978 pp 1-6

[Following is a listing of the Soviet entries frost smm'NAYA mom'rsnn.
WMIONNYYB MATERIAL! (Signal Intonation. mite Interim), I
bibliographic publication of vmru. This listing is from Vol. 3, No. 18,
1978]

Incerpts] 1. The physicochenicel properties and strength characteristics
of boron tile-snts and the proepecte of their use for reinforcing mite
materials. Zhigsch, A. 9., 'rsirlin, A. 14., 'm. Veee. khiu. o-ve insni

be Is ”6.1””... 1978' 23' lb. 3' 26"272e

2. Cmposite materials based on thermplaete. Kuz'nin, Yu. 6., 'Plaet.
m.’.' 1978' Ms 6' 19'22e

3. The coepetibility of csrbon fibrous materials with metal ea‘rix.
Verenkov, A. 14., loetikov, V. 1., Houhukhin, Ye. 1., shinenyuk, V. 7.,
“Irv. may. chern. utellurgiya,‘ 1978, No. S, 128-131.

4. New Couposite materials based on synthetic fiber-tilled polyethylene.
Brakhin, 2., Budnitekiy, Yu. 14., Akutin, M. 8., "12v. vuaov. miniya 1 thin.
W)..." 1978' 21’ NO. 6' 891-893:

5. Investigating the phases formed at high temperatures as a result or
diamond-natal interaction. Teypin, N. v., simkin, B. 8., Kostenetskaya, G. 0.,
"Pin-khan. probl. sintera sverkhtverd. uterialov," Kiev. 1978, 144-147.

6. P. A method of themed-twice]. treatlent of binstal products. Owner,
3. A. [Pin-tskhn. in-t An 3881!]. Author's certificate of the USSR, (c -21
a 7/14, c 21 0 1/78), No. 582305, application 13 Aug 76. No. 2396633,
ptbliehed 24 Nov II.

13. Production 0! the steel-alumni binstal cospound by plane and cylindrical
eurtecee. Arkulie, G. 2., Dorogobid, V. 6., Hakhneve, Ye. x., ”min i
praktiks pr-va netirov,“ Sverdlovek, 1977, 114-116.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
14. The effect of asbestos additives on the porooity of dense silicate con-
crete. sivkov, s. P., Timsshev, V. V., Nik-unova, N. 8., “wt. Mosk. Main.-
tokhnol. tit-t0 he be Is “MOIOyOVQp” 1'.'I7' "0e 98, 90-91e

15. A discrete-matrix model for carbon-carbon coupoeites. Kolasnikov, s. A”
"Mekh. poiimerov,” 1978, No. 3, 387-393.

17. The thermoelectric properties of coeposite materials. Minov, V. A.,
"2h. tekhn. “2.," 1978, 48, No. 6, 1309-1310.

18. Blastic wave propagation in some conposites. Abrsmhuk, s. 5., ”Hekh.
polilltov," 1978' Me 3) 531-536.

20. Efficient designing or rciniorced composite shells in stability.
Samsonov, V. 1., "Mekh. poliserov,“ 1978, No. 3, 481-484.

25. aperienre of using the nathe-atical planning method in finding optisun
conditions for producing filament-like calcium hydrosiiicste crystals with
chain silicate anions. Nikonovs, N. 5., Timashsv, V. V., Vlasov, A. 8.,
Yevstigneyev. A. 3., ”Tr. Hook. khim.-tskhnol. in-ta in. D. l. Mendelsyevs,‘
1977, No. 98, 64-67.

29. Studying the effect of production factors on the properties of alminun
oxide-molybdenum comets. Skidan, 8. 8., Pomina, c. A., Shepilov, I. A”
“Poroshk. metallurgiya,‘ 1978, No. 5, 93-96 (English 8m).

31. The parameters of the porous structure of. pernsabls materials. 11.
Metal fiber materials. Kostornov, A. 6., "Poroshk. metallurgiya,“ 1978,
No. 5, 63-68 (mglish emery).

32. Investigating the structure of the weld seam natal of a cladding bimetal
layer. Duben', 1.. V., steklov, 0. 1., "rr. VNII po nontash. i spots.
etroit. rabotan,“ 1978, No. 23, 62-66.

33. Diﬂractomstric study of filament-like crystal distribution in composite
elastomers. Gorobats, B. R., Chsmyak, a. 1., shchetanov, s. V., "Hekh.
polinsrov," 1978, No. 3, 550-551.

37. Breakdown of superconducting composites at low tesperstures. Parkhmnko,
1‘. A., Pustovalov, V. V., Stepanenko, V. A., 'Probl. prochnosti," 1978, no. 6,
108-113.

39. Investigating the hydration processes of sulioalminste matrices.
Sychevs, L. 1., riuashev, V. V., Otipov, V. 1., Hironov, V. V., "Pr. nook.
khia.-tekhnol. in-ta in. D. I. usndeleyeva," 1977, No. 98, 53-59.

40. Studying the oxidisability of nolten eutectic cospoeites of Orzog-Ho
and Cr203-H system and of calcined materials of the given systems.
Pasechnik, G. 0., Vlasov, A. s., Yakovleva, B. 0., "Tr. Hosk. khim.-tekhnol
in-ta is. D. I. moddeyeva," 1977, no. 98, 14-15.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

43. Approximate solution of the bimstnl molding problem. Smushkevich, 1.. You
"‘l‘eoriya i praktika pr-vs metisov," Sverdlovsk, 1977, 149-156.

47. lsproving the quality of steel-oopper wire from the metallurgical method
of production. Pluqin, A. M., Bazarova, v. You Gorin. N. N” Selezneva.
Yo. 9.. Shsdrunovs. A. P” “sul',” 1978, No. 6, 546.

70. The porous space structure of calcareous-siliceous stone under diaerent
conditions of formation. Timeshev. V. v., Vorob'yeva. H. A” Dyukova. N. P..
Ubeyev. A. V., “tr. mosh. khinwtskhnol. in-ta im. D. I. mndsleyeva," 1977.
”Os 98; 95-970

72. The effect of alkaline additives on the properties of lino-based composite
materials. Timhsv, v. V., Vorob'yeva, M. I... Ubeyev, A. V., Dyukova. N. 2‘”
"tr. Hook. khimwtekhnol. in-ta ill. I). I. Mendeloyeva,” 1977, No. 90, 87-89.
copmom: mm. 1973 '

6521
C80: 1870

1010
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL?

POM. ICAI‘ IONS

NF." BOOK DISCUSSES STABILIZATION Oi~‘ MEASURING DEVICES

Hutton SIMILIZAISIYA Innum'm USTROYS‘W HA KACHAYUSHCBDBYA
OSNOVANII (Stabilizing Heasur ing Devices on Susying Benet) in Russian
signed to prone 23 Jun 78 pp 2-6

[Title page. annotation. and table of contents of book by 8.8. Rivltin.
Nauba - clavnayo Redaktsiya Piriko-Hatenoticheakoy Literatury. 2,750
copies. 320 pages]

[Excerpts] Title Page

Author: S. 8. Rivkin
Title: "Stabilisnteiya lzneritel'nykh Untroystv na Rachayushchensya

Osnovanii" [Stabilizing Measuring Devices on Svaying bases]
Place and Year of Publication: Hoscov. 1978

Annotation:

This boolt sets forth the chief questions of the nechanics of systems to
stabilize neaauring devices. direction finders and the sensitive elenents
of navigation and control systens. on saying bases. The investigation
of stabilization systole for these instrunents and solutions to applied
problems are given Iith reference to a ship, but the naterinl presented
in the book is entirely applicable to neaauring device atabiliution
systens installed in other nobile objects.

The rain characteristics of the investigation of neasuring device stabi-
lisation .ystane are the use of. probability techniques, techniques iron
the theory of autonatic regulation, and the netth of statistical opti-
nization (Kolnogorov-Viner. Kellen. and others).

In addition to the theoretical presentation the book contains solutions
to a large number of spplied problems iron the .field of stabilizing
neasuring devices.

The book is intended for engineering-technical and scientific workers
working with questions of stabilizing neasuring devices. applied gyro-
scopy. and autonatic control oi moving objects. It can also be used by
upper division and graduate students in the appropriate specializations.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The book containa ll tablea. 100 illnatrntiona. and 101 bibliography

en tr iea .

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contanta:

’0’ “rd I O O O O ' O O C O O O I O O I O O 5 O O O O O D O O O 3 O O

blot of Abbreviationa

Chapter 1.

Stabilization of lieaanring Davicee

1.1
1.2

1.3
1.6

Chapter 2.

D.vtc..aeeeeaeoeoeoeeeeoeeooee

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.6
Chapter 3.

General Intonation on Oacillationa of the Baae and

Stabiliration of Haunting Devicae, Hethode and

O O O O O 0 0 O O O O 0 O O 6 O O O I b O O O O

O O O I I O O O I I O I O I D O

r.chn1c.1 ".‘n. O O O C O O I O O 0 O O C I O I O O O O 0

Statement of the Problem of Determining the Characteriatice

o! the Svaying ot a Ship in Irregular Havea . . . . . . .
The Geometry and Kine-atica of the Svaying of a Ship . . . .

Probabilietic Characteriatica of the Svaying and Orbital

Motto“ of . ship 0 0 O O 0 O O 6 O O 3 O O O Q 0 O O O 0

Pactora That ﬂake It Neceaaary to Stabilize Neaanring

Rotation of the Syataa oi Coordinatea Linked to the '

a O O l O O I

lieaenringoevica....................

Angular Velocitiaa and Accelerationa of Guidance of Haaanr-

ing Davicee in Svaying notion . . . . . . . . . . . .

Linear Velocitica and Acceleration of a Civen Point of
. sht’ O O 0 O J O O O O O I O O O O O O O O O C O O
The “fact of Svaying on the Uaa of haunting Devicea .

The Beeential Putnrea of Current Methode o! Stabilisa-

‘unon.shtpoeeeeoOe-eoaaoeaoooaloee

3.1

3.2
3.3

Chapter 4.

Deacription of Hechoda of Stabilization and Claaaiiica-
‘10“ of Thu 0 O O O O O O O ' I O O O O O O O O O 0

Brief Intonation on Ship Stabilitere . . . . . . . . .

Objecte for Local Stabilization, Pare-etera of Stabilize-
tion. and Inetrnnenta to Detenine Than . . . . . . .

The Hethanatical Principlea of Solving Problem of Con-

VCft‘ﬂ‘cootd‘MCCIaaeaaeeaaooeaeaaoeaeoeo

L1

$559
0
0'59”

0

The haential Paatnraa of the Probleaa of Converting Coor-

dinatee on a Ship and a Survey of. Kethoda of Solving
“a O O O O O O O O 0 O O b O O I O O O O I O O O O
Uaing Formulas from Spherical Trigonometry . . . . . . .
Application of the Techniqnea of Analytic Cemtery . .
The Matrix Method of Converting Coordinatee . . . . . .
The Coordinate Convaraion Method Saaed on the Theory of
SnellanneofaSolidlody. . . . . . .. . . . . .

106
M OHICIIJ. USE ONLY

0

o

o

3
10

11

11

16
15

29

66

66
53
63
70
73

73
77

81

33

S3
85
90
95

98
4.6
4.7

Ghep ter 5.

FOR OFFICIAL Ugh ONLY

The Coordinate Converoion Method Based on the Theory
of Pinite Turne of a Solid F.dy . . . . . . . . . . .
Cooperative Evaluation of Dltiernnt Methode of Solving
the Probleme of Converting Coordinatee . . . . . . .

The Geometry and Kinenntiee of Indirect Stabilieetion

O‘MOOOIJt‘insbeVLr-zb................o....

5.1
5.2
5.3
5.6

Chapter o.
6.

o

o

7‘ 00000
a “FUN 8-.

6.7

Chapter 7.

The Resentiel Peeturee of the Technique of Indirect
st.bt11:.‘ 1°“ 9 G O I O C O 9 m 0 O O I O I O I 0 O 8
Anguler Coordinetes of the Axes a! e Measuring Device:
Angle of Inclination of the Ship's Deck . . . . . . .
The Geometry end Kinennticu of Meaeuring Device Guidance
with Verious 5:5emee of Indirect Stebilizetion . . .
Schemes of Measuring Device Stabilieetion Using the
indirect Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Geometry end Kinematics of Direct Stabilization .

The Besentiel Peeturee of the Method of Direct Stabili-
‘.cl°n O O 0 O O O 9 O 0 9 O O O O l O O O 8 O 8 O m
The Gimhal Mount end lte Primary Elements . . . . . . .
The Geometry end Kinematice of the Gimbnl Mount . . . .
Types of Gimbel Mounts end Their Propertiee . . . . . .
The Geometry and Kinematics of Guidance of Meaeuring
Devices Employing Various Direct Stabilization ldees
Schemee of Measuring Device Stabilization Using the
D‘fcc : H. ch“ 0 O O O C 8 O O O I O O O O O O 0 O O 0
The Relationship Between Errors in Stabilization and
Guidance of Measuring Devices . . . . . . . . . . . .

Gyroscopie Devices Used in Stabilization Syeteea for

He..ur1un.vtc..eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

7.1
7.2
7.3

Chapter 8.
8.1

General nggcggpgton of Some Iinde of Gyroscopee . . . .
Gyroscope Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gyroscopic Stebilieation of Measuring Devices . . . . .

Conversion of Coordinatae on a Ship . . . . . . . . .

General Description of the Probleme of Converting Coor-
dm‘.‘ m I 0 O 0 O O O O 0 e O m 0 e O 0 O o O O I O

105

. 115

8.2 Theoretical Elements and Schemes of Coordinate Conversion.
8.3 Error in Conversion of Coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 9.

9.1
9.2

9.3
9.6

Predicting the Position of a Ship That Is Svaying . .

The Essential Peetures of the Problem of Prediction . .
Determining the Optimal Transfer Punction of the Pre-
dieting Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
P'.d£ct1°n Etrot O O O 8 O O O O O 0 O O O I O C O O I 0
Solving the Prediction Problem by the Kalman Method . .

107
POI OFPICIAL USE ONLY

0

117

117
118
123
153
169
169
170
17k
191
205
215

226

228

228
231
238

269

249
252
262

265
265
267

276
276
Chapter 10.
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.‘
10.5
10.6

FOR OP?10!AL USS ONLY

The Dynamics of Stabilization Syotcna . . . . . . . .

Survey of the Problene of the Dyna-ice of Stabiliza-
tion sy.t.” C 0 0 0 I 0 0 e 0 O I O 0 O O 0 O I O 0

Selecting the Linita of Stabilization of a Heaauring

DCVtc. e a e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e

Oanerai Deacription and Functional Diagram of Servo
M‘V. st.b11t“ct°n e e e e e e e e e e e a e e o e e
Probabiliatic Propertiea of Controlling and Diaturbing
Actiena on Haaaurins bavicaa . . . . . . . . . . . .
Equationa and rranafar Punctiona of Servo Drive
Stlbﬂitatton....................
Dynamic Error of Stabilization . . . . . . . . . . . .

B1b11°gr.PWaeeeeaeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeoeoee

COPYRIGHT:

Olavnaya redaktaiya firiko-aatanatichaakoy 1itaratury

iadatal'atvo "Neute". 1973

11.176
cso: 1870

108
PO! OPFICIAL USE ONLY

28‘

285
285
290

293 -

299
303

316
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 631.521.633.11

BREEDING SPRING WT

Hoocov 8513131“ YAROVOY P58331118! in Ruooion 1977 oignod to prooo
25 Jul 77 pp 2, 153-156

[Annoution and Table of Oontonto of book oditod by N. V. 'Nrbin,
deotol'otvo "Koloo", 1910 copioo. 154 pogoo]

[roxt] Tho colloction dulo with tho problem of brooding opring wheat. in-
cluding ohort-otmod voriotioo of the intensive typo. tho nothodology in ro-
voolod .‘or brooding opting what for drought-rooiotonco ond oorly riponing.
ond roioing tho quolity of tho groin. Tho biologicol choroctoriotito of now
rogionoliood ond pronioing voriotioo oro douribod.

toblo of Contonto

‘l'ho Hoot loportont Problono of lrooding Spring "hoot
v. “I ””10. 1.1. v..11.nk° O O O O O O O O C O O O C 0 O I O 3

houlto. Promo-o ond Poropoctivoo of Breoding Spring "hoot
in tho ﬂouthooot of tho Europoon Port of tho USSR
'0 “O mn‘ov. C O C 0 O O O I O I O O O I O O C C O O C O O O 10

Brooding Soft and Duran Spring "hoot in ﬂootorn Siborio
v. ‘0 zyktn. v. A. s.vtt.k.y. O O l O O O O 0 O O .0 O O O I O 20

109
FOR OFFICIAL I153 081.?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Braading Spring "hoot Under the Conditions oi the Central
Volga Region

"0 I. GlukhOV‘IOVO e a a a a a e a a a a a e e a a e e e e e e a

Raaulta and Parapeetivee of Breeding Spring "heat in Baatarn
Siberia
‘0 v0 m:‘.d1.v B O B B I I O B IO 0 O. O O O O O O I

Breeding "ork "ith Spring "heat in the Southern Ukraine
1’. G. Kiriohanko. A. l. Koetanko . . . . . . . . . .

Breeding Spring "heat in Kuataneyakeya (Meet
LBVOPmnovoOOSOOOBOOOOOOOOOOOO.

‘rranda in the Breeding of Spring "heat "ith Irrigation in
the Volga Region
Y“. be Kotlov a e e a a e a e a a a e e a e a a e e e

Breeding for a high Yield and Good Proceaaing Propartiaa of
the Grain of Spring "heat for Irrigated Lands
:0 PO “ﬁnnko B B O 0 .. a O O I 0 O O C O O O O O O

Reeulta of State Tearing of New Variotiea of Spring "heat
and Putting Thea Into Production
Go v. ul.mw.k.’. O O O O I O I O O I O O O I O O O

Brought-Reaietant Strain Sanaa of Spring "heat. Valuable
for Breeding
A. “O “and.” O O O O O O O O C. O O 0 O 0 O I .00 0

Model of a Variety of Soft Spring "heat for the Steppaa
o! the Volga Region
v. A. KWOV O O O O O O O O O 0 O O 0 I O O I O I O

Breeding Value of New Soviet and Foreign Variatiaa
of Spring "heat

Se Va m‘novtch O O O O O C O O O O 0 O O O O O O O O O O O 0

Breeding Spring "heat in the Central Charlton- Zone

N. A. Kur'nin, P. A. Nikulichava. V. V. lbrkovin . . . . . . .

Organization and Raaulta of "ark on Breeding Spring "heat
in tha Hoaoou Breeding Canter Zone

‘aoou‘ct.v1d'aooea0.0000000000000000.

Raaulta and Parapectivea o! Breeding Spring "heat in the Far Beat
v0 “0 WW”. I. “O shindtn O O O O O O O O O O O 0 Q 0 O.

110

FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

29

37

62

lo?

53

SS

60

67

70

75

81

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Breeding Spring Wheat at the 'i‘ulun Breeding Station
AOY.OY“d1nOOOIDIOOOOOOOO00.0.00... 93

The Interrelation oi the Componento of Grain Yield for Spring Wheat
. Sopomttmo‘IgVeAameQOVeoeeooeoeeeeoee 100

lloreditivity of Sedimentation Value in Soft Spring Wheat Hybride
V. ii. Sabyekin. V. A. Krupnov. A. I. Heruohev. ‘
LoPeNOPyatOV.oeeooooooeeooooeeaooeo106

Stock iieteriel in Breeding Spring Wheat With Irrigation
W. A. Stoponiohchov. H. V. Luk'yonovo . . . . . . . . . . . . 112

Breeding Spring Wheat in tha Sethkir ASSR,
VOION‘kNOVIOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.000.0 116

Growing Highly Productive Voriotieo of Soft end Duran Spring
Wheat for the Poreet-Stoppo zone of the Ukraine
Vo s. coltk O I O O O O" I O O O O O O D O I O O O O O O C O C 12°

Baoio Propertioa of the Ideel Variety of Spring Wheat in Kuban'
A.li.lurdm.A.N.cuyde................. 126

Breeding Work With Spring Wheat tor the Conditiono oi
Orenhurgekaye Obleot
“ODOLoud‘.vooooto0.00.00.00.00... 131

Breeding Spring Wheat in Ul'yanovekeye Obloet
“O I. v1.hny.k°v. 0 O O O I C O O O O O O O O O I O O O O O 135

Breeding Spring Wheat in Seloruooia
Vo Y.‘ ”unkov. O O O O I O O O O O O O O O O 0 O O O O O 139

Wooulto of an Bvoluetion of Seapleo of Spring Wheot Pro.
a World Collection Under the Conditiono of the For But
1. ii. Shindin. V. H. Konochnyy. V. P. Koneohooye.
A.H.Kano1ino,Ye.c.l'.yoykh................ 1“

oorrnuarr: Izdatel'etvo "Koloo". 1977

12151
080: 1870 m

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY