FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10440

April 1982

USSR Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, vith the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, vievs or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY

(FOOD 2/ 82

Cameras

38th Session of Council on Coordination of Scientific Activity Held
(VESTNIK MEI! “Aux sssn,D.c81) 00.0.0.0...IOOOOOOOOIIOOIO

Academician Aleksandrov Speech to the Council
(A. P. Aleksandrov; VBS‘I'IIIK AKADMI NAUK 33811, Dec 81)

Closer Coordination of Scientific Institute. Urged
(V. A. Kotel'nikov; VBSTNIK AKADEHII RACK SSSR, Dec 81)........

Central Asian and Kazakh Acadeniee of Sciencea Coordinate Research
(A. S. Sadykov; VBSTNIK AKADEHII “All: 8881!, Dec 81)

Legal Authority Advocated for Anode-y of Sciences as Leading

Coordinating Body
(V. P. Raseokhin; VBSTNIK AKADBHII “AUX SSSR, Nov 81) .........

International Exchange of Technological Knowledge
(Viloriy Anatol'yevich Ryebov; mum 0W

TEKHNOLOGICHBSKIHI ZNANIYAHI, 1981) ...........................

- a - [III - USSR - 210 $81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cian A. P. Aleksandr-0v; vice-presidents of the USSR Acadeuy of Sciences, Acadeni-
cians V. A. Kotel’nikov and P. N. Pedoeeyev: members of the USSR Acadeuy of Sciences;
prcsidiun, Academicians N. G. Basov, S. V. Vonaovskiy, I. A. Glebov, B. Ye. Paton,
A. S. Sadykov, and A. A. Trofinuk; other important scientists and officials of the
union-republic acadenies of sciences. affiliates and scientific centers of the

USSR Academy of Sciences; and responsible workers of the CPSU Central Couittee,

the Uzbekistan Commist Party Central Cmittee and republic Cauncil of Ministers,

In opening the session, the chairman of the Coordination Council, President of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, Academician A. P. Aleksandrov, gave the floor to Candi-

9645
CSO: 1814/42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ACADEMIC IAN ALBKSANDROV SPEECH 1'0 m COUNCIL
HoScow VES‘l‘NIK AKADEHII NAUK 8883 in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 16-18

[Sun-nary of opening remarks by A. P. Aleksandrov, president of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, at the 38th Session of the Council for the Coordination of the Scientific
Activities of the Union-Republic Academies of Sciences: "Opening Remarks by Presi-
dent of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Academician A. P. Aleksandrov"l

[Text] In his opening remarks, A. P. Aleksandrov characterized the status of
scientific research coordination in the country's academy institutions and higher
educational institutions. Considerable improvement in the coordination of research
during the last ten years has made possible a wider exchange of experience and the
achievement and practical implementation of important scientific results but, at the
same time, there are still defects and unsolved problems. A. P. Aleksandrov gave
special attention to the Sun-nary Report of the CPSU Central Connittee to the 26th
CPSU Congress, in which Comrade 1.. I. Brezhnev, having rated highly the role of
science in the life of our country and, particularly, the achievements of the USSR
Academy of Sciences and union-republic academies of sciences, noted at the same
time that among scientific institutions there are still ineffective institutes and
laboratories which, over long periods of time, have not brought about any noticeable
results. It is necessary, said the president, to be more exacting toward the work
of the scientific institutions of the USSR Academy of Sciences and of the union-
republic academies of sciences and to take measures to increase their effectiveness.

A. P. Aleksandrov dealt with the contributions of individual republic academies of
sciences and affiliates of the USSR Academy of Sciences to the development of science
in the country UhiCxl, according to his evaluation, has increased significantly in
recent years. He especially noted the significant achievements of the Ukrainian 889.
Academy of Sciences, which is the head organization for a nutter of scientific areas,
above all in the development of various types of welding and electrometallurgy.

The Belorussian 388 Academy of Sciences, together with the VUZ's of the republic,
are conducting successful work in the application of powder metallurgy. The appli-
cation of powder metallurgy in machine building and tractor and motor vehicle manu-
facture provides for both savings in metal and increases in machine longevity. A
large contribution to the development of permanent magnets with large magnetic
energy (up to 30 million 6-0:) was made by the Ural Scientific Center for the USSR
Academy of Sciences. These works are helping to accomplish many of the difficult
tasks of modern technology, particularly in the electronics industry and even in the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
textile industry. Scientists of the center have found a way of making special items
from tungsten that are necessary for work in thermonuclear energy, and they have
also solved the problem of producing powerful cathodes and a large number of devices
for the electronics industry. Scientists of the Uzbek SSR Academy of Sciences are
successfully fulfilling important scientific developments related to the practical
utilization of‘wastes from the cotton industry. As a result of their achievements,
the possibility has opened up to set up production for a number of products that we
still acquire from abroad. In cooperation with the Siberian Department of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, the Uzbek SSR Academy of Sciences has done important work on
the production of organic compounds tagged with radioactive phosphorus that are wide-
ly applied in medical, biological, and many other kinds of research. Thus, now we
are able to achieve these substances at a quality level higher than those being
produced abroad.

'I#
Further, A. P. Aleksandrov touched on the question of relations between academy and
VUZ science, on the one hand, and industry, on the other hand. He illustrated the
usefulness and effectiveness of such relations with specific examples. Thus,
according to joint complex plans with industrial organizations, hundreds of scien-
tific developments have been brought about and, when necessary, joint laboratories
hale been especially created. This helps ease the introduction of finished scien-

tific developments into industry, eliminating many interagency barriers.

The president dealt with the development of automation for scientific research in
institutions of the USSR Academy of Sciences and republic academies. The convenient
international standard was taken as the basis for automation. Equipment being manu-
Iactured on this standard for tying measuring instruments to computer technology
permits building a unified system on the basis of any domestic or foreign computers.

The USSR Ministry of Instrument Making in recent years has been manufacturing
measuring-calculating complexes (IVE), which include SH-3 and su—a computers. These
complexes already are becoming numerous. In the current five-year plan it is
proposed to produce 1000 such complexes, which will permit substantial progress in
automating our research and increase its rate. In addition to these complexes, the
Ministry of the Electronics Industry has developed the "Blektronika-SO" machines.
The latest modifications have already appeared, and they combine well with the IVK.
The Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the USSR Academy of Sciences
has developed technology for coupling them together and the necessary interface
equipment. Because of this, we now have gone from the lowest level laboratory .
computer technology that could be tied directly to measuring instruments to the level
of the advanced laboratories of the world. The president also noted the development
and manufacture of the "Iskra-226" machines, one of the configurations of which is
very convenient for automation of experiments because, unlike the SH-3 and SH-h
machines, it does not require extended training on the part of the user. Already
in the next five-year plan, noted A. P. Aleksandrov, computer technology will cease
to be a bottleneck in the development of our science. Instrument making still lags
somewhat and, to meet the needs of academy scientific institutions, it is necessary
to continue to expand instrument-making capabilities not only in the USSR Academy

nf Sciences, but also in the republic academies. The president, with great satis-
faction, noted that the development of scientific instrument making is also being

planned in Uzbekistan.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion, A. P. Aleksandrov expressed gratitude to the Uzbekistan Connunist
Party Central Committee, the Uzbek SSR Council of Ministers, and the Uzbek 888
Academy of Sciences for offering the opportunity to conduct the visiting 38th
session of the Coordinstion Council in Tashkent and for creating outstanding condi-
tions for the session's work.

Participants of the session heard and discussed reports by Academician V. A.
Kotel'nikov, vice-president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, on improving the
coordination of activities of the union-republic academies; Academician A. 8.
Sndykov, president of the UzSSR Academy of Sciences, on experience in joint research
among the academies of sciences of Central Asia and Kazakhstan on important regional
problems; and Academician A. A. Logunov, vice president of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, on strengthening cooperation between the USSR Academy of Sciences and
nnion-repuhlic academies of sciences, on the one hand, and higher schools, on the
other. For each report, a corresponding decision was nade.

COPYRIGUT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

9645
C50: 1814/42

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CLOSER COORDINATION OF SCIENTIFIC INSTITUTES URGED
Moscow VESTNIK AKADBMII NAUK $888 in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 19-25

[Report by Academician V. A. Kotel'nikov, vice-president of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, to the 38th session of the Council for the Coordination of the Research
Activities of the Union-Republic Academies of Sciences: "0n Improving the Coordi-
nation of the Activities of Scientific Institutions in the Union Republics and the
Tasks of the Republic Academies of Sciences in Utilising Scientific Achievements
aore Effectively in Fulfilling the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress”)

[Text] The 26th CPSU Congress has again pointed out that, without the developnent
of science, it is not possible to build the new society. The congress gave atten-
tion to the necessity to improve the organization of scientific research and to
accelerate the realization of scientific research results in the country's economy.
In the Summary Report to the congress, which was presented by the General Secretary
of the CPSU Central Committee, L. I. Brezhnev, it was also stated that "science
should be the 'disturber of tranquility,‘ indicating the sectors where stagnation
and backwardness have been noted and where the current level of knowledge provides
the possibility to move ahead more rapidly and more successfully."

In recent years, in the USSR Academy of Sciences and in the union-republic academies,
a large amount of experience has been accumulated in providing aid in the management
uf the economy on a country-wide and republic scale, and also, in individual
economic regions, in creating work forms that facilitate and accelerate the utili-
zation of scientific results in practice.

However, for from everything has been done in this field.

The purpose of the present report is to generalize existing experience and thereby
aid its dissemination.

One of the advantages of our socialist system is the possibility for uniting the
nfforts of various scientific, design, project-planning, and production organiza-
:ions, independently of agency subordination, to accomplish tasks that are impor-
tant for the country or for regions under the management of party and Soviet bodies.
This form of work has been widely used in recent years.

To maintain constant creative relationships between scientific and production organi-
zntions in the union republics, republic councils for the coordination of scienti-

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rust Urn-[Lana use on»!

fic activities have been created; as a rule, these councils are headed by presi-
dents of union-republic academies of sciences.

Purposeful and systematic work by the republic coordination councils with ministries
and agencies, ministerial scientific-research institutes, and VUZ's has led to the
improvement of inter- and intra-agency coordination of scientific research and to
increase in the share of complex research in fulfilling plans for the most important
projects.

Thus, the coordination council under the presidium of the Georgian 853 Academy of
Sciences has done significant work on the analysis of the republic's current posi-
tion in various fields of science and technology and has searched for more effec-
tive ways to solve important economic problems (the autoclave-hydrometallurgical
processing of Madneuli copper and low-grade Chiatura manganese ores, further agri-
cultural development, and others).

The coordination council of the Latvian SSE Academy of Sciences works in close
contact with institutes and industrial organizations of ministries and agencies of
country-wide and republic subordination in adjusting the subject matter and in
searching for more active forms for utilizing scientists' recommendations in prac-
tice. Especially successful are the developing relationships with the USSR Ministry
of the Medical Industry, the USSR Ministry of the Chemical Industry, and the
republic Ministry of Health in the creation and introduction into practice of effec-
tive new preparations and equipment for medical treatment.

Created in 1977, the coordination council under the Moldavian SSR Academy of Scien-
ces has increased the organizational and coordination role of the Academy of Scien-
ces in conducting broad research in the agrarian-industrial and food complexes and,
for these purposes, has united the efforts of all scientific institutions of the
Academy of Sciences, the scientific-research design organizations of the republic
Ministry of Agriculture, VUZ's, and other scientific institutions.

The coordination council under the Estonian SSR Academy of Sciences has done much
work on the solution of the problem "The Fuel-Energy Complex of the Estonian SSR,"
and has also done methodological work with VUz's and ministerial scientific-research
institutes in planning scientific-research projects. As already noted many times,

a large amount of experience has been accumulated by the academies of sciences of
the Ukraine, Belorussia, and Kazakhstan, and by the Ural Scientific Center of the
USSR Academy of Sciences.

The Experience of Visiting-Fassions of Departments of the USSR Academy of Sciences
and of Departments of Union-Republic Academies of Sciences

An important role in coordinating scientific-research work and in raising the level
of research planning can be played by visiting-sessions of presidiun sections of
tne USSR Academy of Sciences and departments of the USSR Academy of Sciences and
union-republic academies with participation by scientific and production organiza-
tions.

For example, in the work of sessions conducted by the Department of General and
Technical Chemistry in 1976, in Baku, and 1980, in Tbilisi, besides officials of
the departments of chemical sciences of all the republic academies, there was parti-

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6
pation by scientists andéproduction specialists from the Ministry of the Chemical
Industry, the Ministry of the Petroleum Refining and Petrochemical Industry, the
Ministry of the Pulp 33d Paper Industry, and the Ministry of Fertilizers.

As a result of this coordination sort, in 1976 a new form was proposed far conduc-
ting joint projects by academy and production organisations according to commission-
orders, and in 1980 an assessment was conducted of these projects for more accele-
rated utilization of them in practical activities.

There are similar examples among the republic academies of sciences. Thus, the
Department of Siological Sciences of the 02853 Academy of Sciences conducted a
visiting-meeting at Andirhan on the cotton problem; the Department of chemical
Sciences of the MaSSR Academy of Sciences conducted one at Kareganda on the develop:
ment of research in the fields of metallurgy and carbon chemistry; and the 3553
Academy of Sciences conducted one at Kohtla-Jarve on the problem of the complex
utilization of shale and other items.

Expanded visiting-sessions of the Section for Social Sciences of the presidium of
the USSR Academy of Sciences are held systematically at union-republic academies of
sciences where, with participation by broad scientific communities of republics and
regions and by representatives of party bodies, there are discussions of urgent
questions in the development and directions of research in history, philosophy, and
other sciences.

Special-Purpose Programs

The conduct of fundamental and applied research under special-purpose programs has
important significance, as these programs reflect the urgent requirements of produce
tion for more progressive types of products and for complex automation of production
processes in industry, agriculture, construction, and transportation.

A substantial feature of the cited programs is the presence of the introduction
stage as an obligatory element, and this makes them an effective instrument for
accelerating the practical utilization of recent scientific and technical achieve-
ments.

Projects according to complex programs are widely represented in the academies of
sciences of the UkSSR, UrSSR, 3883, Lassa, laSSR, and in other academies.

Thus, the Academy of Sciences of the Ukrainian 888 is conducting research according
to [6 complex plans with ministries and agencies, and also according to 20 complex
programs of interest to large scientific-production associations and enterprises of
the country. The accomplishment of scientific and applied research according to
complex plane and programs has permitted the UkSSR Academy of Sciences to create,
for example, more than 300 new technologies of various levels, which are being
successfully utilized by enterprises of the Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy, the
Ministry of the Chemical Industry, the Ministry of the Shipbuilding Industry, and
other ministries.

The Academy of Sciences of the Moldevian SS! is conducting research according to
15 republic complex scientific-technical problems, which cover questions relating
to the intensification of agricultural production and to improving the management

7
FOR¢MHHK1A1.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI'. ONLY

of economic and social processes. In their implementation there is participation
by all institutions of the academy, eight VUZ's and about 50 ministerial scientific-
research institutes and scientific-production associations.

The Academy of Sciences of the Latvian SSR has developed scientific-technical prob-
lems according to 23 programs and the Academy of Sciences of the Turkmen SSR,
according to ll; the Academy of Sciences of the Uzbek SSR is participating in the
development of 23 country-wide programs, including such programs as "Cotton."

Among nine programs being conducted by the Academy of Sciences of the Estonian SSR,
important research is being done on the problems "Complex Utilisation of shale"
and "Complex Utilization of Phosphorites."

The Ural Scientific Center of the USSR Academy of Sciences, together with organiza-
tions of the USSR Ministry of Geology, the 88383 Ministry of Geology, and the
Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy, has successfully conducted research on complex
programs such as "The Mineral Wealth of the Urale" and "Ferrous Metallurgy of the
Urals" -- 28 in all.

The Kola, Komi, and Karelian Affiliates of the USSR Academy of Sciences have united
their efforts in a unified program "The Economic and Social Development of the
European Part of the USSR North."

It should be noted that the academies of sciences of the UkSSR, the BSSR, the UzSSR,
and the Siberian Department and the Ural Scientific Center of the USSR Academy of
Sciences have prepared important material on the Complex Program for Scientific-
Technical Progress and Its Social-Economic Consequences up to the Year 2000. "

Joint Laboratories

One of the forms for uniting the efforts of academy organisations and production
organizations of the economic sectors is the creation of joint laboratories. These
units, as a rule, are created either at academy institutes or at enterprises of
corresponding union or republic ministries. They are financed by the ministry,

and scientific and methodological management is accomplished by an academy institute.

Thus, in the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences at the present time there are about 60
such laboratories of 20 all-union or republic ministries, and over 10 of them in

the Belorussian Academy of Sciences. In the Latvian Academy of Sciences, 10 of them
have been organized; in the Moldavian Academy of Sciences, 11; and in the Kazakh
Academy of Sciences, 6. Interagency laboratories operate successfully in the
Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences. An undoubted value of such laboratories is the
substantial shortening of time from the end of scientific developments to the intro-
duction of their results into the economy. In addition, this form presents more
effective mutual enrighment through the ideas and proposals of scientists and
production specialists.

Unfortunately, it must be noted that experience in the organization of economic-
sector-oriented laboratories and interagency laboratories has still not been
sufficiently disseminated among the academies of sciences of Georgia, Armenia,

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tajikistan, and Turkmenia, although these academies are experiencing serious
difficulties in implementing their scientific developments because of their weak

experimental-production base.

Production Bases-and Experimental Plants

in the USSR Academy of Sciences during the last five years, a significant amount of
work has been done in creating the supply and equipment base to provide for carrying
scientific developmpnts forward to meet the needs of production.

Without referring to the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, where such a base has been
especially developed, I would like to talk about other academies of sciences.

The BSSR Academy of Sciences has a successfully functioning Central Design Bureau
with an experimental shop and seven branches in physical-engineering institutes of
the academy. The volume of products produced by these organizations was about

75 million rubles.

The LaSSR Academy of Sciences has created seven scientific-technical complexes based
at leading institutes and including the institute, a special design bureau, and an
experimental plant. The yearly volume of product output at academy scientific—
technical complexes exceeds 17 million rubles (some of the products are even ex-
ported to developed capitalist countries -- the United States, Japan, PEG, and
certain others.

Experimental production has been well developed at the 02888 Academy of Sciences,
where five scientific-production complexes are now operating.

The experimental-production bases at the academies of Azerbaijan, Lithuania,
Estonia, and Moldavia are being expanded successfully.

Considering the lack of funds allotted to academy organisations for capital construc-
tion and also the slow rates of implementing plans for creating their own experi-
mental bases, the utilization of enterprise production bases has important signifi-
cance; it facilitates experimental-industrial verification of research results and
introduction into the respective sectors. Attention should be given to the
experience of the Ukraine, Belorussia, Kazakhstan, and Moldavia, where decisions by
the republic councils of ministers have determined the base production organisations
which, together with academy and ministerial scientific-research institutes, provide
for the conduct of necessary tests and make available for this purpose their own
experimental-industrial facilities, experimental shops, agricultural plots, and so
forth.

Thus, for example, in Belorussia there are about 40 such base enterprises; in
Moldavia, over 30; and so forth.

Contract Subjects

Contracts are one of the important means for enlisting funds from production
organizations for strengthening the supply and equipment base of academies of

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sciences and also more rapidly utilizing the results of completed scientific
developments in the economy.

The most active in conducting research under contracts with ministries and agencies
are the institutions of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, where receipts from contract
subjects is about 50 percent of the total appropriations for scientific research;
the BSSR Academy of Sciences (over 52%); and the LiSSR and HSSR Academies of
Sciences (over 301).

At the same time, a number of academies make little use of this financing source.
Thus, in the academies of sciences of Georgia, Armenia, Kirghizia, and Turkmenia,
the share of contract topics does not exceed 15 to 20 percent.

Moreover, individual academies (for example, the GSSR Academy of Sciences) conclude
many small contracts of about 2000 rubles each, which is evidence of lack of signifi—
cance of these projects.

A circumstance that calls attention to itself is that the experience of joint work
between institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences and ministries confirms the
possibility of receiving a substantial supplement to the wage fund from ministries
every year -- about 2 million rubles.

The Creation of Centers for Collective Use of Expensive and Unique Equipment

Expenditures for equipment and scientific instruments at the present time have been
seriously growing. In addition, there have appeared unique instruments, the
acquisition and operation of which are beyond the capabilities of individual insti-
tutions. At the same time, many researchers and scientific institutions have need
for such instruments.

Therefore, centers for collective use of unique and expensive instruments and
facilities have begun to operate with the aim of increasing effectiveness in the
utilization of scientific equipment and computer technology and also of improving
the quality of scientific experiments in academics of sciences.

Thus, in the USSR Academy of Sciences, centers have been created for automated
spectroscopic measurements, x-ray structural analysis, and cryogenic research. The
services of these centers are used by over 40 scientific and production organiza-
tions of the republic in addition to academy institutes.

similar centers for interagency use have been created under the academies of
sciences of Georgia, Moldavia, and Uzbekistan, and under the Institute of Deserts
of the TuSSR Academy of Sciences. The LaSSR Academy of Sciences has developed a
computer system that permits structural and programming unification of specialized
computers into an integrated complex. This has provided the possibility for signi-
ficsnt progress in the automation of experiments in scientific institutes of the
academy and in wide use of computer technology by other republic organizations.

A center for activation analysis, created under the Institute of Nuclear Physics of
the UzSSR Academy of Sciences, serves not only republic scientific and production
organizations but is also an interrepublic center. In this connection, it seems

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
advisable to authorise the Coordination Council to prepare and, during the current
year, to hold no one of the academies of sciences (for example, the Moldavian SSS
Academy of Sciences) a special seminar of vice-presidents and chief scientist-
sccretaries of the union-republic academies of sciences to study the experience of
organizing workmat'centers for collective use of scientific equipment and up-to-
date equipment for automating experimentation. Such measures will permit the
expansion and strengthening of creative relationships between the academies and
scientific centers of the USSR Academy of Sciences and to exchange experience accumu-
lated on this important subject.

Organization of Exhibits

It is necessary to note that the existing form of information support to production
organizations concerning achievements of academies of sciences is not very effec-
tive. At the same time, acquainting the scientific-technical communities of
economic ministries and agencies by means of academy institutions' conducting
exhibits is insufficiently utilised in the republics. Exhibitions organized at
Gosplan by the URSSR Academy of Sciences, by the Siberian Department and Ural
Scientific Center, and the Far East Scientific Center of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, and also by the USSR Academy of Sciences as a whole have had extremely
good results. It seems advisable to conduct regular exhibits in republics and
regions and, on results that are most significant for the economy, in Moscow. The
scientific council on exhibits of the USSR Academy of Sciences and union-republic
academies of sciences and the Coordination Council should study organizational forms
for these exhibits.

Effectiveness of Scientific Research

Scientific institutions of the republic academies, utilizing direct program agree-
ments concluded with economic ministries and large prOduction associations, have
achieved important results both in fundamental research and in the development of
applied scientific-technical problems. These achievements are being widely applied
in the economy.

The union of the forces of academy science and science of the economic sectors and
the isolation of leading trends permit, as a rule, the acceleration of research
and an increase in its success rate.

Thus, during the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan, the economic effect from intro-
ducing the results of scientific developments, according to data from the academies
of sciences, was as follows: the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, over 1.5 billion rubles;
the LaSSR Academy of Sciences, over 450 million rubles; the 03883 Academy of
Sciences, about 900 million rubles; the USSR Academy of Sciences, about 350 million
rubles; and the HSSR Academy of Sciences, over 100 million rubles. These data
somewhat exceed the indicators achieved by the named academies during the 9th Five-
Year Plan. significant successes in introducing the results of scientific research
into the economy were achieved by the academies of sciences of Kazakhstan,
Azerbaijan, Lithuania, Estonia, and other republics.

The experience of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences is important; this academy, with
aid from the Ukrainian Communist Party obkoms did significant work in strengthening

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAL Ubl‘. UI‘L‘

interagency scientific-technical relationships in regions. For example, the
Western Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, with active support
from the L'vov obkom of the Ukrainian Communist Party, crested a kind of system for
managing special-purpose scientific-technical programs that provide for increased
effectiveness of work of leading economic sectors of the region. Just during the
last five-year plan, the scientific institutions of the center introduced over

340 scientific developments with an economic effect of about 105 million rubles.
The experience in the work of the Western Scientific Center of the UkSSR Academy
of Sciences and the L'vov obkom of the Ukrainian Communist Party was discussed at
a meeting of the presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences and at a special
conference-seminar conducted in January 1981 in L'vov. without a doubt, there are
examples of extremely fruitful joint projects at individual scientific centers and
oblast party organisations in the RSFSR. They also should be studied and utilized
by all academies of sciences in their practical activities.

Conclusion

The 26th CPSU Congress placed large tasks before Soviet science. It is necessary
to provide for record development of fundamental sciences and increase the success
rate of applied research. The breadth and significance of the planned research
program require energetic utilisation of the strengths and reserves of science
itself. And these reserves are significant. Far from all scientific collectives
work at full output and, in a number of them, there are still petty topics and
duplication.

The documents of the congress note the necessity for improving the organisation of
the whole system of scientific research. It should be significantly more flexible
and mobile, intolerant of nonproductive laboratories and institutes.

In connection with what has been presented, it seems advisable to authorize the
union-republic academies of sciences to prepare during 1982 and present to the
presidinm of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the USSR State Committee for Science
and Technology a proposal for improving the organisation of the whole system of
scientific research in the republics and also a proposal for necessary regrouping
of scientific forces to correspond to the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

To be sure, such work by an academy of sciences should be agreed upon by the
directive bodies of the republic.

"Today, looking ahead for five or ten years,“ said L. I. Brezhnev at the 26th CPSU
Congress, "we cannot forget that it is during these very years that the economic
structure will evolve and be created with which the country will enter the 21st
Century. It should embody the basic features and ideals of the new society,

he the avant-garde of progress, and personify the integration of science and
production, the unbreakable union of creative thought and creative labor."

COPYRIGHT: lsdatel'stvo "Neuka", "Vestnik Akadamii nauk SSSR", 1981

9665
cso: 181a/43

12
FOR OFFﬂﬂAl.USB(NVLY
”CENTRAL ASIAN AND KAZAKR ACADSHIBS OF SCIENCES COORDINATE RESEARCH
'Hoscow 9851'le AKADBNII “All! 888K in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 26-31

[Report by Academician A. s. Sedykov, president of the Uzbek 88R Academy of
‘Sciences: "The Experience in Joint Research Projects by the Academies of Sciences
of Central Asia and Kazakhstan on Important Regional Scientific Problems and
Prospects for Development of These Projects"l

.lText] In the ”Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development for 1981 to
1985 and for the Period up to 1990," which use approved at the 26th CPSU Congress,
the task was posed of expending the economic potential of the eastern regions,
including the republics of Centrel Asia and Kazakhstan. By combining favoreble
climate conditions, large capabilities for agriculture, large fuel-energy and raw-
nsterisl resources, and fast-growing labor resources. Central Asia and Kazakhstan
are unique economic regions. They possess an enormous potential for expanding
production and increasing the contribution to the creation of the supply and equip-
ment base for cor-unism. The task consists of further development of the region's
power, gas and petroleum extraction, chemical industry, construction, nonferrous
satellurgy, and other sectors important for theecmmmv of our whole country.

To accomplish these tasks, the republics of the region possess a significant scien-
tific potential. Over 250,000 people work here in the science sphere, including
over 90,000 scientific and scientific-teaching workers. Just within the republic
academies of sciences there are 110 scientific institutions in mhich there ere over
600 doctors of sciences and 5200 candidates of sciences, and 395 active and corre-
sponding members of the republic academies.

The Council of Presidents of the Academies of Sciences of Central Asia and Kazakh-
stnn has established the goal of increasing the effectiveness of joint scientific
research on problems thet represent general interest. Appropriate republic

ecedemics have been designated heed organisations for these probleme: for the
problem of the biologicel foundations for exploiting the mountain regions of Central
Asian republics - the Kirghiz 888 Acedemy of Sciences; for the problem of the
complex study end exploitetion of the desert regions of Central Asia and Kasakhstan-
the Turknen SSR Academy of Sciences: for the problem of seisnology and earthquake-
resistent construction -- the Tejik 88R Academy of Sciences; for the problem of
population and labor resources - the Kirghiz 88R Acedemy of Sciences; for the

13
ﬁml<lﬂﬂC1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFK]AI.USE(NVLY

problem of studying the environment and utilizing the plant resources of Central
Asia and also complex geological, geophysical and geochemical study of the earth's
crust and outer mantle in the Central Asian region -- the Uzbek 883 Academy of
Sciences; and, finally, for the problem of soil science and soil improvement ~-
the Kazakh SSR Academy of Sciences.

The results, as well as plans for joint research, were discussed at meetings
organized jointly with the Coordination Council and at periodic meetings of the
republic-academy presidents held in the capitals of the respective republics.

In the field of geology, the scientific institutions of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan,
Kirghizia, and Kazakhstan have conducted research on the development of a unified
chart of magmatic complexes for all of Central Asia and on the regional strati-
graphy of Central Asia. Projects have been coordinated on the composition of a
unified metallogenic map and on the study of the tectonics of Central Asia and
Kazakhstan, with first priority on the tectonics of the Tyan'-Shan' and the Pamirs.

Special attention is being given to fundamental problems of forecasting strong
earthquakes. A regional center for earthquake forecasting, created through the
efforts of the scientists of the brother republics, is functioning. It publishes
a yearbook on earthquakes in Central Asia and Kazakhstan.

In the fields of seismology and earthquake-resistant construction, we must note,
first of all, the joint projects for searching for advanced signs of earthquakes, for
seismic microregionalization, for creating test areas and networks of engineering-
seismometry stations, and for exchange of information. The borders of test areas
were refined; basic observation equipment was emplaced in zones of potentially
strong seismic centers. This research was actively supported by the Section on
Central Asia and Kazakhstan of the Interagency Council on Seismology and Earth-
quake Resistant Construction under the presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

within the framework of projects on the exploitation of mountain regions of the
Central Asian republics, work has been done on gsobotanical mapping of mountain
vegetation and forecasting of pasture yields; the possibilities have been studied
for increasing feed resources by means of irrigation, introduction of fertilizers,
and land reclamation; and projects have been undertaken on using mountain and
foothill regions for naturally irrigated gardens and vinyards and on the preserva-
tion and reproduction of rare types of animal life.

In part, we have utilized results from analogous work on the exploitation of moun-
tain regions done in the Caucasus, the Crimea, and the Carpathians; however,
relations with scientific institutions of republics that are utilizing mountain
regions, it seems to us, need to be strengthened.

The time has some also to strengthen relations between the republic academies of
sciences of Central Asia and Kazakhstan, on the one hand, the Siberian Department of
the USSR Academy of Sciences, the Ural Scientific Center and other scientific

centers of our country, the academies of sciences of other republics and, first of
all, the USSR Academy of Sciences, on the other hand.

widespread interest has been aroused by research on desert exploitation by the
Turkmcn SSR Academy of Sciences. since 1967, the all-union journal "Problems of

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Desert Exploitaﬂidn" has been published. Economic-production methods for radical
improvement of desert pastures and for control and afforestation of shifting sands
have been developed and introduced. Some all-union conferences have been held. at
which results have.been generalized and tasks have been determined for complex
research for evalgiting the natural potential of Central Asian deserts.

Horking on this problem, in close cooperation, are the Institute of Deserts of the
Turkmen SSR Academy of Sciences, the botanical institutes of the Central Asian
republics and Kmaakhstan, and the Institute of Geography and the Main Botanical
Garden of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the All-Union Scientific-Research Institute
of of Astrakhan Sheep Herding in Samarkand, and other scientific institutions.

Cooperation has been maintained in a number of areas of scientific—technical prog-
ress in cotton growing. Over 60 scientific-research institutes, VUZ's, and scien-
tific institutions of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the All-Union Academy of Agri-
cultural Sciences, the Hinistry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education, and
the academies of sciences of Central Asian republics cooperate on problems in
fighting cotton-plant verticillate and fusarium wilt. This work is ccordinated by
the Coordination Council on Cotton Wilt of the Uzbek 858 Academy of Sciences, the
All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences, and the USSR Ministry of Agriculture.

Work has begun on optimizing the economic cotton complex. This complex also
includes: industrial sectors that supply means of production to cotton growing;
water management; and sectors in industrial processing of cotton. The Institute of
Economics of the UzSSR Academy of Sciences together with the Central Mathematical-
Economics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences has created the methodological
foundation for the development and determination of implementation conditions of
the complex program "Cotton," which was recalled by V. A. Kotel'nikov in his report.
The results of this work were approved by the second all-union conference on the
problem (Tashkent, 1979). '

In joint developments, a large amount of attention is allotted to research on water
problems. On an all-union, interrepublic basis, research is being conducted on
the ecological, economic, social problems of shifting parts of the flow of
Siberian rivers, irrigation and land reclamation in Central Asia and Kazakhstan,
and problems of the Aral Sea. An important contribution to verifying the advisa-
bility and necessity for accelerating the shifting of Siberian waters to Central
Asia and Kazakhstan was made by the scientific conference conducted in April 1978
in Tashkent, the coordination meeting in September 1978 in Alma-Ate, and a joint
session of the Permanent Commission for the Study of the Natural Productive Forces
of the USSR under the USSR Academy of Sciences, KaSSR Cosplan, and KaSSR Academy
of Sciences in May 1979 in Alma Ata. Participating in them were the presidents of
the academics of sciences of the republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan, insti-
tutes of water problems and geography of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the
Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences, representatives of the State
Committee for Science and Technology, and over 80 scientific-research, design, and
planning organizations of ministries and agencies.

Significant changes in the Aral Sea caused by rapid fall in its level involve many
branches of the conomy and the conditions of life for the population of the Aral
area. In developing ecological and social-economic measures for overcoming the

15
FOR¢MﬂﬂCJALl§EZONLY
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

negative consequences of the drying up of the Aral Sea and the desertification of
the Aral area, there is participation by the academies of sciences of the Uzbek,
Turkmen, and Kazakh $83, the institutes of geography and water problems of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences, all-
union and Central Asian project-design organizations, and ministries and agencies.
Results of research and a system of compensating measures were comprehensively dis-
cussed and approved at the visiting session of the UsSSR Academy of Sciences and at
the scientific-production conference, both of which took place at Nukus in December
of last year.

The four-volume fundamental work "The Irrigation of Uzbekistan" was the fruit of the
scientific creativity of many scientists and specialists of Central Asian scientific
institutions.

Special notice should be made of the useful scientific-orgsnisationsl activity of
the Central Asiatic Commission organized under the Scientific Council of the USSR
Academy of Sciences on the Problem of the Distribution of Productive Forces,
chaired by Academician N. N. Nekrasov.

The Volume of joint work in the social sciences is large: on regional questions of
socialist construction, on problems of mutual relationships among nationalities and
of the formulation of a unified historical community - the Soviet people, and on
problems of uniting the achievements of the scientific-technical revolution with

the advantages of socialist management; study is being done on regional peculiarities
in manifestations of general patterns of expanded production on an intensive basis
and other questions. A number of generalizing works have been prepared through
collective efforts. of course, social scientists still have much to work on in
fulfilling the instructions of the 26th CPSU Congress to deepen the coordination

of their activities by expanding jointly fulfilled research.

Attention is deserved by the work of the Uzbek SSR on the development of a unified
coordination plan for economic research, which includes a clear determination of the
character of economic institutes and VUZ departments, the composition of a list of
complex subjects being coordinated with designation of head performers and co-
performers, and also planned regulation of the subject matter of doctors' and
candidates' dissertations.

The 26th CPSU Congress required still more subordination of the development of
science and technology to the solution of the most important economic tasks of the
country at the stage of developed socialism, wider application of the program
method, providing for the interaction of natural, technical, and social-economic
sciences in the development and implementation of complex problems in the develop-
ment of Soviet society, the improvement of forms and methods of relationships
between science and production, acceleration of introduction and increase in the
effectiveness of completed scientific-research and experimental-design work,
guided by the criteria of their urgency and effectiveness.

Under the 11th Five—Year Plan, more urgency must be given to the development of the
cotton and food complex, water management problems, effective use of fuel-energy
and mineral and raw material resources in production, the formation and development
of regional-production complexes, especially on newly exploited land, improvement

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in methods and forms of planning and management of the economic and social develop-
ment of the region, and environmental protection. The foundation of the economy of
the Central Asian economic region has been and remains the cotton agroindustrial
complex, in the development of which all republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan
are interestedl, The efforts of only one republic are insufficient for its optimi-
zation or for balanced and dynamic development of all its sectors on the basis of
scientific-technical progress. The accomplishment of this task requires the utili-
zation of the potential of the region and of the country as a whole. Without this,
it is not possible to avoid disproportions fraught with large economic losses.

A large array of tasks must be accomplished in the fields of genetics, selection,
radical improvement in the agrotechnical system, chemicalization, mechanization,
distribution of biological methods of fighting plant pests and diseases, in the
development of methods for complex cotton processing and solution of other problems
of scientific-technical progress, and in the intensification and increased effec-
tiveness of cotton growing. '

The necessity has arisen for the re-tooling of the industrial sectors related to
cotton growing: cotton-gin and machine-building industry, mineral fertiliser indus-
try, and others. In all these areas, a large amount of scientific-research and
project-planning work is being coaducted, but it is uncoordinated. Its effective-
ness must be significantly improved by uniting scientific forces within the frame-
work of a unified program and plan and a body must be created for centralised
management of the implementation of the “Cotton" program and the food program.

It must be remembered that the material basis for agriculture and for the whole
economy of the republic is irrigated farming; however, its development is
retarded by a growing shortage of water resources. Thus, even with full and more
effective utilization of the whole water supply of the Aral Sea basin, no more
than 15 to 20 percent of the total area of arable land in the republic will be
irrigated. The water management problem is acquiring exceptional urgency. It is
necessary to search for additional sources of water resources and means for

their economical utilisation. Forthcoming fuller involvement of new lands in
economic circulation requires the creation of new irrigation canals to regulate
the flow of rivers, the introduction of more progressive technology and methods
for utilizing irrigation water, including underground water, and serious recon-
struction of existing irrigation systems. The successful implementation of all
this is possible only on the basis of developing a unified, long-range, water-
utilization plan for Central Asia and Kazakhstan, and drafting a unified plan for
developing irrigation and introducing mutually coordinated complexes of measures
for water distribution and improvement in the status of land reclamation. At

the same time, as provided for by the 26th CPSU Congress, there must be an expan-
sion of scientific-research and project-planning and preparatory work on the
forthcoming initiation of construction of the canal for changing parts of the flow
of Siberian rivers to Kazakhstan and Central Asia.

The republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan have great opportunities to irrigate
lands in desert zones for the needs of livestock raising on the basis of under-
ground water utilization. The character and conditions of geological bedding are
roughly the same in all Central Asian republics. However, their utilisation is

only at the beginning stage and joint efforts are necessary to solve complicated
scientific-technical problems.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Central Asian economic region is a large fuel-energy base for our country. The
basis for the fuel-energy complex of the region is natural gas. At the same time,
energy resources are located very unevenly among the republics.

Under these conditions, to satisfy growing needs of the republics for energy and to
provide a supply of natural gas to other regions of our country, joint research is
necessary on the development and improvement of the fuel-energy complex on a
regional scale with consideration for the possibilities of fuller utilisation of
solar and wind energy and for strengthening geological survey work and other
measures.

The republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan possess deposits of nonferrous metals.
chemical raw materials, and certain other useful minerals. These deposits success-
fully complement one another snd are matched with the region's high degree of
availability of labor resources. The correct and fuller utilisation of these
favorable possibilities is a common economic problem for all of the republics.

It is apparent that scientific bases for special-purpose complex programs for
exploitation of mineral and raw material resources must be developed with partici-
pation by Central Asian and all-union project-planning and scientific-research
institutes and academics of sciences, especially the USSR Academy of Sciences. The
purposeful, scientifically based investigation of completely new genetic types

of natural concentrations of many elements or mineral paragenesis has great signi-
ficance. It must rely, first of all, on deep theoretical geochemical research and
on the study of the most promising areas of the region for the development of
evaluative-survey recommendations for the investigation of various deposits.

Under the 11th Five-Year Plan, it is intended to continue and to expand the develop-
ment of fundamental and applied-scientific problems in the study of the whole com-
plex of geological problems of Central Asian republics. We hope for aid in this
work from appropriate institutes and scientists of brother republics and, above all,
from the scientists of Moscow and Leningrad and, of course, the USSR Academy of
Sciences.

In accord with the instructions of the 26th CPSU Congress, the solution of scien-
tific-technical and economic problems must be subordinated to the solution of
social problems, to the improvement in the material welfare of the people, and to
the comprehensive development of the personality. Under the regional conditions of
Central Asia and Kazakhstan, the fuller and more effective utilization of the fast
growing labor resources is a social problem that has great significance. This
problem is not simple. It requires the theoretical study of population questions
and specific conditions of the region, demographic forecasting, the analysis of
employment status by sectors and regions, the creation of an appropriate number of
jobs, the study of migration processes, the training of labor personnel in needed
specializations, and many other measures.

Hence, the meeting of presidents of the academics of sciences of the Central Asian
republics and Kazakhstan back in 1972 made the problems of population and labor
resources one of the most important problems to be coordinated on the scale of the
whole region.

18
FOR 0FT1C1AI.lEﬂ!(ﬂULY
The program for providing euploynsnt and the rational utilization of the labor

force should be based on effective nessures for accelerating the development of sll
sectors of the econoly, especially industry and the nonproductive spheres, on the
formation and development of large agroindustrisl complexes, new for-s for the social
organization of production, particularly the regional production conplsxes, indus-
trial centers, and regions, for exasple, the South ‘l'sjik, the Lower Am-Dar'ys, the
Keshka-Der'ys, Dzhizsk, Hest-‘hnrknen, and North Kirghiz regions, and the economic
and social development of middle-sized and smell towns.

The scientific collectives of Central Asia and Kazakhstan, having united their
forces, and with 'constsnt support and aid from the USSR Academy of Sciences and from
other scientific institutions of our country, will successfully accomplish the tasks
set forth by the 26th Congress of the Conunist Party of the Soviet Union.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel’stvo "Nauka", "Veatnik Akadenii nsuk SSSR", 1981

961.5
090: lBlh/hh

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 001.83
LEGAL AUTHORITY ADVOCA'I'BD FOR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES A8 LEADING COORDINATING BODY
Moscow VESTNIK AKADBHII “AU! 8883 in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 53-61

[Article by V. P. Rassokhin, candidate of juridical sciences: "The 26th CPSU
Congress and the Legal Bases for a Unified System for Introducing Scientific
Achievements into the Economy"!

[Text] The problem of introducing scientific-technical achievements into produc-
tion has been with us for a long time; however, not only has it not left the agenda,
but it has become a key question, without the resolution of which the future
successful development of the whole economy is inconceivable.

"The decisive, most urgent sector today is the introduction of scientific discover-
ies and inventions," stressed Comrade L. I. Brezhnev in the Summary Report of the
CPSU Central Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress. ". . . Everything must be
eliminated that makes the introduction of new things difficult, slow, or un-
healthy . . . The accomplishment of this task is not a simple matter, of course,
and it requires a break with outdated habits and indicators. But it is completely
necessary for the country, for the people, and for our future."

Evidence of the complexity and unhealthfulness of the problems relating to the
introduction of new technology is the fact that, in practice, the real possibilities
for influence by fundamental science on the development of production and on tech-
nical policy in the economic sectors are still far from sufficient.

L. I. Brezhnev, indicating the special role of science in our society, said at the
26th CPSU Congress: "Science must be the constant 'perturber of tranquility,’
pointing out the sectors where stagnation and backwardness have been noted but
where the current level of knowledge provides the possibility to move ahead more
rapidly and more successfully. Careful thought sust be given as to how to make
this work an integral part of the management mechanism."

From these positions, certain basic legislative and state-organisational decisions
are proposed which, in our opinion, could provide the basis for constructing a
unified system for introducing scientific-technical achievements into production.

20
FIHII”WWCJAI.USE(MNLY
There seems to he no need to demonstrate that the determination of the basic
directions for she-technical development of any economic sector cannot remain the
prerogative of agency institutes and management bodies of that economic sector.
This contradicts not only the sense of a unified state scientific-technical .
policy and the objective needs for integration among economic sectors for the sake
of developing t§P_economy, but also the interests of broad-scale introduction_of
fundamentally new scientific-technical achievements. The determination of the
directions for technical development of production is also the policy of intro-
ducing new technology, and it should be based on solutions adopted under the
general influence of "big science" at a much higher level -- above the economic

sectors at the national level.

Documents of the 25th and 26th CPSU Congresses stressed the necessity [for
strengthening the influence of the USSR Academy of Sciences/[in italics) as the
coordinator of all scientific work in the country - not only let the level of
scientific research but at the level of technical developments conducted by
economic sectors/[in italics]. To embody this important slogan in a real state-
organizational form, to create a unified system for introducing large scientific
achievements, and to turn this system into an integral part of :he mechanism for
managing the economy mean precisely, it seems, finding the consistent solution
to the most important problem of uniting the achievements of the scientific-
technical revolution with the advantages of socialism.

How can we visualize a legal mechanism that could help reallyto increasethe role
of the USSR Academy of Sciences in conducting a state scientific-technical policy
but, in doing this, would not "overflow" its "banks" with unending flow of coordina-
tion matters (from the examination of agency projects to "assembly line" participa-
tion by scientists in the work of an ever-growing number of various commissions)?

The USSR Academy of Sciences -- as the highest institution of scientists in the
USSR -- has been called upon to provide a final evaluation of technical policy in
the economic sectors (from the point of view of its appropriateness to the main,
long-range trends in the development of present science and technology), and also
to provide an evaluation of the activities of head institutes of ministries and
agencies in this sphere and the scientific-technical level of production in
economic sectors.

The academy today is providing its evaluation on these questions; however, its
opinion has no obligatory or legal force and, therefore, does not lead to any real
consequences. Therefore, it seems to us, that conditions must be created whereby
the expert evaluation by the academy, as an act of the highest scientific
authority, should become a [legal act/[in italics], involving the adoption by the
USSR State Committee for Science and Technology [GKNT] and USSR Gosplan of planning
and organizational decisions that are obligatory for ministries and their subordi-
nate institutes, organizations, and enterprises.

In order to implement the appeals of the 25th and 26th CPSU Congresses to make the
USSR Academy of Sciences the coordinator of all scientific work in the country and
to increase the influence of "big science," as an integral part of the management
mechanism, on the development of the economy, it should be legally entrusted with
the authority of [the highest expert collective of the country/[in italics]. In
this connection, it should be allotted the right to provide final expert evaluation

21
FORINHHIJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the technical areas, solutions, and projects not only of one or more sectors of
the economy, but also those (as assigned by the government) of national signifi-
cance .

It must be especially stressed that in a majority of cases (with the exception of
direct orders by the government), the question should be one of right, and not
obligation, for the USSR Academy of Sciences to provide evaluation of the levels

of scientific-technical development of production in economic sectors. The reason
for this is that the aaadesy cannot serve as a usual expert body that, in this case,
finds itself bound up in all kinds of procedures and also with assignments from
Various ministries and agencies. Authority as the highest expert body in the
country, which could be entrusted to the Academy of Sciences, would mean only that
evaluations on questions of technical development, passed by the general meeting

or presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences, would acquire legal force.

Such legal status for the USSR Academy of Sciences would provide active influence
by the academy on the conduct of a unified state policy without "adjustments" under
pressure from agency interests. At the same time, it would prevent the academy
from being burdened by extraneous functions and activities that would inevitably
distract scientists from their immediate function -- the development of fundamental
science problems. In this connection, it can scarcely be doubted that any question
of principal importance to the technical progress of the country's economy can
escape the attention of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

It should be noted that the right of the USSR Academy of Sciences to provide

final expert evaluation would apply only to the sphere of engineering and technology
development and to applied research and development conducted in the interests of
production in the economic sectors and would not apply in any way to the determina-
tion of the development paths of science itself. Academy conclusions on questions
of technical progress should be based on thorough generalization of world experience
and on the latest achievements of science and technology. They can be refined to
the extent that new knowledge and new discoveries appear. of principal importance
can be the position under which the right of the Academy of Sciences to provide
final expert evaluation would become a legal norm: such evaluation could not be
revised by the usual route of "apparat"-agency agreement, "coordination," and
compromise.

It is necessary to stress that even the introduction of a system of final expert
evaluation by the Academy of Sciences of the technical level of economic-sector
production and the direction of its development is not sufficient in itself to turn
the problem of introducing science and technology into an original, permanent,
integral part of the economic management mechanism. The USSR Academy of Sciences,
as the highest expert body of the country, can possess only legally confirmed
"authority with power" which, in the mechanism of state management, should be
united with the authority of power.

To successfully accomplish the tasks posed by the 26th CPSU Congress for the intro-
duction of scientific and technical achievements into the economy, it is completely
necessary, in our opinion, significantly [to increase the power of USSR Gosplan and
USSR GKNT/[in italics] and, in determining questions of unified policy, also

IUSSR Gosstroy and USSR State Committee for Standards/[in italics] (in relations
with organizations, institutions, and enterprises in the economic sectors).

22
FOR‘OFFKHAI.USE10NLY
The general legal basis for imperat1ve authority for these state committees as
governmental bodies is laid down in the Law on the USSR Council of Ministers. The
legislative allotment to the USSR Academy of Sciences of the status as the highest
scientific-technical expert body of the country would not only create the legal
organization of a scientific basis, but would become a key link in broadening the
imperative functions of the state committees. The general aim of these measures is
to overcome agency and economic-sector limitations in the approach to the most
important task of introducing new technology.

with the creation of this system of rights and obligations, the next important step,
in our opxnion, ‘ﬁhhuld be principal changes in the /procedure for agreement by
m1nist11es and agencies on decisions adopted by the state committees/[in italics].

As practice has shown, agreement as a legal act (and not only as a means for com-
prehensive examination of a question and for taking various opinions into account)
serves as the chief legal instrument in the hands of ministries and agencies for
enforcing the priority of agency and economic-sector interests over those of the
whole economy.

For example, with the confirmation by the GKNT or the state scientific-technical
programs for the complex processing of biachofite (a complex mineral raw material
for producing a wide variety of chemical substances) and for the extraction of
titanium concentrates from viscous petroleum, the respective agency refused to
endorse these programs although they were approved as tasks of the state five-year
plan for the 10th Five-Year Plan among the 200 most important programs on basic
scientific-technical problems.

Therefore, it seems to us that a procedure must be established under which agree-
ment with agency tasks provided for in decrees by Gosplan, GENT, and other state
committees does not need to be looked on as a legal act. The planned tasks
established on the basis of state committee decrees should be indisputably obliga-
tory for all ministries and agencies. Scientific-research institutes, design
bureaus, and enterprises of economic sectors, aided by a special system of responsi-
bility,should be brought into the role of an executor of imperative decisions made
at the national level.

This redistribution of rights would not be at all inconceivable (although, from the
point of view of "apparat" logic, the persistent introduction into the system of
relations pertaining to the management of scientific-technical progress would
inescapably lead to infringement of today's role of agency structure in the
economy). In practice, there are several examples of legislative decisions, on the
‘basis of which, in certain spheres of scientific-technical policy, basic rights
were granted not to agency organisations and institutes, but to other institutions
not suffering from economic-sector narrowmindedness (for example, to the Institute
of Electrical Welding imeni Ye. 0. Paton of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences and to
the institute of Catalysis of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of
Sciences).

The new system for the distribution of rights, of course, will require fundamental
/changes not only in the legal position, but the very concept of a "head insti-
tute"/[in italics].

23
FORlOFFKIALlEHEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Once. Bertrand Russellsadly noted that the errors and weaknesses of something new
are always more striking than the obvious absurdities that have become traditional.
It goes without saying that it seems usual today for the position of the head
institute in an economic sector to be that of the last stop on the road to scienti-
fic-technical progress. But this situation has not been characteristic of all those
highly developed special sectors where the greatest successes were achieved during
the period before and during the Great Patriotic War. It is not accidental, for
example, that the aircraft industry, instead of a monopoly by one head institute,
has had intense, really creative competition among design bureaus.

The monopoly position of a head institute, especially in the "civilian" production
sectors is not simply the result of evolving traditions. The consolidation of
monopoly by the head institute was one of the primary means on the part of the
agency structure for securing its role as the absolute regulator of scientific-
technical progress and also was one of the consequences of strict priority of the
producer's over the user‘s interests. In the special sectors during wartime, there
was no other choice but the wide range of real (sometimes dramatic), rather than
formalistic and contrived, competition. This was also dictated by the enormous
responsibility for developmental results and by the absolute priority of the
client-user.

In the event that the monopoly of a head institute establishes itself under condi-
tions where there is an absence of legal or any other means for real influence on
the part of fundamental science, the appearance of such monopolism can become
especially negative, if not repressive. Having allotted broad and absolute author-
ity to head institutes, the law up to now has not established a real system of
responsibility on the part of these institutes for the results of scientific-
technical development within their economic sectors. Thus, the important truth has
been forgotten, that the degree of authority should be adequate for the level of
responsibility. This is a cornerstone both of management science and of juris-
prudence.

There need be no doubt, to be specific, that it is just this kind of monopolism
with the absence of real responsibility that was the basic reason for the 20-year
delay in beginning the introduction of forechamber flare combustion in internal
combustion carburetor engines. As explained at the general meeting of the Academy
of Sciences in March l981, this method, which was developed long ago at the Insti-
tute of Chemical Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, not only permits a 10 to
12 percent reduction in the use of gasoline, but also a sharp reduction in toxicity
of exhaust gasses. However, only this year was the manufacture begun of the first
Volga motor vehicles equipped with the forechamber flare combustion deVice. The
same reason -- monopolism by head institutes accompanied by absence of a system of
responsibility -- was one of the factors that has delayed until now the wide re-
placement in machine-building technology of metal cutting by plastic deformation
and other non-waste technologies. The monopoly legal position of the Experimental
Scientific Research Institute of Metal Cutting Machine Tools (ENIHS) in machine-
tool building undoubtedly played a large role (along with many other factors) in
raising the "production of shavings" in the country to more than 8 million tons a
year. What is unnatural in this situation is not at all that the ENIMS scientific
school was relentlessly attached to the ideas of metal cutting but, most of all,
the monopoly influence of this institute on the unified policy in the development
of technology for metal milling.

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\h' -.
It is appropriate,also to speak here about the real meaning of conservatism, which

is often assumed'to be the basic obstacle on the road to the introduction of
scientific-technical achievements. "Normal" conservatism, not burdened by special
agency interests, has a necessary, healthy, protective function: it prevents
senseless expenditures by society on premature, scientifically unsubstantiated
projects. In fact, the requirements for innovations should be higher and stricter
than for engineering and technology already tested in production -- this is quite
natural and justified. Conservatism is not a terrible thing in itself; it is a
terrible thing when it is the monopoly position of the "conservative" and his
special interest in proving his own conservatism.

Agency and economic-sector monopolism today has become one of the most serious
problems awaiting solution in the sphere of scientific and technical progress.

1here are two very important ways, in our view, to weaken the influence of
monopolism by producer economic sectors on the development of science and technology.

First, [the isolation, within the structure of state science organization, of the
fundamental sphere of engineering sciences and the creation of a "fourth system" of
scientific institutions under the aegis of the GKNT/[in italics].

This, for example, could be done by organizing an Academy of Engineering Sciences
by transferring from agency subordination to GKNT jurisdiction those institutes
that were formerly under the Department of Engineering Sciences of the USSR Academy
of Sciences and also those institutes whose scientific potential cannot be used

in a complex and effective way within the framework of economic-sector agencies.*

Such a solution would not only allow concentration of large forces on the main areas
of technical progress, but would also create the basis for conduct by GKNT of a
unified technical policy and for more objective solution of complicated problems.

Secondly, [strengthening as much as possible the rights and influence of head
institutes in those cases where they express the interests of their economic
sectors as a client and user/[in italics] Most often, the interests of an economic
sector as a user coincides with the end interests of the economy as a whole.

An example of rational application of law in the conduct of scientific-technical
policy is the already mentioned situation that evolved in the aircraft industry
during the Great Patriotic War. Scientific policy here was determined by the
Central Aero-ﬂydrodynamic Institute - an institute of the fundamental type, which
actually possessed the right of final expert evaluation. The interrelationships
among the various developmental design bureaus was built on the basis of "the
competition of results"; the fate of a development was decided by the user-clients
of new aviation technology.

A large role in reducing the influence of agency and economic-sector monopolism,
undoubtedly, could be played by allotting the USSR Academy of Sciences the right to
make final expert evaluations on questions of technical progress.

* For more details on the necessity for creating a "fourth system" of scientific
institutions, see the author's articles in VESTNIK AN SSSR [Herald of the USSR
Academy of Sciences] 1979, No. 11, and "3K0," 1980, No. l. - Ed.

25
FIHIIDFiICJAI.lEﬂE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Agency bias (a phenomenon that deserves attention not only from lawyers, but most
of all from sociologists, economists, and philosophers) is not limited strictly to
economic-sector agencies. EVen OKRT has had up to now to construct its work
"especially according to economic-sector principles."* Today, the sections of
GKNT correspond to agencies of the economic sectors. And this often leads to a
situation whereby, in its work, a section of GKNT puts the interests of the agency
whose activities it should be directing -- above the national interests. One such
case, relating to the fete of an important invention, was described by PRAVDA in
the article "Bureaucratic Protection of the Old Homestead."**

Proposals have already been made many times for the creation of special state
bodies for special-purpose program management of research, development, and the
introduction of the most important scientific-technical achievements. But the
activities of GKNT itself should be constructed according to the special-purpose
program principle and not according to economic sectors. Instead of sections
corresponding to economic sectors (the inadequacy in the influence of which on the
technical development of economic-sector production has already been laid down in
the very principle of their formation and functioning), with the addition of just
a section "tor summary planning," there should be sections, in our opinion, that
would direct all work on the fulfillment of national-level complex scientific-
technical programs, would distribute resources, and exercise control over raising
the technical level of interrelated production, independent of its economic-sector
subordination. If a "fourth system" of scientific institutions were to be created,
the GKNT would receive a powerful scientific base and an organizational system
corresponding to its functional purpose.

In principle, the strengthening of the authority and the expansion of functions of
CKNT would permit it to have real influence on the introduction of fundamentally
new and other especially important scientific and technical achievements and to
affect, specifically, the technical progress of production in individual economic
sectors in the interests of the whole economy. And this, in turn, it appears,
would require the creation of a system of GKNT bodies in the union republics.

Proposals have been made many times for the formation of republic committees for
science and technology subordinate to union-republic councils of ministers. This
solution. in our opinion, would run counter to the very essence of conducting a
unified national-level policy for developing science and technology during the
epoch of the scientific-technical revolution, to the concentration of effort on
the decisive areas, and to the needs for rapid growth in scientific potential. It
would be more advisable to create in the republics (and also in large regions of
the country as, for example. in Siberia) departments or administrations of USSR
GKNT. in form, such a unified system of bodies for national-level management of
scientific-technical progress would be close to that of the organizational
structure under which, for example, the USSR Procurator's Office functions.

The strengthening of the imperative function of USSR Gosplan and USSR GRNT, resting
on the scientific basis of final expert evaluations done by the USSR Academy of

 

* In this connection, see, for example, the article "Faktor vremeni" [Time Factor],
TRUD, 1975, 1 February.

** See PRAVDA, 1980, 11 February.

26
INJR 0F1WC]AI.lEﬂE(NULY
Sciences would be, in a natural form, related to the creation of la system of
responsibility on the part of economic-sector scientific-research institutes and
design bureaus, and also associations and enterprises/[in italics].

with such changes in the management mechanism, when it would be oriented toward more
rapid introduction of scientific-technical achievements into production, it would be
advisable to give GKNT the following authority:

the right to transfer scientific and design organizations responsible
for °§55fuatic nonfulfillnent of national-level tasks temporarily
(for period of up to five years) to a lower category;

the right to suspend payment of bonuses to managers of enterprises
and organizations failing to fulfill such tasks; and

the right to exact from enterprises or scientific-technical organiza-
tions (as fines according to a decision of the State Board of
Arbitration) of estimated sums paid for work which, through their
fault, has not been carried forward to the point of introduction
into production. These sums then would be entered into a GKNT
reserve fund.

And finally, one of the most basic positions is that GKNT itself should decide
questions not only concerning the allotment of head-institute rights to economic-
sector institutes (these rights should be effectively limited to the sphere of
designated problems), but also concerning the redistribution of these rights (under
conditions where the interests of user economic sectors are taken into primary
consideration), and also concerning the deprivation of head institute status from
any economic-sector institute.

There should be established also a clearly defined procedure for resolving
differences between scientific research and design bureaus, on the one hand, and
head institutes, on the other hand (for example, through GKNT scientific councils
and conmissions).

In creating a unified system for introducing scientific and technical achievements
into production, it would be extremely important to introduce a special [economic
and legal policy for obsolescent production/[in italics].

Such a measure is necessary because,employing just incentive measures for success-
ful technical innovations, it is not possible, in our view, to move off dead center
in solving all the very complicated and important problems in the introduction of
new technology.

Long ago, the necessity arrived for introducing asystem of responsibility that
would operate constantly, automatically, and independent of the interests of bodies,
enterprises, and organizations that it should be applied to. '

what, in our opinion, should be included in a policy on "obsolescent production"?

First of all, there should be a well-developed "system of special taxes "on.
technical backwardness"/[in italics].

27
FOI4OFFHJAI.USE(N§LY
'0“ OFFICIAL use ONLY

The first attempt to introduce such a tax was the formal establishment (by a joint
decree of USSR Cosplan and USSR GKBT, the State Committee on Prices, and the State
Committee on Standards, of 23 September 1971) of discounts, deducted in the state
budget, from the prices of products certified to be in the second category of
quality. However, in reality, these discounts have never been rpplied since that
time.

A decree of the CPSU Central (knuaittee and USSR Council of Ministers adopted

12 July 1979 indicated that discounts from prices of products of the second quality
category should become obligatory; definite procedures were even provided for. Such
a tax is a legal expression of economic responsibility on the part of enterprises
for the backwardness of the technical level of production.

In the future, discounts on prices of products in the second quality category should
be supplemented by other types of taxes. Thus, gradually, an effective, noncompro-
mising system of special taxes would be developed "for technical backwardness."

Apparently, the right to impose these taxes on obsolescent products and backward
technology should be entrusted to financial bodies, which would be guided by the
decisions not of economic-sector agencies, but of USSR GIFT or USSR State Cunaittee
for Standards. In accord with policies in decrees of the CPSU Central Committee and
USSR Council of Ministers, the functions of these governmental bodies should also

be strengthened in the field of control over the technical level of economic-sector
production.

The establishment of a system of taxes on technical backwardness in the hands of
GKNT and USSR State Committee for Standards would provide an extremely effective
means for influencing enterprises and associations. In this case, financial bodies
would have the capability, according to proposals by the state committees, to
confiscate profits received by enterprises and associations on account of backward
products or technology, and USSR Cosbsnk could introduce certain limits in financing
obsolescent production.

Secondly, a very effective means for implementing policy on obsolescent production
could be [the right of USSR Cosplsn and USSR GKNT to exclude the volume of products
("sold" or “net") recognised as outdated, from indicators of total volume of plan
fulfillment by enterprises (associations)/[in italics].

ﬂiirdly, for certain special cases, the [introduction of exclusive authority for
CKNT could be provided for/[in italics].

Quito common, for example, are the imperative functions of the Committee for Super-
vision of Safe working Practices in Industry and for Mine Supervision , which has
the right through its own authority (in spite of prospects for frustrating planned
indicators or of "objective reasons") to forbid use of any mechanism or equipment

if its further operation threatens an accident. And there are situations, when very
important scientific-technical achievements fully prepared for introduction into
production are not applied for many years (even despite the fact that they would
solve very urgent economic or ecological problems with unusual effectiveness), that

cause losses no less important than do large accidents or natural calamities.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
No less important is the question relating to environmental protection. And here it
is sometimes necessary to give exclusiVe authority to state committees. One can
scarcely hope that the interdictions of local sanitation inspectors will at some
time have sufficient means to influence large enterprises and agencies that violate
requirements for ecological cleanness; the "weight classes" of the parties here
are really unequal. Practical power in this sphere for representation of
sanitation supervising bodies could belong to USSR GENT itself: pollution of the
biosphere and technical backwardness are two sides of the same coin.

Therefore, in cases of gross violation of requirements for ecological cleanness
because of the "nonintroduction" of scientific-technical achievements into produc-
tion, and also in certain other exclusive cases (for example, cases of violations
of basic scientific- -technical programs) it would be advisable to give USSR GKNT
rights analogous :6 the rights of the Committee for Supervision of Safe Working

Practices in Industry and for Mine Supervision, to put a stop to obsolescent produc-
£10".

In these rather rare cases, a powerful system of responsibility that has evolved in
our economic life -- the machinery of internal agency responsibility -- would begin
to operate automatically and irrepressibly. Such a "push" would be sufficient for
the system to begin to operate independently, with ever increasing acceleration

and inevitable sweep, capturing an increasingly wider circle of workers -- from
"apparat" managers to specific performers at enterprises.

All these measures, in our opinion, should lead to the gradual formation of a
special legal regime for obsolescent production, one of the most important factors
in transform1ng the contradiction between science and production into an internal
contradiction of production itself.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR”, 1981

9645
C80: 1814/16

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE OF TECHNOLOGICAL um

Moscow HEZIIDUNARODNYY OMN TEKNNOLOGICHESKINI ZNANIYAHI in Russian 1981 (signed to
press 17 Jul 81) pp 2, 20-21, 23-26, 37-38, 46, 65-66, 80

(Annotation, excerpts and table of contents from book "International Exchange of
Technological Knowledge", by Viloriy Anatol'yevich Ryabov, Izdatel'stvo
"Hezhdunarodnyye otnosheniya”, 25,000 copies, 80 pages]

[Excerpts] Examines the role of scientific-technical knowledge

and production experience in international economic relations.

Shows the function of knowledge in the work process in the fulfill-
ment of work in the research-development-production-msrketing cycle.
The international exchange of lmowledge; knoﬂedge as a co-odity;
what "know-how" is; how such "know-how" costs; what it is necessary
to do to sell it -- these are the basic questions dealt with in this
book. Examples are given fro- international licensing 'practice and
the practice of Soviet enterprises and organisations.

Patents in Capitalist Countries

The patent system of modern state-monopoly capitalism, under the conditions of the
scientific-technical revolution, assumes a two-sided role.

0n the one hand, it continues to stimulate the development of scientific-technical
progress; on the other hand, it retards such progress. Honopolies, especially
multinational corporations, widely exploiting patent rights, actively force competi-
tors out of the international market, establish monopolistic high prices for
patented products, and limit the production and output of new products by other
companies (even the purchasers of licenses). They try to seize blocks of patents
for the most important inventions, and they conclude agreements with one another,
forming patent pools, where a majority of inventions in a particular sector of
production are concentrated. The rights to these inventions are acquired by all pool
participants through the issuance of mutual licenses. Other companies, who create
new inventions in that sector have difficulty in standing up to the power of the
monopolies participating in the patent pool; as a result, the utilization of new
inventions created outside the pool is retarded.

The monopolies widely utilize patents to control the development of technology and to
control the development of technology and to retard this development when it suits

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
them. Some inventions that are disadvantageous for the monopolies are bought up and
put on the "shelf." The monopolies not only do not use these inventions themselves,
but prohibit others from using them. As a result, a number of innovations are either
not utilized at all or are utilised only after a long delay.

At the same time, by retarding the use of new inventions, the obsolescence of in-
ventions alreadf'sold is delayed.

These circumstances often force companies that are not among the larger monopolies
that participate in patent pools not to patent new inventions, but to hold them in
secret, as knodﬂhow; deriving benefit from the "secrecy" of inventions, technologi-‘
cal knowledge, and experience.

In addition, the;modern patent system of capitalism does not provide for the protec-
tion of all scientific-technical achievements. Not protected by patents, for
example, are mathematical methods of engineering calculations, computer programs.
management and efficiency measures, or the results of social-economic and technical-
economic research necessary for planning industrial units and enterprises. Conse-
quently, the holders of these achievements, to receive economic advantages over
competitors, must keep these achievements in secret.

The regional limitation of patent rights forces the inventor or patent holder to
haVe his invention patented in all the countries where he wants to have exclusive
rights for his invention and to give him an advantage over competitors in its use.
However, this requires certain financial outlays related to patenting and keeping
patents in force. Moreover, the patenting of inventions, as a rule, is done at a
stage when a technical solution is being created in the process of conducting
scientific-research and experimental-design work. At this stage, it is still
difficult to make a very clear forecast with respect to the countries where an
invention could be used effectively during the period that the patent is in effect.
Therefore, it could turn out that, in the future, in the process of using the

invention in some ecuntries, it would not have patent protection.

Industrial Espionage in Capitalist Countries

Companies have taken measures to protect their secrets and industrial security
services have been created that are directed against industrial espionage. It is
sufficient to say that this kind of measure was foreseen as early as the end of the
19th Century at the Krupp plants in Germany. However much espionage there is,

not all secrets can be stolen. For example, how can the skill and experience of
specialists be stolen? We have already said that the rapid assimilation of new
products requires a complex of knowledge and experience that pertains to many
aspects of development, industrial production, organization, management, utilization,
and so forth. Is it possible that this whole complex can be stolen? And what
guarantee is there that the process of manufacturing new products according to
stolen documentation will proceed without problems? And if there are none, how
much time and money will have to be spent in eliminating "blank spaces" in the
design and technology and in correcting the unavoidable errors in organising
production? will this not lead to the company's being late in coming on the market
with new products or new merchandise? Which is better, then: to buy a license to

31
IIMR(NWNCJAI.US£13NLY
FOR(NHWCJAL.US£(NNLY

produce these products, to receive the necessary technical documentation, consulta-
tion, and specialists' training, to assimilate production in a very short time,

and to enter the market "officially," with new products, or to risk spending s lot
of money on stolen secrets, without a guarantee of their completeness, authenticity,
or quality, losing time in testing and revising, without confidence in rapid
success, entering the market with secretly manufactured products with the risk of
being exposed for stealing others’ secrets and for "unfair competition"?

Protection of Inventors' Rights in Capitalist Countries

It must be especially stressed that there is a difference in principle between
capitalist and socialist countries in the approach to the legal status and principles
in the transfer of knowledge and experience, including that which pertains to know-
how. in capitalist countries, specialists' knowledge and experience, like their
inventions, are taken over by companies. When hiring a specialist. a company
concludes an agreement with him, transferring to the company all rights to future
inventions created while working for the company. Specialists are also obligated
nos to divulge or publish, without the permission of the company, any information on
scientific-technical achievements, developments, technology, the production process,
and so forth, which the specialist creates or about which he has knowledge because of
his work for the company.

Bourgeois legislation supports the effective protection of the interests of capital-
ists and entrepreneurs by providing for strict responsibility (including criminal
liability) on the part of specialists and employees of companies for divulging
company secrets.

The control by companies over the publications of their specialists leads to the
emasculation of valuable scientific-technical information, turning them to a large
degree into advertising publications.

In fairness, any specialist can easily be convinced of this statement if he analyses
the publications of foreign companies with the purpose of gaining information on the
details of a new design or technological process. The exchange of scientific-
technical achievements, inventions, scientific-technical documentation, production
experience, and so forth, between companies in one country with companies in other
countries is accomplished, as a rule, on a commercial basis through licensing agree-
ments or contracts. The cementing basis for these agreements are patent rights to
inventions, industrial models, trade marks, and so forth. The exchange of patent
rights and knowrhow, even between mother and daughter companies, is accomplished

on the same co-nercial basis.

International SST Agreements

Agreements were signed for scientific-technical cooperation between Soviet organiza-
tions and 68 American companies, including such well-known companies as General
Electric, Coca-Cola, and Occidental Petroleum. Recently, the American administration

has taken the course of "freezing" these relations, although the companies them-
selves and representatives of business circles are in favor of developing normal

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
trade and scientific-technical relations with the USSR, seeing in this a mutual
benefit both on a business plane and on the plane of relaxing the international
tensions caused by the actions of American authorities.

In the case of joint scientific research and development, the agreements specify

the legal questions relating to the protection and utilization of joint inventions
and the scientific-technical knowledge and experience transmitted, and they

specify the share of each participant in a development in the event of the sale of a
license for joint results and other questions.

...> .
. I

Protection of USSR Patents Abroad

The decisions of the 2&th, 25th, and 26th CPSU Congresses gave attention to the
future developmentYof inventions and patent-licensing business in this country and
the new USSR Constitution strengthened the rights of inventors and the obligations
of enterprises and organizations to give them aid in the creation and utilization
of inventions. A new holiday -- Inventors' Day -- was introduced.

All this indicates the large amount of concern on the part of the CPS” for the
constant development of inventions, rationalization, and patent-licensing business
in this country and for increase in their effectiveness.

As the data introduced above convincingly indicate, our country has had certain
successes in the field of invention. At the same time, invention and patent-
licensing work is not found to be at a high level at all enterprises and organiza-
tions. This particularly pertains to licensing work and to patenting of inventions
abroad. Many scientists and specialists have still not overcome the psychological
barrier that consists of the contradiction between the objective lav of develop- .
ment of a wide exchange of achievements and advanced experience among specialists,
enterprises, and organizations under the conditions of building the communist
sociutv. on the one hand, and the necessity of protecting their scientific-techni-
cal achievements by protective documents in the USSR and abroad, to "squeeze down"
the size of publications about these achievements, removing from them the valuable
know-how in the form of details of the technological conditions, designs, "plant“
methodologies of engineering plans, and so forth, so as not to allow gratuitous
utilization of these achievements by foreign companies, on the other hand. For it
is quite well known that foreign companies attentively follow our scientific and
technical achievements and advanced production enperience.

Thus, the American political observer, 6. Ransom, has stated that the United States
widely utilizes the open information on the achievements of 088! science and .
technology that appears in publications. According to an estimate by the American
intelligence authority, U. HcGovern, in the process of preparing strategic decisions,
about 20 percent of the basic information comes from secret sources and about

80 percent cones from open, legal sources.

According to evidence from the American press, in industrial espionage, the collec-
tion and analysis of published materials has first place. Then come: the analyses

of exhibition entries and prospectuses of competing companies; study of products;
utilization of data received in conversations with a competitor's employees;

33
IN3R‘0F1WCJAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
Intr

Conc

Note

Appe

COPYRIGHT: "

9645
C80:

1816/22

oduction
A Little History
The Patent System and Production Secrets

The Role of Knowledge, Experience, and Skill during
the Period of the Scientific-Technical Revolution

What is Know-ﬂow?

Types of Know-How

Forms of Know-Bow Transfer

Special Features in the Bxchsnge of Inventions,
Knowledge, and Experience in Scientific-Technical

Cooperation with Socialist Countries

How Much is Know-How North? How Can Its Transfer
Be Stimulated?

"hat Needs to Be bone for Successful Sale of
Know-How

lusion
s
ndix [definitions]

Hezhdunsrodnyye otnosheniya", 1981

END