FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10139
25 November 1981

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 16/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/lO:
25 Novemh

HORLIMIDE REPORT
TEuacomwcATsz Poucv, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(P000 1 6/ 81)

CONTENTS
ASIA
JAPAN
Concealed Image Transmission Method Developed
(RIM KmYO mun, 21 sep 81) .IIOOOOODIOOIOOJOOOOIOOQ
WEST EUROPE
ITALY

Modular Equipment for Packet Switched Data Networks
(N. Corsi, L. Husumeci; EIBTTRONICA B TEIBCGWNICAZIONI,

Hay-Jun 81) oooooooooooooooooeono.eooooooooocooooeeoooooou

-a— [III-WW-140Pt

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONCEALED IMAGE TRANSMISSION METHOD DEVELOPED
Tokyo NIKKAU KOGYO SHDiBUN in Japanese 21 Sep 81 p 3

[Text] New Secure Communication Method Developed by Professor Tominaga et s1 of
Waseda University; Industrial Espionage Throws Up hands

In the field of facsimile, which is one of the three “divine objects" of 0A (office
automation), s new method of communication developed for the purpose of "keeping
things secret" has been the topic of conversation recently. As the amount of in-
formation in society increases, many problems are expected to crop up. That is.
there is urgent need for transmission of confidential documents by means of
facsimile transmission. for measures to counter the theft of documents and "eaves-
dropping" on microwave millimeter wave transmission, and for protection of images
(documents) transmitted which are of value to a third party. A new concealed

image transmission method has been developed by a research group headed by Professor
Hideyoshi Tominaga, Department of Electronic Commication, Faculty of Science and
Technology, Waseda University. the “concealed image transmission meth " developed
by this group uses a format that may be called a "hidden image" conversion method.
Secrets can be kept and certification (confirmation of document exchange) can be
accomplished conveniently by this new method. It has caught the attention of many,
because development of such software enables the confidential management of various
"documents" according to their importance even after the 0A document management has
entered the paperless age.

Documents and Images Protected, Jumbled Transmission, Sharp Reception

Facsimile transmission is a method of transmitting images such as documents by
electronic means over a distance to a receiver. The original dommsnt that is to
be transmitted is scanned with a light, and the black and white density of the
image is converted into electric signals. At the receiving and, the electric
signals are converted back into the corresponding image. However, facsimile equip-
ment used in an office is shared by many for economic reasons and is used for
transmitting various types of documents including both confidential documents and
open letters. Under such circumstances, if a document that must be kept secret can
be transmitted with jumbled signals which can only be decoded by the rightful re-

ceiver with a certain key into a clear image (docmnt), then the confidentiality
of the docment can be maintained.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There_are many applications of this method. For example, it can be programmed to
detect whether the seal of electronic mail has been broken by a third party or not,
or only a portion of the document such as the signature may be concealed by the
jumbled signals so that only the rightful receiver is able to reproduce the .
signature. Thus, the transmission of documents which could be of value to a third
party, such as tickets, entrance tickets, and checks, can also be carried out. and
“many other new uses may crop up," says Professor Tominaga.

The basic principle of the method is as follows: the arrangement of the image
(latter) point and the arrangement of black and white are mixed up so that the re-
arranged signals have the appearance of a jamming signal. The change in arrange-
ment can be accunplished by changing the order of scan lines according to a random
number generator and repeating this pattern periodically. In an actual machine,
this becomes part of the logic inside the shift register before codification.

The decoding key used by the receiver for reproduction of the image consists of the
same random number generator. With this key, a register logic which is the reverse
of the transmitter is created so that the scan lines are restored to their original
arrangement.

There are infinite variations of this rearrangement scheme, and if the period of
random number generation is increased, the process required to decode it also in-
creases proportionately. Hawever, the standard proposed by the CCITT (Consultative
Committee for international Telephone and Telegraph) is centered around a technol-
ogy which is aimed at shortening the fascimile codification of the image information
in order to imrpove the circuit efficiency. A technology in which the random number
generation is made more complex runs counter to the effort to make codification more
efficient. Therefore, the problem is how to reconcile these two. That is, the

algorism for arrangement change must be decided by the codification efficiency and
the content of the document.

Ihe method for arrangement change may be varied according to the degree of secrecy
desired. One of the methods is called shuffling. The original manuscript (Figure
A) is shuffled into random order by a single scan line as in shuffling a deck of
cards (Figure B); or points may be rearranged on the same scan line (Figure C);

or points may be rearranged between different scan lines (Figure D); or blocks may
be rearranged as a unit. [Figures not reproduced!- This process of randomly chang-

ing the arrangement is called scrambling. The scrambled signals appear to a third
party as nothing but noise. -

Concealed image transmission is a method of transmission of a more advanced degree
than the scrambled signals. The signals transmitted by this method consist of the
scrambled signals of a confidential document superimposed on the normal signals

of an ordinary document. Unless one knows the decoding key. the signals appear

to him as an ordinary transmission with garbles. "As the algorith for removal of
garbled information in order to improve the image becomes more commonplace in the
future, the unsuspecting third party will throw away a large quantity of concealed
images disguished as garbles," says Professor Tominags.

Reproduction of this concealed image is achieved by turning it over so to speak,
that is, by interchanging the position of an apparent image on the front with the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. egxmxk .
. N.u..w.\...w..\\ :
2%. .\\..\.\\.s \.\

.. ~x .\\.:
FOR OFFICHL USE ONLY

hidden image on the back. Thus, by reversing the arrangement order of the front

and the back, the image on the front becomes scrambled while the image on the back
becomes unscramhlcd. The concealed image may consist of a superposition of several
sheets of images or just a sing].e sheet. In the case of a single sheet of image,

the key section of the document such as the signature may be scrambled and scattered
in the form of garbles somewhere in the document.

Certification may be cited as another effective application of the concealed image
transmission method. Certification is a process of confirming receipt of a docu-
ment by the receiver. An additional scrambled image is superimposed onto the
scrambled signals of the document which is being transmitted. After the rightful
receiver has decoded the scrambled signals with an appropriate key, the reproduced
additional image is then sent back to the original sender. Thus, certification can
be carried out smoothly if the sender and the receiver make arrangements beforehand.

The high speed facsimile machines used today are standardized by the CCITT as 6-11!
(Group.III). The next generation of c-1v facsimile machines reportedly will be
facsimile machines with an internal memory. The purpose of having a memory is to
increase the effective utilization of the circuit and to transmit a larger volume
at a higher speed. With the memory function available, the technique of superimpos-
ing several images which is essential in the concealed image method can be intro-
duced easily and the application of software for confidential transmission can be
accomplished. Furthermore, in the future, when all documents and information are
stored in the computer memory and the so-called "paperless office" is a reality,
the equipment itself can be shared by everyone, with the confidential and non-
confidential documents intermixed. In such circumstances, the document management
can be easily carried out by takint appropriate secret protection measures in ac-
cordance with the degree of confidentiality. Meanwhile, communication by such
means as microwave and millimeter wave is expected to grow in the future because

of the low equipment cost per circuit. Aside from military secret communications,
other users of cmmmunications via electronic waves are beginning to attach impor-
tance to the concealed communication technique.

Finally, this group plan to present a paper describing their results at the "Inter-
national Symposium on Image and Document Communications" in Paris in November.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha, 1981

9113
C50: “106/11

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fill(ﬂﬂﬁ(1A1.USE(NVLY

ITALY

MODULAR EQUIPMENT FOR PACKET SUITCHED DATA NETUOBKS
Turin ELETTRONICA a rattcomumcszmm in Italian Hay-Jun 81 pp 126-130
[Article by N. Corsi and L. Huaumeci*]

[Test] Summary-~Hodular Equipment for Packet Switched Data Networks. This paper
points out the basic choices for the design of network equipment to be used in pack-
et switched networks. Considering the wide range of system requirements, the ap-
proach based on the availability of modular blocks has been chosen and investigated.
The paper shows how it is possible to interconnect the building blocks in order to
best fulfill network requirements. A packet adapter concentrator (ACP) for x28 and
x25 data traffic has been developed and tested. The AC? is a single processor
equipment based on a general purpose CPU and dedicated communication units. The AC?
is described in more detail from the hardware and software point of view.

I. Introduction

The first Public Data Networks, based on the packet-switching technique, went into
service in the second half of the 1970's. The standardisation activity successfully
carried out by the concerned international organisms, particularly by the ISO (In-
ternational Standard [as published] Organization) and by the ICCTT (International
Consultative Committee for Telegraphy and Telephony), has made it possible to obtain
a range of Recommendations that have created the premises for having available. in
the near future, a world-level Data Network, like what has come about for the tele-
phone service snd the telex service.

These decidedly positive results have led several Administrations in Europe to adopt
the packet technique for constructing Data Networks, to be opened to public service
in the beginning of the 1980's.

The packet networks furnish "Virtual Circuits“ that can be defined as logical asso-
ciations between pairs of terminals, by means of which it is possible to exchange.
through the network, packet-structured data information.

 

* Doctor of Engineering Norberto Corsi of the CSELT (Telecommunications Research
and Study Center), Turin; Doctor of Engineering Luigi husumeci of ITALTEL. Type-
script received 12 February 1981. Paper presented to the 28th International Com-
munications Conference of Genoa.

5
ran omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he characteristics of the virtual circuits are defined by Recommendation X25. Two
basic communication services are offered in particular by means of virtual circuits:

1) Virtual Calling, by which, and analogously to what happens in circuit switching,
a virtual circuit is temporarily established between two terminals by means of
exchange of suitable signaling packets with the network.

2) Permanent Virtual Circuit, by which two terminals are permanently associated
through a virtual circuit. This service is similar to that offered by means of
dedicated connections of point-to-point type.

While on the one hand there is a growing demand for data services, on the other
hand, users are having to cope with problems today relative to exchange of informa-
tion between terminals having different formats, codes, transmission speeds, etc.

Because of its intrinsic nature, which involves "store and forward," the packet-
switching technique seems to be the most flexible, in terms both of performance
characteristics and cost, for solving these problems.

This article describes how, starting with appropriately chosen modular structures,

it is possible to construct the network equipment necessary for providing a packet-
switching service open to the ongoing technological development and to the use re-

quirements in terms of new applications.

The solutions described make reference to the results of studies and experimentation
carried out in collaboration between the CSELT and ITALTEL.

2. Network Configuration

In the Data Network, the essential functions to be performed are those of concentra-
tion and switching. In addition to these, it is also necessary to take into account
the functions of management and control, which make it possible to keep. in time,
the available resources at a high level of efficiency and to manage the development
of the network in a coordinated manner.

Generally speaking, the concentration function is carried out in the peripheral part
of the network so as to achieve savings in the transmission lines. This function is
often associated with that of adaptation of the nonpacket terminals; this makes it
possible to transfer into the access network the heavy task of support of the vari-
ous protocols and thus to lighten the load on the nodes with which it is most con-
vcnicnt to interface with unified protocols of type X25.

The nodes--both terminals and transit nodes--provide for switching the packets and
directing them to the destination requested in accordance with the routing strategy
chosen.

The management and control philosophy depends fundamentally on the dimensions of the
network and on its architecture. In the context of a public network with broad geo-
graphical coverage and organized in at least a two-level hierarchy, it is considered
more advantageous to go with a hierarchical structure, in which various peripheral
centers are available, coordinated by one or two primary centers positioned at the
highest level of the network. In short, the control and management functions pro-

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vide for gathering and transporting to the center the data for carrying out the op-
erations of charging, continual testing of the state of‘the network, gathering of
data for statistics, and signaling of breakdowns occurring in the equipment.

(I) [I wcumuccurnohzs)

(2) g- mtuusmn-stoo (us)

 

Figure 1. General structure of the network referred to. ACP I Packet Adapter Con-
centrator; NC? I Packet-Switching Node; CH I Maintenance Center; CG! I Management

and Maintenance Center.

Key:
1. Packet users 2. Start-stop users

 

 

Figure 2. Honoprocessor structure. CPU I Central Processing Unit; H I Memory;
IPA I Asynchronous Protocols Interface; IPS I Synchronous Protocols Interface.

Key:
1. Interface units

 

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition, the management centers are capable of carrying out operations relative
to topological change: and network reconfiguration owing to breakdowns and over-
loads.

Figure I shows the reference-network st - :ure. - equipment considered can be
classified as follows:

1) Packet Adapter Concentrators (ACP), normally placed in the access network and to
which the user lines are connected;

2) Packet-Switching Nodes (NCP): te:m.na! witches or transit switches for the pur-
pose of being able to construct differen. network structures;

3) peripheral Maintenance Centers (CH) and priﬂk Management and Maintenance Cen-
tars (3m).

3. Structure of the Network Equipment

A structure-design objective for achieving the functions requit nc -switch-
ing networks should provide for a single "system" with such flexibility as to be
able to configure all the necessary items of equipment with the capacity desired.
The technical and economic advantage resulting from a solution of this type is in—
deed quite obvious.

The present state of the technology, which has introduced the microprocessor on a
vast scale and has enormously reduced the cost of memories, has made this approach
possible. The availability of processing units at extremely low cost has oriented
design toward objectives such as:

a) functional modularity, for the construction of distributed and therefore flexible
systems;

b) modularity of the processing capacity, for construction of economically viable
systems, of both small and large dimensions;

L) modularity of the reliability assignable to the systems, by providing them with
the quantity of redundance required by the degree of service of the particular
application.

In short, the technical solution that meets with greatest favor today provides for
development of units based on microprocessors specialized for handling particular
functions (for example, management of a particular protocol, switching of individual
packets, etc) and interconnected in a wide variety of configurations.

In our case, the aforesaid units constitute the "basic subsystems," comprising a
processor, the memory related to it, and the associated terminals and interfaces
(Figure 2).

The fundamental component was chosen in accordance with the criterion of being able
to develop the ACP equipment with a single subsystem and to use a large number of
subsystems, appropriately interconnected, for higher-level functions and greater
traffic capacity. This is because of the fact that it was considered advantageous
to exploit the economy and efficiency of single-processor structures in the peri-
pheral area of the network where the traffic is less concentrated.

8
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE‘ONLN
EOR‘OFHKJAI.USE¢MVLY

As regards the Central Processing Unit adopted, products of the PD? 11 family of mi-
croprocessors were decided on, while the Interface Units for the various linetermin-
ations were specially designed for the purpose. This structure makes it possible to
manage up to 66 user terminals. with a mixed traffic of characters and packets up to
60 packets/sec (on the assumption that each packet is made up of 6k characters).

This modularity permits a vast range of applications in the peripheral area of the
Data Network. Interconnection of several subsystems (nodules provided with CPU,
memories, and appropriate interfaces) sakes it possible to obtain increasingly com-
plex structures so as to construct equipment that can be used as terminal nodes and
as transit nodes for processing capacities of several hundred packets per second.

 

Figure 3. Multiprocessor structure. SCOH - Communication Subsystem; SCOL . Subsys-

tem for Management of Connections; SPL - Subsystem for Handling Line Protocols;
INT . Line Interface.

 

The most important aspect in the designing of a system of this type (multiprocessor)
is to assign the functions to be carried out to the various subsystems in such a way
as to optimize the traffic handled. In particular. in order to achieve, within ac-
captable limits, a linear growth of traffic capacity manageable with the growth of
the number of subsystems involved. it is necessary to keep the processes with a high
degree of information exchange within the subsystem itself as much as possible.

Figure 3 presents the block diagram of a multiprocessor structure whose subsystems
can be reduced to the following three types’

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) Subsystems for Handling the Line Protocols (SPL): it is obviously necessary to
use a large number of SPL's, with the load distributed uniformly so as to opti-
mize the utilization of the available resources.

2) Subsystem for Management of Connections and for control and management of the
network (SCOL). These functions are not critical from the point of view of pro-
cessing capacity. but they do require considerable memory capacity and can be
centralized in a single subsystem.

3) Communication Subsystem (SCOM) for interconnection of the SPL's with one another
and with the SCOL subsystem. This fun:tion can be fulfilled in a satisfactory
manner through the use of a processor-type control. This solution was considered
an efficient one by comparison with other anthods such as the use of a global
comon memory, which entails excessive access "inflicts when the traffic is high,
or the use of the consnon-bus TIM technique, which involves a rather complex logic
in the individual SPL‘s.

In order to ensure high availability of the system. redundance elements must neces-
sarily be introduced; in particular:

1) full duplication, of the "hot stand-by" type, of the centralized subsystems ($001.
and SCOH);

2) SPL-subsystems redundancy of the n + 1 type.

Redundancy between the duplicated subsystems is provided for by means of parallel
interfaces directly connected for transfer of synchronization and exchange messages.

The interconnection of the SPL and $60!. subsystems with the comunication subsystem
(SCOH) is by means of exchange of packets on a cosmon memory. The duplicated struc-
tures are connected to the unduplicated subsystems through appropriate bus switches
of very high reliability.

15 . First Prototypes

The definition of the structure described above was achieved by use of the results
of the following work:

1) simulation of the procedures in increasingly complex structures;
2) development of the most important nodules of the software structure;

3) fabrication of the ACP, which, as stated earlier, constitutes the basic subsystem
of the architecture proposed.

Further work will be related to development of nonpacket synchronous protocols, the
making of multiprocessor prototypes, development of remote-management centers. More
detailed information on the ACP already developed is given below.

The AC? is an apparatus composed of a Central Processing Unit (CPU) of general-pur-
pose type and specialized Conunication Units which, under the control of the soft-
ware, carry out the functions of adaptation of the user data to the packet protocol
of the network and of concentration of these data at the junctions for connection to
the node.

The AC? was built in two equipment layouts. The first makes it possible to hook up
64 asynchronous lines up to the speed of 1,200 bits/sec, for a maximum traffic ca-

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pacity (throughput) of 15 packets/sec; the second makes it possible to hook up 48
asynchronous lines of the above type and 4 synchronous lines up to the speed of
9,600 bits/sec. for a maximum capacity of 60 packets/sec. Various mixed equipment
layouts are possible, within the limits of the maximum traffic capacities, simply by
variations in the wiring of the apparatus.

“.—————-‘H
W "3' \III (1)

lb.—

 

Pigure 3. Block diagram of the Packet Adapter Concnetrator (ACP). IOS ' Serial In-
put/Output Interface; IOP - Parallel Input/Output Interface; 1TB . Bus Interface;
IPS = Synchronous Protocols Interface; IPA I Asynchronous Protocols Interface; HOT I
alarm circuit (Hatch-Dog).

Key:
1. Terminal 2. Disc memory

 

Figure 5. The software system for Packet-Switching ($0?) of the ACP.

Key:
1 Scheduler 7. X25/7S channel manager
2 Memory manager 8. Communication programs
3. Time-sharing manager ' 9. Charging
4. Supervisor 10. Alarms and statistics
5 Router ll. Operator interface
6 x28 channel manager 12. Support programs

—__________.__———-—————-_——

11
NOR CMﬂﬂCJAL USIZ¢NVLY
FOIIOFFNJAI.USE(MVLY

Transfer of data between user terminals and ACP is by use of protocols conforming,
respectively, to Recommendation X28 for asynchronous terminals and Recommendation
X25 for synchronous terminals. For both installations, the connection to the
switching node involved is by means of a junction lines of synchronous type with

maximum speed of 9,600 bits/sec. Transfer of data between AC? and Node is by use of
a protocol based on Recormendation X75 of the ICCTT.

The following units are shown in the block diagram of the A6? in Figure A:

1) Central Processing Unit (CPU), for all the data-processing and communications-
management functions. It consists of a Digital PDP 11/23 miniprocessor that per-
mits interconnection of external units on its own internal bus;

2) Communication Units, for the data input/outpu. functions and for the lower-level
processing provided for by the protocols. They consist of modules, organized in
5 groups which, by means of appropriate bus extension plates (1TB), are connected
directly to the bus of the Central Unit. Each module can ‘orminate 4, 2 or 1
lines or junctions, depending on the type of protocol used on the line and the
type of access to the central memory. In particular. there are 4-line modules
for asynchronous interfaces, 2-line modules for synchronovs interfaces with in-
terrupt access, and l-line modules for synchronous interfaces with direct memory
access.

The software of the ACP equipment group is composed of two systems:

I) the Packet-Switching Software (SCP) system for real-time execution of the network
functions residing in the ACP itself;

2) the Maintenance system (M) for off-line execution of diagnostic and testing pro-
cedures.

The 50? system (Figure 5), in turn, is designed in terms of three subsystems:

a) Supervisor, for management of the resources and coordination of the processes;

b) Communication Programs for traffic management;

c) Support Programs for supervision of the ACP and for network-management functions.

The Supervisor comprises the following modules:

I) the Scheduler, which provides for synchronization of the processes and assignment
of the CPU's time to the processes themselves;

2) the Memory Manager, which provides for dynamic assignment of the memory areas for
temporary memorization of the characters and packets as well as of the data ex-
changed between processes;

3) the Time-Sharing Manager, which provides for management of the meters associated
with the time-sharings put into the ACP.

The Communication programs comprise:

l) the Channel Managers: program modules for management of the virtual connections
(formation and killing) and for control of the data flow through the connection
itself;

2) the Router: program module responsible for association between input and output
lines for each of the virtual connections required. and depositary of the config-
uration of the ACP (lines hooked up, in service, out of service, etc).

12
FOR OFFNJA1.USE(NNLY
The Channel Managers so far developed relate to the X28 protocol for asynchronous
terminals, the x25 protocol for packet terminals, and the X75 protocol for junction
lines: the program modules reproduce, as regards structure also, the typical multi-
level structure of the recommendations involved. The Channel Managers communicate
with one another through internal interfaces; the mechanism that provides for these
interfaces is a code system to which the managers accede through the Scheduler.

Finally, as regards the Support Programs, the following modules have been provided:

I) the Charging-Block Manager: the data used for generation of the charging blocks
are detected by the Channel Managers and transferred to the Network Management
and Maintenance Center, using a logical channel devoted to this purpose;

2) Alarms and Statistics Managers: provides for collecting information on the state
of the ACP and forwarding it to the operator (local or remote) or to the Manage-
ment and Maintenance Center;

3) Man-Machine Interface: this module manages the operator-machine dialogue, which
can be both local and remote (from a Maintenance Center [CM] or from the Man-
agement and Maintenance Center lCGM]--see Figure l).

5. Conclusions

The choices made for constructing equipment to be used within the framework of Pack-
et Switched Data Networks have been illustrated. The basic structure, already built
with a single processor, is that which carries out the function of adaptation of
nonpacket terminals and of concentration of the data traffic. Multiprocessor struc-
tures can be built, starting with the basic structure, in accordance with the guide-
lines discussed in this paper and with a modular approach, for both the hardware and
the software, covering the entire spectrum of functions and capacities required even
by networks of considerable complexity and large dimensions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. ICCTT Recommendations X3. X25, X28, X75; Study Group VII, Geneva, February 1980.
2. Roberts, L.G.. "Packet Network Design--The Third Generation," IFIP Congress 77.

3. Kelly, P.T.F., "Public Packet Switched Data Networks, International Plans and
Standards," PROCEEDINGS 0? IEEE, Vol 66, No II, November 1978.

6. Halsey, J.R., Hardy, L.E., and Powning, L.P., "Public Data Networks: Their Evo-
lution, Interfaces and Status," IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, Vol 18-2, 1979.

S. Micciarelli, A., and Mossotto, C., "Technical Aspects in the Implementation of a
Public Switched Network for Data," International Switching Symposium, Paris,
1979.

COPYRIGHT: 1974 by ERI-EDIZIONI RAI RADIOTELBVISIONE ITALIANA

11267
050: 5500/2311 END

‘3

son omcfAL use ONLY