APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100010022-5
FOR OFHCIAL USE (“LY

JPRS L/8215
11 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreignolanguage
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
ur [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of ,a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
motion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itelu are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

. -' EJz‘i .-\HS :‘ND REGULATIORS GOVERNING WNERSIIIP 0F
f.\“?L" S Rr.PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIKATION
IS "'"llC.‘T[0\ 5E RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I. III-Ian" N».

   
     
     
   
  

BIBLIOGRAPHIC OAI’A
SHE E?

. luI. .nsl \all‘l' I

TRANSLA'l‘lONS 0N ussn sun-mm: AND TECHNOLOGY - mwsmlu.
scwucrzs AND TECHNOLOGY , (F000 3/79)

JPRS l./ 8215

  

_ I. IIt't‘IpIeni'l Arron-Ion No.

to autos-in; Organisation Kept.
0.
I.

. I’veiecl/Taslzl'ork Unn No.

I). I‘ype ol Rose" a: Period
Covered

   
 
      

   

,- :‘uIIuItI‘I

   
  
  
  
 

    

9. “whee-m: Ingenunlmn New .uI-I Ashlin“
Jolnt Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

  
  
   

l3, wan-mm,- lhgamlMIum Near and Mm»

    
    
    
      
 
   
   

 

    

As above

 

IS. ‘urrlrrv IIHH Nmru

I6. Alan... u

  

The report contains information on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics;
atmospheric sciences; chemistry; earth sciences and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; mathematical
sciences: cybernetics, computers; mechanical. industrial, civil, and marine
engineering: methods and equipment: missile technology; navigation.
communications, detection.and countermeasures. nuclear science and technology;

ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels; space technology; and scientists
and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

    
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
    
 
   
         
  
   

. t- \ I.n.l~. .mJ I'm urn-M Mulysu.

   
    

.- Urn “Huh

USSR Electronics Missile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Engineering Navigation and

Astronomy Energy Conversion Communications

Astrophysics Materials Detection and
Atmospheric Sciences Mathematics Countermeasures
Chemistry Mechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Computers civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics Industrial Engineering Ordnance
Earth Scluncus Marine Engineering Physics
Urcanunrnphy Methods Propulsion and Fuels
m. N. Main . . (I... a--I ls-Inl Irma. Equipment space Technology

 

Ih-"“‘|Il~|'h~vw- 01.03.0h.07.08.09,10.ll.12.13.16,16,17,18,19,20,21.22
)9. Mom} ('Isu iThu II. No. cl Pun

92

' - \numyl lsui In
Port
“\I “‘ I' I)

nus rum MAY nr RI.PR()I)U(‘F.D "“°""'°‘ "““"'

IA: \- «Ln-.1... Nair-um

   

  
   

For nrficinl Usv Onlv. Limited
Number of Copies Available From JPRS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY k

spas L/azié
11 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOLIO 3/79)

Coureurs PAGE
CYBBRNETICS, COMPUTERS AND AU‘mMTION TECHNOLOGY

Seminere on Theory end Prectice of Scientific-Technical
Information

(MW-WICKESKAYA INFORMTSIYA, SERIYA 1--
ORGANIYATSIYA 1 “£po INPORHATSIONNOY neon,

No 9' 1978) 0‘00...OOOOOOOUOOOOOOOOOOOC0.00000COOOOOOOOI. 1

ELECTRONICS AND SLECTRIUL ENGINEERING

Bxhibite at the 1978 Leipzig Spring Feir in the Fielde
of Hetrology, Date Acquieition, end Dete-Proceeeing Syetene _
(RADIO FERNSEHEN ELBKTMIK’ Jun 78) eeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeee 7

Hetrology end Dete-Acquieition, by G. Reeb
Dete-Proceeeing Syeteme, by D. Rocket

The Detection of a Queeihemonic Signal Nevins en Unknown
Frequency in Noiee of an Unknown Power and Spectral Pom
(V. Ni Prokof'yev; Izvzsrzxe vuz RADIOELEKIBDNIKA,

"0 7' 197a) CUIIOOOOOOOO00......000COOOIOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIOOO 37

Have Spectrum Convereion Ue ins Spatial Hemnice
(Ya. K. Bogetyrev, N. P. Yenpurin; IZVESTIYA W2
“DIOFIZIM' m 8’ 1978) .‘O.‘UOOCOO....OCCOOODCOOOO’.... “2

Studiee of the Surface of Hater Areee Ueing Microwave
Bedionetry (Review) '

(A. N. Shutko; aanloraxnxxe 1 ELEKTRONIKA, No 10, 1978) . as
PUBLICATIONS

The LYAPAS-M Programing Syetean
(A. D. Zekhrevekiy, N. R. Toropov; SISTEHA
PmcmlvaNIYA LYAPAS'", 1978) OIOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOO... 66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continuod)
Subocrtbor Computer Cantor.
(V. I. anutmonko, I. V. Kul'mtn; KUS‘I‘OVYYE
chuIsLITSL'Nm TWY, 1978) OOOOCOCOOOOOIOOOOOOO.
sum“ for Data Tranumtuton Network.
- (Alokundr Mtkhaylovich Kryukov, of. :1 . 3
MATMTICHSSKOYE OBSBPBCHBNIYE SETS? PD, 1978) a . o u 0

Table of Canton. From Journal ' EXPLORATION GEOPHYSICS'
(MZVENCHNAYA GEOFIZIKA, N0 80' 1978) ococoooooooooo

Tublo of Content. Pmm Journal 'BXPIDRATION GEOPHYSICS'
(“MWYA GEOPIZIKA, "o 81' 197B) 0.. 00.00.03...

Table of Content. From Jouml 'BXPwRA'rION GBOMSICS '
(RAMDOCHNAYA GEOFIZIKA’, No 82, 1978) ..............

~b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GYBBRNHICS, COHPUTBRS AND AUNMTION WMWY

UDC 3307.7.830613
SEMINARS ON THEM AND PRACTICE OF SCIBI‘I‘IPIC-TECRIIICAI. INFORMATION

Moscow MUCﬂﬂO-WNICHEKAYA INNRMA‘I‘SIYA.' SBRIYA 1--OROANI2A'1‘BIYA I
MTODIKA INFORMA'I'SIONNOY W in Russian No 9. 1978 pp 20. 27-28

[Article by a. 0.]

[Text] A report by V. N. Tverdovskiy (All-Union Agency for Author's Rights)
on procedures in acquiring publication and translation ri'gits for articles
and books by foreim authors and by soviet authors for overseas use was
delivered at the “arch seninar "Theory and Practice of Scientific-Technical
Information." at the Moscow House of Scienti fie-Technical Propaganda ineni
P. E. Dserzbinskiy.

Since 196?. a systeu coordinating translations in electrotechnology has
been functioning in the electrotechnical industry. it was stated in a

report on the effectiveness of coordinating trannation activity. pre-
sented by 'r. '1‘. Sychev (Infornelektro [Division of Scientific-Technical

Information in Electrotechnolog. of the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Electromechanical). The coordinating system is directed by

the Center for Coordinating Translations under the Central Reference Infor-
mation Collection of Informelektro. Also developed and in service are

guidance technical materials: System for Coordinating Translations in Elec-
trotechnoloy [Sistena koordinatsii perevodov po elektrotekhnike] and Instruc-

tions on Compiling and Coding Teletype Requests [Instruktsiya po sostavleniyu
i kodirovaniyu teletavpnykh zayavok].

The participation by ncicnti fie research institutes. design offices and see-

tor enterprises in the coordinating: activity is mandatory. Efficiency in
coordinating translations is ensured by a reference file annually supple-

mented with 7000 secondary documents.

From experience in coordinating translator activity in the sector. it can
be stated that elimination of direct duplication, up-to-dste information

on scheduled and completed translations and prompt filling of requests for
translations in the collection, with the aid of modern coding equipnent,

each year prevents the carrying out of 1000 already-existing translations;
the funds saved in this case are roughly 1.5 million rubles annually.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR (WPICIM. "SK ONLY

Informelektro copies translations at its own copying center. Since 1971
Informelektro, on receiving the first two copies of translations from organ-
isations and enterprises, transfers the first copy onto microfilm and the
other copy is sent to all-union centers coordinating translations of docu-
ments of different kinds (patents, standards. articles, books. and so on).

G. A. Tsyganov (0081"?! [State Scientific Research Institute of Scientific-
Technical Information]) spoke at the April seminar. delivering a paper:
"Automatic Information Retrieval System" (AIPS) of intersector scientific-
technical information from experience at the OOBIM'I. He said that a Repub-
lican Automatic System of Information Retrieval and Dissemination (mm-1)
was developed and is functioning successfully in the MINI.

'i'he RASPRI-l is built on the three-loop principle. The first loop is embo-
died in an Minsk-32 computer and the Yes computer; it is an information re-
trievnl unit. vhoae bnnin is a multinector file of retrieval images of docu-
mentu. organized in accordance with the list of headings of the RASPRI-l
information retrieval system. within each heading of the RASPRI-l two modi-
fications of the retrieval file organization are possible: direct and in-
verted. Direct organization of the file of retrieval images of documents

is used in the mode of selective dissemination of information. for current
inquiries and inverted organization-afar retrospective retrieval. At the
present time the RASPRI-l information retrieval system is used in the
inverted retrieval of intonation mode. The file of queries is organized
by headings.

In the RASPRI-l information retrieval system document texts are fed directly
without preliminary intellectual processing. The main attributes of the
document format in the RASPRI-l IRS [information retrieval system] are as

follows: document number, classification index, input and output data and
the document text in the natural (Russian) language. The document text can

The linguistic means of the RASPRI-l IRS can automatically transform a docu-
ment text into its retrieval image by self-coding.

Special tabulated form are fed into the first IRS loop: each tabulated form
has n net of document numbers corresponding to the inquiry from the view-
point of the linguistic means of the RASPRI-l IRS, matching each inquiry

number. The tabulated form are used for an address retrieval in the second
rm loop.

The second loop of the RASPRI-l IRS is a set of subJect-oriented numbered
card files of the secondary documents on conventional and machine carriers.
The address retrieval in the card files based on conventional carriers is

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I’I’IGIAI. "SH ONLY

done by hand. Documents submitted are verified for their relevance at the
address retrieval stage. This procedure. as indicated by the speaker, all a

users to be serviced with high precision, virtually close to 100 percent.

The third loop of the RABPRI-l IRS is a collection of primary information
sourcesuapecifically, the Tam [central scientific and technical library .
The loop is activated when a user requests a copy of the primary dooment.

In 1977. 180,000 documents were fed into the RABPhI-l IRS; about 31.000 docu-
ments were fed in the inverted retrieval mode: the documents had been sent to
users at 1600 enterprises and organisations in Moscow and Moscow Oblast.

"Operational Characteristics of the Sector-Based Automatic Information Be-
trieval System in the Indexing of Patent Documents and in Their Retrieval"
was delivered by V. P. Mikhaylova (Automatic Information Retrieval System in
Electrotechnoloy, "source" subsystem). She said that as the sector-basedl
automatic information retrieval system grows. a question arises as to the u
organising of specialized patent retrieval when expert examinations are un er-
way of an obJect under patent protection for innovation or purity or when
products are being delivered for export. The conventional approach to pat nt
retrieval requires, first, finding its regulation in the m [Internation
Patent Classification], that is, formulating the inquiry in the alphanumer c
codes of this system. The paper examined the possibility of transforming he
traditional inquiry in the HKI indexes into a query for the descriptor re-I
trieval system. It was shown that retrieval organized by the system prin-'
ciple (based on "(I indexes) is not effective owing to the considerable aub-
Jcct-matter diffuseness of the information in the patent collections. The
cause of the diffuseness, V. P. Mikheylova pointed out. lies in several fac-
tors; of these the principal factor is the ambiguity of indexing because

the documents can be indexed according to two bases: according to the appli—
cation of the obJect under protection and according to its functional desig-
nation. Descriptor concepts must be used to augment patent retrieval effec-
tiveness. Indexing documents introduced into the file only with the des-
criptor lexicon based on the R211 VINITI [Referativnyye ahurnaly VINITI; Ab-
stract Journals of the All-Union Institute of Scientific-Technical Informa-
tion]. without allowing for the specific features of the patent glossary
equally fails to yield the desired results. Experiments were conducted show-
ing the weak consistency of the patent glossary lexicon and the sector-based
glossary lexicon based on the R211 VINITI. So the two indexing systems must
coexist and must be taken into account concomitantly in the same automatic
information retrieval system: the hierarchical classificatory field of the
subJect-matter fragment of the "(I and the instrument of coordinate indexing
_--thc sector-based descriptor lexicon. The correspondence between these two
system is achieved by constructing a classification that is secondary with
respect to the "(1, a local classification, that is, one that is meaningful
only for a given retrieval file. An algorithm of the formal procedure was
developed for constructing the classificatory field and the semantic names
of the classes. The class name is the standard inquiry addmssed to some
one of the conceptual fields of the file. The glossary of the documents

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

supplied by the system in response to the inquiry is the basis for forming
lexical entries of the class. 'ihe secondary classification compared to the
sector-based lexicon of the descriptors constitutes the linguistic support
of the patent retrieval with regard to the specific inquiry, which can sub-
otantially increase the retrieval effectiveness.

At the May seminar, the paper “System for Satis tying Inquiries of Enterprises
and Organizations of the National Econow for Primary Documents" was delivered
by '1'. l-‘. Snastina (GOSIN'PI [State Scientific Research Institute of Scientific
and Technical Information”. She spoke about different primary documents
appearing during and as a result of investigations, develoments and produc-
tion activity: reports, articles, reviews and so on. he speaker directed

the attention of the seminar audience to the fact that not all information

personnel can manage the method of pre ing and filling out primary and
secondary documents and they .allow the r duplication.

Specifically, T. F. Snastina dwelt on a form of primary documents of impor-
tance, such as sets of designer-drawing documents (DDD) for nonstandard equip-
ment and industrial processes, without which introducing innovations into pro-
duction is difficult and often even impossible. Yearly, the GOBIM'I fills

up 250,000 orders for sets of DDD.

Specific examples illustrate how significant is current awareness infome-
tion in the publicity and dissemination of primary documents; the system
of this information in the electrotechnical industry was examined at length.

the index "Bibliograficheskava informatsiya" [Bibliographical Information]
is published in 15 series with a scheduling of 1-3 months between issues;

"Bibiiograficheskiy ukazatel' obmennylth fondov nauchno-tekhnicheskikh biblio-
tek elektrotekhnicheskoy prowshlennosti [Bibliographical Index of Exchange

Collections of Scientific and Technical Libraries in the Electrotechnical
Industry] is published quarterly; annually indexes are published to the in-
formation bulletins, reviews and so on published in the sector. In the
speaker's view, copies of the headings of Journals in capitalist countries

that are made on order by information users are an important kind of current
awareness information.

The paper shed light on the form and methods of satisfying the inquiries of
organization and enterprises of the national economy for primary documents;
mention was man of a trend of the growing number of inquiries: for example,

in 197’: about 100 daily inquiriescnmc to the Informelektro Central Reference
Collection, and 150--in 1977; each year some 70,000 inquiries are answered.

Concluding, the speaker stressed that the system of filling inquiries for
primary documents stands in need of further improvements.

The paper "'i‘echnoloyuthe Most Important Factor in the Functioning of an

Automatic Information Retrieval System" was read by A. z. Shneyerson (Inform-
elektro). He expounded at length on the most important problem emerging in
the operation of an information retrieval system. 'Ihe speaker indicated that

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1’0“ (WHCIM. llSli ONLY

now u new scientific discipline has emerged in information science--the
theory of documentary automatic information services, studying the scienti-
fic and scientific-technical problem of converting from an "abstract infor-
mation retrieval system" to service in a fixed process environment. A: z.
Shneyerson familiarized the seminar participants with the results of studies
dens in Informelektro based on the Electrotekhniha Automatic Information Be-
trieval System.

6. I. Gol'dgemer (Informelehtro) gave a report, at the June seminar, on sev-
eral problems in the organising, use and upgrading of the reference informa-
tion collection.

Remaining as the most important problem is the automtion and mechanization
of the set-completion of the reference information collection and document-
handling. In speaking about unified sector—based reference information collec-

tions, the speaker pointed out that in mew instances they .have not yet come
on the scene; one reason for this situation is departmental, in several cases,

not the sector nature of the activity of the Central Sector Agencies of Scien-
tific and Technical Information (TSOON'I'I). Subsystem of information services
were examined, under implementation with the central reference information
collection; the suggestion was made to give extra attention to systems of
' the selective distribution of primary documents (IRPD [izbiratel‘noye ras-
prostraneniye pervichnykh dokumentovl) .

In the speaker's View, by 1990-2000 the collections of the OSN'I'I [State Sys-
tem of Scientific and Technical Information] will double. This vill compel
efforts even now to be made to engage in solving several of the leading pro-
blems. The speaker elaborated the structure of the functioning central ref-
erence information collections of the TsOON'l‘I and underscored the necessity
of their improvement; he maintained that it is time to free the central in—
formation reference collections from exercising the function of the informa-
tion service of the 'l‘sOON'i'I and to set up information services that in fact
must take on providing information support to specialists and scientists in
the TsOON'i'I. This service is being organized at present in Informelektro.

The speaker gave much attention to the problem of uncovering the information
needs of a variety of information users and methods of discovering information
requirements; it was noted that the set-completion of the reference informa-
tion collection must be done on the basis of information requirement uncovered.

c. I. Gol'dmmer spoke about the system of set-completion of the reference
information collection of foreign literature from capitalist countries. func-
tioning 1n the electnotechnicel industry.

The incoming document flow is ranked prominently in the set-completion of
the "cference information collection. The speaker spoke about the system of

setting up and controlling the incoming document flov functioning in the elec-
trotcchnical industry.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. S. Nemirovakaya dclivercd a paper on the sector-based system of standar-

dization of information activity. Standardization of information activity
is linked closely with the growing role of standards in the control of the

technical level and quality of products. In June 1977 an expanded plan of
manures for the further strengthening of the role of standardization was

examined and confirmed at a Joint session of Gosstandart 888R [All-Union
State Standards] and the Board of the LBSR Ministry of the Electrotochnical

Industry; the plan is aimed at the further strengthening of the role of stan-
dardization under which scheduling of activities in standardization will be

improved, anticipatory standards will be applied and so on.

The sector-based system of standardizing information activity is developing
in close association with the standardizing of production, technological

and economic activity of the sector.

In electrotechnolog a long road has been covered from setting up individual
technical-standards and methodological documents to the elaboration of an

integrated system for standardizing information activity in the sector.

The first technical-standards documents were confirmed in 1967-1971; since
1975 the concept of a unified system of technical-standards and methodolo-

gical-organizational documents is being implemented systematically and con-
sistently.

Currently the complex of technical-standards documents and methodological
documents in electrotechnoloy numbers 50 state standards, guiding technical
materials, principles, directives and so on. Included in the complex are

effective. under-development (including 17, for the first time) and proJected
documents.

The system of standardization consists of three blocks: system-wide elements;

functional subsystems of input, storage, retrieval and publication of scien-
tific and technical information; and organizational aspects of the function-

ing of subsystems and elements of the sector-based system of scientific and
technical information in electrotcchnology and the control subsystem.

In the system-wide documents a special place is given to the model draft

regulating thc procedures of organizing an enterprise information system'
in which all problems of organizing information support of an enterprise

into a unified system are being cumulated.

COPYRIGHT: VSEOYUZN'YY INSTITU'I‘ NAUCHNOY I MMCHESKOY INFORMA'ISII. 1978

10123
cso: 1870

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iron OFFICIAL use omx

mornouzcs Aim 31.2mm mcmsuuc

EXHIBITS AT THE 1978 LBIPZIG SPRING PAIR IN THE FIELDS 0P WHOM, DATA
MUISITION. AND DATA-PROCESSING SYSTEMS

Hetrology and Data-Acquisition

Beat Berlin RADIO FBRNSEHKN ELBKTRCNIK in German Vol 27, No 6, Jun 78
pp 355-360

[Article by 6. Each]
[Text] German Democratic Republic

The exhibits of Carl Zeiss JENA State Enterprise reflect the increasing and
fundamental importance of microelectronics. Intensification of science and
production based on the use of microelectronics manifests itself in two ways.
The availability of photolithographic and microscopic equipment lines, pri-
aarily as an aid in production and testing for the microelectronics industry,
contributes significantly to the strengthening of the material and engineer~
ing base of this industry sector. In addition. microelectronic components
find increasing use in precision optical devices. resulting in more effect-
ive and easier-to~use instruments.

The COORDIHEIER 6, an electronic recording device, is used for solving tasks
related to the acquisition of photogrammetric test data, and may be readily
connected to all photogranmetric measuring instruments made by Carl Zeiss
JENA State Enterprise. The electronic system of this recorder contains.
among others, a microprocessor, which operates in conjunction with a 1K

RAM and a 8K PROM memory. Display is on a screen and by light-emitting
diodes.

Another instrument in thefiéldof precision metrology using a.microcomputer
is the DKM 1-300 DP three-coordinate measuring device, which may be used

in metrologicnl and testing procedures in all areas of the metal- and
plastic-processing industries. With the instrument it is possible to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
measure tools. devices. and gauges. it is suitable for the following aes-

suring tasks: .

- Lengh neasureaent in unidimonsional, two-dimensional, and three-diaensional
Cartesian coordinates:

- Measure-ant in polar and cylindrical coordinates around vertical and hor-
lzontal axes of rotation;

- Direct and indirect angle aeuureaents;

- Point-by point aeasuramants of levelness. parallalaaas, and roundness.

a _ﬁ"‘,"“.

._, .(v

    

Electra-optical tachymeter from Carl Zeiss JENA State
Enterprise (factory photograph)

The electronic system of the three-coordinate measuring instrument contains,
among others. a Robotron K lSlo microcomputer, which performs the immediate
evaluation via the measuring and evaluating programs entered through the
keyboard. The evaluating prograas may be permanently built into solid-state
memories.

The microprocessor installed in tho BOT 2000 electro-optical tachyleter
computes oblique distances, horizontal distances. altitude differences. or
heights after entry of a two-digit atmospheric correction, the vertical
wind. and the altitude above the control console. displaying the results.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

The instrument may be used for all surveying tasks up to 2.000 m range. and
because it contains a microprocessor performs efficiently and is easy to use.

These advantages are particularly appreciated when the instrument is used in
the field.

Soviet Union

The c 9-1 television special oscillogreph is used for pulse aeasurements and
visual observation of periodic signals. it is particularly suitable for a
thorough study of television signals with visualized grid (lines) on a vi-
deo monitor. such as measuring the difference phase, differential gain.

and characteristic lines of the color-carrier frequency in the sac»: ill 8
color-television system.

Some technical data:
Picture screen: 80 In by 100 mm
Pass range of the vertical deflection channel: 0 - 20 Mi:
input impedance and parallel capacitance:
input I: l mohm/ISS pP
Input Ii: 75 ohms -
Time scales with possibility of five-fold expansion: 0.1 micro-
seconds per cm to so milliseconds per cm
Stable synchronization in the frequency range pf: 20 Hz - 20 an
Error in measurement of signal levels and tied intervals: max .tSb
Dimensions in In: 480 by :60 by 475
Weight: 25 kg

The €1.79 dual-bean oscillograph is equipped with a dual-tilt'unit. one with
delay. As a result. examinations of any desired part of a signal of complex
~structure becomes possible. The instrument is used primarily in various areas

of science and technology for functional checks and maintenance operations
of complex electronic equipment.

Some technical data:
Useful picture screen area: 48 u by 80 II
Frequency range: 0 - loo Mir.
Deflection factor: 2 mV/cm to 12 V/cm
Rise time: 3.5 nanoseconds
Overshoot: 5‘!
Adjustable delay: 1 microsec - 10 seconds

Frequency bandwidth A e B: 0.5 mV/cm
Basic error: 25b

Horizontal-frequency bandwidth: 0 - S m:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Horizontal deflection factor x-Y: 7.5 aV/cm to 12 V/cn
Dimensions in am: 348 by 220 by 490
Height: 19 kg

The 0 4800 digital multimeter is used to measure resistance values. capacity
values. inductivity values. d.c. voltages, direct currents. frequencies. time

intervals, and pulse counts. The instrument is also suitable for use as an
independent measuring system as well as a measuring unit in automated control

and guidance systems.

Some technical data: _3 3 _3 3 _3 2
Measuringzranges: U: 10 _‘- lo SV; 1: 10 - 10 9A; c: 10 :310 ug;
L: 10 - 10 H; R: 10 - lo kn; f: l H: - 10 kHz; t: 10 - 10

sec

 

C 9-1 Special television oacillograph from the
Soviet Union

0 4800 digital multimeter from the Soviet Union
Selection of the polarity in measuring U, l, and f\ is accomposhcd auto-

matically, as is the selection of the range in measuring f, t, and N. The
U, l, c, L, and R ranges are selected manually.

.-

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Input impedance in measuring

U: 2 1 an

t. f, n: 2 lo kn

I: 1

Measuring error: up to 0.25t
Ambient temperature: 5 - 40'C
Relative hunidity: 80$

Dimensions in mm: 135 by 380 by 495
Height: 12 kg

The P 5085 and P 5016 automatic digital alternating current measuring bridges

are fully automated instruments for the determination of complex resistances.
They are designed for laboratory use.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Phase shift 10-3-1
Test frequencies in 1:11: 0.05; 1; 10 l; s; 10; 50
Base aeasuring error in b 0.2 - 2 0.02 - 0.05 - 1
Measuring tiao in sec 0.1 - S 0.03 - l
Diaensions in an 490349$x210 490x405x210

' weight in kg 30 ' 40

The 0 EMS phase-shift calibrating instrument consists of two quarts-
controlled generators. of which the phase position is changed by a preci-
sion phase bridge. The instruaent is used for calibrating and checking
of phase-leasuring systeas.

Soae technical data:
Adjusting range of phase shift: 0 - 359'
Basic error: 0.05 - 2'
Output frequency range: 1-2-10‘ In
Shape of output signals: sine/square
Quartz-generator frequencies: 2.5 klir - 200 His
Dimensions in II: 490 by 210 by 375
Height: 18 kg

The K 484/2 digital recording and aeasuring systea is used to neasure d.c.
voltage in 30 channels with digital display of the channel umber. the
result of the neasureaent. and the measuring tine. At the sane tine. a
perforated tape is generated. The systea asy be used for auto-atiun of
electrical neasureaents to check the parameters of technological and pro-
duction processes in scientific studies carried out under laboratory and

factory conditions. It lay also be used as a digital voltmeter with prin-
ted output.

The system consists of a 0 4830 digital voltmeter. a aeasuring-site selec-
tor switch. a clock, a recorder. and a perforator. These coaponents are

nodules in functional and design terns. and nay also be used outside the
system.

Some technical data:
Test-voltage range in V: 0.0005 - 1.000
Polarity selection: automatic
Test-range selection: manual, automatic. reactely controlled
Accuracy class for ranges: l V. 0.1/0.06; 10. 100, 1000 V. 0.15/0.1
Maxim aeasuring rate: 10 aeasurenents/sec
Accuracy of tine-signal output: 0.021
Dinensions in In: 490 by 340 by 360
Weight: 32 kg

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

The BM 539 RLCG measuring bridge from Czechoslovakia

The exhibits of the XOVO foreign-trade enterprise in the field of electronic
measuring instmnents were developed and manufactured by Tesla in Brno. They
demonstrate clearly the effort toward making operation easy and simple. For
example, there were many programable. autouatic, and seniautonatic instru-
ments among the exhibits.

The test transmitter BM 536 was developed for precise measurements in the
laboratory and the test field. This instrument is particularly suitable
for the determination of bandpass and filter curves.

Some technical data:

Frequency range: lo Hz - 12 Mix in five subranges

Frequency setting: decadic

Setting uncertainty: 1-10'7 with shut-down intermediate-value
oscillator 3. 1 bit with intemediate-value oscillator on

Attenuation of hamonic signals: 10 Hz - 100 ldiz: 60 dB;
100 kHz - 12 Hit: 40 dB

Attenuation of non-harmonic signals: > 60 d8

Internal frequency standard: 10 Ml:

Short-tine error of the frequency standard: 1-10'7 after a
runup tine of 30 min

Frequency-response error: :_ 0.5 dB

Runup time: 30 Iain

Remote control: parallel 8CD code

Interface: INS-l, according to RS 3826-73

Dimensions in an: 430 by 190 by 470

Height: 20 kg

1 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In cases where the setting inaccuracy for the output level is too high on
the BM 536 generator, the programmable In 547 attenuator (damping line) may
be used. In addition. it is advisable to use the SM 547 for damping and
gain measurements on quadrupoles.

The ON 552 vector voltmeter is a selective HF microvoltmeter equipped with
two channel systems. as well as a phase-measuring instrument with simulta-
neous display of the voltage and phase values. with the special coaxial
accessory BP 5321. it is possible to measure the reflection factor of
impedances and admittances; the s parameter of quadrupoles. and the para-
meters of semiconductors. '

The instrument is particularly suitable in information measuring systems
because of its technical properties and equipment. There is automatic
setting of the voltage ranges , phase ranges, and frequencies. Both manual
and remotely-controlled operation is possible. Programming is accomplished
in parallel BCD code. '

Sena technical data:
Voltage measurements: we microvolts - l V in nine ranges
Frequency range: l - 1000 Hit.
Measuring uncertainty: m of full deflection at 0-1 V
Input impedance: loo kohms/l2.8 pP at 1 III:
Input noise: approx. 18 microvolt
Bandwidth: 1 kHz
Measurement of the voltage ratio with dual reading.
Range: ~80 I +80 dB
Basic error: 3.0.3 dB
Phase measurement
Range: 0 - 980'
Resolution: 0.1“
Phase-null shift: 0 . aao' fpr every 10‘
Measuring uncertainty: 9.5' for coinciding voltages in both

channels

Outputs:
Voltage: 0 - 3.1 V
Phase: 0 - :1 V

Interface: Remote control is possible with the aid of replaceable
interface units for INS-l or INS-2

Dimensions in II: 330 by 450 by 390
Weight: 20 kg

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL'USE ONLY

The semiautomatic RLCG measuring bridge BM 539 is used for precise determina-
tion of the network parameters R. L. C, and G. as well as tolerances in parts.
Among others, it contains circuits for the automatic compensation of the

loss components on the test object. The compensation of the basic value is

accomplished manually to four decimals. where the pointer instrument indi-
cates the mistuning direction of the measuring bridge.

In addition to the standard neasureeents, the instrument may also be used
for the repeated measurement (screening) of parts. Setting of the tolerance
field is accomplished simply at the upper and lower limits of the basic com-

ponent. and the upper limit value of the second part. If the limit values are
exceeded, this fact is indicated optically.

Some technical data:
Basic measurements
Measuring ranges
' R: 0.5 mohm - 10 Mohm

G: 5 pS - 100 as
C: 0.0005 p? - 10 micro?
L5: 50 nH - 1000 H
l/L (C): 25 microF - 0.1 F
LP: 100 nicroH - 1000 H
D: 0.005 - l

Permissible measuring uncertainty
R: 1 ohm - 10 Mohns 210.1% :_l mohm :_ 0.2 0%)
G: 10 n5 - 100 as :(0.05% 30.01 n5 :ﬁx/loo s 30.2 0%)
C: l pF - 10 microF :10.05% 30.001 p? s0.20%)
L3: 100 nicroﬂ - 1000 H :[0.2% a 0.2 micro“ 20.20%)
1.1, sec micron - 1000 H ;(0.2% a 0.2 micron zp.20%)
0: 5-10-4 - 1 .qss 5-10“)

Total range: 0.02% - 20%

Test frequency for tolerance: 1 kHz :1%

Resolution: 0.01% - 0.001% of the display

Dimensions in In: 480 by 180 by 370

Height: 15 kg

BM 541 logic comparator
from Czechoslovakia
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An automatic sorting system enables, in conjunction with the Bu $39 mea-
suring bridge. the sorting of parts with axial leads in the given size into
three groups. In measuring the main portion, a decision for three groups

is made: smaller. larger, and within tolerance. The mechanism of the instru-
nent places the parts against the contacts. These contacts are connected

as Kelvin clamps. and may be converted into a two-terminal circuitry. The
sorted parts are collected in three containers below the unit. Three
counters indicate the number of parts in the individual containers.

The BM 560 instrument is used for measuring the effective value of the
quality factor Q. By means of direct measurement we determine the reson-
ance frequency of the measured object; by means of indirect measurement we
determine the coil inductivity. the capacity, and the loss factor of capa-
_ citors, the resistivity of bipoles. and other parameters. Among the ad-
vantages of the instrument is the low test voltage on the test object.

Major technical parameters:
Frequency range: so Idlz - 35 Mi:
Basic frequency error: .tlt
Test range of the quality factor Q: S - 1000
Capacitance range of the test capacitor: 25 - 450 pF
Basic error of the test capacitor scale: :4 p? for C S 100 p?
3.1% for C > 100 1)?
Measuring range for indictivity values: 540'8 ll - 0. 4 H
Dimensions in u: 180 by 490 by 355
Weight: 13 kg

Basic measuring error of the quality factor Q with the
BM $60 from Czechoslovakia

Range Frequency Frequency
50 kHz-25 M12 25-35301:

0... so

30...”. 3| .. 0.)

name .(0- 1(0— °"-‘)x

sea...waa I(ea° 0"“)7.

 

 

The IN 538 HP impedance and transmission measuring instrument has direct
display and is suitable for the determination of the impedance vector

2 I |z| e19 and the vector of the voltage-transmission coefficient

of quadrupoles A - |A| e 59in the 0.5 . 110 Mi: frequency range, for which

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPTCTM. USE ONLY

a separate signal generator is provided. An advantage of the instrument is
that it is easy to operate; this allows fast measurements over a wide fre-
quency range. The operation involves merely the setting of the signal fre-
quency of the z or A region. and if necessary of the phase angle 9. In
special measurement jobs, the built-in generator may be replaced with an
external HP generator having a slight wobble frequency.

Independent aeasuring probes are provided for impedance and transmission
measurement. The instrument measures impedances in all four quadrants of
the impedance plane, and is suitable for measuring the impedance of pas-
sive and active components, the input and output impedance of amplifiers.
the impedance values of transformers and filters, and for matching opera-
tions to measure resonance circuits. and so forth. The values of L and C

may be read directly on the instrument's scales for the correspouding
frequencies.

The instrument permits fast measurement of voltage transmissions of active
and passive quadrupoles over the entire phase plane.

The BM 541 logic comparator permits the in-sorvice fast localization of a
faulty logic integrated circuit directly on the circuit board. and also
permits a siaple analysis of the fhult with the aid of a probe. Localiza-
tion of the faulty output on the tested logical integrated circuit is ac-
complished with the aid of comparators (16 independent channels) which
compare the test-sample with a reference component of the same design.

The comparator enables the testing of TTL and DTL components with a
working voltage of as V.

Sone technical data:
Comparator: UL < 0.8 V
"h > 2.0 V
Resolution: 250 nsec. All level differences of z 250 nsec are com-
pared and recorded on the display panel
Maximum repeat frequency: 2.5 Mi:
Dimensions in mm: 240 by 110 by 37
weight: 1.2 kg

People's Republic of Hungary
The TR-1855/Q loo SECAM analyzer is used to test and check video signals

coded according to the SECAM standard, and checks, measures, and sets the
modulation parameters of the SECAM coder.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following may be selected with the analyzer:

- Coaposite color-picture signal coded according to .th. SEC»! standard;
- Brightness sig'nal;

- Modulated color signal;

- Modulated color signal with bell correction;

- Deaodulated color signal after subsequent alignment.

The calibration oscillators per-it checking the characterizing frequency va-
lues of the SECAM signal. With the aid of the continuously tunable oscilla-
tor, the frequencies corresponding to all color signals of the signal to be
measured may be simulated and thus measured. Measurement in this case is
also accomplished by covering the color signal by the detected signals of
the oscillator. The frequency values nay be read on a four-digit LED dis-

play unit in km. The accuracy of the readout may be increased by one posi-
tion through the use of a vernier unit.

'Technical data:

Input signal: seem-coded composite television signal

Signal magnitude: 1 V (peak-to-peak) :5 dB (positive white) at 75 a

Input impedance: 75 9

Output signals, synchr. signal mixture

Signal value: 4 V 35% at 75 a

Polarity: negative

Output impedance: 75 n

Half-line frequency signal

Signal value: 4 V 35% at 75 a

Polarity: negative

Output impedance: 75 a

Test signals

SECAM-coded composite television signal

Gain: 0 dB $1.2 dB

Fluctuation of the anplitude-frequency characteristic,
related to 100 kHz: L0.S dB. to 8 Mi:

Luninance signal

Gain: 0 dB :0.2 dB

Fluctuation of the amplitude-frequency characteristic: corresponds
to a Gauss filter, 3 dB at 1.3 an. aim 50 dB at 3.9 dB

Auxiliary color carrier frequency color signal

Gain: 0 d8 sD.2 dB at 4 m:

Fluctuation of the amplitude-frequency characteristic related
to 4 mt: +0.1 - 0.4 dB between 3 “I: and 5.2 m2; -3 d8
between‘ 2.75 m: and 5.6 m2; ~20 d3 between 2 m2 and 6.5 Ml:

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reference oscillators

Quartz frequencies
Identification signal
Auxiliary color carrier

Yellow color signal

Blue color signal

Accuracy: 1-10'5 -

Continuously tunable oscillator
Frequency range: 3.5 - 5 VH2
Short-tern instability: gloo Hz
Frequency measurement:
Frequency: 10 Mi:

Setting accuracy: :2-10'7

Da

4756.25 kHz
4406.25 kHz
4561.25 kHz
4686.25 kHz

Display: Four-digit LED display; five digits with vernier

Resolution: 1 RN: or 100 Hz 31 digital

Power connection: 110, 127, 220, 240 V :l0%/50-60 Hz

Power consumption: 40 VA
Dimensions in an: 440 by 90 by 415
Height: approx. 10 kg

 

TR-1855/[ [Q 100 SECAH analyzer, from the People's

Republic of Hungary

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010022-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Til-0307 pulse generator from the Peeple'a Repdbli
of Hungary

 

TR 0313-pulse generator from the
People's Republic of Hungary

Tit-4910 signal-font
the People's Republ

 

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010022-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The response frequency of tho TR-0307 pulse generator (ENG [Electronic Mea-
suring Instruments Factory] 11.590) nay be set in a wide range (15 Hz to
100 ms). The triggering possibilities (internal, external. single. gated)
expand the range of applications. The inputs adapt to the TTL logic levels.
A new node of operation is the external width control, which permits the
control of the output stage with complex word forms. digitally calibrated
times. and so forth.

Some technical data:
Delay tine, adjustable delay-tine range: 5 nsec - 30 nsec ’
Internal triggering. period-time range of the internal
control generator: lo nsec - 66 msec
Adjustable pulse-duration range: 5 nsec - 30 nsec
External triggering. response frequency: DC - 100 MHz (with pulse
triggering)
Output modes: pulse. square wave, external pulse duration
Output trigger signal
Amplitude: 1.5 V/So ohms
Rise time: 3 nsec
Amplitude: 70 mv - 10 V
Overshoot: S St
Rise and decay times: 2.5 nsec - 0.5 msec
Dimensions in mm: 132.5 by 443 by 354
height: 9 kg

Within the framework of specialization in the field of pulse generators.
the novelties originate primarily from the People's Republic of Hungary
(ENG). A trailbazing novelty is the new programmable, quartz-controlled
pulse generator TR-0313 (Buss 12 .533). It generates pulse durations of
high accuracy (error: +1 10-5) controlled from either the front panel or
by remote control. The pulse generator consists of a period-duration unit.
a pulse counter, three tine-interval channels each, and an output stage.
It is used in development laboratories and manufacturing establishments
in the semiconductor industry, and also in the testing of amplifiers and
electronic devices.

All data and operating modes are set on the front panel with keys if the
unit is operated with internal control. In the case of remote control, the
unit nay be programmed on the rear panel with program plug wires.

The program-controlled pulse generator may also be operated in autouated
measuring systems. The program inputs are TTL-compatible. If so desired,
the unit may be adapted to the bus system of the Type 666 instrument and
the IEC bus. There is a seven-digit display unit.

21
FOR OFFICIAL us}: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Seae techniul data:

Tiling-pulse generator

Operating nodes: external. internal

Internal tieing-pulae generator

Frequency: 10 m:

Accuracy: ngO‘s

External tiling-pulse generator

Frequency: lo m:

Triggering signal: ﬂL-coepatihle

Input loading: 2

Timing-pulse signal output

Output aaplitude: 2.5 V

Polarity: positive !

Internal triggering

Period-duration range: 0.2 - 999.999.9 nicroaec
(loo nsec resolution) or 0.2 - ”9,999.9 nsec
(loo nicrosec resolution)

Accuracy of period duration: 3.0.0010 of the set value 35 nsec
External triggering (EXTJN)

Response frequency: oc. . .5 m:
Trigger signal: ﬁl-coepatible
Input loading: 2

Pulse category

A predeterlined number of pulses aay be output independently of the period
duration. Each tine-interval channel has two outputs. A pulse appears on
the pulse output after the end of the set tiae duration. in this case,

the set time duration loans the pulse appearing between the so: points of
the channel-trigger signal and the rise flank on the output. The duntion

of the pulse appearing at the TIMING output is the sense as the set the
duration.

Synchronous signal output

A pulse appears at the beginning of the TIMING interval only uith external
triggering (EXT). The tine uncertainty is. related to the external trigger
signal, approxinetely loo nsec or loo eicrosec (vith a loo eicresec tiling-
pulse signal). ,-
The Tit-4910 signal-fern analyzer systen (PM; 5,500) is used to convert any
analog and digital signal, and signal fen. into a digitally stored infor-

mation. as well as to visualize and evaluate this infomtion by Iaeans of
eathceatical nethods.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The digital conversion of the analog electrical signals to be tested is ac-
ceapliahed with the aid of an analog-te-digital converter. The analog
signals to be tested of various frequencies aay be applied directly to

the analog-to-digltal converter under appropriate offset setting, or they
reach the converter free units connected to the converter. having approp-
riate gain or scan rate. The digitally converted intonation is stored by
the systea in a seaiconductor-based aeaory. All further operations are per-
formed on the signals stored in digital fora by aeans of aatheaaticel ae-
theds. The content of the aeaory lay be displayed on the aenitor of the
systea. The characteristic paraaeters of the neaory contents aay be dis-
played in nuaarical fora. Relatively siapie aathaaatical operations such
as addition. subtraction. calculation of pulse paraaeters. and so forth,

may he perferaed with the contents of the aeaery. with the aid of an ar-
ithmetic unit.

The Type Til-4910 offers flexibility of the input units and versatility of

the aatheaatical operations. so that the systea aay be put to a great va-
riety of uses.

Important use areas:
- Digital conversion. storage. and evaluation of signal ions in studies

concerning any industrial. aedical. biological. physical, cheaical. and
electrical phenoaonon;

- Oscillography with digital storage, oscillograph-lilte uses with digital
evaluation;
- Measure-ent of pulse paranoters at high speed;

- Measure-cuts on dyaaaic acasuring systeas. especially to test integrated
circuits.

 

CH? la digital level aster from the People’s Republic
of Poland

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Selective nanovoltmeter, No 237. People's Republic
of Poland

The following may be built up by combination of functional units:

- Signal-form analyzer

- Response signal~£orm analyzer _
- Sampling oscillograph with digital storage of analog signals
- Oscillograph with digital storage

- Universal signal-form analyzer systel.

The following functional units are available:

Signal-tone memory, Type 55100

Memory capacity: 4,096 x 8 bits

Memory organization: 4 x 1 Kbyte; 2 x 2 Kbyte; l x 4 bete

Number of inputs: 3 (2 parallel 8-bit inputs; 1 series input lfor magnetic
tape unitl)

Outputs for controlling the electron-beam tube, for x-Y recorder, for di-
gital recorder, for magnetic tape recorder, and for external arithmetic
unit.

y

26
FOR OFFICYM. USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

Digital converter unit. Typo 55141

Vertical unit

Nuaber of inputs: 2. independent of each other

Coupling: DC. AC. 6ND

lspedance: l aohIl/ISO pP

Sensitivity: so aV/step

offset range: 39.9 V (in 0.1 V steps)

AID resolution: 6 bits

Measuring range: 3.640 IV - :25.6 V

Trigger nodes: pretrigger, posttrigger

Digital delay: up to 999 tines the selected tile base

Triggering possibilities: Clil. an, EXT

Coupling: oc. AC

Trigger-level range: 3.4.9 V (in 0.1 V steps). The controls are reaotely
operable: their position say he interrogated.

Miniprocessor unit: Npe 55110

Design: binary. 8-bit '

Functions: transfer of data blocks. basic calculations carried out with
data blocks. operations within a block. operations with constants. and
special block operations (pulse~paraaeter evaluation)

Operating lode: froa built-in keyboard. via external coaputer Type 666

Display: built-in electron-bean tube

Neaory capacity: coabination of new and/or RAM with up to 8 lxbyte or non
and/or a»: with 16 kbyte

Sapling-digitai converter unit: Type $5140

Input data

Vertical unit: “No channels (independent). so ohns. DC

Rise tine: 350 psec

Sensitivity: S all/div

horizontal unit

Deflection speed: up to 100 psec/div

Trigger: EXT. INT

People's Republic of Poland

Most exhibited products indicate the trend that the developaent and produc-
tion of selective and broadband voltmeter and level Deters is favored.

The CM? 4 digital level meter is an electronic measuring instrulent for the
precise determination of a.c. signal levels in the 30 lit to 120 ill: fre-
quency range. The level is indicated digitally at an uncertainty of 51.1 dB
and the output is BCD-coded for possible recording an level). In the

30 lit to 30 RH: frequency range. there is a syuetric input and in the

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

30 H: to 120 ms range there is an asyuetric input with switchable input
.resistor (600 ehas. 950 ehas. high-elusic). ‘l'he level-aeasuring range is
-60 dB to 020 d3. Diaensions in I: 128 by 438 by 250; weight: 9 kg.

The No 237 selective naneveltaeter is designed for a.c. voltage aeasure-
aents in the l Hz to 100 hilt frequency range. within the abeVe frequency
range. phase and amplitude aeasureaents of aaplifiers and filters. spectral

analyses of low-frequency signals. alignments of ensuring bridges. har-
aenic distortion factor aeasureaents. and aany others aey be perferaed.

Seee technical data:

Frequency range: 1 Hz to 99.9 kHz
Sensitivity (full range): 1 nicrevelt te loo W
with preaaplifier

up to 3 nV
Measuring uncertainty: 3.0.4 d8

Linearity error: 5 0.1‘

Octave daaping: 0 - 40 dB

Input iapedance: loo Mil/20 pP

Outputs

a.c. voltage: 1 V (eff) at full deflection and 600 ohms
d.c. voltage: loo IV at full deflection and 100 ehas
Drift (24 hrs): $0.2 d3

Diaensiens in I: 440 by 164 by 330
"eight: to kg

The PFL-22 digital frequency and tinednterval aeasuring instn-ent per-its
highly accurate nusurmnts to be carried out in the laboratory on sine

or pulse frequencies. sine or pulse periods. frequency ratios of two fre-
quencies. and pulse widths.

There is the possibility of obtaining highly precise frequencies and using

the unit as a decedic standard generator in the l H: to lo Mia frequency
range.

Technical data:

Frequency-measuring range: 0 to 100 Mi:

Instability of the nether generator: 25-10‘9/24 hrs
External control possible: 5 Mix. 10 Mi:
Teqerature drift: 2'10'9/K

Dimensions in -: 446-by 240 by 96
Height: 5 kg

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The PCP-7 dual-pulse generator is designed for tests in digital and ceeputer
technolosY. television technology. nuclear technology. and control technol-
ogy under laboratory and production conditions. it aay directly control
relays or counters since it has a high output power.

Sens technical data:

Frequency range. internal

Single pulses: 0.5 ii: to 50 m:

Pulse pairs: 0.5 Ii: to 25 Mi:

Pulse anplituda ($0 ehns lead): 150 IN - 5 V

Output 1apedance: so 310‘

Pulse polarity: positive (nor-a1 or inverted pulse);
negative (normal or inverted pulse)

Output voltage (50 ohns): -3 V . 3 V

Dilensions in u: “6 by 340 by 98

weight: 7 kg

 

\

PTC-l m tester from the People's Republic of Poland

The PTC-l Tl’i. tester is used to test digital 111. components. digital assaab-
lies. and test setups. The auxiliary units required for the testing. such
as the square-wave generator. single-pulse generator, pulse detector. pulse
former, load resistors, and so forth, are all built-in. The testing nay be
carried out stepwise. under annual control. or under autoaatic control.

A prototype as reference is required for the testing.

Soac technical data:
Number of outputs tested: up to and including 16

Nmber of digital ceabinations: up to and including 2
Digital test setups: S x Oil. 16; 10 x on. 14 -
Frequency range of the square-wave generator: 1 Hz to 3 Mia

15

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Output voltages: no I 0 to 0.4 V
01 . 02.4 to 05.5 V
Supply voltage: 95 V £1.25 V
bond: 5 3 A
Ripple: S 0.25 V .
Albient tenerature: 05 to 040°C '
Dinensions in I: 300 by ‘450 by 146
Height: 9.6 kg

The lib-060 A fluctuation-measuring instrument is used for tests of the lech-
anisa of tape recorders and phonographs. The instrument permits ell tests

specified for such devices to be perfened in accordance with the provisions
of the we es of l9”.

Technical data:

input parameters

Frequency: 3,150 N: we

Voltage: 30 IV to ls V

Input inpedsnce: z 300 ha

Audie fluctuation neasurenents

Measuring ranges: 3.0.1; 3.0.3; 3.1; a; slot

Frequency response: in nor-a1 position linear (according to teen
0.2 to 300 Hz
with the internel bandpass filter regulated; optionally. an
external filter nay be installed

Sound-level fluctuations: :05 to 80‘

Dilensiens in u: l32 by “(by 300

height: 7 kg

Other Develop-ant Trends

The new generation of laboratory instrunents controlled with nicroprocessor
was represented at the Leipzig Fair by the No 7065 digital voltneter nsde
by Solartron.‘l'he laprovenent of the properties of the instruent by the
systenatic introduction of nicrocoeputer technology is indicated in this
instance less by the technical parameters (see the measuring ranges); it

is denonstrated instead by the inprovcnent in usefulness by mltiple util-
ization of the nicroconputer unit:

Ranges:

no: lo nV to 1000 V

AC (l0 Hz to so has): loo IV to 1000 IV
R: 10 ohns to lo nohns

Tolerance:

oc: low-5 4» I. digits
ac: 6-10'3 + 20 «gm ;
as i

FOR OFFICIAL 08! TL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Microprocessor-controlled digital voltnetar No 7065
froa Great Britain (Photo by K. Schwarser (1‘))

The size of the instrtnant is conparahla to that of conventional digital ‘
voltaotors; it per-its the following operations to he parfornad for cosp-
letlon and siaplification of the neasurenants in nine progress:

Multiplication with a constant

Calculation of percentages

Addition and subtraction with a constant

Ratio fornation: linear a - x/a; logarithmic I! e 20 log x/a; square

(for power calculations) 8 a lea

- Detanination of naxim and nininu values. as well as their difference.
which any be stored as desired

- Progre-ing of liait values. tho fact that they are exceeded either way
nay be stored in the Iasory

- Statistical calculations; every test value is stored. arithlatic naan.
variance fornation. standard deviation. square seen value .

- Tesperatura neasuroaant with thernocouples. conversion of the affective
thernocoupla voltage into displayed values is autonotic _

- Measuraaents in tine interval; ongoing tine. Iaasuraeent with start/stop

feature during a day; duration up to 96 hours.

COPYRIGHT: Veh Verlsg Technik, Berlin

Data-Processing Systene

East Berlin RADIO “”8389! 21.th in Ger-an Vol 27, No 6. Jun 78
pp 361-362

(Article by D. llanltel]

[Text] The eahihite in the field of coaputer technology and data processing
all show highly increased versatility. It is a characteristic future that
in addition to the already custonary £831! [Unified Coquter Systan] line. the
enphaeis is on niniaturised data engineering and data processing. in which
areas najor qualitative and quantitative growth is evident. 'l'hare is a
clear-cut trend toward the use of nicroelenents so as to provide the

devices with perfornance characteristics which neat the nodern needs.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Based on the favorable experiences. gained with socialist econonic integra-
tion within the 38!!! project. a start was node a few years age under the
leadership of the Soviet Union on a sieilar international project concerning
the developeent end eanufacture of a line of stall coqutera. The first re-
sults of this project were presented by the Soviet Union by the cm to
04-4 control coeputers.

within 38!!! itself, a phase of couples develop-ant is just about ceqnleted.
Series 1 of the 883R. of which the device technology was exhibited in re-
cent yeers. will shortly be replaced by Series 2.This letter designation is
used for new dataoprocessing devices eade available to users. featuring
new and ieproved systee characteristics. increased reliability. end. of
course, compatibility with devices free Series 1.

Conan Deeocratic Republic

Robotron Coebine State Enterprise-exhibited the ac less data-processing
systee. which is in Series 2‘(see title picture) .The central coeponent of
this systee is the no 2658 central processor unit recently developed by

the Robotron coebine. It e’ay be'regarded as a further develop-ant of the

BC 2640. which has been produced for several years. It hes a capability

of performing approxiaately 400.000 operations per second. Even the exte~
rior appearance suggests developeent free the BC 2640. The central processor
unit has only so percent of the value of the EC 2640 (three instead of six
cabinets). The control console installed on the front of the BC 2640 is no
longer found. Instead. there is a separate control nodule. designated BC
7069. which is used eoth by the systee user and Iaintenance technician. The
concept of this control nodule. including the use of.e display unit with
keyboard and a series printer. per-its the use of not only an increased
co-unication speed but also offers significantly superior operating con-
venlence.

In a nodern fen. the BC 7069 control eedule nay also be used in the EC l040
instead of the interrogation unit provided therein.

The reduction of the voluae in the EC 2655 was achieved primily by the
fol lowing engineering leasures:

- Realization of the operative enory as a solid-state eeuory on the basis
of ms coeponents. A capacity of "byte. including the required power

supply unit. is acco-edeted in a single cabinet. Maxi-n I080]? capa-
city is Zlbyte.

30

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- Use of a more effective nethod of power supply.

The BC 2655 realises 188 co-ands fro. the cos-and set of Series 2 of the
883R. The input and output systea is characterized by the use of block
multiplex channels instead of the selector channels. and by the possibi-
lity of data transfer via a 2-byto wide interface.

worthy of special asntion is the reelization of the principle of the so-
called virtual aesory. which allows the establish-ant of a progra-er
using a virtual operative neoory capacity of meme. This possibility is
provided with the also newly developed 006-30 operating systea ads in

' series in the Soviet Union for the large Iodels of Series 2.

 

K 1520 aicrocoaputer systea from the Robotren Conbine
State Enterprise (factory photograph)

Finally, the EC 2655 features an extensive diagnostic facility.

Robotron presents a new aicrocolputer systea with the K 1520. This Iedel say
be used for installation in devices and also for the assenbly of an inde-
pendent nicrocoaputer systeu.The primary unit of this colputer is a aicre-
processor in n-channel ms technology. which has the advantages of in-
creased switching speed compared to the p-channel technology presently
used. The systea is offered in four versions, all equipped with a 4Kbyte
aeaery. Connection of peripheral devices through connector/control units
is possible: K7622 control nodule, om l2l0 perforated-tape reader. DARO
lle tape perferater. MRO 1250 cassette tape recorder. and so 4000 alpha-
nuaeric display with printer.

The progrs-aable ninicoaputer nobotron K 1001, exhibited already last year,
was further developed and is now shown in the K 1002 and K 1103 versions.

The new versions feature broader application field. The K 1002 is equipped

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1183 ONLY

with a aagnetic-card unit for insertion of program and data. as well as for
output of the contents of the operating memory. The K 1033 is additionally.

equipped with, an internal printer for the optional printout of intermediate
and final results.

The factories forming part of the Roboth Combine State Enterprise since

early 1970. the erstwhile Zentronik combine. also exhibited now and devo-
loped products.

The MRO 175,0 magnetic-card computer was equipped with the "PM 2/4 floppy-
disk unit manufactured in the People's Republic of ﬂungary. This expands
tho memory capacity available in direct access 60- to lzo-iold.

Tho series of small bookkeeping machines 1330 to 1850 was expanded by tho
DARO 1355 electronic bookkeeping machine. It combines the features of tho
conventional models-minimua space requirement. simple operation. and fast

progran change—and offers the advantages of electronic components compared
to electromechanical cemenents.

The DARO 1255 magnetic-tape converter serves for the preparation of data
stored with data-acquisitoon devices on 3.81 ms magnetic-tape cassettes

to enable further processing in. computers by conversion to l2.7 am mag-
netic tape. .with appropriate data format. The outstanding properties of
this instrument were achieved in the framework of an international coopera~
tion project among the socialist countries. Czechoslovakia developed the '
keyboard; the People's Republic of Poland developed the Pit-l aagnetic-tape

cassette unit; and the People's Republic of Bulgaria developed the 1801'-
5003 magnetic tape unit.

The ROSY 4000 speech dialog system was developed with the cooperation of
Dresden Technical University; this device was exhibited in Leipzig as a
demonstration model for timetable information used by the German Railways.
This is a character-controlled speech synthesizer, converting a discrete
sound-character information into comprehensible speech. with the aid of
the synthetic speech it is possible to use the telephone as a computer
terminal opening access through the telephone system. Characteristic for
the use of a synthetic language is the transmission of small amounts of
information for a large number of users. Thus. information systems of all
kinds are regarded as the main applications of the speech-dialog system.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000100226

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

K 1002 programmable minicomputor K 1003 progrmble
from Robotron Combine Stu. from Robotron Conbi
Entorpriu (factory photograph) Entorpriu

 

CH4 control computer from the
Soviet Union

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIAuRDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010022-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Felix C-ZS6 data-processing The ”bars" terminal processor from
system (photograph taken the Soviet Union, with a Hungarian-
by K. Schwarzer (5)) made screen terminal

Soviet Union

As mentioned earlier, the Soviet Union exhibited the small computer system
(SKR) for the first time. This is the CM-3 control-computer complex, part
of the CM-l to CM-d computer series designed in the form of a module. Com-
puters of this series are designed on the basis of the modular-design prin-
ciple. The CM-3 realizes 65 commands and has an operational speed of up to
200,000 operations per second. It permits both byte- and word-oriented op-
eration (one word has 16 bits). The working memory has a capacity of up to
32K words. The input/output interface is realized on the basis of the uni-
bus principle.

The SM-3 control computer may be used as an autonomous system for the
automation of design functions, as well as of technological processes, and
also in hierarchy systems in conjunction with ESER computers as satellite
processors for data concentration and preprocessing.

The ”bars” terminal processor was also exhibited in the Soviet pavillion. It
is a connecting unit between various terminal systems and electronic com-

puters. Since it operates as a multiple-path switch, it may also be used
as a multic-channel adapter in computer centers. Its particular advantage

is the microprogram-controllcd interface, so that the connection of another
tenninai than originally intended becomes relatively problem-free.

FOR OFFLCIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The People's Republic of Bulgaria and the Socialist Republic of Ronnie

The 1501-0310 sasll coaputer deaonstrates that the trend was followed in the
People's Republic of Bulgaria also: snail conputer systeas for scientific
and technological control unite in nodular design. Acce-odation o! func-
tional groups (including peripheral devices and their connection controls)
in nodules created a nodular systea which per-its siaple adaptation to a
variety of user needs.

in addition to the processor and operative nesaory. oight peripheral-device
controls are offered. They range from perforated-tape readers, nagnetic-tape
units and aagnetic-dislt Ienories to cassette terainals.

Tho technical parameters of the lSO‘f-OSlO are of tho sane order of magnitude
as those of the abovo-described Chi-3 saall coaputer node in the Soviet Union.

Exhibiting tho Felix c-zso coaputer. the Socialist Republic of Romania de-
nonstratod the technological lovel achieved already in Series 1 of BSBR.

The central processor unit is built in “I'll. technology, and realizes 102
col-ands. A ferrite-core operative aenory is used; its capacity is 256 mu.
which nay be doubled. ‘l'he input/output systea has aultiplex and selector
channols. Tho alternating-disk unit with a 29 myte capacity (expandable to
58 myto) was worthy of special noto anong tho assortncnt of conventional
peripheral dovices for computer systems.

COPYRIGHT: Veb Verlag ‘l‘ochnik, Berlin

2562
C50: 1870

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.s aeo-v-s- 00- bat-e

BLSCTEDNICS AND ELECTRICAL SNDINIERINO

unc 621.391.26

Th3 DETECTION OF A QUASIHARHONIC SIGNAL HAVING AN UNKNOHN FREQUBNCY IN “0183
0? AN UNKNOHN PONBR AND SPECTRAL PORK

Kiev IZVDSTIYA V02 RADIOBLBKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 7, 1973 pp 100-111

(Article by V.N. Prokof'ysv. eanuseript received 10 March 77, and following
reworking. 25 May 77]

[Text] Multiple alternative dotaction of a sinusoidal signal against a
background of noise is analyzed, whoro the frequency of tho signal belongs

to a rather broad range of possible values and is unknown. The practically
Justified digitization of this rango into resolution intervals (soctions)

is assumed, for example, where the dopplor shift of the frequency is eaasurod
by a set of filters; tho white or nonwhita noise power is unknown; the sig-
nal has a random initial phase or anplitudo and phase (reception in into-
horont or Rayleigh channels).

The problen is solved as tho detection of a signal with the readout of tho
frequency interval. The solution rules are found based on tho statistical
principal of invariance (l. 2], and are invariant to tho initial phase of
the signal and the scale of the observations. They keep the probability
of false alarms constant, do not dapond on interfering parameters of data
distributions and are suitable for realization in automated devices.

"white" naive. There are H rosolution aegnonts (with 2s/t; T is the
duration of the signal) at fro uoncios of “i' i 0 l, H. The signal in an
incoherent channel is 81(t) 0 3287? cosault + 01), 8 is the energy of the
signal in tho interval T, 01 is tho uniforlly distributed initial phase.

01 is one of the aquiprobabla frequencies. 1 8 (l. H). It needs to be do-
ternined whether the observed realization is gaussian noise or a eixtura of
noiag_gnd one(with an indication of which) of h equiprobable signals 8;(t),
i - l, H. i.e.. the following hypothesis needs to be checked:

mum-n(t). o<:<r.'
M.u(o-S.io+am. mm. (1)

where n(t) is tho realization of the noise with the unknown power spectru-
"0/2e

37

FOR OFFICIAL 085 ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL 083 ONLY

.-

Hs shall use as the initial sample of the oscillation x(t). 0 g t g '1'. its
quedreture components in the frequency intervals:

p,”- srmr'm). V; Ssmeose,l(une,0dl. r- ‘3: e>Ml

(the cese where n > H corresponds to tehing edditionel ”noise” segeents. for
exemple. with the ease velue of the noise level No).

Taking the prerequisites into sccount. the distribution of the date (at, y)
evereged over the phese 9‘ for the cese of s signal in the i-th segeent is:

p.:-.n-(w'*np(-‘—';.5)I. 37".L.)m- 33mg).
M

‘ﬁ-I’+':e “m
100) is a modified Bessel function: the density po(x. y) for the noise is
derived at B I 0. Problem (1) reduces to checking the hypotheses:

ﬂ,:~(e.mﬂ‘:p‘(l.y).f- L17; No. B ere unknown (2)

where No end B are unknown, the solution is to be sought among those rules
which are invarient with respect to the scele of the observetions. For the
description of such rules. it is convenient to compute the density wot, y)

of the dots for events which ere inverient to the scale in the space of velues
(x, y). Using the procedure of [2], one can find thet here:

I.(&s)-us(-9)V(n.l: 45.). qua/8'. q-cm.
f(...:.) is a degenerate hypergeoeetric function.

The invariant solution of problem (2) should be based on the functions
a: (x. y) or on the ratios of st for which they ere eonotonic. According to
t e solution theory of [3]. in the sy-etricsl problem being treated here,
the optilel rule.which for a fixed probebility e of e felse elern eini-izes
the error probability (liesing end ”confusing" signsls), has the fore:

Aseueelu,ifs£-sa:):s3>c

Assume no, if all a“; c, 3 - ‘17:” (3)
where c is the threshold number. Rule (3) is the desired invariant solution
of the problee. It differs from the well-known rules for the £533 of a speci-
fied noise level, in thet it is besed on the ratios of s1. 3 - 1,)“ and for
this reason, does not depend on the interfering pereneter No: thethreshold
c likewise does not depend on No (the densities of the statistics s1 for the
cese of Ho do not depend on No).

He shell employ an ssyuptotic (n -e -) approximation of the distributions of

ea to estimate the effectiveness of elgorithn (3). At the limit of n e -,

t e quantities $1 - Znsj are independent and each have a xi distribution

(with two degrees of freedoe), which is central for the case of no end noncon-
trel for the cese of a signal with a noncentrelity pare-eter of 62 - 2o. In

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR OVVLCIAL "8! ONLY

this case, we obtain the threshold c of the rule, the probability I of missing

the signal, and the probability c at "confusing" the signal (tales indication
of a "signal" section):

can" - (I -a)"“r": n~u -a)""“ "-0“. V8»:
U;l(- l)‘ (“-1) .
e~l—O- —,+.,'_ u.(-1-i'-r)oa'm mm

(-0
where

m o‘“”'3"""('”_P.)’°‘°M‘ (g) 1.: :hasxbzr oi combinations

In the special case n - H - 2, precise for-alas are found:

c-’-:—‘: n-[xvi-u+upt-w-cmm(-91-)s

'-%w[-v('-%)]- _

For a Rayleigh channel, the optimal invariant rule likewise has the form of

(3) with the some threshold c; the probabilities B and c are asymptotically
equal to:

s~a-¢)""" u-n-(I -c)"“1"“"5n

1H .
-u-| 3. ._.,w +W+o
.. .. ‘+' L—-L--—-E.p---..
' a‘ " l t l+l(l+s) "

where i’- EYNo, E'is the average energy of the signal. Por the special case
n - H - 2, the precise formulas for B and c here are equal to!

l— l+ 0. a! '7 .
"(I-t-cqg'mu-i-u-mo'i' 'a+«'m+u-«m‘i

"Nonuhitc" noise. To obtain an invariant solution, it is assumed here that

the change in the noise power in the range being analyzed is rather smooth:

in it, one can segregate m pairs of adjacent sections so that the noise power
in each pair is the some, and equal to No I2, 1 - IT: (acceptable in practice
for a step approximation of the form of t a noise spectrum). The 1ndeeerninacy
of the form of the noise spectrum is thereby expressed in the appearance of

m unknown parameters of 801, J - l, m. The signal can appear with equal pro-
bability in one of the pairs (occupying any one of its sections).

As before, He will employ the set (x,y) - ((x13,y15), (ijoY21)» j - l,m) (the
subscripts l and 2 indicate the first and second intervals of the j-th pair) of

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PDR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

the quedreture coeponente of the proceee being obeerved. which we ehell ueeuee
here to be e aenerelited lineer prooeee: the cleee o! euch proceeeee ie breed
(end conteine not Juet neueeien proceeeee) [6]. Although the quentitiee x15.
ygj, :2 end y; . J - 173. ere not independent, they etill eeyeptoticelly

(r + I ’ inde ent end noreel to the diepereione N [2, J I 17'; Thie lollowe
tron Vol. 13, ehepter 1V in [lo], end the Rourke iolg n; it.

He ehell detenine the inwerient eolution rule for the eeylptotic Iodel cited
ehove for the obeervetione. ln thie ceee. rule optinlity ie of en eeylptotic
neture, while the propertiee o! in inverience which ere inportent in prectice
occur without eeynptotic hypotheeee. Coneiderine the hypotheeee edopted. end
the inwerience oi the problea, one cen find thet the eolution ehould be beeed

on 5tetietic1of the ore v I VJ. J I m. where w I needed. l/ej). e3 I
I 'th;3' :10” I 3‘1“” + yuan, where the quent tiee V3. 5 I la, ere

independent (eeyeptoticelly). Nevins written the cabined dietribution of the
given w (or the once of n eienel in the i-th peir o! eectione. one cen con-

vince oneeelt thet the optim- (eeylptotioelly) inverient eolution hee the for-
(identicel for incoherent end neyleish chennele):

Meune “1, if w1 I m v.1 > c.
Aeeuee Ho. it ell v.1 gt. 3 Iﬁ,
"here the threehold ie c~l'+U-¢)"'VI|-0-I)“'l.
I

The probability of eieeins the eignel ie 3-7:: 1". where the probebilitiee

bl
81 of e wine with e eignel in the i-th peir ere ee followe for incoherent end
Rayleigh chennele reepectivelyt

‘ (I - ov-m up (- 44) {u [3,- q. (I - mm] + u - ”We: [i’ntI-«rhn .
' «I -e)d.l[(l 44,). -0 - emu —e)”"|. A, - I N. ago (I 4-0.)“.
One can likewise eetilete the "confueion" error c.

He will note in conclusion that the invariant eolution of the problem treeted
here can eleo be derived in the one of Iultichennel (divereity) reception
with different end unknown noiee levele in the chennele.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Lenten 2., "Prowerke otetieticheekikh sipoter" ("Checking Stetieticel
Hypothoeee"]. Hoecow, h‘nuke publiehere, 1966.

2. Geyek Ye., Shidnk 2.. "‘l'eoriye rengovykh kriteriyev" ["Renlt Criteria Theory”).
Hoecow, Neuh Publishers, 1971.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
3. Hiddlcton 0.. “Vvedcniyn v otattattchoukuyu toortyu ovyAIt" ("Introduction
tobstntllttcal Co-nuntcaetons Thacry“). Moscow. Bovatnkoy¢ agate Publiahorn.
19 2. 2.

a. ﬂnnnnn 3.. "Hucsoncrnyyn vrnlonnyyo ryudy" [“Hulctdxnnnuional Tin. lortno"l.
Moscow. H1: Publishers. 1974.

COPYRIORTa “lsvcut£ya vusov 888R - Rndiooloktrontka.“ 1978

8225
C80381k‘I0683

61

FOR 0P?1CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

IWMNICS AND IWRICM. rmmaamo

uoc 621.372.:
mm: menu: commmu uam 9mm mm:

Gor'kiy IZVSS‘I‘IYA W2 MDIOPIZIKA in Maian Vol 21 No 8, 1973 pp 1156-1160

[Article by Yu.l€. logetyrev and NJ. Yaapurin, aor'ltiy Polytechnical lnatitute,
unuecript received 6 Jul 77]

[Text] The converaion of the epectrua oi apatial harnonice oi
oppoeing vavea ia analyred in an active periodic atructure with
equate-lav nonlinearity. ‘l'he apeciiic featuree of three-wave
interaction are aecertained tor varioua boundary conditiona.
‘l'he poaaihility of ainultaneoualy amplifying all of the‘inter-
acting vavea ie deeonatreted.

Beaidaa the coupling due to nonlinearity. coupling can elao ariee between
vavoa vhich propagate in periodic atructuraa hecauee of the interaction at
apetiel luraonica ll, 2, 6-9], where thie coupling hea a euhatantial influence
on the proceaaea of generating and converting a vave apactrma. Theoretical
and expert-enrol atudiea of interactiona of thia type were previouely con-
ducted priaarily or applied to coneervative eyeteae in nonlinear optica,

aa vall ea to para-atric radio frequency atructurea [2, 7-9). lioreover,

to convert a eignal frequency in the aicrovave hand. it ie expedient in a
nunber of caeea to employ periodicatructurea with active. nonlinear ele-ente
(tor exaaple. for the purpoae of boosting the power o! the converted aignala).

A vave device in the fora of an Lc
line with mutually coupled aectiona,
periodically loaded with active ele-
unto having an N-ehaped volt-aspere
characteristic (Yigure l), vhich ia
typical of tunnel. Guun diodea. etc..
(b) g, in etudiod in thia paper. The pri-
Igry apecific feature of the operation
o ouch a device conaiata in the uae
Figure i‘ 0 Ehzc':&1:3?h: 32:31,? of nonlinear, eynchronoua interaction
0

at the spatial her-onion of the op-
” :zi:?:::ix::i:l§e:::. poring vavee (duo to undeairahle

   

(02
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
reflections tro- inhooogonoitioa in conventional. vovcguide ayataoa) tor the
purpose of tho efficient genorntion and convoraion of a apeotrue of aignala.
The apeciiic tecturaa ct three wave interaction are aacertainad tor varioua
boundary conditiona.

The diaperaion characteristic (Figure 2) of the atructure treated here
(ligura la) correaponde to the equation:

00'. k) I I -2~(l + LiIf-coekymaln -;- - 0. (1)

where “0 - (1.0)“, 3. and H ia the nutuel inductance between the adjacent
oectiono. According to (l), the conditiona for apatial aynchroniaation in
ouch a atructure for three wavaa are:

..-I.+.u "+*‘+*‘.23 (2)

and can be not by neana of varying the para-eter "It. for valuaa oi It), < 1.5
and Ikzl g 2.

' To realize the poaeibility of obtaining
the aecond heroonic 2» (where u: - U3)
of the aignal frequency being converted
and to provide for otable operation of
the 'oyaten aa a whole. it ia expedient
here; in contreat to a aelt-oacillating
node, to aalect the operating point cloae
to the mine ot the N-characterietic
(Figure lb), where the following approxi-
nation La Juatitied for call “Thales
.(‘l)"3“'3“2 (85°. “’00 3| «
<< Bung). In thie caee, the equate-law
effecta of the active conductivity will
dominate the linear and cubic ooeo,,while
the equationa or the elowly changing

:?2::"§§::J2:;§h'.:33)"um" uplitudca At(n) end phaaea Odo) of the

3 ° - ateady-atate. tinewiae interacting wavea

(3/3: - 0) with a voltage of ul ~ A1 x oxp[j(u1t - k1n + 91)], uz,3 ~ A2,; I!

x cxpljhmgt + kz’gn + 93.3)], which aatiety the cooditiona (2). have the

following (or. according to [l]:

 

Figure 2. The diapereion charac-
teriotic of the atructure where
"/1. - 0.6 «1,2,3, “1,2,3 are the

%‘3l‘i‘lcoaoo
ﬂ! . - 2:,A.A.coso.
do:
M (3)
27"-”8Al‘lmoe
an AA AA AA '
_ _ .J_’..2 '_'... __i' ..
“- (3. A. 3. A. 23.“ )9“ a,

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' _ mu omcw. m om

uhsrs o - 91 - 93 - 92 - An. tho nistunins A - lkzl + [Ital - lull. a; -
' 98ml; is the coupl n5 oooﬂicisnt,

4M .5 2A ' -|. M )-m k
Aha-[1+ L sln 2(I+ A cost.) ](l+ Leon, coca.

ln tons o! sxtsrnsl torn. systss (3) is skill: to s tions which dssotibs
tho psrssstric asnststion o! vsvss in rssctivs Iodis 8. 10]. ss vsll ss
stinulstsd Mslstu-Irillouin sosttsrins in tho csso of opposing propon-
tion dirsctions of tho Stokes conponsnt and tits hypstsonic ms [9). Con-
ssqusntly. tho solution of (3) rot-sally notchss tho solutions first dsrivsd
in [10]. Hovsvsr, such a solution in tho csss considsrsd hots hos s cosplsts
ly dittstsnt physicsl Issuing ss oospsrod to [10],,“ will to shovn bslov.

An «act solution of systss (3) tor ths squsrss of ssplitudss of tho volts”
vsvos hos ths (on [10]: , -

Aka) n Ugo |~ (Iv .. h)sn'X(n)].
Ago.) . 2mm! - b + (b - momma”
Alan) - 2033.11 - b + (b - 0) «Wall/13..
(4.)

whore s, 5, ml c (s < b < c) on tho roots of ths squstion,

 

m-(v+l+m‘;:u:)z'+ (f+%)Z-w%-O.

z - Ann/0:. o‘ - vuu:.
V3 - WWI) H.431». U: - 2mm + MM.
Do - AnWMRMsW 1an + “kW/”a

arc the intogrnls of equation (3). X(n) - zuolagsga - ﬁll/2n + P(0. It) '
° ssnlcosﬂon is tho sumsnt of tho ollipticsl unctions, 6(0) is tho

phsss shift at the point I: 0 0, "9. It) . ?[l - kzssinzol'uzdo is on
' 0
elliptical intsusl of the first kind with tns modulus k2 . (b - I)/(c - s)

and the emu-st“: 9 - n can“? -a)/ (b - 40].“.

In the sinplcst csss of physical intsrsst, vhsrs thsrs is no nistuning,
A . o, the following situations on possible dspsnding on ths typo of
boundsty conditions.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OPPIOIM. USE ONLY

a) Zero boundary conditione for the high frequency wavee. “(0) - a (no) - o.
and nonrero boundary conditione for the low frequency wave. ”(110) 3 0
( ia the length of the etructure). according (to), the eteedy-otate alpli-

t ee of.the interacting wavee are: AM) . ﬂamwﬁmmxmn.

Mn) - Mom A.(0)culx(n)l. ‘
Mk) I A.(0)dn[X(e)|. (5)

where X(n) I X (0) ' m: 31WMeio)". '3 'An(ﬂe)Me("eN3n'23.)‘".
The functione en[X(n)l and cn[x(n)l have a period of MI, and dn[X(n)l hee a

period of 2x; I - Nr/Z. n) ia a coeplete elliptical integral of the fi'ret
kind.

if the reletionehlp of (8] io aetiefied
x0“) n (9"! 4' "FF”. '0) (M 309 'e 20 m). (6)

which detereinee the threehold of the amplitude of the low frequency wave

at the boundary of the etructure. n o no. then generation of high frequency
vevea takes place at frequenciee of u; and u . When I - 0. a quarter of

the variation period of the functione en[x(n§] and cn[x(n)] is packed in the
length of the etructure (Figure 3a). The anplitudee of the low frequency
and high frequency voveo increeee. reaching a minus at the boundariee of
the etructure, while the rate of their riee alone down. tending to zero.

If I g 1, there occurre a periodic variation in the aeplitudee of the Haven.

According to (6). the threehold value of the uplituda moo) increaeee
with en increaee in the para-eter I!

A3 threoh ' Ame ‘ (2" 'l‘ ndnlxwdlnnmm)“.

b) Zero boundary conditions for the forward high frequency wave, “(0) o o,
and nonzero conditione for the return wavee. A 3(0) 9‘ o. Reletionehip (6)
ie not obeerved in thie caeo. For valuee of the alplitude of the low fre-
quency wave lower than the threehold (- - 0), converaion of the waves at

frequenciee of 02 and e3 to a "CV. with a total frequency of on ie accou-
pliehad with the uplif cation of all vavee.

c) Nonrero boundary conditione for all vavce: A1(0), Az.3(no) i 0.

For the condition Alma) - A (0) - 0. expreeeion (6) ie obeerved. The ao-
lution in thie ceee hee the ion of (S), where:

M , ' m (3. )
’18 MN' \’(ﬂ)=ua(0)(3:.hl 0+I' 2. r. sgnlcostqon.

ucpcnding on the sign of coe[0(0)]. the picture of the wave amplitude dia-
tribution io ehiftcd either to the left (coe(e(0)l > 0), or to the right

(code(0)) < O) by a quarter of the period of the function P(el2.n). ‘l'he
diatribution of the aaplitudea of the oecillatione for any of the nodes

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OPI’ICIAL 088 ONLY

(- e 0) her the fore ehown in Figure 3b. In contraet to Figure 3a, the upli-
tudee of all wevee (all off along n.

 

It

(a) a) (b) g)

5

Figure 3. the gpatial diatributione of the nonalieed wave aeplitudee
MM I Mn)" “hymn“. 3.(»)-4|.(n) “mam“.
In) - «WW
for the boundary conditioner

e) eolid linear Inn-3.1m)”. x(n.)- P(-;-. t):

deehed - broken liner: 3m.“ 7-05)“. A1 Mk I-‘( .3. t)
b) add-7&0) - 0. xw - PG g)

The reeulta obteined can be phyeicelly explained in the following eenner.
In caeee (0) end (b). the energy it picked on iron the nonlinear eleeenta.
and the wave alplitudee riae elong the etructure. In ceee (c). the aitue-
tion ie revereed: the energy of the wave ie absorbed by the nonlinear ele-
Iente end their aeplitudea fall of! during the propagation. If e > 1,
uoeething which correepond‘e to reletively large aeplitudee of A3013). eodee
(a) and (c) alternete.

Valuer of the pare-etere of 31 - 53 end n - 1 (V3 - 03) in the eolution of
(6) correepond to the degenerate care of wave interaction when on - 03. k: I
- k3. end oppoaing waver of the fundauntel ( ) and doubled (ml 0 2oz)
trequenciee propagate in the atructure. The p yeicel interpretation of the

behavior of the tunctione e1,¢(n) in rhie ceee ie eieiler to that deecribed
above. '

Thus, the reeulte of the etudiee which were carried out ehow that in a
periodic etructure with on active equate law conductivity, the effective
interaction of oppoeing wevee ie poeeible ueing epetiel haraonica, which
eccoepanied by frequency convereion or generation. In contrast to periodic
eyateee with reectiwe pereaetere [2, 3. 7, 8], euch etructuree lake it poe-
aible to eeplify the waves in addition to converting end generating then.
however, in contract to the once of exploaive instability [lo], the effects
or the einultaneoua rice or decay of the wavee are deter-lined here prinr-

ily not by the ratio of the pheeee. by rather by the aeplitudee of the inter-
acting waves.

66

FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

J.

l».

S.

6.

7.

9.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

DIMJOORM‘IIY

“.1. unbtnovlch. 0.0. Roaanblyua. "Morhvuaovakly ah. Manila “no."
("The Collocrad Hot-ha of tho ﬂlghor Educational Inatlruroa, 'Syuoa
Dynaalcoml, No lo. Oor'kly. 1976.

MS. Gorlhkov. VJ. Horchtnko. IZV. VUZOV - MDIOPIZIKA [PROOIBDINGS Ol’
m HIOIIBI EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES - RADIOPIIYSICSI, 10. No 6, 815 (1967).

8.1L Ant-an”, RN. Khokhlov. "Probloay nollnoynoy opukt" ["Problaaa 1n
Nonllnoar Optics”). Nauka Publlahcra. Hoocov. 1967.

“.1. Rablllovlch, ML. Flbrlklnt, IZV. WZOV - MDIOPIZIKA, 19, No 5 - 6.
753 (1976).

Yu.K. Bogatynv. V.P.Pukhln, H.I. Rnbtnovtch. IZV. W209 - MDIOPIZIKA,
13, No 5, 695 (1975).

Yu.K. logatyrov. K.A. Cerenkov. L.A. Ourovakly, MDIOTWIKA 1 WORM
[RADIO momentum AND menomcs], 21. No 3. 658 (1976).

MS. Oorlhkov. P.8. Korotkov, IJ. Tron-take, MOIO‘MNIKA I mm,
21. No 6. 13“ (1976).

K.I. golylk, A.8. Oorahltov. MOIOTBWIKA I SWIM. 18, No 10. 2073.
(1973 .

1.l.. Paboltnakly. ”ﬂolckulyarnoya rauoyanlyo mu" [”1110 Molecular
Scattering of Light”, Nauka Publlahora, Mouov. 196$.

J.A. Amrrong, N. Blocaborgan, J. Duculns. and 9.8. Porohan. PINS. m.
127. 1918 (1962).

oomwur: "lavaulya vyashlkh uchabnykh :avodanty." "Radloflukaf' 1978

8225
csowuuoasz

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOTION!“ W “BOWL ENGINEERING

uoc 62i.37l.3
amrss or run some: or mm m usmo mcsoms unionism: (mun)
Moscow wrorsmm 1: mm in Russian No 10. 1978 pp 2197-2119
[Article by M1. shutkol

[Text] ‘l'haoretical research and experiaental field
studies were sade of the interrelationship between
the characteristics of a microwave field and the
state and physical and chenical paraseters of a-
vatar surface. the temperature and the degree of
sineraliution. Substantial spectral differences in
the degree of influence of various hydrophysical
paressters on the characteristics of the radiation
were ascertained. Spectral setth for deter-lining
the taaperature and state of the surface of the Pacific
Ocean were proposed taking into account the specific
features of the radiation field. The problem of de-
tarsining the option. portions of the spectrum for
probing the characteristics of a vater surface was
forsalated and solved by approximation.

Kati-ates of the precision in determining a masher of
hydrophysicsl parameters were derived.

Introduction

Hicrowave radiocatry sethods are effective tools for the reaote probing

of the surface of water basins. The date of contrast and spectralnessure-
seats of the average values, the intensity of the variations and also the
degree of polarization of the radiation, which can be obtained by radioacters
sounted on board aircraft, contain infomtion on the spatial-tineivise vari-
ations in tho intensity of wave agitation, the theraodynsnic temperature

and the salinity of the surface layer, with a thickness of up to several
centimeters, as well as concerning the presence of films of petroleua pro-
ducts and floating ice.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTICIAL USE ONLY

by virtue of the fact that the influence of various hydrophysical parameters
on the characteristic of a microwave radiation field is manifest unequally
in different portions of the spectrum, it is necessary to choose the optimal
spectral ranges for the reliable identification of the nature of a perturbing

factor (espicially in the presence of several perturbation sources simultan-
eously) .

For the solution of this problem, it is necessary to know the sensitivity of
the radiation field in different portions of the microwave spectrum to varia-
tions in the hydrophysical parameters cited above.

The intensity of the radiation of a water surface is characterized by the
brightness temperature*:

(1) Th " "Teff

where r is the radiative capacity of the surface; T.ff is the thermodynamic
temperature within the boundaries of the skin layer, the thickness of which.
I... amounts to from 1/3 to 1/10 of the electronegnetic wavelength, and there-
by varies within a range of from a few millimeters to several centimeters in
a wavelength range of from 1 to 30 centimeters.

The quantity r is homogeneous over the depth of the water medium. and is
determined by the value of the dielectric permittivity of the water and the
specific features of the geometric structure of the surface (wave formations).
in particular, by the relationships between the characteristic dimensions of
the nonuniformities and the electromagnetic wavelength. The values of r at
at given wavelength depend on the temperature and the degree of mineralisa-
tion (salinity) of the water.

The emissivity depends substantially on the type of polarization of the radi-
ation and the observation angle.

For the case of vertical and horizontal polarizations respectively:

(2) - elsnlimcosOcasP—gi)
”d-‘-Ru -

 

 

lerl’cos' 0+la.l+2lt.|1lt_..loo:0cos(d--624

* The brightness temperature of the "ocean-atmosphere-spece" system is
a function of the meteorological parameters of the atmosphere (at wave-
lengths shorter than 3.cm) and the cosmic radio radiation (at wavelengths
lauger than 30 cm) in this case.

49
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30h OFFICIAL 088 char

 

 

 

"We: Wade-:4
(3) ”IA-1-1:“. o.
ooa'0+lc.|+21meoe0eos7

The following ayabola are adopted in (z) and £3): a; I c' - iti': axle; -
- tend“ 6A is the loss angle: :18 - t1 - sin e; ‘la - :9;

.ﬂ” 0 %
”Ga-m: I'd-Ci Vi-Hg'dn .

Ital-um

Por the case of vertical observation, 9 - 0':

«'17.: cos-:-

Ia.l+2ﬂT.lcaa-%-+i

The coefficient of radiation polariration, which is defined as the ratio
of the difference in the caaponenta In [11,. vertl and ‘1'"- l'l'b, hor] to

their sun, decreases nonetonicaliy wit an increase in the observation
angle.

 

(’0) Rea-X's-“ -

Layers of foam formations on a water surface substantially change the radi-
ative capability of the "layer—water" aystea. This effect is due to the
considerable difference between the effective dielectric properties of fees

and the water sediua, as well as to the scattering of the alectraaagnetic
radiation in the thickness of the foam layer.

The influence of the factors indicated above is aanifeat in the form of a
variation in the average radio brightness value, as well as in spatial-
tiaewise variation in the intensity of radiorsdiation in the case where
the spatial resolution element and the observation tile constant are less
than the spetisl-tinewiae correlation intervals, which characterize the
properties of the perturbation source, or are couensurate with then.

I. The Characteristics of Radio Radiation Under Conditions of Wave Agitation

The large-scale components of wave formations are described by a steady-
state randoa function c (x, y, t), which are characterised by the distri-
bution density of the slopes po(c,", 4, v) having different effective
values 0;,“ and °C§ - we 1." in the direction of the wind and in a direction
nornal to it respectively (v is a wave agitation three-dimensionality in-
dicator). A normal distribution is used. as well as modified ferns which
are well known in the literature, including assynetrical distributions. He
shall characterise the space-tine properties of the aodel by a two-disen-
sional normal density of the instantaneous distribution of the slopes with
correlation functions in the corresponding directions. The correlation

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

properties are duuuribud by a decaying oucillatory function with different
vaiuoo of the indicator for the wave agitation irregularity co (the ratio
of a quaaiporiod to a correlation interval. defined an a drop in tho level
of the correlation factor by e tiaao). on well an by a boll function [la].

The radiative proportion of the aurface. the average valuea of I, the intonoity
of the variationo in the radio radiation 0‘. and tho polarisation fac-

tor not ~r)/(rv+rh)[r Int-r ,xh-r - 1]
are d retained in aKirchhoff apKroxﬁatioX‘ﬁr‘rgai'goonetrig ”338?“.

(s) (5) 2...“). v) -e I 13:140. 9. 0. 9) MM. v/O. u) n (0. V0. 9.»)60dc

Ooh

m an o.',,,(o.v)-bj I[Momma-Mo.»mew/Mm
I...

x" (00 W0. *1 Po) ‘0 do.

here a and b are nornolieing factors; :3 are tho curront voluoa of tho
radiative capacity for vertical and horizontal polaritotione: ro’h -.
an.” 3 (cv - ch) coazaza ia the depolariration angle; r‘, h era the local
valuoo of the radiation coefficient. defined by relationehipa (2) and (3).
the angular function for which at centimeter and docinotor wavelength: to
approximated (with an accuragy of n: voroe than 90-97:) by polynooiolo of
the fore: cv(el) - to + M91 4» 3,,01, 0 361 < 70’; “(91) - Ito - Ahez.

0 g 0 < 90'; 01 I are con q; q I cone cone - nine nine to!“ - O): t," '-

- atlax - tanO toad; t; - delay-cane nine; J, - ainO/too 0 in the Jacobian
of the trnnofora of the donoity valueo pom". W. V) into 90(0. 0. v);

0. p and o, O are the angular coordinatao of the diroetion of oboervotion
and the nor-a1 to the aurface; p in the conventional denoity of the dia-
tribution of the slope angleo vith raapect to the obaervation direction.
related to the true donaity [so by the relotionahip:

M0. 9. Wm 9) "Mo. v. ‘09“). V. 0. a):
(7) - ”(0 ‘1 o v)_ cosﬂH arctgligOcodc-qﬂ)
, . . ..___.°_._._

c in a nornaliring factor; n in a function which taken into account the
shading of the aurface olenenta; accounting for only the effecta of oelf-

shading ia accoapliohed by the appropriate oelection of the integration
limits in the regiona n, and 0,.

Approximate analytical expressions for the values of Ar, °x and the cor-

relation function ”x of the eaiaoivity an a function of the obaervation

angle 0 and the parnneter do have the following for: (a tvo-diaenoional
uodel where 0 I 0'; 0 :9 < 60'):

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USI ONLY

(8) Au...~t1...nc': ',,-2.n:.o.'(2o'+o.');

(9) P. “(0) II {kW—:07 [30’1” (u) +Oe'pe' (u) I.

For a fixed value of e:

(10) 11...,(M)’¢-.,,(M ‘ 'I'e. 70‘0"“. out).

The intensity of the fluctuations as a function of the linear dinensiona
of the field of viev of the antenna (the attenuation function of the fluc-
nations x; 0"): II xox) is deternined by the expressions:

"h.“ 99(u) is specified in the for- of an exponential oscillatory
function:

d.e.-H _ 0'“. [.22
(2nd.» Tani)“ a

where do - d/W is the ratio of the_linear sire of an anittins section d
to the average length ofaeee wave A;

when 96‘“) is specified in the for- oi a bell function:
1 v; .- 1
two-Who zoom-ﬁu-a-«op

 

(11) x'(d..¢.)- manna-mm).

(12)
r; 1 -
I _ __ _ .
+o.[ f5“(34.) w“ M)“.
where d; - d/uo: no is the size of the correlation interval based on a

drop in the level of the correlation function by a tines: O is the
genssian probability integral.

Changer in the radio brightneee which are caused by the long period waves
of a swell with a slope 660, where 0 g 0 < 60'. are evaluated by the
approximate expression:

(13) at“ - amen.

An isotropic model has been adopted for the snail scale components, which
are described by the effective height “h and the noraal correlation func-
tion of the rises with a characteristic interval 1.

The radiative properties are determined by the nethod of small perturbations
by loans of colparins the albedo A - R.» + DJ. determined by the reflective
M and diffusion DJ couponnnts, with a reflection factor R. for a moth
surface. This is equivalent to conparins AR - R. - IL». The size of I.»

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

in defined by Iodified Preenel coefficienta [8]. A procedure for the approx-
ieate determination of 0 free the tire of the acattering factor in the re-

' Election direction J an the width of a cone in which the main energy of
the diffueien field a concentrated vae treated in [2]. The approxieete
repreeentation of R~(0) and DJ(6) pernita the derivation of an approximate
expreeeion for eetieating the degree of change in the radiative capecity*:

A

The radiative characteriatica of the dual ecale eodel era eetahliehed by

eubetituting valuea of a + a: in (5) and (6) ineteed of r, vhare the
quantity A: ie determined approximately by (lb).

(14) Am(0)an [3..(o)cu'o-c(-:T)mo](—‘£ '.

The influence of etnoapheric paraeetera on the eiee of the average valuee

and Variatione of the inteneity of the radio radiation 1a taken into account
by substituting the following veluee in (S) or (6) ineteed of r for the
model of large acale foreationa (or r«+Ar for the duel acale model):

(is) «3'mom.)-x...(o.v.o.o)+u-u...<6.v.o.¢)ix
x “4“,. v. or 9. 1a).

where RA ia the noraaliaed value of the radio brightneae of the eteoephere
at the level of the eurface; YA ie the abeorption factor for oxygen. water

vapor and cloud cover. A planar-layer model of the ateoaphere ﬂee adopted

in the calculationa for the caee of 0 3,6A < 0.4:, and 0A la the zenith '
angle:

0“ - “M- 1‘(1..0.e.0.o))l “at o<e. <o,a.;
(16) _ x. - meant m 0,4“ ‘0‘ <_’;.;
8
° «28: °‘ >7“
9a "“3 ‘08 t; :-cos 0 cos zo-un 0 sin 20 cos (vp-op);
’ - TA - AT .

h

23 '

TA, To and or are the temperature of the atmosphere at the aurfece, the

temperature of the surface, and the correction for a aonieotherlal atnoe-
phcrc.

————_—

* The concluaion vaa propoaed by A.Ye. Baeharinov.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0¥PICIAL USE ONLY

Figure l.

The radiative characteristics of the
surface of the sea as a function of
the intensity of wave agitation (wind
velocity):
to 0' 0.3
1. Experiment uith the "Kosmos-2i3”
satellite. wavelength 8.5 cm.
and the histograms are for the
distribution of the increments
in radio brightness (plan view):
2. Calculation for a model with a
foam layer having a thickness
of: (e) 0.5 cm; (b) 1 cm;

II. III. IV. The date from measure-
ments taken from s
shore station for the
intensity of horizontally
(II) and vertically (III)
polarised radiation and
the polarisation factor
(IV) at a wavelength of
3.2 cu. uhere o - 80’.

 

The radiative properties of foam formatione are evaluated from the formulas
for the emissivity of layered media for models of foam in the form of a
statistical mixture of water and air. a porous dielectric. Theoretical
mixture relationshipa are employed to estimate the effective value of the
dielectric permittivity of a foam layer (for example, Odelevskiy fornulss
for statistical and matrix mixtures). Also derived were estimates of the
absorption and scattering coefficients of the model of a foam-spray layer
in the form of a cloud of hollowspheroids,vhich was characterised by a
distribution function of the dimensions of the bubbles. the air concentra-
tion. the layer thickness. end the relative coverage area. Taking into
account averaging in the field of viov. the magnitude of the fluctuations
of radio radiation is estimated by the relationship:

0.. - 10...; 1:03.. P.) - [d.u(P.) - i + e-‘N'I'l;

9
(17) [douU’dl’

“x" are the nonaveraged fluctuations:

(18) o..-AX.VP.zi-P.);

5k

FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FUR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Ar, is the increase in the eeieeivity due to the fees; a. is the relative_
foes coverage area; x is he attenuation function of the fluctuations;

3;. llP.(l - 9.); do 0 d x d is the linear dimension of the field of view;
A is the average length of a sea veve.

 

Figure 2.

The spectral dependence of the slope of the radiative-vied relationship.

The eaesureeent data:
1. Free the "Kosaos-ZbJ" satellite [ll];
2. in the "Bering" experiment [9];
3. Pros the literature [10];
6. Averaged values.

We shall give a few results of the calculations and the data of eeeeurenents.

The calculations were carried out in a wavelength range of 0.8 - 30 ca, end
some of the results are given in [l - 6]. The experiments were conducted
in the period fro- l96b to 1977 on the veter basins of the Black. Kiev.
Caspian, Barents, and Ohhotsk Seas and the Pacific Ocean from a shore ete-
tion, Eros aircraft laboratories, end free a satellite in wavelength bands
of 0.8 - 3, 0.8 - 8.5 and 0.8 - 30 co; the sensitivity of the radioeeters
was 0.1 - l' K. Sane of the results are given in [1, 3 - 7]. The measure-
ment data confire the justification of the basic eodel representations'(see
Figures 1 - 3).

At grazing observation angles, for the case of a wave agitation intensity of
up to four balls [6 points on a 12 point scale]. the radiative properties
were primarily determined by the effective slope angle. practically regardless
of the form of the distribution function of the slopes. Based on the cal-
culated data. the sensitivity of the radio brightness to a change in the
effective angle at 0 - 60 - 80’ is characterized by values of around

~(2-4)‘ Kleff. angular deg., for the case of vertical polarization, and

about +(l-3)‘ Kleff. angular deg. for the case of horizontal polarization.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPIQXAL "SI ONLY

an inoraoaa in tho oifoctiva alopo anglo iron 0 to 10‘ with a growth in tho
intonaity at wavo agitation ia accoapaniod by dopolarioation of tho radiation
by 10 - 308 in a tango o! angloa of 60 c 0 < 80'.

it tho dopondonco of tho alopo diatribation intonsity on tho ohaorvation
diroction (7) is not tahon into account. tho arrorintho dotornination of
tho valaoa of Ar and ox roachoa $02 and Ioro. In oxporiaanta tron s ahoro '
station at wavolongtha of 1.6 - 3 ca. dopolariaation of tho radiation is
notod. aa ia a docroaao in tho intonaity of vortically polarirod radiation
by 10 - 20‘ K whon tho wind volooity incroaaas iron 0 to 7 nlaac; with
horizontal polarisation. an incroaao in tho radio radiation intonaity ia
notod with a alopo or about 1 - 1.5 ' K/(alaoc) (aoo Pigaro l).

Valaos of tho alopo of tho radiativo-wind rolationahipa. which aro anallor
than follow iron the calculation for largo wavoo, aro oxploinod by tho
soothing inflaonco of small acalo foraationa and tho dopondonco of tho
affactivo para-otora of largo acalo inhoaogonoitioa (in this caso, do),
which datoraina tho radiativapropartida. on tho wavolongth of tho radiation.

Tho calculations indicato tho proaonco of azimuthal functions t(#) and o‘(9)
(with a wavo agitation thrao-diaanaionality indicator of u < l), which woro
rogiatorod in a naahor of oxporinonta. For tho caso of normal sounding, tho
radiativo proportios aro dotorlinod by roan ioraations, anall acslo coupo-
nonts. and to a ninor dogroo. by largo wavoa. Tho data oi Figaro l illu-
strato tho calculated and oxporiaontal valaoa for tho incroaso in radio
hrightnoas at a wavolongth of 8.5 on with a chango in tho wind valocity.
Shown in Figaro 2 is tho apoctral curvo for tho alopo of tha radiativo-wind
rolationohipa bssod on uoaaurolont data iron tho “Koanoa-263" aatollita

[11] and in tho ”Boring” oxporinont [9].

Figaro 3. Tha intcnoity of tho fluctuations
in radio radiation. Havolongth
3 co, observation anglo 25’,
boa- width 3':

1-2. Calculated valaaa, wavo
agitation at 3-5 points
on a 12 point scalag.

3. Hind wavoo and swolla;
' 6. Wind wavo agitation.

Haxinao values of tho fluctuations are
noted at angloa of e - 60-70'. For the
case of linear dinanaiona of tho fiold

of view which exceed the length of a

sea wavo, the fluctuations are attenuated

 

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

by 5 to 10 times. and the influence of swells is noted (Figure 3). The
correlation functions are distinguished by an oscillatory character.

The influence of ntnospharie background light is a determinative factor at
grating angles when receiving horitontally polarited radiation in a wave-
length range of l < 3 cm. with an increase in the radio brightness of the
atmosphere. the fluctuations with vertical polarisation increase. and de-
crease for horisontsl polarisation.

2. The characteristics of Radio Radiation Under Conditions of Variations
in the Temperature and Salinity of the Water Surface

Calculations of the sensitivity of the radiation field to variations in the
tharnodynamic temperature and salinity were carried out using the Debye
formula. taking into account ionic conductivity [6. l2 - 151*. The spectral
curves for the slope of the radiative-temperature and radiative-mineralisation
relationships. determined from the data of calculations and measurements,

are shown in figure A for several values of the temperature and salinity.

A quantitative correspondence is observed between the theoretical and ex-
perimental values of the radiative characteristics.based on the measurement
data in the centieeter wavelength band. obtained under laboratory condi-

tions from on board aircraft laboratories and the “losses-2&3" and "Kosmoa-Jdb”
satellites [1 - 6].

The data of radiometric measurements at a wavelength of 8.3 cm from the
"unseen-263" satellite above the relatively calm regions of water basins
(wave agitation less than 3 - a points on a 12 point scale) are compared in
figure 5 with the data of shipboard measurements of the temperature of the
water surface [7}. The observed scatter in the points, besides being due
to a possible influence of variations in the degree of water darkness and
errors in equipment calibration which were not taken into account. is also
due to the considerable fluctuation noise of the radiometer (approximately
615 I 0.7' K at r - 1 sec) and the lack of refinement in the procedure for
comparing the data, in which the values of radio brightness averaged in the
field of view of the receiver with an area of about 2,000 square kilometers
is matched up with a limited sample (1 - 2 values) of the data of point con-
tact measurements. The averaged radiative-temperature function is close to
linear with a slope factor which corresponds to the calculated value.

The sensitivity of the radiation field to variations in the salinity is
noted at wavelengths longer than S - 10 en. The data of experimental studies

._.____._—————

ﬁ The first approximate model estinates of the relationships between the

thermal and radio brightness contrasts of a sea surface were derived in
[15].

57

roe 'orrlcuu. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure lo.

The apectral curve for the alope of the radiative-temperature (I) and the
radiative-ultnity (II) functiona.

I: A. The calculated valuea for a ealinity of -- (a) 0 %o;
(b) 20 W”; (a) 60 92.. and a teaperature of:
(1) O C; (2) 10 C; (3) 20' C; (6) 30' O;
3. Experi-ontal data from the "Rome-253” utellite in
tenoerature ransea of -- (01' ) - (0-iO)’ C: (61;) -
(10-20)° c; (m) - (0-30)’ 3.

II: C. Calculated valuea - for a salinity of (2b) - 20 9503
(2c) - 1.0 %0. and a (measure of 10° 0, and
(3c) - 1.0 0/00. 20° 0;
D. Bxperinental data fro- an aircraft in salinity ransea of -
(asp - (0-20) %0; (05;) - (20-30) 0/"; (083) - (0-30) 930.

performed in five portions of the apectru- in a wavelength range of from

2 to 30 on from on board the aircraft laboratory of the Inatitute of Radio
Engineering and Blectronica of the USSR Academy of Sciencea above the voter
haaine of the Sea of okhotek (s I 30 - 35 om), the Anur actuary (s I

- 0 - 2 °/00)o and the Tatarakiy Straita (5 g S g 30 %0 at a water unper-
ature of 10 - 15‘ C provided quantitative confirmation of the repreaenta-
cional uodela which were developed.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sensitivity of the radiation field to a change in the concentrati and
composition by parts of the salts right up to values of 8 I 200 - 300 o
is shown by the calculations and confirmed by the data from experiments
perforsed above the water basins of internal water reservoir: Lake Sivash
and the Kara-logas-Ool day (see figure 6).

3. The formulation and Approximate Soluetion of the Problem of lstimating

Hydrophysical Parameters from the Data of Hicrowave Radiometric Measure-
seats

is follows from the theoretical concepcepts and the measurement data, the
sensitivity of the microwave radiation field to variations in the tempera-
ture. uallnity,ond intensity of wave agitation vary substantially over the
spectrum. The specific spectral features of radio radiation are also charac-
teristic of portions of the water surface which are covered with a film of

petroleum products, or floating ice, as well as of radiation components (or
absorption) of the atmosphere [6].

These differences are the basis for eethods of determining the hydrophysical
parameters under complex weather conditions from the date of simultaneous
measurements of the radio radiation:

(l9) 7!. -Fa; (00...“ H 00'.“ Me as”; QI‘OH' 0 0“!“ ' I Q“)

in so acted portions of the spectrum A‘; Q'0 are hydrophysical parameters,
and ‘ are atmospheric parameters: i - l, 1. .... u; u gv + 3 [l6, 17].

To obt in reliable information, the solution of system (19) for the parameters
Q t, , should be stable over all intervals of there variation for the case
o the existing model indeterminacy and the natural nonuniqueness of the
radiative-hydrophysical functions and the relationships between the radiative
characteristics and meteorological parameters, and the errors in measurements
of radio brightness should also be taken into account. Such a problem is
solved by means of selecting spectral segments which maximise the determi-
nant of the s¥stem of equations (l9)(or minimise the error in determining the
parameters Q3 , 02).

This problem was solved approximately for the case where only the hydrophysicel
parameters T, V, and s were taken into account (19), with a subsequent
check of the stability of the solution and estimates of the additional errors
by means of accounting for the specific radio radiation spectral features of

the atmospheric paraneters in the chosen portions of the spectrum, and the
errors in their independent determination.

A piecewise linear approximation of the increments in the radio brightness
(or each parameter is employed to solve this problem:

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m 0!"an US! ONLY

A”. (Q!) " ﬂ. (0!) - ".(ngJo
(30)
A". (Q!) . ‘1'“le - 0].“) + I o o + H'(Q' — 0].“)

and tho linoar sodol oi tho intorrolationship of tho para-otors in oach in-
dividual portion a I I. It. .... a. b. o (soo 21).is also usod. Indotoro-
inacy factors which are inhoront in tho dopondanco of tho radio hrishtnoss

on tonporaturo. salinity and vavo agitation (tho chango in tho slopo. psrallal
displscononta oi tho rolationships) sro takon into account. as uoll as rsn-
do. variations in tho radio hrishtnoss duo to tho influonoo of rolatod fac-

tors (for oxanplo, ﬂuctuations canoad by atmosphoric paranotora) and fluo-
tuotin; noiso.

In tho abaonco of tho influonco oi atnoophoric paranotors, and vhoro tho
vstar capacity of clouds is takon into account with on orror ol no Ioro than

1 - 3: in wavalonsth rongo of 0.8 g A 3 30 ca. tho solution for tho paralotora
T. V and 8 is tho lost stahlo (Figaro 7) in portions of tho spoctrun
Al-S-lOcn, A;-0.8-l.6cn. l3-25-30cn (vhoroOg'rgSO'c;
0;: 360 0/0.; op: 325 Inst).

Piauro 5. Tha rolstionship botivosn tho in-
croaso in radio htiphtnoss at a
wavalonsth of 8.3 on and that-o-

dynanic tooporaturo (oxporinont
with tho "Roms-2‘3” utollito).

At thoso wavolonstha. tho oporator of
syston (19) for intorvals of tho valuos

'l‘ 8 s: V e b; s e c has opproxinatoly tho
following torn:

 

a.’ k." if-o
21 I . O
( ) Al I- *3; kg: ‘4-00 ,
a...

The npproxinate expressions (22) - (28) porsit the estimation of tho orror
in tho dctoroinstion of tho poranotor 1' due to tho following:

o) “tho parallel shift of tho radiativo functions 15(1) and 150!) by the
mun“ 6T0 and 6V0:

(22) AT- (00' r) ‘ ' [k..'k..'A1'..-k..’l:..'or..+
'H‘u'k \¢v~“5voo) I.
(2 3) D0". 7 ”ku'ku"*h’ku's
60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

h) A change in the slope (i'uk'u-O-a’); k"-k“(l+c")):

(26) ark-(Dom nut)"IAr..'k..'e.'-AT..'k..'a."-FA Dot].
(25) A Dotuku'ku'ml‘i-m') -k...'k..'(a.'+e.").
(26) .\T.'-AT.-AT.(T...IP(I- l))-AT.(V...9(b-l)).

c) Rondo- variations in the radio brightness (tor exaeple. due to a change
in the state of the dthIph"!O)8 -

(27) are(on)-'(ar.k..'-M'J»').

d) ﬂuctuating noise:
(28)
or-lnat|"ﬂ'5f.7c'.."') «W ..’)‘.

Errors in the anti-ates of the parameter V are deter-med by the analogoua
symetrical relationships.

The error in the doter-ination of the salinity due to variations in the
temperature at for fixed values of 1' and 8 is evaluated by the expreeeion:

(29) AS'»,B-(k~'/k~.)drll.h

Changes in the slope of the radiative functions at a wavelength A; are re-
duced to the errors:

(30) 58:: [k.,‘(i+a.‘) l"[-AT.'¢.‘-k..'1'(a.'-m‘) lo
For random variations in radio brightness:

(31) ASE (k...)" [thh'dﬂbhu 81".)1'

The error due to fluctuating interference is:
(m mum-W .) +1 to (o 7—1.". '.

Evaluations show that for axe-pie, when ‘l‘ - 5' e, V - lO shoe, 3 a 35 0/“

and 61], - 0.2' K, the errors aaount to 61' - 0.3' C, W 0 0.22 Ia/sec and
as - 0.1.2 0/90.

Variations in the slope of the radiative-temperatu e and radiative-mineral-
ization functions within units of 32 (e1 - a! - oi - «g g 3!) and the

radiative-wind relationships within limits of 20: («‘1' - a: g 201) lead to
the following errors in the deteruinotion of the temperature, salinity and
wind velocity: Arn—OJZ’C, QVn-M ulcex,AS--O.8‘X..

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL 088 ONLY

(A) v: I (C) (D)
no
nuﬁmdi (I) auwuuu Janus
an o catwaum

   

   

1&3” _+_ ‘ 30

Figure 6. The radio brightness increment at a wavelength of 30 cm as a
function of the concentration of salts:
1. Calculated values for NaCl salt at a temperature of:
(a) 18' c; (b) 15' c; (c) 10‘ c;
2. Calculated values for a mixture of salts;
3, 4. An experiment at T - lO - 15' C (3) and r - lS - 18' q (A).

Key: A. Black Sea, Sea of Okhotsk;
a. Lake Sivash;
c. Salt basins;
D. Ksra-Bogaz-Gol Bay.

The influence of the atmospheric parameters is approximately taken into
account by expressions (27) and (31).

The two-dimensional radio brightness fields 3(AT21, ATRk} (Figure 8) are

the graphical representation of the system of radiative-hydrophysical
equations for the different pairs of channels (A1, lk). The optimization
procedure for A1 and Ag consists in selecting the spectral intervals which

assure a maximum of the length of the partial vectors 331k and ighk and an
O D

angle between them which is maximally close to 1/2, something which corres-
ponds to the maximization condition for the determinant (23).

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
eon ‘1...qu Venn vole-IA

   

Figure 7.:

3

 

Figure 8. The two-dimensional radio brightness fields for the case of

a variation in the parameters '1', V and S (calculated)
1. (T,V), 11 - 8.5 cm, ‘1: . 0.8 cm;
2. (Ls), 11 - 8.5 cm, Ak - 30 en;

3. The partial vectors: "at: ”(W 1"“) 'un ‘un
am -‘~: - +
0010» u h h
63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is useful in this procedure to eeploy neeeurenent dete in the infrared

bend to monitor the state of the ateosphere end the eurfece teepereture in
the ebsence of cloud fornetions.

The effectiyeness of these methods has been confirmed experieentelly in
(3, 5-7. ll . .

BIBLIOGRAPRY

I. A.N. Shutko, TRUOY GOO [PROCEEDINGS OF THE MAIN GEOPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY
IHBNI A.I. VOYBYKOV]. 1968, KO 222, 19.

2. A.N. Shutko, TRUDY our. [PROCEEDIROS OF THE MAIN METEOROLOGICAL CENTER],
1969. No 30, 103.

3. A.Ye. lesherinov, A.H. Shutko, "Preprint IRE AN 838R“ ["Preprint oi the
Institute of Radio Engineering end Electronics of the USSR Acedely of
Sciences], No 63, 1971.

a. N.H. Tseytlin, A.N. Shucko, 0.“. Zhislin. "Preptint IRS AN SSSR" , No 6,
(155), 1974. ‘

5. A.Ye. Eesherinov, et a1., in the collection. "leelcdoveniye v oblesti
radiotekhniki i elektroniki 1955 - 1976 gg" ["Reseerch in the Fields of
Radio Engineering end Electronics 1956 - 1976"]. IRE AN SSSR [Institute

of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the USSR Acedeny of Sciences],
1974.

6. A.H. Shutko, 3.6. Kutura et al, "Rediofizicheskiye ieeledoveniye plenet.
ltogi nnuki i tekhniki. deiotekhnike" ["Rediophysi e1 Studies of the
Planets. Results of Science end Engineering. Redio Engineering"), 16,

VINITI [All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information].
1978.

7. A.Ye. Busherinov, et e1.. “Kosnicheskiye isslcdoveniye" ["Specc Research"];
1971. 9, 2, 268.

8. S.Ya. Breude, IZV. VUZOV HVO SSSR (RADIOPIZIKA) [PROCEEDINGS OF THE HIGHER

soucnuoum. msnwres or ‘l'llE ussn umts'mr or arouse EDUCATION (mm-
PHYSICS”. 1959, 2, s, 691.

9. "Sovetsko-snerikenskiy eksperinent 'Bering'" ["The 'Eering' Soviet-American
Experiment"], Proceedings of the Final Symposium, edited by K.Ye.

Kondret'ycv, Yu.I. Rebinovich, w. Nordberg, Gidroneteoizdnt Publishers.
1975.

10. H. Nordberg, J. Conawey, P. Thaddeus, QUART. J. ROY. MET. $00., 1969.
95, 606, 608.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

VON OI'FICLAL USE ONLY

Ado. Bauiurinov. A.s. Ourv1ch, 8.1‘. Yugorov. "Rndioixluchontyo 20-11 kak

plnnoty" ("Thu Radio Radiation of the Earth and P1onoco"]. Naulu Pout-hon.
19M.

N.A. Armand, A.Yo. Bulwrtnov. AM. Shutko. IZV. 9020‘! HVSSO 888R
(RADIOPIZIKA) [PROCBBDINOS 0! m NIGNER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES 0? TN!

USSR MINISTRY OF HIGHER AND SECONDARY SPSCIAL EDUCATION (RADIOPNYSICSN.
1977, 20, 6, 809.

V.Yu. Rays". Yo.A. Sharkov. v.3. Benn, IN. AN SSSR, PIZIRA A1108"!!!
1: OKEANA [PROCEEDINGS 01’ THE 0881! ACADm OF SCIENCES. Amospunm AND
ocmxc PHYSICS]. 1975, 11, 6. 652.

Yu.l. Robtnovtch, V.V. Molont'yov, mun! 600, 1970, No 235, 78.
SN. Percalesin, IZV. AN 888R, PIZIKA AMSI’BRY I am. 1967. 3, 1, 67.

A.H. Shucko, "Spooob SVCh radimtrtchukoso oprcdoloniyo oostoyontyu
povorkhnoou akvacoriy" [“A Method for tho Hierovovo Radio-uric Duo:-

Iunnuon of the State of tho Surface of Hater Arno"). Patent No. 319918
of 25 Kay 1970.

Am. Shutko. "Spooob optedoleniyo coupontury poverkhnoou okvocorty o
lotatol'nykh oppnruov" ("A Hothod of Dctoruntng the Surface ruponturo
of Hour Aron tro- A1:on£:"]. Patent No. 335613 of 26 July 1970.

COPYRIGHT: deatol‘uvo "Noun." ”Rndtotoldmm 1. Blokcrontlu." 1978

. 8225
080: 8166/0636

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

THE LYAPAS-H PROGRAMMING 8Y3?!“

Minsk SIS'mM PROORMMIROVANIYA LYAPAS-H in Russian 1978 signed to press
2 Dec 77. pp 2-6. 239

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from book by Li). Zakhrevskiy
and ".8. ‘roropov. Nauka i tekhnika. 220 pages, 3650 copies]

[Annotation]

[Text] The structural design of complex technical systems and primarily of
computers and other discrete devices reduces to the solution of varied
problems of combinatorial logic formulated within the framework of cutouts
theory. conbinational analysis, logic-tree theory, and other fields of pres-
eat-day discrete mathematics. the automation of design work necessitates

the compilation of progress for the solution of these problsns on computers.
but the existing programing languages, which are chiefly designed to solve
problems of a computational nature. prove to be ineffective for this purpose.

The book describes the new algorithmic language LYAPAS-H end a progra-ing
system oriented toward combinatorial-logic problems and implemented on Minsk-
32. DESK-6. and Yes [Unified System] computers. This new language includes
was for operating with symbols and logic vectors. making it possible to
develop programs that are not inferior in operating speed to programs written
in autocodea; as a result. the new language can be used in the developnent

of programing and operational systems. including those based on the dialog
principle. The absence of complex constructs in this language makes it
readily accessible to a broad coununity of users.

The book is designed for specialists in the automation of design work and for
the developers of oriented programming systems.

The book contains 3 tables, 8 illustrations. and a bibliography of 12 items.
Reviewers: Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences H. G. Contsa,

Candidate of Engineering Sciences Yu. N. Pecherskiy,
Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences A. A. Utkin

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Foreword

The range of applications of computers is steadily widening. Recently it
has been extended with increasing intensity to various problems of combina-
torial logics whose principal source is the theory of logic design. or the
synthesis of discrete devices of which the computer itself is a typical
representative. The problem of logic synthesis breaks down into a.number of
more elementary logic problems: equivalent transformations of Boolean formu-
las. the solution of logic equations. certain problems of the logic-tree
theory. ceding theory. and combinationel analysis. operations with symbol
sequences. etc. Problems of a logic nature also arise in the exaeinstion of
a number of economic and production problems associated with the selection
of optimal variants in certain complex situations. the automation of trans-
letion from one language to another. the analysis of malfunctions in techni-
cal devices. the diagnosis of diseases in medicine. the compilation of
weather forecasts. etc.

The solution of most of these problems requires an examination of a large
number of variants whose sorting is. in principle. unavoidable. but can be
to some extent reduced by improving the solving algorithms. The labor re-
quirement of the calculations involved in the solution of these problems
partially increases exponentially with the increase in their volume. and
hence the solution of practical complex tasks is sometimes simply incom-
ceivable without using computers.

A large number of algorithmic languages pretending to universality has be-
come widespread. but they are chiefly oriented to problems of numerical
calculations and are relatively ineffective for the solution of problems of
combinatorial logic owing to their lack of economical means for the presen-
tation of logic quantities and operation with these quantities. Of these
languages the one most suitable for the solution of logic problems is the
Pill programming language, but owing to its universality it is so complex
thatcheuncovery of all of its semantic potential and the complete exploita-
tion of its potential in modern computers are difficult.

There exist known attempts to expand the existing algorithmic languages by
including in them various means oriented toward the solution of logic prob-
'lcms. but these expansions, while convenient for programming. yield little

to enhance the effectiveness of the process of the solution of logic prob-
lems.

Special-purpose algorithmic languages that are entirely oriented toward the
solution of problems of a logic nature deserve special attention. since the
use of these languages assures not only convenience in program compilation,
but also an effective implementation of programs on modern computers equipped
with appropriate translators. It should be noted that the development of

a translator from an elementary special-purpose language costs incomparably

less than does the development of a translator from a universal algorithmic
language.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL US! ONLY

One of such special-purpose languages is the LYAPAS algorithmic language.
whose development was begun toward the end of 1962 especially for the presen-
tation of algorithms for the synthesis of discrete automate. with the first
translator from that language having been completed as early as in 1963.
The first widely used publication on that language was the anthology ”Logi-
chaakiy yaayk x dlya predatevlaniya algoritmov sinteta raleynykh uetroystv"
[A Logic Language for the Presentation of Algorithms for the Synthesis of
Relay Devices] (Nauka Press. Moscow. 1966). The present anthology contains
acompleta description of the LYAPAS language, of the Ural-l and M-20 comp
puter programming systems based on this language. and a set of algorithms
in that language-solving a broad range of problems relating to the analysis
and synthesis of discrete devices.

Subsequently the LYAPAS language has been expanded to cover computational
operations with numbers of various types. The most widely used versions of
LYAPAS to be developed in this connection were the trapas-zo for the Minsk-22
computer and the LYAPAS-7l for the BBSH-o and u-zzo computers. The_latter
version markedly develops the second and third levels of the language. as-
suring a convenient unit-by-unit compilation of programs. The mechanism

of automatic segmentation developed in that version makes it possible to
compile and use in a unified system programs containing several tens of
thousands of instructions.

Following the publication of the English translation of the anthology named
above (by Academic Press, New York-London. 1969). the LYAPAS language has
become known abroad; an interpreter from this language has been developed
in the United States. and translators from this language are used in Poland,
Czechoslovakia..and the GDR.

In the course of its existence the LYAPAS has been sucessfully competing
with other universal and special-purpose programming languages. It has
been used as the basis for developing a number of systems for automated

synthesis of discrete devices which are being used by many design organiza-
tions.

The considerable experience gained in the practical use of the LYAPAS lan-
guage as well as the advances in means of computer equipment showed the
way: toward further refinements of that language. Toward the end of 1976

a new version of the language. called LYAPAS-n appeared. Improvements in
the language proceeded in the direction of making its symbols close to the
standard alphabets of domestic display devices and broadening the language
by including in it the operations with symbols as well as with time measure-
ment. The purely computational potential of the language has been expanded:
operations with real numbers represented by floating-point decimal fractions
have been included. 0f major convenience to programming also are the opera-
tions with complexes (two-dimensional logic arrays) included in the language
at the level of elementary operations. Modular programming devices have
been further developed. The possibilities for using this language not-only
for the representation of synthesis algorithms but also for the solution of

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a broad class of problems of coabinatorial logic. including the development
of programming systems themselves. have been markedly expanded.

The presence of a means of operation with binary vectors. symbols. and bite
in this language makes it close in effectiveness to computer-oriented lan-
guages. and makes it possible to write in this language programs that are
not inferior in compactness and rapidity of action to programs compiled
with autocodes. so that this language can be used to develop programming and
operational systems. The exceptional simplicity of the syntax of this lan-
guage makes possible the development of simple and effective interpreting
systems convenient for the adjustment and editing of programs in the dialog
regime. At the same time. the high speed of translation. which is a conse-
quence of the language's simplicity. makes it possible to include the imple-
mentation of the translation process in the internal cycles of programs.
This last circumstance can be successfully exploited when constructing ef-
fective dialog systems on the basis of LYAPAS-M language.

within the framework of programming systems based on LYAPAS-H language.
dialog devices designed to solve various problems are being developed.
Problems of this kind primarily include the adjustment and editing of the
compiled programs directly in PAPAS-M language and the analysis and syn-
thesis of discrete devices. Both the designing of discrete devices and the
development of the corresponding programs are markedly accelerated on using
the dialog system of communicating with computers vie extension terminals.
Computer time is saved ("overhead expenses" on the performance of short
specific tasks are reduced) and. which is particularly important. design
time is reduced (the number of approaches to machine is reduced compared
with the packet regime, and their frequency is increased).

This book offers a description of the LYAPAS-H language and its application
in modern computers.

Chapters 1 and 2 are written by A. D. Zekrevekiy and Chapters 3 and 4. by

N. R. Toropov. The Sections "Programming System for the BESH-6” and "Pro-
gramming System for the Yes Computer" were written on the basis of material
provided by I. c. Borisov and N. G. Golovchiner, respectively. while the
section "Translator for the Minsk-32 Computer" was written by V. P. Tbmashev.

The suthorsareindebted to the reviewers A. A. Utkin, Yu. N. Pecherskiy and
H. G. Gontsa. as well as to S. V. Bykova. whose critical remarks and con-
structive comments served to improve the quality of this book.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m orrtcm. use our?

Table at Contents Page
vormrdsseseeaoeesaosaeooaooooeostaoeaooeaaassaeoaseaeaooeoeoaeeseeaes 3

Chapter 1. Elementary Programming

pt‘nc‘PCI CODCODCO.............a.n....u..u...unnuonunnuuu 7
LYAPAS‘" “um. OPCrC'IdUssseas-oataeoaeeeaeaoaaeaaeaoeesesooeoeaaaaoa 1‘
Pr°8IOItns 0‘ “81C cmu‘.“s°n.eaessseeeaooaosscone-assessesesaaaaaea 22
8°1u‘1on o: Ari:h-.‘tc.1 PrOhlm....'I....'.....C..................... 32
opotﬂticﬂ. with swul. and Foml..saaoaeseessseesaaaaesoaoooeoeooooea 37
op.rnt1°n. with c”p1.x..l................C..IO..‘O...’.......|....'... ‘3
In!oru‘£°n'gxchm° op.rat1°n'.......0....O...O....'..............I... ‘9
.synt“ of LYAPAs-H ““8““..0..0......0...‘0..O...0......0............. 52

Chapter 2. System Programming

Technology of Compilation of Largo Programs............................ 62
Modular Organization of Programs....................................... 67
Formation of Macrooperations and Modules............................... 72
Principles for Implementing Large Programs............................. 77
010108 LonamsuooltoooOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOD0.000000000DOOOOOOOOOOOOO..00... 8‘
Adjustment and Editing in LYAPAS-H Language............................ 88
”1.108 “.18“ systmOIDO000‘IOOODCOOODOC...0..GOOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOOI'IOOI 96

Chapter 3. Principles for Using LYAPAS-H Language

Prefntow RmruOOOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOI0.0...0.ClI.0...0.0.0.0000000000000103
Presentation of Operands to Machine Hemory.............................108
Realization of Elementary Operations Hith Language.....................113
Specific Features of Conversion Operations.............................lla
Implementation of Operations With Complexes............................126
organization of BXChamet.00.....0.0.0...O..0.COOOI.OOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOlaz
Implementation of Hicrooperations......................................147
Translator for the “tn.k"22 computer.............u...ocu.....no.n..1“
Functional Diagram of Programming System...............................175
Programming System for DESK-6 Computer.................................179
Programming System for YeS Computer............................... ....186

Chapter 6 Using the LYAPAS-M Language in s Dialog System

Prefatory Remarks......................................................192
Dialog System for Instantaneous Servicing..............................l96
Information Assurance of DISHO [Hultilanguage Dialog System for In-

stantaneous Servicing]...............................................205
Organization of Dialog with Subscriber.................................218
Requirements for Dialog Languages......................................229

Blbliogl’ﬂphy....un..............'...............o...........-oo...o..~238
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka i tekhnika." 1978

1386
C50: 1870
70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUBSCRIBER COMPUTER CENTERS

Moscow KUSTOVYYB VYCHISLITBL'NYYB TSENTRY in Russian 1978 signed to press
22 Hey 78. pp 3-6. 230-232

[Annotation, foreword end table of contents from book edited by V. I. Hehsi-
esnko. I. V. Kut‘min, Statistike. 15.000 copies. 232 pages]

[Annotation]

{Text} The book describes the purpose end cleeeificetion of KVTs [sub-
scriber computer centers]. definestheplece of KVTs in GSVTs [Netionel
Network of Computer Centers]. discusses the design principles end the ef-
fectiveness end optimization criteria of KVTs. It also examines the prin-
ciples for compiling the algorithm for the functioning of the informetionel
and mathematical softvere. the orgsnizetional-legsl fecilities end the opera-
ting problems end problems of evelueting the functioning effectiveness of
subscriber computer centers.

The book is designed for specielists working in the field of the design,
construction end operetion of subscriber computer centers end eutometic
control systems. end it also can be useful to students of vuz's mejoring in
the corresponding fields.

Foreword

The 25th CPSU Congress has. on the besis of e profound scientific enelyeis
and generalization of practical experience. stipulated the transition to the
development of comprehensive programs of work on the most important technicel
and scientific problems. This represents e new stege in perfecting the
planned mansgement of the socialist economy.

Comprehensive programs are of n goal-oriented nature and provide for the im-
plementation of the complex whole of operations connected with the eccom-
pliehment of the principal scientific-technicel, economic, and sociel teeks
within the fremeuork of a unified national economic plan.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I03 OIPIOIAL US! ONLY

At present both in this country and abroad electronic computer equipment
represents one of the most isportant directions of scientific and technical
progress. Computers were originally conceived solely for the performance
of computational operations. but now they have found broad application in
many aspects of management. in industry. construction. trade. scientific
research. medicine. transport. etc. lash year additional new applications
are found for computers. while at the some time the range of their applica-
tions in all already known directions is broadening.

The introduction of qualitatively neu Unified-Series computers (Yes EVH) in
the industry of the cash member countries has placed before experts in the

development and operation of automated control systems (A80) tasks relating
to the exploration of more effective vays of utilizing these new computers.

"The Main Directions in the Development of the Nntional Economy of the USSR
for tho Years l976-l980" provide for: "...aeauring the further development
and re is ing of the efficiency of automated control systems at computer
centers: and the consequent combining of them into a single national system
for tho retrieval and processing of inforlation needed for planning. ac-

counting and control. Collectively shared computer centers should be es-
tablished" Ill.

The technical base of tho OCAS [National Automated Control System] is
represented by tho GSVTs [National Network of Computer Centers] and by tho
YeASS [Unified National Automated Network].

The basis of tho TSVTs is represented by the major collective-use territorial
computer centers (TVTsKP) designed to satisfy the demand of many customers
regardless of their administrative jurisdiction mskes it possible to sharply
reduce the number of small and uneconomical computer centers. The ﬂationol
Network of Computer Centers also include subscriber computer centers. in-
dividually used computer centers, and numerous subscriber terminals.

"hat do the subscriber computer centers (KVTs) represent? The KVTs are
collectively shared computer centers. and they are established to improve
the efficiency of utilization of computer equipment by the ministries and
departments of the industrial and nonindustriel sectors of the national
economy. They are under the jurisdiction of these ministries and depart-
ments. and they are designed to perform data processing operations and as-
sure the functioning of the ASU's of the medium and small enterprises and
organizations (subscribers) of the concerned ministries and departments.
By contrast with the collective-use territorial computer centers, the sub-
scriber computer centers are of limited capacity and can service not more
than 10 to 20 subscribers of e single ministry (or department) located in
the same city or within relatively short distances from each other.

The KVTs may perform the following functions: implementation of data
processing operations for subscribers on a unified technical, informational.
program, and organizational-legal basis; establishment and conduct of data

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sIse cmcuo—s- at. 5.1..

banks for subscribers: development of applied routines to satisfy the needs
of subscribers; participation in the development and introduction of auto-
mated control ayatema for subscribers; centralised servicing of data-proces-
sing and -trenemitting facilities installed among the subscribers.

The establishment of the KVTa produces savings (in per-subscriber terms)
of capital outlays on the compilation of routines and reduces the expendi-
tures on the operation of computer equipment and on servicing personnel.

The subscriber computer centers should be equipped with computers and data
transmitting facilities belonging in the Unified Series to an extent tail-
ored to the needs of the subscribers regarding the packet. inquiry-answer.
end dialog modes -3 information processing.

The subscribers will be provided with subscriber terminals (AP) equipped
with facilities for the collection. preparation. end transmission of data
to the Kyle as well as for the reception of data from the KVTa end their
transmission to the subscriber.

The complex whole of the facilities installed at the tyre end among the

subscribers represents the subscriber computational information network
(Ktvs).

Subscriber computer centers may be established either as financially auto-

nomous organisations (enterprises) belonging to specialised branch (depart-
ment) associations or as structural subdivisions of individual enterprises

or organisations having the necessary materiel base.

At present more then 120 subscriber computer centers operated by various
branches and departments exist in this country. The experience gained in
the design end operation of KVTe'e for the assurance and automation of con-
trol processes at enterprises, organisations, and institutions has demon.
strated the high economic effectiveness of the use of computer equipment on
this basis as compared with the individual computer centers of enterprises
and organizations. It is thought that the capital investments in A80
created on the basis of e KVTa are reduced by 50-60 percent. while operating
expenditures then diminish by a factor of two to three /67/.

A great deal of work to establish KVTs's is being performed by the ministries
of the machineabuilding and instrument-making industry and the chemical. gas
industries and a number of other branches. One of the first KVTs's to be
accepted for industrial operation by a state commission is the Rhsr'kov

KVTs of the Ministry of the Machine Tool Industry which services lb enter-
prises and organizations of the branch. The KVTs of the Ministry of Petrole-
um and Gas Facility Construction in Tyumen' is functioning successfully.
During the 10th Five-Year Plan it is expected that more than 100 subscriber
computer centers will be established, and that their number will sharply in-
crease during the subsequent five-year-plan periods. Under these conditions
the utilisation of experience in the theory. methodology and construction of

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIPICIAL "8: ONLY

eubecriber computer centers in extremely topical and actual. The book of-
fered here to the render axeninee the pramiaea for the eetabliahment of KVTe'e
and determinee the plece of the KvTe in the National Network of Computer
Centere. The book containe nethodologicel materiel concerning the optimi-
ration of the etructure of a KVTa network, the determination and formaliea-
tion of criteria for the effectiveneae of a KVTa.-end an algorithm for-the
functioning of the KVTa an a computer eyetem.

The book alao anaeinea the principlea and elgorithm for the eelaction of
the etructure and parenatera of a KVTe. and definitiona of a rational etruc-

ture end topology of the data trenamieaion network for an arbitrary number
of levele of commutation pointe.

Coneidereble attention ie devoted to the informational fecilitiee of the
probleme being aolved by aubecribera with the aid of ere'e. ea well ea to
the aoftwete of the KVTe and ite eubecribere. the operating featuree of

the technical bane of KVTa. the reletionehip between the KvTe and the aub-
ecribera. and the implementation of the technological proceee of information
proceeeing. In the eolution of the above problema. the three yeare of

operating experience of the Kher'kov Subecriber Computer Center alao have
been taken into account.

In conclueion, the book offere recoemendatione on the phaeee and etagee of
the deeigning of branch KVTe'e. Thie book does not, of couree, completely
reeolve the problem of netting up an efficient functioning KVTe. However
the expoaition of eethodological and orgenizetionel probleee end the ex-
perience in eetabliehing eubecriber computer centere ie extremely ueeful to

a broad circle of readere. and prilarily. to experte working on the eatebliah-
nent of KVTe'a.

This interesting end needed book on the new forms of the utilization of
computer equipment in the national economy in offered to the reedere. here

it should be mentioned that the collective forms of computer use have a
greet future.

74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Contents Page

Chapter 1. The KVTs-a New Organirational Perm of the Utiliration of
cmut.’ Mu‘mn‘OOOOCOUDOOOOOOO0.0IOOOOIIIOOIOOOOCOIOOO'. 7

1.1. Premises for establishing a Nﬂra'e................... 7
1.2. Principal definitions. functions and classification

0‘ I m.'.ueeoeeeoeeoeeeoeeeeeeseteeeeaoeoeeeeoeeee 11
1.3. Role of a KVTa in the National Network of Coeputer

c.nt.r.UOIIQOOIOODI.0.0.0.ID..IIOOOOOOOOOOCOODOOCOOO. 16

1.6. Optimisation of a KVTs Structure..................... 19

Chapter 2. Principles and Algorithms for the Selection of KVTs
strutur. .nd P.2“OtCr.aeeeeeaooeeeaaeseosoeeeeeaeeeeeeeee 31

2.1. substantiation of KVTa Design Principles and Porlula-
tion of the Problem of Their Structural Synthesis.... 31
2.2. Algorithm for the Synthesie of a Three-Level Network
of conuntc.“°n chm.1.eseeeaeoseeeeeeeeeeooeeeoeeo 33
2.3. Determination of the Rational Structure and Topology
of the Data Transmission Network for an Arbitrary
Number of Commutation-Point Levels................... 61
2.6. Assurance of Structural Reliability of the Data
Ttm.“..1°n ".erOOOOIIOOOOOIIOOOOOOQO0.0.0.0.000. ‘5
2.5. Optimization of Parameters of the Subscriber Terminal

Network”............................................ ‘9

2.6. Optimization of the Allocation of Data Bases in a
m. ".mrkOOCC00.000.060.000...OQOOIOOOOOOSOOOOOOO. 56

mpt.r 3. Th. m. Punctiontn‘ moritmOOOOOOOOO..QOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOIO 62

3.1. Subscribers and the Formation of an Order “Portfolio? 62
3.2. Technological Process of Data Processing at the KVTs. 70
3.3. KVTe Structure as the Structure of a Computer System. 82

Chapter 6. Informational Assurance of Probleme Solved at KVTe......... 86

6.1. Principal Elements and Featurea of the Informational
Facilities of Problems Solved at KVTs................ 86

6.2. Codifier of Elements of the KVTs Information System.. 88

6.3. The KVTs Information Fund............................ 92

Chapter 5. Softwareofa Ma 96

5.1. Principal Elements and Features of the Software of

a MS............................................... 96

5 2. Control Programs for OS [Operating Systems of a KVTs. 99
S 3. Synthesis of Optimal Dispatching Algorithms..........l18
5.6. Ancillary Programs...................................l68
5 5. Applied Program Packets..............................l69

75
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
you omcm. us: om

Chapter 6. Criteria for the Effectiveneee end Optieiretion of the Inn-.152

6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
6.6.
6.5.
6.6.
607.

6.8.

6.9.

The Coeputetional Proceee at a Source of In!ornetion.153
over.t1n‘ merit.“ of . m..0.00000.00000000000000015‘
OpOfOtm Accur.cy of ‘ Mann...”................156
Start-Up and Activation Period of e KVTe.............l$9
vol“ 0‘ m. “unantOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.0.00080800080161
Enud£turn on s.ttm up . m...‘OOIOOCI0000000600161
Overall Punctionel-Statieticel Criterion for the

Bffutivm“. o! . m.00000000000000.60.000000000000162
Certain Particular stetietical Criteria for the

Bffectiveneee of e KVTe Derived tron the Overall

ort‘.r1°nltt0.00.0000...00.00.000.00.OOOOOOCOOOIOOOOIOIGS
Cele Criterion.......................................166

6.10. Coet Criterion for lyre Servicing....................l67

Chapter 7. Orgenirationel end Legal Pacilitiee of e KVTa..............169

7.1.
7.2.

Organizational-Legel Porn of Eetabliehins n KVTe.....169
Organizational-Legal Pecilitiee of e KVTe............17O

Chapter 8. Phaeee and Stasee in the Establishment of a KVTe...........207

8.1.
8.2.
8.3.
8.6.
8.5.

Organization of work to Eetebliah a KVTa.............2o7
Drafting the Technical Teak..........................208
The Technicel Project of a KVte......................220
The working Project of a KVTe........................222
The Introduction of e KVTa...........................223

Bibliogflphy..un”non-o...-n.......................2..............225

COPYRIGHT: deetel'etvo "Stetietika," 1978

1386
C80: 1870

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 681.3.06:62l.39
SOPTHARB FOR DATA TRANSMISSION NEIHORKS

Moscow HATEHATICHBSKOYE ODSEPECHBNIYB SETS? PD (Software of Data Transmis-
sion Networks) in Russian l978 signed to press 16 Nov 77 pp 2-6, 158

[innotation, foreword, introduction and table of contents from book by
Aleksandr Mikhaylovich Kryukov, Yuriy Mikhaylovich Hartygpv (editor), Vladi-
mir Leonidovich Rstgon. "Svyaz'",5,000 copies, 158 pages]

[Ions] The book is devoted to the statement of questions of the software

of data transmission networks. The tasks being solved by programs of the
software of the main elements of the network, the interrelation of the modes
of their operation with the indicators of the efficiency of the network.

the structure of the software of general-purpose and specialized computers
in the part of the programs, which accomplish the exchange of information
through communications channels, are examined. An approach to the creation
of the software at different stages of planning is set forth. The peculiar-
ities of the composition of the software of the cormmnications centers in
networks with different structures are examined.

The book is intended for scientists in the field of data transmission and
the developers of the software of computers.

Foreword

One of the main problems of domestic science and technology at the present
stage is the creation of data transmission networks, which ensure the auto-
matic exchange of information between territorislly dispersed sources and
receivers. A typical trait of the operation of the networks is the change
of the intensity of the external influence and internal structure of the
network in the process of operating. Here these changes are of a random
nature. The efficient operation of the network under these conditions is
achieved by the use of adaptive operation algorithms, which realize various
processes of information processing depending on the state of the network.
The use of technical means with program control. particularly the use of
computers, is the economically most feasible, and in a number of cases the
only possible method of realizing adaptive algorithms in networks. The ag-

gregate of the mathematical methods. models. algorithms and program means,

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Oli OWICML USE ONLY

which ensure the efficient operation of all the elements and t network as
a whole. is called the software Eatenaticheskoye obaepechaniyg of the net-
work or its corresponding elements. The specific program ree isetion of
these methods models and algorithms is called the software rogra-noye
obespecheniye . The program realisation of the operation algorithms of the
network depends on the skills of the programmers. on their knowledge of
the structure and principles of the operation of the network as a whole.
its elements and hardware. which are used in the network. In connection
with this precisely the operation algorithms of systems. and not their spe-
cific program realisation. are of the greatest interest to the developers
of systems.

In this book. on the basis of the analysis of foreign and domestic works,
an attempt is made to cover questions of the software of data transmission
networks. Of course. in one book it is impossible to cover all aspects of
this problem. In connection with this the most urgent and the most common
questions for a broad class of networks were selected. Moog them. in the
opinion of the authors. there are. first of ell. the algorithms of the con-
trol of information flows in the network. which are realized by terminal and
nodal objects. It was proposed to cover questions of the modeling of net-
works. However. in the process of writing the manuscript the authors be-
came convinced that this problem requires independent examination. The
authors declined to examine the questions of software, which are oriented
toward ensuring the great reliability of the information being issued to
recipients. This is explained primarily not by the fact that in the litera-
ture (particularly periodical literature) this problem has already received
some coverage, but by the fact that this function of the network in many
instances is realized by equipment. and even with program realisation its
specific embodiment in algorithms largely depends on the specific nature of
the network.

The Introduction and Chapter 1 were written by Yu. ti. Martynov, Chapters 2,
lo and 5 were written by V. 1.. Razgon. while Chapters 3 and 6 were written

by A. H. Kryukov.

Cements on the book should be sent to Izdatel'stwo "Svyas'" at the address:
Moscow 101000, Chistoprudnyy bul'var, 2.

Introduction

A data transmission netowrk is a system which ensures the automatic exchange
of information between remote sources and recipients of a single or several
systems of automated data processing, as which there might be automated con-

trol 'systems (ASU's) which have been constructed on the basis of computers
(EVH s).

The main purpose of the computer inn ASU is the processing of large amounts
of information for the purpose of solving specific problems. The current
level of the development of technology enables the numerous users of an AS!)

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIN ill-'FNHM. n-m ONLY

to uoch problems while at a considerably distance from the computer. The
user feeds in the initial data and receives the results of the solution of
the problems by means of terminal equipment. here data transmission sys-
tems, which ensure the exchange of date through communications channels,
are used for the transmission of the data to the computer and back. The
solution of problems in systems with remote users is usually called tele-
processing. The use of a computer by numerous territorially dispersed
users with the optimum distribution of the resources of the computer can.
in particular. he carried out within the computer systems created on the
basis of third generation computers of the Unified Computer System. in
this case the hardware and software. which accomplish the exchange of date
ower a distance, are called a teleprocessing system. This system is closely
linked with the set of programs, which ensures the solution of the problems
on the computer.

Along with this it can be noted that the realization of the functions of

the exchange of data through communications channels in the main computer
along with its positive features also has its bad sides. First of all this
is the need to allocate considerable resources of the computer in the in-
terests of the exchange of information, which is especially appreciable

when tens of communications channels are tied into the computer. Here, as
practice shows, the time of the solution of the problems of users increases
substantially. Moreover. the creation of numerous systems of teleprocessing
with centralized control requires great expenditures on the creation of a
network of communications channels.

An escape from this situation was the creation of general-purpose data
transmission networks and so-cslled distributed networks. in which a portion
of the specific functions on the transmission and special processing of in-
formation is removed frem the main computer and entrusted to the processor
of the data being transmitted (a communications processor), which is con-
structed usually on the basis of a minicomputer. Moreover. in such networks
a portion of the functions of preprocessing and exchange is performed by

the terminal data equipment, which in connection with this is made more com-
plicated, in particular programmable subscriber points appear.

The diversity of the functions of the data transmission systems and the
need to decrease the transmission time of the ever increasing flows of in-
formation with great realisbility led to the need to automate the processes
of data exchange. For this purpose within the data transmission networks
computers are used, which perform special functions, for example the commu-
nication of reports. General-purpose computers.psrticular1y the computers
of the Unified Computer System, can also operate in the mode of the communi-
cation of reports. However, with a large number of tied-in communications
channels the delay time of reports is significant. This is explained by
the following circumstances: first, the operational systems of the Unified
Computer System basically are designed for ensuring the package processing
of data at the computer centers. second. the operational systems of the
Unified Computer System were created as general-purpose ones, on the basis

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

of which the users can solve the most diverse problems, therefore their
operation in the mode of the communication of reports is accompanied by
considerable systems time lags. In this connection the development of spe-
cial algorithms and software for the computer performing the functions of
control in the data transmission networks is a very important task.

in the software of data transmission networks it is possible to single out
two main classes of algorithms, which ensure the normal operation of the
system. The first is the algorithms of the control of information flows,
which ensure the delivery of the reports with tolerable time lege. hare
belong the operation algorithms of the terminal objects in the area of the
preparation and feeding in of reports into the network, the operation al-
gorithm of transit objects (nodes of communication) in the area of the pro-
cessing of incoming and outgoing flows of reports. The second class of
algorithms (which is especially typical precisely for data transmission net-
works) is the algorithms which ensure the required degree of reliability of
the information being transmitted in the network. These algorithms are
realized in all the elements of the network. Newever. if at the nodes of
the network they are secondary, this is the main function for the data trans-
mission channel. The examination of the software oriented only toward the
first class of algorithms is the task of this work.

Table of Contents Page

Forewrdeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee3
Intmductioneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee5

1. Structure and Operation Algorithms of Data Transmission Net-
wrka 0 O O O O O 0 b O O O O D O I O O I O O O C I 0 O C I I O O 0 7
7

1.1 Structure of Data Transmission Networks . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Demands on the Processes of Information Transmission Through a

Data Transmission Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.3 Operation of the Data Transmission Channel. . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.4 Operation of the Terminal Object. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1.5 Operation of the Nodes of Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . l8

2. Computer Software. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.1 Structure of Software .‘. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

2.2 Peculiarities of Software in Data Transmission Networks . . . . 33
3. Program Complexes Which Realize the Exchange of Information

Through Communications Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.1 General Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.2 Characterization of Telecommunications Access Methods . . . . . 39

3.3 Concept of the Teleprocessing System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.6 Construction of a Program of Control of the Reports of Telecom-

munications Access Methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.5 Format of Reports of the Teleprocessing System. . . . . . . . . 69

3.6 Organization of Buffers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.7 Passage of a Report in the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.8 Use of Telecommunications Access Method . . . . . . . . . . . . Sé

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Systems Analysis in the Planning of Software in Radial Data Trans-

.‘sulon Notwrku "1th Centralized mntmls I s e s e e e e a a e a o 55
5.1Stutuuntofﬂwl‘roblulﬂ..o...o..........-..- 55
6'2mﬂnuofmnlyIIHSIhesyute-eesoeeeeesseseesee 59
4.3 Made With Interruption of Processing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6A
6.6 Node of Cyclical Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6.5 Estimate of the Required Resources of the Computer. . . . . . . . 76
6.6 Interrelation Between the Execution Rate and the Delay Time . . . 90
5. Distribution of Resources and Software in Computer Networks. . . . 93
5.1 Networks With a Radial Structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
5.2 Networks with a Circular Structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
5.3 Networks With Commutatable Channels . . . . . . ; . . . . . . . 108
sl‘ complax ".twrkaI I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 110
5.5 Distribution of Resources in Computer Networks. . . . . . . . . . 121

6. Software of Hinicomputers in Data Transmission Networks. . . . . . 127

6.! Ninicomputsr as a General-Purpose Control Element of a Data
Transmission System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

6.2 Peculiarities of the Construction of the Software of a Hinicom-

Puter I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I. I I I I I I 130
6.3 Programmable Subscriber Points. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
6.4 Communications Computers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146

6.5 Modular Organization of Computer Equipment of Data Transmission
Networks on the Basis of Hinicomputers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169

6.6 Software of the Multipurpose Conmunications Computer. . . . . . . 151
6.7 On the Distribution of Functions Between the Programs of the Cen-
tral Processor and the Processor of the Data Being Transmitted. . . . 153

BlbliosraphyI I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 155
COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Svyaz'", 1978

7807
C80: 1870

81
FOR nl-‘FXCIM. "SC ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 550.83
TABLE OF CONTENTS PROM JOURNAL 'BNPLORATION GEOPHYSIOS'

Moscow RAZVBDOCMNAYA GEOPIZIKA in Russian No 80, 1978 signed to press 9 Feb 78
pp 171-172

[Table of contents of journal published by All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Geophysical Exploration Methods, USSR Ministry of Geology. and

Central Geophysical Trust, RSPSR Ministry of Geology, Izdatel'atvo Medra.
2,700 copies. 177 pages]

[Text] TABLE OF CONTENTS Page

Possibilities for the Vertical Grouping of Sources During Seismic
Surveying of Foothill Regions .
(Ya. Ya. Zentsov. D. P. Zemtsova, V. I. Voronov)................... 3

Using Statistical Accumulation of Information to Attanueta Technological
Noises in Marine Seismic Surveying

(0. 1. Rogers, G. P. Suchkov, I. I. Korobko. V. V. Trofimov)....... 9

Possibilities for Using the Directional Properties of Lines of Detonating
Cord During the Seismic Surveying of Complex Structures
(1. A. Kobylkin, B. P. Shalimov, A. V. Korkhov).................... 17

The Role of Back Filtration in the Processing of Seismic Surveying
Materials

(Es Va KolenNOV. "a Ts orlovich)eeaeaaestassesoseeeessseeseseaeaese 22

Testing a Quasiremultiplication Algorithm During Surface Excitation
(E. V. Zavalko, Yu. P. Kostrygin, V. B. Csvryushin)................ 27

Effectiveness of the Method of Determining the Difference in Absorption
Coefficients According to Reflected Wave Amplitudes Under the Con-

ditions in the Southern Part of the Siberian Platform
(A.I.ﬂumnﬂ.n.u.u.n.u.“.u.u.u.u.u.u.u.u.n.u.n. 36

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Properties of Nonlinear Signal Discrimination Operators Used in the
Analysis of Velocities -

(Ya. Vs Nrmyuk)OOOCOIOOOIOOOOOOOOUOIODCIOIOOOOOUIOOOCOOOOOOOOO. 37

Seismic Surveying Capabilities for Direct Prospecting for Hydrocarbon
Deposits

(B. M. Vagantsev, V. N. Ryapisov. O. Ye. Morgunov)................ ‘2

Methods for Equipment Realization of Linear Digital Filters
(A. D. Pakhotin. V. Ya. Romizov. V. V. Spirin. A. I. Slutskovskiy). 47

A Graphic Method for Determining the Apparent Resistance 01. by
Formation of the Field in the Near Zone
(00 v. Ktadev., Y.O s. no.1.v)...ODD...0......000.000.000.000... 51

A Technique for Making Phase Measurements of Induced Polarisation
in Samples

(2a As LelhnOVl, Vs Ne olofinakaly.)oeeeeoaeeooeeIeeeoeeeeeloeasool 5‘

Possibilities of Vertical Electric Logging Hith Induced Polarization
when Prospecting for Gas and Oil Deposits Under the Conditions of
the Steppe Zone in the Crimea '

(Va Is 30068?” v. Ge zelenchuk)ooeoeeoosometoes‘eeaeeeiooeooooooeo 59

A Device for Modeling the Field Formation Process
(M. s. Sergeyev. Ye. V. Pankratov. A. A. Yeramenko)............... 62

Determining the Depth of the Lower Edge of Bed-Shaped Bodies by
Gravitational Anomalies

(Yu. V. Ancomv).eosooseooeoeooeesoeeeoosaesoeooooseaeooeeeaoeoooo 66

Studying the Structure of the Southeastern Part of the Dnepr-Donets

Basin With the Help of the Complete Normalized Gravity Gradient Method
(V. M. Berezkin, M. A. Demidova, L. V. Kalamkarov)................ 70

Interpreting the Data From Gravitational Observations in Underground
workings -

(Ye. c. Bul.kh’ It “I Kotchasin)000000000..OOOICOOOICOOOODOOOOOOUU 77
Determining the Optimum Conditions for Use of the "Fon" [Background]
Program
(Ye. A. Mudretsova, V. G. Filatov).....................L.......... 82

Selecting a Model Approximating a Structure and a Deposit
(G. "I Komrova)0000IOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODCO.IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 86

Determining Rock Density From the Results of Gravity Logging in the
Presence of the Effect of Anomaly-Forming Masses
(A. I. Prishivalko)............................................... 89

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using the Full Normalised Modulus of the Vector of the Magnetic Field's
intensity to Determine the Depth of Occurrence of Magnetic Anomaly
Sources

(V. M. Dereakin. V. P. Stepanov. M. A. Dokuchayeva, V. I.

usatov)lIOOlO|.I.OI0.00000000IOOOIOOOOOIOIOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOIOOII 99

Using Normalized Autocorrelation Functions to Determine the Depth of
Occurrence of Magnetically Disturbing Objects
(v. N. 61.x“.Vg v. I. P.v1°v.k1y)000COCOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOII.0.0.0.0... 105

A Systematic Substantietion of Aerial Magnetic Surveying on a
1:10.000 Scale
(Yu. H. Erinch“)..tliltl.00OOOOOOOOOOIIOOOIOO0.00.00.00.00.00...... 108

Theoretical Apparent Resistance Curves for Real Probes
(A. I. stdorchuk)OlOOCII0l.0.00.0.00.0.0.0....OOOCOOOOOOOIIIOIOOIIOC 116

Distinguishing and Evaluating Terrigsnous Gas- and Oil-Saturated
Reservoirs on the Basis of Industrial Geophysics Materials -
(L. A. Buryekovskiy, I. S. Dzhafarov, B. R. Madera).;............... 119

A Method of Delineating Stratum Boundaries from Three-Electrode
Lateral Logging Diagrams
(V. P. zhuraVICV. Ye. N. mvibv)00000000COOOOOIOOOOOO'IOICOOOOOOOOI 125

An Algorithm for Evaluating the Nature of Reservoir Saturation from
Lateral Logging and Micrologging Data
(K. ”‘0 Y‘kubov).....oI.OOOOOIOCOOO0.00.0.0...IOOIOOOOOOOCOIOOOOOOO. 128

Allowing for Measurement Conditions in the Interpretation of Date
Gathered by Neutron Methods
(A. V. Bulatov, R. A. Rezvanov)..................................... 13b

Possibilities for Using the Techniques of Quantitative Interpretation of
Gas Logging Data Under Complicated Conditions
(A. M. Levit)OOOIOIOIOOIOCODOOOOOOOIOOIOOIIOOIOOOIOIIOOOOOOOIOOOOIOO 139

Determining the Porosity and Density of Coal-Bearing Rock in the Donets

Basin From Date Gathered During Geophysical Investigations of
Boreholes

(B. i. Vovevods).................................................... 143

Effectiveness of the Modifications of Density Gamma-Gamma Logging
When Investigating Coal Boreholes
(R. T. Khsmatdinov)................................................. 153

Effect of the Anisotropic Properties of a Thin-Layered Medium on
Potential Probe Readings

(V. P. Zhursvlev. G. P. Vasil'yeva)................................. 163

COPYRIGHT: Itdatel'stvo "Nedra," 1978

11766 ea
°5°= 137° son OFFICIAL use ONLY
EOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUELICATIONS

UDC 550.83
TABLE OF CONTENTS FROM JOURNAL 'EXPLORATION GEOPHYSICS'

Moscow RAZVEDOCHNAYA GEOEIZIXA in Russian No 81. 1978 signed to press
29 Dec 77 pp 160-161

[Table of Contents of journal published by All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Geophysical Exploration Methods. USSR Ministry of Geology. and
Central Geophysical Trust, RSESR Ministry of Geology. Izdatsl'stvo Nedra,
2,700 copies. 168 pages]

[Text] TABLE 0? CONTENTS Page

Processing Common Deep Point Materials with Continuous Automatic
Analysis of the Kinematic Parameters, Using the Central Priob'ye
as an Example
(L. L. Trusov)lOOOI9DOIOOOOOOOOOIOI.IOOOOIOOOIOIOIIOOOOOOIOOOOOO. 3

Seismic Surveying by the Multiple Profiling Method in the Volgograd
Region of the Povolzh'ye

(Yu. N. Gafurov, s. N. Hoaastyrev. Ye. S. Pechenkin. E. D.
shleyenkov)00000000IOI.0.0...0..OCOOOIOOOCOI.00.3.000000000000000 7

A Method for Calculating Observation Interpolation and Discreteness
Errors From Autocorrelational Analysis Data, Using Seismic Surveying
as an Example
(E. M. Yagnntsev, B. I. Muzychenko, V. N. Ryapisov).............. 12

A Study of Interference Haves Recorded During the Excitation of Elastic
Vibrations by Surface Sources

(H. A. Zavesin, B. V. Semakin)................................... 18

Calculating the Kinematic Correction Factors in Electronic Seismic
Profile Plotting Devices
(Ye. YUe Yakush>eeseseeseasesseesseessesseeeesseesseeeeseesseeses 21

Resolving Regular Seismic Signals with the Help of a Quasiremultiplier
(V. E. Gavryushin)............................................... 26

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suppresaing Pulaation When Using Pneumatic Signal Sources in Marine
Seismic Surveying

(H. I. Balaahkand, D. F. Isnsgilov. 0. L. Chen. A. A. Arkhipov)...

Analysis of the Errors of a Laser Interferometer Used in a Seisnie
Pressure Detector
(B. I. mahtn.k1y)0000.00.00.00IDIDCOOIODIOOO'OIIODCOODOODOIOOIIDO

A Technique for Working with the Contact Method of Polarization Curves
V. I. Kondrati'hko)...0C0.I'D0.0.0....It...OOODOIOIOOOOOOOODOOODOO

An Experiment in Using Nagnetotelluric Sounding on the Shelf of
Sakhalin Island

(I. H. Al'perovich, V. H. Nikiforov. H. I. Ussnove)...............

Using Electric Borehole Exploration When Drilling in Ore Deposits
(VI Ye. unda. v. P. Kizyanov)00000000.00...OOOIODOOIOIOOIIOIO...0

Determining the True Density of Rock From Gravitational Logging Date
Gathered Under Complicated Geological Conditions
(A. I. Pri.htv.1k°)0.itOIOIODOOOOIOOIDIOOOIOOC.UOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOOOO

A Solution of the Inverse Problem of Crevimetric Surveying for Two
Contact Surfaces

(YUe Vs Antonov)...........u.u............._.....................

The Interpretation of Highly Accurate Graviuetric Date on the
Urtabulak Deposit
(Ye. A. HudretsoVa, A. S. Orlovskiy. V. C. Pilatov)...............

Solving the Inverse Problem of Cravimetric Surveying by the Selection
Method, Hith the Help of a Computer

("0 A. Bykov)eeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeesseseessssesseeeeeleeeeseeeses

Allowing for Local Reief in Crevimetric Surveying with the Help of
Small Computers

(G. A. Lyubimov)..................................................

Allowing for the Effect of Irregularities in the Upper Strata During
the Conduct of Cravimetric Work Under the Conditions Encountered
in Tataria and Kuybyshevskaya Oblsst
(N. I. Tyurin. L. A. Zharkova)....................................

Techniques and Equipment for Bottom Gravimetric Work in the Caspian
Sea

(P. D. Bagdatlishvili).........l................ ..... .............

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

35

36

63

67

54

61

75

82

85

88

93

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

Using Geophysical Methods to Study the Tectonic Structure of the
Starobinskoye Potassium Salt Deposit

("0 8s or..hk°. R. R. Rudmvakty. A. II 6’1.hk°) I 0 O O O O O O O O O O O l 0 I 101

Studying the Pstrographic Composition of the Crystalline Foundation
of the Eastern Part of the Russian Platform on the Basis of
Gravitational and Magnetic Anomalies
(V. P. Stepenov. M. K. Anichkina. M. A. Dokuchsyeva.
v0 V0 Dorot.yev)00|OOOOOOII'OOOOI.O0"...OQOUOIIOODIOOIIIIOOIOI. 109

Using Mathematical Statistics Methods to Process High-Accuracy Aerial
Magnetic Surveying Data Gathered When Prospecting for Bauxites
(Va. 8. Bugayeva. L. A. Samoylyuk, V. A. Tsygsnov).............. 116

Results of Experimental work on Determining the Heights of Geophysical
Points by the Aerophotogra-netric Method

(B. L. Kheyfets, 1. Ya. Reyzenkin. N. T. Kapral)................ 122

Using a Difference-Rangefinding Radiogeodesic System and Equipment
from an Independent Navigating Complex to Correlated Regional
Aerial Geophysical Surveys

(A. M. Lozinsksya, V. S. Preysman. B. A. Preydkin, V. A.
Khmelevskiy).................................................... 125

Effect of the Eccentricity of the Hell Tool on the Readings of
Pseudolatersl Focused Probes

(M. T. nondarenko. V. I. Ostrovskiy, T. K. Rubinskaya).......... 131

Determining the Specific Electrical Resistance of Rock on a Computer
(v. c. Insemn)000000.0.0.0000...IOOOOCIOOOOOOOIOOOOOOO...IO... 137

Using the Specific Electrical Resistance of Coal-Bearing Deposits to

Study the Lithology and Type Composition of the Goals in the Donets
Basin

(8. [. Voyevoda)................................................ 165

Indicative Ratios of Radioactive Elements During Gemna-Spectrometric
Prospecting for Nonmctels

(V. A. Bol'shov)................................................ 156

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Nedra." 1978

11766
C80: 1870

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC 550.83
TABLE OF CONTENTS FROM JOURNAL 'BXPLORATION GEOPHYSICS‘

Moscow RAZVEOOCHNAYA GEOPIZIKA in Russian No 82, 1978 signed to press
13 Jan 78 pp 162-163

[Table of contents of journal published by All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Geophysical Exploration Methods, USSR Ministry of Geology. and

Central Geophysical Trust. RSPSR Ministry of Geology. Izdatel'stvo Nedrs.
2,700 copies, 168 pages]

[Text] new or comm-s Pass

Adaptive Multichannel Suppression Filters
(80 A. Kate. 3. "I shub1k)..000IO...I.OOOOOOOOOOOIO'OOIOCOO0...... 3

Tho-Stage Algorithms for the Kinematic Analysis and Adaptive
Kinematic Filtration of Seismic Haves

(S. A. Kata)....o..........o....o.......oo...........ncoooon..... 10

A Criterion for Evaluating the Resolving Power of Frequency Filters
(V. Ya. Sorin. A. K. Yanovskiy)................................... 15

A Programmometric Investigation of Automated Processing Systems for
Geological and Geophysical Information
(P. G. Gil'bershteyn. N. N. Gurin, Ya. A. Kogan. L. S. Popel').... 19

The Possibility of Realizing an Optical-Digital System for Processing
Seismic Surveying Data
(P. 0. Cil'bershteyn. Ye. A. Kapilevich, L. Sh. Yunermnn)......... 24

Prospects for Using Optical-Digital Real-Time Systems for Processing
Seismic Surveying Data

(P. G. Cll'bershteyn. Ye. A. Kopilevich, L. Sh. Yuncrnsn)......... 37

Evaluating Nonlinear Distortions During the Input of Seismic
information Into an Optical Computer
(S. H. Kofsman)................................................... 46

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

Improving the Quality of the Presentation of Results of the Optical
Processing of Seismic Materials
(5. N. Rosana. N. v. sh.p1r°)000000000600DIOOOIOOOlOlOOOOOOQOO. so

A Technique for Manufacturing Density Pilters with Given Characteristics
(0. A. Po:ap°v)05000000000DO...0.00.00.0000000000IOOOOODOIOOIO... 5‘

Prospects for Using the Transverse Reflected Have Method in the Moscow
Synaclise

(S. I. Zav'yalov. A. G. Lur'ye)................................. 60

The Relationship of the Propagation Rates of Longitudinal and
Transverse waves in the Moscow Syneclise
(Vs Vs mlchanov, V. T. Loginov).“nun”...”unnunuuu 67

A Study of the Relationship Between the Similarity Factor and Phase
Dispersion of Signals of a Regular Have ,
(V. I. Meahbey, V. M. clogovskiy. N. D. Stsricheako)............ 71

Increasing the Effectiveness of the Common Deep Point Method by "eve
Selection According to Apparent Velocity in the Original Material
(A. Ya. Brodskiy, A. T. Yakovlev)............................... 76

Increasing the Effectiveness of Seismic Surveying Within the Limits
of the Southeastern Slope of the Karpinskiy Range
(6. N. Goryunov, A. K. Kalinkin)............................... 79

Optimizing the System of Observations by the Common Deep Point Method

on Longitudinal and Nonlongitudinal Profiles During Detailed Seismic
Investigations

(V. Ya. Zolomarenho)............................................ 86

Determining the Angle Between the Profile Line and the Projection of
a Diffracting Rib on the Observation Plane
(0. A. Zorin, V. P. Telezhenko)................................. 94

Distinguishing Fracture Zones by Refracted Haves Along the
Peschnnokopskaya-Surovikino Profile Determined by Deep Seismic
Saunding and the Correlation Method of Refracted Haves

(Yu. B. Konovsl'tsev)........................................... 101

Possibilities of Eliminating Cable Waves in First Arrivals and
Evaluation of Distortions in Seismic Logging Data
(V. K. Aleksandrov)..... ....... ............... ....... ........... 109

Cable Haves During the Seismic Logging of Boreholes
(V. K. Aleksandrov)............................................. 114

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

Predicting Sections to which Mineralized Waters Have Spread
(Yu. KO cur‘yCV. “I I. molikov)otilttlltohO’COOOOUIOIOIOOOOOI. 123

Principles of the Rational Integration of Electric Surveying
Equipment in Coal Deposits
(E! Co Porfi1k1n’ no I. zhurbit.k1y)0OOOOIIDOOI'I.00.000.00.000. 127

Approximate Evaluation of the Vein Ice Content in the Layer of
Ground Near the Surface

(K0 Ve Gl‘dkty. A. He hbanov)eeaaeaeaeaaeeeeeeaaeeeela-aaeeaeee 138

A Technique for Establishing the Sequence of Admission of Objects

for Coaplete Surveying in Oil Fields That Are Being Exploited
(Yuu Bl Kirahfel'dt)oltbioCO‘OOOQ.‘OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOCOUODOOOIOI 143

Analysis of Field Measurements for Several Reference Stations
During Barometric Leveling in Hountainous Regions
(V. 0. Pirogov)................................................ 147

A New Technique for Baronetric Leveling in Hountainous Regions
(v. c. P1!°8°V)IOI.0...0'00...IOOOOOOOOOOOOIIOIII.IOUOOCIIOOIOC 155

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nedrs," 1978

1171.6 -
cso: 1870 3ND

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY