FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10183
14 December 1981

East Europe Report

SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS
[FOUO 11/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts.. Materials from'foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10183
14 December 1981

EAST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 11/81)

CONTENTS

CZEGlOSLO VAKIA

Factors in Increased Automated Hamgemnt System Reliability
(Frantisek Merck; INVESTICNA VYSTAVBA, Jun 81)........ ........ .. 1

- a - [III - BE - 65 P000]
FOR OFFICIAL L'Sli ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

FACTORS IN INCREASED AUTOMATED MANAGEMENT SYSTEM RELIABILITY
Prague INVESTICNA VYSTAVBA in Czech No 6. Jun 81 pp 196-281

[Article by Eng Prantisek Harek: 'Treconditions for Reliability of Automated
Management System Hardware"!

[Text] At the end of 1980, the Federal Statistical Office published data in the
specialized press on the status and utilization of data-processing equipment in
Czechoslovakia in 1979 which merit consideration, for as of 1 January 1980 the
purchase value of basic data-processing equipment in the republic reached Kcs 18.77
billion, in addition to a value of Kcs 2.1 billion in buildings and construction work.

Nonetheless, no fundamental changes had been achieved in time utilization of installed
data-processing equipment; for digital computers, for example, the figure was 91.1
percent in two-shift, 5-day operation, and of this, only 74 percent was productive
work. In addition to a number of important factors, particularly involving automated
management system (ASR) software, it is of particular importance in data-processing-
equipment utilization to improve the operating reliability of ASR hardware, for
maintenance accounted for 8.6 percent and down time for 5.6 nercent of the total

use time of digital computers in 1979.

It is understandable that a critical role in the improvement of technical standards
and operating reliability of ASR hardware must be played by the producer, by both
provision of modern, reliable components, and assurance of the technical and software
relaibility of computer and controllsystems, including design of their Operating
systems, memory protection, data protection during collection and transmission, and
the like. The new technology for producing logical circuits itself considerably
increases the reliability of data-processing equipment, especially since it has
eliminated the numerous electrical connections required in the past. Another
important influence is the quality of applications software (restarts with check~
points, emergency control of the program or process during a computer breakdown, data
protection in data bases and the like), as well as regular servicing of the hardware
and the organization of comprehensive maintenance, not to mention 2 sufficient

supply of spare parts and assemblies.

Nonetheless, creating the preconditions for maximum operating reliability of ASR
software must become an inseparable part of the preparation and design documentation
for construction projects. This especially involves the area of process control

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(where classical methods of control and regulation are increasingly being replaced
by microprocessors), but also applies to aviation, nuclear engineering and medicine,
where the automated management system is a factor which is increasingly affecting
the technical and economic parameters of construction projects and equipment.

The critical measures which should be carried out following evaluation of their
economic effect, especially in the case of capital construction, can be classified
in the following categories:

--hardware configuration;
--power supp 1y;

--climate control;
--facilities for maintenance.

Hardware Configuration

One important factor in this area is optimisation of the number of components and
the level of capabilities of the equipment. As regards the computers themselves,
essentially antithetical tendencies are emerging in the design of enterprise auto-
mated management systems (ASRP) and design of the lower levels, i.e., automated
control systems for production procedures (ASRVP) and for manufacturing processes
(ASRTP). while at the ASRP level extremely powerful computer facilities are
installed, in accordance with the size of the enterprise, with immense external
disk storage capacity for the creation of enterprise-wide data bases, in terms of
reliability it is much more advantageous at the ASRT? level to divide the con-
trolled process into smaller sections which are controlled by stand-alone mini-
computers or microcomputers.

In designing ASR's, it is also beneficial to devote attention to the selection and
integration of suitable sensors and measuring devices so as to achieve a maximum
quantity of important information with a minimum number of installed sensors and
interfaces, which are the most common source of breakdowns in operation. The same
applies in planning and the number and location of terminals. To assure operating
reliability of terminals and associated systems, where both the human factor (in
this case generally the regular personnel of the workplace where the terminal is
installed) and the economic consideration of expenditures on the purchase and
operation of terminals and their control units and consunication lines play important
roles, it is necessary to keep the number of terminals from being uneconomically
large, but also to install them only in certain control centers to which data flows
from other associated work stations.

An important factor which may help improve the reliability of AS! hardware is that
of limiting the selection, along \ith a certain degree of standardization of
computers and their peripheral equipment and terminals; in practice, this is taken
care of for the immediate future by the use of the Unified System of Electronic
Computers (JSEP) and the Unified Ssstem of Hinicomputers (SHEP). Of course, there
is an economically based optimum here as well. The selection of suitable computer
or hardware items for data collection and transmission requires that they be suited
to the tasks which they are required to perform within the ASR at the level and
location in question.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0f the greatest importance in terms of operating reliability is the design of backup
provisions or replaceability of subsystems. central processors, transmission paths,
peripherals, terminals and sensors, for either dealing with or preventing breakdowns.
It is entirely logical that economic considerations percent the provision of 100 per-
cent reserve capacity (because there is almost no case where it would be economical,
for example, to back up an ASRTP with classical-type regulation. including instru-
mentation and personnel). nonetheless it should be possible while eliminating a

external sotrage.

Perhaps the ultimate in operating reliability, which, howwver, because of purchase
and operating costs, is justifiable only in extraordinary cases involving direct
real-time control of certain important processes, is the use of a fully duplexed
system of two interconnected computers. In such a system, both computers work
simultaneously on the same task and compare their results or checksums, so that they
can quickly discover errors. The classical duplex system consists of two central
processing units, each connected with a direct-access external store and an operator's
console. The other peripherials, particularly punchcard or punched-tape input and
output devices, printers, terminals and the like, are generally common to both
computers. One of the computers functions actively, the other passively. In data
collection, the input data are fed to both computers. which process them. The

computer. the two computers exchange functions, and the active computer stops and
begins to diagnose its malfunction. If there is a malfunction in the passive

In the NHKG [Klement Gottwald New Metallurgical Works], two Hewlett-Packard 1000/31
computers (Fig. l) are currently in operation in the ASRTP system of the central
oxygen converted shop, controlling two oxygen units with capacities of 35,000 Nm3
of oxygen per hour each. For better operating reliability, a parallel redundant
system (Fig. 2) is used, in which each computer, while it directly controls only
its own oxygen unit, also accumulates permanent data on the other unit. If a
malfunction in one of the computers is detected by the computer malfunction logical
unit, the outputs to both oxygen units are connected to the other computer. which
takes on the essential control functions for the entire oxygen converter shop.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 1. Computer for contr_91 _of NHKG's centre; oxygen converter £1192.

 

0|". 2. Schema mm M puma
pm ASRTP math! 8pm“!

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pig. 2. Backup provisions for computers in ASRTP of central oxygen converter shop.

Key: a. Communications system
b. Oxygen unit (No 1, No 2)
c. Results
d. Input data
e. Control computer (No 1. No 2)
f. Switched channel
g. Computer malfunction detection unit

To provide for communication between the two computers. which are located side by
side in a single room underneath the shop's control room, an E? 91700 A communica-
tions unit is used, allowing interchange of data at 1 million bits per second, with
data exchange between the two computers proeeeding via working memory by means of

a pair of programs. This redundant system of two computers unquestionably has
allowed further improvement of the operating reliability of the entire system, which
is in constant use in continuous three-shift operation. In practice this has
eliminated all planned switching-out of the individual computers for scheduled
repairs. Currently the operating reliability figure for the entire system is 0.984
with the only important remaining factor being availability of spare parts.

NRRG has also instituted interconnection between two central computers located
together in one room by using common peripherals for input and output (Fig. 3). This
has also created optimal conditions for simultaneous performance of two separate
types of work: direct teleprocessing of data. including an interactive system for
running documentation and the planning of production, sales and transport is done

in the faster, more powerful computer. an IBM 370/168, while batch processing of

data is done on a 370/145 computer, which is also used for interactive programming.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080037-9

VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 3. IBM 291/. unit, allowing slow peripherals to be connected to bc

Another possibility for assuring reliability of a real-tine system, vhi
makes possible continual system development, is the installation of a t

conputer. which can be used for debugging and testing of new program a
_ progras changes, and in case of a breakdown, as a substitute for the ct
that is out of service. NHKG used this arrangement in designing a syst
controlling and nonitoring the production in a nediun-light section ro]
where a system of three control cosputers is backed up by a fourth (Pi:
further develop-ent of the ASR for four rolling trains and production c

selection after 1992; this year two rolling trains producing a limited
being put into operation.

 

Fig. ’1. Hardware for ASR of Indium-light section mill in MG.

Key: a. 1 “byte central computer
b. 96 Kbyte backup computer
c. 96 Kbyte coordinating cosputer
d. Unit for interface with surroundings
e. Rolling train control computer
f. Runout section control computer
3. Process regulators

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400000037-9
Electric Power Supply

In capital construction, two requirements are imposed on the power supply for
computer and control systems:

--continual, uninterrupted supply of electric current, with the exclusion of even
brief interruptions on the order of milliseconds;

-nininal vcltsge and frequency fluctuations of the power supply: generally the
voltage tolerance reuuired is 1? to 10 percent of the average value, while for
nicroproceusora the figure is only 3 percent; the frequence tolerance is :l percent,
i.e.. 50 H: 39.5 Hz.

Particularly in the control of continuous manufacturing processes, but also in
medicine and aviation, use of equipment for uninterrupted supply of electric power
is of steadily increasing importance. For powering couputers and miniconputere, two
main technologies are used:

-a rotary converter with a diesel unit, which goes into operation when there is

a power grid outage and drives the generator which produces power for the ASR hard-
ware. This design is of course common with a number of other types of equipment;
lakes heavy demands as regards structural modifications, and its operation involves
considerable noise and sizeable energy losses, in addition to which it cannot be
started up innediately when there is a power failure;

-a static converter, in which electrical energy is accumulated in storage batteries
(Pig. 5). In this case, Ac current from the power system is first rectified by a
thyristor rectifier, which provides direct current both for charging the electric
batteries and for powering the alternator. which again converts the DC current to
AC of the required voltage. The function of the battery is to power the computer
or control system during a power failure long enough for all the necessary coqute-
tions to be completed and the results to be read out or stored in memory. and
possibly for the reserve power source to be started (generally after 10 minutes to
an hour).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 5.
Key: 8.
b.
C.
d.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

A static converter and ways of providing redundancy.

Mnnual switch f. Coquter

Power grid 3. Backup from grid via electronic
Rectifier switch

Alternator h. Bettery

Backup from grid, via unusl switch 1. Electronic switch

5. Redundant system
1:. Commotion of redundant system and backup fro. grid
8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The static converters are made up of electronic power components, thyristors and
diodes, which in addition to good reliability also have very good efficiency, and
require less structural modification than rotary converters. They have the
additional advantage of eliminating current peaking, maintaining vol'age and fre—
quency stability, and providing complete phase symmetry. They require less space
and auxiliary equipment, and are .ess demanding as regards foundations, since they
involve no vibration. In addition, they are notseless.

To assure a continuous power supply, but also to deal with failure or repair of the
converter, it is desirable to provide backups for these continuOus sources. This is
done either by backing then up directly from the AC grid, with manual or electronic
switching, or by using a redundant system of several parallel units for continuous
power supply, or by a combination of a redundant system with backup supply from the
power grid. (Fig. 5).

The use of converters for continuous power supply may be of especial practical
importance when they are produced domestically. EVU [Power Research Institute]
Nova Dubnica has developed a single-phase source for continuous power supply to the
TESLA RPP 16 computer. The national enterpris. Elektropristroj [Electrical Equip—
Ient] Hodrany has begun production of the TZNP type static converter with a power
of 25 kVA and has also developed 2.5, 6 and 12 kVA single-phase converters.

NHKG has installed static converters for uninterrupted power supply in the control
systems of the central oxygen converter shop and medium-light section will. A
domestically produced converter from Elektropristroj Modrany with a capacity of 25 kVA
is used to power the ASRTP of the converter shop. Tn the case of the ASR {or the
medium-light section mill, where the continuous power supply must power four control
computers and a number of terminals connected with the central computers, it was

necessary to select a static converter with a higher power, and accordingly a 65 kVA
converter from the Swedish Asea Co was installed (Fig. 6).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The installation of static converters must have evident economic Justification. In
cases where these are not absolutely essential. it is helpful to provide a cosputer

or control system with at least a backup power source in case the main power source
fails.

Continuous power supply is much more important in the case of nicrocowuter systems.
Generally this does not require power equipment, because it is necessary only to
provide 5 and 12 volt DC current, to prevent even brief power supply interruptions

and to assure a smaller voltage fluctuation. Protection of data in lemory is
important.

Here, too, two main types of equipment are considered, both using reserve batteries:

--a static converter (Pig. 7) assures continuous 06 current for the entire systea on
in essentially the same nanner as for [larger] computer systems. This design is,

however, more costly than a battery power supply and moreover involves superfluous
conversion of some DC current to AC;

--a stabilized DC power supply from reserve batteries: the main cowonent here
(Fig. 8) is again a rectifier, which converts AC current from the power grid into
variable-voltage Dc. The other couponent is a charger, which supplies constant-
voltage DC for three purposes. namely slow constant charging of the batteries to
full voltage, fast charging of the batteries when they have been discharged and
powering of DC converters. Among other things, the control logic is used to isolate
the charger from the battery in case of a power failure, in addition to which a
switching relay is used to disconnect the battery from the circuit if its voltage
drops to the minimum permissible bv value. A lZ-volt battery is used as the system
power supply source when the power supply from the grid is out. The DC converters
also provide the required 12 and 5 volt current, generally with tolerances of 13
percent of these values.

“:0 variants of this approach are possible: the first is a system which assures
uninterrupted DC power only for the processor, the memory and other comments with
LSI circuits, while the peripheral equip-ant is supplied frost the standard AC grid
(Fig. 9); the other alternative is a systen which provides a constant power supply
to the memory even when the standard power supply is off (Fig. 10), for example
when the processor is not in operation.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig.

Key:

7.

 

Fir.

Provision of uninr~r;upted power for a microcomputer, using a static converter.

Power grid
Rectifier
Charger
Control logic
Alternator
Battery
Processor

7.

FOR ()FFIUAL VS? 0N!)

 

h. Memory

1. Power supply

1. Floppy disk memory
k. Console

1. Distributor

m. Other peripherals
n. Microcomputer

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080037-9

FOR OFFICIAL t'Sl’I ONLY

 

Fig 8. Stabilized Dc source with reserve battery.

Key: 3. Power grid e. Control logic
b. Nonstebilized voltage f. Conversion
c. Charger g. Rectifier
d. 41.10] stabilized voltage h. Battery

 

0M.O.NMmiedreipMpA-ewm

Fig. 9. Uninterrupted power supply for 1.81 circuits

Key: a. Power grid c. Nonetebilized voltege
b. Rectifier d. Charger
12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080037-9
(NunI..Zdaolpeetrvslimapﬂkmlhlavmipamuhi

fig. 10. Constant power source for main memory

Key: a. Power grid 1. Memory
b. Rectifier 1. Power supply
c. Nonstabilized voltage k. Battery
d. Charger 1. Floppy disk memory
e. Stabilized voltage m. AC distributor
f. Control logic n. Console
g. DC converters o. Other peripherals
h. processor p. Microcomputer

Hhile the provision of an interrupted power supply applies only to important,
generally continuous, real-time ASR applications, it is also desirable to meet the
requirement for a power supply with minimum voltage and frequency fluctuations for

computers for mass data-processing. table top and office computers. terminals, and
also possibly equipment for data collection and transmission.

In the case of computers with large power consumption, it is sometimes necessary to
install a rotary stabilizer. A domestic supplier is the 322 [Bratislava Electrical
Engineering Factories] national enterprise in Bratislava. But it is always
advantageous to assure a power supply to the computer independent of that for climate
control and other large power consumers, or to supply the computer or control system

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with its own transformer, which somewhat decreases the effects of power-grid fluc-
tuations. Finally, the importance of adhering to the requirements regarding the
grounding of data-processing equipment, and particularly of maintaining the same
ground resistance in a computer and its terminals. should not be underestimated.

Climate Control

The following climate-control requirements apply in the design and construction of
computer and control centers:

-meticulous adherence to prescribed operating conditions, particularly regarding
temperature, humidity and freedom from dust, in addition regarding minimum sulfur
dioxide content in the case of a chemically aggressive atmosphere. Associated with
these requirements are provision for monitoring and recording the conditions in
question (air temperature and humidity), monitoring of the operation of climate-
control equipment, and possibly provision of warning signals when the prescribed
conditions are not met or the climate-control equipment breaks down;

--minimum energy consumption, and a separate power supply, independent of computer
power supply;

-~small size and easy accessibility for servicing and maintenance;

--low noise level, which is particularly important in the case of compact climate-
control units located directly in the computer room. in which case it is desirable
that the noise from these units not exceed that of the installed data-processing
equipment;

--maximum operating reliability and service life.

Two somewhat contradictory tendencies have currently taken shape as the demands for
climate control for data-processing equipment have developed. One is the introduc-
tion of modern processes for the production of electronic components (minicomputers
and microcomputers, but also the CPU's of the latest-generation digital computers),
which is associated with decreased climate-control requirements owing both to a
decrease in the heat given off by new types of processors and to the prescribed
temperature and humidity requirements. Currently, the air temperature requirements
for the human operators are more demanding than those for failure-free computer
operation; experience confirms that human workers have maximum productivity at
temperatures between 20° and 25° C and humiditias between 40 and 55 percent. In
addition, the number of devices which must be noncentrally located in ordinary
manufacturing or office conditions and which are intolerant only of water condensa-
tion is steadily increasing.

In contrast, however, as the track density and the recording density on an individual
track, or the capacity of external magnetic storage in general. increases, so do the
demands for cleanliness of these storage units' working environment. The greatest
demands for freedom from dust are imposed on the operation of magnetic disk stores;
extraneous particles entering the space between the magnetic surface of the disk
itself and the read-write head (which are between 0.8 and 6 microns apart) can
damage both the disk and the head mechanism. Taste of a 7.25 Hbyte disk memory unit

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
operated in nonfiltered city air indicated that the disk pack and the heads were
ruined in a maximum of 30 days.

The producers of disk storage units are trying to prevent dust particles from
getting between the disk and head. In the case of fixed disks, the unit is sealed,
while in the case of replaceable disk packs and cartridges the air which enters the
storage unit is filtered and an overpressure is created in the pack area so that any

dust will not be sucked into the disk pack during rotation, but instead will be
blown away fro- it.

As a result of energy requirements and investment costs, primarily compact, air-
cooled climate control units are now used with data-processing equipment. Host of
these are units produced under license from Hiross-Denco by Vzduchotechnika [Air
Engineering] national enterprise in Rove Hesto nad Vahom. For smaller data-processing
devices, thoI SP!) 800 unit from LVZ [7Liberec Air Engineering Plant] Liberec, or the
“'1 and KTZ units imported in limited nuabers from the GDR, may be used. To

illustrate the climate-control requirements of JSEP and SHE? computers. Table 1
gives the prescribed working conditions for computers.

(I) TMLPmM-Mnchluum

 

 

(2) mail“) WW
vaun- : “I'aclaclac'su'wr
- ::::;:°.::.:a mg“
m -caiaain!ain
(6) rc 4|: 1 a s z
|

 

 

Table 1. Survey of requirements for cosputer working environments.

key: (1) Table I Overview of Requirements of working Environments for Computers
(2) Item

(3) Unit of measure
(4) Type of Couponents
(5) Air tewerature

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0f11C1Al.USEtoNIN

(6) Permitted tolerance

(7) Relative humidity

(8) Permitted tolerance

(9) Dustinass
(10) Maximum dimensions of dust particles
(11) Permitted content of SO2

Maintenance Facilities

Maintenance has a major effect on the operating reliability of A53 hardware. Nonethe-
less, even within the context of capital construction it is possible to create the
necessary conditions for maintenance activity. whose performance does of course
require an optimal concentration of manpower and faci equipment. in either a
specialized NOTO [National Organization for Technical Services (Computers)] service

or specialized automation equipment service as a part of a large industrial enter-
prise.

Primary attention should be devoted to the following:
-~construction of the necessary areas for maintenance work in the immediate vicinity

of the computer room, including optimal areas for storage of spare parts and
technical documentation;

--provision of suitable measuring and testing instruments for maintenance work,
particularly oscilloscopes, multimeters and the like;

—-provision of maintenance workers or operators with portable equipment for cleaning
and testing of magnetic tapes;

--provision of suitable portable equipment for cleaning and visual and mechanical
testing of disk cartridges or packs;

--provision of spare display or teletype terminals and matrix printers, as well as

other peripheral equipment in cases where exchange and repair of assemblies is
practiced (Fig. ll);

--provision of suitable transport facilities for rapid transport of workers for
repair work or exchange of noncentrally located data-processing equipment.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 11. Repair of a VT 340 display in the EC 1010 computer workshop of the NHKG
central oxygen converted shop.

Nor would it be logical to undervalue the important function of data-processing
personnel, particularly in automatic testing of computer and control systems during
Operation, and in regular provision and systematic updating of the relevant technical
documentation (including management of the updating work).

in creating the conditions for maximum operating reliability of ASR hardware as part
of capital construction, primary attention must be given to the economic point of
view. In particular, the provision of certain high-investment features, such as
Sontinuous power supply, a duplexed system of two computers, a reserve computer,
uplication of peripheral equipment or an increase in the number of external storage
units, must always have economic justification.

The importance of all of these measures naturally will increase if data-processing
equipment is to be used in continuous three-shift operation, when it is impossible

to eliminate malfunctions in special night, Saturday or Sunday shifts, and particularly
in the case of real-time operation, in the control of important manufacturing pro-
dessee, in medicine, aviation or nuclear engineering.

The equipment producer and domestic supplier (NOTO organization) will always have an
entraordinary position in creating the conditions for maximum operating reliability
at data-processing equipment, both in building up siseable stores of spare parts

and equipment for maintaining and repairing defective logical circuits.

éOPYRIGHT: SNTL, Nakladatelstvi Technicke Literatury, Prague, 1981

31.80 m
cso: 21.02/78 17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY