FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10645
8 July 1982

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 14/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
301'!

m publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and mterisl enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar mes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Government.

COPYRIG'IT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNBRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 8! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
Cvseauencs, Commas mo AUTOMATION Tecuuomsv
(rouo waz)

Comems
Hm
Component Base of Hiya-Performance Conputer .................
Redundancy of Finite Automate in Uniform Conputing Arrays ...

Choice of mroughput of Processor Series in Designing Family
of spai‘l‘moae Wtin‘ systﬁs eeeeeeeoeoeeeeeseeeeee

Formalized ApprOach to Optimization of Internal
Configuration of Microcomputers ...........................

Highly Productive Computer Bquipnsnt for Data Processing"...

Configuration and Principles of Organization of Panllel
Processor for Numerical Processing ........................

Structure of Image Processing System ........................

Data transmission System Based on Blektronika-éo
mcrwmur md cm mimt .0.000000000000IOOIOOOOCO

mwm $9.1 convoraim Me. .0.000000000COQOOCOOIOOOO
SOFTWARE

Method of Protection hon Unauthorized Use of Information
in Adaptive Control System With Identifier ................

comm NW
Computer Network Adaptivity, Stability, Reliability .........
Design Principles for Computer Network Upper Levels .........

- a - [III - USSR - 21C $1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Implementation of Network Access to Software Packages on
Wmul War “0*;er 000.0...OOOOCOOOOQOOOOOOO.CO

Role of Terminal Stations in Couputer Networks .............

Computer Networks: Path to Development of International
Infomtim ”Moe, 0.0.0.0...I.0.0.0.COOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'O

Complex of Hodels for Design of Topology of Communications of
Territorial Information and Conputing Centers With Regard
to Reliability .0000...OOOOOOOOOQOOOCOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0000...

Design Principles for Structure of Shared-Use Computer
sysma in State computer Center Network .0000 seoeeaa see so

Language for Development of Programs With Distributed
structure in Omar “etwrka OOOOIOOOOIOOQO...0000......

maluation of Time of Hessage Tranenission by Datagran
ﬂawed in mter Network 0....0..IOIOOOOCOOCOOQIOOOOCOOC

Approximate Method for Comparative Evaluation of Cost of
matribuud systems of mtg Baas00.00.00...OOOOOOIOCOOOOO

Efficiency of Information Exchange in Computer Networks..."

Data Teleproceseing Standardization Activity by
International m‘gmizations OOOODOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOUCIOOOO

Problems in Experimental Research on Interactive
Infomtion “triwal syetme eeoeeooeeeeeeeaeeeeoeeeoaeee

Computer Network Economics .................................
EXHIBITS AND MWCES
Systems hugineering Exhibit To Be Held in Leningrad.........

Questions of Computation Optimization: lhth Republic
m”-&h°°1 1n “taiwli O..OQ'O‘COOOOOCOOQOOOOOOOOOCCC

PUBLICATIONS

Abstracts of Items in Journal 'AUTMATION AND comm
WWT‘, “arch-Awil 1982 00"0000000000COCOQOOOOOICOCOO

Table of Contents From Journal 'GYBERNETICS’, March-April

1982 eeeeeaeeaeeeaeaeaaeoeeaeooeeaoaeeeeeeeoeeoeeoeeeo-seen

Analytical Hethods for Hultiprogram Systems neeeooeoeeeeeoeoe

ab-

MOMCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Journal 'INSWTS, MEANS OF AUTGMTION AND CONTROL
mm TS-Zl comm HAW AND OFFICE EQUIWT',
July-Wat 1981 OCOCOOOIOO...O...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOO

Journal 'INS'MIMDITS, HEARS OF AUWTION AID WI.
3mm 13-28 mm HM AND OFFICE WT',
hptmrmtober 1981 .OQOOOCCCO0'OOOOCOCOO'CCVQCCC'..QO'

Journal 'ms'rmmrs, M3 0? AWTION AND CONTROL
mm 13-23 comm WARE AND OFFICE WM',
Novmr'mmer 1981 O...ODOOOOOQOIOOOO'OOOOOOOO0.0DD...

Power System Automatic Bquiment Semiconductor Elements ....

“OFFICIALUSEONLY
HARIHARB

UDC 681.335.7
COMPONM BASE OP “ICE-PW! comes

Moscow WK MI W $88!! in Russian No 3, ﬂat 82 pp 62-75

[Article by Corresponding Huber of USSR Academy of Sciences K. A. Valiyev
and Candidate of Technical Sciences A. A. Orlikavskiy]

[Text] One of the nest important problens of modern conputer equipment is
develop-ent of powerful high-performance computers designed to solve important
national economic and scientific research problems with minimal time
expenditures.

The productivity of this coeputer system should reach one billion operations
per second. which is guaranteed not only by innovations in conputer configura-
tion but. also by development of high-performance large md superlarge inte-
grated circuits (as and $318) for processors and neaory systm. that is. the
conponent base of the coeputar.

Three independent approaches to developnent of processor 318 and 8318 have now
been established. First, this is develop-ant of specialised circuits--a large
set of integrated circuits which cannot usually be used for processors of oth-
er types is developed for a specific processor.

Another approach is development of sicroprocessor modules that are low-digit
processors (d, 8. 16 and so on) with aicroprogran software. The sphere of in-
fluence of nicroprooessors is extremely broad-«rest control systems of mechan-
isms to mini- and large computers. The processors of large computers can be
developed on the basis of microprocessors with supplementary use of a number
of circuits, usually of standard series of digital integrated circuits.

The third direction is developsent of matrix 318 and 8318 that are matrices of
logic cells with sultilayer connections. The first layer guarantees connec-
tion of transistors to the logic coeponent. The second guarantees connection
of several logic components to cells. for example, flip-flops. The third
guarantees connection of cells to the circuit of the functional unit. In this
case the noeenclature of the functional units based on a typical base crystal
can be extensive and can nuber 206-500 circuits of different types. The
second and third of these directions have been developed nest intensively and
the use of matrix 818 and 6318 is preferable for high-performance computers.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁe cowonent base of the internal wry of .hiqh-perfomce computers will
be senioonductor us and 8318 of the internsl (with rando- eocess). read-

only (”ogre-able) and associative sue-cries.

(1) (2)
Koala-v n One New v u essneoy Hes-van! u Ito-mm”

Ill ‘1’”

i7/_ 0

“out. I sauce:
"0 :33" 3 (ll) Hen-vas‘lazgvouy

/ 'H' ' H

in

 

riqure 1. structures of Bipolar (a) and m (b) Integrated Transistors:
the bipolar transistor (s) is toned in a thin (approximately 1 no) epi-
taxiel lsyer. li‘he base and emitter donsins on the order of 0.3 and 0.15
us thick. respectively, are greeted by ion isuplentation and diffusion
methods. The no transistors with n-type channel (b) is developed by
ion implantation to a high-resistance substrate. The donain of the chan-
nel is separated from the gate by a thin (less then 100 m) layer or
Si03. 'no elininate spurious contacts between the transistors in the in-
tegrated circuit, eadx of that is surrounded by s layer of si02. The
length of dtannel by is limited due to the possible coupling of the chan-
nel and source specs charge (003) domains with a value on the order of
0.1 us: (I?!) - netsl-dieletric-eetuconductoj

[Key on following page)

MOMMUSBONLY
[Key continued from previous page]

1. Contact to base 9. Contact to source

2. Contact to mitter 10. Contact to gate

3. hitter ll. Gate

4. Contact to collector 12. Contact to drain

5. r-base 13. Source

6. n-collector 14. Channel .

7. n+-concealed layer 15. Thin layer of (1,000 A) $102
8. p-substrate 16 . Drain

The basic material of modern sicroelectronics is silicon. The two main vari-
eties of silicon 818 and 8318 are deterlained by the physical principles of
their design. These are bipolar and HP!) transistors. Their structure. real-
izable in an integrated circuit. is presented in Figure l. haplification in
bipolar transistors is based on control of base current by the value of the
collector current and that in m transistors is based on control using the
voltage on the gate through a thin senigate oxide with a value of channel
current. Unlike HPD integrated circuits, bipolar integrated circuits have
higher speed (by a factor of 2-10), but are inferior to then in the degree of
integration, that is, by the maximal number of canponents located on the chip.
Along with the use of silicon to create integrated circuits. the capability of
using new materials having better electrophysical paraaetsrs than silicon is
being studied extensively. One of these pronising materials is gallium arsen-
ide, in which electron nobility in weak fields is 2-S-fold higher than in
silicon. This essentially permits one to achieve higher speed of transistors
and circuits based on than.

The nest important parameters of integrated circuits are the delay tine per
logic cosponent t3. the miner of gates on the chip N and the power P consumed
by the circuit. The power consulted by the chip is limited by the capability
of heat dissipation in high-speed semiconductor circuits. Thus, the maximal
dissipation with air cooling should not exceed 2 w per chip, while that with
liquid cooling should not exceed 20 H. The relationship of output to the
speed of the component is determined by the physical operating principles of
the active instrulent on the basis of which the circuit is constructed. These
relations are basic in nature and will be considered with respect to specific
“Vi“.e

One can assme in the first approximation that the delay time in a component
is inversely proportional to output. Therefore. in attespting to achieve
high speed, the developer is forced to restrict the power consumed by the
chip by the hunter of oaaponents located on a single chip. It is obvious
free these argunents that all three parameters are interrelated. Therefore,
the quality of the logic cowonent is usually characterised by switching en-
ergy Ptz/N - Pot” obviously dependent on all three parameters.

The two lain channels of develop-mt of microelectronics are related in one
case to achieving the naximua possible speed and is related in the other case
to achieving the highest degree of integration. In the first case we will
talk about very high speed integrated circuits ($818) and in the second case
we will talk about very large integrated circuits (8318).

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The capabilities of bipolar and ”PD transistors are far from exhausted in both
directions, but are limited by the minimum topological dimension. the evolu-
tion of the minimum topological dimension is illustrated by the curve presen-
ted in figure 2. It is obvious from the figure that the minimum topological
dimension in industrial production of integrated circuits now comprises approx-
imately 3 um. which is guaranteed by the methods of optical lithography. 'rak-
ing into account that the resolution in formation of a drawing cannot be less
that the wavelength of the light used for exposure, one can conclude that the
efficiency of optical lithography is sharply reduced upon crossing the boun-
dary of l um. hethode of cathode-ray, ion-beam and X-ray lithography are
being developed for industrial production of integrated circuits with minimm:
topological dimension of not more than 1 um. The resolution is not directly
related to the wavelengths of these emissions. but is limited by the effects
of interaction of the radiation with matter. Along with development of pre-
cision methods of creating the drawing of devices and the connections between
then. development of precision methods of microstructuring, specifically of
methods of ion alloying of supersmall domains. ion and plasma etching1 and so
on. is required to achieve such small dimensions.

Main attention will be devoted in this paper to analysis of alternative di-
rections for development of very high-speed integrated circuits--the component
base of high-performance computer systems. Among these directions are bipolar
and RFD-silicon integrated circuits, circuits based .on field-effect transis-
tors with Schotthy barrier based on galliu arsenide and superconducting in-
tegrated circuits based on the Josephson effect, considered as the future base
of supercosputers.

Components of Bipolar Integrated Logic Circuits

let us return to the structure of a bipolar transistor (Figure l, a). Side
dielectric domains (8102) that usually cover a thin (approximately 1 um) epi-
taxial layer, are used to insulate the transistors in the integrated circuit.
The transistors on the substrate are insulated from each other by a closed
"concealed laysrsubstrate" p-n junction. The base and emitter domains are
created by ion implantation and diffusion methods. The high speed of bipolar
transistors in digital circuits is determined by the transit time of electrons
19: through the thin base (0.1-0.15 um), the recharging time of the barrier
capacitors of the p-n junctions and the accumulation and scattering time of
the minority charge carriers in the domain of the base. Bipolar transistors
in higher speed circuits do not operate in the saturation domain: therefore,
the inertia related to acct-elation and scattering in the base of electrons
injected from the collector is eliminated. The high speed of this circuit

is determined primarily by the length of recharging the barrier capacitors of
the emitter (C._b) and collector (ebb) p-n junctions through the resistance
of the base.

 

1'See: It. A. Valiyev, “Problems of Developing the Cauponent Base of Very High
Degree of Integration for Computers.“ mmmsomxa, Vol 9, No 6, 1980,
p 483-490.

I;
m omcm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

i.

—

° _

—

i -

_g

—-—

——-

—-

o: -__-
3.00 mo 1.” I.” m
foe-42)

Figure 2. Variation of Minimal! Topological Dinension in Integrated
Circuits United by Capabilities of Lithography: The

minun capabilities of photolithography coaprises approx-
inately 0.5 no when using a light source with wavelength

of approxinetely 200 nu. The use of x-ray sources and
electron and ion beans is required to craete a drawing
with the ualleet possible topological dimension (0.1 an)

Kay:
1. Mini-m di-ension, an 2. Years

The tips constant or this process is

n - l’u (Cu + Cu.o)- (l)

The process of establishing the current in the collector is equivalent to the
process of charging the co-celled diffusion capacitor

€u~ rap-1.19,. (2)

which is also charged through the resistance of the base with tine constant

1m.~r°.fu'.lJ9'. (3)

Here ‘t is the te-perature potential and 10 is the current switched by the
logic component.

The output voltage is shaped on the load resistor in the collector circuit.
The inertial of voltage variation on the load resistor is determined by the
recharge time of the barrier capacitors of the “collector-base junction

(Ck b) and "collector-substrate“ junction (CI: 9) through the load resistor R3
The constant of this process is

l"
J
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.: = Ru (CLO + cml‘); (0
Taking into account that the logic drop on the load resistor is
Mush"... (5)

the function of $3 on current is easily found

1'00 3 Ava-"Cs“ + Cu,.)lle. (6)

The tile constants Th (1) . ‘dif (3) and ‘k (6) are contained in the general
expression for the delay tine with sue coefficients which are equal to unity
by an order of magnitude. Without calculating the values of these coeffi-
cients. let us present the general form of function t; (10) in rigure 3.

Since the power consued by the component Po . 10014, (019 sthe voltage

of the power supply source). than the dependence presented 9in .rigure 3 is
similar to the dependence of the delay tine on consumed power Po. It is
rather general in nature and valid for any digital bipolar circuits. If the
transistors in the circuit are contained in saturation, the delay is increased
by the scattering time of the surplus electrons in the base, which is equiva-

lent to the shift of the curve in l'igure 3 to the donain of greater values of
t;.

 

Figure 3. Dependence of Delay Time of Logic Caponent in Bipolar
Transistors on Value of Switched Current: the dashed
line indicates the dependence of some conponents of de-
lay title on current: l--tine of voltage variation on
collector in whose circuit the load resistor is oonner
ted to resistor RR: 2--tine of establishing the collec-
tor current, determined by the tins of accuulation of
electrons in the base injected from the .itterz 3--
tins of establishing the voltage on the ”base-nitter"
junction due to the effect of the input voltage gener-
ator in the circuit of the transistor base

It is clear front the given argusents that the values of the barrier capacitors
Ce.b' Chg and Ch!” the resistances of the base body :1, and the transit tine

6
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the electrons through the base tp, must be reduced to guarantee high speed
or bipolar logic circuits. This is achieved by reducing the dimensions of
the transistor in the plane of the chip. The resistance of the base is re-
duced by additional alloying along its periphery (see Figure l, a). The value
of constant rk is reduced by reducing the voltage of the power supply 01,!) and
of the logic drop 001.

Let us consider the experimental dependence of the time delay in the current
switch on bipolar transistors2 (Pigure 4) , which correspond to two types of
transistors with atittere having an area of l x 3 us and 2 X 5 us: and resist-
ance of the base of 360 and 290 ohae, respectively. The logic drop was selec-
ted as equal to 450 av. The depth of alloying the "enitter-base” and ”collec-
tor-base” junctions was 0.15 and 0.30 ms, respectively. It is obvious from
Figure 4 that. the minimum values of the tine delay culprised 0.29 and 0.39 ns
at consumed poser of 1.48 and 1.85 nu, which corresponds to values of the pro-
duct Po'talao and 310 Ed.

      

0.! 0.2 0.3 0.4 0,6 0.7 ' 3

2
Poem (2)

Pigure 0. Experimental functions of Time Delay in logic Couponent
Based on Bipolar Transistors: l--corresponds to transis-
tors with eeitter having area of l x 3 um 2--vith emit-
ter having area of 2 x 5 as

Key:
1. Nanoseconds 2 . law

The reserves for further reducing the delay time in bipolar logic components
include reducing the value of the logic drop to approximately 4 0g, reducing
the power supply voltage to values on the order of l V and reducing the barrier
capacitors or the p-n junctions to values less than 10'“ P. which is quite
achievable with mininun topological disension of 1 un. As indicated by esti-
mates,3 the delay ties in bipolar logic couponents can be snaller than 10-10 a
while the product Pot, can be less than 10‘ 3 a.

 

2See: H. Nakeshiba, I. Ishida, K. Aonura and T. Nekenure, rare JOURNM. 0F
SOLID-STATE. CIRCUI'I‘S, Vol 86-15, No 4, 1980, p. 455-459.

35s.: a. A. criirovskiy, nrxnosnsrmaourxa. Vol 10, No 3, 1981 p 195-205.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

silicon Integrated Circuits With "PD Structure

The speed of a logic conponent based on HP!) transistors is deternined first

by the inertia of channel formation in the connected transistor, that is, by
the accusulation time of electrons injected (roe the channel and source do-
mains in the channel and, second, by the recharge time of the total load capac-
itor, consisting of the self-capacitances of the transistors which form the
logic cooponent and the input capacitances of the following logic stages. The
storage tins of the basic carriers in the channel is short. It is equal to
Harwell relaxation tine by an order of magnitude. Therefore, one can assme
in the first approximation that

‘0 ~ C.-U.,.,/I. (7)

and the product
t.P ~ cs'U:.n- (8)

here, as before, 01. is the voltage of the power supply source and To is the
switched current. 1:. logic drop is AU], - 01,1, in the considered circuits
with HPD structure.

The proportionality of tg'Po to the square 0! the power supply voltage has
been conrirned experiaentally.

Taking into account that the current of an HP!) transistor (see Figure l, b)
is proportional to its transconductance and by expressing the transconductance
by the "gate-channel" capacitance Co, the electron nobility in channel up and
the length of the channel I“, we find the expression (g; the any time

l' l’

“*7? r" (9)

It is obvious frca (9) that by keeping the ratio Cn/co constant, one can
reduce t; by reducing the length of the channel [4,. Tgerefore, when develop-
ing $515, one must guarantee the nariluun possible short lengths of the channels
of m transistors. The parameters of m logic components for L; - 1 un are
presented in Table l, where data on bipolar logic components with the sue min-
imum topological dimension are also reported.

Table 1. Parameters of Higher Speed "PD and Bipolar Logic Cuponents‘ for
Minimu- Topological Dimension of l m:

Parameters Bialar Cment W
t2, ps
at I!“ - l 70 115
at "n - 4 115 230

(Continued on following page)
W

‘5“: p. a. 3. am, 1-. Van't not" and r. n. Klassen, 1m mnsnmoss, Vol
D26, No s, 1979, pp 421-429.

FOROl-‘I'ICIALUSEONLY
[Table continued fro- preceding page]

Parameters Dialer ﬁlament ”0th

Pot , fa Ct “n - 1
Mini-us diaensionsx

hitter l x 2.5 no -
width of contact to base 1 un '-
Etfective length of channel - 0.5 ms
Length of gate -- l mu

Note. Mn is the nuber of identical logic conponents connected to the output
of the component being investigated.

It is obvious from the table that a bipolar logic coaponent has the highest
speed with equal energy expended for switching and with identical minim di-
mension, while the advantage with respect to the m component because a mul-
tiple of 2 as the nusber of loads increases to 4.

As can be seen from (9), the additional capacity of increasing the speed of
HPD couponents includes the use of m transistors vith cavity channel. The
channel in these devices is arranged in the suiconductor where electron no-
bility can be 2-3-fold higher, rather than in the surface of the domain. The
lowest achieved delay times for a logic conponent based on m transistors
with micron cavity channel cot-prised 72.5 ps at P0 - 43 all per costponent,
which corresponds to pox; - 3.1:5-10'12 J.

Unlike bipolar components. the delay tine in RFD-caponents is inversely pro-
portional to the power supply voltage. This is explained by the fact that
the current to be switched 10 of. since the current or the m transistor
in the sloping part of its charactegistics is proportional to the square of
the voltage on the gate with respect to the source. Taking this into account,
we find from (7) that

'e~('.u/Us..o (10)

Therefore, record low values of delay time have been experimentally at power
supply voltages of 10-14 v, unlike values of 3.3-5.2 V in bipolar circuits.
It follows fro- (B) and (10) that the power consueed by an HDP-oonponent in-
creases in proportion to Ufa, as 03,? increases. This feature of EDP-coupon-
ents can hardly be regarded as favorable for design of 5818 based on then.

a significant decrease of the ”source-substrate“ and ”channel-substrate" ca-
pacitanoes is achieved in the ”silicon on sapphire" structure. This permits
one to reduce the delay time by reducing the value of en. The experinental

 

5See K. Nishiuchi, II. Shibayua, T. Nakalmra et al. 1322 m 01’ SOLID-
STATE CIRCUITS, Vol SC-ls. No 5, 1980, pp 509-816.

9
FOR OPE-1C1“. USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. Bperinental Dependaweof Delay 'l'ine of Logic Couponent
Based on HDMransistors on Power Supply Voltage for
Transistors with Different ungths of channels

Key:
1. ps 2. v

dependence of t; on power supply voltage is presented in figure 5. he can be
seen, a delay tins of 200 ps is achieved with power supply voltage of 5 V and
Ink - 0.5 nu. m linin- delay-of 170 ps is achieved with power supply voltage
of 10 V. An attupt to develop devices with channel length or 0.3 no did not
lead to an increase of the speed of the cospcnent since it becaas necessary in
this case to reduce 01 the value of which is limited due to the effect of
coupling of the space cﬁarge domains (002) of the “source-substrate” and
”channel-substrate“ p-n junctions. Thus. the maxim: speed is achieved in
silicon lDP-calponents in “silicon on sapphire" structures with ninimn topo-
logical dimensions of 0.3-0.5 up and with sufficiently high power supply
voltages (approximately 10 V).

Very nigh-Speed Integrated circuits Based on Galliu- Arsenide

Galliu arsenide has a ntﬂaer of advantages over si con. rirst. it has high-
er electron nobility in weak fields? (3 500-7, 000 /V-s) and higher maxi-t-

drift velocity of electrons (1.5 107 eels). Second, galliun arsenids has a
wider fowiddsn zone (1. 52 eV). which pernits one to produce high-resistance
material (up to 10° ohms-ca) . which has excellent dielectric properties and
can be used in insulating substrate for an integrated circuit.

Interest in galliu- arsenide as a laterial for integrated circuits arose dur-
ing the early 1970s with regard to the attempt to develop very high-speed in-
tegrated circuits based on Gann devices in thin epitaxial layers and later

with regard to the capability of producing planar Bchottky field-effect tran-
sistors in galliu arsenide. 'lhe Schottky field-effect transistor in chern
integrated circuits based on gallit- arsenids is the basic cmcnent.6 The

 

6See: K. A. Valiyev, 1.. II. Kravchenko, A. A. Orlikovskiy et a1, utm-
mum. Vol 5, No 5, 1976, pp 378-392.

10
won OFFICIAL USE ONLY
structure of a Schottky transistor is presented in Figure 6. This structure
is realized by using prcnising processes of ion inplanatatichouble 8e- and
3' ions) in a high-resistance substrate (i-Gahs), electronic lithography and
place or icn methods of etching. This essentially permits one to realize
the euhaicrcn dimensions of the channel and gates between the gate and re-
sietance contacts to channel and source donains.

 

riguru 6. Structure of Pield-Bftect Transistor with Metal Gate formed
with Dwain of Schottky Contact Channel

Key :
1. Source 5 . Channel
2. Gate 6. n-channel
3. Resistance contact 7. achottky contact

4. Dielectric

With electron concentration in the channel on the order of 1017 “’3, the
thickness of the space charge dc-ain in a Schcttky diode is equal to 0.1 a
by an order of magnitude under equilibriu conditions. The thickness of the
channel in a field-erfect transistor should be the sane. Develcpnent of such
thin halogenecus highoquality layers by the epitaxy nethod is clearly problem-
atical; therefore. it is preferable to use ion alloying.

‘l‘he inertia of a “gate-channel“ schcttky diode is detenained by the product of
the barrier capacitance of the gate by the resistance. which consists of the
resistance 0! the channel and source. including the resistance or the clinic
contacts. Therefore, one atmpts to reduce the length of the channel bk and
the dinsnsione cf the gaps between the gate and contacts to the channel Lband

sougce L; and to increase the degree of alloying of the channel (up to 10
- )-

If one assulea that the resistance at the channel and source are equal to rare.
the tine of switching an "ideal'I field-eftect transistor is determined as

11
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1"“. USE UNIX

‘ozAQIIo. (ll)

Here A9 is charge variation under the gate and 10 is the current to be
switched.

According to estimates.7

“z 1W” (12)
s. '

where h is the thickness of the channel and v. is the maxi-tn velocity of
electron drift in weak fields, equal to approximately 1.5-107 ale. 1: is
easy to see that t; is equal to 10‘11 s by an order or magnitude at bx - 1 um
and h - 0.1 we. no value of t; decreases to 3-10'12 s with a decrease of 1.x
to 0.2 un. This estimate may be assumed maxi-um for a delay tine of switching
a field-effect transistor.

 

Circuits based on normally closed transistors in which the channel current is
equal to zero with zero voltage on the gate with respect to the source, have
the lowest energy expended for switching anong the different types of circuits
based on Schottky field-effect transistors. This circuit engineering also has
greater simplicity with minimal dimensions of 14; < 0.5 s--the lowest speed
due to lower values of capacitances introduced by the connections between
transistors.

 

Figure 7. Josephson Tunnel Junction: e--structure of tunnel junction
between two superconductors $1 and 83 separated by thin di-
electric layer (t - l he): b--volt-npere characteristic of
Josephson junction; c--eguivalent circuit: ducircuit of
silplest switch based on Josephson device with tunnel junction

with the diaensions 14‘ - 1-2 ua now achievable, the highest speed is achieved
in circuits based on nor-ally open transistors due to the high currents that

 

7See V. I. Starosel'skiy, L. N. Iravchenko and A. N. Sapel'nikov, pumm-
mum, Vol 9, No S, 1980 pp 387-400.

12
'0'! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
guaran‘ee recharging of the ”gate-channel” capacitor. The typical parameters
of logic canponents now achievable at L); ~ 1 \- in logic components based on

normally open and normally closed field-effect transistors are presented in
Table 2.

Table 2. Typical Para-eters of Cmponents of Logic Integrated Circuits
Based on GaAs with Minimn Length of Channel of 1 un

On mortally On Nor-ally
Parameters mu Transistors Closed Transistors
Delay time t;, pa 90 700
Consumed power Po. m“ 20 0.15
Logic drop A01, V 2.5 l
Potz' N 1.8 0.1

Gallium-arsenide integrated circuits with media: degree of integration (fre-
quency dividers, counters, ring generators and so on) are now going through-
the stage of development and testing. Developent of large 8818 based on
GaAs becomes possible after industrial assiuilation of production of high-
resistance substrates and the technology 0! nornally closed field-effect
transistors with minim- dimension of the gate less than 0.5 ml, which will
stake it possible to achieve t: s SolO'n ps at Pot; I 10-10 to 10‘13 J.

Taking into account that gallius arsenide has a number of disadvantages (high
cost, cooperatively low mechanical strength and plate diameter less than that
of silicon by a factor of 2-3). one can assune that the economic factor be-
comes decisive when selecting gallium-arsenide or silicon circuits of the com-
ponent base for modern development of large high-performance components. Gal-
lium-arsenide circuits may become the main component base of the processors
of superconwters during the period 1985-1990.

Superconducting Integrated Circuits Based on Josephson Junctions

A Josephson junction is an almost ideal switch with a sharp threshold, super-
snall switching delay (10"11 s) and very low dissipation (10'6 w).

The main Josephson device, on the basis of which sane types 0! logic circuits
have been studied, is the tunnel junction containing two superconducting layers
51 and s . They are separated by a thing insulating layer with thickness t
(Figure ;, a) in which exchange of Cooper pairs between superconductors is
possible. As a result, when the voltage on the junction is equal to zero, the
current of the Cooper pairs to can pass through it and in this case the junc-
tion can be in two states-~with voltage U - 0 and current I _<_ re and with
finite resistance (with single-frequency tunnelling) in which the voltage pro-
portional to the sun of the widths of the elite of the superconductors A1 + A2
drops.

The well-known Josephson equations are easily valid for this type of junction

I -.I,si».gv. . (13)

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-1f'IAI. USE ON”

(I - (Ara) «pm. (14)

way -- (2mm. +M+I)~(wll x a). (15)

Here 0 is the phase difference of f1 and £2 wave functions in superconductors
$1 and 82. U is the potential difference, A1 and X2 are the tendon lengths of
penetration for superconductors 81 and 82, H is the vector of eagnetic field
intensity. n is the unit vector, "0' e and h is the magnetic permeability,
electron charge and Planck's constant. Piecewise linear approximation of the
volt-anpere characteristic of the juncion is used for analysis of the logic
circuits (Figure 7, b). The slope of the first segment is determined by the
resistance R, - Lin/1c and the slope of seglsent 2 is assumed equal to zero with
current drop A1 at voltage of 09 - (Al + Gave. Por example. the typical
parameters are 1c - 50 uh. u. - 27 nil. Ug - 2.8-2.9 V and AI . 70 uh for tun-
nel junctions 2.5 ms in disaster (based on Pb alloys). This junction is an
equivalent circuit (rigure 7, c) with current generator

I "’ ’c "i" S (Eh/h) (I (ll. (16)

shunted by capacitor C3 and nonlinear resistor 8(0) . For the example pre-
sented here, C - 0.2 pl", which corresponds to approximately specific capaci-
tance of 10'5 laz.

The Josephson tunnel junction is used in logic circuits as the threshold de-
vice controlled by current. Calculations show that the simplest switch based
on a single Josephson tunnel junction (Figure 7, d) with the parameters pre-
sented above drops as a result of switching current with delay 5'10”12 s to
the load Rn at power supply voltage of 01.p - 10 Iv, bias current I.- - 35 uh
and input current Jim I 35 A and dissipates power of 0.35-10'6 W, which
corresponds to an energy of l.‘)5-lO"’18 J expended on switching. These values
are better than the corresponding values for semiconductor integrated circuits.
The low logic drop (approximately 1 IV) determines not only the low level of
dissipation, but also the high speed since it permits one to use low load re-
sistances (approximately 10 ohms) .

However, the circuit shown in Figure 7, d cannot be used as a logic component
since the output is not determined from the input and the component has poor
load capacity (Nn * 1) due to the technological difference of current 1c.

We directions were formlated to develop logic conponents with tie-in of the
inputs and high load capacity (Nn 1 3).

SKVID (Superconducting quanta: interference devices), which are a conﬁnination
of two or three Josephson junctions. are used in the first of then. The input
line is connected to the sxvm by a sagnetic flux. These calponents are
called components with magnetic coupling.

The main disadvantages of logic components with magnetic coupling based on
SKVID includes the relatively large area occupied by then on the chip and the
high sensitivity to external random nagnetic fields. If the minimum topologi-
cal dinension is 2.5 um. a logic component based on a three-junction SKVID

1h
‘ FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
occupies an area of 4,400 unz, and approximately 80 percent of its area is
occupied by inductive components.

An alternative method of coupling is to use Josephson Jevices in the input
circuits as nonlinear uncoupling components.

Both magnetic and direct couplings are realized in the higher speed logic cm-
ponents based on Josephson devices that utilize the phenonenon of quantities-
tion of the magnetic flux in sxvm. The typical area of these components is
approxilstely one-third less than the area of components with inductive coup-
lings. A delay in the range of (3-4)°10’11 with ninisnss topological dimension
of 2.5 us: and consumed power equal to approximately 5°10"6 I per caponent is
achieved in these components.

By culparing the record results achieved with silicon and gallima arsenide
logic components with ninimlm dimension of l I!!! to the results tound for cost-
ponents based on Josephson junctions with minimu- dimension of 2.5 um, one
can see that components based on Josephson junctions have one-half the values
of the delay time and are characterised by lesser energy expended for switch-
ing (10-16 a) by more than a factor of 2.

However, it would be erroneous to assume that all problems of developing 8815
on the basis or Josephson coeponents have been solved. Producing tunnel junc-
tions is a complex technological problen due to the need to guarantee high
reproducability ot a thin dielectric layer (3 nu) by tunnelling. The inte-
grated structure of a circuit based on Josephson oonponents together with the
shielding superconducting layers has 10-12 thin-tile layers.

Therefore. along with Josephson tunnel junctions. so-called bridge junctions
are being studied intensively. A section with weak superconductivity, which
is a thin "bridge“ between two auperconducing shores (Figure 8), is used in
these devices instead of the tunnel barrier. Min with Tc - 8.9 K. the
thin layer (0.1 um) of which is applied to a silicon substrate, is used as the
superconductor in the example in Tigers 8. Thinning in the tile is created by
the electronic lithography and plasma or ion etching method. It is desirable
in this case to achieve a length of the microbridge o! l < E. where E is the
length of coherence. The value or E is usually approxisately lo nan. Por
ample, ( . 25 nn in niobium at T - 4.2 x. Achieving these dimensions in

the plane of the chip is still extremely difficult. As shown by K. r. Likharev,
characteristics similar to those of ideal bridges can be observed in microbrid-
gas with length l, for which the following condition is fulfilled

E<1<M (17)

where M: - l-coth (d/Zl), d is the thickness of the bridge and A, as before.
is the London length of penetration.

To increase the logic drop in micrcbridges. one attempts to reduce the cross-
section of the bridge and thus to increase its resistance in the nonsupercon-
ducting state (Ru) . The 134 Cmpany. for example, has developed microbridges
with record seall dinensions (30 x 30 m) based on niobiun.

15
ms omcw. use ONLY
I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONL"

 

tigure 8. Josephson “Bridge" Junction: enstructure of device unu-
tectured tro- niobiun on silicon substrete; buvolt-upere
cherecteristic of junction.

Key:
1. He 3. Substrate
2. I“

Another direction of reseeroh is to develop tunnel junctions with thick ber-
rier (epproxieetely 100 nu) frat e degenerete seeiconduotor or noml motel.
week induced superconductivity is observed in these junctions in degenerete
seeiconductors in the dolein on the order of the length of coherence of the
saioonduotor. ﬂerrow-sone uteriels. for mle, InSb end Inhs. in mich
the cerriers er; not frozen at heliu temperatures end heve nobility on the
order of lo6 a Ne. ere of greet interest (or these junctions. Thus. the

problul of selecting the caponent base for e Josephson superooquter cennot
be considered solved.

The systems engineering problems ere of orgenising processor end storage sub-
systees heve not yet been solved for supercaeputers besed on Josephson cos:-
ponents. The development of supercomputers will be preceded by development
of snell test Josephson coeputers. According to esti-etes, the test .1111"
computer besed on Josephson coeponents will include so 8818 of 5-103 coupon-
ents in eech end e wry with cepeoity of 64-103 bits. The coeputera will
cognac e power of epproxinetely l I end will occupy e value of (3 x .3 x 3)
a 0

According to estiletes eveileble in the litereture. superooeputers besed on
Josephson devioee will contein e processor on lo6 logic caponents. e high-
speed nemry with cepecity o! 64 ltbytes end lain internel storege with cepec-
ity of 64 or 128 “bytes. The processor can be node in the tors: of 103 chips
of 103 ooeponsnts eeoh, 802!) (high-speed nuories) of 32 chips of 16 hbits
eeoh end en ow [internel storegel at 9.103 or 15-103 chips 0! 64 kbits eech.

 

8See: 8. l-lesuo. a. Butuki, ‘1'. Ins-urn end 1'. Y-eohe, Proceedings of the

12th Conference on Solid-sate Devices. Tokyo, 1980. in mm 1118111013 a!
APPLIED PHYSICS. V01 20, 110 20-1. 1981. PP 323-329.

16
POI OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
Tbs chips osn bs locstsd on 100-200 squus silicon cards with side 0! 10 a.
The cards in turn srs comotod to s singls block assuring 15 x 15 x 15 a.
Tho cots). dissipation of tho outputs: any bs cqusl to 10 I. Roslisstion at
this compute: nquim dsvsiopllsnt of digital systsss squipont and tschnoloqy
of 8818 bsssd on Josophscn cosponsnts, dovclopnsnt of tho eschnoloqy of assem-
bly of 8518 into blocks, pactsction of tho couputot sgsinst external noiss sod
cooling supstcoapucsrs to holiu uspsrsturss.

COPYRIGEI': :mea'uvo “links". "Vsstnik Miami W 8883', 1982

6521
C80: 1863/172

17
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3:621.3.019.35
RBDUNDANCY 0! rmm mm m m WING ARRAYS

Moscow Avmn'rm I mm in xussian No 4. Apr 82 (unuacript received
12 Her 81) pp 139-149

[Article by 6.6. Aaatiani and v.c. Chachanidse, noscow]

[Excerpts] A cc'puter algorithn is discussed for global redundancy
of finite auto-eta in uniforn conputing arrays (Uca'e)
with the existence of faulty cells in then. The nethod
provides an acceptable solution by neans of a practicable
exhaustive search. The solution sought is arrived at
by using an alnost twofold snaller ether of redundant
00A cells than with other known nethods.

1. Introduction

Uniforn coqmting arrays (UCA's) are pronising facilities for constructing counters
of various classes and for various purposes [1-3].

, One problea of designing sutonetion and conputer hardware facilities based on UCA's
resides in the davelopnsnt of netth of providing redundancy of finite autonate in
UCA's. By providing redundancy of finite auto-eta in UCA's we lean the process of
reordering the array for the new inlenentation of a specific finite auto-etch while
bypassing faulty cells, whose coordinates have been determined at the testing stage.
Traditional nethods of providing redundancy of finite sutonta are not very accept-
able for solving this problem, since by their neane it is difficult to take into
account the errangenent of the elements and interelenent links of a ma. Of in-
terest chiefly are redundancy nethods which can be iqlsnented by fairly siqle
systems for auto-stic restructuring of a 06A. i.e.. nethods which mke it possible
to produce a new sdjustnent progran by moonplicated trensfornations of the origi-
nal progren; in nind here is the fact that nethods exist for inserting an arbitrary
graphic representation of a specific finite auto-aton in a DOA with faulty cells

[‘]e

In inlanentins finite auto-ate based on Dee‘s. because of the existence of topo-
logical restrictions on the arrange-mt of cells in the structure, a certain number

of cells in good working order are usually contained in the structure, positioned
both in the section of inlanentation of a finite autoneton and outside it and not

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
teking pert in inplenentetion of e finite imtountong i.e.. e we in cherecterired

by the exietence of neturel redundency [S]. Conventionel methode of providing re-
dundency in e on either introduce ertificiel redundency into the etructure (local
redundency nethode). i.e.. ere eiuiler to treditionel nethode of providing redundan-
cy [6]. or utilize juet the neturel rednndency of the errey (global ,redundency ne-
thode) [7}. In connection with thie,'conventionel nethode of providing redundency
in the firet inetence work with high redundancy fectore, end in the eecond ere in-
effective beceuee of the null eliwnt of redundancy employed, which in not elveye
eufficient for finding the WA reordering progren nought. '

The purpoee of thin peper ie to etudy end develop e mute: method of providing
redundency of finite eutolete in e 00A, teking into eccotmt reduction of time end
the redundency fector, ee well ee linitetione on loving the etructurel diegrene of
finite eutonete over the UGA'e field.

line of the algorithm euggeeted preeuppoeee. in the detection of feulty DOA celle
at the coating etege, the eingle reordering on enother coeputer of ell etetenente
ilplenented in the etructure.

Bibliography

1. Prengiehvili. I.V., Behicheve, Ye.v., Veyte, A.V., Keener, ILL. Helyugin. V.D.,
Pevteov. D.V., Prokhorove, 3.6., Sokolov, v.v. end Shketulle, A.I. "Peeturee
of e Uniform Hicrocowuter" in "teziey I Veee. emehch. po nikroproteeeeorel"
[Theeee of Piret All-Union Conference on Hieroproceeeore]. Riga. Zinetne, 1975.

2. Prengiehvili, I.V., Behicheve, Ye.V.. Veyte. A.V.. Helyugin, V.D., Pevteov. D.V.,
Prokhorove, 3.6., Sokolov, V.V., Detach. Hm. end Shltetulle, A.I. "Principlee
of benign of Microcomputers Beplcyia; Uniforl Adjueteble Structure" in
"Odnorodnyye vychielitel'nyye eieteey i eredy. Net. IV Veep. hoof." [Unifor-
Conputing Syetene end Media: Heteriele of the fourth All-Union Conference].
Kiev. heukove duke. 1975, Part 1, pp 221-222.

3. Prmgiehvili, I.V.. Todue, D.A., Absalom. N.A., Venkhvedze, A.N., Gogoledze,
0.V., Uekech, H.A. end Sokolov, V.V. "PS-300 Colputer." Person l 8151'!!!
WWA. No 10, 1978, pp 3-6.

lo. Chechenidee, v.6. "Queetionn of Developeent of Coquter Algorithm for Inner-
tion of Finite Auto-tn in Uniform Cowuting Arreye" in "'l‘r. Veee. ehluoly-
eeninere po uprevleniyu bol'ehini eietenni" [Proceedinge of the All-Union
‘l‘reining Seniner on Control of Lerge Syeteu]. Thiliei, Heteniyerebe. 1976.
pp 199-208.

5. Anetieni, 6.6. end Chechnnidre. v.6. "mention of Redundancy of Digital

Unite in Uniforl Cowuting Unite." Amrm I mmm. No l. 1981.
pp 156-165.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6O

7.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Koyieen. AA. “Resale: Locel Redmdeney end Reetruttutins in Counting
Hedie" in ‘mterinly muchmtehhn. ken!" pomehehennoy 754nm eo dnye
izobreteniye redio" [materiele o! the Scientific end humerus Conference
Devoted to the 75th Annivereery or the Invention of Indie]. Nmeihirek,
Neuke. 1970. pp 6—57.

Chechenidze. v.0. "Algorithn for Rendering unifor- Cowuting were" in
"Vychielitel'nyye stately i truly. neteriely III Veee. tool. 90 prohlene
'Odnorodnyye vychielitel'nyye stately i eredy'" [Counting Syeteu end ﬂed“:
Materials of the Third All-Union Conference on the treble- "0niiou Conutins
Syegeusend Hedin"], ‘rewros, regent-es Radio Engineering Institute, 1972,

pp 10- ll.

Chechenidze. 7.6. end untieni. 5.6. "Principles of Deeign of mititmctionel
Celle of Uniform Colputins Arrey with high Functional and Switching Cepebilt-
ties," AVTOHKHKA I mm'mu 115mm, no 3, 1975, pp 10-17.

Zykov, A.A. '“l'eoriye honechnykh grefov" [unite Graph Theory]. Rovoeibirek.
"nuke. 1969.

COPYRIGIIT: Izdetel'etvo "Retake". "Avtonetike i telenekhenih", 1982
8831

080:

1863/ 155

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1100 681.323

080103 01’ WT 01’ P39033803 SERIES m DESIGNING IAN-Y 0P SPECIAL-PURPOSE
WING 8Y9!“

Moscow AVTM‘I‘IKA 1 mm in Russian No lo, Apr 82 (unuscript received
18 Dec 80) pp 150-159

[Article by V.A. Vedeahenkov, ILA. Vlasenko and AJ. Volkov, Moscow]

[Excerpts] The probl- is solved of determining the throughput of
a series of processors intended for designing a family
of special-purpose multiprocessor coquting systems.
The cost/throughput ratio is used as the optimality cri-
terion for various variants of the design of central
units of multiprocessor systems. An algorithm is de-
veloped which makes it possible to solve the problem.

In designing automated systems for controlling entities or processes of the same
type, special-purpose computing system are often necessary, having various pro-
cessor capacities, infatuation input/output facility capacities and memory capaci-
ties. l'urthermore. economic requirements dictate that both the principles of the
structural design of these computing systems and the principles of the structure
of their software be identical. A promising may of creating such a series of ape-
cial-purpose coquting system is their inlementation in the form of mltiproceaaor
systems. The fact that in recent years a new elementary coqutsr hardware base-
microprocessors-has appeared speaks in favor of using this method of designing
special-purpose systems. Microprocessors. which have relatively limited computing
capabilities, make it possible by uniting them into multiprocessor systems to
create sufficiently large-capacity computing complexes.

An important characteristic of multiprocessor computing systems is their basic
modularity. Because of this it is possible to construct on the basis of a single
set of functional modules counting aystens which, although of identical structure,
nevertheless differ in the throughput of their central units, menory capacities

and carrying capacities of input/output facilities. By the term "central unit"

is meant the codiuation of general-wrpoae processors. Of course, an increase in
the nudist of functional memory modules and input/output processors results in
practically a linear increase in the respective capacities of the special-purpose
system. However. increasing the number of general-purpose processors in the central
unit does not produce a linear increase. in throughput [1-3]. This fact is amplainsd
by the folloving reasons.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. By conflicts in the simltsneoue access of several processors to their faci-
lities for linking with mry moduleey The probability of such conflicts is
especially great if a shared line, which is typical of mltinicroproceesor systems.
is used as the continuation facility.

2. By conflicts in access of processors to the sane memory modules. Losses of
the central unit's throughput are thereby inevitable, since the majority of
problems solved in a special-purpose multiprocessor system are heavily related in
terms of initial data.

3. By the impossibility of conpletel'y loading with assignments all processors of
the system at any nonent of time. This takes place on account of the linited
capabilities for maltiprocessing of problems solved in the system. Hultiprocessing

capabilities are especially limited in high-reliability multifunctional computing
systems.

In developing multiprocessor computing systems oriented toward functioning in

the control circuits of Mill's [automated control systems] for entities of the same
type, the requirements for the real throughput of central units of systems, first,
are known, and. second, differ strongly from one another. Therefore, the problems
of determining the optimum values of the throughput of various types of processors
from which central units are made up and of determining the number of processors
of a specific type in specific configurations of computing systems satisfying spe-
cific requirements are of interest. This study is devoted to solving these prob-
lems. Here the "cost/throughput" ratio is used as the optimality criterion for
different variants of the design of central units of multiprocessor systems.

The results of solving this problem according to the algorithm presented are shown
in the table (not reproduced]. It is obvious from the data of this table that

for fulfilling the problem's conditions it is necessary to use three types of basic
processors. Here the breakin down of requirements into groups is performed in the
following manner: {Q } , {ng , {Q3, Q‘} , and the total percentage loss for this
variant of designing entral units as conpared with the optimum solution equals

10 percent.

For the purpose of comparison, in the last section of the table analogous data are
presented for the implementation of all required central units in single-processor
variants. The advantages of multiprocessor organization of central units of con-
puting systems are clearly evident from conparing these data with the data of other
variants of their implementation.

The use of the method developed for determining the throughput of general-purpose
processors and their number in central units of computing systems makes it possible
to make a valid choice of the structure of central units at their rough design
stage. Because of this, designing time is shortened and the quality of design
solutions is improved. ‘

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

3.

b.

m1W‘Ph)’

Eulou, P.G.. editor. “Hul'tiprotoesoorum outcry i pardlu'nyye
vychislsniys" [Hultiproceooor arse... sod Pound Mutations]. motor.
Kit, 1976. -

Burtsev, v.3. "Printsipy postroysniys momrotuuoruykh vychislitel'nykh
kooplsksov '31'brus‘" [Design Principles of ”n‘bruo" mltiprocessor computing
Complexes]. bacon, hatel'stvo 111! i wt All 8881. 1977.

Andshl. 6.11. "Validity of the Singlo Processor Approach to Achieving Large
Scale Computing Capabilities" in ”Prat. m 28, 1967,. Spring Joint Calputcr
Cont.." London. Acsd. Press, Vol 30. 1967, pp ‘83-‘85.

Nslinov, V.V. '“rooriya airport-cuts" [Bxperiuntstioo Theory]. lblcov, Rocks.
1971.

Vedeshenkov, V.A., Vlsssnko, N.A. and Vo1kov, AJ'. "Choice of risksup of
Modules of mltiproceuor Computing Sync." in "In. dokl. 9m. somhch.
'Probleny sozdsniys i iopol'uvaniys mokoproixvoditol'nykh intorlntoionno-
vychislitol'nykh ushin'" (Thou. of Pspors of tho All-Onion Confsroncs
"Proust. ot Cmtion and Us. of nigh-Throughput Data Processing and Coquting
Machines"). Kilhinsv. M0 in. A.8. Popova, 1979, pp 15-16.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstsl'stvo ”Noah", ”Avtoutiks i talc-swims", 1982

8831

(:80:

1863/155

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 691.322-181.48.001.2

Riga ammm I wcaIsnnu'mn mm in Meeian no 2. liar-m 82 (nann-
ea-ipt received 15 Oct 80) pp 15-19

(Article by 1.. Ya. napkin and V. 6. Noeovl

Analyeie of the literature shove that the given direction of. limcuputer
design in aduievinq ever mate: develop-ant. The internal configuration of a
Maroon-pater deeiqned on the buie of nicroprooeuoreua net 0! eeriee 1589
and capatihle with the "-6000 niniouputer-ie deeazibed in Ill and a litto-
conputar dweloped on the Intel 3000 limpmceeeor net and progruocmpatible
with the mien at EDP-ll niniccquteze of the one cupany. ie deecribed in

signed between the hardware and limpzogm levels. On one hand, the charac-
tetietic teetutoe at the instruction eyet- being emulated ate taken into ac-
count and on the other hand the multe of analyzing the realised algorithm
and tentsictione placed on the nicmcupntec being designed in the volume or
equipent. mductivity, weight. mom-ed power. reliability. cost and no on

eh
m omcm. use on“
Lot ua con tho oggrogato of functional aaaablioa of o niorocalputor, tho
conunicationo botwom than ond tho corroaponding Iicroprograno tho intornol
configuration of a nicrocoqputar.

Lot ua alao introduco tho concopt of foaturoa of intornol configuration that
dotor-ino tho alcontory functiona (indiviaiblo ot tho aoloctod lovol of con-
oidoration) of a niorocaputor which con bo rooliud by hordwm or nicrcpxo-

graoo ond frc- which tho ”configuration? oppooranoo of tho niorocclputor ia
Dado up.

Tho act of footuroa of tho intornal configuration is dotorninod. on tho ono
hand. bythoooloctodinotructionayatuondonthootharhond.hythoooloc-
tod typo cf oicroprocoaoor.

Pooturoo con noun difforont vomaa. If tho not of microco-putara undar con-
aidoration with different configuration ia donotod by tho lottor A and if tho
nubor of tho configuration in donotod by tho lotto: ll. thon ooch configura-
tion in ooaignod ito own tumor i - 1, 2, ..., I! and tho voluoc of on ita
foaturoa. In tho conoidorod coco tho footuroo a: lay aaauo throo valuoa:

0, if tho function in fulfilled by Iicﬂprogrm:
Ax . 1, if tho function in fulfillod by hordworo;

y, if tho function in not includod in tho configuration.
‘l‘ho roprooontotion xx INA; that caporoa tho valuo 8353‘ to each objoct
MGR io undarotood u a foaturo. ‘l'ho promo- of aolocting tho intornal con-
figurotion of a oicrocalputor with fixod not of fuctiona for on voraiono of
tho configuration in aubaoguontly conoidorod. raaturo x in thio pootulation
aoouoa only two valuoa (0, 1) fro. not A, ond ia a booloon voriablo.

Tho voraiona of tho intornol configuration of a nicrocuputor having II foaturoo
aro dotarninod by tho aot of voctora {:1} of foaturoo of tho intonol configur-
ation. whoro x1 - (x11. .... x“). The voctor of foaturoo of tho intornol con-
figurotion will. bo donotod X - (:1, .... x5. .... I.) for duplicity.

Bach footuro of tho internal. configuration :1. j - (1, I}. ia charactorisod
by tho tino of nicroprograo radiation ‘3 ond by tho oquipont oxpondad for
ito hoer rooliuticn Qj. ‘l'ho tino on into of tho foaturo io found at

tho nicroprogr-Iing atogo by dotornining tho product of tho nu“ of oicro-
inatructicno fulfinod in roalioation of tho givon foaturo and tho tino of tho
amino cycla. Par-otor q ia doth by tho nubor of homing. of into-
grotod circuita (Is) oxpon for hard-taro roalioaticn of tho footuro.

Lot ua introduoo tho “so ond hardworo “podium voctoro: '1' - (1’1. ..., 1.)
“‘9' ‘q1' ooo' “)o

Lot o cyst. of inotructiono of a nicroconputor K - (k1, ..., ki' ..., kn) bo
aolootod for which tho canniootion Iatrix H - {In} in dotorlinod.

25
mornanussomv
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

feature ie fulfilled in inetruction hi by nictoprograny (l)

{3, if the functional traneforlation aeaigned by the j-th
I a
15 0 in the oppoeite me.

The than of fulfillment t1 of inetructione 3:1 for a eelected value of x are
determined by the formula

t... .. _ ~ .

I.

vherei-(l-x....., 1—1:“ ... I—x;)-(in.--~-.3;w-v3.3:I

let ue aleo introduce the vector “the treneported vector x. ‘lhe effective
productivity of the nicroeoquter e detenined by the formula

2 m. ‘2’

w..-

 

where f in the frequency of neing the i-th inetrnction in realisation of the
algori fulfilled by the nicrooeqnter.

A Gibeon nixtnre is need when calculating I” of a general-pupae niczocon-
putez [d] and the epecifioe of the problem being eolved by it nre taken into
account what deeigning a problen-oriented licrooonpnter.

bet 1' - (f1, .... fa). then the nean tine of perfotning the operation in

-‘

I 4' ' (3)
W-P-M-X.

Let vector x contain only 'changed“ featuree, i.e.. thoee which can name
both a wit and zero value. net us denote by 1'30 the tines of fulfilling the
functions oorreeponding to the unchanged featurea that aeeue only a zero
value and let ue denote by 10 the tuner of the mdtanged feature. The tine
of fulfilling inetruction hi can then be expreeeed by the female:

.. a. u... -
- (d)
h- 2 mum.+ 2 mami‘I-W‘l’ 2'. Wm!!- .
h ’u' "'

Here to ie the tine of fulfilling the “core” of the inatrnctionuthe part of

it uhith ie alveye fulfilled on a nicroprooeeaor by feeding the cornepending
nicroinetructione with any version of configuration.

FOIOFI‘ICMLUSEONLY
Taking (4) into account, one can write (3) in the form

I -
-w-—..—- 70+ FMX,

(5)

M

where To-F' ( ) ie the tile of realizing the algorithm in the ceee when
(.9

all the featune of the intemal oonfiguration are realized by hardware.

heralare erpendituree to realize a eiorooowuter are deter-ined by function 2:

2(Q.x“)-'Qlo+0'xr. ~ (6)

where 90 ie the minim- eguipnent expendituree for the vereion of internal
configuration of the nicrooonputer being deeigned when all the featuree of the
internal configuration are manned by nicroprogran.

Expreeeione (5) and (6), which yield eetinetee of the baeic characterietice

of the aicroconputer, are linear functione of boolean varidzlee x3. are poe-
eibility of finding ei-ilar functione ie determined by eelection of independent
features of configuration. by realisation of eicroprogr- control in the modern
318 [large integrated circuit] of the m [reed-only Deloryl. in which the P20
expendituree in nicroprogran realization of the feeturee of configuration are
incowarably lower than the expenditures for hardware realisation of theee
feature” the length of the machine cycle of the micron-put” ie eelected with
regard to all the poeeibilitiee of introducing harOIare that realiree the fee-
turee of the configuration.

Baeed on (S) and (6). one can foreulete the following probleee of deeigning
the internal configuration of a aicroooquter. deecribed by the vector x I-
. (81' 000' 5)'*j-o°: 113.1. eee' .e '

l. The problee of achieving the giggnbmductiyity with linin- ewipent
expandituree. ZuQ-Xr-vmln..-and FmizTu-To . here 1.409 - 1%: "409
ie the requirement on the liorocoquter being deeigned with reepect to
productivity.

2. The problea of aohieving given productivity for applicatione of the nitro-
ooquter in eeveral different eyetene with linin- equipment eagendituree.

Z-Q- X1» min;

FnMi S Tum:- Tie.
hm? < rum-r...

Here '1'" b9 - UN; 409‘ Pk ie the require-ante on the nicroooeputer and the
0

If:
characterietioe of problem of the k-the ante. and 13,-}; (g .
!.°

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. the prcble-_o£ edlievmm pgdpctivity with given reetricticne on
eqniyeent. FMX-vmin, Z-Q'Xr<Q”-Q.. ilere 9499 ie the and” pernie-
eible equipnt of the nicrocoquter.

‘l'hue, the problem or optimising the intemel configuration or e nicroco-puter
an be reduced to problem of lineer proqr—ing with booleen veriﬁlee.

 

Block Diegren of Mimuter. Mctionel Mlle” an Icon-
reed-only Ienory or inetructione: sx--inetruction counter: lib-in-
etmtion regieter; m1, Sh”, 8h” end stare-oboe ehepere for ieeue
of intcruetion fro- correeponding tunetionel eeeedaliee; DID—lieu-
progre- control wait: no Ip--reed-only eeeory or eicroproqrne:
Wudcroinetruction regietern Ten—centre]. prooeeeoz eleuenti
Sch'rr-cycle counter: kayo-external ehift reqieter: Shh-«datu-
hue eheper' Shh-date bne ehepen Shh-«damn bun nib-'dltl b ;
W-internel etoreqe; {mgr-index edder: lib-index regieter: '-
can dete bue eheper; Brno-wit for toning remit foetus-ea: 881»-
proceeeor etetue mieter: ”Po-plenty interrupt nit

In reel noble-e o! niomcolputer deeiqn. the nwer or teeturee of internel
oontiguretion eey exceed 10-20, which nekee it ilpoeeible to eolve the indi-
cated problem by direct eeleoticn end deter-inn the neceeeity of wing eten-
derd progrue thet eolve lineer pron—in; problem with booleen verieblee
by the Beluhnethod (5) or by other nethode [6, 7).

he en example, let ue coneider the internel configuretion of e eicrocoquter
deeiqned on e nicroproceeeor eet or eeriee K509 end thet ie progrerooepetible

with coqutere of the an M eeriee. A block ding:- ot the meter ie pre-
eented in the figure. The (motionel eeeeebliee er. Schfe, amen.» Nov.
EM, 1! end an ere heralere reeliretion of the teetnree of internel contig-

uretion of the nicroconputer.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Developnent of the indicated nicrocolputer with regard to the specifics of
probleu of processing infornaticn coning in free enelytical devices per-its
one to establieh the following characterietice for solving linear programing
DMIWI 1) m . ‘5’ a) t . (‘1' ‘2' ‘3' t" ‘5. g‘) . (0.‘5. 0.05, 0e13,
0.02, 0.25. 0.1). where f; is the frequency of ueing the following instructions
in fulfilling a given elgoritII: fl is audition-subtraction, f: is shift. f3
ia eultiplioation, f4 ie diviaion, f5 is control trenafer and f5 is logic oper-
atione. 3) Z.“ - 67, 4) paruetere 1’5 and g, are according to the table and
5):.“6- 200 ops/s at vector 7. corresponding to iten 2, not)“: - 1M -
- .10- second.

Batintaa of figurea of Internal Configuration with Respect to nguipent q,
and With Respect to fine 1',

. -._.... -. . ..‘—. ~_..— .._ _

a. -
Seven: ob Janna my ‘5)
"noses-e e, s In: Janene ape~
. “"70 ll. (II-pee- M. t, a It
3 uses) “rm”

95 ‘P e)
CutAnbf
senpuo)
Call (11)

Pm (12)

     

 

      
  
   

    
 

— (13)
l'lpu onepmu mute
n ""‘r......"‘::::'... .
Km ”loam-('14)
"on annuaeaaa ou-

paun yellow“)

    
   
 

0 G ‘6)“-

  

 

‘l'ha tieaa are given for Iachine cycle of 200 nanoeeconde.

by:
1. liner of ite-
2. Pmctional assewly
3. Equip-ant expenditures g1 (houaing of series 155)
e. m expenditurea in Ink (nicroinatruction)
S. ‘rine expenditures 1’, in nanoeeconda
6. lie-arts
7. Instruction counter
8. Index register plus index adder
9. Circuit of value A
10. Unit for foreinq result faaturee
1].. Cycle water

12. External ehift register
13. During addition-aubtrection operation
14. During nultiplication operation

Batinates of the features of the internal configuration of a nicrwoconputer

with SD! M [International hull Ocnputer Breton] instruction eyaten are pre-
sented in the table with reepect to g, in m [integrated nicrecircuit] houe-
inga of series 155 and with respect to tine t, in nuer of nicroinetructione.

Solving the linear programing problem described above, replacing the hard-
ware realieation by certain features and entrusting fulfillment of their

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

functions to the corresponding nicroprogrua. one can find the vsrsiona of
internal configuration that satisfy the specifications for productivity and
equipusnt.

The internal configuration presented in the smple is the highest-speed
version of a Iicroooquter that at the one tins requires the highest equip-
ment expenditures. ‘rhe given version of a nicrooonputer is the result of
solving problem 3 for achieving the minus productivity with given restric-
tions on equip-wt with the input data presented above.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Bensanko, A. 1.. v. I. Berezin, 8. Ya. minin and 1.. II. Koryagin.
"uiorooouputer on a nicmproosssor 8st of Series 1699." mm
PMYW'. No 6. 197B.

2. Asbrosy. 6., I. Iliskoloai and P. Vajda. ”hall Caputar Built with Intell
3000 Bit-Sliced microprocessor syst-ﬂ' m. 31:. m. m. [91:131.].
No 100. 1979.

3. Berson, Yu. 1a., 2.. v. Gol'dreyer. L. Ya. Lapkin. V. G. lbsov, N. P. Sedov.
v. 3. analov and V. '1‘. Startsev, 'Qtaractaristic restarts of Designing
Specialised Digital Conputars on s uicroprooessor Set.“ 6?“me
SIM! I WW, "0 3. 1980.

4. Zhuravlev. Yu. P.. 'sistemoys proyaktirovaniya upravlyayushcnikh mm"
[Bysteas Design of Digital Control Ooaputers], nosoow, Bovetaloya radio,
1974.

S. Balesh, 3., “Additive Algoritln for Solving Linear Progra-ing noble-s
With Variables mat Assune Values of Zero or Om," in 'xibernetiohsskiy
abomik' [Mounties Collection], No 6. nosoov, air, 1969.

6. Yukhinenko, 3. 1.. 'Sone Algoriths for solving Linear Programing Pub-
las with Boolean Variables." mm. No 5, 1979.

7. Panchenko, n. 1., "Sons Algorithm for Solving Special Linear Progra-ing
Pmblm With Boolean Variables.‘ mumm, llo 2. 1976.

mutant lsdatel'stvo “Zinatne', 'Avtc-atika i vyduislitel'naya takhnika'.
1982

6521
080: 1%3/161

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HIGHLY mm comm mum NR can menus

mulbirek waommxzvoom'm mum'm mm on: m
m in Rnuian 1981 (eiqned to preee 15 Jul 81) pp 2-4

lumotetion, table of contente and (onward fro the collection "Richly Produc-

tive Co-putex lquipneut to: Data Proceeeinq" edited by Vadie Yewen’yevich
Kotom Vychielitel'nyy taent: 80 A! $88!. 299 copies. 90 payee!

[‘rextl Annotetioo
the topical collection "Highly Productive Capote: Equipment for Date Proceee-
ing' includee articlee devoted to vorte certied out at the Computer Center by
the ma module: Asynchronous Developed Syatenl and ‘l‘eDCI [Cater for Geophye-
ical Intonation Ptoceeeing) pmjecte.

Coatente Page
m.“ 0 O O 0 D O O O O C O O O O O O O I O I I O O O O O O O O O O 2

foreword................................ 4

m. L. Viehnevekiy. V. Ye. Rotov end A. 6. W, Configuration
and Principlee of Organisation of Parallel Pxooeeeot to:
Matricell’roceeeing....................... 5

v. I. Deetyekov and Yu. L. Viehoevekiy. Deeiqn Principlee of Input
WOIMi'mSPtOOOIIOI..................1‘

G. I. Griehin. tonetion of Addzeeeee and Organisation of teceee to
mqummmeeeor................... 25

P. v. Mo. Organisation of niniprogr-inq in uni-mas Proceeeox . . 32

V. a. Dutbayeva and Rh. lth. Dutbeyev, Devices to: Synchrotron and
Asynchroooue Interactiooinuini-HMBProceeeo: . . . . . . . . . . 38

A. G. Tereyle and N. A. Chertenkov, Organization of attend Co-un-
icetioneotninimshooeeecr.................. 45

31
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

v. s. Nikul'tsev, Structure of Syste- for leage Processing . . . . . . 52

v. P. Carin and It. I. nogil'nitekiy, Specialized Capote: mus
Basedonlticrccouputer...................... 60

V. A. Shaptsev, One Approach to Increasing the Correctness of Infome-
tion ‘rranaIieeioo Over Radio Granule in the ‘l‘er-inal Radio Net-
work forecollective-UeeCGIpoterCenter . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

s. '1'. Vas'kov. Ye. N. Dobrov and B. V. tesenko, Data Trans-lesion
System Based on Blektronika-GO hicrocawter and came Equip-sot . 75

B. V. resenho and h. D. Qurnavin, Modes-2400 Signal Conversion Device. 82
foreword

‘lﬁe eucceae of aicroelectronice per-its a ooneidsreble expaneion of the
nooenclature of cosputer equipment and developent of coaputers of different
designation with diverse structure that corresponds acre optiIally to the dif-
ferent ephsrae of their application. Il‘he fields of application of coaputer
equip-ant and cathode of using ito-highly productive univereal computers for
solving large problems of aathenatical physics, coapotere for large informa-
tiom eyetus, field cowuter ooaplexae, video inforlatioo proceseing ayete-s,
coqmtere ae oo-poneate of collective-nee networks and systems, problu-ori-
ented laboratory coepnter eysteu and so cn-are being expanded constantly.
Scientific research work is being conducted at the Coaputer Cutter. Siberian
Depart-ant. um hoaduy of Sciences in the configuration of parallel co-pu-
tere and coapleznes. Articlea that illuinete ems preliminary reeulte of in-
vestigations on the egoipent caponaote of the m Molar Asynchronooe
Developed Bystua) and fecal (Geophysical Intonation Processing Center) m3-
acts and the eel-tic data gathering and proceeaing eyetu are included in the
preeent collection.

COPYRIGHT: wcazsum'm ram 80 All 8888

6521
C80: 1863038

32
FOROFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY
novooibirek WSOIDPROIZVODnn'Nm wcuxam'm mm om 0mm
05mm in Ruaeian 1981 (signed to prose 15 Jul 81) pp 5-13

[Article by Yu. L. Viahnevoxiy. V. Ye. Kotcv and A. G. ilerchuk from tho collec-
tion ”Richly Productive Co-putor Equipment for Data Proceeding“ edited by Vadil
Yevgen'yevich Kotov. Vychialitol‘nyy toentr 90 All 8881!, 299 copiee, 90 page.)

[Text] An approach that includoa the dooiqn of opecialirod caputera intended
to solve one or another clan of problue has gained wide dietribution during
the loot fev yeara in design of couputoro of high and euporhigh productivity.
A wide divoroity of apecialired proceoooro with very high productivity and
that oolvo opocific problono in real tine, related lainly to image procoooinq,
procooaing of radar oiqnalo, trajectory calculationo and co co. hoe appeared.
Those procooaoro have given o good account of th-oolvoo and the diversity of
apecialirod procoaoore will probably increase oven acre in the future.

The qroateot advanceo in tho increaao of productivity in the field of malari-
cal proceeoing are related to effoctivo realisation of a nuﬂaer of vector oper-
ationo. However, ecalar calculations are carried out in thio caeo vith a con-
aidorable ion in productivity. no a rooult the efficiency of a opecialired
proceaoor dopenda conaidorably on the percentage of ocalar calculationa in the
problo-o being oolvod. The aituation aloo chanqea alightly when a ecalar pro-
coeeor of traditional configuration ie added to the col-pater oyatan.

A new configuration of a numerical data procoeoor. booed on the concept of
nodller eaynchronoue developed oyot-e (ans) [1) and that permits new oolu-
tion of the problua of efficiency both for ecalar and vector calculationa. io
proposed in the given article. The main footuroa of the proceeeor are:

hierarchical etructure (oyatc, ouboyatlla, functional dovicea and baoic
ccnponenta lovelo) and functional apocialization at all lovele by eharinq con-
trol, notion. procoeeing and «itching function”

paraliollie- at all levola. aaynchronoua interaction of oubayetona.
minaticn of frequnte, parallel execution and a conveyor:

oynchronouo nicroproqran realization of oubayote-a;

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a baeic nethod of conbining functional davicee-the Witching nethod;
development of a local nanory etructure and lilti-acceee coma nenory:
hierarchical nicroprogr-ningx

configurational independence of nadzine language;

high level of ayeten language;

parallel operating eyeta.

Structure of Proceeeor

The proceeeor coneiete of four nain aubeyetuancontrol eubayetel, addreaa and
counting eubeyetene and aleo nelory eubeyeten.

The proceeeing eubeyetene of the ptoceaeor are constructed on the unified
principle. They coneiet of conveyor type individual functional devicea (f0)
epecializad to parforn specific operationa. The functional devicea interact
by neane of a controlled high-epeed ewitchboard. The eubeyetu control device
guaranteea parallel operation of the functional devicea end parallel execution
of eeverel (poeeibly different) fragments in the eubayetna that realize epecif-
ic nacrofunctiona. The prograna of theee frag-ante are atored in the eubayeten
instruction nanory. Nnctional delay devices were need in the eubayetue for
temporary atorage of internedieta reaulte.

In the information eanee. the eubayetue are divided into aaveral layere of
data to be prooaeead. belonging to independent frag-ante in the general caee.
The functional devicea ehare theae layera in tine. which per-ita coabination
execution of acalar frag-ante to increaaa the degree of ueaful loading of the
eubeyet-e.

The unified structural principle. which includee the fact that the eeparate
nodule at each level of the hierarchy coneiata of functionally oriented aub-
mdulee that perforn procuring, etoraga, control and awitching function, in
followed in daeign of individual eubeyete-e, the proceaeor ea a whole and the
ayetu that conbinee eeveral proceeeore.

The figure preeente an overall repreeentation of the proceeaor etructure.

The functioning of the entire prooeeaor ia baaed on the flow or conveyor prin-
ciple. The control eubeyetan (0P8) forna the line of operatora ready for ex-
ecution. The operator in a liet of nanee of frag-ante, ooneiating of the nuee
of addreee frapente and the nanee of the computing frag-ante and their rela-
tionehipe according to the initial calculating formula. The nanee of the frag-
nente are accordingly entered in the addreu aubayatu (APB) or conputing aub-
ayetan MB). In the general oaae an individual addreee fragnent reelieea a
nontrivial function of aanpling data ale-ante of coupler atructure and gener-
atea addreee flown by which operande ehould he read fro- tha data acory or by
which the reeulte of calculatione ehould be written in the nanory. The

FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
Pigure 1. Overall Structure of Proceeeor

Key:
1. onto memory eubeyetu 5. External chennele
2. llenory nodule 6. Coeputing eubeyeten
3. Mtohboerd 7. Control eubeyet-

4. Mdreee eubeyetee

coeputing frequent reeliue eoee culputing function on vector independent
verieblee. It prooeeeee input dete {love end tone output flove ot reeulte,
pert of which in eent heck to thie e-e eubeyet- ee input {love for other
frequents end port of which in written in the ee-ory. The control eubeyet-
per-ite eeverel interpretetion proceeeee to he cerried out in the leyere of
the eubeyeten, for-ins frepente in the computing end eddreee euheyetele end
monitoring their execution.

Orqenizetion of Subeyete-e

An importent confiqm'etionel concept ie thet of the eubeyetee. A eubeyete-
in e functionally eelt-contuned nodule o! e eyete- connected to other

35
m omcw. us; ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subsystems by asynchronous exchange channels (AK). One~vay transmission of
information from one subsystem to another is accomplished through the asyn-
chronous channel; therefore, writing and reading channels are distinguished.
The sane channel for a single subsystem is a reading channel and the same
channel for another subsystem is a writing channel.

A subsystem, as noted above, generally realises nontrivial processing func-
tions. These functions are programmed in the subsystm and represent func-
tionally complete program modules, so-called fragments. we shall smtimes
understand a fragment as a progru itself and sometimes as the process of ex-
ecuting this program in the subsystem. A fragment usually realises some typi-
cal microfunction, partially used in user programs. No special restrictions
on the algorithmic complexity of fragments are introduced. They can realize
both simple processing diagrams and those containing cycles and conditional
control. The complexity of the fragments will be limited on the one hand by
the limitation of the resources in the subsystem and on the other hand by the
requirement of sufficiently frequent use of this fragment in user problems
(it is probably unfeasible to create a too complex fragment for infrequent
use: it is better to realize it by means of simpler typical fragments).

Several fragments can be initiated in a subsystem. The capability of oaabining
the work of several fragments in a subsystem is provided by the following
concepts.

First. the capability of assigning several address and canputing fragments in
the instruction is an important aspect. Several structures can participate
simultaneously in processing. The elements of these structures can be read
and written by different, but simultaneously executed address fragments. The
instruction for several related computing fragments permits a more complex
processing function to be assigned. which is a composite of typical functions.

Second, we regard the combination of fragments as a method used to increase
the productivity of the conveyor subsystem when processing scalar fragments.
During operation an individual fragment that processes scalar independent
variables, the subsystem is not completely loaded. A ccmbination of fragments
is essentially a method used to determine the advantages of continuous flow
organization of the subsysta.

Since several fragments can be in the active state simultaneously in the sub-
system, it is convenient to represent a subsystem consisting of several layers
or sections by the number of combined fragments. Bach fragment can function
within only one section allocated to it and in this sense it is protected
against the action of other fragments and itself does not affect them directly.

Differently processor subsystems have a unified structure regardless of func-
tional orientation. This solution has a nuber of positive properties. Thus,
the methodology and technique of fragment microprogra-ling. subsystel control,
organization of the mesory of fragments, the structure of cosmunications be-
tween devices, verification and debugging are all solved in the unified manner
in different subsystems.

36
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
A subsysten regarded as an individual functional module cmsists of subodules
that perform the functions of processing, control, switching and memory. Pro-
cessing functions are accomplished by neans of functional devices (1'0). The
subsystem contains several functional devices, which can operate simultaneous-
13/. to parallel these functions. functional systems are oriented toward per-
formance of specific elementary operations. The «reposition of a functional
systu in the subsystem and structure of data that are processed by these func-
tional devices deternines the functional specialisation of the subsystem.
Functional devices that realise functions rewiring several operating cycles
for execution have conveyor organization.

Thus, regardless of the nubsr of cycles required to perform operations, the
input of each functional device is freed at the beginning of the next cycle to
receive the following operands and instructions.

Analysis of typical computing problems such as those of linear algebra, spec-
tral analysis, calculation of elementary and spectral functions, formula cal-
culations, calculation of polynomials and so on showed that a high-speed
matrix switchboard can be used to guarantee flexible col-unication of the
functional devices with each other if their nusber is relatively small (lo-20) .

The synchronous principle of functional device interaction is adopted in the
subsystem First, the synchronous principle requires approximately 30 percent
less eguipent compared to the asynchronous principle. Second, the determin-
ant behavior of all the functional devices simplifies the control of the func-
tional devices and, which is important, simplifies the switchboard since in
this case the status of the switchboard is replaced synchronously by a single
switching instruction. Moreover, fragment “W is simplified. nird.
analysis of synchronous systems is simpler than analysis of asynchronous
systuls.

Systems Organization
The design principles of a system are as follows:

the syst- is constructed from several functionally oriented subsystems--

the address subsystem ms). computing subsystem ms), control subsysta‘ (OPS).
sesory subsystem (PPS) and peripheral subsystem (3P8)!

a set of interacting processes (fragments) functions at a given moment in
each of the subsystems and in the system as a “let

asynchronous channels are used to transfer operands from one process to
another; if the interacting processes function in different subsystem. their
interaction is organised through channels that link different subsysth to
each other; if the interacting processes function within a single subsystem,
then channels that combine input and output terminals of the subsystme are
used:

input operands are accordingly entered in the subsystem through input
terminals. while the result operands accordingly leave the subsystem through
the output terminals; the terminals can connect the inputs or outputs of

37
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

asynchronous channels of different designation; there may be several input
and output terninals in the subsystem:

different types of resources required to fulfill a process are designated
dynamically and independently of each other; the types of resources subject to
distribution are the sections of the subsystem the stbchannels of asynchron-
ous channels. the zones of local parameters of the process and the data and
program memory domains. The last type of resources is determined for the pro-
graa as a whole rather than for an individual process. The dyn-ic distribu-
tion of reswrces creates prerequisites, first. for organisation of uynelmon-
ous starting of processes as resources are freed. which leads to an increase
of the degree of loading of subsystems and accordingly to an increase of pro-
ductivity, and second. to create a configurationally independent processor
input language. This lust be understood in the sense that the input language
should not be strongly dependent on a specific set of processor resources.
which solves the problem of the transferability of progr-s within different
processor cmfigurations.

The hierarchical principle of control is realized in the systu, which reflects
the hierarchical structure of the programs. The following levels of control
are distinguished (from top to bottom):

control of execution of an individual fragment in a subsystulx

control of execution of an operator consisting of a list of interacting
fragments: it includes tracking the operation of individual fragments and the
distribution of resources for than:

control of execution of the progru nodule consisting of a list of oper-
ators: it includes organization of the sequence of fulfilling the operators
and of following the work of individual operators:

control of execution of the progru consisting of modules: it includes
following the work of nodules. calculating the conditions of response of the
nodules and organization of access to shared resources jointly with the dif-
ferent nodules being used.

The first level of control is realised in subsystems. The second and third
levels are realized by the control subsystem by means of the corresponding
fragments whose programs are written in the fragment se-ory of the control
subsystem. or in other words by means of nicroprogram realisation of control
functions. It is feasible that several control processes--fragsents-are
constantly in an active status in the control subsystem. This is true of such
frag-ants as interpretation of the input language operator, control of fulfil-
ment of the operator. initial response to interrupt signals coming fro. sub-
systems and so on.

The fourth level of control is realized sainly by programs. i.e.. by the oper-
store and program nodules of the user progr. or of the operating systcs. Some
functions such as synchronization of processes during use of canon resources
and others such as second- and third-level control functions. may have equip-
ment support in the form of special functional devices within the control
eubsystu.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Marduk. G. I. and V. Yo. Rotov, "nodular Asynchronous Developed 8pm,“
Propane no 68 and No 87. mint“, 1978.

COPYIIGST: VYCBISLITZL’NYY TEENTR 80 A8 8883

6521
C8): 1863/11”

39
PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WOPMWMSW

Novosibirsk wsommrzvoom'mz mann'm mm DINA 0mm
mum in Rnooian 1981 (cloned to preoo 15 Jul 81) pp 52-59

[Article by V. 8. Niknl‘toov fun the collection: 'lighly Productive Captor
Equip-out for Data Proceooing' edited by Vadin Yovgon'yovioh Kotov, Vychio-
litel'nyy toontr 80 All 5883. 299 copioo, 90 moo]

['rextl Conoidorotion of a rothor wide range of inogo procoooinq pueblo-o.
realization of \dsioh dooo not eon-o different gen-trio tronoforlotiono of
the rotation or tonoion type and in the general caoe io unrelated to detona-
tion of the coordinate grid, penito one to dotonino at o opooific level of
detail the otohle otructuro of olqoritt-e thot norantee oolution of theoo -

problo-o.

I'hio io dotomination of one, relatively coll ouhoot of oluonto of the in-
itial ioaqe or an ogqrocoto of then.

Thin in tho roprooontation on thio aot of tho coopntinq procedurim thot gon-
oroteo o tumor of valuoo related in the general cooe to different footuroo.

'l'hio io organization of the proceoo that occulplioheo continuou- or block nop-
ping of the data of tho initial oot onto the donut: of definition of tho con-
puting procedure during tho proceoo or oeqnontial application of it to tho
entire initial value of date or during trocking of one functional by it.

The entire oorieo of prohla-o in the conoidorod ochue will require o known
motor of 'paooeo.‘ rolotod to calculation of tho preliminary paranotero of
tronoforlotiono, for oranplo. of paraootoro thot reflect the charoctoriotico
of clooooo, in problm related to cloooificotion ll. 2]. ﬂoreovor, oequontial
uoo of computing proceduroo ponito one to reolioe iteration algoritl-o. ‘lhe
effectivonooo of the lattor will he dotonined by the flexibility of ropcooon-
totion of poroootoro, by the variety of ccoputinq procednroo corroopcndinc to
the iterationo and by the capability of ropreoonting different otructuroo and
"fom' of oubooto for then. i'hno, thio ooy he one lccol do-in around each
point in the plane of the photograph for a nubor of trancforootiono oo, for
example, in roolizotion of convolution or o oorioo of oothmtioal operaticno
related to calculation of grodieuto, Loplaciano and to interpolation or to
calcnlotion of foatnroo that reflect the texture of Moo [4. 5, 6]. for

MOFHMLSCMY
realisation of orthogonal transforsstions. this say be a set formed of elements
whose coordinates reflect doubly inverse order [3]. this will be sets of vec-
tors in probls-s of synthesis of color isages or problem related to presenta-
tion of input information contained in several photographs. according to the
characteristics of huan perception of the isagas [7. 8]. In some probless
the doeain of definition of the caputing procedure nay correspond to sons
"volune.’ related to multidimensional representation of data [6] or on the
contrary nay degenerate to a point It) . It is the necessity of the joint
guarantee of the variety of "ferns” and structures of the domains of defini-
tion of coquting procedures that affect to a considerable degree the practi-
cal realization of interactive nodes of image processing if the latter are

not restricted by sons narrow class of problem. If one proceeds frat the
fact that couples mastic processing of images, interpreter to a significant
degree by its fern, first requires an interactive nediu, ensuing joint pos-
tulation and resolution of a rather wide range of proble-sl then guarantee of
the capability considered above becomes one of tho nain aspects in realisation
of this systea. The latter is considerably aggravated by tho significant vol-
ume of data to be processed, which co-prises tens of bytes with regard to in-
termediate results in nany probl-Is even in relatively snail inage forests,

as for ore-ple, in probluas of classification with regard to adjacent elements
in the plane of the photograph. All this assuaes the presence of intoer
storage corresponding to the systa.

nlthmsgh the prospects for designing an internal storage with this capacity
with rendu access is unrealistic. this is still on the one hand an expensive
gratification (and even in this case one nust have it in practice) and on the
other hand. one can consider a colpralisa version. Then there is a correspond-
ing hierarchy of my levels related to each other by exchange processors.
The structure of the latter. depending on specific problns and types of data
determined by the control conputer, should guarantee dynuic puping of data
and passage of it tbourhg a nediu that accollplishos direct processing.

The sufficient effectiveness of this hierarchy of nescry levels follows priner-
ily fro- the structure of processing algoritlns that considers the sequential
nature of access at the level of certain volt-es of data and that assumes ran-
dom access within them. It must be noted that this situation can occur upon
transition frat level to level up to a nediun that guarantees realisation of
computing operations and in this case. the levels, like the algorithm thu-
eelves, nay pernit considerable parallelling.

The corresponding .Imd levels of the memory hierarchy are:

the level of the operating library that guarantees randaa access at the
data file level and sequential access inside them

a nain internal storage that guarantees buffering, storage and random
access to data,

fast internal storage to which data are transfornod which are the domain

of definition of the computing procedure and from which they are accessible to
it.

m
me email us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The interaction of exchange processes of the corresponding maory levels is
unrelated to the address spaces of the latter and is vector. block erchange
in nature. The problem of realization of a conveyor in direct form is not
posed here. Again the variety of problems obviously does not permit complete
coordination of the indirect rate of processing. the speed will be determined
by the longer term Operation and is more reasonable to guarantee support of
them. using both microprogram and equipent realization of the latter.

The general algoritha of interaction of the main parts of the system. consist-
ing of a main compuur and terminal station (figure 1) that includes a control
computer, a set of :mutation address exchange processors. several levels of
data storage and display system, a direct computing nedium and also abbrevia-
tione of interaction with the operator, assumes napping of the selected com-
bination of user procedures by the control computer onto a set of intial states
of the required nodules and parts of the system and initiation and maintenance
of exclunges between them.

The sesory subsystem, related to the level of the operating library. is guar-
anteed by the interaction of a nmber of modules joined in a single crate by
the corresponding mainlines--one for control from the controller (3-60 nini-
computer) and two for exchange of data. The latter guarantee sequential bit
and byte addressless asynchronous exchange of data. Apparatus support of the
controller at the level of the corresponding modules permits connection through
interface cards of different media that guarantee direct storage of data if
their structure permits one to consider thu as a memory having renda access
to secnsential files. 'niis can obviously be nedia realized on the basis of

1‘s. ILD. [expansion unknown], on r.z.s («pension unknown]. on structures or.
for example. on magnetic disk store. The difference will be essentially re-
lated to the enchenge time, which in the latter case for an image with volue
of 512 X 512 x 8 bits (Yes-$061 sagnetic disk) will correspond to 1-2 seconds.
The effect of this value on the rate of solving problems in dialogue. with re-
gard to the corresponding capabilities of buffering up to several images in
the internal storage. of guaranteeing dynamic pumping of data and finally,
with regard to the time for representation of the corresponding user directives
during operation, can obviously not be so significant. Guarantee of all fmco
tions for nanagement and description of the library catalogue and also col-un-
ication with other external devices is guaranteed directly by means of this
level. this permits one to consider interaction with a control process at the
level of images and tasks and is not rigidly tied to realization of other

levels and subsystns .

The level of the main internal storage is guaranteed by the set of unconnected
units (clunnels) of the internal storage. physically realized in individual
crates. Each of these units is a semiconductor memory with direct access.
which is accomplished through a unified exchange mainline and which permits
connection of different functional modules to it. In this case the capacity
of each unit is determined by the number of memory nodules contained in it.
me maxim- nmber of these modules is limited to eight. Their organization
corresponds to a two-dimensional structure with capacity of 256 x 127 16-bit
words and permits double stratification at the module level. This permits,
along with the capability of access to a byte and lo-digit word. a guarantee

h2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of simultaneous access of tvo words (32 digits) and of realizing the maxim-
capacity with a cycle of 400 nanoseconds of the uory itself up to lo betas/s.
This capability guarantees the effectiveness of data exchange during operations
related to representation of operands that require large dynamic ranges.

The nature of interaction of all Ibdules and the processes corresponding to
than is related to execution of drive and driven (several driven) functions
and to establiat-ent of asynchronom col-mications at the level of the first
part of the address (the hunter of the vector) and synchronous data exchange
in the second part (tn-bar cf the slant). The latter is achieved by a 12-
digit eultiplexed line.

Resolution of conflicts for a simultaneous request of a mainline is entrusted
to a home that perforas the functions of arbitrator and in this case the
process having lowest priority can be interrupted after notification.

The basic set of functional nodules corresponding to a single channel includes
N inteer storage nodules (1-8), nainline arbitrator nodule. corresponding
exchange processor nodules both with operating library and fast internal stor-
age accessible for calculations. a television driver and interface nodule di-
rectly for the control conputer. The control registers of each of the nodules
is allocated an address space in the total capacity of the nenory. Thus. for
example, the television driver is described with the following set of registers.
These are:

an eluent nus-bar register free which the inge can be fed to the monitor
(1,024 X 512 ale-ants):

register for placing the image on the nonitor screen:
register of the sire of the imaged sons of the noncry:

vertical and horizontal scale register (1. 2, d, a):

general control register.

Control of than registers is accessible to any nainline nodules and permits
realisation of a nmbar of interesting nodes in inage interpolation on the
screen and in "anination' of the images by using nultiplication by addition
of special modules or, finally, it guarantees the capability of achieving a
stereo effect with subsequenting tinting.

The carrying capacity of each of the channels and its capacity per-its the
television driver to display one of two images measuring 512 x 512 aluents

on the monitor or two of eight images simultaneously with resolution of 256 X
x 256 elements of 8 bits each. Television drivers permit joint synchronisation
to regenerate the images in color with resolution of 512 x 512 eluente or,

for example, to achieve the capability of printing the image in 1,02d x 1,024
elements. One to organize parallel printing of several images inediately,
depending on the nunber of available channelnand guarantees the capability of
subsequent joint processing of then in the video tempo, i.a.. to realise

1:3
ron omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iimilar capabilities of known systems. The basic version of the system in-
cludes up to four channels whose television outputs are coebined into a sys-
tees television unit that pernits switching. superposition of data, 'tinting'
of them during using of a color aonitcr and conversion of digital values to
analog values.

The provision of readout by neans of address processors fro. each of the in-
ternal storage units. determined by an ordered set of data that are the dalain
of definition of the congating procedure, pernite effective use of vector pro-
cessors for direct calculations. In this case the functions of the donain of
the fast internal storage are performed directly by the internal storage of
the vector processor. This version is more than sufficient for a mater of
problems, but one must encounter rather significant overhead expenses in ex-
change and duplication of data when realising algoritm related to the init-
ial two-dimensional structure of data. Thus. for eranple, when realizing
convolution of an inage with some nae): (window) measuring 32 x 32 ale-ante for
calculation of a single new value. tron-lesion of up to 1,000 elements to a
vector processor without modification and adjusuent of its prograe is required.
whereas it would be sufficient to get along with 32 eluents. Without exclud-
ing the considered capability, the teninal station is provided with its own
internal storage and the corresponding computing mediun.

The structure of the neaory, from the viewpoint of display of an initial ag-
gregate of data on it, emulates to a known degree the nuory on shift regis-
ters. retaining random access within it in this case. A specific structure of
data controlled by previous processors essentially seems to move and slip
through this nenory.

The nuory consists directly of nodules that per-it parallel access of a set
of coeputing processors (autonatons) to th. through one of the channels
("vertical") . a guarantee of novemeuat through that is acoosplished by the
"horizontal" channels. All the nodules are combined by a unified address line
connected to a control device. Parallel renoval of sinilar operands from each
module is realised in practice.

The set of ccnputing processors (or one processor) is also under single con-
trol. Canunication with nodules of the internal storage is accomplished
through a switching media. The latter ensures the capability of a relative
shift of the processor satrir with respect to the emery nodules, thus expand-
ing the do-ain of definition of the computing procedure and retaining parallel
operation of all processors.

The control device and the corresponding exchange channels with upper level of
internal storage are sililar to the nedia considered earlier and are accessible
to the control computer through the level interface.

The considered structure of the ilage processing systee. which assumes a devel-
oped dialogue during operation, guarantees known flexibility and permits the
development and increase of capacity both in speed and in the complexity of

the algorithm. The independence of lovels and their modular nature within
guarantees effective practical realisation and the capability of design and
aseeably of different configurations.

m.
POI! omcul. use ONLY
menu a comidenbie pert of the cost of e eyeten is non releted to its
software, then pert o! it cannot be applied to the hudvere level.

1.

2'

3.

‘0

S.

6.

7.

8.

3mm

'ru. .1. end P. Gonzelee. "Printeipy rupomveniye obi-em" [Principlee of
Pattern Recognition], Hoeoov, Hit, 1978.

We, I" ’Wedeniye v etetilticheelmyu teoziyu respocmweniye obrexov"
Introduction to 8tetietice1 booty o! Pattern Recognition]. ﬂoecov. Retake.
1979.

Rnbinez, L. and 3. Gold, ’l‘eoriye i pti-eneniye teitrovoy obrebotki eig-

nelov" theory and Application of Digitel Prooeeeinq of Signal-l , Moscow,
Mix. 1973.

M113. R. u” “Stetieticel end Sttucturel Approach“ to Deecription of
rattan." 'rnan, Vol 61, No S. 1979.

Andrew, H. c.. "Digital. Image Prooeeeing,” In: Spectrum ma. 1979.

Benin. 6. ‘1'. and a. K. Lin, “Dynamic sundry Surtece Detection.“ 'Cc-po-
to: Graphic- end Inge Proceuing,’ Vol 7, No 1, 1978.

Adams, J. and R. mince, "New Concepts in Diepley Technology,“ coco-ran,
Magnet, 1977.

shoup. R. 6., Md- e Unified Amoech to two-Dimensional Picture unip-
ulation.“ comm amazes, V01 11, No 2, 1977.

WRIGHT: VYCSISLM'M am so M 8881!

6521

cso:

1863/1138

1:5
roe omcm. use on“
MWLIJSBONLY

om MISSION 818'!!! new 0!! W0 ummmn AI) cam
murmur

ﬂoweibii’ek waomnoxzvoom'me mxsum'me mm DLYA came:
m in Rueeiam 1961 (eigned to preee 15 Jul Bl) pp 75-81

[Article by 8. 1'. Vae'kov. Ye. II. lobm and e. V. reeenko fro. the collection
“Highly Productive Capote: Iquipeent for Data Prooeeeinq' edited by Vadi-
Yevgen'yevich Rotor. Vychielitel'eyy teentr so en 8885!. 299 copiee. 90 page)

[Text] A eat of MC nodulee that match the crate mainline to different con-
unicetione channele and linee over a wide range of date tnneeieeion epeede
wee developed according to the operating prograa to create hardware of the
firet unit of the Wet! multiple-nee caputer center]. Siberian Deperuent.
088R need-y of scienoee. which eade it poeeible to link territorielly die-
pereed inforlation gathering ad prooeeeinq eyetua to each other [1, 2).

An exuple of thie eyet- may be the eoientific reeearch mtoeetion ayat-
beeed on the Bleku'onike-Go eicroavmter.

e eat of different malt-output devioee linked by a colputer channel providee
greater functional oapabilitiee in organisation of thie eyetea.

Development of date trannieeion equipleent (no) in the deeiqne of the Blak-
tronika-so nicroconputer waa a further continuation of work within the project
of the multiple-nee caputer center. Siberian Depart-eat, USSR heads-y of
Scienoee. and node it poeeible to expand the capebilitiee of the eerial

coeputer .

0n the one hand. development of data tranelieeion equipant within the deeiqne
of nicrooanputere and on the other hand, compatible in exchange for-ate and
protocole to einiler MC equipent, pernite organiaation of different ver-
eione of equip-ant configuration airing deeign of the network each ae:
exchange of two ruote cuputere,
exchange of two relate cam eyem.

and exchange of a relate nicrocoeputer with a cum: eyetee.

MOI-TIMUSEONLY
Data tranmaission equipment guarantees matching of the coal-on bus of the
alehtronika-GO microcolputer to a sequential co-unications channel. The con-
neoting lines of a city telephone exchange or physical pairs, tranmaission
through mich can be accomplished at speeds of 12, 24. 48 and 96 kbaud, can be
used in realization of the cannications channel.

Data transmission to a distance up to 16 kilueters is possible in this case.

There is the capability of operating on a standard tone-frequency telephone
channel using serial signal conversion devices (Indus) .

In this case the data transmission equipment, besides being matched to the
physical line, guarantees latching with the modem by a standard 82 junction
[4) .

Organisation of data trannission over a tone-frequency telephone channel us-
ing serial modems is presented in Figure 1.

A duplex information channel is realised in these systems. i.e.. transmission
can be accomplished independently both in the fomrd and reverse directions.

At the same time the proposed circuit also permits operation in the semiduplex
node.

The data transmission system is by function:

a system with resolving feedback (intonation is verified at the receiv-

ing end and a signal is transmitted to the return channel on the results of
reception);

a system with feedback signal expectation (the next information is trans-
mitted after the signal is received from the return channel).

The feedback signal is transmitted over the information channel of the reverse
direction.

'the presence of an internal storage permits information to be stored until
confirmation has been received from the return channel.

{he developed data transmission equipment is oriented toward the use of mm
line protocol (high-level bit-oriented co—unicetione channel control proce-

dure). confirmed by the International Organization on Standards (180 standard
3309) .

According to the protocol, a code-independence mode. formation of the struc-
ture of information transmitted over the cummioations channel and verifica-
tion of the status of the channel are provided.

A block diagram of the data transmission equipent is shown in Pigure 2.

The tranmlitting and receiving part includes an internal storage with capacity

of 256 eight-digit words intended to store information for the verification
tine. .

h?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500080019-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

be
m omcm us: on“

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500080019-0
IAIAIOI :-

i
I
I
II
It
a
a.
II
0
o

083..

 

Figure 2. Block Diagram of mu Tran-1.01m Equip-ant

Key:
1.
2.

3.

7.

run-lute: a. eta-mutations line
It... verification cognac. 9. Field shaping cheat
chnpc: 10. Adan”

Caputcr channcl. mutation 11. Mice

circuit 12. 11020ch frequency
mum]. stung. 13. run- .1119th device
1109 shape: 14. OR signal Gaucho:
um bit insert 15. Error dccodcr

Signal. convmion Mice

[Continua on following page]

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued tron preceding page]:

16. Ira-e verification seemence 19. Frans receiving circuit
17. Analysis of field 8 20. zero exclusion circuit
18. Receiver 21. Synchronization circuit

ll‘heuseot tvointernalstoresvasdeterninedbytheneedtoorganireadwlu
operating node in both directions.

361 and no: are registers that convert an eight-digit parallel/series code to
series/parallel code.

the trans verification sequence shaper is a register with feedback that real
ires the generator polynonial

12

x16+x +x5+1,

The designation of the ruaining asseshlies is clear from the block diagran.

Intonation is exchanged between the central processor and the data translais-
sion equinent by leans of standard access cycles to the channel.

There is a ntnber of internal registers to organize this exchange of the data
transmission equipment.

The transmitter status register (address 177600) participates in operations
with respect to the service require-ant and presentation of interrupt.

The transmitter (address 177602) and receiver (address 177606) data registers
are used during data exchange.

The trannitter word counting register (address 177610) is used to control the
length of the transnitted data pack in the range from O to 256 bytes.

The receiver word counting register (address 177612) is designed to store in-
formation about the length of the data pack taken from the Meadow
channel and stored in the internal storage. The register (ornate are pre-
sented below.

151‘131211109876663210

',-_w:- '5':) .'-‘;i a" 'x.‘ Liir 1' ' sans (2)

 
  

 

Format of Transmitter Status Register

Key:
1. "Breakdown in channel” error 3. Servicing requirnent (run)
2. Interrupt authorization

MOI-TIMUSBONLY
lornat o: Receiver Status Register

 

Key:
1. Interrupt authorisation 2. Servicing requirusnt (rm)
formats of Data Registers and Tran-itter and Receiver
Word Counting Register
Key:
1. Not used 2. Data

Using the capability of writing to the trenenitting and receiving data regis-
ters (and the internal storage serves as thu) for all 256 addresses and sub-
sequent reading permits one to organise testing at the internal storage in the
auto-increment node, while the use 0! the write-pause-read mode per-its one to
organise random access to the internal storage.

Organisation of the interrupt requirement, presentation or interrupt and
trannission of the interrupt vector address are acoupliehed in the standard

aanner for a computer.

‘mo independent interrupt requirements are used to call up the tun-litter and
receiver servicing subroutines. The interrupt vector addresses are 230 and
234, respectively.

Structurally. the data transmission equipment is fulfilled in two versions:

data trans-lesion equip-ant for operating over the connecting lines of
a city telephone exchange or over physical lines. In this case the data trans-
mission equipment is made in the tors: of a single plate neasuring 252 x 296 In
with disconnects for a lead to the computer channel and one disconnect on the
plate for connecting the municetione line.

It operation is over a standard tone-frequency telephone ﬂannel. then the same
plate measuring 252 x 296 u is used, but instead of an integration device with
physical line, integration by a standard 82 junction is nade on it [4] that
guarantees hatching to the serial mod-.

51
ms omcm. us: on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of this equip-eat amides-ably expend. the clsse of prone-s solved
by seens of microcomputers and eating this equip-eat on a single ideological
bees tron one developed previously pet-its solution of prom-s o! eta-peti-

bility and cmtinuity of the equip-em being developed.

1.

2.

3.

‘0

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Herchuk. 6. 1., Ye. P. Nmtsov, o. v. Noskelev. m. v. netlyeyev end

1.. 3. Shoe, 'Openting Progre- to Develop e Collective-Use Comte: Cen-
ter st the ﬂovosibixsk Scientific Center, Siberian Department, 0883 needs-y
of Sciences (Project ML" in ”Press-awe i tekhnicheskoye obespechen-
iye V'l'sKP' [Softwate and Mere of the Collective-Use Canter Center).
Novosibirsk. We 80 All 888. 1978.

Bobmv. Ye. N., v. A. Slepoev end 3. v. Yesenko. 'CNIAC nodules Oriented
Toward Develop-eat of Different-Purpose res-mind Complexesu' AW“.
No 4. 1980.

ISO Stendud 3009 1976 (8), Date transmission, verificetion of high-level
data txensnission channel, structure of units.

0081' 18145-72, “Tseli i pen-em chem as etyke 82 psi poeledavetel'non
vvode-vyvode dim intoneteii' [Purposes and Parameters of Rename
on 52 Junction During Sequential Input-mtput of Digits]. Infestation] .

comm: WCIISLITE'M m 80 MI 8888

6521

C80:

1863/3138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MODE-2400 SIGNAL W10“ DEVICE

Novosibirsk WSOKOPROIZVODM'W wmnmm'm earner“ DLYA 08M!
Dam in Russian 1981 (signed to press 15 Jul 81) pp 82-89

[Article by 8. V. Pesenko and A. D. Chermvin fro- the collection ”Highly Pro-
ductive Co-puter Equipment for Data Processing“ edited by Vadin Yevgen'yevich
Notov, Vychislitel'nyy tsentr so MI 8881!, 299 copies. 90 We]

[Excerpt] The Modem-2400 signal conversion device is included in the hardware
of the data trananission systems of the Collective-Use Couputer Center. Siber-
ian Department. 0888 Academy of Sciencea and is deeigned to convert binary sig-
nale to a signal suitable for tranenission over etandard tone-frequency (TCh)
telephone channels with four-wire ending.

The node- guarantees synchronous operation in the duplex node with data
transmission speed of 2,400 bite/a over segregated (mavitched) channele with
a length of six transceiving sections on a tone frequency (without correction
of the characterietic of the group delay tine (M) of the m1).

The digital lethod of direct aignal shaping in a may detain is used to
trans-it data in the mden tran-itter (ll .

Service information is transmitted in the return digital intonation channel
organized in ”data tranenitter" and ”data receiver" cam nodulee [2, 3].

The modest-2400 is designed for stable operation with frequency shift up to

£7 a: in the con-micationa channel and length of the cotmecting line (Sb) be-
tween the node- and tone—frequency channel up to 20 la and vith variation of
the received signal level from 0 to ~30 dB. The signal level dicing transmis-
sion can be regulated in the range free 0 to 28 d8. 111a per-issihle co-unica-
tione interrupt tine that does not lead to deeynchreniution of the node: re-
ceiver is lo seconds. If fluctuating noise is fed to the receiver input with
level 5 d8 below the signal level, the bit error coefficient co-prises not less
than 1°10". The frequency stability of the aaater oecilletor in 110's. no
output reeietance of the nodes: in the direction of the tone-frequency channel
ie equal to 600 obs.

umGB'l'z VYCﬂISLI‘l‘BL'm rsm 80 AN SSSR

6521
cso: meg/133

53
Iron omcm. use onur
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.067

mmmmmmmnmosnmmrmmmmcmmsrm
WITH mmm

ﬂoscow luv-mum I mm in Russian No lo. Apr 82 (musuipt received
1 Dec 80) pp 127-132

[Article by v.3. Dyn'kin, 3.8. nusayelyen and 3.8. layhnsn (deceased), Mount]

[Text] The prohlen of protecting infornstion fron unauthorized use
in an adaptive control systee with an identifier havin a
hierarchical structure is discussed. Counter-pron!
transforntions are presented which are used for protecting
the password list of systen users. A neth of encryption
of infornstion and a eethod of authenticating essssgae in
data transmission channels are suggested.

Modern systole for centralised supervision and control of territorially scattered
enterprises, their individual subdivisions and entities have a hierarchical struc-
ture. For a hierarchical systee it is possible to stipulate inleesntation of the
ASI (adaptive control systen with an identifier [1]) principle, not only for indi-
vidual entities, but for the systee as a whole. The block disgras of such a systen
for a 3-lsvel hierarchical structure is presented in fig 1.

For nany reasons, e.g., when it is necessary to maintain responsibility for func-
tioning of an individual entity or group of entities. as well as to prevent the
introduction of accidental or intentional changes in their operation, interference
in the functioning process by outside individuals or individuals responsible for
other entities can he undesirable. 0n the other hand the need arises of protecting
the infatuation circulating in the systen froe unauthorised actions—hooking up to
conunications channels for the purpose of intercepting tranuitted infer-stion. in-
cluding control instructions, or inserting spurious nessages; and unauthorized
reading or nodification of data files. Various inforestion on raw nsterials, nater-
isls, personnel resources and products produced can be subject to protection at
various hierarchical levels. It is often necessary to protect individual subsys-
tems. For ennple, of special interest is an A8! for controlling mltirsnge sup-
plies, when a storehouse for raw uterisls, senifinished products and finished pro-
ducts provides for the requests of several enterprises or entities. and ASI's for
especially precise production processes, whm the interference of outside personnel
is inperniseihle. The spot conplete protection of nodes-n autseeted system requires

51:
ms omcw. use my
the involvenent of hardware and software together with cryptographic nethoda and
organizational measures for protection.

      
       

   
 

‘5 - -- __ I t——
I.” In“ In! '
ling-{lbs}: [rm-I

    

     

   

¥

  

Figure 1. Block Diagra- of Hierarchical A81: ITO-«antral unit, Inidentifier,
O-eontrolled entity

1. W 3. Data transmission channel
2. I la. Third level

One effective Issue of protecting infatuation: frosunsuthorired use is cryptography.
It has found its obvious application in protection of co-mications. when infom-
tion is treasutted through co-unicstiona channels in encrypted fora. Here the
encryption can he perfornsd both by the outputs: itself and by special cryptographic
equip-ant installed at the transmitting and receiving ends of the co-unications
line. Another important application of cryptography is the protection of external
Ileaories by leans of encrypting stored infornstion. As will he denonstrated helov,
cryptography can he used also for solving the problea of authenticating a user of
the systeaufor deter-ining the authenticity of a person requesting access to the

Content Pomlation of Problems

Qualitative changes have been observed in the field of cryptography in recent years.
which is associated with the rapid development of co-puter technology and an in-
crease in the speed of computers. In particular, such concepts as counter-proof-
ness and the one-way function [2] have appeared.

A codeu-the transformation of an unconcealed text into an encrypted text-4a called
conputer-proof if in order to solve it (cracking the code's key or cracking the
encrypted text without knowing the code's hay is had in mind) the best of known
algorithm requires the performance of a nunber of operations which not a single
modern colputer is in a position to perfora in a certain tine period.

55
ms omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we will any that function f in new if it easily (in a relatively mil
nunber of operations on a computer) .ccneerta unconcealed text a: into encrypted
text y -- f(x) for all values of x . frosthe denim of definition. and the
reverse operation (conputation of the value of n: s 1" (y) with a known encrypted
text. y ) is computationally unrealizahle. The term 'conputatienally unrealitable"
means that transforaation by naans of the one-way function is counter—proof.

Two problens in protecting the hierarchical systen referred to. which can be solved
by means of cryptography. are discussed in this article:

1. Protection of the list of system user'passwords stored in the coquter's memory.

2. Protection from unauthorized reading of information and insertion of spurious
messages in data transmission channels.

Our goal is solving the problens formulated above is to substantiate the conputer-
proof nature of the transformations presented and to construct appropriate encrypt-
ion and decoding algorithms which can be implemented practically.

Solution of Problems

The traditional method of protecting a conputing system from unauthorized access to
it is the so-called password nethod. for the purpose of gaining access to the
system each of its legitinste users presents his secret password. which is compared
with a copy stored in the computer's nenory in .the password list under the anus of
the user in question. Access is pernitted if the password presented agrees with the
copy stored. Clearly, the list of stored passwords of systes users requires reli-
able protection fros encroachments of unauthorized people. for this it is possible
to use a one-way function and to enter in the list not the passwords themselves,

at , but their one-way transforntion, f(x) [3]. Each tine a user. i . presents his
secret password, x . the computer cosputes function “‘i) and conpares it with
the value of y ‘tored in the list. Since f is a one-way function, then finding
password 3: do. its transformation, y , is ilpossible. Consequently, the need
to protect tires unauthorized reading) e list in the computer's.sasory disappears.

The transfornstion of a binary vector-password x -into a binary vector—-trsns-
fox-nation y —by means of a certain binary matrix, I! . can be used as the one-way
function.

Statenent l. Transfer-anon 1-H - y is computer-proof.

In [A] the problen is discussed of the existence of a binary vector x with a
ﬂaming weight of 5 w . so that N! - y , where. y is the assigned binary vector,
H is the assigned binary natrix and w is some negative nusber. It is demon-
strated in [lo] that this problen. as in problems of decoding in the general case of
a linear code. as well as of finding the weight of the vector of a linear code,

is [NP-complete. III-complete problems are lit-difficult ones for which easy solution
algorithms have not been found. Mlete problems belong to the class of N!
problena which are solved by an indeterninate algorithn over a time period having a
polynonial dependence on input parameters. The NP-conpleteness of these problems
is proved by reducing to them the familiar NP-colplete problem of ”three-dimensional

56
ton omcm. use ONLY
sapling.“ l'hue. finding password vector x of the aseigned weight with known
transfornation vector y and netti- I is an lit-couplets probles and. consequent-
ly. has a solution of exponential conpleeity. It remins to he added that vector

2: east be eufficiently long to avoid the possibility of direct search and a mat
he an orthogonal natriat with randoe distribution of zeroes and ones.

In [3] for the purpose of protecting a password liet it is suggested that the fol-
lowing one-way function be used:

,(,,-','(;);a+...-'-'n+..';+.;;.;4a.<inoap). ' ' (1)

which self-naps set Cl.2,....p) . where p is a large silple Met. 1 5x .
f(x) 5 p and n. a1, ..., en are whole non-negative numbers not greater then p .

Statenent 2. Transforaation f(x) 5 q(x) (and p) is colputerdproof.

Actually, the conputetion of f(x) requires k log n log p operations. where k

is a certain coefficient. This computation, even with high n and p (n on the
order of 25° and p about 2‘"). is perforned on e cosputer in fractions of a
second, whereas the cosputation of x (finding the root of the polynonial over a
Galois field, cup) ) is a such lore difficult problen. The best of the algorithls
known [5] require at least n2 (log p)z operations, which with the proper selection
of n end p is an utrononically high number and is practically unrealizahle.
Therefore. if use outside person got possession of list y and tried to gain un-
authorized access to the systas, then he would encounter th‘ insoluble problen of
finding a: fron f(x) . It was also denonetrated in [3] that if n possible 3
correspond to each y (since the polynolial has a degree of n and. p is

prime) then the nethod of trial and error is also ineffective by far. (The required
nusber of etteqts for finding just a single password is ﬁve . where n is the
nud>er of passwords.) _‘I'hus. function (1) is a good (in the sense of being coquter-
proof) one-way function.

It is tewting to use this one-way function for solving probles 2 (i.e., for en-
crypting infatuation to be transnitted through «limitations channels). If. for
example, digital values of messages. it , are substituted for x in function f(x) 5
5 (1(3) (sod p) . end their sappings, foo , are trensnitted through the channels.
then in view of the one-way nature of function f the code will be sufficiently
coeputer-proof. but the question retains unclear as to how a legitisats receiver
will extract the transacted messages fron the encrypted Isssages received in order
thereby not to perforn extensive cosputetions for finding'the roots of polynonial
q(x) over G!(p) . It is necessary also to take into account the fact that n
potential messages can belong to each coded lessege in translation (the degree of
the polynomial equals n )3 therefore, enhiguity arises at the receiving end in
cracking the coded neesages received.

The encryption nethod suggested 'here has the following plan (fig 2).

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

figure 2. 11mm: of hcrypticn and Decoding Algoritb

Key:
1. from data tranuieaien channel ‘. (eye
2. Rando- nuﬁar- generator 5. To data truanieaien channel
3. meagea 6. To receiver

Encryption Algorith-

Lat every kind of Ieaeege. H . be replaced by ite nautical equivalent ever the
range tron l to p .vhera p ieahighprinenmer, letuaeey, p-Z"-S9 .
One-way function {(x) . deternined by expraeaion (l). ia tirat cmted for tendon-
ly eelected 3 over the range Iron 1 to p . Then message it ia converted into
preliminary encrypted Ieeeage c in the following gamer:

‘ c-otu.t(zn.
there N") ia an invertible tuction determining with each fixed value of ((3)
the one-to-one correspondence betveen lie (1, .... p) and €e(l, .... p) . Then

preliminary encrypted leaaage C ia cenverted into encrypted neeeage l by neane
of Ian-bare n and b and the previme aelacted enter a: :

__..._._._._ _. _, - .

- N-C- m+ (b+r)|nod p.

where n>p and lgbgp . Ila-bare II and b areaelectedinadvancebythe
sender and receiver aa the key and are held in aeerecy, and encrypted manage N
ie tranaaittad into the channel. as illuetrated in fig 2a.

58
roe omcuu. us: ONLY
Decoding Algorithn

Having received encrypted neseags N , the receiver “video it by nunbar n and
obtains praliainary meryptsd neaaage c as the quotient. and in the reminder
a certain number. d I (b + x) and p . fra- which. knowing h , randonly selected
nunber x is easily found and one-way function f(x) is conputed. Then the
neasage is finally conputed hy naans of inverse function 0" ,

H-¢"[C.I(z)].
as illustrated in fig 2b.

The encryption and decoding slgorithns include amputation of polynonial q(x) over
cup) and sole additional operations. which nakes it possible to inlanent then
simply and to conpute then rapidly on a colputer.

Discussion

The Federal Data Encryption Standard (D38) developed in the USA for protecting
col-ercisl information transforms 60 bits of a binary block of unconcealed text
into 66 hits of an encrypted text block. This transfornation is perforned under the
control of 56 hits of a key block and by uesns of rearrangements and nonlinear sub-
stitutione screnbles the bits of data so that the slightest change in the uncon-
cealed text conpletely changes the corresponding encrypted text. An analysis of
the conputeruproofness of the code (cryptsnalysis) has shown that no einple method
of disclosing the key exists for the D88, but has established the property of syn-
netry of the encrypted text and key in relation to their couplenants [2]. which
makes it possible to reduce by 50 percent the effort spent on" cryptanslysis. The
insufficient length of the key is the nsjor‘araa of criticism. It has been con-
fined that with sufficient parsllelisation of the search process (on the order of
10‘) and when enploying cryptsnalysis. with-knowledge of the unconcealed text, when
the corresponding unconcealed text is available in addition to the encrypted text,
it is possible to units an oodleustive search of all 2 “possible keys.

For the neth suggested. cryptanalysis reduces to finding the secret key—nubers
n and b . Direct search for the key is impossible. since the exhaustive search
of note than 2‘" variants is unrealizable and the fact than nutter x is selected
at randou (for this purpose it is recouended that the cream physical rsndon nunber
generator [6] be used, which produces a eeduence of rando- nuﬂ’ars with a specified
distribution and which has a conputer interface) ukes it possible for identical
messages to have different (randon) encrypted nessages and at the sons tine clini-
nstes cryptanslyais by utilising the statistical characteristics of the language
enployad. Furthermore, the cryptographic systen described is protected from crypt-
analysis with knowledge of the unconcealed text when the interceptor possesses the
encrypted nssssges, N . and the nessages, Ii . corresponding to then. Knowledge of
these pairs of N and it does not provide the interceptor with any information on

the key. Even the availability of the preliminary encrypted nessage. c . does not
facilitate his situation.

59
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
I'Ull UI'HLIAL USE ONLY

The disadvantage of the encryption eysten described is extension of the anount of
inforaation to be transmitted at least' twofold.

Authentication of Messages

This system also lakes it possible to authenticate muses-to detemne' et the
receiving end the authenticity and tiaeliness of seesaw received. for this
purpose. in foraing the next encrypted nessage, 31 .' the sender mat take into
account the preliainary encrypted nsasage. 61 - l . of the preceding nessage. as
illustrated below:

N.;c.-m+'(i+a.)u;oa},ﬂ W" I. ' _
Ng-crn+ (b+C.+:.) m“ P,

hécI-u1+'(a§~ci+'.'..'+é..'.+:.)nodp.

s eeeeee s s s a a e s a (2)

It is obvious fron (2) that each successive encrypted nesssge is related to the
preceding. This structure for the foraation of encrypted nessages sakes it possible
for the receiver to detect deliberate insertion into the co-Inications channel of
spurious and old (previously intercepted) nessages.

Additional Encryption

It is possible to inrove reliability of concealnsnt of transmitted lesseges by
additional transforastion of the encrypted nessage, ll . for this it is necessary
to select two nunbers, a' and b' , satisfying the condition

m’>mop. i<V<p. (3)
I

Then the final encrypted nesssge, N , will be

”N’;C'-m’+b’+h'-.- a.)

where c'-0[n. f(C)l . or if to condition (3) is added the condition that a'
and b' be relatively prins, (n', b') - l , then instead 0f (6) it is possible to
use the transfornation

ll' -b'°N|odI' .

here two pairs of nuahers. (n. b) and (n', b') , serve as the secret key and en-
crypted nesaage N' is transmitted through the channel. The receiver by nsens of
nuabers n' and h‘ easily finds N and then nessage ll fro. the algorithn de-
scribed above. Transformations like (4) can be perforned repeatedly by selecting
new pairs of meters as the hey. Cowuter-proofness is thereby increased. The
encryption and decoding algorithm are coaplicated unsubstantially. But the nein
disadvantage is retained. This is the greater increase in the enchant of

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
intonation trenenitted. In particular. in the can of repeated transformation,
when encrypted Incense N' is trenuitted through the channel, the anount ot
intonation transmitted increases at-1eaet' threefold.

The encryption and decoding algorithu can be inlenented both through soitvare on
the counter and through hetdvere. The latter turns out to be sore desirable in the
Injority of inetencea. since it trees the data processing processor iron the addi-
tional load of encrypting and decoding intonation and makes it possible to increase
speed considerably by new of special-purpose large-scale integrated circuits.

hibliography

1e h‘mim) VsAe, ”’mn, NeSO, Maw. Vent. ucqt.k1y’ Y‘AOQ mdd'p
A.s. and Dyn'kin, v.3. "ASI-nsdaptivneya eistene s identitilutoron" [ASI—
Adaptive Systen with Identiﬁer]. ﬁasco», Institute of Control Problem. 1980.

2. Ditii. U. and uranium. H. "frotection and Initetion-Prootnees: htroduction -
to Cryptography," rtlxn, Vol 67, No 3, 1979. pp 71-109.

3. Purdy. 0. “A High-Security Log-In Procedure,” muons 01’ TE! A011,
V01 17, NO 3. 1976. pp 662-445.

lo. Berlekanp, 3., ”caliece. n. and van who”, It. "On Inherent Intrectability
of Certain Coding Problems," In: M8. mom. THEORY. V01 11-26, No 3.
1973. pp 386-386.

5. Knnt. D. "lehlsstvo programirovaniya dlya M. I. 2. Poluchialennyye
algoritny" [Art or Programing for Computers: Vol 2. Seninunerical Also-
rithne], Hoecav. air, 1977.

6. Gavel, Ya. 'mew-a Rando- Process‘aenerator," amrm 1 W.
No 3, 1975, pp 171-175.

COPYRIGT: Izdatel'stvo 'Weuh", "Avtonetika i telelelthenike", 1982

8831 -
080: 1863/ 155

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mam

UDC 621.395 : 621.391.15

COMPUTER NETWORK ADAPTIVITY, STABILITY, RELIABILITY

Hoscow WCRISLITSL'NYYB SBTI (ADAPTIWOSI'. WSNYCHIVOS‘I', NADSZBNOS‘I') in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 16 Oct 81) pp 2-6, 10, 62-610, 191-198. 273-277

[Annotatiom table of contents, preface, conclusions and bibliographies from book
"Computer Network Adaptivity, Stability and Reliability". by Stanislaw lvsnovich
Sanoylenko, Aleksandr Abramovich Davydov. Vsleriy Vladinirovich Zolotarev and
Yevgeniya losifovna Trst'yakova; editor-in-chief: Professor Yu. G. Dadayev. doctor
of engineering sciences; USSR Acaday of Sciences, Scientific Council on the Complex
Problaa "Cybernetics", Isdatel'stvo "Rauka", 3100 copies, 278 pages]

[Excerpts] Structure of complex information processing systems

is discussed in this book. Support is given to the method of
adaptive switching, in which both circuit and packet switching

can be used in a network as a function of the information. Con-
sidered are the sources of errors in infatuation processing sys-
tems and methods of enhancing system noise inunity and reliability.
Software methods are cited for enhancing noise i-Inity by using
correcting codes in systems for infatuation input, storage and
transmission. Hathods of synthesizing network structures are

discussed.

The book is for scientists, engineers and technicians engaged in
designing data transmission systems insune to noise.

Figs. 66, tables 18 and a bibliography of 216 titles.

CONTENTS Page
Preface 3
Chapter 1. Adaptive Switching in Computer Networks 7
1.1. Introduction 7
1.2. Computer Network Design Principles 10
1.3. Method of Adaptive Switching 20
1.6. Structural and Functional Scheme for Adaptive Switching Center 27
1.5. Adaptive Switching Center Access Procedures 33
1.5.1. Asynchronous Subscriber Access to Adaptive Switching Center 35
1.5.2. Synchronous Subscriber Access to Adaptive Switching Center 53
1.6. Conclusion 62
Literature 64

62

FOIOFHCIALIBEONLY
Chapter 2. Noise IImunity in Computer Netuorks 65

2.1. Introduction 65
2.2. Error Statistics 65
2.3. Linear Block Codes 84
2.4. Binoid Codes 103
2.5. Codes over Field of Rational Numbers 120
2.6. Convolutional Codes 152
2.7. Noise-humane Coding during Data Input and Storage 172
2.8. Comparison of Noise-Immune Coding Methods 187
2.9. Conclusion 191
Literature 192
Chapter 3. Data Transmission Network Reliability
3.1. Introduction 199
3.2. Statistical Characteristics of Communication Line Rtliability 202
3.3. Matrix Method for Computing Probability of Connectivity of Random .
GriPh 206‘
3.0. Symbolic Method of Computing Probability of Connectivity of Random
Graph 211
3.5. Symbolic Method of Computing Probability of Connectivity of
Arbitrary Subset of Random Graph Nodes 215
3.6. Approximate Method of Computing Probability of Connectivity of
Arbitrary Subset of Random Graph Nodes 226
3.7. Algebraic and Logical Method of Computing Communication Network
Reliability Characteristics 231
3.8. Method of Computing Mathematical Expectations of Time Co-unication
Network Stays in Communication and Noncommunication States 239
3.9. Model of Communications Network for Determining Functional
Characteristics of Its Reliability 269
3.10. Method of Designing the Optimal Configuration of a Communications
Network with a Given Reliability 256
3.11. Method of Weakest Section 260
3.12. Method of Synthesizing an Extremal Configuration of a
Communications Network with a Given Reliability 263
3.13. Method of Synthesiring Configuration of a Communications Network,
Based on Broad heuristics 265
3.16. Conclusion ' 273
Literature 274
Preface

A basic problem in developing computer netuorks is achieving high noise immunity, .
reliability and viability of the system as a whole, i.e. achieving the capability of
system operation when individual elements in it fail and when there are malfunctions
in the systems for information transmission, storage and processing.

Analysis of error sources in complex man-machine systems indicates that of basic im-
portance in the process is the protection of information input systems, information
transmission channels and storage units. Information processing systems, based on
computers, usually have higher noise immunity and reliability and make a lesser
number of errors.

63
FOR 0F11CLAL.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In connection with this, the main focus in this work is on the problems of guarding
against errors in the facilities for information acquisition, storage and trans-

The question naturally arises: Are packet switching networks the lost efficient
facilities for designing integrated digital intonation transmission systems?
Obviously. the answer has to be: No. Although packet switching networks have any
advantages, they also have certain limitations and shortcomings. we should mention
first of all that the presence of queues in the network centers, the length of
which depends on the current load on the network, prohibits real-tine transmission

sent through the network is not stable and varies with the network load. Also, the
efficiency of path capacity utilization in packet switching networks depends on the
type of messages sent. An analysis was made in a number of works on capacity utili-
ration efficiency that showed that packet switching has the highest efficiency when
short messages typica.’ of interactive canonication are sent. But when messages
are long, circuit switching networks have higher efficiency because there is no

The network design problems is also not solved by the methods of message or circuit
switching adopted separately. Message switching does not meet the requirements on
delays even for interactive communication, to say nothing of real-time transmission.
And with circuit switching, network path capacity utilization efficiency is con-
siderably limited when short messages are sent, and when a low failure probability

in the connection is required, loading a considerable share of the circuits in a
trunk is not possible.

From what has been said, the general conclusion is that no one switching method is
sufficiently universal to be used as the base for designing an efficient digital

communication network to handle all types of information. Where is the way out of
this situation?

videa for combining switching centers while keeping separate transmission paths for
the different switching nodes. A higher level of integration is provided by hybrid
switching in which comaon centers and common tranmsission paths are used in the
network for two switching methods, say for packet and circuit switching. In the
process, channel capacity can be shared between both nodes. The boundary between
them can be either fixed or floating; then its position is adaptively varied as a
function of the traffic. The latter method, adaptive switching, is the most pro-

mising in the sense of achieving efficiency in tranmaitting different types of
messages when the relation between their amounts varies.

In the first chapter of this monograph, we present the principles of designing com-
puter networks that make use of the adaptive switching method, we discuss possible
network structures and we develop procedures for accessing an adaptive switching
network based on extending the standard protocols used in packet switching networks.

In the second chapter, we cover the problems of enhancing noise imunity in compu-
ter networks. Here, we analyze error statistics and discuss methods of modeling
then; we define the main error sources that most affect network noise immunity and
methods for guarding against errors. In the sampling of protection methods in-
cluded in the book, the main focus is on methods of noise-imaune coding that are
easy to implement by software. This is because under modern conditions with wide
use of programble units, including microprocessors, in networks, the most

rational approach to enhancing noise immunity is to use software methods of pro-
tection.

In the third chapter, we discuss the problans of reliability of computer networks
that include unreliable elesents. Here the main focus is on principles of design-
ing viable structures in which thanks to backup alternative routes for information
transmission, there is the capability of operating the system when individual
elements in it fail. As noted before, the most vulnerable spots in computer net-
works that affect their reliability are the comunication channels; because of
this, the main focus is on problems of designing reliable data comunication net-
works that combine the network computer resources.

Chapter 3 was written jointly by A. A. Korobov and Yu. 3. Shufchuk by using material
made *vailahle by S. I. Samoylenko (section 3.13).

The authors wish to express their gratitude to V. A. Koshevnikova, Ye. A.
Chernoivanova and V.' V. Smirnova for their help in preparing the manuscript for
publication.

chapter 1. Adaptive Switching in Computer Networks

All that has been presented indicates that commication channel capacity utiliza-
tion efficiency, and consequently conunication costs, with the different switching
types depends substantially on the nature of messages sent.

However, the precise value of the parameters of the messages, on which the switch-
ing method efficiency depends, is unknown not only when the network is being de-
signed, but even when it is being operated; as a result, a clear choice of an opti-

mal switching method for a network being designed is essentially an unsolvable
problem.

The sole possibility of achieving high networlr efficiency is to use adaptive
switching principles, in which different switching methods can be used in the net-
work, and the distribution of capacity between them occurs adaptively as a function
of the state of the network at a given time.

65
ma OFFICIAL use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.6. Conclusion

The adaptive switching method affords the capability of raising the efficiency of
using channel capacity in those cases when there is no precise inforaation on the
expected characteristics of messages to be sent, particularly on the distribution
of message lengths and priorities, when the network is designed.

Adaptive switching will also allow raising the efficiency of communication channel
utilization when the traffic varies in time.

Raising channel utilization efficiency with adaptive switching is achieved by using
two reconfiguration mechanic-s:

1) changing the allocation of network path capacity for sending in the packet and
circuit switching nodes as a function of require-eats that arise, and

2) filling the pauses in the component messages.

Adaptive switching expands the range of services offered the network users, since,
based on it, one can send with different priority levels in two nodes, packet and
circuit switching. Also, in the case of adaptive switching, there is the funda-
mentally new capability of organizing permanent switched channels with a high
efficiency of path utilization, since the lack of communication on the permanent
channel will automatically be filled by packets.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Samoylenko, S. 1., "Adaptivnaya koamutatsiya v vychislitel'nykh sety "
[Adaptive Switching in Computer Networks], Moscow, VIMITI [All-Union Institute
Of Scientific and Technical Inforsstion], 1978.

2. Sanoylenko, S. 1., "Method of Adaptive Switching," in "Voprosy kibernetiki"
[Problems of Cybernetics], Moscow, Scientific Council on the Complex Problem
"Cybernetics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 1979.

3. Samoylenko, S. 1., "Nekotoryye algoritmy adaptivnoy kommutatsiya" [Sane
Algorithms for Adaptive Switching], Moscow, VINITI, 1980.

4. Samoylenko, S. 1., "Protsedury dostupa i protsessy peredschi v seti adaptivnoy
kommutstsii" [Access Procedures and Transmission Processes in the Adaptive
Switching Network], Moscow, VINITI, 1980.

5. Close, P., "Message Delays and Trunk Utilisation in Line-Switched and Message,"
in "Switched Data Networks: Proc. of the First USA-Japan Computer Conf.,"
Tokyo, 1972, pp 524-529.

6. Esterling, H. and Hahn, P., "A Coaparison of Digital Data Network Switching," in

"Proc. of National Telecommunications Conf. NTS 75," New Orleans, 1975, Vol
8-42. 11. p 42.

66
INJR‘OFINCJAI.UEEI(M§LY
7. Itoh, K.; Kato, T.; hashida, 0. and Yoshida, Y., "an Analysis of Traffic-
Handling Capacity of Packet-Switched and Circuit-Switched Networks," in
"Proc. of Third Data Communications Synp.," St. Petersburg (Florida), 1973,
pp 29-37.

8. Jenny, C.; Kuemnerle, K., and auerge, 8., "Network Node with Integrated
Circuit/Packet-Switching Capabilities," in "Proc. of the European Computing
Conf. on Communications Networks," 1975, pp 207-228.

9. Jenny, C. and Kuemmerle, K., "Distributed Processing within an Integrated
Circuit/Packet-Svitching Node," 1333 TRANS. CW8” COX-26, 1976,
pp 1089-1100.

10. Kuemmerle, K. and Rudin, H., "Packet and Circuit Switching: Cost/Performance
Boundaries," COMPUT. NETHOBK, Vol 2, No 1, Feb. 1978, pp 3-17.

11. Kuemmerle, K., "Hultiplaxor Performance for Integrated Line-and‘Packet
Switched Traffic," in "Proc. of ICCC '74," Stockholm, 1976, pp 507-515.

12. Hiyahara, ﬂ.; Hasegawa, T.; and Teshigars, Y., "A Comparative Evaluation of
Switching Methods in Computer Communication Networks," in "Proc. of the
Intern. Communication Conf.," San Francisco, 1975, pp 616-620.

13. Port, 3.; Kuemmerle, K.; Rudin, H. at al., "A Network Architecture for the
Integration of Circuit and Packet Switching,” in ”Proc. of ICCC '76,"
Toronto, 1976, pp 505-514.

14. "Provisional Recommendations x.3. x.25, x.28 and x.29 on Packet-Switched
Data Transmission Services, Geneva, 1979.

15. Rosner, R. 0., "Packet Switching and Circuit Switching: A Comparison," in
"Proc. of the National Telecommunications Conf., NTS 75," New Orleans, 1975,
pp 42.1-62.7.

16. Rosner, R. D. and Springer, 3., "Circuit and Packet Switching: A Cost and
Performance Trade Off Study,” COHPUT. NETHORKS, No 1, 1976, pp 7-26.

chapter 2. Noise Immunity in Computer Networks

2.9. Conclusion

The evolution of complex data processing systems is producing the need for a
thorough study of the methods for raising data transmission efficiency and quality
at all stages of the passage of digital data through.the system. A noat important
criterion for selecting a particular method is the simplicity of the n1gorithms
used to achieve high validity in information exchange and processing.

Another important problem occurring in computer network design is the development

of methods that speed up and facilitate modeling of the operation of systems or
parts of them under real conditions.

FOR OITHC1A1.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In connection with the obvious nonstationarity of many of the channels used and in
view of the need for a set of rather large statistics, the models and error genera-
tors used must be especially simple and at the same time reflect the most essential
properties of the channels they correspond to. Examples of the solution to the
problem of designing efficient models meeting these requirements were presented
above.

In selecting noise-immune coding methods, one should be guided by the fact that
the least currently possible complexity of implementation with at the same time
maximum speed and high uniformity of the apparatus is achieved when multithreshold
decoders of convolutional codes are used in memoryless DSK [symmetric binary chan-
nels]. Hhen there are severe restrictions on the delay for decision making in the
system, a more complete comparison of all decoding algorithms has to be made.

for channels with a complex structure of errors, modeling the operation of decoders
is evidently a mandatory stage in the design of all systems that use noise-immune
codes. In doing so, all methods discussed in this chapter and cascade codes can
be used.

The simple block codes, discussed above, that combine the advantages of ease of
implementation and rather high degree of protection against errors when the noise
level is small, are now fully acceptable during data input and storage.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Alekaeyevna, N. 1., "Perforation Errors," in "Voprosy mekhanizirovannoy
obrabotki ekonomicheskoy informatsii" iProblems of Mechanized Processing of
Economic Information], Moscow, Vysshaya shkola, 1964. pp 102-138.

2. Amosov, A. A. and Aleksandrov, N. A., ”Model of Discrete Communication Channel
with Variable Parameter," in ”Chetvertaya koaferentsiya po teorii peredachi i
kodirovaniya informatsii" [Fourth Conference on Information Transmission and
Coding Theory], Section 3, Moscow, Tashkent, 1969.

3. Afanas'yev, V. 8., "Fast Coding and Error Detection by the Reed-Solomon Code,”
in "3-y Hezhdunarodnyy simpozium po teorii informatsii: Tea. dokl.” {Third
International Symposium on Information Theory: Theses of Papers], Moscow,
Tallin, USSR and Estonian Academies of Sciences, 1973, part 2, pp 13-17.

6. Afanas'yev, V. 3., "Computation of Values and Boots of Polynomials over a
Finite field," in "Povysheniye vernosti peredachi tsifrovoy informatsii po
diskretnym kanalam" [Raising the Accuracy of Transmission of Digital Informa-
tion through Discrete Channels], Moscow, Nauka, 1974, pp 49-56.

5. USSR Patent 610311, "Device for Coding the Reed-Solomon Code with an Odd Simple
Base," V. D. Afanas'yev and A. A. Davydov, published in B. 1. [Bulletin of
Inventions], No 21, 1978.

6. Afanas'yev, V. 8., "New Algorithms for Decoding Reed—Solomon Codes,” in "VI
konf. po teorii kodirovaniya i peredachi informatsii” [Sixth Conference on
Information Coding and Transmission Theory]. Moscow, Tomsk, part 2, 1975.

68

IN)! OFIWCJA1.UGI2(HVLY
7.

8.

lo.

11.

12.

13.

1“.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

Afanas'yev, V. 3., "Complexity of Decoding Reed-Solomon Codes," in "VI Mezhdu-
narodnyy simpoz. po tcorii informataii: Tez. dokl." [Sixth International Sym-

posium on Information Theory: Theses of Papers], Moscow, Leningrad, part 2,
1976, pp 10-13.

Afanaa'yev, V. 3., "Past Decoding of BChKh [Dose-Chaudhuri] Codes," in
"Voprosy kibernetiki" [Problems of Cybernetics], Moscow. Scientific Council on
the Complex Problem "Cybernetics" of the USSR Acadsny of Sciences, Mo 42,
1978, pp 110-118.

Berger, J., "On Error-Detecting Codes in Asymmetric Channels," in "Coding
Theory,” Moscow, Mir, 1964, pp 107-115.

Bernshteyn, S. M., "Ekstremal'nyye svoystva polinomov i nailuchsheye pribli-
zheniye odnoy veshchestvennoy peremennoy" [Extremal Properties of Polynomials
and the Best Approximation of One Real Variable], Leningrad, Moscow,
Gostekhizdat, part 1, 1937.

Dernshteyn, S. M., "0 base sistemy Chebysheva" [On the Base of the Chebyshev
System], Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR [USSR Academy of Sciences], 1954, pp 287-291
(Collected Works, Vol 2).

Blokh, B. L. and Zyablov, V. V., "Obobshchennyye kaskadnyye kody" [Generalized
Cascade Codes], Moscow, Swyaz', 1976, p 260.

Boyarinov, I. M., "On the Complexity of Implementation of Certain Cyclic Codes
that Correct Multiple Unrelated Errors," in "Voprosy kihernetiki“ [Problems of
Cybernetics], Moscow, Scientific Council on Complex Problem "Cybernetics" of
USSR Academy of Sciences, No 28, 1977, pp 56-81.

Boyerinov, I. M. and Xatsman, G. L., "0n Implementation of Linear Codes on
Computers,“ in "Voprosy kibernetiki", Mo 42, 1978, pp 110-118.

Bukreyev, I. N.; Mansurov, B. M.; and Goryachev, V. 1., "Mikroelektronnyye
skhemy tsifrovykh ustroystv” [Microelectronic Circuits of Digital Devices],
Moscow, Sow. radio, 1975.

(Heiner, B. and Bah, R.), ”Analysis of Recurrent Codes," in "Kiberneticheskiy
sbornik. Novays ser." [Cybernetic Collection. Mew Series], Moscow, Mir, No S,
1968.

Gallager, R., "Information Theory and Reliable Communication," Moscow, Sov.
radio, 1976.

Gevorkyan, D. M., "Codes for Operator Communication with a Computer," in "IV
Vseaoyuanaya shkola-seminar po vychislitel'nym aetyam: Dokl." [Fourth All-Union
School-Seminar on Computer Networks: Papers], Moscow, Tashkent, Scientific
Council on Complex Problem ”Cybernetics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences,

part 6, 1979. pp 36-37.

Crayfer, R. S. and Yakerevich, R. 0., "Method of Raising Validity of Informa-
tion in Automated Control Systems," PRIRORY I SISTIMY UPRAVLRNIYA, Mo 10, 1973,
pp 16-17.

stydov, A. A., "A Method of Synthesizing Set Generators," AIT, Mo 12, 1970.
pp 126-132.

Davydov, A. A., "Raising Reliability of Storing Information by Using Correcting
Codes Implementable by Software," AIT, Mo 1, 1973s, pp 153-160.

69

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE¢DNLY
22.

23.

24.

25.

26'

2.7.

28.

29.

30.

3‘1.

32-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dawydov, A. A., "Error Correction during Storage and Transnission of Informa-
tion in Computer Control Systems,” A11, 80 10, 1973b, pp 116-127.

Davydov, A. A., "Razrahotka metodov kodirovaniya informatsii s tsel'yu
povysheniya dostovernosti yeye khraneniya i peredschi v infomtsionno-

uprsvlyayushchilth sistemakh s m: Dis. ... hand. tekh. nauk" [Development of
Information Coding Methods to Enhance Validity of Its Storage and Transmission

in Computer Intonation and Control Systems: Dissertation ... Candidate of
Engineering Sciences]. Moscow, 120 [Institute of Control Problems], 1973c.

stydov, A. A. and Afanas'yev, V. 3., "On One Maximal Code," in "III heshduna-
rodnyy simposium po teorii informatsii: Tet. dokl." [Third International Sym-
posimn on Intonation Theory: Theses of Papers], Hoscow, Tellin, part 2, 1973.
pp 68-72.

Davydow, A. A. and Afanas'yev, V. 8., "0b odnon maksimal'nom Rode" [On One
Maximal Code], Moscow, Scientific Council on Conplex Problem "Cybernetics" of
the USSR Academy of Sciences, 1976a.

Manuscript deposited at VIKITI [All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical
Information] No 112-74 Dep.

USSR Patent 4103389, "Coding Device for Linear Correcting Code," A. A. Davydov
and V. D. Afanas'yev, published in B. 1., No 36, 19761).

Davydov, A. A., "Correcting Codes over a Field of Rational Numbers," in "IV
Hezhdunarodnyy simpozium po teorii informatsii: ‘rer. dokl." [Fourth Interna-
tional Symposium on Information Theory: Theses of Papers], part 2, Moscow,
Leningrad, 1976, pp 29-31.

USSR Patent 559395, "Counter with Constant Number of Units in the Code," A. A.
Davydov, V. I. Gridin and II. A. Pis'mennays, published in D. 1., No 19. 1977.

Davydov, A. A.; Smerkis, Yu. 8. and Kaplsn, L. N., "On Short naming Codes,"
in "Vsesoyuznoye nauchno-tekhnicheskoye soveshchaniye 'Prohlemy sozdaniya i
ispol'zovaniys vysokoproirvoditel'nykh informataionno-vychislitel'nykh mashin':
Tea. dokl. Sektsiya 'Radezhnost' i disgnostirovaniye vychislitel'nykh sredstv'"
[All-Union Scientific and Technical Conference on the "Prohlus of Development
and Use of High-Throughput Information Computers": Theses of Papers. Section
on ”Reliability and Diagnostics of Computer Hardware"], Moscow, Kishinev,

1979. PP 14-15.

Davydov, A. A., "Some Problems of Implementing the Reed-Solomon Code over a
Simple Field," in "IV Vsesoyuznaya shkola-seminar po vychislitel'nyn setyam:
Dokl." [Fourth All-Union School-Seminar on Computer Networks: Papers], Moscow,
Tashkent, Scientific Council on the Complex Problem "Cybernetics" of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, part 6, 1979. PP 66-51.

USSR Patent 7610576, "Device for Coding the Reed-Solonon Code over a Simple
Field," A. A. Davydov, published in B. 1., No 26, 1980.

Davydov, A. A.; Smerkis, Yu. 3. and Tauglikh, G. 1... "Optimizing Short Binary
ﬂaming Codes," in ”V Vsesoyuznaya shkols-seminar po vychislitel'nyn setyam:
Dokl." [Fifth All-Union School-Seminar on Computer Networks: Papers], Hoscow,
Vladivostok, Scientific Council on the Complex Problem “Cybernetics" of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, part lo, 1980, pp 81-85.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
33.

39.

‘2.

b3.

Dadayev, Yu. 6., "Arifmeticheekiye kody, iepravlyayushchiye oshihki" [Arithme-
tic Error-Correcting Codes], Moscow, Sov. radio, 1969.

Zhigulin, 1.. F. and Popov, 0. V., "Computation of Probability Characteristics
of a System with Repetition Request, Operating through Channels with Storage,"
in "Kodirovsniye i peredacha diskretnykh soohshcheniy v sistemakh svyazi"
[Coding and Transmission of Discrete Messages in Co-unicstion Systems],
Moscow, Nauka, l976.

ligangirov, K. Sh., "Some Serial Decoding Procedures," PROM! PMDACMI
INFORMATSII, V01 2, 1966, pp 13-25.

Zigangirov, K. Sh., "Protsedury posledovatel'nogo dekodirovaniya" [Sequential
Decoding Procedures], Moscow, Msz', 19710.

Zinger, I. S. and Kutsyk, D. 8., "Obespecheniye dostovernosti dannylth v
avtomatisirovsnnykh sistemakh upravleniya proirvodstvom" [Ensuring Data Valid-
ity in Autonated Production Control Systems], Moscow, Nauka, 1976.

Zolotarev, V. V., "0n Suboptimal Decoding of Convolutional Codes," in "VI
simpozium po probleme izbytochnosti v infomtsionnykh sistemakh: 'rc 7.. dokl."
[Sixth Symposium on the Problem of Redundancy in Information Systems: Theses
of Papers], Leningrad, part 1, 197a, pp 34-36.

Zolotarev, V. V., "0n Methods of Improving Threshold Decoding of Convolutional
Codes," in "VI konferentsiya po teorii kodirovsniys i peredachi informstsii"
{Sixth Conference on Information Coding and Transmission Theory]. Moscow,
Tomsk, 1975, pp 60-63.

Zolotarev, V. V., "Multiplication of Errors with Threshold Decoding of Self-
Orthogonal Convolutional Codes," IR. MF‘II. BADIUIBKENIKA 1 mm. 1976.
pp 79-82.

Zolotarev, V. V., "Error Packet Elimination with Multithreshold Decoding," in
"VII Vsesoyuznyy simpozium po probleme izhytochnosti v informateionnykh
sistemakh: Tex. dokl." [Seventh All-Union Symposiu on the Problem of Redun-
dancy in Information Systems: Theses of Papers], Leningrad, part 1, 1977.

pp 82-86.

Zykov, P. N., "Sintez transformatornykh skhen s izbytochnym kodirovaniyem"
[Synthesis of Transformer Schemes with Redundant Coding], Rive, Rank. dumka,
1970. p 116.

Kasslni, T.; Tokura, 8.; Iwadari, 8.; Inagski, Ya., "Coding Theory," Moscow,
Mir, 1978.

Kuznetsov, A. V. and Tsyhakov, B. S., "Coding in Storage with Defective Cells,"
PROBLM PEREDACHI INPORMATSII, V01 10, NO 2, 1974, pp 52-60.

Martin, J., "Computer Communication Networks," Moscow, Svyaz', 1974, p 230.
Peterson, H. and Weldon, 5., "Error-Correcting Codes," Moscow, Mir, 1976, p 596.

Polua, G. and Sege, 6., "Problems and Theorems from Analysis," Moscow, Nauka,
part 2, 1978.

Popov, 0. V., "On a Cascade Model of a Storage Sy-etric Discrete Channel,“ in
"Kodirovaniye v slozhnykh sietemakh" [Coding in Complex Systems], Moscow.
Nauka, 1976.

71

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
69.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

SS.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Popov, 0. V., "Determining the Probability Characteristics of a Syuetric Dia-
crete Channel, the States of Which Form a Markov Chain," in "Povysheniye ver-
nosti peredschi tsifrovoy informatsii po diskretnym kanalam" [Raising the
Accuracy of Digital Information Transmission through Discrete Channels],
Moscow, Nauka, 1974.

Popova, S. A., "Povyaheniye pomekhoustoychivosti khraneniya i peredachi tsifro-
voy informatsii vneshnikh nakopiteley EV! algoritmicheakimi netodami: Avtoref.
dis. ... jand. tekhn. nauk" [Using Algorithmic Hethods to Raise Noise Inunity
of Storage and Transmission of Digital Intonation of External Computer Stor-
age Units: Author's Abstract. dissertation ... canadidate of engineering
sciences]. Taganrog. TRTI [Taganrog Radioengineering Institute], 1970.

Proskuryakov, V. V., "Shornik radach po lineynoy algebre" [Collection of Prob-
lems in Linear Algebra], Hoscov, Pizmatgiz, 1962, p 332.

Purtov, A. P.; 2miy, A. 8.; and Shapovalov, I. P., "Nature of Distribution of
Errors in Telephone Channels during Discrete Signal Trsnuission,"
WSWAZ'. No 6. 1965, pp 31-61.

"Nekotoryye klassy lineynykh kodov, ispravlysyushchikh oshibki v kanalakh s
pamyat'yu, i ilth realizataiya na TsVH" [Some Classes of Linear Codes That Cor-
rect Errors in Storage Channels and Their Implementation in Digital Computers],
B. U. Bakhmatkariyev, hoscov, Scientific Council on the Complex Problem "Cyber-
netics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 1971, manuscript deposited at the
VINITI, No 3219-71 Dep.

Renee, Ye. Ya. and Koromyslichenko, V. D., "Vladimir Harkov's Problem for Poly-
nomials of a System of Chebyshev Functions and the Concept of a Regular
T-System," DAN SSSR [USSR Academy of Sciences' Reports), Vol 135, No 2. 1960a,
pp 266-269.

Remez, Ye. Ya. and Koromyslichenko, V. D., ”Regular T-Systems and Certain Prob-
lems of the Theory of Generalized Polynomials of V. A. Markov," DAN 3583, No lo,

Remez, Ye. Ya., "Osnovy chislennykh metodov chebyshevskogo priblizheniya"
{Principles of Numerical Hethoda of the Chebyshev Approximation], Kiev,
Nauk. dunks, 1969, p 624.

(Riordan, J .). "Introduction to Combinatorial Analysis," Moscow, Leningrad,
1963.

Rybnikov, K. A., "Vvedeniye v kombinstornyy analiz," [Introduction to Combina-
torial Analysis], Hoscov, Izd-vo HGU [Moscow State University], 1972, p 256.

Samoylenko, S. I., "Pomekhoustoychivoye kodirovaniye" [Noise-Illune Coding],
Moscow, “suite, 1966. "Binoidnyye pomekhOustoychivyye kody" [Binoidel Noise-
Inune Codes], S. I. Samoylenko, Moscow, Scientific Council on the Complex
Problem "Cybernetics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 1970. manuscript
deposited at the VINITI, No 1962-70 Dep.

Samoylenko, S. 1., "Some Approaches to the Approximate Description of Error
Statistics," in "VI konferentsiya po teorii kodirovaniya i peredache informa-
tsii” [Sixth Conference on Coding Theory and Information Transmission).
Moscow, Tomsk, part lo, 1975, pp 105-112.

72

FOIOH'ICIALUSEONLY
61.

62.

63‘

66.

65.

66.
67.

68.
69.

70.
71.

72.

73.

76.

75.

Samoylenko, S. 1., "Kaskadnyye blokovyye modeli stetistiki oshibok" [Cascade
Block Models of Error Statistics], Preprint of the VINITI, Moscow, 1977a.

Samoylenko, S. 1., "Information Coding and Transmission in Computer Networks.
Problems and Directions of Efforts," in "Voprosy kibernetiki. Kodirovaniye i
peredacha informatsii v vychislitel'nykh setyakh" [Problems of Cybernetic;:
Information Coding and Transmission in Computer Networks], Moscow, Scientific
Council on the Complex Problem ”Cybernetics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
No 28, 1977b, pp 3-29.

Samoylenko, S. 1.; Laptev, A. N.; and Trem'yakova, Ya. I., "Study of Cascade
Block Models of Error Statistics," in "Tr. VII Vaesoyuznoy konferentsii po
teorii kodirovaniya i peredache informatsii" [Transactions of Seventh All-Onion
Conference on Coding Theory and Information Transmission], Moscow, Vilnius.
part 6, 1978, pp 130-138.

Sellars. P., "Methods of Detecting Errors in the Operation of Electronic
Digital Computers," Moscow, Mir. 1972.

Samarskiy, A. S. and Belyayev, V. 6., "Economic Design and Efficiency of
Storage Error Correction Unit." VOPROSY RADIOBLEKTRONIKI, 83R. EVT, No 11,
1977, pp 59-67.

Sinavina, V. 8., "Otsenka kaohestva funktsionirovaniya ASU” [Evaluation of
Operating Quality of Automated Control Systems], Moscow, Bkonomika, 1973. p 191.

"IBM System/360. Introduction to Direct Access Storage Devices and Data Organi-
zation Methods," Moscow, Statistika, 1974, p 127.

Sloane, N. J. A., "Survey of Design Theory of Coding and Table of Binary Codes
with Highest Rnoun Speeds," in "Kiberneticheskiy sbornik. Novaya ser." [Cyber-
netic Collection. New Series], Moscou, No 10, 1973, pp 5-32.

Timofeyev, B. B. and Litvinov, V. A., "Methods of Detecting Errors in Alpha-
numeric Series at the Stage of Data Preparation and Input to Computer,"
UPRAVLIAIUSRCRIYE SISTEMY I MASHINY, No a, 1977, pp 20-27.

(Porney, 0.), "Cascade Codes," Moscow, Mir, 1970.

(Forney, D.), "Viterbi Algorithms." TIIER [PROC. 1333], Vol 61, No 3, 1973,

Khetagurov, Ya. A. and Rudnev, Yu. P., "Povysheniye nadezhnooti tsifrovykh
uatriystv metodami izbytochnogo kodirovaniya" [Raising Reliability of Digital
Devices by Redundant Coding Methods], Moscow, Bnergiya, 1974, p 272.

Taibulevskiy, I. Ye., "Brroneous Responses by Human Operator in a Control Sys-
tem (Survey of Foreign Research)," AIT, No 6. 1977, pp 112-166.

Shostak, A. A., "Problem of Determining Optimal Linear Correcting Code with
Specified Redundancy," in "Avtomatika i vychislitel'naya tekhnika" [Automation
and Computer Technology], Minsk, Vysheysh. shkola, No 6, 1976, pp 250-255.

Shufchuk, Yu. 3., "Problem of Noise-Immune Protection of Information in the
Data Transmission System for the Gas Industry's Automated Sector Management
System," in "Avtomatizatsiya, telemekhanizatsiya i svyaz' v gazovoy promysh-
lennosti" [Automation, Remote Control and Communications in the Gas Industry],
Moscow, VMIIBgazprom, No 8, 1975.

73

FOIlﬂﬂﬂ¢1Al.USE(NVLY
76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shufchuk, Yu. 3., "Noise-Immtne Code to Protect Information in Computer Ret-
work Communication Channels." in "IV Vsesoyuenaya shkola-seminar po vychis-
litel‘nyn setyam: Dokl." [Fourth All-Union School-Seminar on Computer Ret-
worka: Papers], Moscow, Tashkent, Scientific Council on the Conplex Problem
"Cybernetics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Vol 4, 1979. pp 122-126.

Shufchuk, Yu. 3. and Pridman, R. M., "Results of Modeling Intercomputer Data
Exchange System," in "IV Vsesoyuznaya shkola-seminar po vychislitel'nym
setyam: Dokl." [see 76.], part 3. 1979. PP 161-166.

Yakerevich, R. 0.; Grayfer, R. 8.; and Ahezgauz, H. 1., "Study of Operator's
Hork on Information Input Units," PRIBORY I SISTRHY UPRAVLENIYA, No 7, 1971,
pp 6-7.

Alexander, A. A., "Capabilities of the Telephone network for Data Transmis-
sion," BSTJ, Vol 39(3), 1960. PP 131-476.

Andrew, A. M., ”A Variant of Modulus 11 Checking," COMPUT. BULL., Vol 14,
No 8, 1970, pp 261-265.

Andrew, A. H., "Decimal Numbers with Two Check Digits," COMPUT. 3011., V01 16,
No 3, 1972, pp 156-159.

Azumi, S. and Kasami, T., "On the Optimal Modified Ramming.Codes," DERSHI
TSUSHIN GAKKAI ROHBUNSHI, TRANS. INST. ELECTRON. AND COMMUN. ENG. JAP., Vol
A58, No 6, 1975, pp 325-330, translated into Russian by the All-Union
Translation Center, No A-85522, 1979.

Bahl, L. R. and Jelinek, F., "Rate 1/2 Convolutional Codes with Complementary
Generators, IERB TRANS. INFORM. THEORY, Vol IT-l7, No 6, 1971, pp 718-727.

Reckley, D. P., ”An Optimum System with Modulus 11," COHPUT. 3011., Vol 11,
No 3, 1967, pp 213-215.

Beuscher, R. J. and Toy, W. N., "Check Schemes for Integrated Hicroprogranmed
Control and Data Transfer Circuitry," IEEZ TRANS. COHPUT., Vol 19, No 12,
1970, pp 1153-1159.

Boosen, D. C., "B-Adjacent Error Correction," IBM J. RES. DEV., Vol 14, No 4,
1970, pp 402-408.

Blahut, R. C., "Transform Techniques for Error Control Codes," IBM J. RES.
DEV., V01 23, No 3, 1979, p 299.

Doosen, D. C.; Chang, L. C.; and Chen, C. L., ”Measurement and Generation of
Error-Correcting Codes for Package Failures," 1388 TRANS. COHPUT., Vol 27,
No 3, 1978, pp 201-204.

Bouricius, w. 6.; Carter, w. c.; Rsien. B. P. et e1., "Modeling of a Bubble-
Memory Organization with Self-Checking Translators to Achieve High Reliabili-
ty," IEEE TRANS.COHPOT., V01 22, No 3, 1973, pp 269-275.

Briggs, J., "Modulus 11 Check Digit Systems," COMP. RULL., Vol 14, No 8, 1970,
pp 266-269.

Briggs, J., "Heights for Modulus 97 Systems," COMPUT. BULL., Vol 15, No 2,
1971. p 79.

Brown, D. T. and Sellers, F., "Error Correction for IRH BOO-Rit-per-Inch
Magnetic Tape," IBM J. RES. DRV., Vol 14, No 4, 1970, pp 384-389.

7h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
93.

96.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

1010.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

Bucber, E. A. and Heller, J. A., "Error Probability Bounds for Systematic
Convolutional Codes," I338 TRANS. INPORH. THEORY, Vol IT-l6, No 3, 1970,
pp 317-319.

Carter, H. C. and McCarthy, C. 3., "Inplanentation of an Experimental Fault-
Tolerant lie-cry Systan,“ 1m TRANS. COHPIITJ’ Vol 25, No 6, 1976, pp 555-568.

Chien, R. ‘1'., "Henory Error Control: Beyond Parity," IRRB SPECTRUM, Vol 10,

Chevillat, P. R. and Costello, D. J., “A Hultiple Stack Algorith for Erasure-
Pree Decoding of Convolutional Codes," 11388 TRANS. COMES” Vol cos-25,
No 12, pp 1660-1470, 1977.

Costello, D. J., "Free Distance Bounds for Convolutional Codes," 1m TRARS.
INFORM. THEORY, Vol IT-ZO, No 3. 1976, pp 356-365.

Bliss, P., "Coding for Noisy channels," IRE CONVERT. REC” Vol 6, 1955;
translated into Russian in "Teoriya peredachi soobshcheniy" iTheory of Trans-
mission of Conunications], Moscow, II. [Foreign Literature], 1957.

Elliot, B. 0., SYST. TECHN. 3., Vol 62(5), 1963, p 1977.

Psno, R. 11., "A Heuristic Discussion of Probabilistic Decoding," IBBB TRANS.
INFORM. THEORY, Vol IT-9, 1963. pp 66-67; translated into Russian in "Teoriya
kodirovaniya" {Coding Theory], Roscow, "11-, 1964, pp 166-198.

Forney, C. D., "Convolutional Codes. II: Algebraic Structure," 1233 TRANS.
INFORM. THEORY, Vol IT-16, NO 6. 1970.

Pomey, G. D. and Dover, B. 1., "A High-Speed Sequential Decoder: Prototype
Design and Test," 1833 TRANS. CW8. TBCHNOI... Vol cos-19, No 5, part 2,
1971, pp 821-835.

Porney, C. 0., "Convolution Codes II: Maxim-Likelyhood Decoding," INFORM.
AND CONTROL, Vol 25, No 3, 1974, pp 222-266.

Gilbert, 2. 11., "Capacity of a Burst-Noise Channel," BSTJ, Vol 39(5), 1960,
pp 1253-1267.

Heller, J. A. and Jacobs, 1. 11., "Viterbi Decoding for Satellite and Space
Conunication," IRES TRANS. CW8. TECHNOL” Vol CCU-19, part 2, 1971,
pp 835-848.

Herr, J. R., "Self-Checking Number System," COMPUT. 038., No 6, 1974. pp 85-.
91.

Ilolnes, H. 8., "Identification ﬂulber Design." COMPUT. J., Vol 18, No 2,
1975. PP 102-107.

Ilsiao, H. Y., "A Class of Optimal Minimum Odd-Height-Coh-n: SEC/DEB Codes,"
IN! J. R38. DEV” V01 16, 1970, pp 395-601.

Huffman, D. A., "The Synthesis of Dinear Sequential Coding Network," in "In-
foraation Theory," ed. by c. Cherry, New York, Academic Press, 1956.

Jacobs, I. 11., "Sequential Decoding for Efficient Communication for Deep
Space," 1333 MS. MS. 1308., V01 GUI-15, N0 4, 1967; translated into
Russian in "Nekotoryye voprosy teorii kodirovaniya" [Sane Problens of Coding
Theory], Moscow, Mir, 1970.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
111.

112.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.
126.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jacobs, 1. M., "Practical Applications of Coding," IRES TRANS. INFORM. THEORY,

Jelinek, 3., "Fast Sequential Decoding Algorithm Using a Stack," IBM RES. DEV-
ELOP., V01 13, 1969. PP 675-685.

Ivasaki, K; Kasani, T; and Yananura, 8, "Optimal (72, 66) Modified Manning
Codes in the Sense of Hsiao," DENSHI TSUSMIN GAKKAI ROMBUNSNI, TRANS. INST.
ELECTRON ENG. JAP, Vol A61, No 3, 1978, pp 270-271; translated into Russian
by the All-Union Translation Center. No 3-26021, 1979.

Ksutz, 9., "Constant-Height Counters and Decoding Trees, IRE TRANS. ELECTRON.

Larsen, K. J., "Short Convolutional Codes with Maxinal Free Distance for Rates
1/2, 1/3 and 1/6," IBEE TRANS. INFORM. THEORY, Vol IT-l9, No 3, 1973. PP 371-
372.

Layland, J. H. and Lushbaugh, H. A., “A Flexible High-Speed Sequential Decoder
for Deep Space Channels," TREE TRANS. COMMUNS. TBCHNOL., Vol COM-l9, No 5,
part 2, 1971, pp 813-820.

Massey, J. L., "Threshold Decoding," M. I. T. Press, 1963; translated into
Russian, Moscow. Mir, 1966.

Massey, J. L.; Costello, D. 1.; and Justesen, J., "Polynomial Heights and Code
Constructions," IEEE TRANS. INFORM. THEORY, Vol IT-l9, No l, 1973. pp 101-110;
translated into Russian in "Kiberneticheskiy shornik" {Cybernetics Collection],
Moscow, Mir, No 11, 1974.

Mastranadi, J. P., "Fault-Tolerant Storage Systems Design Studies," in "Intern.
Sylp. on Fault-Tolerant Computing,” 1973, Pale-Alto (Calif.), pp 61-65 (also
see EKSPRESS-INPORMATSIYA. VT, No 67, 1973, ref. {abstract} 260. PP 55-63).

McAdam, P. L.; Stine, L. 8., "Reed-Solomon Coding for Errors Plus Brasures,"
in "Proc. 1388 Conf. NABCON '76," New York, 1976, pp 793-800; Russian trans-
lation: EKSPRESS-INPORMATSIYA VINITI "PBREDACHA INFORMATSII”, No 30, 1977,
abstract 163, pp 22-29.

Meggitt, J. 8., "Digit-by-Digit Methods for Polynomials," IBM J. RES. DEV.,
Vol 7, No 3, 1963. PP 237-245.

Mertz, P.. "Hodel of Impulsive Noise for Data Transmission," IRR TRANS.
COMMUNS. SYST., Vol 05-9. 1961, pp 130-137.

Parhani, D. and Avizienis, A., "Detection of Storage Errors in Mass Memories
Using Lou-Cost Arithmetic Error Codes," 1383 TRANS. COMPUT., Vol 27, No 4,
1978, pp 302-308.

Raddy, S. M., "A Class of Linear Codes for Error Control in Byte-per-Card
Organized Digital Systels," IEEE TRANS. COMPUT., Vol 27, No 5, 1978, pp 455-
459.

Richardson, M., "Check Digits," COMPUT. BULL., Vol 14, No 10, 1970, p 359.

Reed, 1. 8.; Truong. T. K.; and Helch, L. 3., "The Past Decoding of Reed-
SOlonon Codes Using Ternat Transforms," IEEE TRANS. INFORM. THEORY, Vol IT-24,
No A, 1978.

76

FOI‘DFFMJAL.USE(NNLY
127.

128.

129.

130.

131-

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

Ron, T. R. N. and Chauls, A. S., ”Asymmetric Error Codes for Some LST Semicon-
ductor Memories," in "IERB, Symp. of Systems Theory," 1975, pp 170-171 (see
also: RRSPRRSS-INPORMATSIYA. VT, No 8, 1976, abstract 51).

Robinson, J. P. and Bernstein, A. J., "A Class of Binary Recurrent Codes with
Limited Error Propagation," 133! TRANS. INFORM. THEORY, V01 11-13, No 1, 1967.
pp 106-114.

Robinson, J. P., "Error Propagation and Definite Decoding of Convolutionsl
Codes," 1338 TRANS. INFORM. THEI’Y, Vol IT-14, No 1, 1968, pp 121-128; trans-
lated into Russian in "Nekotoryy. voprosy teorii kodirovaniya" [Some Problems
of Coding Theory], Moscov, Mir, 1970, pp 68-90.

Samoylenho, S. 1., "Rinoid Error-Correcting Codes," ISBN TRANS. INFORM.
TMEORY, V01 1T-19, No 1, 1973. PP 95-101.

Sanyal, A. and Venkstaraman, K. N., ”Single Error Correcting Code Maximizes
Memory System Efficiency," COMPUT. 088., Vol 17, No 5, 1978, pp 175-184.

Schﬂrbs, R., "Chip Cuts Parts Count in Error Correction Networks," ELECTRONICS,
Vol 51, No 23, 1978, pp 130-133; Russian translation: RLRKTRONIKA, Vol 51,
No 23, 1978, pp 62-67.

Sethi, A. 8.; Rajsrsman, V; and Kenjsle, P. 8., "An Error-Correcting Coding
Scheme for Alphanumeric Data," INFORM. PROCESS. LBTT., Vol 7, No 2, 1978,
PP 72-770

Sloane, N. J. A., "A Simple Description of an Error Correcting Code for high-
Density Magnetic Tape," DELL SYSTEM TBCMN. J., Vol 55, No 2, 1976, pp 157-165.

Sullivan, D. 0., "Control of Error Propagation in Convolutional Codes,”
Techn. rept. N 82-667, Univ. Notre Dame (Indiana), 1966.

Sundberg, C.-E. H., "Erasure and Error Decoding for Semiconductor Memories,"
1338 TRANS. COMPUT., Vol 27, No 8, 1978, pp 696-705.

Sundberg, C.-B. N., "Properties of Transparent Shortened Codes for Memories
with Stuck-st Faults," IRBB TRANS. COMPUT., Vol C-28, No 9, 1979, pp 686-690.

Tang, 0. T. and Lum, V. Y., "Error Control for Terminals with human Operators,"
IBM J. RES. DEVELOP., V01 14, No 4, 1970, pp 409-416.

Townsend, R. L. and Weldon, 3. J., "Self-Orthogonal Quasi-Cyclic Codes," I338
TRANS. INFORM. THEORY, V01 IT-13, N0 2, 1967, pp 183-195.

Ullman, J. R., "A Binary N-gramm Technique for Automatic Correction of Sub-
stitution, Deletion Insertion and Reversal Errors in Horde," COMPUT. J.,
Vol 20, No 2, 1977, pp 141-147.

Viterbi, A. 1., "Error Bounds for Convolutional Codes and an Asymptotically
Optimum Decoding Algorithm," 1333 TRANS. INFORM. THEORY, Vol IT-l3, No 2,
1967, pp 260-269; translated into Russian in "Nekotoryye voprosy teorii
kodirovaniya" [Some Problems of Coding Theory], Moscow, Mir, 1970, pp 142-165.

Viterbi, A. J., "Concolutionsl Codes and Their Performance in Communication
Systems," 1853 TRANS. COMPUT. TBCHN., Vol COM-19, No 5, part 2, 1971, pp 751-
772.

Hild, H. 0., "The Theory of Modulus N Check Digit Systems," COMPUT. 8011.,
V01 12, No 8, 1968, pp 309-311.

77

FI”!(Hﬂﬂ(1A1.USEioNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

166. wolf, J. K., "On Codes Derivsble from the Tensor Product of Check Matrices,"
IEEB TRANS. INFORM. THEORY, Vol 11, 1973, PP 281-284.

11.5. Hozencraft, H. "Sequential Decoding for Reliable Cos-unication," HIT Research
Lab. of Electronics, Techn. kept. 325, Cambridge (ham), 1957.

166. Hozencraft, H. and Jacobs, J. 14., "Principles of Communication Engineering,"
New York, Wiley, 1965; Russian translation: Moscow. Mir, 1969.

1.47. Na, R. It, "New Convolution]. Codes. Pt I," 1338 TRANS. CW8" V01 OOH-23.
No 9, 1975, pp 941-956.

1108. Wu, H. U., "New Convolutionl Codes. Pt II," IRE! TRANS. 0019111118., Vol 1,
COM-23, No l, 1976, pp 19-32.

159. Wu, H. H., "New Convolutional Codes. Part III," 1883 TRANS. comma, Vol 2,
No 9, 1976, pp 946-955.

Chapter 3. Data Transmission Network Reliability

3. 14. Conclusion

The results given in this chapter permit analyzing the characteristic of reliabili-
ty (structural and functional) of cos-unication networks used as the basis for
data transmission networks. The analytic methods given here provide for precise
or approximate computer computations of network reliability performance. These
methods include:

the nethod of computing the probability that at any given time, couunication is
possible between any two nodes of an arbitrary subset of the co-Iunication network
nodes (capacity of subset varies from 2 to n, where n is the number of network
nodes);

the method of computing that at any given time, the condition is met for reliable
network operation specified by an arbitrary Boolean function;

the method of computing the mathematical expectations of the time of faultless
operation and the time of recovery of network comunication; and

the simulation model for determining the laws of distribution of the time the
communication network stays in the conunication and noncomunication states.

Also given in this chapter are the methods for solving the problem of synthesizing
the commun. cation network configuration with a specified reliability under the
condition of various limits on redundancy introduced into some initial configura-
tion to enhance its reliability. These methods provide for precise or approximate
solution to the synthesis problem on computers. These methods include:

the method of synthesizing the optimal configuration, i.e. configuration of a com-
munication network with a specified reliability at minimum cost for network
redundancy;

the method of the weakest section, which is a heuristic procedure for finding the
configuration with the required reliability using the least possible number of
redundant coununication lines or at the least cost for them;

the method of synthesis of the extraal configuration of the communication network,
from which the elimination of even one reserve conunication line would lead to a
decline in its reliability performance to a level below that specified; and

the method of synthesizing a configuration for a reliable conunication network,

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
built on a base of broad heuristics that provides for an approximate solution to
the problem of synthesizing the optimal network configuration.

The results given in this chapter can be applied and have already been applied in
practice in the design of data transnission networks.

1.

2.

3.
4.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abezgaus. G. G. et al., "Spravocbnik po veroyatnostnym raschetam” [handbook on
Probability Compuations], Moscow, Voyenisdat, 1970.

Barlow, R. and (Proshan, P.), "Mathematical Theory of Reliability," Moscow,
Sov. radio, 1969.

(Birkhoff, C and Berti, T.), "Modern Applied Algebra," Moscow, Mir, 1976.

Bunin, D. A., "Operating Reliability of Cable Lines for Long-Range Communica-
tion," ELEKTROSVYAZ', No 7, 1967.

Hentzel, B. 5., "Operations Research," Moscow, Sow. radio, 1972.

Gadasin, V. A., "Reliability of Network Structures with Samioriented Structure,"
IZV. AN SSSR. TEKHN. KIBERNBTIKA, NO 1, 1976.

Gadasin, V. A. and Lakayev, A. 5., "Evaluation of Reliability of Relay Networks
by the Method of Decomposition," 12V. AN SSSR. TEKHN. KIBBRNETIKA, No 4, 1978.

Gadasin, V. A. and Lakayev, A. 8., "Method of Computing Reliability of Communi-
cation Networks with Linear working Hours,” in "b-aya Vsesoyuznays shkola-
seminar po vychislitel'nym sstyam: Dokl." [Fourth All-Union School-Seminar on
Computer Networks: Papers], Moscow, Tashkent, Scientific Council on the Com-
plex Problem "Cybernetics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences, part 2, 1979.

Cnedenko, B. V.; Belyayev, Yu. 1.; and Solov’yev, A. D., [Mathematical Methods
in Reliability Theory] "Matematicheskiye metody v teorii nadeehnosti," Moscow,
Nsuka , 1965 o

Davydov, G. B. and Rozinskiy, V. N., "Problems of Communication Network Design"

in "Informstsionnyye aeti i kommutatsiya" [Information Networks and Switching],
Moscow, Nauka, 1968.

Davydov, G. 3.; Rozinakiy, V. N.; and Tolchan, A. Ya., "Seti elektrosvyazi"
[Electric Communication Networks], Moscow, Svyas', 1977.

Zhukov, V. M. and Shufchuk, Yu. 3., "Determining the Reliability Performance of
the Communication Channels for the Leningrad UMG," in "Aytomatizatsiya, tele-
mekhanizatsiya i svyaz' v gazovoy promyshlennosti" [Autumation, Remote Control
and Communications in the Gas Industry], Moscow, VNIIEgszprom, No 4, 1972.

Kel'mans, A. N., "Some Problems of Network Reliability Analysis," AIT, No 3,
1965.

Kel'mans, A. K., "On Connectivity of Probability Networks," AIT, No 3, 1967.

Korobov, A. A. and Shufchuk, Yu. 3., "On Method of Analysis of Information Net-
work Reliability," in "VI aimpozium po probleme izbytochnosti v informatsion-
nykh sistemakh: Dokl.” [Sixth Symposium on the Problem of Redundancy in Infor-
mation Systems: Papers], Moscow, Leningrad, part 2, 1974s.

79

FOI¢HWHC1A1.USE(NNLY
16‘

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Korobov, A. A. and Shufchuk, Yu. 3., "0n Method Used in Computing Communica-

tion Network Reliability Performance in the Ministry of the Gas Industry," in
"VI simporium po problems izbytochnoati v informataionnykh sistemakh: Dokl."

isee 15.], Moscow, Leningrad, part 2, 1976b.

, "Problem of Synthesis of Optimal Communication Networks with Complex
Configuration," in "VI konf. po teorii kodirovaniya i peredache informatsii"
{Sixth Conference on Coding Theory and Information Transmission], Moscow,
Tomsk, part 3, 1975.

, "Connectivity of Arbitrary Subsets of Information Network Nodes," in
"7-y Vsesoyurnyy simpozium po problems izbytochnosti v informatsionnykh
sistemakh: Dokl." [Seventh All-Union Symposium on the Problem of Redundancy in
Information Systems: Papers], Moscow, Leningrad, part 2, 1977s.

 

, "Problem on Analysis of Information Network Reliability Performance"
in "7-y Vsesoyuznyy simporium po probleme irbytochnosti v informatsionnykh
sistemakh: Dokl." [see 18.], Moscow, Leningrad, part 2, 1977b.

, "Method of Computing Communication Network Reliability Performance,"
in "VII Vsesoyuznaya konferentsiya po teorii kodirovaniya i peredachi
informatsii“ [Seventh All-Union Conference on Information Coding and Transmis-

sion Theory], Moscow, Vilnius, part 3, 1978a.

, "Method of Computing Mathematical Expectations of Time Network Stays in
the Conunication and Noncomunication States," in [same as 20.], 1978b.

, "Symbolic Method of Computing Communication Network Reliability Perfor-
mance," in "5-y Mezhdunarodnyy simpozium po teorii informataii: nokl." {Fifth
International Symposium on Information Theory: Papers], Moscow, Tbilisi,

part 2, 1979a.

, "Method of Computing Probabilities of Connectivity of Subset of Nodes
of Probability Graph," in "b-aya Vsesoyuznaya shkola-seminar po vychislite1'-
nym setyam: Dokl." iFourth All-Union School-Seminar on Computer Networks:
Papers], Moscow, Tashkent, part 1, 1979b.

Krakovskaya, S. S. and Tolchan, A. 1a., "Evaluation of Probability of Connec-
tivity of Communication Network Graph," in "Informatsionnyye seti i kommuta-
tsiya" iInformation Networks and Switching], Moscow, Nauka, 1968.

Lomonosov, M. V. and Polesskiy, V. P., "Upper Bound of Reliability of Informa-
tion Networks," PROBLEHY PEREDACHI INPORHATSII, V01 7, No a, 1971.

Mizin, I. A. and Sidorov, A. A., "Algorithmic Procedures for Structural Syn-
thesis of Communication Networks," in "Voprosy kibernetiki. Problemy informa-
tsionnogo obmena v vychislitel'nykh setyakh" [Problems of Cybernetics: Prob-
lems of Information Exchange in Computer Networks], Moscow, Scientific Council
on the Complex Problem "Cybernetics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 1979.

"Broad Heuristics," in "k-aya mezhdunarodnaya konferentsiya po iskusstvennomo
intellektu. Dokl" [Fourth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Papers], Tbilisi, Scientific Council on the Complex Problem "Cybernetics" of
the USSR Academy of Sciences, 1975; manuscript deposited at the VINITI,

No 1877-76 Dep.

 

80
l1)R‘0FFIC1Al.lEﬂE(HNLY
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

349

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

60.

Samoylenko, S. 1., "Bvriaticheskiye metody poiska resheniy v vychislitel'nykh
setyakh" [Heuristic Methods of Finding Solutions in Computer Netuorks] (pre-

publication), Moscow, Scientific Council on the Complex Problem "Cybernetics"
of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977.

Tolchan, A. Ya. and Shval'b, V. P., ”Communication Network Configuration Syn-
thesis," in "Problemy reaheniys ekonomicheakikh zadsch na EVH" [Problems of
Solving Economic Problems with-Computers], Moscow, Tasu, No 6, 1969.

, "0n Purposeful Synthesis of Communication Network Configurations," in
"Nauchno-tekhnicheskaya konferentaiya MEI: Dokl. aprel' 1970" [Scientific and
Technical Conference of the MRI [Moscow Power Engineering Institute]: Papers,
April 1970], H31, 1970, No H76.

Fedenko, V. 8., "Evaluation of Communication Line and Network Reliability" in
"Konferentsiya 'Elektrosvyaz' i peredacha dannykh': Dokl" [Conference, "Elec-
trical Communication and Data Transmission": Papers], Kiev, 1968.

Shufchuk, Yu. 3. and Viguahin, N. I., "Opredeleniye kolichestvennykh kharak-
teristik nadezhnsoti kanalov svyazi Hingazproma" [Determining Quantitative
Characteristics of Communication Channel Reliability in the Ministry of the
Gas Industry], Moscow, VNIIEgazprom, No 9, 1973.

, "Puti povysheniya nadezhnosti kanalov svyasi gazoprovoda Srednyaya
Aziya-Tsentr" [Ways of Enhancing Reliability of Comlmnication Channels for the
Central Asia-Center Gas Line], Gazovaya prom-st', No 2, 1975s.

Shufchuk, Yu. 3., "Problem of Designing the Information Transmission Network
for the Gas Industry's Automated Sector Hanagement System," in ”Avtomatizatsi-
ya, telemekhanizatsiya i avyas' v gazovoy promyshlennosti" [Automation, Remote
Control and Communication in the Gas Industry], No 2, Moscow, VNIIEgazprom,
1975b.

Birnbaum, 2. w.; Esary, Y. D. and Saunders, S. C., "Multicomponent System and
Structures and Their Reliability,” TECHNOHBTRICS, Vol 3, No l, 1961.

Gilbert, E. N., "Random Graphs," ANN. MATH. STAT., V01 30, No 4, 1959.

Pratta, L. and Montanari, U. C., "A Boolean Algebra Method for Computing the
Terminal Reliability in a Communication Network," 1333 TRANS. CIRCUIT THEORY,
No 3. May 1973, p 20.

Lin, P. H.; Leon, 8. J.; and Huang, T. C., "A New Algorithn for Symbolic Sys-
tam Reliability Analysis," 1388 TRANS. RBLIABIL., Vol R-25, No 1, April 1976.

Moore, 8. and Shannon, C., "Reliable Circuits Using Less Reliable Relays," J.
FRANKLIN INST., No 3, 1956, p 191; No 6, p 281; translated into Russian in
"Raboty po teorii informataii i kibernetike" [Works on Information Theory and
Cybernetics], Hoscow, IL [Foriegn Literature], 1963.

Neumann, J., von, "Probabilitic Logic," Calif., Inst. Technol, 1952; trans-
lated into Russian in ”Avtomaty" [Automate], Moscow, IL, 1956.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

8565
C50:

1863/152

81
FOR OFTNCJAl.lEﬂD(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DESIGR PRINCIPLES FOR COMPUTER NETWORK UPPER LEVELS

Hoscow PROBLEM! HSNTI: INFORMATSIYA, UPRAVLENIYB, sxsrm in Russian No 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 5-17

[Article by Aleksandr Ivsnovich Ilyushin, candidate of physicomathematical
sciences and senior scientific associate, Anatoliy Nikolayevich Myamlin, doctor of
engineering sciences and department chief, and Vsevolod Serafimovich Shtarknsn,
candidate of physicomathaatical sciences and department chief, all from the
institute of Applied Mathematics imeni H. V. Keldysh, 0833 Academy of Sciences]

[Excerpts] Discussed is a schae for designing the upper levels
of computer network software that in contrast to traditional
schemes is based not on the sending (receiving of sessages), but
an calling of procedures in abstract objects. Levels 7-6 of the
standard 180 nodal are reduced to one level. Advantages of this
scheme compared to traditional schemes are shown: reduced cost
for software development and operation, expanded functional
capabilities with reduced resource coat and two-way network
transparency.

180 Model

A major problem apart from those discussed in the preceding sections concerns the
ISO model, or more precisely, levels 7-4 of it. From a scientific and technical
viewpoint, it seems to us the problem is rather clear. The ISO nodel as far as
levels 7-6 are concerned is unsatisfactory at its very basis. This is evidenced
in particular by the fact that the very authors of the model [2] were unable to

decompose the protocols of the virtual terminal and sending of jobs and files by
model levels.

In the proposed four-level model, the problems are solved much more sinply;
however, one can easily image the "political" difficulties of introducing it.

Conclusion

Discussed in the article is a scheme for designing network software as an alterna-
tive to that suggested in levels 7-10 of the ISO nodal. The main difference is that
the suggested scheme is based on interaction of abstract objects (subsystems)
effected by a call of procedures in these objects. The ISO model is based on

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
process interaction effected by sending and receiving messages. Placed above level
3 in the suggested model is the UDV iremote call] level which is the last in the
system network software. It is found that the applications level does not actually
have the specific nature of a network and in the majority of cases is reduced to
local application software.

Implementation of the upper layers of the SBKOP [Hultiuser Computer Network] {3]
has confirmed a number of advantages of the approach in question:

I. Two-way network transparency is provided for. On the one hand, a user of the
subsystems available on the network calls operations in them without concern as to
whether these subsystems are local or remote relative to him. On the other, the
subsystems (procedures in a subsystem) are independent of how they are called,
locally or remotely. Thereby a simple interface can be provided between the users
and preparers of subsystems in the form of agreements on communications when pro-
cedures are called. In the process. a local case is implemented efficiently.

2. Costs are reduced for developing applications subsystems since development of
specific protocols is eliminated. With that, distributed programming is actually
reduced to local.

In particular, during the development of the SEKOP network, implementation, for
example, of sending jobs was reduced actually to writing interface procedures for
the local system to start jobs and took several weeks in contrast to the several
years usually needed to develop and implement traditional protocols.

3. Network software logic becomes more unified and transparent.

4. Data representation conversions can be naturally reduced to conversion of
built-in types.

5. The universal protocol does not cause ”superfluous" messages and deterioration
of response times.

6. Coordination and standardization are required for one universal functional
protocol (standards at layers 1-3 have largely been established). For comparison,
let us point out that the 180 model requires standardization of protocols for
layers 4 and 5 and a potentially infinite number of protocols at layers 6 and 7.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. McQuillan, J. H., "Local Network Technology and the Lessons of History,"
COMPUTER NBTHORKS, Vol 6, No 5, 1980. PP 235-238.

2. "Reference Model of Open Systems Interconnection," ISO/TC 97/50 16, N 227.

3. Drozhzhinov, V. 1.; Ilyushin, A. 1.; Hysmlin, A. N. and Shtarkman, Vs. 5.,
"Design Principles for Experimental Hultiuser Computer Network-SEKOP," in
"Voprosy kibernetiki. Vyp. 57. Problemy informatsionnogo obmana v vychislitel‘-
nykh setyakh" [Problems of Cybernetics, No 57, Problems of Information Exchange
in Computer Networks], edited by S. I. Samoylenko, Moscow, Scientific Council
on the Complex Problem of Cybernetics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1979. PP 18-33.

83
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY
‘a

S.

6.

7.
8.
9.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ilyuehin, A. I. and Shtarknen, Va. 8., "A Hethod of Deaigning the Applicationa
Layer of Software for Computer ﬂatworka," PWANIYB, no 6, 1979.
PP 3443.

Ilyuahin, A. I. and Pilippov, V. 1.. "multilayer Model of Architecture for
Data Base and Information Retrieval System," PWANIYB. No 6. 1980.
pp 66-71.

Liekov, B. et al., "Abatraction Mechanic-e in cm," CAQi, Vol 20. no 8, 1977,
pp 566-576.

Wagner. 9.. "Programing with ADA," Prentice-Hall, 1980.

"mm Protocol 96," IFIP.

Hiknelev, V. H. and Shterlnaan. Vikt. 8., "MARROKOD (opiaaniye yazyka)"
[HACROCODB (language deacription)], Preprint of Inatitute of Applied
Hathmtice, USSR Academy of Sciencea. No 24, 1972.

"11m Protocol 86. A Remark Independent Pile Tranafer Protocol, HIP/OP," IPIP.

COPYRIGHT: Hezhdunarodnyy teentr nauchnoy i tekhnicheakoy infomteii, 1981

85105

080:

1863/ 129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IMPLEMENTATION OF NETHORK ACCESS TO SOPTHARE PACKAGES 0N EXPERIMENTAL COMPUTER
NETHORK

Moscow PROBLEHY HSNTI: INPORHAISIYA, UPBAVLKNIYB, SISIEHY in Russian No 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 18-24

[Article by Eduard Aleksandrovich Yakubaytis, academician, Latvian 883 Academy of
Sciences, and director of the Institute of Electronics and Computing Technology,
Latvian 883 Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Two alternatives are discussed for organising network
access to software packages on the Unified System of Computers
which have been implemented on a Latvian 583 Academy of Sciences'
experimental computer network.

Keywords: computer networks, network access, software packages,
network protocols

Computer networks are the highly efficient base for the modern information proces-
sing industry. The first stage of their development was the creation of tree-like
centralized networks in which n subscriber stations were connected to one computer
through communication channels. In the second stage. the capability of combining
a small number of "trees" together emerged. And, finally, in the third, currrent
stage, distributed computer networks are being created; their topology is deter-
mined by the efficiency of execution of all processes of information processing.

Solving the varied network problems is enabled by specialization of systems
shown in the table.

No System Tasks executed by system

1- Working Making network resources available: storage of data files;
information retrieval; execution of computing operations;
simulation of processes, phenomena and objects; software
development

2. Terminal Use of network resources: terminal operation control, job
preparation, interface with industrial processes for
measurement and control of them

3. Communication Routing of flows of files of information sent between
working or terminal systems

85
mommmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Administrative Administrative control of computer network (collection of
statistics, operation accounting, reports, malfunction
diagnostics, reference information on network operation.
etc.)

The working, terminal and administrative systems are called subscriber systems.
Subscriber systems meeting the standards for interface to the data transmission net-
work are connected directly to the communication systems. If a subscriber system
does not meet these standards, it is connected to a communication system through a
network logic element called an interface module. Each system is implemented in a
complex consisting of one or more computers.

working complexes enable making the most varied information and computing resources
available to a broad group of users. Host efficiently used in them are computers
especially developed for networks. The machines already produced under the Unified
and Small Systems are not designed for networks. However, after taking special
measures, successful implementation of working systems can be achieved with these
computers.

There are three methods for connecting a working complex built with one or more
Unified or Small computers.

The first of them: the subscriber complex is connected to an interface converter of
the communication complex through a standard data transmission multiplexer (HPD) or
data teleproceseing processor (PTD). This converter, which implements the interface
module, looks like a standard subscriber station to the urn (PTD), and a standard
(for the network) subscriber complex to the communication complex.

The second method is logically equivalent to the first. However, here the interface
module is implemented not in the equipment linked to the communication complex, but
in the PTD, a mini or micro computer, linked directly to the subscriber complex.

The third method for connecting a working complex: special programs enabling
creation of the network access method are written for Unified or Small computers.
Then, after adding a network adapter to the working complex, it can be connected
directly to the communication complex [1].

Let us consider two alternatives for organizing access to software packages (PPP)
on the Unified System of Computers (KAHA, OKA, DUVZ, POISK-l, etc.) by using the
network access method and the IRPR [radial parallel interface] network adapter
(parallel transmission).

The first alternative consists in adding the network access method (SUD) to the
software package. In doing so, the access method becomes, as it were, an integral
part of the package and is used to implement the required programs. Note that
application programs that operate in the package environment remain unchanged.

The second alternative consists in developing special software that implements the
interface between the package and network. This alternative does not require making
changes to the package. With that, the network access method is subdivided into
logical and physical parts. The logical part emulates a standard device or group of
devices and is implemented in the ‘orm of a logical interface converter (LOGIP).

86

IN)! (MHHIJAJ.IISEZ(HVLY
The physical part is associated with support of the transport network protocols and
is implemented in the form of a transport station (TS).

Let us dwell in more detail on each alternative.

The first alternative, the software package/network access method system, along
with standard system terminals supports operation of remote terminal machines (TM)
in the mode of multiaccess to software packages functioning on a working machine

(RH) in the Yes OS operating system environment by using the network access method
[RAM] [2].

The version of software (P0) of the software package/NAM consists in an extension
of the package control program functions, development of additional program modules
and modification of package control tables to support the mode of multiaccess of

terminal machines through the communication complex to the software packages by
network protocols.

The NAN is the basic access method and consists of a set of macro instructions and
macro definitions that are stored in a system library, the input/output module

loaded to user main storage and the real-time supervisor (SRV) as the basic
complexing facility.

A request for use of the NAM which advises of the presence of a task that requires
its services and loading of the input/output module to main storage are effected by
the macro instruction AOPEN, which also opens the ADCB block previously built by
the corresponding ADCB macro instruction. The block contains references to NAM
modules and control blocks used by real-time supervisor during input/output and
dispatching operations.

Input/output [10] functions are performed by the macro instructions AREAD, AHRITB
and ACNTBL, which initiate, respectively, read and write operations and transfer of
control instructions. Access to the 10 module occurs through these macro instruc-
tions; the module builds the channel program and To control blocks and transfers
control to real-time supervisor, which starts the to operation and returns control
to the program through the 10 module.

The NAM supports sending "attention" signals to user programs for attention proces-
sing. An "attention" program for a given device is assigned by the macro instruc-
tion ASPAR, which opens the attention control block built earlier by using the
macro instruction ASABC. To synchronize 10 operations with other program sections,
the macro instructions AHAIT and APOST have been dsvsloped.

The macro instruction ADAR is used to disable a user's attention handling routine
and discontinue communication between the "attention" control routine and real-time

superviser. At the same time, the "attention" control routine is deleted from main
storage.

The software package/NAM software, making use of NAM services, organizes:
-initiation of 10 operations upon external or application program requests
-completion of handling of network protocols

-diagnostics of error situations during reception/sending of messages through the
adapter

87
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--nultiaccess from terminal machines to indpendent system and application programs

functioning in the operating environment of the software package/NAN
--conversion of network protocols to software package terminal protocols
-accumulation of statistical data during input/output of data, and
-multiplexing and deeultiplexing of input and output data queues.

Thus. this alternative provides the capability of using software packages on a
network.

The advantages of this alternative are:

-savings of main btorage

-no need for development of additional support save for the access method nodules
--and network software affects only the functional layer of a software package and
not application programs.

The shortconing of this alternative is that the software package operates directly
with the network adapter and is independent of protocols used in the network.

The second alternative is to interface the software package with the network outside

the package by developing special program facilities, the logical interface con-
verter (L061?) and TS (transport station) which perforn NAM functions [3].

L061? and T8 software is based on the nodular principle.
The general structure of the LOCI? is shown in fig. 1.

After receiving control from the ~-—" ' "
operating system, the loader:

--starts the task of emulation of the data
transmission multiplexer and subscriber
stations (REM),

-starts the transport station (TSTATION)
task. and

connects the nucleus.

The loader also handles REM and TSTATION
abnormal ends of tasks and completion of
the RE“ and TSTATIOﬂ tasks.

 

Loader program modules are:

-module for starting REM and TSTATIOﬂ
tasks and connecting the LOCI? nucleus,
-4nodule for handling REM and TSTATION

ABEND'e, and Pig. 1. General structure of L061?
-aodule for completion of LOGIP [logical interface converter]
operation. Key:

The LOCI? nucleus perforns analysis of %: ::::::‘

all SVC instructions 1‘3ued 1n the 3. device mution CI“ (m)
”‘w' ‘° “an" the “C? (cvc I) a. transport station (rsnrmu)

instructions. The axes instruction is
generated when it is necessary to request

88

FOR¢OFIHCJA1.lEﬂE(N‘LY
the operating system to execute an 10 operation. While analyzing all EXCP instruc-
tions, the nucleus selects those instructions issued to devices emulated in the
LOCI? and uses the POST/BAIT apparatus to send the instruction to the IBM task for
processing of the BXCP.

The task of emulating a standard device or group of devices (REM), with which a
software package oper:tes in a data teleprocessing system, effects simulation of
the data transmission multiplexer and user subscriber stations. Required in the
process are:

-data recoding

-reformatting of messages to he sent, and

-trsnslation, processing and execution of instructions of the emulated device or
group of devices.

Interaction of the modules is effected on the basis of the control tables.

The AVT (Address Vector Table) is the main LOGIP control table. Interaction be-
tween the RIM and TSTATION tasks is based on this table.

The TSU (Table Status Unit) is used to describe each unit emulated in the LOGIP.
Each entry in the table contains the address of the emulated unit and designates
the logical channel corresponding to it. '

The TCHT (Task Control Master Table) contains the syabolic names and addresses of
points of entry to the modules that process the macro instructions of the basic
telecommunications access nethod (BTHD) {BTAK]. The size of this table depends on
the number of ETA! macros emulated in the LOGIP.

The REM task program modules are (fig. 2):

--starter

--dispatcher

--input/output supervisor

~-BTAH macro processor

-task supervisor. and

-module for conpletion of REM device emulation program.

Starter prepares the RE“ program for functioning.

Dispatcher generates the list of addresses for the Event Control Blocks (ECB) for
which the special flag is set for including the 803 in the queue. In the LOGIP
system. there are: an 363 for each of the emulated units, an 803 for expectation
of the arrival of data or an instruction from the transport station, an 803 for
expectation of the arrival of the receipt for transfer of data by the transport
station, and an BCB for expectation of the event of emulation program completion.
Expectation of the events described by these BCB's is effected in the dispatcher.

The 10 supervisor effects transfer of data and instructions upon requests from

the processors of BTAH macro instructions and TS. Hhen a request from TSTATION

for receiving data is received, the dispatcher performs transfer of control to the
10 supervisor. The 10 supervisor is built from several independent program modules.
After receiving the data. the 10 supervisor sends a receipt to TS and transfers
control to either the task supervisor or the dispatcher.

89
FinllJFFlChkL lEHEfN‘lY
I“)! OFiﬂCJAL USI2CNVLY

1-}

 

Fig. 2. REM task progran nodules

Key:
1. starter 6. task control naster table
2. conpletion of 33H 7. task supervisor
3. dispatcher 8. STA! instruction handlers
a. transport station 9. table status unit
5. address vector table 10. nucleus

The BTAH nacro instruction handlers process the corresponding BTAH nacro instruc-
tions and forward 10 requests to the task supervisor. They are loaded to Iain
storage by the starter and receive control from the task supervisor when the
appropriate BTAH nacro instruction is issued by the user.

The task supervisor controls the BIA! nacro instruction handlers and transfers con-
trol to the appropriate [0 supervisor entry points when 10 requests are forwarded
by the handlers.

Completion of the device emulation progran begins when the dispatcher receives an
instruction for tsrnination fron the loader. Upon ternination, storage requested
for the buffer for the nessages and the list of addresses for the scs'a is cleared,

the BTAM nacroinstruction handlers are cleared. and control is returned to the
operating systel.

90
li)!‘0ﬁﬂﬂ€1kl.USl§(ﬂVLY
The transport station is a system of program modules intended to perform two
basic functions:

-set up and maintenance of operation of logical channels, and

—support of data transmission by physical co-unication channels.

Responsible for implementation of these functions are the appropriate subsystems
for control of the logical (SULK) and physical (803K) channels.

SULK performs the functions of the transport layer of the experimental computer
network, implementing organisation of the logical channels and maintenance of
communication sessions, assembly and disassembly of messages and control of their
flows. and the functions of interface between the LOCI? and the TS.

SULK has the following structure:

-TS initialiser

-TS scheduler

-TS terminator

-TS request handler

-interpreter and protocol instruction preprocessor.

The TS initializer issues the RAM instructions ADPBN and ASPAR, opening data sets
for operation with the adapter and monopoliaing IO processing from this unit.

The T8 scheduler plans TS operations. When there are no requests for rs services,
TS is in a wait state. after issuing the macro instruction AHAIT for the list of
ECB's of expected events.

The T5 terminator receives control when there is a request for T8 termination.
Forwarding the RAM macro instruction anan, it disables TS access to burst use of
the adapter. The macro instruction ACLOSB terminates use of NAM by the transport
station.

The interpreter interprets LOGIP-TS interface instructions. It discerns logical
instructions and requests for data transmission to the network. Logical instruc-
tions are requests for opening/closing of logical channels. When these requests
are made, control is passed to the protocol instruction preprocessor.

If the length of the message to be transmitted exceeds the maximum packet length
established by the administration for the experimental computer network, the
interpreter breaks up the message into packets and sends them to the SUFK.

The protocol instruction preprocessor performs operations to open/close logical
channels and advise LOCI? of completion of these operations. The module analyses
protocol instructions, noting the logical channel state.

The SUPK is the program implementation of the network and channel levels of the
experimental computer network. In accordance with this. the SUPK performs the
functions of generating the packet. routing packets, making up the frame, trans-
mitting data over the physical communication channel, handling malfunctions during
data transmission over the physical channel and interacting with the SULK.

91
FOI*OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFHCIAI USE ONLY

The physical channel control subsystem (SUFK) has the following structure:
-packet control module

--channel dispatcher

-trsnsnission module

“instruction analyzer

—frame transmission conpletion nodule

—frsme retransmission nodule

—data reading module

—TS data processing nodule, and

—data receiving nodule for the LOGIP.

The packet control module, after receiving control from the sum, copies the data
into its own area and generates packet headers, noting the numhers of the logical
channel and group logical channel. This ensures delivery of the data to the
necessary user through a virtual chain.

The channel dispatcher performs the functions of allocating the physical channel
between the 1.061? and the TS. Using the exchange log, the dispatcher inforns sun
of the intonation source and amber of nalfunctions during data transmission.

The module also makes up and packs data packets into a frame and makes up frame
headers.

The transmission module effects direct transmission of data over a physical channel.
It initiates tranmnisaion by using the NM! macro instruction AURITB and analyzes
the completion of an 10 operation.

The instruction analyzer receives the instructions that have arrived fron the
adapter, forwarding the NM! instruction mm.

The analyzer also checks for adherence to the channel protocol. When the protocol

is violated, an error meesage is sent to the console and the instruction received
is ignored.

The frame transmission completion nodule clears the exchange log for further use.

The frame retransmission module receives control when there is a negative receipt
for frame transmission. It notes the number of repeat tranmissions. Hhen this .
number does not exceed the naxinum specified by the protocol, the module calls the
channel dispatcher with a request for frame retransmission. When this number is
exceeded, the conmunication channel is considered out of order.

The data reading nodule receives control when the adapter sends a "read" instruc-
tion. Making use of the NA! nacroinstruction am. it reads the arriving data
into its own buffer and checks for completion of the I0 operation.

when the ID operation is completed normally, the module sends the originator an

explanatory receipt, using the NAM necroinatruction ACNTRL, and transfers control
to the operating system.

The T5 data processing module receives control upon conpletion of transmission of
a packet belonging to the Ts, and also if data has been received through a logical

9?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
channel that had not been opened. The module controls the queue of messages, the
source of which is the TS itself.

If the TS has received a message through a logical channel that had not been
opened by the LOGIP, this nodule prepares a message to the user through the corres-
ponding logical channel on the lack of facilities, the services of which were re-
quested, and puts this message in the 1's message queue.

Upon completion of rs message transmission, the module orders the message queue
and informs the TS scheduler of the presence of messages for transmission.

The data receiving module for the 1.061? receives control when a logical channel has
been opened by LOGIP for data transmission. The module informs the 1.061? of the
presence of a message and sends it the data buffer address. After receiving a
positive receipt, the buffer is considered free.

The module analyzes the sequence bit of the message packets and when necessary,
performs assembly of the message.

This software design principle for the LOGIP and the TS permits affording simpli-
city of further expansion of system capabilities by incorporating new modules.

The advantage of the second alternative is that there is no need to make changes
to the software package to enable its interface with a network. In the process,
the software package is independent of the complexing units and the TS protocols.
The shortcoming of this alternative is the high cost for software development.

Thus, as the more optimal by amount of additional software to be developed and
system response time, the first alternative can be successfully used in
specialized network software packages.

The second alternative is universal in the sense of adding to the nomenclature of
software packages used and can be recommended as standard for networks built on
the base of Unified System computers.

By using these methods, the following Unified Systan software packages have been

connected to a network: 0W2 [conversational remote job entry], RAMA, ORA and
POISK-l.

Now being implemented are the network access method and network adapter that follow
the x.25 standard for connecting a working complex directly to a cmunication com-
plex with the aerial method of transmitting information.

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Yakubeytto, E. A., ”Concept of a Hodern Computer Network,"
AVTOHATIKA I VYCHISLITBL'NAYA TBKHNIKA, No 2, 1981. pp 3-14.

2. Zinov'yev, E. V.; Strekalev, A. A.; and Rogove, 0. Ye.. "The RAMA Raote Data
Henegenent System in a Couputer Network.”-
AVTOHATIKA I VYCBISLITEL'NAYA mm, No 6, 1980. PP 21-26.

3. Yakubeytis, E. A., "Arkhitektura vychialitel'nykh eerey" [Computer Network
Architecture], Hoecou, Statutike, 1980, 278 pages.

COPYRIGHT: Hezhdunerodnyy teentr neuchnoy i tekhnicheekoy infometeu, 1981

8545
C80: 1863/ 129

9b
roe omcm. use own
301.3 01’ TERMINAL STAIIORS Ill COMPUTER mars

Moscow PROBLBIY HSNTI: WOMSIYA, UPMVLENIYB, 31mm in Russian No 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 25-30

[Article by Viktor Mikhaylovich Bryabrin, candidate of engineering sciences,
sector manager. Conputer Center, USSR Academy of Sciences]

1.

2.

3.

[Excerpts] The generally accepted view of architecture of
computer networks assumes that the basic functions for user
intonation and computing service are performed by base

(host) centers, while terninal stations together with
channels and cousunication centers provide only transparency
for the intonation to be sent. In this work, an analysis is
made of an approach under which terninel stations implemented
as personal computer systqss provide users with far more
service functions than under the traditional approach. No
nontraditional functions of terminal stations are discussed:
1) preparation of object or load nodules for their execution
on base center conputers, including input of source programs,
their editirg, debugging and cross translation; 2) creation of
an "intelligent interface" to a computer network, including an
intonation reference systen on its conponents, formation of
a user's view on types of service and others.

BIBLIOGMPHY

Yakubaytis, E. A., "Arkhitektura vychislitel'nykh setey" [Computer Network
Architecture], Hoscov, Statistika, 1980.

"Vychislitel'nyye seti. Terminologiys" [Computer Networks. Terminology],
Scientific Council on Coupler Proble- of Cybernetics, USSR Academy of Sciences,
Hoscow, 1979.

Asaf'yeva, 8. Yu.; Borkovskiy, A. 3.; Bryabrin, V. 14.; Pononarev, V. V. and
Senin, G. V., "Representation of Knowledge and Processing of Natural language
in the DIDOS Systen," in ”Voproey rasrabotki prikladnykh sisten" [Problens of
Development of Application Systems], Novosibirsk, We 80 AN SSSR [Conputer
Center, Siberian Branch, USSR Academy of Sciences], 1979, pp 25-50.

95
ms omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

10. Brynbrin, V. lb, "P—Lnnsuue: Pomli- for Repreuntntion of Knowledge in n
Intelligent Inunctivc System." in "Priklndnnyn inlomtikn” [Applied
Intonation Science], Moscow, Finnnny i ntntintikn, 1981.

COPYRIGHT: lexhdunnrodnyy tuntr nauchnoy i tekhnicheskoy infomtsii, 1981

8565
(:80: 1863/ 129

MWGALUSEONLY
COMPUTER nervous: PATH 1‘0 DEVELOPMENT 01’ INTERNATIONAL momrw SERVICES

Hoscow norm asm: Im’ORHAISIYA, UPIAVLBNIYB, alarm in Russian No 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep Bl) pp 31-42

[Article by Khinko liikovich Khinov, professor and deputy director. and Vladimir
Nikolayevich Kalachev, candidate of engineering sciences and senior scientific

associate, both from the International Scientific Research Institute of Control
Problem]

[Excerpts] State of the art of international infatuation
services based on computer networks is analyzed. Trends in
development are identified. Various rates for use of
information services are systematised. Efforts performed

in socielist countries on organising systems for conunication
with foreign computer networks and data bases are described.

Organization in Socialist countries of Systems for do-unicstion with Foreign
Conputer Networks

Several socialist countries now have efforts underway to establish systems for
conunication with computer networks in the United States, Canada and Western
Europe. Interest in setting up these co-unication systems was evoked primarily by
the capability of an outlet to the major foreign data banks and computer networks
and of studying asking the infatuation and computing resources of their own coun-
tries comercislly available to foreign users.-

A number of socialist countries, members of the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Lexenberg, Austria, use its conunication center for
an outlet to foreign computer networks. Establishing cal-unications through the
IIASA allows use of the experience, gained in IIASA, on setting up computer net-
works [8, 9] and resolution of a number of organisational problems.

Cos-unication with the IIASA was set up centrally by establishing in each country
a Center for Automated Access (IsAD) [CAA] to the IIASA. within the country,
access to ford-'83 computer networks and data bases nust be effected through the CAA.

The CAA's technical equipment must provide for:
-convenient access in the interactive and batch nodes to IIASA information and

computing resources, and through the IIASA, to the foreign computer networks
-continual reporting on all connections

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-prevention of unauthorised access to external resources, and
«establishment of an additional level of information protection with a record of
data and messages received and sent.

The CM also has to make access available to national users remote to it. In con-
nection with this, it has to be noted that a centralized access system will be
profitable when it has a large number of users.

The nain administrative functions of the CAA include:

—-providing the legal and financial bases for access to foreign resources
—administrative monitoring and access control

-maintenance of the archive containing the co-unication protocols, and
-estsblishmamt of necessary working contacts with national organizations responsi-
ble for setting up computer networks in their own countries to introduce expertise
in using foreign information and computing resources.

Systems for automated access to foreign computer networks and data banks are being
set up in the m [Hungarian People's Republic], the m [Polish People's Republic],
the USSR and the 0883 [8-11]. Experience in setting up these systems and the
little operating experience gained so far have shown that the main diffi:ulties
occur in solving organizational, financial and legal problems, but not technical,
since there is now sufficient experience in organising national computer networks
in these countries. Organising access to foreign computer networks through the
IIASA has contributed considerably to simplifying technical problems.

For conunicationa, hungary uses hungarian TBA-70 computers, a leased co-sunicstion
line and the 3.25 protocol [10]. The solution to the financial and legal problems
is of interest. During the experimental operating period, costs are being paid
centrally. This is because at this stage in view of the still in sufficient number
of users, it is inexpedient to introduce a regulating system of payment by the
users themselves for access to the foreign information and computing resources.
Therefore, in Hungary, the main costs are paid by the State Co-ittee for Develop-
ment of Technology. These include funds fer purchase of equipment needed and pay-
ment to foreign firms for information and computing services granted. Costs for
use of the communication line are «zrne by the Hungarian Post Office. System
operating costs are borne by the organisation that set up this system, the Research
Institute of Computer Technology and Automation of the hungarian Academy of
Sciences. In the experimental stage, computer users can access foreign computer
networks and data banks during 60 hours per week. An hour of operation costs 60 to
80 dollars and depends on the type of operation and data base. Contracts with the
foreign firms that make the information and computing services available were con-
cluded through the foreign trade firm, the m METROIMPEKS. In 1980, contracts
were made with Lockheed and the European Space Agency (asun).

Used for conunicstion with the IIASA in the USSR is the sons-10 co-unication com-
puter and a dedicated comunication channel routed Hoscow-Prague- Laxenberg. The
channel is time-multiplexed into eight asynchronous channels with s throughput of
300 baud and one synchronous channel with 2400 band. The synchronous channel is
allocated for development of packet switching, which will be implaented on the
base of the 91-4. Financial problems are resolved the same as in Kungary, central-
ly, in the experimental stage of operation of the automated access system. The
basic costs are borne by the USSR State Comittee on Science and Technology. Costs

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
for maintaining the system are borne by the organization that set it up, the All-
Union Scientific Research Institute of Systems Research. Connected to the CAA in
Hoscow are users from Kiev, Leningrad, Novosibirsk and Riga as well as numerous
users in Moscow itself.

At the start of 1981 in the CSSR, a communication system was connected to the
Hoscow-Prague- Laxenberg communication channel and uses four asynchronous 300-baud
channels. Experimental operation of the system started in mid 1981.

Efforts are underway in Poland within the framework of the "Computer network"
research program to set up an inter-V02 computer network. Putting a network of
three centers into operation was planned in the first stage in 1981. One center
will be connected to the IIASA communication line and will provide access for
national users to foreign computer networks and date banks. As the network
expands, the number of can users will also increase.

Communication systems between the socialist countries and Heat European computer
networks, interexchange of information in national data banks and connection of
national users to CAA's can be effected on the basis of Unified Computer System
hardware. An example of the capability of implementing computer networks based

on Unified Computer System hardware is the experimental communication line between
Moscow and Kiev computer centers [12]. Used to link the Yes-1040 and Yes-1030 com-
puters in it were Yes-8403 data transmission multiplexers, 8010 modems, a four-wire
connecting line to link the computer centers to an international telephone station,
and an international telephone channel.

Conclusion

With the emergence of computer networks, information services have expanded con-
siderably, the number of users is continually increasing, and international
information servicing is developing rapidly. This has caused a need for further
development of data bases to meet the continually growing user demand for informa-
tion from the various fields of human knowledge. The income of firms from provid-
ing information services is continually increasing: average annual income growth
rates are 15 percent. Let us note that the export of information services is a
very unique form of international trade, in which the sale of the commodity does
not reduce its supply in the exporting country and requires no nonrenewable
national resources.

The lack of legislation on setting up and operating international computer networks
in the majority of West European conutries at the start of the period of develop-
ment of international information servicing based on computer networks facilitated
the rapid monopolization of information services by n.s. firms. Laws are now
being passed or prepared in the Heat European countries to restrict the entry of
American firms into this area and promote development of national information
computer networks.

Since the time of emergence and development of information services based on com-
puter networks, the pricing system has undergone several changes on the information

market. Since the mid seventies, transfer of data bases by creating firms to
operating firms has changed from a rental to a license basis. The cost of

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

author's rights (royalties) for data base creating firms has increased, but this
has not affected the growth rate of demand on the information market. Among the
system of payment by the user for operation with a data base to an operating firm,
used most often are systems of payment by the hour, dependent or not dependent on
the data base, and a payment system depending on the type of operations on the
computers.

1.
2.
3.

4.
S.
6.
7.

9.

10.

12.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Organization of Management in the Control Data Corporation," Moscow,
Progress, 1976, 359 pages.

Rothenbuecker, 0. U., "The Top 50 0.8. Companies in the Data Processing
Industry," DATAHATION, June, No T-6, 1978, pp 85-110.

”TECUNOTBC/HDRLDTECU. A Global Marketing System for the Exchange of Technology.
Report," Control Data Corporation, 1975, 35 pages.

Butrimenko, A. V., "0.3. and Rest European Computer Networks and Some Trends in
Their Development," AVTOHATIKA I VYCBISLITBL'NAXA TEKHNIKA, No 2, 1979.
pp 27-35.

"Study of the Potential Use of Informatics Technology for Problems in Scien-
tific and Technological Cooperation," Prepared for UNESCO, Report, Interna-
tional Institute for Applied System Analysis (IIASA), July, 1978, 183 pages.

Page, J. and Sichra, U., "On-Line Use of Databases. Charging Practices of Data-
base Producers," working Paper, HP-78-7, IIASA, February, 1978, 165 pages.

Kelly, P. T. P., ”The BUROUET DIANE Network./Proceedings of IPIP-UNBSCO Inter-
national Symposium-COHNET-8l," Budapest, 1981, pp 3-96.

Butrimenko, A. V., "Computer Communication for Scientific Cooperation-the
IIASA Case./Proceedings of BURC-IPIP Conference,” Amsterdam, North-Bollsnd,
1977. PP 238-263.

Lahadi, A., "IIASA Cateway System and Experiments in Daily Operation./Proceed-
ings of IPIP-UNESCO International Symposium-COHNBT 81," Budapest, 1981. pp 3-8.

Bakonyi, P.; Kiss, 1.; Petrenko, A. and Sebestyen, 1., "Promotion of East-Heat
Computer Cmmmunication in IIASA's Intercontinental Environment and Hungarian
Case Study./Proceedings of IPIP-UNBSCO International Symposium-COHNST-81,"
Budapest, 1981, pp 1-3.

Golovanov, S. V.; Smirnov, 0. L. and Shmykov, 0. A., "Design of Network for
Member Countries of the International Institute of Applied System Analysis
(ISA): Achievements and Prospects," HTsNTI [International Center for Scientific
and Technical Information], KSA under the Presidium of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, Hoscow, 1980, ho 9, "Management and Scientific and Technical Pro-

gress," pp 68-83.

Gurzhiy, V. P.; Nikitin, A. I. et a1., ”Organization of Interaction between Two
Remote Computers Based on Unified Computer System Hardware and Software,"
UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYE SISTEHY I HASBINY, No 6, 1978. PP 128-131.

COPYRIGHT: Hezhdunarodnyy taentr nauchnoy i tekhnicheskoy informatsii, 1981

85b5
CSO:

1863/129

100
lNJI.(IﬂﬂC1Al.lﬂSli(H‘LY
Moscow PROBLEM! HSNTI: INFORMATSIYA, UPRAVLENIYE, SISTEHY in Russian No 2. 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp b3-48

[Excerpts] Discussed is a complex of models for design of
topology of information communication networks with regard to
reliability. Topology is optimized based on successive
improvement of initial structure. Economic algorithms have
been developed to computer cost characteristics and network
reliability parameters. The complex has been implemented in
the form of a PL/l software package.

PLOTTBR. These are programs that organise output of graphic information on an ATsPU
[alpha-numeric printer]. This section combines general-purpose and specialized
programs. A printer has to be used because of the shortage of plotters in existing
computer centers equipped with the Unified System of Computers. The general-purpose
programs in the section allow output of an arbitrary plot on a working field with
the dimension h x v, where h and v are the number of characters horizontally and
vertically. Values of h and v are defined by the user. When h exceeds 128, the
size of the printer carriage, the plot is output in several pages.

The interactive complex developed allows improving a communication network config-
uration that includes up to 500 objects and up to 1000 communication channels. The
complex has been implemented in the PL/l algorithmic language and is intended for
operation on Unified System computers using the OS 6.0 or OS 6.1 operating system.
The catalog. organized on disk after translation, which includes on the order of 35
programs, requires about 150K bytes of storage. In the case of optimizing a network
of 100 objects on the Yes-1060 computer, on the order of 100K bytes of main storage
are required; the time for inclusion or exclusion of an optimal branch ranges from
0.5 to 1 minute for determinate criteria and to 7-10 minutes for stochastic criteria.
In the NET version of the package, all programs are stored in a common library on
magnetic disk and program interaction is controlled automatically by Yes 05
facilities.

101
FOR OFFKJAI.USEINVLY
1.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

6.

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MELIOGRAPHY

Bratukhin, P. I. and Hakainanko, V. 1., "Structure of State Network of Conputer
Centers and Couple: of Hathaatical Hodela for Detenining Ita Basic Technical
characteriatica and Territorial Layout," OPRAVLYAYDSHCHIYE srsrm 1 mm,
No 6. 1978, pp 3-8.

Bratukhin. P. I. and Kvaanitakiy, V. N. at al., "canovy poatroyeniya
bol'ahikh infomtaionno-vychialitel'nykh aetey" [Principles of Deaign of
Large Infomtion and Computing Networks], edited by D. G. Zhinerin and V. I.
Hakainenko, Moscow, Statiatika, 1976. 296 pages.

Gadaain, V. A. and Ivanov, 6. 1L, "Interactive Couple: for Optiniaation of
Structure of Redundant Conunication Networka." mm SRBDSI’V SVYAZI, 83R.
ASU, No 2. 1978. PP 125-130.

Gadaain, V. A. and lvanov, G. 8., "Computation of Matrix of Lengths of Minimum
Patha in Optimizing Conunication Network Topology," AWL“ I
remm, No 6. 1980, pp 186-187.

Gadaain, V. A., "Interpolation Method for Evaluating Characteristics of
Reliability of Relay Networka with Homogeneous Structure,"
AVTOHATIKA I mmm. N0 8, 1979. PP 172-179.

Gadaain, V. A. and Lakayev, A. 8., "Method of Linear Couplexity for Evaluating
Reliability Characteriatica of Redundant Co-unication Networks,"
UPMVLYAYUSBCBIYB 3151191! I M5311“, I0 3. 1979. PP 1045.

COPYRIGBT: Heahdunarodnyy taentr nauchnoy i tekhnicheakoy infomtaii. 1981

8545

C80:

1863/12?

102
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR STRUCTURE OF SHARED-USE COMPUTER SYSTEMS IN STATE
COMPUTER CENTER NETHORK

Moscow PROBLEHY HSRTI: INPOIHATSIXA, DPPAVLENIYB, SISTIHY in Russian NO 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 69-59

[Article by Aleksandr Petrovich Aleshin, candidate of engineering sciences and
sector chief , Oleg Sergeyevich Konstandenko, candidate of engineering sciences and
senior scientific associate, Gennsdiy Viktorovich Ross, candidate of engineering
sciences and senior scientific associate, and Leonid Grigor'yevich Rykov, depart-
nent chief , all from the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Organization
and Control Problems of the USSR State Comittse on Science and Technology]

[Excerpts] Discussed is the problen of designing shared-use
computer systen (VSKP) based on selected system of efficiency
criteria. Design principles for VSKP structure are suggested.
Basic slgorittns are given to solve the problem of designing
V8!!! for the State Computer Center Network.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Kulinets, I. M. and Yarnosh, ll. A., "liethods of Designing Information and
Computing System," ZARDBBZHNAYA “MOW, No 8, 1978, p 36.

2. Korolev, 1.. 11., "Struktura m i ikh sataaticheskoye obespecheniye,"
[Computer Structure and Software], Hoscow, Nauka, 1978, 3108 pages.

3. Martin, J., "Systems Analysis of Data Transmission," Vol 1, Moscow, Mir, 1975,
256 pages.

lo. Ora-0nd, H., "Methods of Evaluation and Measurement of Discrete Computer
Systems," Moscow, Mir, 1977, 361 pages.

5. Davis, 11., "Operating Systems," Moscow, Mir, 1980, 436 pages.
6. Kleinrock, 1... "Computer Systems with Queues," Vol 2, Moscow, Mir, 1979, 600 p.

7. Hayorov, S. A., ed., "Oanovy teorii vychislitel'nykh sisten" (Principles of
Theory of Conputer Systems], Hoscov, Vysshaya ahkola, 1978, 408 pages.

103

POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. Vssil'yev, Yu. P., "Seti M v uprsvlenii proisvodstvon" [Co-purer Networks in
Production Control], Hoscou, Bkonosiks, 1981, 260 pages.

9. Sipser, R., "Architecture of Conunicstions in Distributed Systels."
Moscow, Mir, 1981, 744 pages.

10. Yakubsytis. B. A.. "Arkhitekturs vychislitsl'nykh setsy" [Architecture of
Computer Networks], Koscov, Statistiks, 1980. 280 pages.

11. Hartin, J ., "Organization of Data Bases in Conputer System." Moscow, Mir,
1980, 622 pages.

12. Chsnpins, G. A., "Perspectives on Business Data Processing," commas, Vol 13,
N0 11’ PP “-990

13. Cristofides, IL, "Graph Theory," Moscow, Mir, 1978, 622 pages.

14. Korbut. A. A. and Pinkei'shteyn. Yu. Yu.. "Diskrstnoys progrmirovaniye"
[Discrete Programing], Moscow, Nauka. 1969. 320 pages.

15. Burkov, V. II. and Lovetskiy, 3. Ye., "Methods of Solving Extra-Isl Conbinatorisl
Problems (Survey)." AMT!“ I 13mm, 80 1, 1968. pp 62-66.

16. Vinogrsdova, '1'. D.. "Integer Distributing Problen," 12V. All 8888. ram.

17. Benpol'skiy, V. Z. and Hsksrov, I. 2., "Algorithms for Distribution of
Problsss with Boolean Variables," in KIBBBRE‘IIKA I V02, No 3. Taskiy
universitet, 1510. pp 22-26.

18. Dennis, A. and Boweder, C., ”An All Zero-One Algoritl- for a Certain Class of
Transportation Problems," OPBB. 338., Vol 19. No 16, 1971. pp 61-67.

19. Bales. 8., "Discrete Programing by the F-’ -ter Method," OPEL 838., Vol. 15,
No S, 1967, pp 482-1085.

COPYRIGHT: Hezbdunarodnyy tsentr nsuclmoy i tekhnichsskoy infomtsii, 1981

8565
C80: 1863/129

FOIOFHCIALIJSBONLY
LANGUAGE FOR DBVBLOPHBRT OF PROGRAMS WITH DISTRIBUTED STRUCTURE IN COMPUTER
NETWORKS

Moscow PROBLEM! M81111: INFORMATSIYA, UPRAVIHIYB, 818m in Russian No 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 60-67

[Article by Anetoliy Pedorovich Dedkov, candidate of engineering sciences and
sector chief, and Artur L'vovich Shchers, candidate of engineering sciences and
departnent chief , both free the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of
Organization and Control Prohlens of the USSR State Couittee on Science and
Technology]

[Excerpts] An experimental expansion of PL/l, oriented to
operation in computer networks, is described. It includes
facilities for list processing, subtask interaction, data
exchange through a coll-unication network and exchange with
local terminals. The iaplenentation. sale on the Unified
System of Computers, permits the user to define new types
of data and include new statements in the language.

Conclusion

The RPL/S language has now been inplenented on the Unified System of Conputers by
using a general-purpose RPL converter. It is undergoing experinental operation
within the frnework of the efforts on develop-ant of an uperilental network of
conputer centers. Early results indicate the language is convenient and easy to
learn. This is an experimental language and it may he recouendad for broad
application only after comprehensive tests and discussion. But there is no doubt
of the need for programing languages oriented to operation in computer networks
which will increase as this area of culputer teclmology develops.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. hansen, P. 3., "Distributed Processes: A Concurrent Programing Concept."
COW. ACH, Vol 21, No 11, 1978, pp 934.941.

2. ﬂoare, C. A. R., "Co-sunicating Sequential Processes," com. ACH, Vol 21, No 8,
1978, pp 666-677.

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Fem-en, J. A., "nigh Level Frost-ring for Distributed Co-putins."
COMM. AC“. Vol 22. No 6, 1979, pp 353-368.

lo. Cook, R. P., "moo-4 Language for Distributed Programs,"
1588 MS. 01' 83., V01 83-6, No 6. 1980, pp 563-571.

5. Mac, 1‘. w. and Yeh. R. 1., "Cc-nnicetion Port: A Language Concept for
Concurrent Programing," IRE! MS. 08 83, Vol Slit-6. No 2, 1980. pp 194-206.

COPYRIGHT: Hezhdunarodnyy tsentr nauchnoy 1. tekhnichukoy infomteii, 1981

8565
080: 1863/129

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EVALUATION OF TIME OF MESSAGE TRANSHISSION BY DATAGRAH METHOD Ill emu-ran NETWORK

Moscow PROBLEM! nsnm: WTSIYA, UPRAVLBNIYE, SISTER in Russian No 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 68-70

[Article by Rashit Biktiniravich Bayhulatov, candidate of physical and mathematical
sciences, Lyud-ila Yur'yevna Bedova, senior scientific associate, and Lidiya
Ivanovna Ivanushkina, senior scientific associate, all fro- the All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Organization and Control Problems of the USSR
State Comittee on Science and Technology]

[Excerpts] Evaluation is made of mean delay time for

nonpriority nessage when data is transmitted by
datsgran aethod.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Kleinrock, l... "Cowputer Systems with Queues," Moscow, Mir, 1979, 600 pages.
2. Hiyahara, EL; Hasegawa, 1.; and Teahigawara. I... "A Comparative Evaluation of
Switching Methods in Computer Co-Imication Networks. Proceedings of the
International Comnication Conference," San Francisco. Calif, June. 1975.
pp 616-020.
3. (Jayswall, IL), "Queues with Priorities," Hoacou, Mir, 1973. 280 pages.
COPYRIGHT: Heshdunarodnyy tsentr nauchnoy i tekhnichaskoy infomtsii, 1981

8545
C80: 1863/129

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROXIMATE METHOD TOR CMARATIVE EVALUATION 01' COST OF DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS OF
DATA BASES

Moscow mom HSNTI: momrstu, umvumm. $181!!! in Russian No 2. 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 71-75

[Article by Inel' Alekseyevns Zotova. candidate of engineering sciences and sector
chief , Lyubov' Hikhaylovna Peofanova, senior scientific associate, and Artur
L'vovich Shcbers. candidate of engineering sciences and depart-ant chief, all fro-
the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Organisation and Control Problems

of the ussn State Co-ittee on Science snd Technology]

[Excerpts] A centralised date base and two types of distributed
data bases are conparatively analysed by using coat criterion.
Pornulas are derived for spproxinste evaluation of cost of
different data base systens. Sons results are derived and
discussed.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Savinkov, V. M” "Distributed Data Base and Its Maintenance by a Data Base

Manage-eat System," in "Printaipy postroyeniys RADD GSV'rs" [Principles of
Design of Distributed Automated Data Bank for State Conputer Center Network],

Kiev , 1915 e

2. Toninaga, IL; Tejina, 8.; and Saito. IL, ”Tradeoff of File Directory System for
Data Base," 1. B. C. 3. Japan SEN-88.77.

COPYRIGHT: Hezbdunarodnyy tsentr naucbnoy i tekbnicheskoy infornatsii. 1981

85105
CSO: 1863/ 129

108

POROFFIGAIJJSEONLY
BPFICIBNCY OF INFORMATION EXCHANGE IN COHPUTER NETUOBKS

Moscow PROBLEM! MSNTI: INFOBHATSIIA, UPRAVLBNIYB, SISTEMY in Russian No 2. 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 76-84

[Article by Stanislav Ivanovich Samoylenko, doctor of engineering sciences,
professor, and deputy chairman of the Scientific Council on the Complex Proble-
"Cybernetics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Basic principles of functioning and procedures for
access to an adaptive switching network are considered. The
adaptive switching method is comparatively analyzed with
other known methods: packet switching, channel switching.
and hybrid switching with fixed and floating threshold.
Comparison is made by criterion of useful utilization of
network path throughput. It is shown that adaptive switching
provides a gain in throughput utilization, offering a universal
set of transmission capabilities in the mode of packet and
channel switching or by dedicated (permanently switched)
channels.

Keywords: computer networks. adaptive switching method.
packet and channel switching, hybrid switching, network path
throughput, comparative analysis

1. Introduction

To achieve high efficiency in a general-purpose data transmission network, the fol-
lowing main requirements have to be met:

1. Capability of interaction through network of existing teleprocessing facilities
without changing software.

2. Capability of interaction through the network of future teleprocessing systems
based on international standards.

3. Achievement of efficient use of expensive throughput of network paths.

b. Achievement of capability of data transmission in various modes, including real-
time transmission and direct interaction between computers.

These requirements are not met in a network based on one switching method taken
individually. Thus, in particular, a channel switching (I!) [CS] network does not
neet requirement 3; a packet switching (KP) [PS] network does not meet requirements
1 and k; and using permanent (dedicated) channels (Pl) [no] does not meet
requirement 3.

109
'maomaatussomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In connection with this, for general-purpose networks, it is advisable to apply
hybrid switching nethods that achieve an efficient path load when the CS, PS and
Dc nodes are combined.

These capabilities are possessed by the adaptive switching (AR), [AS] method, which
combines PS, PS and DC with achievaaent of efficient use of network path
throughput [1-5].

Discussed in this article are the general principles for designing an adaptive
switching network and procedures for access to a network based on the standard
1.25 and x.28 protocols, and adaptive switching is compared to the other nethods.

The main switching nethods used or under development for use in digital conunica-
tion networks are: cs, PS, hybrid switching (GR) [us] with fixed (MP) or
floating (GKPP) threshold [6].

In comparing A8 with the other transmission methods, we will use the following
technique.

For a specified type of traffic and path capacity, the naxinun flow achievable in
the node of CS, PS, GKI-‘P and GKPP will be evaluated when the specified requirements
for service are net. Then AS will be evaluated by capability of achieving trans-
nission of the same flows under the sane requirements as that for the nethods being
conpared, and additional capabilities (if any) offered in the as node will be
determined.

In selecting parameters determining service quality, we will seem that in the cs
node, the transmission system is described by the nodal HIM/l without a queue with
failures and the basic criterion of service quality is the failure probability Pf.

In the PS mode, transmission will be described by the nodal hill/II with queues
without limitations, and the nain criterion for evaluating tranmaiaaion quality
will be the anus packet delay tine during tranuiasion through network path 1.

The evaluation will he made under conditions of transmitting the following type of
traffic. Transmission will be nade by communication sessions of mean duration ‘1‘- .
In each session, nessages with pauses between then, the share of which equals b.“
will be trannitted.

2. Design Principles for Adaptive Switching network

The adaptive switching network consists of nodes connectedto each other by paths.

Through each path, fired-length francs, consisting of a specified number of octets,
are transmitted. In each frame in the tine-division multiplexing mode, tramission
in node of CS, PS and DC is combined.

To transmit in the CS node when connections are organised on all paths through
which the connection passes, the fruae positions assigned to the given connection
are fixed. The request for organisation of a connection is sent to the network in
the form of a service packet or prescribed dialog with an asynchronous subscriber
station.

110
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the Dc mode, a connection is secured just as in the CS mode, but for a rather
long period and by previous agreement with network administration.

The connection may be set up by the operator of a network input node by previous
agreement with a subscriber.

In the PS mode, all frame positions are used that are not occupied at a given time
by transmission in the CS or Dc modes, including those temporarily free in orga-
nized connections because of pauses in messages being transmitted.

The adaptive network functioning principles are discussed in more detail in [1-5].
3. Procedures for Access to Adaptive Switching Network

In considering access procedures. let us give the procedures for existing and
future teleprocessing systems.

3.1. Teleprocessing System with Permanent Channels

A teleprocessing system using dedicated channels can be implemented by connecting
subscribers by trunk lines to the closest network node and organizing permanent
channels in the network. In the DC mode with synchronous transmission, the net-
work provides for transmission of blocks formatted in accordance with the protocol
used in the given teleproceasing system. when interacting with an asynchronous
subscriber, the network transmits characters one at a time or in a group between
the computer and subscriber. Implemented on the trunck lines is the procedure for
transmission of levels 1 and 2, adopted in the givtn teleprocessing system. In the
simplest case. permanent connections can be organised through network operators.
When software is used, service packets to set up and dismantle connections can be
generated. Using 00 does not cause reduction in efficiency of network path use
thanks to the capability of filling the pauses in messages being transmitted.

3.2. Extension of the Standard x.2s Protocol

The standard x.2s protocol is intended for interaction with a network of synchro-
nous subscribers in the PS mode with transmission through virtual channels or in
the datagram mode. In the adaptive switching network, similar procedures can also
be used for transmission in the CS mode. To achieve compatibility with the 1.25
procedure in the AS mode, the CS mode can be earmarked by assigning appropriate
groups of logical channel numbers to the PS and cs modes.

Thus, in particular. one can use the following distribution of logical channel
groups:

group 0. for transmission in the datagrsm mode

group 1, for permanent virtual channels

groups 2-13, for switched virtual channels

group 14, for permanent channels

group 15, for switched channels.

In the process, to simplify dividing the data and service packets in the DC and CS
modes, for each channel one can allocate two adjacent logical channel numbers,
using one to send data and the other, service packets pertaining to this channel.

111
FOI:OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the distribution of logical channels is a local node function and the ser-
vice packets used in the PS node do not change, this access node is fully conpatible
with the standard PS node provided for by the x.25 reconendation.

3.3. Extension of the Standard 1.28 Protocol

For asynchronous character-oriented terminals, an extension of the x.28 procedure,
provided for the PS node. can be iaplelaented when describing the special services
requested when the connection is organised. i.e. when the paraneters are specified
to inpleaent interaction. In doing so. an additional parameter defining the
switching nethod can be introduced.

The absence of this parameter indicates transmission will occur in the PS node;
presence of the parameter determines the cs node. In the process. compatibility
with the standard 1.28 procedure is achieved, since no procedures provided for by
1.28 are nodified.

A. Conparison of Adaptive and Channel Switching

In using channel switching, one of N channels is nade available for each co-unica-
tion session. If requests for conunication sessions cone in accordance with a
Poisson distribution and the distribution of their duration is described by an
exponential distribution, then the minus input streaa that can be served in the
cs node is deternined by the condition [7]

 

' N
P?“ . (DECS) _, (1)
N n
(“'9 )
N! CS
n50 __—n!

where P?“ is the minus permitted probability of failure to respond to a
request to set up a col-unication session,
is the load factor for one channel of the path by the connunication

p
CS sessions in the CS node. and
N is the number of channels in the path.

If P?“ and N are given. then from expression (1) we deternine 908, on vhich in

turn the degree of use of network path capacity depends.

If ocs is known, then the network path usage factor for tran-ission of data and
service information for P?” << 1 is

u '3 peso-h) (2)

cs
where h is the share of pauses in the transmitted nessages.

when adaptive switching is used, we shall assue that the sans traffic as in the
preceding case is sent through the path in the cs node. In the process, there will
energe the capability of sending in the PS node additional traffic through part of

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cg: ' c (1'ucs)’ (a)
where c is the network path capacity.

In the PS mode, with a Poisson stream of packets with an exponential distribution
of their length, for a system with an unlimited queue, the maxiaaaa stream is
determined by the condition [7]:

t r . (4)
max 1 '9Ps

where tmax is the maximum mean delay of packets permitted in the PS mode trans-
mission,

T is the nean time for tranmission of one packet through the path (or
part of it) with a specified capacity. and
pPS is the capacity usage factor with PS.

Expression (4) determines the maximum value of the capacity usage factor with PS:

923'“ Tr . (s)
max

 

Based on what has been presented, one can formulate
Statement 6.1.

With identical traffic and equal qualitative conditions for cs mode transmission,
adaptive switching affords the capability of additional data transmission in the
PS mode with the maximum amount of transmission:

Corollary 1. Maximum relative gain in
path capacity usage with AS is

_ a -u . 1 _
"as/cs ——‘3 cs “ps‘gﬁfm 1" (5)

cs
Shown in fig; 1 is the relationship
between "as/cs and the share of pauses h

when ops-0.6 and hes-0.3 and 0.6. Analysis

of expression (6) shows that the gain with
As compared to CS increases as p and h
increase and declines as pcs incg§ases.

Key:

 

1. "AS/cs a. Dcs- 0.6
2? pcs"°'3 5' pys'°°° o 0.2 on M on n h
5. ops.006

Fig. 1. Comparative evaluation of
adaptive and channel.switching

113
FOI<DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Comparison of Adaptive and Packet Switching

In comparing adaptive and packet switching, let us consider transmission of inter-
active trsffic containing relatively short messages with long pauses between them.
Comparing adaptive and packet switching in transmission of files is equivalent to
the comparison of channel and packet switching which has been widely discussed in
the literature [8].

Adaptive switching during transmission of interactive traffic may make use of the
entire path capacity in the PS mode. however. transmission through the path in the
AS mode differs from the transmission mode used in rs networks.

The difference is that in P8 networks. each packet is formatted into a separate
block transmitted over the path. Transmitted over the path in as are fixed-length
frames, each containing part of a packet, an entire packet or several packets as a
function of the relationship between the length of the part of the frame used for
packet transmission and the lengths of the packets to be sent.

In subsequent discussion, we will asst-e that the frames in the PS and AS modes,
during tranmlission of them over the path, have an amount of service information

0 0
PS and 5A8

The mean number of packets sent in one frame when there are no switched channels is

equal to 8 respectively.

N: - Lf/Lp.

where Lf is the length of the information part of the frame, and
LP is the mean packet length.

however, in a frame that may contain several packets, for example up, there is

additional service information required to define the bounds between the jointly
transmitted packets.

The size of this additional service intonation sf can be determined from the

following considerations. The service information entered must define the:
-number of full packets in the frame

—number of positions in the frame at which packets end, and

-f1ag of completeness or incompleteness of the last packet in the true.
Consequently,

SiS+S+S

f l 2 3’
1 is the size of information needed to describe the nuber of packets in the
frame: 81 . “”2";qu hits,

where S

where N.“ is the maximum number of packets that can he sent in a frame,

P
[r] is the smallest integer equal to or greater than a, and
s2 is the mean size of information needed to describe the separations
between packets: “-
$2 ' [1-08sz1 P a

m
we omcm. use ONLY
where If is the number of positions in the information part of the frame,
a: is the mean number of packets sent in a frame, and

$3 is the size of information needed to describe the completeness or incom-

pleteness of the lost packet in the frame:

83 O 1 (hit).

In sending 8: packets in the packet switching mode, needed to frame the blocks in

the network path are _ 0
st,s spsngmu),

where SPS is the size of service information used to frame w: packets in the PS

mode.

In adaptive switching. needed to send u: packets over the network path are

_ o
sas 8A5

Based on what has been presented, the following conclusion can be drawn:
Statement 5.1.

+ Sf(bits).

In sending interactive traffic under the conditions when an average ﬂ: packets are

sent in a frame, AS affords better utilisation of network path capacity, if this
condition is met:

0
, W- (7)

p o _
srs [1°‘2‘tl
Example. Comparison of adaptive and packet switching with interactive traffic.

To illustrate the range in which AS affords more economic utilization of capacity
than PS, let us consider expression (7) under the following conditions:

a) maximum number of packets in a frame u:'" - l6, i.e.

[1082 P5“ 1 - a.

b) BDLC or 380 [binary synchronous communication] procedures are used to send the
franes over the path. In the case of HDLC procedures [9], 6 octets are used for a
frame, and we will assume that 0 0

8A8 - SP8 - 48 (hits).

In the BSC procedure with the transparent node of transmission, framing consists of
lo octets, and we will assume that

5:3 - $38 - so (hits).

' Under these conditions, let us derive from expression (7) for the HDLC procedure

53 . (8)

“3 (“D“) ’ 48—-'['_1ogztf]

115
ms omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sinilarly, for the use procedure. let ua derive

85 . (9)

Fig. 2 shove the relationahip between ___ _‘
i: (HDLC) and i: (35c) and the nulber of

poaitiona in the information part of the
frane. it. where

i: is the nean nunber of packeta in a

franc, above which As ia more efficient
in capacity utilization than PS.

It can be aeen fro. thia graph that AS
affords better utilization of capacity
than PS when the frane length exceeds
lean packet length by 20-60 percent
when the 1mm procedure in need. or
by 15-20 percent when the 386
procedure to used.

 

l‘ 31 6‘ I). 156 SI! ‘I

Theae conditiona are eaaily net in
practice. Conaequently, always under
real conditiona, even when interactive Fig. 2. linen nunber of packeta in a

traffic in aent which in aoat suited to fr-e, above which adaptive ia
PS, adaptive awitching can afford nore efficient than packet
better path capacity utilization. this twitching

gain beconea even nora tangible when one

coneidera that leaa redundancy ie “"1 i-
needed for foraing the frane under the ' p
conditiona of A8 with a fixed-length 2. I.

frane than ia the caae for P8 with a f

variable-length frane.
6. Comparison of Adaptive and Hybrid Switching

1n conparing adaptive and hybrid switching, we will conaider hybrid awitching with
fixed (MP) and floating (60?) threshold.

In evaluating As, we will coneider the uae of it in which all as functiona are per-

forned and certain additional capabilitiee are inplananted. which aleo deternine
the advantagea of A8.

6.1. Conpariaon of Adaptive and Pixed-‘l‘hraahold hybrid Switching

In uaing fixed-threahold hybrid switching [ms]. the network path ia permanently
divided into two parta. uaing one in the cs node and the other in PS.

116
5'0! (Fl-1C1“. USE ONLY
If of the total number. N, of channels in the path, Ncs are used in the cs node and
RPS-N-Ncs, in the Ps mode, then the path load factor can be determined by the
relation “PS

“rxms' Tsc o s(140+ 91,3.

where pcs, pPs and h are determined in accordance with (l), (2) and (4).

 

(10)

with adaptive awitching that enables tranamitting in the cs mode the name stream of
meaeagee and with the aame qualitative characteristice as that for us, the volume
of meaaagea cent in the PS node can be increased by ueing the temporarily free
channela intended for the cs mode.
In this caae
u - cs [9 (“0+9 (1-9 Hap )1+—n’sp (11)
AS cs Ps CS cs Ps’

 

He shall determine the efficiency of AS compared to Parks in utilization of path

capacity as before -
“as “urns .

“runs

"as/mus- (12)
One can now write the following:

Statement 6.1.

With identical traffic and equal qualitative charactariatica of eending in the cs
node, adaptive twitching afforda the capability of increasing path load by the value
“cs°Ps(1‘°cs*h"cs) . (13)
"cs“csa'h)”rs"rs

"As/mus -

Example. Conpariaon of adaptive and
fixed-threshold hybrid switching.

Let us assume that in the txrus node, the
path hea been divided in two, so that

l'cs'l‘l’s'm/L

 

Key:
1’ “as/mas
2. NCS'NPS'N/Z
3. pcs-0.3; ops-0.6
6. pas-0.3; DPS-0'3 0 on 03 as o; h
5‘ pCS-o'é' pPs'o'6 Fig. 3. Comparative evaluation of

adaptive and fixed-threshold
hybrid awitching

117
FIII¢HHﬂC1Al.USE(NVLY
FT”!(NNH(1AI.USE¢)NLN

”rsu"cs+h"cs)

n _ . (14)
AS/Fxrus pcs(l-h)+pPs

Then

The relation between “AS/Paths and h for certain values of pcs and OPS is shown in

fig. 3. It can be seen from the drawing in particular that the efficiency of AS in
path capacity utilization when h-0.5 in a wide range of values of gas and pPS lies

within the bounds of 30-60 percent compared to PxTHS. It should be noted that this
gain is achieved under conditions more favorable for Paras, since the volume of
traffic in the CS and PS nodes matches the capacity allocated for these trans-
mission modes.

6.2. Coaparison of Adaptive and Floating-Threshold hybrid Switching

when AS is used. a gain coapared to floating-threshold hybrid switching [FttﬂS] is
achieved only by filling the pauses in the component messages. "hen h-O, AS and
PtTBS have identical efficiency.

The path load factor with FtTﬂS is evaluated as follows:

I'cs Mcs°rs° (15)
"cs"'cs(1 ")""‘1’s"1>s‘mcs(1 pcs)"1’s

Exaaple. Comparing AS and PtTﬂS. as in “‘”"‘"“"’ '
the previous example, we shall assuae

" AS/Pt‘ﬂis"

that Nos-N PS -n/2. 1 (1)
N
Then from (15), let us derive 1 (2)
pcs""1>s . (16)

n _______.._______._.
AS/FtTHS ocs(l- h) + pPs(2-pcs)

The value of the gain for certain values
of pcs and OPS is shown in fig. b. It

can be seen from the graph that the gain
by AS in the path capacity utilisation
when h-O.S for the values of pcs and OPS

under investigation, compared to rcrus,
ranges from about 5 to 25 percent.

 

0 0) 0A 05 Q1 1 h

Fig. 6. Comparative evaluation of
adaptive and floating-threshold
hybrid switching

Key:
1' “AS/Ft!“ ‘. 9cs'0.6;
2. "P8.“ cs 'N/Z DPS-0'6
3. 9-.c508; DPS-0'8 5. :cs:g,g;
PS °
118

FOI‘OI1HCJA1.USE10NLY
Conclusion
This analysis allowed drawing the following conclusions.

1. Adaptive switching, offering universal capabilities for data transmission in
the various modes (channel and packet switching. dedicated channels), can provide
under real conditions hetter network path capacity utilization than all the
switching methods discussed: channel, packet, fixed-threshold hybrid and floating-
threshold hybrid switching.

2. A comparison of adaptive and channel switching shows that adaptive, providing
for transmission in the CS mode of the same traffic and with the same qualitative
characteristics of communication as a CS system, at the same time allows very sub-
stsntial improvement in capacity utilisation compared to the CS mode.

3. A comparison of adaptive and packet switching shows that with the easily met
requirements with regard to As frame length and mean packet length under other-
wise equal conditions, AS affords better capacity utilization than PS.

4. A comparison of adaptive and fixed-threshold hybrid switching indicates that
in sending real messages with the share of pauses on the order of 0.5, AS affords a
gain of 50 percent or more in capacity utilization.

5. A comparison of adaptive and floating-threshold hybrid switching shows that
under actual conditions with the share of pauses on the order of 0.5. A3 affords a
gain of 25 percent or more.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Samoylenko, S. 1., "Adaptivnaya kommutatsiya w vychisltel'nykh setyakh“
[Adaptive Switching in Computer Networks], Pre—publicstion. Moscow, VINITI
[All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information}, 1978. 78 pages.

2. Samoylenko. S. 1., "Hetod adnptiwnoy kommutataii" [Method of Adaptive Switching]
in "Voprosy hibernatiki: Problemy informatsionnogo obmena v vychislitel'nykh
aetyakh" [Problems of Cybernetics: Problems of Information Exchange in
Computer Networks], Moscow. 1979. PP 130-160.

3. Samoylenko, S. 1., "Nekotoryye algoritmy adaptivnoy kommutatsii" [Some Algo-
rithms for Adaptive Switching], Pre-publication, Moscow, VINITI, 1980, 36 pages.

4. Semoylenko, S. 1., "Protsedury dostupa i protsessy peredachi v seti adaptivnoy
kommutatsii“ [Access procedures and Communication Processes in an Adaptive
Switching Network], Pre-publication, Moscow. VINITI, 1980, 66pages.

5. Samoylenko, S. 1., ”Adaptive Switching," Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Computer Communications, Atlanta, 1980.

119

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(MQLY
7.

8.

9.

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLV

(Jitman. I. and Frank, n.), "Economic Analysis of Integrated Data and Speech
Connunication Networks,” T1133 [PROC. OF THE 1833], thenatic issue, "Packet
Switching Networks," Vol 6, No 11, 1978. PP 313-337.

Martin. J.. "Systems Analysis of Data.COInunication." Vol 2, translated from
English, ed. by V. S. Lapin, Moscow, Mix. 1975.

Runnerls, K. and Rudin, K., "Packet and Circuit Switching: Cost/Perfornance
Boundaries," COHPUTBR NEIBOIK, Vol 2, No 1, February 1978, pp 3-17.

"Public Data Connunicstion Networks. CCITT Recommendations, Series x (x.25,
X.20, X.20bis, x.a)," Geneva, 1976, translated from English, ed. by A. I.
Kirplyuk and V. B. Kovyazin, Leningrad, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Hezhdunarodnyy tsentr nauchnoy i tekhnicheekoy infornatsii. 1981

8565

CSO:

1863/129

120

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
DATA TELEPROCBSSING STANDARDIZATION ACTIVITY BY IRTBRNATIORAL ORGANIZATIONS

Moscow [’30le HSNTI: INFORMATSIYA, UPRAVLENITB, SISTER in Russian N0 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 85-98

[Article by Stanislav Kushik. senior scientific associate, Aleksandr Sergeyevich
Sorokin, candidate of engineering science and department chief. and Stanislav
Nikolayevich Florentsev, candidate of engineering science, decent, chief of depart-
nent of information technology and application program, all iron the International
Center of Scientific and Technical InforIation]

[Excerpts] Described is the activity of a umber of
international organisations on standardization in data
teleprocessing. the standards and recouendatione of which
have been widely propagated in the world. Brief information
is given on series V, x, F, R. S and U ccm recoI-endations,
ISO and mm standards. Activity of technical couittee
m97/SC16 of the ISO and other organizations on develop-ant of
standards and reconendations for the seven-level nodal of a
ccnputer network is discussed.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. "can Sixth Plenary Assenbly. Geneva, 27 Septenber—8 October. 1976. Orange
Book. Vol. VIII. 1. Data Tran-ission over Telephone Network; 2. Public Data
Networks." Geneva, published by the International Teleco-unication Union, 1977.

2. "cent Seventh Plenary Assembly," Geneva, 1980. docuents No 6, 7. 8. 9, 11,
39, 44. 48. 88.

3. Kodola, V.; Skripkin, V.; and reend-Ayuush. 2a.. "Sostoyaniye i perspektivy
standardizatsii v oblasti infometsionnoy deystel'noati" {Status and Prospects
of Standardization in Intonation Activity], Moscow, mean [International
Center for Scientific and Technical Information], 1979.

lo. Stepanenko. s. 1.. "uezhdunarodnyye standarty'f [International Standards].
Moscow, Hezhdunarodnyye otnosheniya, 1979.

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

5. ISO (7097) 8016 "ZN—"Morena Model of Open Sync-3 Interconnection."
Version lo, June 1979.

6. "Stnndnrty 1 roko-ondncnu v con-:1 teleobubotld. donnykh. Sptnvochnik. Ch. 1”

[Standards and Roconondnuonn in Data Teleptocouing. Handbook. Part 1].
'Motodichonuyo unruly :I. dohnentntotyn po pnkotu priklndnykh progrm"

methodological Hntormo nnd Docmcntncton on Softvnro Pnckngu], macaw.
mum, 1981. No 11.

COPYRIGHT: Hozhdunnrodnyy cunt: mchnoy 1 tekhnicheokoy infomtou. 1981

854 5
cso: 1863/ 129

122

MOWUSEONLY
PROBLEMS IN EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH Oil INTERACTIVE momma: RETRIEVAL SYS‘IDJS

Moscov PROBLEM! usm: WSIIA. UPRAVIBIIYB, srsrm in Russian No 2, 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 99-112

[Article by Vladimir Petrovich Sinyakov, aenior scientific associate, International
Center of Scientific and Technical lnforaation]

[Excerpts] General characteristica are given for the problem of
experimental reeearch on interactive information retrieval ayetens.
Discussed is the content of the main problus, for the solution of
which experimental nethode should be applied. Given is a claaaifi-
cation of the main stages of the procedure of experinental research
on characteristica of serving users of interactive intonation
retrieval ayatems and the content of the problna occurring in each
of these stages is defined. A brief description is given of the work
performed by the International Center of Scientific and Technical
Intonation within the framework of the progran on experimental
research in interactive infornation retrieval systems.

The KAHA aoftuare package is used in the 0883 as a renote control ”at. in auto-
mated systela for scientific and technical information operating in the mode of
remote retrieval. Standard KAIA ayat- facilitiea allow performing analysis of
near activity free the viewpoint of using computer resources in an interactive
system. At the end of a co-unication aeaeion, the system outputs data on the nun-
her of transactions performed, umber of acceeaea to files and atatiatics on the
execution of application and control modules. liovever. the standard RAMA system
printout does not allow deriving data such as system response time to execution of
individual instructions in the interactive ayetu, statistics on inatruction execu-
tion, value of input and output meaeagea, etc. [6].

Brief Description of Work Performed at the International Center of Scientific and
Technical Information (ln'sN'l‘I)

A remote processing system for data baeee of scientific and technical information

has been developed at the pawn based on the [AHA remote control system. Listed
in table 2 is the composition of hardware need.

123
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Hardware used in renote data processing systen at the Internation Center
of Scientific and Technical Intonation

lit-her of units Producer

liodellllnit in installation
Yes-1060 conputer (13 byte nain storage) ' 1 cos
Yes-5061 sagnetic disk storage unit 15 m
Yes-8603 MID-3 data co-aunication nultiplsxer; 2 USSR
w telephone adapters
Yes-8002 low-speed node- (200 baud) lo CSSR
Yes-8006 sedan-speed soda (600/1200 baud) lo we
Yes-8670 0-70 subscriber station 2 0589.
Yes-8566 AP—Glo cluster subscriber station 3 m
(8 video terminals and a typewriter)
Yes-7906 local display station 1 USSR

(9 video terninals and a typewriter)

(m - People's Republic of Bulgaria; m - Bungarian People's republic]

The configuration of the renote data processing systa at the mum is shown in
fig. 2. The software includes the 08 6.1 operating systen with the basic telecon-
sunications access nethod (m). the nu rants control syste- and the DIALOG
software package (2”). Functional capabilities of the mm and DIALOG are
described in [lo] .

The program of esperinental research on interactive intonation retrieval systems,
perforned under the general scientific direction of Professor 1.. ll. Suarkov, doc-
tor of engineering sciences, was begun in 1979 [30]. All esperinantal research is
perforsed on the base of co-unication sessions with users at the hoscow Institute
of Engineering Physics and the Institute of Atoaic Energy ineni I. V. lurchatov
within the fruework of conversations on scientific and technical cooperation.

The all of the effort is to study the typical behavior of users or the typical user
during sessions of cn-nnication with the systsn, and to define for these users the
characteristics required of a syst- when a selected nunber of problels are being
solved.

Under this progrsn, the following nain results have been derived.

1. Probability distributions and averaged characteristics for an interactive
inforsstion retrieval systel were deternined:
Mean systu response tine T. is 7-8 seconds

Mean size of i Eonstion output fro. systen is 24.000-26,000 characters

12h
ma OFFICIAL use ONLY
Fig. 2.

Key:
1.
2.
3.
‘0
5.
6.
7.
a.
9.

10.

 

 

mun

m an ...........
'J i ‘ room-an

——

nan: 20)
. .. ma

a
a alt-II!!! (r. want)

Configuration of Root. Data Procaaaing Syatu at tho Intarnational
Cantor of Scientific and Technical Intonation

mus-10w counter ll.
ant. and application aottvarc 12.
08 6.1

Yes-8002 noda-
nodiu-opoad co-unication linen,
aaynchronona tran-iaaion. 1200 baud

mm 13. luv-speed cmnication lines.
mu aaynchronoua tranuiaoion, 100-300 baud
DIALOG lb. co-unication channala
data bate 15. control unit
mm: 16. 188-8564. (AP-64) cluator aubacribor
Yes-8603 data co-nnication station

nultiplcxer 17. 028-180 printor tor-inal
Yes-8006 nodal [Key continued on following page]

125

MOWISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18. Yes-8570 eubecriber station

19. "-340 video teninal

20. renote teninale at: Institute of Atomic Energy ineni I. V. Kurchatov,
Moscow Institute of Engineering Phyeica and the Lithuanian Scientific Reeeatch
lnatitute ot Scientific and Technical Intonation (Vilniua)

2. Probability diatributiona and averaged parnetera ot dynenic propertiea of the
user were determined:
Kean uaer reaponae tine ‘1" ia 22-28 aeconda

Average umber of inetructiona per retrieve]. aeeeion in 35-60.
Average size of intonation input into ayaten ia 170-200 charactere

3. Traneition probability netricee for the net of functional uaer atatee vere
detenined (exanple ot natrix ie ahovn in fig. 3).

Nov being studied are correlationa of the indicated perenetere, baeic eyeteae
engineering paranetere (eize of date baeee, total nunber of active teninala, and
others) and integral characteriatice of interactive intonation retrieval aeaaiona.
The main characteriatice being neaaured. conatant and conputed, are given in

table 1 [not reproduced].

The ayate- for experimental reeearch on procedurea of ueer interaction with an
interactive intonation retrieval eyaten, inplenented on the bane of the [MA tele-
nonitor and DIALOG eoftvare package. has been included in the aottvare for the aub-
eyeten, "Reiaote Retrieval of Intonation tron Data Dam of Scientific and Technical
Intonation," ot the mom and introduced in a umber of other organization.

Conclueion

For the first tine in the USSR. experi-ental reeearch has been perfoned on a
practically functioning ayetu of renote acceae to large data baaee ot ecientific
and technical intonation that in part at the intonation netvork of the 088R
Acadeny of Sciencea ("Akadenaet'") on the couple: progran "Power Engineering."
Raeulta of experimente can he need in developing etandard docuentation on organiz-
ing efficient interaction between uaera and the USSR Academy of Sciencea'
intonation network.

126
POI OMCIAL US! ONLY
Ill-“III“
n-nnmmnmm

c nununnnn
° III-nun“
ﬂ-"ﬂ-ﬂﬂﬂ
“manna“

  
 
      
   
   
     

  

Pig. 3. nanaition probability matrix for functional atataa:

1.

2.

A - retrieval 8 - query scan

3 - docuunt acan 1' - training mode

c - document printout G - auxiliary operations

I) - data base aalaction a - diaconnection tron ayaten
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gornoatayev, Yu. IL; Sinyakov, V. P.; and Plotantaev, 5. BL, "Soatoyaniye i
parapaktivy ekaparinantal'nykh rabot 10er yo diatantaionnoy ohrabotka
nauchnoy i tekhnicheakoy intonataii. lazul'taty nanchnykh i praktichaakikh
rabot lﬂ‘aﬂl‘l: Nauchno-takhnichukaya konferentaiya. poavyaahchennaya lO-latiyu
KIWI. 16-15 Pevralya 1979 s. (Sbornik raaahirannykh tuiaov dokladov)"
[Status and Proapacta of kpcrinental Work by the International Center of
Scientific and Technical Intonation on Buota Procaaaing of Sciantific and
Technical Intonation. Roanlta of Scientific and Practical Bork by the MINI:
Scientific and Technical Confarancc Davotad to 10th Annivcraary of the maul,
1"].5 Pabruary 1979 (Collection of Expanded Iheaea of Papers), l‘loacou, 1mm.

1979. PP 36-35.

Gornoatayev. Yu. 11.; Zinov'yev. S. P.; and Sinyakov. V. P., ”Diatributed Syc-
te-a for Procaaaing of Scientific and Technical Inforution," PROBLEM! usm/

man-r1, Hoacov, No 3, 1979. pp 3-28.

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

lo.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

1/4.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aylanazyan, A. K., "sans-u Experimental Priority System: Status and Pro-
apecta of Developnent," in "‘rezisy dokladov RI nauchnogo seninara 'Siatnnyye
issledovaniya GASM‘I” [Theses of Papers at the 11th Scientific Selim,
”Systela Reaearch for the GASM'rI], part 1, Alla-Ate, 13-17 October 1980, pp 5-7.

Penninan, H. 1)., "Monitoring and Evaluation of On-Line Intonation System
Usage," IMPORMAIIOII PROCESSING AND MANAGEMENT, Vol 16. No l, 1980.

Chernyy, A. I. and Gor'kova. V. I., "Poreign Integral Autonated Intonation
Retrieval System," in "Itogi nauki i tekhniki. Seriya 'Infonatika'” {Results
of Science and Technology. Series "Information Science"), Vol 3, Moscow,
VINI‘l‘I [All-Union Inatitute of Sscientific and Technical Intonation]. 1980.

Gornoatayev, Yu.M.;Zinov'yev. S. P.; and Yastrhelhski. 8., "Using the RAMA
Renate Control System in Autonated Scientific and Technical Intonation
Systems," in "Metodicheskiye naterialy i dob-entstsiya po psketan prilrladnykh
program" [Methodological Materials and Documentation on Software Packagea],
Moscow. MEI'aM'H. Mo 8, 1980.

Sheridan. 1'. B. and Ferrell, U. R., "Siat-y chelovek-naahina: nodeli obrahotki
infonatsii, upravleniya i prinyatiya resheniy cheloveRon-operatoron" [Man-
Machine Systems: Models for Processing of Intonation. Management and Decision
Making by the linen Operator]. Moscow, Mashinostroyeniye, 1980.

"Infomtsionno-vychielitel'nyye seti EVM. (Obaor p0 raruberhnyl iatochniken)"
[Co-purer Intonation Networks (Survey tron Foreign Sources”. Moscow, VIMI
[All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Inter-Sector Intonation], 1976.
PP 12-21.

Vanda, V. P., "Videoteninaly v infonatsionnon veainodeystvii (inahenerno-
tekhnologicheakiye aapekty)" [Video “Peninala in Intonation Interaction
(Engineering-Technological Aspects)], Moscow. mergiya. 1980.

Martin, J., "Conunication and Coeputer Metvorka," Part 1, Moacov, Svyar', 1976.

Bell, 1'. 8., "Conputer Performance Variability,” National Conpurer Conference,
1976, pp 761-766.

Devde, D. 3., "Alternatives to Bandprinting in the Manual Entry of Data," 1383
TRANSACTIORS on ma FACTORS IN ELECTRONICS, January 1967, pp 21-32.

Bryan. G. 2.. "1088: 20,000 Moore at e Console—A Statistical Smary,"
Pall Joint Conputer Conference, 1967. pp 767-777.

Miller, 1.. IL, "A Study in Man-Machine Interaction," National Conputer
Conference, 1977, pp 409-621.

Miller, R. 8., "Response Tine in Man-Oonputer Conversational Transactions,"
Pall Joint Coeputer Conference. 1968, pp 267-277.

Mackworth, J. P., "Vigilance and Attention: A Signal Detection Approach,"
Middleaex, London, Penguin Books. 1970.

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Boer-I, B. 11.; Seven, M. J.; and Watson, R. A., "Interactive Problem Solving:
An Experimental Study of Lockout Effects," Spring Joint Computer Conference,
1871, pp 205-210.

Davies, 0. R. and Tune, 6. 8., "11m Vigilance Performance,” New York,
American Rlsevier Publishing Company, 1969.

Boiea, S. J., "User Behavior on an Interactive Computer Syatu,"
IBM SYSTEM JOURNAL, Vol 13, No 1, 1974, pp 2-18.

Carbonell, J. R. et al., "0n the Psychological Importance of Time in the Time
Sharing System," HUMAN FACTORS, Vol 10, No 2, 1968, pp 135-142.

Abrams, H. 0.; Cotton, I. IL; Hatkins, S. H. et al., "The 838 Network Heasure-
Ilent System," 1332 TRANSACTIONS ON WICATIORS, Vol COM-25, No 10,
October 1977, pp 1189-1198.

Abrams, H. D. and Treu, S. A., "A Heth for Interactive Computer Service
Heasurement," CWCATIONS 01' THE Am, December 1977, pp 936-9“.

Jackson, P. E. and Stubs, C. 0., "A Study of liultiaccess Computer Cos-unice-
tions," Spring Joint Computer Conference, 1969, pp 691-5010.

Dudock, A. 1..; Fuchs, 3.; and Jackson, P. 3., ”Data Traffic measurements for
Inquiry-Response Computer Co-Iunication Syatm," Pace. 0? m IFIP, Yugoslavia
August 1971, pp 636-661.

Abrams, H. 1).; Lindamood, G. E. and Pyke, 1‘. al., "Heuuring and lbdeling Han-
Conputer Interactions,” Proc. of the 1st Annual SIGHB Symposiul on Measurement
and Evaluation, February 1973, pp 136-162.

Dzida, 1%.; Herda, S. et al., "User-Perceived Quality of Interactive Systems,"
1288 TRANSACTIONS 0]! SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, July 1978. pp 270-276.

Fuchs, E. and Jackson, P. 8., "Estimates of Distributions of Random Variables
for Certain Coaputer Comnications Traffic Models," MICATION OF THE A01,
Vol 13, No 12, 1970. PP 752-757.

Miller, J ., "Information Input Overload," Proc. Conference on Self-organizing
Systems, 1962.

Horrin, R. 3.; Porin, B. and Archer, H., "Information Processing Behavior: The
Role of Irrelevant Stimulus Information," J. EXP. PSYCHOL” No 61, 1961, pp 89-
96.

Smrokov, l... 3., "Deyate1'nost' Hezhdunarodnogo taentra nauchnoy i tekhniches-
koy informatsii po sozdaniyu i razvitiyu informatsionnykh sistem. Doklad na
nauchnoy seasii otdeleniya mekhaniki i protsessov upravleniya Akademii Nauk
SSSR (7 Maya 1980 g.)" [Activity of the International Center of Scientific and
Technical Information on Creation and Development of Information Systems.
Report at the Scientific Session of the Department of Hechanics and Control
Processes of the USSR Academy of Sciences (7 May 1980)], Moscow, mam. 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Hezhdunarodnyy taentr nauchnoy i tekhnicheskoy informataii, 1981

8565
080:

1863/129

129
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMPUTER muons mums

Moscow Panama m1: momrsm. UPMVLKNIYB. 818194! in Russian No 2. 1981
(signed to press 28 Sep 81) pp 113-120

[Article by Yuriy Aleksandrovich Hikheyev, candidate of engineering sciences and
deputy director, Pavel Ivanovich Bratukhin. doctor of engineering sciences and
depart-ent chief, and Artur L'vovich Shchers. candidate of engineering sciences
and depart-eat chief. all fro. the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of
Organization and Control Problems of the USSR State Co-ittee on Science and

Technology]

[Excerpts] Discussed are the three nain components of the
economic effect fron introducing computers into the national
economy: 1) selection of an efficient organizational form

for introducing computers—establisbent of the State computer
Center network (GSV'Ia). The main design principles for the
6871's are given; 2) optinal selection of the structure of
technical characteristics and territorial location of the GSV'l's.
Discussed is the structure of the caplex of nathnnstical nodels
for determining these characteristics of the GMs; 3) optimal
nanagenent of GSV'rs resources in solving subscriber problene.
Given are the structure and nain design principles for the
network dispatcher service and the network distributed operating

systen.

Develop-eat of the ROSS [network distributed operating systen] and the nss [network
dispatcher service], which perforl the functions mentioned above. will allow pro-
viding for the solution to complex national economic problems and intonation ser-
vices to network subscribers with the nininun outlays for data processing within
prescribed periods and with the required quality.

Evaluating the economic effect fron setting up the State Computer Center Network at
present is a very cuplicated process. However. the experience available fron set-
ting up early computer networks (frapents of the State Computer Center Network)
indicates that performing a given count of work on a shared-use computer network
required half the capital investnent and one-half to two-fifths the operating cost
of performing it at individual (departnental) conputer centers. The payoff period
for setting up a conputer network in the USSR is about 3 years.

COPYRIGHT: Meshdunarodnyy tsentr nauchnoy i tekhnicheskoy infernatsii, 198l

85105
080: 1863/ 129

130
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
EXHIBITS AND MOSS

smmmxmmmnnmumnmmm
819. Am I WCHISLI'I'IL'M m in Minion No 2: Her-hp: 82 p 94
[Mticlo]

(Text) The next emibition System- Engineering-83 ie plenned to be held in
Leninqred in ”111 1983 at the enggeetion of the ecientific and technical
eociety. ‘l'he topic ie countere end eyetene, etbeyetene, eini- end nicro-
coeputere, orqenieetionel tedmiquee, SAP]! [eutoneted deeiqn eyeten] eyetene.
multiplication equip-ent, busineee geeee. counicetione eyetue end eo on.
lending foreign min, the collective organiser of which will be the Raven
Coupeny (ﬂeet Get-any) . will be ”presented et the exhibition.

To supply the exhibition with equipnent meeting the intenete of developing
Soviet ecience end technology end the neea of induetry, the ecientitic end
tedznicel center :equeete omenieetione. inetitutee, entetprieee end epeciel-
iete to preeent their enggeetione on the conpoeition (topic) of the exhibition,
specific equip-ent end the nennteoturing coepeniee end eleo pzoblene in thie
field which they would like to have diecueeed et the Wen-I. The eddreee
in: 191014 uninsured. Rovenekiy penulok, 12, l’lent Oqtebnike m. sieteeo-
tekhnike. The telephone nudaer for inquitiee ie 272-16-01.

cornice-r: ndetel'etvo 'Zinetne". 'Avtonetike i vychielitel'neye tekhnike“.
1982

6521
ceo: 1863/161

131

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

QUESTIONS 0? OMUTATION OPTIHIIATION: 161'! REPUBLIC SEMINAR-SCUM. IN WBIVBLI
Kiev nexus-rm in Rulsun No 2. bit-Apr 82 pp 129-130

[Report by V.S. Mikhalevich. LV. Sergiyenko. V.':.Ivanov. 14.1). habich and VJ.
Zadiraka]

[Text] One of the main avenues in the developaent of coquter asthmatics is
inrovements in the theory of computation errors. research on questions of
coeparative analysis of coaputing algoritl-a and the building of optinl (in a
given sense) algorithms for problen-solving in computer and applied mathematics.

Because with each passing year there is an increase in the nuaber of organizations
using coeputers for couple: calculations. optinintion of cowutations by all
rational methods and means is an urgent and iaportant problen.

Taking into account the urgaacy of this subject. the Ukrainian 888 Acadeny of

Sciences Institute of Cybernetics organized the 16th Republic Seminar-School
"Questions of Coqutation Optimization" for the purpose of familiarizing a broad

range of specialists with the latest achievenents in the field of the optimization

of coaputations. mthenatical nethods and progra- facilities for dialogue optinintion
and the aura rapid introduction of research results in the national economy. and

also for the purpose of coordinating research. The institute conducted the seninar-
school 13 through 22 October 1981 in the settlement of htsiveli (Krymskaya Oblast)

on the base of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences house of Creativity for

Scientists.

The seminar-school use oriented on the scientific staffs of counter centers.
scientific research establisl-ents and teaching “12's.

The nein work on deternining the subject matter of the seminar-school and the
direction of its work was done by Academician VJ. Glushkov (deceased), Academician

of the Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences v.3. hikhalevich. corresponding ester
of the Ukrainian SSR Acadeny of Sciences LV. Sergiyenko and professor V.V. Ivanov.

Representatives free 60 of the country's scientific research and training
esteblislnents participated in its work. They included Ukrainian SSR Academy
of Sciences institutes of cybernetics. matheutics. applied problems in mechanics
and aathmtics. mterial science and physics. the USSR Academy of Sciences Ural
Scientific Center for aathematics and nechanics. conputer centers of the USSR.

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Belorussian and Georgian acadanias of sciences. the Ukrainian SSR Gosplan, the
universities of Hoscow. Leningrad, Kiev. Uahgorod. Odessa. Novosibirsk and Gorkiy.
polytechnical institutes in L'vov. Kiev and Pens. teaching institutes in Irkutsk
and Sumy. and others.

The number of participants totaled 130. including 1 academician of the Ukrainian
SSR Academy of Sciences. 1 corresponding member of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of
Sciences. 10 doctors of science and 60 candidates of science.

At the plenary session the participants of the seminar-school were welcomed by
professor V.V. Ivanov, who tal'fed about the development of the subjects of the
seminar-school and its topicality having a direct relationship to imroveaents

in quality and efficiency in solving important national economic tasks. In their
speeches. senior staff newer of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences Institute
of Cybernetics 14.0. Babich and director of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences
house of Creativity, A.V. Yermsshin. spoke of the history of the seminar-schools
and matters concerned with organizing and holding them. and also of the procedure
for work at this seminar-school.

0n the scientific plane. of the subjects presented at the seminar-school. mention
should be made of those avenues concerning the theoretical and practical bases

for systems optimization and methods for doing it, and coaputation optimisation

by aodeling systems under development with parallel cometations on a large computer
complex. These avenues. formulated by academician v.u. Glushkov. are being developed
at the Ukrainian 881?. Academy of Sciences Institute of Cybernetics by Ukrainian

SSR Academy of Sciences acadenician v.5. Hikhalevich. corresponding master of the
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences I.V. Sergiyenko. doctors of physical and
mathematical sciences V.V. Ivanov, A.A. Letichevskiy. Yu.V. Kapitonova and NJ.

Shor and doctor of technical sciences V.L. Volkovich and their colleagues; and

they were presented in lectures delivered by doctors of physical and mathematical
sciences V.V. Ivenov. A.A. lastichevskiy and 8.2. Sher. doctor of technical sciences
V.L. Volkovich. and candidates of physical and mathentical sciences P.N. Besarab.
V.A. Roshchin and V.A. ‘l'ruhin.

There was lively interest in the lecture titled "Main Directions in the "ark of
the International Institute of Systems Analysis (IIAS, Vienna)" delivered by

Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences academician v.s. Hikhalevich who had just

returned from a scientific trip to Austria. In his lecture he characterised the
main scientific problems being worked on by the staff of this institute, and he
also talked about the role of the Soviet Union in fulfilling its basic programs
and about the participation of Soviet mathematicians in its scientific research.

Under the general title "The Variety of Optimisation Problems." devoted to theoretical
bases and practical recommendations in mathematical programing problems. interesting
and substantial lectures were presented by professor V.A. Yemslichev.and also by

his students candidates of physical and mathemtical sciences V.N. Shevchenko and
V.A. Pavlechko. and by scientific colleagues A.D. Korzinkov, v.9. Ovchinikov and

V.V. Matveyev.

Questions concerned with the theory of chain and branch fractions and its application
for solving problems in computer mathematics were dealt with in lectures and addresses

133
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by professor V.Ya. Skorobogat'ko. readers P.l. Bodnarchuk and R.V. Slonevskiy and
their students Ya.N. Glinskiy, 2.1. Krupka and Ya.N. Pelekh.

Note should be made of the lecture by doctor of physical and mathematical sciences
Yu.I. Petunin "A Modified Least Square Method for Regression Models With Random
Pertubations of Arguments." and of candidates of physical and mstheamtical sciences
I.V. Beyko ("Extreme Models for Controlled Systems"), M.K. Samaria ("Direct Design
Methods for Aggregates of a Simple Structure"), A.I. Grebennikov ("Optimization
Problems in Approximation Theory"). A.V. Buledza ("r-Functions as Generalizations
of Chebyshev Polynomials and Their Application in Iteration Process Theory"). 8.8.
Kiro ("Polynomials Deviating Least from Zero").Yu.K. Dem'yanovich ("Approximation
of Local Functions on an Irregular Grid"), A.Yu. Luchka ("Past Convergence in
Projection of the Noniterstive Method for Hanerstein Equations"). and DJ]. Gussk
("Boundary Punctionals for One Class of Random Processes").

Great attention was given to lectures dealing with the development of applied
program packages for solving problems in mathematical programing. function
approximation and numeric integration. These were delivered by doctor of physical
and mathematical sciences ".2. Shor ("Use of the Methods of Nondifferentiated
Optimization as Nuclei for Functional lbdels of the 'Planer' Package") and
candidates of physical and mathematical sciences V.A. Roshchin (”hthematical
Models and Methods Realized in the DISPRO [expansion unknown] Applied Programs") .
V.A. Pavlechko ("Realization of an Aple Program Package for Optimal Planning
in an Automated Enterprise Management System"). v.1. Berdyshev ("Numeric Function
Approximation") and M.V. Anolik ("A Program Package for Calculating Continual
Integra ls") .

In addition. the subjects of the seminar-school included 17 addresses by its
participants. These included reports by candidates of physical snd mathemtical
sciences Yu.Yu. Chervak. 8.8. Volokitin. I.V. Boykov, V.G. Ustyuzhaninov, A.A.
Alekseyev. R.V. Polyakov, B.A. Galanov and N.Ya. Mar'yashkin, junior scientific
personnel A.Yu. Yeremin and S.V. Poborchiy, and assistant lecturer LN. Sharipov.

There was discussion of original work and results. Particularly lively discussion
resulted from the lectures by doctor of physical and mathematical sciences A.A.
Letichevskiy "Parallel Computations on a Macroconveyer Computer Complex" and by
candidate of physical and mathemtical sciences P.N. Besarab "Numeric Solutions
to Regular Differential Equations in Multiple Processor Comter Systems."

The particpants of the seminar-school were given an opportunity to familiarize
themselves with the latest achievements in the field of computation optimization

and to get to know about a number of new theoretical problems and possible directions
in their research.

Summing up the results of the seminar-school, it can be noted that it was interesting
and was conducted at the necessary scientific level. The lectures presented were
substantial and profound in the scientific sense. They will undoubtedly promote

a widening of the front of work to develop optimal methods and the corresponding
software to provide solutions for standard classes of problems in couputer and
applied mathematics on the computer. and an improvement in the quality and efficiency
of computations in general.

13h
ma 0mm; us; arm
Professor V.Ya. Rkorobogat'ko and candidates of physical and nethemtical sciences
8.". Kiro. H.D. Babich. v.1. stiraka, 5.8. chedev. V.V. Lukovich and A.Yu. Luchka
spoke at the final session. They noted the topicality of the subjects of the seninar-
school. the high quality of IOBt lectures and the undoubted usefulness of such
measures, and they expressed a washer of wishes regarding future seninar-schools

and their subject setter. organization and venue.

A decision was adopted in which the following. in particular. were proposed:

to request the Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences to take the initiative in organizing
and holding the 15th Republic Seminar-School on Questions of Computation Optimization;

to recommend that when selecting participants for the 15th and subsequent republic
seminar-schools the organizing committee give preference to computer nathenaticians
and programers fron Vuz's. computer centers and scientific research institutes

and industrial enterprises working within the franeuork of the given subject netter;

to attract specialists from the country's major scientific centers to lecture at
the seninar-school;

to express thanks to the Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences Order of Lenin Institute
of Cybernetics. the Ukrainian SSR Acadeny of Sciences House of Creativity for
Scientists and the organizing committee of the seminar-school for organizing and
holding it.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATKL'STVO "NAUKOVA DOM", 'TIBERNBTIM", 1982

9642
CSO: 1863/178

13S
roe omcw. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIOES

ABSTRACTS 0? H318 IN JOURNAL 'AIHGMTION AND WEI! BQUIPHM’,
MARCH-APRIL 1982

Riga avm'rm I WCRISLI'I'BL'MYA mm in Russian No 2. Mar-Apr 82
pp 95, 97, 99

UDC 681.324
FIBER-OPTIC CHANNELS O! IDCAL carom mm
[Abstract of article by Yakubaytis, B. A. and rinkel'shtoyn, Ye. Ya.)

['roxtl Fiber-optic data transmission chanmls are considorod as con-Imitation
devices of local couputor networks. ‘l'ho different oothods of designing the op-
tical nonochannol on the basis 0! optical cable sag-ants with optical connect-
ing olononts and on the basis of long optrons aro colpsrod. ‘l'he advantagos and
disadvantages of dittorsnt vorsions of nonochannol configurationﬁlinoar and
star-are considered.

WC 681 . 324

ANALYSIS 0? IHOM‘I'ION MISSION IN Inna-mm 8181'“ mm DIM
MICHIONS

[Abstract of article by Rod'ko, v. A. and Pom. V. 6.]

(rm) The process of intonation transmission in a tour-machine oo-putor sys-
tem is analysed by means of silulation nodolling. ‘i'ho load of the transmission
channel oooponents. tho nature of the resulting queues and tho oftoct of the
flow intensity of require-ate on transisoion opood are investigated. Il'ho
variable per-ours aro the structure o! the butter neoory, tho nub: of its
units and sections and the policy of designating tho butter units. The pro-
sentod nothod permits selection of the optin- vorsion of the structure for a
specific sitmtion.

UDC 681.322-lel.48.001.2
mrm ”PM '10 mmznxou or 1mm OONI'IGORM'ION 0? MW
[Abstract of article by napkin. 1.. Ya. and Nooov, v. 6.]

[Text] A fornalirod nethod is suggested for optimization of the internal con-
figuration of a sicrooouputer designed on the basis of licroprocessor sectims.

136
roa omcm. us: on“
Detinitiona of the internal configuration and ite featurea are given. The
problem of optiniring the internal configuration reducea to one of linear
programing with bcolean variableo. Several poatulatione of the problem of
optiniainq the internal configuration or a aicrocc-putor are coneidered. An

exuple of the atructure o! a nicroccoputer and eetinatea of the teaturea of
internal configuration are preoentod.

UDC 681.32‘

FUNCTIONAL “BBS OP menses WITH mm on Dmmﬂ, W All) ELIMIN-
ATION OP DEAD-BID SITUATIONS

(Abstract of article by Zinov'yev. I. V. and Strekalev, A. A.)

[Text] Functional nodele of procoaeee are considered under conditiona of the
occurrence of dead-end aituationa for nethob of detection, banning and alia-

inaticn of dead ends. The nuﬂaer of atepa necoeaory to the proceaa for con-
pletion ie eatinated.

UDC 519.1
SEMION W DIVISION 118 amazon 0! “APB-m 8m (3 amonnms
[Abatract of article by Baranov. s. 1.. zhuravina, L. It. and Peachanakiy, v. AJ

[Text] The nothod of finding tho divieion in doconpoaition of graph-flow
aheeta of algorithm (GSA) ie conaidered that quaranteee tho diviaicn will be
found with nininu nut»: of unite with reatrictiona on the paraetere of each
ofthecoopcnontGSh. mooothodperniteonetotindthecoqonentcﬂotap-
proximately identical couplexity. The lower and upper bounds are introduced to
eatioate the motor of unite ct divieion. A aequential algoritln ia described
for finding thio divieion. The reault of can deco-poeiticn by thie divieion

ie cloao to the option.

one 519.713
IONIC-DYNAMIC WIS 0? DIGITAL DEVICES
[Abatract of article by Devin, V. 1.]

[Text] An approach ia aqueatod for doaign of the block diagram at digital
autooatcna that guarantee two directiona of the theory of auto-atone indepen-
dently developed earlier: a) logic oyntheeio of the autonaton circuit and
b) dynanic analyaia of the given autouaton circuit. The doeign includes five
otopa: l) coding of the internal etatea of the auto-aton by the vareion of
the diatinquiahing code (n, ..., yr) that moouplea a great a number or
transition pairs on poeeible. 2) eeparation of tranoition paira (if neceaaary)
that are 'inpaeaing" uncoupled in etage l. 3) deoign or the bloc): diagra- of
the autonatcn, 4) dynmic analyaia of the traneiticna included in the rennin-
inq uncoupled tranoition paire to doteraine the conditiona for the tile paran-
etera of the circuit that guarantee the correctneaa ot tranaition and aalection

137
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the corresponding perneters (and of procedure). if selection is impossible
5) introduction of an additional y,“ digit of the internal status code and

transition to stop 1 with respect to the code (y1, ..., Vr' Yﬁl)° ‘l’he algo-
ritrmic structure of each step is descriud in detail. An example that illus-

trates the advantage in the cmplority of realisation of the automaton is
given.

000 681 . 518. 5‘

WM! m mm amazon 01‘ arm ms ”0 m M me
MIR 81m

[Abstract of article by lovik, G. n... xramfus, I. R. and ahenderovich. s. D.)

[Text] signature analysis is used extensively as a means of recording output
binary vectors when testing logic circuits and devices. The length of the out-
put binary vector corresponds to the dimension of the measuring window inside
which specific, usually periodic distribution'of cuponents (ones and sores)
of the vector occurs. This permits one to realise sufficiently compact nota-
tion of thevector in the form of sequentially arranged groups of ones and
zeros and this notation in turn permits one to introduce vectors into a digi-
tal computer by means of which the signatures are calculated theoretically.
‘rhe calculating ram is ad on simulation of the operation of the poly-
nonial divisorxs-oxn-ox +x7+l. mprogr-modelutilisesahlock
of programs written in ppm-so and microassubler 8000/8085 languages and the
corresponding systus program. The proposed formal entry M is suffi-
ciently simple and ensures the flow of entry with arbitrary depth of swed-
ding. me operating time of the program is on the order of a fraction of a
second. The calculated signatures of binary vectors when testing logic micro-
cirouits of different series corresponded fully to experimental signatures.

one 681.324:681.3.06
om mm new no mum or DESIGN or 0mm svsms
[Abstract of article by Ialnin'sh, Ya. Ya. and Mania, Ye. Ye.)

[Text] Synthesis of operating devices that realise a program given in high-
level algorithmic language with time restriction of fulfilling it is described.
The problem of minimising the hardware expenditures in synthesis of these de-
vices ia considered. A method is outlined for automated design of operating
devices in which the use of formal methods of parallelling the performance of
program and minimisation operations of harbors expenditures can be combined
with the use of designer experience.

138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
one 681.35

MINA?!” m 01513130110! mamas W m MISTICS C? m
SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by Chuyko, H. n. 1

[Text] A method is proposed for determining the estimates of the distribu-
tion parameters of the characteristics of outputs: systems found as a result
of measurements. The experiments show that these distributions are multimodal
with regard to which it is suggested that they be regarded as mixtures of sin-
glo-modal distributions of the given type. The problem of determining the
distribution par-store reduces to one of dividing the distribution mixtures
by the components. It is suggested that random search for the global maximu-
of the similarity function in the presence of restrictions on the optimisation
parameters be used to solve it. A lumber of advantages of realizing this al-
gorithm is noted compared to realization of the previously known algorithm of
dividing tho s-ple by stbpopulatione. It is amended that the algorithm
be used in the case of weakly separated mixtures of distributions.

UDC 681.324
nouns or oomzc‘rs In “EMORY (r MULTIPROCBSNR SIMS
[Abstract of article by Regan, B. n. and Kreynin, R. 2a.]

[‘rextl Analytical probability models are proposed for estimating the pro-
ductivity of multiprocessor systuas with general and local memory. The models
are based on exponential stochastic mass queueing networks.

UDC 681.513.519.872

MOP mmcammmronmcormsoromm SYS‘I'BJSW
VARIABLE HI)!

[Abstract of article by Sklyarevich, !. h.)

[Text] The fragment of a computer system with variable functional mode is
considered. the process of changing the modes is on inhomogeneous marker
process. A transient system of first-order linear differential equations
that determines the laws of variation of the functional indicators corresponds
to each mode. It is proved without using Pocker-Plandr-Kolmogorov equations
that their unconditional mean values are determined by a system of linear dif-
ferential equations easily found by transforming the equations of the behavior
of the fragment with each of the modes separately under conditions of fitting
the functional indicators when their modes change. The method is applicable
for determining the mean value and second initial moment of the nuber of oc-
cupied processors in a multiprocessor eystee with variable node.

139
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IDC 519 .718

DESIGN OF VERIFICATION TESTS NR mm MIC NITRICBS
[Abstract of article by Zakrevskiy, A. D.)

[Text] The problem of detection in progras-able logic satrices of multiple
nalfunctions for-ed by arbitrary conbinations of single nalfunctions of the
type of appearance or disappearance of transistors in the oonponents of the
matrix field of the circuit is considered. It is elm that the problan of
designing effective verification tests for progr-nsble logic satrioes is
closely related to that of optim- reelisation of a given system of boolean
functions on a progra-able logic natrix. An approach is suggested for solv-
ing it that is nade more specific for the case of a single boolean function in
the systen. The problem reduces to finding a weakly determined boolean func-
tion having single realisation along disjmctive nor-a1 forts with given nunber
of elementary conjunctions.

UDC 621.372.542

mars or vmocm m 20!! announce or DISCRBTB room mm or
2“-pomr sequences

[Abstract of article by nayorov, 8. A., ﬂatveye. Yu. N. and chin, Ya. I.)

[Text] The possibility of direct me of the Vinograd algoritln to calculate
a 2“-point discrete rourier transform and alsothapossibility of using anall-
point Vinograd algorithm in a 25-point fast Pourier transform are considered.
The computer nenory expenditures and nuber of operations in realisation of
Vinograd algoritlus are estisated.

UN 621.3913“

APPLICATION C W PERIODIC MIONS TO W110” 0? 013mm
POURIER mussel!“

[Abstract of article by Bilineltiy. 1. Ya.. Borovik, Yu. P. and llikelson. A. L]

[Text] A eethod is proposed for fulfilling a l'ourier transforn that utilises
an internediate procedure of signal expansion in a system of rectangular per-
iodic filter functions that assune only values of 0. l and -l. which can also
be nonorthogonal. The regain-ants on the filter function eystu are deter-
nined. It is shown that the procedure of deter-ining the Fourier coefficients
according to the proposed method consists of two steps. The internediate co-
efficients corresponding to the procedure of signal expansion in a system of
rectangular periodic functions are deternined in the first step. This step
does not contain multiplication operations. The desired values of the Farrier
coefficients as solutions of a systan of linear equations are calculated in the
second step. The nmer of nultiplication operations in the second step de-
pends on the type of filter functions. haples of possible systens of filter
functions are presented. The use of a given method in fulfilling a discrete

11:0
ma omcm. use ONLY
Fourier transform per-its a considerable reduction of the number of multipli-
cation operations caparsd to the algorithn of a fast tourist transforn. The

nethod can be recmendsd for design of special processors of discrete tonrier
transfors operating in real tine.

UDC 519.711.?

mm: mums FOR mama-mac M

[Abstract of article by Aptaksin, Yu. L, Zapevalin, A. A. and nryukhin, v. v.)

[Text] A procedure for selecting the direction or intonation transmission in
nessageosvitching networks is investigated. A nmer of routing algorithm
that utilize inﬂornation only about the status of channels incident to a given
assesbiy is considered. A unified structure for describing the algorithm is
proposed. an effectiveness of the algorithns is estimated on the basis of the
adopted nodal of the newer)! ﬁrm the viewpoint of the Iain criterion--the
average tine or delivery o! the nessage to the addressee.

common-r: Izdetel‘stvo "zinatns'. "Avtcnatika i vychislitel'naya tekhnika'.
1982

6521
cs0: 1863/161

1111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS FRO}! Jomum. 'mmmlcs', men-APRIL 1982
Kiev “3me in Russian 80 2. Mar-Apr 82 p 133

[Text] Contents

Aarna. O.A. Task Solving on Partially Explicit l‘bdels. I. ................
Pogrehnoy, VJ. A Method for Detenination of Graph Isonorphisl ...........
“Rushin. 8.1!. An Algoritln for Finding the Greatest Internal Stability

1n Graph set. o.0to...0......000......OO'OIIOOOOOOUOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOO
Bskayev, A.A.. Kranaranko. R.P.. Kostmba. 1'.V. the Question of anoosing

a Conceptual and Internal Model for Data in a Systaa for Control of Data

u... with “yet“ mmtwtu“ OOOIIOODOOOODOOOIO...0.090000090000003...
Nikitin. A.S.. Skrigan. 11.1. Hierarchic Graph Structures and Prograas

for Proc.‘.1n8 ma .0.COCO...IOOOOOOOOCOOOCOOOOOCOOOOOOOIIOIOOOOOOOOOOOC
Loskutov. v.6. Hisrarchic Structures in Optiaization Progrsn Packages ....
Babichev. A.V. Theoretical Questions of Parallel Syntactical Analysis ....
Lipayev. V.V., Pozin. D.A.. Dlau, s.A. Analysis of Strategies for

168cm hop” “81¢ 00.0...0....0....0.00.00.00.00...OO'IOIOOOOIOOOOOOQ
Val'kovskiy. V.A. Parallel Cycle Execution. The Parallelepiped Method ...
Zayko. Yu.G. Khabibullin, nus. Evaluation of Reliability in the Function

of an Alternative Conputer System .......................................
Beresnev, V.V. Extrema Conditions for Convex Integral Inclusions

and Their Applic‘tm 0.0000000...0.00.0'OOIOOOIOOCOOOOOUCOOOOO0.00.00...
Dabich. H.D.. Shevchuk. LJ. An Algoritln for Approxi-tion Solutions

for Systens of Nonlinear Equations ......................................
Bardadyn, LA. The Problen of Tracking with Silple Hoveuent and Different

md. of m.tr.‘nt. on mtrol 0.0.0...0.0.00.0..000.000QCCOOCOOCOOCOOOC
Gayvoronskiy. A.A. Approxi-tion Hethods for Solving Problems in

stmmatu Frost.“ 0.09.00...OIOOOOOOOOOOCOOOIOI.OOOODOIOOOOOIOIOOOOO

Grinehpan, L.A. Analysis of Steady-State Conditions in Semi-Markov Processes

by the Heth of hypothetical States ....................................
Dunayev. 3.3. Opti-l Solutions in Image Recognition .....................
Bondareva, 0.10. A Production Model and Calculation of the N-Rucleus with

the Aid of “ﬁring. OOOOCOOOOOOO0.0CCOOCIOOOOOOCOOO0.000QCOOOOCOOQOOOOO.
Yakhno. VJ. A Method for Iaproved Rmtes for Probleas of Opti-l Loads

m Mutmt 09.000.000.000...IOOOOOIOIOOOOODOIOOQ...OOOOOOOOOOQIOOOOOOCO

11:2
ms 0mm us: onu

.-

lb

25
31
35
1:0

65
51

63
69
76
80
85

91
95

101

105
REPORTS IN BRIEF

Tinofeyev. Ye.A. An Algoritln for Constructing a Mini“: k-Linked Bound
s‘lbst.ph U.0...00......00.0.0090...OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOCI...OOOCCOIOOOOOOOC.

Gostav. Yu.G. Application of Atomic Grams: To Describe Data Structures
(Using as an Bunple a Language for Deecribing Circuits Dude up of
nt‘cn“ Elmt.) .00.00000000000000000000.0.0.9..OOOOOOOOOOOIOOIOOOOOOO

Gupel. A.ll.. Loslnntov. v.6. Effectiveness of Finite-Differmce Hethode

for undifferentiated Optiniution ......................................
Radkovekiy. NJ. Use of Curvilinear Coordinates for Minimizing Ronconvex

mtiw. eeoeeeoeeeeoeoeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeoeeseeaaeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoe

Polyabv’ LON. Ahwl-munwm optmntim 0......OOOOOOOOOIOIOOOOIO.
Arentov, V.A. Disparities for Evaluation of System Reliability ...........
Kolyada. A.A. Number Nucleus in Residual Class System ...................
Zhuk. O.V. Alorithnic Deterdnetion of Data Transnission Delay Tile in
Conflict Situations in MltiIodal Hierarchical Syetene ..................

scmmlnc Imnon O.ICC...0......CCOOIOIOOOOICO0......OCOOOOOOCOO..I..
Rams 0? "mm 0.00.00...0..................COOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI0......
COPYRIGHT: IZDATBL'STVO ”NAUKOVA D ". "KIDMTIKA". 1982

96102
080: 1863/178

11:3
ron omau use ONLY

109

111
116
117
119
124
126
126
129

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.1623
ANALYTICAL METHODS FOR HILTIPW SYSTBHS

Hoscow HBTODY ANALHA HUL'TIPROGW 818T!!! in Russian 1982 (signed to press
29 Dec 81) pp 2-3. 153

[Annotatiom editor's foreword and table of contents from book "Imalytical Hethods

for Hultiprogran Systeas". by Valeriy Aleheyevich Balyherdin, edited by s. D.
Pashkeyev, Izdstel'stvo "Radio i svyas'". 8,000 copies. 153 pages]

[Text] Methods are show for quantitative analysis of data processing systens
built on the basis of mltiprograned corputers. The main problens arising in
the development and function of such system are discussed and ways of solving
them are indicated. The conputation methods considered make it possible to take
into account the complex processes involved in prohlen interaction at the level
of exchange and computation overlap. ﬁnch attention is given to questions of the
practical application of these methods.

The book is intended for engineers associated uith the design and organisation
of function in data processing systens based on nultiprogra-d progran counters;
it may be of use to students on advanced courses.

Editor's Foreword

Questions of improving the efficiency of conputer equipnent have always attracted
the attention of data processing system developers and users. One pronising way
in this direction is the use of mltiprograning as s nethod for simltaneously
solving several prohlens on the sane comuter.

lt cane about historically that the first period in research in the field of
nultiprogrsnning on a single coQuter coincided with the appearance of multiprocessor
and multinchine computing systems. This stimulated development of work in the
field of parallel algorithns and cosputing structures. on which the main scientific
effort was focused. Later. however. developments in practical data processing
showed that in many cases the most expedient and econonically justified way of
increasing a system's productivity is nultiprograI-ing. This is especially true

for specialised systens in which constraints on physical psraaeters partially
exclude the possibility of substantial increases in systen productivity through
augmenting the cowuter resources.

In recent years there has been a marked increase in the interest in the problems
of mitiprogranming. especially with regard to methods for fornal description and

lhh
roeorncmussomv
quantitative analysis of multiprogram systems. not only in our country but also
abroad. The concrete proof of this is the publication in foreign sources of a
number of materials on this subject written by Soviet authors, including the author
of this book. However. available work is largely disjointed and reflects isolated,
partial aspects of multiprogramming. It would seen that there is a need for a
generalized presentation of questions concerned with quantitative evaluation and
optimization of the computing process in multiprogram systems. within the framework
of a unified approach. V.A. Balybedrin's book "Analytical Methods for Multiprogram
Systems" is the first of attempts of this kind. It has been written on the basis
of many years in research and practical experience by the author in the field of
developing data processing systems on the basis of multiprogrammed computers. In
it. material is generalized from a great amount of work on this subject done in
recent years. The book reflects the present status of and ismediate prospects

for the development of methods for quantitative analysis of multiprogram systems
and will undoubtedly fill a gap in the literature on data processing systems based
on multiprogrammed computers.

Contents

Editor's foreword ..........................................................

Foreﬂord esosoeeosasssoeeeseeeeeeeaossessesesssseeseesesseesssssssoeessseses

Chapter 1. Introduction ...................................................
1.1. Problem solving on a computer ......................................
1.2. Multiprogram mode in computer operation ............................
1.3. General structure of a multiprogrammed computer ....................
1.4. Basic equipment and programs in organizing multiprogram mode ....... l
1.5. Problems in quantitative evaluation of multiprogram systems ........ 1

M’s-ONO0\ #9)

Chapter 2. The Mathematical Apparatus in Multiprogram System Analytical

Prwlm O00.00.000.00...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOO 15
21. Basic concepts in mass utiliution theory ......................... 15
2.2. Analysis of mass utilization systems .............................. 18
2 3. Basic concepts and methods in schedule theory ..................... 27

Chapter 3. Analysis of Batch Data Processing Systems ................... 28
3.1. Main factors affecting system productivity ........................ 28
3.2. Indicators of efficiency in multiprogram mode ..................... 31
3.3. Formal description of the function of a multiprogrammad computer .. 33
3.4. Analytical methods in multiprogram problem blends ................. 35
3.5. Features in the use of analytical methods in multiprogram problem

blend‘ .0IIOOOIOOOOOOOOOOCOCOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOCOOOOOOO0.00.00.00.00. 50
3.6. Control of the computing process in multiprogram mode ............. 55
3.7. General evaluation of facilities in a multiprogrammed computer .... 66

Chapter 4. Systems Analysis With Time Sharing ............................ 71
5.1. Basic concepts and characteristics of time-sharing systems ........ 71
4.2. Models for time-sharing systems with a finite number of sources

of dmd 0000.00.000m0.0090'00.000000.90.0.9....0000000000000... 77

3. Open models for time-sharing systems with swapping ................ 81

4. Models for systems with time quantization ......................... 92

11.5
roe omcm. use onu
INDI‘OFFICIAL USIZCMNLY

Chapter 5. Analyete of Real-Time Syataua .................................
5.1. Features of real time operation ...................................
5. 2 Hodela for real-tine ayatene disregarding exchange and computing

onrup 0.00....COOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0000IOOIOOOOIIOQOOOODOOO
5.3. Model: for real-tine ayatena taking account of exchange and

couputing overlap ...............................................
5.4. Operation of real-tine system in external subscriber polling node .
5.5. Real- the mltiprocmor and mltmhtne ayete-a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

conCluBiO‘n oaaaaoaoeaaaarooonov'eaa...eooaeeaaaaeaaaoaeoaeoaaeaaeeaaaaoeoeoe

Bibl1°8raphy one.to...eeoeoooaeoaeaaoaeoaeaeaaaaaeeoeaeeeeoanaaoeeaaaaeoaae
subjat 1nd“ oeoooaoaaaoaaatea.oaneeaaoaan.a...aaaeaeaaeaaaeoaeaeeeaeooaea

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo ”Radio 1 avyaz'". 1982

9642
C80: 1863/175

11.6
FOR omcuu. use ONLY

105
105

112

128
137
162

166
1108
151
JWRRAL 'INSTRUHEI'I‘S, MS W AMTIG MID mm; SYSTEM TS-Zx COHPUTER HARD-
UARR AND OFFICE MIMI”, JULY-ANS? 1%].

Hoscow moat. smsrvA amnu'rsn I 31er WW“. rs-z. snmsrva VYGHIS-
mwnox woman I ammuni (smocammu manusms) in Russian No a,
Jul-Aug 81 pp 1-16

[Text] A. comrm Tmowcy

A1. General Questions of cellpnter Technology 681
322
360. "Co-puter task euecutia: analysis.” Kostyuk. I. ‘1‘. end Hekarenko. V. I. In
book: 'Probleny rszrebotki lateuticheskogo obespecheni mundane-nu“
[Problems of the Develop-eat of latex-branch ASU Software . Collection of Scientific
Works. UkrSSR Gosplsn. Iain Scientific Resesrch and Informtim-Cclputer Center.
Kiev. pp 123-128. [Input fron cm].
681.3.003.13
361. ”On the question of the effectiveness of conputer use.“ Karapetyan, V. V.
V013?! RADIMRWIKI. m1 ammumo-‘rmamn 330nm. 1980, No 15.
pp 13.
631~323
362. "Criterion for estimting effectiveness of speedslized computer hardware.”
Assn-0v. Sh. 31:. In beau "Avtontizstsiya proizvodstv h protsessov" [Autom-
tion of Production Processes]. Tsslkent. 1980, pp 38-16. {mu/reelient Polytech-
nic Institute. No 308). [Input from cm}. 681
6.01

363. “On some distinctive features of the electromagnetic coupatibility of em...
tors.” Kmpetyen. V. V. “PM RADIOEBC’I‘ROI'IKI. SERIYA Mcmucmo-mmcms-
KIY SW, 1980. No 15, pp3-7.

See also N0 M7}.

A2. TMoretioel Questions
681.325.66
361$. "Automtion of construction of nodels of mncticnine of elements of digital
cirwits." Tetulyen. S. A. and Ogsnesyan. G. 6. VW RADIMROIIKI. SM“
MaKAucmo-TI-xmcmn sacrum, 1980. lo 15. pp 91-9‘5. 681
.3.01

365.. "Analysis of methods of organizing a. computer synchronization system" Sero-
pyan, S. S. VOPRWY RADIW. SEIYA Mauwmo-mmcmn swam. ' '
1980, lo 15, pp 3341. Bihliogrsptw, p 1&1: 10 itens.

It?
ran omcm. us: ONLY
FOR UH‘KJAI. USI'. ONLY

681.3.01:621.398
366. “Analysis of buffering processes in remote processing systems." Wm.
H. D. and Ettinger, B. Ya. AVTGIATDIA I vrcmsu'rn'mu TEXHNIKA. 1981. No 2.
pp 55-61. Institute of Electronics and Computer Technolog. Latvian SSR Academy

of Sciences. Bibliography p 61: 10 items. __
' -'3681—v326.3t[53.072‘a68;.3]

367."!Iethod of combining the nodeling levels during investigation of the function-
ing and development of conputer systems.“ Dudkin. A. 11., Zinkin. S. A. and Kulegin,
V. P. VOPROSY RADIOEIBCTMI. SERIYA MulMUCMO-J‘l'ixmm m. 1980. No
10. pp 85-89. in.

681. 3.06

368. "Minimization of systems of canonicsl equations representing a uﬂ'auto-‘v
maton with consideration of the signal distribution.“ Vasﬂsevich. N. P. VOPROSY
RADIOMTRGIKI. SERIYA ManllCHNQ-TWGHBSKIY SB . 1980. IO 10. pp 90-96.
Bibliography. p 96: 3 items.

369. 'Deternination of the probabilities of distortions of the positions of pulses
of reproduction." Knyszev, G. 1.. Mikhaylov. V. I. and Rskov. B. H. VOPROSY RADIO-
ELEXTRONIKI. SERIYA mmwcxmo-mtmmmn 33mm, 1980, lo 10. pp 9-11}. Biblio-
graphy. p 11;; h itens. Calculations of the probabilities and distributions of posi-

msthenstical nodel.
. 007.52
370. "Optimization of disjunctive deconposition during synthesis of an automton ton
PLH [not further identiﬁed." Plotnikov. A. V.. Salonatin, V. A. and Barkslov. A.
A. VOPROBY RADIOEIMRGIIKI. smn mmvcxmo-mcmcmn 33m. 1980. No
10, pp 80-84. ill. Bibliography, pp 83-81}: 5 items. 681 326
e ‘32

371. “System of documted representation and coding of a diagram of nicro-progran
10310.. VashkeV10h, "a Po, Ridkin, A. "a. 2mm. Se A0 Ct 310 VOPRCBY mm-
TRONIKI. SMA MulAUcmo-TRHNICMIY SBORNIK. 1980, No 10. pp z5-79, ill.

See also 363, #35 and “3?.

A3. Reliability of Counters

681.3-192
372. "Questions of increase of computer reliability in con-station working regimes.
up [not further mammal” mm. a. A. vomosy ammomz.
SERIYA EV'rmAucmo-mcmcmn 83m. 1980. No 15. pp 55-61. 68

103-192
373. "Integrated device for diagnosis of Yes computer cards.“ Marta-yen. I. B.

and Karokinnyen. H. 0. VOPROSY RADIOEIETRQ‘IKI. SERIYA mmwmmo-mmmmn
SBORNIK. 1980, No 15. pp 50-510.

Tsapulin. V. K. and Gomchev. V. A. VOPROSY RADIOEIBCI'RGIIKI. SERIYA MxNAUCHNO-
TECHNICHESKIY am. 1980, No 10. pp 127-130, ill. The authors examine questions
regarding realization on Series 155 nicro-oimits of a device for Ionitoring infor-
mation on mgnetic carriers by news of an error detection code.

11.6
roe omcul. us: ONLY
631 . 3-192

575. "Posting of main equip-eat of single-channel Iiu'o-colputers." Bryunin. V.
l.. Kobzev. s. P. and Plotnikov. V. V. WA“ Tm. 1980. lo 6. pp 1.6-1.9.

Bibliography. p 1&9: 5 itens. !_(Input from cm).
62010536813

376. "Stend dlya nakhozl’deniya defektov elektroﬁhen vychislitel'noy nashiny
ram-1" [Stand for detecting conwter electrical ciruiit defects moo-1]. Krasno-
ynrek. 1980, 3 pages. (lnfomtion Sheet/Krameyarak Tsl'l‘I [center of Scientific
and Technical Infomtim and Disselination] No 579-80). (Input from cm).

8 .
Yeritsyan. V. A. and W. A. L. VOPROSY RADImmI. SERIYA EVTHMUCH-

NO-TEHKICMIY SBOR‘NIK. 1980. I'D 15. pp 95-99. Bibliograplu. p 9937 item.
681.3.053

378. ”Algorithn for intonation retrieval on 'decodm'." Wm, 11. In
book; "Avtonatitatsiya proizvodstvennykh protsessov" Tastkent. 1980. pp 93-96.
(dey/rasrkent Polytechnic Institute 1'0 308). Intonation retrieval by means of
“mm” [mm M “MEI 681.3.015.681.326.7u.06

379. ”Hethod of accelerating recognition of texts of a directive character in ex-

tractive systems.” linukin. E. 11.. mnvelyen. A. R. and Karapetyen. K. c. VOPROSY

RADIOELEXTRONIKI. SERIYA mmucmo-mmmmn SBORNIK. 1980. 110613. gpéZO-lzy
.3 .

380. ”Modified progran of mltiple linear regression.“ Izergina. R. A. In book:

”Problem rambotki mtenaticheskogo obespecheniya nezhotraslevykh ASU.“ Collection

of Scientific works. UkrSSR Gosplan. Main Scientific Research and Inforlation-

ccnputer Center. Kiev. 1980. pp 112-11u. [Input from cm].
681.3.o6.658.o12.on.56

381. ”Some questions of automtion of the development of dowmntation for software.
3. A. and Vsrtanyan. G. . VOPRIBY mmwmx. SERIYA mtmucrmo-

TWCMIY mm. 1980. No 15. pp 100-105. Bibliography. p 105316 items.
621.316.?29s681.327.13

382. "the task of synchronization in the process of separation of data from a re-

producible code.“ Wow, V. 6.. and cmlkov. V. A. V
SERIYA mmwcmo-rmmmm 330m. 1980. No 10, pp 15-21. ill. Bibliography.

p 2h 10 items. An analysis is made of the inﬂuence of static and dynamic error of

synchronization on the Jeliability of data separated from an inforlation code in the
process of reproduction in digital mastic recording apparatus.
681e3e01‘69001200neﬁ

383. "Realization of a syste- for automating the devalopnent of software docunenat-

tion.“ Avetisyan. S. A.. Vartanyan, G. .. Grigoryan. 6. Kb. et a1. VOPROSY RADIO-
EIBCI‘RONIKI. SIRIYA mmucmo—Tmmcmn 5301mm. 1980. No 15. pp 106-111.

Bibliography. p 111. in items.

681-32505-181010

181+. “Realination of means of modeling micro-program processors." 1W. 'V.'V.
VOPROSY"MDlmPRMD(I. 3mm! mmwcmo-mmmn SW. 1980. No 15,

pp 76-83. Bibliograpm. p 83; 5 items.
681.3.06a658.012.011.58

385. ”Realization of a language for lodeling software.” Vartanyan, R. H. VOPROSY
RADIOQMTRONIKI. SERIYA mmwcrmo-Tmmmn 83m. 1980. No 15. "p 84-90.

Bibliography. p 90. a itens.

11.9
won omcm. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

681.32.06
386. ”An algorithm for dynamic control of the flow of regularly soluble problems
of 9. computer center.” Ilyukhin. S. V. In book: "Problem nmbotki Intenti-
chedcogo obespecheniya nezhotrsslevykh ASU." Collection of Scientiﬁc Works.

UkrSSR Gosplsn. lain Scientiﬁc Re and Infomtim-Conputecr center. Kiev,
1980. pp 22-32. [Input fro. cmaj.

38?. ”Means of adjusting the 'Nairi-lb' interpreter." Belysvskiy. Ye. I. and
Natanson, Ye. G. VOPROSY WWI. SRIYA MINAUCIUOJBHNIWY 3303-
m. 1980, lo 1+, pp 110-111}. Bibliography. p 118316 itens.

681o30%’1810u8
388. "Bstimte of the effectiveness of licroprogran realization of sons systel
subprograns.” Henry“. G. 11.. Taknrysn K. S. Baku-yam c. G. and Abovynn. L. 8.
zones! mtonmolun. mm. m. niumlog'mnms'tmm. 1980. No 15, pp
7-70.

681.32.06-528 £905
389. ”Parametrization of working file characteristics in Yes operating systems.”
Bich, V. ll. In book: 'Problewrrsmbotki netenticheskogo obespecheniys mhot-
raslevykh ASU." Collection 0! Scientiﬁc Hordes/0km Goeplan. hi!) Scientiﬁc
Research and Informtion-Conputer Center. Kiev. 1980. pp 132-13“.

6210m6s729'68103a013
390. "Increase of precision of synchronisation of reproduction signals.” .

A. I. and Hikhnylov. V. I. VOPROSY mmmmm. SERRA EVT|NAUCIMO-_Tﬂ(m-_
CWIY 3m, 1980. No 10. pp 22-28. 111.

Guseve. S. S. AVTOIATIKA I WMSLITEL'MYA Tm (Institute of Electraiics and
Colputer Technology. Latvian SSR Acadew of Sciences), 1981, No 2, pp 39-131}. Bib-
liography, p M; 3 items.

681.3.06
392. "Program for opening the lines of s level a: a triangular simplex (the "Haiti-
2' conputr.r)." Moscow. 1981. 2 pages. (Intonation Sheet. VIII 0150, Series Imo-
13-11). (Input mu arm-3).

6&0327028868103-18101‘8
393. ‘7qu pregnant based on the 'Elektronika-éO' micro-computer.” Katokov. H.
D. and Shlov'yev, A. K. In books "Oblsstnaya studencheskeys nauchno-tekhniches-
keys. Womm'maktnmmye tsepi 1 sisteny'EOhlast Student Scientific-
Technical Conference on Electrical Circuits end‘Systens]. Perl' Polytechnic In-

stitute. Scientific-rectiﬁed Society of Radio Engineering. Electronics and Con-mi-
cations ineni A. s. Popov. Perl'. 1981. pp 11-12. [Input m- cm].

681.3.01H6alo3a.6.071
39h. “Synthesis of adaptive codes." Rskcv. B. l. and Ssposlmikov. H. In. VOPROSY
mum-mm. SERIIA MalIAUMO-TBGMIGMI! m. 1980. lo 10, pp Ml.
Bibliography. p bl: 10 itens.

681.3.0131681.325.63

395. "Synthesis of a decoder of Iicro-instructims on m [not further identi-
fied]." Fritsnovich. G. F. AVI‘OHATIKA I vrcmarm'mm TREND“ (Institute of
Electronics and Conputer Technology. Latvian 88R Auden of Sciences. 1981, No 2.
pp Its-53. Bibliography, p 53: 7 items.

150
ron omcw. use ouu
681.0 .6
396- "Program sealing table for 'zm-tron 382. 383. 38“. 385' [not further 129n-

tified ." 3mm. 1981. a pages. (Intonation Sheet. Inning-an. TsIITI.
No 52 1. [Input moms].

681.3.053
397. ‘Silpnficstion of algorithe for coding and decoding digital hinoid codes
with successive whole-manhu- ooefficiente." Pamyan, L. I. VWROSI rumm-
TRGIKI. SERRA mmwcmo-mmmmn m. 1%0. I0 15. pp 116-119- Bib-

See also "0 W1. W2. ““50

A-S. Computers

681.382
398. ”Analog-digital couple): based on the MIR-1 digital computer." Anisinov. S. N.
IZVESI‘IYA VYSSHIKH ucnmmm ZAVEDHIY. WWW. Novocherksssk Politdth-
nic Institute. 1980. No 18, pp 1275-1277. [Input from ems].

621.3.0h9.771.1u8681.327.2-185.u
399. "Tests for monitoring large-scale integrated-circuit min storagesand storage
devices based on then." Ivanov. II. V. In book: Poiuprovodnikovyye integnl'nyye
alchemy. Skhenotekhnika, i tekhnologiysr“ Collection of Scientiﬁc Works. Institute

of Electronic Technology. Moscow. 1979. pp 73-78. Bibliogrspiuh P 79: 2 its-s.
[Input tron cm]. .

See also No 396.

#00. “Analysis of the state of surface end 31+.an structure of rem-lawn: coat-
ings of magnetic disks." Heshtekov. Ie. A., Seunnnnwv, 8. s. at a]. VOPRCBY RADIO-
mmmIKI. smnA mmwcmommmn 330mm. 1980, lo 10. pp 122-126. 1n.

11-01. "The influence of so-e tecrmolcgicsl mentors on the resistance of TsHP
[not further identified] to ageing.“ Yegiyan, x. A. et n1. vomosr mum-
'raoxnu. 3mm mmucmommctmn 33mm. 1980, No 15. pp 125-131. 51n-
Iiogrsphy. p 131: h itels.

route." Km. 3- H. VW WI. SERIYA m: ”limo-mm-
ml! m. o 1%0. NO 15, pp 71-75. 31mm! P 758 3 items. Drilling
of contact sites by HP? [not further identified] computer cu'ds.

$1.3”.28‘529‘621030 9??
M3. ”menace in proscennng micro-circuits of I'm-type EL-l prograners.”
Shcmtmm’ Y“. Io. “mm. A. Boo mtw’ Va I. .t 31. In boa. Polupro-

vodnikovyye integI-sl‘nyye ekhew mti. W i teldnolcgiys. Collec-
tion of Scientific Hodge. Institute of Electronic Technology. Moscow. 1979. pp

27-37. ethnogrnpnv. p 98: 1» items. [Input tron cm].

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A-?. Elementary Constructive Base of Computers

621.3.0h9.??1.11&
18015. ”Possibilities of using partially suitable large-scale integrated circuit
memory elements.“ In book: ”1’0le integral'nyye alchemy pemyeti.
Skhemotekhnika i tekhnologiya.‘ Collection of Scientific works. Institute of Elec-
tronic Technology. Moscow. 1979. pp 55-65. Bibliography. pp 65—66: 8 items.

681.327.67:621.3.ou9.77
hos. ”Ultra-high frequency elements and tactical units of high-speed equipment
for storing and processing infomtim on ninitrons." Bamntseva. O. D. and Ponds.

S. A. In book: ”Poluprovodnikovyye integral'nyye thew pemti. Skhemotekrnika i
tektmologiya.’ Collection of Scientific Works. Institute of Electronic Tectnology.

Moscow. 1979, pp 159-165. Biblioaaphy. p 165: 1. items. [Input fron am].
See also No 36!}.

A .8. Computers

A.8.1. General Questions

681.3.02
M6. ”Equipment for the foruation of time delay in electronic apparatus.” Cerbin-_:- '
yen. A. A. and Kasaryan. V.A. VOPROSY RADIWTRGIKI. SEIIYA EVTH‘AUCINO-TBIH-
NICHESUY 330m, 1970. No 15, pp 19-28. Bibliograpm. p 28: 14 items.

681.3.02

W. “Means and systeu of automation control. Organization and Optimization of
atmama. School Aide” K0808“. VI 60 mm, 1%. 72 was. me R8933 H1!!-
istry of Higher and Secondary Specialised Mneatim. Leningrad Polytechnic Insti-
tute. Bibliosnpiw. P 71: 5 items. Questions of structural planning of means and
systems of automatic control are conﬁned. Attention is given to standardization

of control computer manure (registers decoders. accoun uchines. stores. oper-
ating devices. controls. centers. etc . [Input from cm .

A.8.2. Equipaent for Prim Processing of Infomtion Input-Output 68
1327.2

1608. ”Probabilistic analytical models of channels for computer system input-output."
Dinitrw. A. A.. Kachan. B. H. and Xalynin. A. 'De. AVTOHATIKA I VYCHIm'NAYA
THWA. 1981. No 2. pp 78-83. Bibliography. p 83: 3 items. Institute of Electrm-
ice and Computer Technology. Latvian 88R Academy of Sciences.

681.3.le621.316156
1‘09. “Some questions of the construction of a commtator of the min-line channel
in a 'NAIaI-u/m' complex." Dzsndsmlysn. s. I... Zadsysn. v. 3.. Surenyan. s. c.
and Mom. G. A. "EROS! RADIMMI. 3mm mmucmommmn 8301!-
m. 1980, No 15, pp 162-116.

681.3.01l621.xl6.56
1610. “Data trans-ission system of 'll'hrus-l' multiprocessor cosputer couples.”

Burtsev. V. s. and Perekatov. V. I. AVTOHATDCA I VICIIISLIM'NAYA TECHNIKA. 1981.
No 2. pp 15-30. Institute of Electronics and Coaputer Technology. Latvian SSR
Academy of Sciences. The work deecfibes the results achieved in creating a. data
transmission system which is the basis of the entire system of mate processing of
the mltiprocessor computer complex and 'El'brus-l'. The data messing system of
the "El'brus-l" complex is in the general path of development of the fourth genera-
tion remote processing system.

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
681. 327.2
#11. "Device for conputer input of infomtion fro- a graphic downent based on

a television colors.“ Meyev I. I. I... Zelendtiy. A. IL. Klyucﬂco. S. V. et s1.
In books "Probarostroyeniye' immanent-Making]. Republican Interdepartmental
Scientific-Tectmical Collection. Kiev. 1981, pp 22-27. Bibliography. P 27: 5
itens. [Input tron cm].

681.327.2‘ﬁ103-1810u
1‘12. ”Device for input and processing of pulsed intonation on electrophysiologi-

cal processes for a stall caputer.‘ Leningrad. 1980. Infomtion Sheet. Leningrad
TsN'I'I No 576-80. [Input fron cm].

amt. Processors and Peripheral Control Devices

681.326.3
1:13. "Microprocessor intonation input-output controller of informsticn of a. spe-
cialized processor.” Bogdanov. B. V. and Stepanova. Ye. V. In books "Pribory i
ustroystva elektnmkh sisten upravleniys" Instrunents and Devices of Electronic
Control Systems]. Intervuz Collection No 1 3. Leningrad Institute of Aviation In-
strunent-Haking. Leningrad Electrical kgineering Institute, Leningrad, 1980, pp

69-73. in. A controller for infomtialal coupling of conputere with a peripheral
processor.

68103’18101‘8
1.11.. ”Adjustnent panel for the 'Blektronika-SS-ll' nicro-colputer.” Zonove. L. V.
and Arkhipov. S. A. In book: “Oblsstnsya studencheeksya nsucmc-tekhnichesksyn
konferentsiys [Elektricheﬁiys teepi i sistelu' Tezisy doklndov." Pern' Polytech-
nic Institute. Sdentific-Teelmicsl Society of 0 Engineering. Electronics and
Communications mm A. s. Popov. pm'. 1981. p 17. [Input m- cm].

A.8.h. Hicroproceesors

681. 326.3;
#15. 'Developnent of s Iicroprocessor oonputer for processing neasuremt informa-

tion.‘ Infomtion Card. mung: Aviation Technological Institute. 39920. Ry-
binek.

See also No 393.

A.8.§. Stores

53.072: 681.31
l$16. "Analysis of sons nethods of comtatim of calls during page exchange in (link

external storage units.” Rakov, B. 14.. Zinkin. S. A. and Kulagin. V. P. VOPROSY
mxmmm. SERIYA mammo-mmmn 33m. 1980. lo 10. pp 66-71;.
ill. Bibliography. pp 73-71;, 9 itens.

681.327
#17. "Store with data protectiax against destruction." Data Card. Leningrad.
”Burevestnik' Scientific Production Association. 39123. Leningrad,

62103120799
#18. “Measure-em of resonance frequency of nagnetic heads." Belous. V. V., Zayt-

sev. V. A. and Bullo. L. I. VOYROSY WWI. SERIYA MINAUCHNO-TEXMI-
CHESHY SBORNIK. 1%0, No 10, pp 58-61. 111.

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
621.327.632
1&19. "Use of a. Ingnetic dru- external store in the 'llairi-h' counter in simia-

tion of the 'Nalrl-Z'.” Khmni, S. U. and Ashnynn. G. Sh. VCPRWY ”DIM-
TRCIIIKI. SERIYS BVTIKAUCHNO-TKMCHESKIY 330mm. 1%0. No 15, pp 62-67.

momo6oWI03
l$20. “Study of questions in planning mgnetic heads." HEDVEDEV. A. I. VOPRwY
RADIOELECTRWIKI. smnm McleHNO-TEXMIGMIY swam. 1980. No 10, pp h7-53,
ill. Bibliography. p 53: 6 itens.

681.327.68
ha. "Investigntion of an optical disk protected by s tnnspsrent dielectric fill.”
Rakov. B. H” Strelkov. A. A” and Olmhanv, V. G. VOPRCBY WWI. SERRA

BUTmAUCHNO-THHNICIESIY swam. 1989. No 10. pp 116-120. ill. Bibliograpm,
p 120: 3 items.

681.327.67
#22. "Investigation of the conductivity of nenory elements based on snorphous seni-
CmdnCtorso” ”Maumm. Yu. Vs. “ﬂy”. V9 Po and GOIOVkO, A0 Go In m'
"Poluprovodnikovyye integrsl'nyye skheny pewsti. Skhenotekhniks i tdshnologiyn.”
Collection of Scientific Works. Institute of Electronic Technology. Hoacow. 1979.
pp W98. simognpm. p 99: 2 no... [Input m- cm].

681.30%?
I$23. "Intrazonnl task disposition in the win nenory during its static distribution.”
Hundyan. D. 0.. Kant-yam A. A. and Hovsisysn. A. S. VOPRCBY RADIWRIONIXI.
SERIYA ManAumo-mmclmn m. 190, No 15, pp 112-115, ill. Biblio-
graphy. P 115! 1} 1W0

681.327.6c071.33621.317.m3
uzu. ”The intensity of the nsgnetic field of heads with applied tips of small size.”
VOPROSY RADIOWI. SERIYA MsNAUGHNO-TECMICMIY SBORNIK. 1%0, No 10. pp
$57. 1110 Bimomm. p 57' 7 in”.

681.327.67
1‘25. method of testing and results of operation of eeniconductor storage in nessure-
mt caplmso. Daylidm. V0 no. 029““, V0 Veg Yum. Vo Is 8“ “take.
A. A. In book: "Polnprovodnikovyye integral'mcye ekhew pewsti. Schenotekhnika i
tekhnologiya.” Collection of Scientiﬁc Works. Institute of Electronic TecInology.
Ioscow. 1979. pp 166-170. [1mm from cm].

681.327.2
1&26. ”Sons methods of synthesizing associative storage units with combined types of

retrieval." Trusms, V. I. In book: ”Ppluprovodnikovyye integrsl'nyye skheny pu-
yeti. Sim-0mm i tekhnologiyn.” Collection of Scientific works. Institute

of mectrmic Technology. Hoscow, 1979. pp 86-92. Bibliograpw. pp 92-93: 11 items.
[Input Ira Gill's].

681.327.2-185.“
1.27. “Operative semiconductor stowage devices for the 'NAIRI-lb' computer.” 'Qkopov,
Po V0. W. Ac V0. "ovumnp ‘- 60 0t 81o In M‘ W“.
‘tognl'nmakhen mu. Skhenoteklmih. 1 tekrmologiya." collection of Scientific

works;J Institute of Electronic Technology. Room. 1979. pp 67-72. [Input from
GPNI‘B .

l.t28. ”Experience in develop-em and operation of Rt)! based on PPZU 'I‘I‘I. 236~BIYAND

l-KBIT nicrocircuits.’ Akinfiyev, V. H. et 3.1. In book; "Poluprovodnikovyye in-
tegral'nyye alchemy Mati. Skeenotekhnika i teldmoloays.” Collection of Scientific

151:
m omen/u. use ONLY
works. Institute of Electronic Technology. Moscow. 1979. pp 20-86. Bibliography, .
p 26. 3 iteas. [Input no. arms].

681.3%.3
l$29. ”Organization of work of a high-speed external store control unit
and the way to increase the rate of data exclange.“ Rybakov. A. A.. Chishov. A. A.
and Sobolev. Ye. Ye. VOPROSY RADIOHE’I‘RGIIK MIA Mamucmo-mmcmn
8m. 1%. N0 10' pp ”-102. m0

681.327.2-185J6
1‘30. "Seaioanuctor operative storage units.“ Savchenko. A. H. and Sokolova. c. N.
ZARUBBSIWAIA. _ mama m 1%0. Ito 6. pp 3-195, ill. Central Scientific
Research mti‘tu "mattrmika'. '

681.32?.2
2.31. ”Comtruction of associative storage units with coabdned types of retrieval."
Hagveyev, V. B. and Trusfus. V. II. In bodn "Poluprovodnikovyye integral'nyye
Mmti. Skhelotekhnikc i tdhnologiya." Collection of Scientific Works.
Institute of Electronic Technology. mom. 1979. pp 80-85. [Input fron ems].

6810327'634
#32. “Application of edatptation in mgnetic-did: storage units.” Kmsei, G. 1..

VOPROSY RADIWI. seam mmucmo-mcmm 33mm. 1980. No 10.
PP 3-9. Bibliograplw. p 9t 3 iteas.

621e32?e6e°7103‘6210317au
1‘33. "Use of a neasurer of quality to assure magnetic para-stem of ferrite mater-
ials or aagnetic circuits of magnetic Made.“ Lobsnov. Ye. II. and Kunetsova, V. P.
VOPROBY mmmmmomm. SERRA Msmucmo-rrmcmn m. 1980. No 10.
pp 62-65, ill. Bibliography. p 65: 3 itens.

681.327|.621.3.0l&9.77
1:31;. “Application of correcting codes to expand functional possibilities.” Varies,
I. I., Glasko, B. Ye. andKultygin. A. K. In book: 'Polyprovodnikovyye integral'-
nyye skinny pamti. Skhelotdumika i tektnclogiya." Collection of Scientific
Hanoi Institute of Electronic Technology. Hosoow. 1979. pp 3949. [Input m.
cm . ~

681.3.0‘M681.327.11
#35. “Forced phasing of a systea of pulsed-pines self-elignnent of frequency."
Hakarochkin, V. 6.. Chukov. V. A. andGlybovskiy. A. D. VG’BOSY RADICIHKTROIIKI.
SERIYA mmAucImo-mmcmn mm. 1980. No 10, pp 29-33. Bibliography. p
33: 8 iteas. The useful capacity or! a Iagnetio store depends on the speed of the
reproduction synohroniser. This stipulates urgency of the tad: of accelerating the
process of capture in the pulsed syste- of phase self-alignaent of frequency. forn-
ing the basis of the synchronim. That system of rowed phasing is analysed in
the paper.

631.327.2-185.M621.3.0u9.7716.3
#36. "Developaent and application of high-speed operative stores on bipolar large-
scale integrated circuits.“ Vitaliyev, G. V., Yevseyeva, I. V., Sairnov, R. V and

Chugunov. A. 1’. In book: [Poluprovodnikovyye in 'nyye ekheay pamti. Skheao-
teckImika 1 teldmologiya." Moscow. 1979. pp 171-17 . [Input era am].

$1. .68
437. "Design of optical circuit of a defocussdng transducer." Buzin, O. F. 333308!
RADIWRO‘IKI. SERIYA MsMUMO-TMMMI! mm. 1980, No 10, pp 109-115,

ill. The author presents the optical design of a defowssing transducer used in an
aptico-electronic disk storage device.

. _ 15'5-
FOR omcu USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

681.327.6.071.1/2
1638. "Hethod of recording digital infomtion for storage devices on a. mobile .
curler." Arkhipov. G. l. and Krivetekov, Ye. M. VOYROSY WWRGIIKI.
SERIYA MIMUMO-TRMWIY sacrum. 1980. No 10. pp 42-166. ill.

681.327.67
109. ”Stores based on chlcogenide glassy seuconductore." Popov, A. I., Vormkov,
E. I. and erv, II. I. In book: Woluprcvodnikovyye intesrel'nyye ekhm mti.
Skheloteklmika i tektmologiya." Collection of Scientiﬁc ﬁlms. Institute of Elec-
tronic Technology. Hoseow. 1979. pp 113-122. Bibliography. p 122. u itele. [Input
fro- 09mm].
68103.“?

mo, "Device for reconling inforntion in e. eotrege unit of the ’Elektronika-Ps-
PPZU.” Traktinn, '1‘. A. andTipov, Yu. K. In book: ”Ohlaetnaya studenoheekeye
neucrmo-tekhuclusknye konferenteiyn, 'Elektricheekiya teepi i eisteny'. ‘l‘ezisy
doldndov." Pern' Polytech Institute. Scientific-TecImicel Society of Radio En-

eering, Electronics and Commicntions ineni A. s. Pcpov. Pern', 1981. p 1.
Input Iron cm].

Shetskiy. H. V. In books 'Poluprovodnikmryye integral'nyye skhelw mu. W
tekhnika i tekhnologiye.“ Collection of Scientific Works. Institute of Electronic

Tecmolme "03cm. 1W9. pp 175-1780
See else No 369, 374, 382. 390. 393. M0. 1601

A.8.7. Other Couputer Units and Elenente

681.3.06?
M2. ”Channel of access to field of general operative ne ." (Intonation Sheet.
mu No 81-0038. Series nxn-Is-oa-ou). [Input from cm i.

63-33265
M3. ”Device for {oration and testing of eolid-phaee integrators." Penn, V. D.

Prikhod'ko. T. R. and Sidorenko. L. I. In hock: 'Priboroetroyeniye." Republican
InteIdepeI-tlentel Scientific-Technical Collection. Kiev. 1981, lo 30, pp 93-97.
[Input tron arm].

A. 9. Application of Couputera

621.9.06-529
15M. "Automtion of the devélopnent of control progress for nehine toolsmith
nunericnl progruned control.” Leningrad. 1%0 3 pages. (Intonation Sheet.
Leningrad mm no 1063.80). [Input tron cm .

M5. “Two-stage Iethode of interpolation in syetens for group control of nehine
tools by coupeter." Vukkevich. s. 1!. end Shitcv. A. D. VOPROSY RADIMMROUIKI.
SEBIYA Evnmucmo-mmcmstn 51mm. 1980. No 10. pp 103-108. 111. Biblio-

graphy, p 108 6 itels.
' 681.3.001.zl+

“#6. "Engineering method of unlyeie and design on e celputer of a resonance in-..
verter with a. thyristor-diode cell." Kozlov, V. A. and Latin. A. V. In bodn ”Sis-
tau 1 uzly elektrichedtoy svyazi'.‘ [Systems and mute of Electrical Communications].
Tashkent. 1980. pp 16-22. (dey/‘l‘asﬂcent Polytehnic Institute, No 307). Biblio-
graphy. p 22. 6 itens. [Input Iron cm].

156
mn omcw. use ONLY
002. £31681. $8
I447. "Sredneaziat-elektroappamt' (Central Asia Electrical Apparatus data re-
trieval eyeten. instalments.“ Inforntion Care/Old: P3: of Autonated control Sys-
tems. M327. Olsk.

681.26:681.2/.3
M8. “Soft-rare of specialists in scientific instrulent-nking.” Vekker. B. I...
Guhma, S. 1.. Gurevich, , 2. H. et a1. NAUCW PKWY/83V. 1980. NO 21. pp
3-9. Bibliography, p 9: 5 iteas. ASI'I'I 'Referat“.

681 . 3.001. 5?
M9. "Use of economic lathemtical methods and coaputers to determine expenditures
of asterials on electrical translission line constructial.” L'vov. 1980. 3 pages.
Information Sheet/mm rem Ito m-zus). [Input me am].

1:50. "Prelilinary satiation of the effectiveness of the use of computers in plan-
ning monolithic piezoelectric instmnents." Vashp. ll. 6.. Alekeeyev. V. V md
Bril'. V. I. WRMAYA mama. SERIYA 5. RADIGDBI‘ALI I RADImmTY.
1980, No It. pp 49-53. Scientific-tectmical collection. Central Scientific Research
Institute "Elektroniks'. Bibliography, p 53: 6 iteas.

1551. "Modelling on a digital conputer the computational stmcture of a discrete
control systen.“ Zaychenko. K. V.. Kalyuzhnyy, V. P. and Stepanov. A. C. In book:
"Pribcry i ustroystva elektricheskikh sisten upravleniya.“ Intervuz Collection 110
lb). Leningrad Institute of Aviation Instrument-ﬂaking. Leningrad Electrical Engin-
coring Institute, 1980. pp 77-82. Bibliography. p 82: 3 Itene. [Input from ems].

662‘6290113868105
#52. "Some aspects of systen use of economic-nthentioal nethods and coaputers to
control the supply of actor-vehicle fuel.” Hatveyev. N. T. and Tolochko, L. G. In
book: "Probleay razrabotki ntenatiche$ogo obespeo ya nezhotraslevykh ASU"
[Problene of software development for intersector Aw' ' . Collectim of Scientific
Works. UkrSSR Gowlan. Main Scientific Research and Infomtion-Conputer Center.
Kiev, 1980. PP 6-1“. Bibliography. p Ila lb iteas. [Input froa GPM‘B].

681. 3: 531.7131

1:53. "rho possibility of using a caputer to control the work of angle-measuring
devices of a microwave landing system” Pam-tsev. V. P. VOPROSY RADIMBITRMI.
SERRA sv'rmucmo-Tmmcimn 33mm. 1980, No It, pp 88-95.

6%.01202'68103
45“. ”Organization of planning and monitoring of plans. cooperative production

with use of counter.“ Kaliningrad. l . 13 pages. Infomtion Sheet. Kalinin-
grad TeNTI no 102-81. [input froa cm .

681.3.338.981h2
“55o ”Predicting the cast of solving racks by counter.” Koetyuk. I. T. In book:
"Probleny proyektirovaniya i funktsionnirovaniya vtoroy ocheredi ASPR soyuznoy res-
publiki" [Problems in the Planning and Mctioning of the Second Line of the Auto-
netea Control Syeten folr Planning Calculations of the Union Republic]. Collection
of Scientific Works. UltrSSR Gosplan. Main Scientific Research and Information-Con-
puter Center, Kiev. 1980. pp 163-16u. [Input froa cm].

690m06i 68103

#56. "Yes computer calculation of a Inn for weavers." Roscoe, 1981. 2 pages.
Informtiat Sheet. COSIIITI no. 95. Input from cm].

FOR OFFICIWUSE ONLY
, 539.“:681.)

#57. ”Celwlntion of the strength isotherls of hotels on a. digital couputer."
Lysakov. A. V. In book: "Oblsstnsyn studonchosksys. nsncho-tekl'michoskayn konfor-
entsiya 'Elektricheskiyo tsepi 1 rsisteny .' Teziay dothdov.“ Porn' Polytechnic In-
stitute. Scimtific-Technicel Society of Radio Engineering, Electronics and (lo-uni-
ootions ineni A. s. Popov. l’orn', 1981. p 32. [Input from cm].

658.512.6I681.3
1:58. ”Yes conputer calculation of the planned task of wesvers and tools.” hoecow.
1981. 2 pages. Intonation Sheet. comm No 73. [Inputi tron cm].

681.3-192
#59. ”Digital conputer calculation of the rate of detox-nation of hotels." Zykova.
H. B. and Stashkov, L. A. In book: “Oblsstnsya studenchosknyo nsuctmo-tekhniohee-
kayo. koni’erentsiys 'Elektricheskiye tsopi i sietony.‘ Tosisy doklsdov." Pern'
Polytechnic Institute. Scientific-Technical Society of Radio Engineering. Electronics
end Commicstions inoni A. s. Popov. Pen', 1961, 33. [Input from cm].

621e38508320ﬁt68103'1810u8
1860. “Calculation of topology and preparation of control programs to obtain photo-
graphic originals of variable netsl-foil resistors with use of s nini-conputer.“
Andreyev, A. I., Sortovs, L. s. and Tonhosovs. II. A. WW“ mum. SERIYA
5. RADImE'rALI I mmcmm. 1980. N0 1+. pp 19-20. Bibliography, p 218»: h itens.
Scientific and Technical Collection. Central Scientific Research Institute "noktroni-
ks."

658.012.2 "M3”
1661. 'Systen for operative planning of work on s 'mak-32' conputer.” Gor'kiy.
1981, It s. Infomtion Shoot. Gor'kiy TsN'l‘I l|o 25-81. In the ”To [not further
identified of trade e. systen of operative planning of ‘ Inchine processing of in-
forla‘tion on the "Mask-32" computer has been introduced..

6 o 368
462. ”Oonﬂol of labor ”stone with the use of ”pater... most: a. 13:35“;-

' V' P’ ”ham” 10 In and Ribohinsknyl '1' v . .-.~.

r .. noun
omumn I museum Wm'moo P35 m’ m. '
pp 9-11. (Input rm- spurs). I '1'". 1981. No 4.

464. “Formation of machine docmnonts on the musk-32' computer.” ﬁlgga,

1980,)? pages. Intonation sheet. lolgpgrod Tsl'l'I, No 175-80. Input from

621. O
464. ”Digitnl modeling of multichannel survey location system” @361. Yo,

Hikhsylov, V. A.. and 'l'umotdiy. L. S In book: "Pribo
. ry i ustro tvs olok-
tronnyhh silt-M! Interns Collection lo 143. Inning-:1 Insti-

tute of Aviation Instrmnt-Hsking, Leningum meotrio‘el Mooring
In -
tuto. Leningrad, 1980, PP 83-86. Hodoling on s digitsl conputer. (Inﬁ

mo. comma mas accommc mm
mm was STATIORS, cum cum muons mm

465. "The question of the dynamic eontml of resources of a magma?"
$3111, A. Pee Ilyukhin, s. V. In book: "Problem: rszrsbotki nstmti-
U]: (.ggosobeepeohenii neshomslnykh ASH." Collection of Scientific Works.
r u kite Fleming Oo-iesion, Main Scientific Research and Intonation
and compass: Mater, 1980, pp 15-21. (Input fron m).

158
non omcw. use on“
467.

ware 15-.

'Oonception of a contenporary cceputer netwoﬂ." Yakubaytis, B. A" "'10-
mm I I wmsum'mn m. 1981, Ito 2, pp 3-14. Bibliopplu,

p 14, 8 item. Institute of Electronics and eta-puts: ‘I’eckmoloby, Latvian
SSR Acadeqy of Sciences.

681.}
"Experience in the developent and introduction of sons standard technologi-
cal proceduns of a Yes colputer center.“ Kostnk, I. T.. and Zskharchenko,
A. I. In book: “Problem mraboﬁi untenaticheskogo obespecheniya seab-
otraslevykh ASH.“ Kiev, 1980, pp 129-131. Collection of Scientific works,
mesa State Flaming Omission. Iain Scientific Research and Oonputer Cen-
ter. (Input m- m).

Seealsollo386

B. Means of Autoeation and the Automation of Administrative and Engineering Labor

468.

469.

470.

471 .

472.

473.

474.

475.

OO1.891:771.428.2
"Investigation of the possibility of creating channeling mite for copies
obtained on plwtostatullelectrognphic equipssnt.‘I Intonation card. Special
Design Office of Office Emil-ant. 39929. Orel. 68 6
1.

”Investigation of the principles of construction of apparatus for control of
mall-fomt electrophotosraphic apparatus with use of microelectronics."
Information card. Special Design Office of Office Equipment. 40161. 111'-

We
681.6

"Investigation of the principles of construction of a registering-reproducing
device with the use of electrophotognphic apparaws.“ Information card.
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Organisational mechnoloy. 40318.
Moscow.

744-32
"Set of drawings of the table-node]. Ken-24." Infcnation sheet. Special
Dacia: and 'lschmlogical Office "W". 39993. Orel.

658.532.772.93
"Methodological guide for the developssnt and introduction or nonative
technical docmentation for scans of electrophotographic copying." Informs»
tion card. Special Design Office of Office Eminent. 40388. Vil'nyus.

778.14.071
"Scientific research work on the creation of apparatus for obtaining copies
fans 32 x 45 - nicrofiln francs nounted in an aperture card on diachiln.‘
Intonation card. Special design and hohnoloucal Office “Orgtekhnika'.
39931. Orel.

658051237440341
"Preparation of production for series output of the Feb? 24-01 instrument."
Infomtion card. Special Design and 'lbchnological Office "Orgtekrmika'. '
39932. Orel.

772-933-019
”work on inmaeing the reliability of electrophotographic equipment." Infor-
mation card. Special Desig: Office of Office Equip-out. 40274. Vil‘nyus.

15%
FOR OFﬂClA USE ONLY
476.

477.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

001.18
"Prediction of the roguiments 6: the national ooonouy for mom of .00th-

ization mooring-technical and Mott-nun work to 1985." Intonation
card. Spocial Design Office of Office mun-at. 40394- Vil'wus.

744.34
"Melopant of not: of type 163-11, Ida-12. Iii-16.ndzixmnnm: 1n-
atruenta." Intonation can. Special Dacia: and Technological Ofﬁce
"0W3“. 39937. 01%1.

COPYRIGln‘: Toentral'nyy mmhuo-iuledovatol'akiy initial: infer-atom 1 cckhniko-

2176
C80:

ekonoucheokikh iulodovaniy priboroocroyeniya, arodotv avtoutiutsﬂ
1 state. upravleniya (TaNII‘rBIprtboroutroyoniya). 1981

1863/ 100

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JGJRML 'INSTHUHIM‘S. use 01“ AUTQWPIM AND MROL SYSPHlS 'rs-zxoonmm HARD-
HARE AND OFFICE MEIER", mum-mom 1%].

Hoscow PRIBORY. SREDSTVA AVTGIATIZATSII I srsrm UPRAVLENIYA. TS-ZI SREDSTVA VYCHIS-

mama: manna I Grumman (mmmncman mann'rsrn) in Russian No 5.
Sop-Oct 81 pp 1-15

[Text] A. 0mm mummy
A.l. General Questions of Computer TecMology

478. 'Sone questions about increasing the effectiveness and stability of mtput
parameters of secondary power sources for conputer unaware." Voranin. V. 6.,
Batyukov. Ye. I. and Solov'yev, V. S. VOPROSY RADIGLDCTRGIIKI. SERIYA BVTWAUCH—
NO-TEXHNICHBSKIY 330mm. 1980. lo 7. pp 67-77. Bibliography. p 7?: 6 itens.

“79. "On increasing the effectivenss of use of computer hardware and software.”
Yermolsyev, B. 1., Karpilovich, Yu. V. and Fateyev, A. Ye. VOPRCBY RADICELBCI‘RGI-
m. SMA MINAUCHNMBUMW m. 1%0. NO 7. PP 3'12. Bibliography.
p 123 1} items.

681.3
1‘80. “Shipments end the oonputer pool of American production in 1981‘.” Lunev. A.
V. RADIOEIMTRGRA ZA mm. 1981, No 7. PP 26-29. Intonation Bulletin of
Scientific Research Institute of Econonics and Information on Radioelectronics

681.3038
1‘81. "Indicators of counter loading in the subsystem 'Introduction of computer

technology into the national econow' of the unssa Gosplan wtonted control sys-
ten for planning calculations.” Telicﬂto. A. It, Buncmk, c. 11.. Denim. Ye. G.
and Il'yaeova. 1.. c. In book! "Problelv ektirovnniye i funktsioniroveniya
vtoroy ocheredi ASPR soyumoy respubliki" Problens in the Planning and Function-
ing of the Second Line of the Union Republic ASPRJacollection of Scientific Works.
UkrSSR Gosplnn. Main Scientific research and information-Comte: Center. Kiev.
1980. pp 11.5-11.7. [Input from cm].

(81.3.01
1:82. Conpnrstive evaluation of general-purpose conputere on a cost basis.”
Przhllekobdkiy, B. 8. VOYROSY RADIWTRGIIKI. SERIXA MzﬂAUMO-Tl-XHNICIMIY
SBORNIK. NIIEIR. 1981. No 1. pp 3-11» Bibliography. p lit: 15 items.

161
m OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A . 2 . Theoretiml Questions

$1.?
083. ”Automtion of synthesis of large network regions of arbitrary configuration
in solving banana-value problens by means of analog-digital conplexes.” Koslov.
B. 8., Hireshkin. V. A.. Kreshin. I. I. et el. VOPRCBY RADIOEIETRMI. SERIYA

sv'rsnucrmo-Tmmmn 330mm. 1980. lo 13, pp alt-us. Bibliogreplw. p as. u
items. [Input tron cm]. -

681.327.6’”
1181‘. ”Analytical celmhtion of the optiml working point of e mtrix on ferrite
cores.“ Kus'nin, V. P.. Levshin, V. I. end Surin, R. V. VOPROSY RADIOELEXTRMI.
SERIYA EVTtNAUCHNO-TECHNIGMIY mm. 1981, No 1. pp 38—45. Bibliography. p ’46:
7 itens.

. 681.3“
I685. "Co-mter cclplex to solve external boundsry-velue problems.” Vishnevdtiy.
A. 11., Gorbachenkc- V. 1.. Kstkcv, S. l. et'el. VOPROSY RADIGIHTRGIKI. SERIYA
BVTHMUCPNO—THL-..CMIY . 1%0, No 13, pp 119-5“. Bibliography. p 54:
3 items. [input tron cm .

681.32
1#86. "Ccnceptunl model of e system of packet processing.” ctusmkhin. G. 11.. and
Osﬂtallpe. E. A. VOPR‘BY RADIMQHKI. SERIYA MIMUCMO-Tﬂmmn SBORNIK.
1980, No 13. pp 2am. Bibliogreplw. p 31. 3 itels. [Input m- cm].

681.3
lt87. "Sons questims about eatinting the productivity of equipment with differ-mi
kinds of synchronization systems.“ mm. H. H. and Alekseshine. N. Ye. -"-".- -
VOPROSY RADIOEIMRGIIKI. SIRIYA mmucmo-Tmolmn mm. 1980. no 7. pp
92-101. Bibliography. p 101: 1} itens.

681.321»
#88. Sue questions about the construction of exchange systels of a. digital colputer

complex.” Mikhaylw. 3. F. VWRWY RADIMMI. SERIYA EVTIMUCHNO-Tmm
KIY. 1981. No 1, pp 65-73. Bibliography. p 73; 3 itens.

681. 31+: 51?. 5%
1$89. ”An iterations]. method of solving two-point bomdnry-velue problems on a digi-

tal-analog commuter complex.” Kozlov, L. c. VOPRwY RADIOEIETRQIKI. SERIYA EVT:
NAucmo-TBKHNICHESIY snomx. 1980. No 2. pp 3340. Bibliography, p to. It itens.
[Input fro: cm]. 621.3-0§2.1

2.90. ”Calculation of the volt-upere ctmcteristice of ferrite cores with PR: [not
mrther identified." Surin. n. a. veneer mImmonnu. smut BVTIRAUOHNO-
Tncmcmsxn 530nm, 1960. No 7. pp 128-136. Bibliogrsplw. p 136. 6 items

681.3%![681I300136aem]
l4,91. "Stochastic models for analysis of the functioning of e, relote processing compu-

ter complex.” Vorankov, A. I. and. 68515. A. A. THHNIKA SREDSTV SWAZI. SERIYA ASU.

1980, No 3. pp 86-91. Biblicmphy. p 9lr92: 8 items. Scimtific-Technical Collec-
tion. TsmNTI ”Eros".

See also No 9&6

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘ A.3. RELIABILITY OF CGDUTERS

681.327.67-192
#92. ”Evaluating the reliability of semiconductor stores with correction of single
errors." Sofiyskiy. G. D. and Smirnov. R. V. “1me RADIOEIBC‘I‘RGIIII. SERIYA

EVE: NAUCHIIO-TEXHNICMIY 330mm. 1980. lo 7. pp 55—66.. Bibliograpw, pp 65-66:
itens.

line with 1mm [not further identified] cards.“ Hikhaylov. s. F.. Pczharov. I. I.
and Kadontseva, v. Ye. vomosr mnmamatm. mun mmwcmo-rrncmcxmm
3mm. 1980. No 7. PP #8-5#. Bibliograpm. p 5% # its-s.

621.317.3ﬂl621.317.75
#9#. ”Oscillographic accessory for testing and adjusting logical conbination cir-

cuits.” Tsiguro. N. G. and Kmpin. A. V. In book: 'Peredovoy proizvodstvenno-tekh-
nicheski opyt. Ispytsniys i iznereniya. kontrcl'no-isneritel'naya apparatura i
netody" ELeeding Production and Technical Experience. Tests and Measurements. In-
strumentation and Methods]. Intersector Abstract Collection. VIII Moscow. 1981.

No 1. p 63. [Input from ems].

681.325.65'650012e?
#95. "Instrument for testing logical circuits.” Gvomva. V. s. In book: "Peredo-
voy proizvodstvenno—tekhnicheskiy opy‘t. Ispytcniya i inlereniyn, kmtrol'no-izneri-
tel'naya. apparatura i netody.” Intersector Abstract Collection. VIM! Moscow, 1981.
No 1. pp 75-76. [Input m- cm]. '

621617-799
#96. ”Instrument for functional monitoringcof nodules.” Gorelova. L. v, 13.5.“;

"Peredovoy proizvodstvenno-tekhnicheskiy opyt. Iepytaniya i innereniya. lontrol'nc-

imritel'nsya apparatura i netodv." Intersector Abstract Collection. VIII Hoecou.
1981. No 1. pp 18-19. [Input from cm].

621 .327. 5#.ll
#97. “Stand for autonomous adjustment of a. counter electromagnetic unit.“

Yuzhno—Ssklnlinsk 1981. # pages. Intonation Sheet. Sakhalinsk TsNTI No 10-81.
[Input from cmnj.

68l.ﬂ8.52:68l.327.8
#98. ”Structure of instruments of sutonated systems for nonitoring cotputcr turd-

were based on the Jim-#88 interface.” Kednikov. 1.. 11., Ustinov. V. I. and cmvilin,
I. v. vomosr mmmmonm. 31mm mmucmo-Tmmc IY snomx. 1980. No
13. pp 70-71.. muiognpm. p 71.. u itens. [Input from cm .

6810616082868105
#99. "Equipment for autononous checking.” the perforation node of the Yes-7022.”

Fabrin, A. A. and Vsynberg. Ya. F. In book: 'Peredovoy proizvodstvermo-tekhni-
cheskiy opyt. Ispytaniya. i innereniya. kontrol'no-iueritel'naya apparatura i

netody.” Intersector Abstract Collection. mu. Moscow. 1981. No 1. pp 1#-15.
[Input from cum].

See also No 566

163
FOR omcm. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A.u. SOFTWARE

681. 513.5
500. “Algorithn for optima control of domtation output.” Horasshev, H.
l.. Odintsov, B. V. and Rsykov, L. D. VOPRmY RADIMRGIKI. SERIYA EVI‘:
naumo-Tncmmn 31mm. 1981. Ilo 1. pp 117-125. Bibliography. p 125: h its-s.

622069201073. 65.011.%
5010 ”200 did. data unit used a! Yes dig 099mm systems. Ufa. 1%0. 1" mes.
Intonation Sheet. Baum:- Tslfl'I; no 107-80. [Input no. cm].

, 681. 325.6?
502. "Information retrieval systen in sutonated systems for planning computer con-
plexes.’ Harchenko, A. G. and Obsysnnikova. V. A. MEANIZATSIYA I AVTOHATIZATSIYA

UPRAVIEIIIYA. 1981. No 2. pp 30-33. Bibliograpiv, p 33: 3 items. Scientific-Techi-
cal Collection. Ukrainian MIMI.

621.3.0u9.771.11a681.326.7u.06
503. ”Use of test structures to analyze the reasons for failures in estinating the
reliability of large-scale integrated circuits." " ’ Lazhevskiy, R. A. and

Rahkins. N. V. Hosco‘, 1980, 31 pages. Series 3. Hicroelectrmics TsNII ”Elsi:-
tronika'f. canon: .m,mnmoxem. No 1.. [Input mu cmj.

6810326035006' 68103250 5-181 .1!
505 . "0n the cratim'ot. enhance: .eqnipaent custng ndbnpnMifﬂSﬁtzE
pages . Operating Intonation. Tsﬂl‘l‘ﬂlproborostroyeniya. Bibliography, p 8: 12
i tens .

68l.3-181.1&83ﬂ9.85
506. "Cross-system of programim for the ‘Blektroniks-M‘s-Oﬂ' for nini-conputers."
Podrahinnik. H. A. OBORUDOVAI'IYE S MSIDVYI PRGRAW WWI“, 1981. No 2,
pp h—5. Scientific-Tearmical Abstract Collection, msn.

9.9020681014
507. “Applied problems for tasks in estilating and predicting electrical strength."
Razin. I. T.. Stupachenko, A. A. and Kharitonov. Ye. V. MTRGINAYA TECHNDKA.
SERIYA 8. UPRAVLBNIYE KACHDSI'VGI, S‘ANDAR’I‘IZATSIYA. HEI'RMIYA. ISPY'PANIYA '19813.

No 3, pp 12-15. Bibliography. pp 111—15: 20 items. Seoientifio-Teolmicel Collection.
TsNII "Eldltronika".

508. ”Sons questions of modiﬁcation of applied prey-ass during transition fro:
DOS to OS.” Kozaohenko. L. A. and Sereda, V. V. Tm SREDSI'V SVYAZI. SERIYA

A31). 1980. No 2. pp 55-61. Bibliography. pp 61-62: 1? itels. Scientific-Technical
COLIECI‘ION. TMI "EROS".

681.3.06
509. "The language of noteproeeesor system planning. Syntsiui'f Vlssov. l". S. and
Shspovalenko, S. V. VOPROSY RADIWRWI. SERRA Mumucmogracmmmn
5m. 1980. NO 7. pp 23-260

681. .06 002. .
510. "Packet of prosraas for work with a permanent data file in :3 min-32133
retrieval system" Zsmtins. G. A. Haslennikov. A. N. and Yakinenko, II. V. nas-

TRONNAYA TBCHNIKATTSMYA 1. .MRGIKO SVCh? I981; No 1. PP 67-68. Scientific-
Technical Colloctim. TslIII "Elektrmika".

161;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' 511.

$12.

515.

$7.

”>18.

$19.

521.

681. .06 002 .
'Padrage of programs of access to the file of an infmtion 2‘et.r‘ie\va§l.51s;s2

tom.“ Haslennikov. A, H. WA" TWA. SERIYA 1. mm
8110)). 1981, [lo 1. p 6?. Scientific-lemma). Collection. TelII “Klektrm-
ika'.

6810322I6a99ow
”Parallel processing of control data in numerical programmed control systems.“
Mow V. D., Vashkevich. c. 3.. andKrasnov, G. I. VOPROSY RADIOEIKTROIIKI.
SERRA m. 1980. Ito 13. pp 133-137. mung-am. p 137 (15 items). Scien-
tific Collectim. (Input m. ems).
681?26t6ﬂ.9.0h8.1
”Software of an electric-Spark cutting set.“ Chiprynin. A. . WRWAYA
Taxman. SERIYA 1. mm SVCh. 1981, No l. p 6h-67. Bibliography,
p 67 (5 items). Scientific-'l‘ecrmicsl Collectim. Tam “mektroluka'. Elec-

tric-sparkoutting set (Selim-Generator of processing inpulses).

6810MoW2o5|6210
“Hicro-conputer programing of tasks of ewuipnent control." Ivanov, Ye. e..

madman; LIL. and Tairlin. L. A. MAYA PROUSWOST’. 1981,

No in pp 110-45. Bibliograpru. p as (3 its-s). Scientific-Technical Collec-
tion. leII "Elektronika'.

681. .06
”Development and experimental investigatim of nunerioal algorithm for? digital
computer analysis of nonlinear electronic circuits in a static regime." Sigor-
skiy. V. P.. and Kolyada. Yu. V. mama TKHNIKA. SERIYA 10. MIRRO-
mama USI'ROYS’I'VA. 1981. no 1. pp 39-45. Bibliography, pp lib—45 (13
items). Scientific-Technical Collection. Tam "mmmm".

681' O
”Dovelopnsnt of a package of applied programs to organize infomtion-gonogitcr
processes." Gard. TsNIIKA. l$0617, Hoscov.

681. .06
"System processing of slgoritlus and prograas for graphic information Enput/
output devices with microprocessor control units.” Gokhberg. A. 6.. '
Golovin. s. S... zelenko. G. V.. et a1. VOPRCBY RADIOEIRTRMI. SERIYA
m.. 1980. No 2. pp 3-10. Bibliography. pp 9-10 (3 itens). Scientific-rech-
nioal Collection. (Input fro-cm). -' ‘

681.321

“Structural organisation and modelling of nicrocaloulator working by the code
method as digital." Andrianovs. K. A.. Polosukhin, B. 14., and P'yansin, A. Ya.
mama TRHIIIKA. SERIYA 10. Hikroslektronnyye ustroystva. 1981, No 1.
PP 7-1“. Scientific-Technical Collection. leII ”Elektronika".

68 .-.0
"Universal algorithm for oalctﬂation of logarithm and indicator “5“ '
functiws.” Lobov, O. 1". VOPROSY WMRGIKI. SERIYA m. 1980, No
13. pp 78-81;. Bibliog-Spiw. p 8b (3 items). Scientificheclmioal Collec-

tion. (Input from GM
658.012.011.56:5l9.85
“Control program of a system of software based on the Yes computer.“ Niko-

mov. Y“. F. sol-ntw. Vs Pop Kametsm. 3. V0. and 3min, To V. TEKWA

WWW. SERIYA A91. 1980, No 2. pp 81-88. Scientific-Technical Col-
leotion.

a1. 0 O 0
”Device for automatic recording of programs according to a nogegétéalyagzri'sy,
1981, 2 pages. Information 3 et. GOSINTI No 38-81. For machine tools with
nulerical program-ed control. Input tron GMB '

165
FOR omcm. ass, cm-
522.

523.

to! OEHCIAL USI‘. ONLY

681.3.06
“Device for dehigging programs of a specialized digital counter." Volkov.
A. Yaw. Gwm' I. 20. ”Mkkls.1h m “£11.10". 8.: H. VOPROSY Wo-
mam. SERRA M. 1981. No 1. pp 62-6}. Scientific-Technical Col-
Imus

681.3.%--181.38
”Lungtnge and translator of assigiinent of test for diagnosis of nicro-
oonpnter nodules." Arnhenovdtaya, 0. m. lanolin. B. 11.. Reshetov. H. V..
and Chukina. 0. 1. WA“ 'rnxmnu. 85mm 7. TRONMIYA. 0mm-
ZATSIYA morzvonsrvn I mm. 1981. lo 2. pp 56-59. Bibliography.
p 99 (Bite-e). Scientiﬁc-Technical Collectiai. TallII "nektrmika”.

See also Ito 1189.

M5.
525.

528.

529.

530-

531-

mm

681.38623u39hu
”3-102 . Immuum cm”... Rem. RRVo'sW’ Y3. An. “yum,
E.-A. A.. et al. In bod“ “rezisy dokladov respublikanskoy naushno-tekhi-
cheﬁoy kcnfemtsii. posvyashohennoy dnyu radio. Saktsiya inforntsionno-
insrite1'noy tektmiki" (Sun-oriee of Reports of Republican Scientific-Tech-
nical Conference Devoted to the Day of Radio. Sectim m Instrnnentation
Technology). Estonian Republican Coven-ant. Scientific-ﬂechnical Society
of Radio Engineering. neotrmios and Con-nicotions ineni A. S. Popov.
Tallin. 1981. pp 13-116. totalled for for analog miles of the 811-1800 nim-
oosputer. (Input tron cm).

681.3.022

"W'uﬂSO 'Sdctor' more-comm oosplemJor scientific reseuch
“tutti“! ”“0”.” ‘W' V. ‘0. him-nets. Va Go and m. In Se
"Hekhaniaatsiys i avtonstiaatsiya upravleniya'jlschanimtion and Antcnstion
of Control). Scimtific Production Collection. W. 1981. no 2. pp

“6-158.
681.38
"Him-calculator with summed mutational possibilities." Spriin. Yu. L..
Stupin. V. V.. .m 1.,Iand. Millikan 0. II. VOPROSY RADIMRQ'IKI.
mm m. 1980. No 7. pp 110-115. ill. Bibliography. p 115 (6 items). Sci-
entific-Technical Collection.
a1033‘86830ﬂ803
I'llnltifnnction 'antomtio soasurensm systen of an [RC-network ’MO‘ ’Wo'
Pavlov. V. 8.. and Starikov. D. I. vomosx WWW. SHIIYA M. 1980.
No 13. pp 110-111}. Soientifio-ﬂ‘eolnical Collection. (Input tron (Eliza.
.3
”Develop-ant of single-plate oonputers.’ Hoscow. 1981. 3 pages. Operative
Intention No 29.
" 681.30%

”hogan-controllable device for investigation of corputer systens.“ 'Lenin-
grad. 1980. 2 pages. Informant sheet. Leningrad Tsﬂl‘l no 1292-80).

681.
"Work of Japanese specialists on the orestiui of a fifth generation of cozpu-

ters.” Kosoow 1971 it pages. Operative Intonation TsNIITBI borostroyeni-
ya no 33. Bibliography. p u (6 items). ' m

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
681.3.05
532. 'Variable-length coding device for neutering-teaching machines." Leningrad.
1980. 1. pages. Inter-sum sheet. humped Tal'l‘I lo 217-80. (Input no.

arms).
681.3%
533. "Equivalent speed of analog-digital systole." Belikov, V. I. VOPROS! RADIO-
IIMMI. MIA m 1980. lo 2.’ pp 16-21). Scientific-’reclmical Collec-
tion. (1am me cmi.

See also nos #82. 1688.

A.6. omens or man Tmowcr m) mm: 621 on 1
e3. 20
53h. "Autontio mohine for nonitoring ferrite cores.“ Ysroelavl', 1981, 2 pages.
Infomtion sheet. Ymﬂavl' rm: No 1115-81. (Input from cmgél 06
.3.
535. ”Investigation of polyure for ferrite can-tart 4m: AD printers." A'nosove.
1:. IL. and Hysin. n. P. veneer mmmx. mm m, 1980. no 2.
pp 7M6. saunas-9mm Collection. (Input tron cm).

“1.30%
536. Weeks-eats mitonng device.“ Hoscow. 1981, 2 pages. Intonation
sheet. mu lo 81-ou25. Series n.v'r-13-06-01. (Input me am).

A.7. mm mm! m or commas
681.327.12
53?. ”Andysis of speed of the bode cell of a. reading uplifier based on K)! DP
transistors.” Grlgor'yev, u. C... and sagas. x. x.. mmu Taxman.
sum; 10. mm usraorsrvn, 1981, Ito 2. pp 7-10. mmogn hp.
p 10 (3 itene). Sdentifio-l‘eohnioal Collection. TellII “Electronika”. In-
put of can) .

63.382.33
5380 ”Bipolar- wve BIS dwtsew*m’ Yee V. and Mn, Ge Io MRWAYA

yummy no 1., pp u-n. Bibliompm. p 11. (9 mes). monume-
TecInioal Collection. Tenn "matronika'.

621.328.3.ou9.776
539. "KID? BIS set for apedalised 16-digit dmoouputing systole with e stan-
dardised interface.“ Bottom. V. A., and Shiner. V. A. mama

WWM', 1981. lo 1:. pp 32-35. Bibliography. p 35 (16 itens).Soientif:o-
Teol'mial Collection. TeNII "Harm".

6a.3.0u9.773681.325.5
5&0. 'licropowerml aioroporooesor set of series [58“ BIS on the basis of circuits
With injection {MO. 301mm. ‘0 Io. Gm”. Ve Ve. Knunttiyg Be I.
et a1 mama mammosr'. 1981. Ito h. pp 26-29. Bilhiography.
p 29 (1. items). Soientifio-TeoMioal Collection. rem "Elektronikn'.

.. 681.3236;
5&1. Sane nethode of structual analysis of of logical circuits of oonputere.

Km“. Va ”a VW WWO MY‘ m, 1980. N0 7' pp 78-919
Bibliography, p 90-91 (3 itens). Sodentific-‘reohnioal Collection.

167
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9‘2-

5‘8-

5"7.

'V“ VIEAWMIBMM'

6a-3.0u9.77t681.325.5
”n... high-capacity aicroprocessor set BIS." Benzenko. A. 1.. Golubev. A.
9.. Nazar'yan, A. 3,. and Sheratenin, Yu. I. EMMA“ WM'.
1981. No 1.. pp 35-37. Scdentific-‘rechnicel Collection. TslII ”Elektronika'.

681621.35
"Pneuntic single-diam integrated circuits." Potepalov, Yu. IL, Tugo-
lukov. v. 11.. , and lesedkin. A. A. In bodu vmosr mama! mm-
mm' (Questions of Industrial Cybernetics). Hoacov. 1979. pp 25-27.
Trudy TeﬂlIKA. No 61.

681.3.06
"Input nmitoring problen and acne results of tests of dynalic nenory micro-
circuits." 3min, A. I...Ignat'yev. A. I... Itikolayev. V. V., and Selitkov.
Yu. V. VQROSY 3mm. SERIYA M. 1961, no 1, pp 53-61. Scien-
tific-Tectmicel Collection.

6a.}.0h‘9.771t681.3
”Develop-eat and introduction of a universal inetallationftornonitoring and
latching of elenents of hybrid integrated circuits with cuputer control."
Intonation an. Penna bunch, mﬂpribora. 3781.5.

6816.991.th
"Calmlation of nonlinear Oscillations of computer constructim ole-ants.“
Horgunov, B. 1.. and Petrov. L. 5‘. VW WW. SHIYA M.
1981, No 1. pp “7-51. Bibliograpmr. p 52 (l!- itols). Sedentitio-IIWIOAL
Collection. '

”Specialized Inchine for cleaning Meta of Yes-5261 didte of contanination.‘
Intention card. Krasnodar Electricu lleamring Instruments Plant. 39916.
Krasnodar.

See also No 565.

A08-

001mm UNITS

A.8.2. Devices of priaary preparation and inmt-mtput or data

9.8.

9&9.

550-

681.3.053
"Date. output on rive-track pinched tapoJmK-Z for transmission by Teletype.“
Volgograd. 1981. 2 pages. Information sheet. Volgograd Tenn, No 157-81.
(Input tron cm).

621.397:681.3
“Snell video-monitoring device.” llarol’dtiy, V. I. EMMA“ measu-
mower. . 1981. No 3. p 53. Sclentiﬁc-‘l‘eolmlcal Collectim. TallII
"Electronika'.

681.327.11
method of toning graphic inges with variable dimensions.” Petrov, Yu. A..
and lodvedev. 1. FL. and Tartakavdxiy, a. D. VOPROSY RADIW. SKIIYA
EVT. 1960, no 2, pp 11-15. Scientific-Technical Collection. (Input tron

cm).
to 581-3276
Grammatical of a system of data input tron punched came. for the transla-

tor I‘M-22.“ Kuybyshev. 1981. 2 pages. Intmtion sheet. Kuybyshev TslVTI
No 50-81. (Input tron cm).

168
mmm mm:

r
681.3.066
552. ”Use of Ill-2000 as a Yes computer operator console." Ufa. 1981. 1* pages.
Inform/clan sheet. m1:- ‘rsm. no 1153-61. (Input m. cm).

681.139.1u 681.327.11
553. "Preventive checking of the interface of a couputer thput.”
Dolya. A. 1).. and Dvoralanskiy. v. I. vomost mmm.. sauna M.
1980. 1'0 13. pp 66-69. Scientific-meaning Collection. (Input from ems).

68103"1810u
551.. "Device for data preparatim for aim-computers on the basis of an electron
register." Vasil'yev, V. P.. Golaort. V. Ye.,and lupin, D. I. VOPRM
RADIWRGIKI. Mn m. 1980, lo 13. 66-69. Bibli pig. p 69
(3 itens). Scimtific-Teclmical Collection Input tron cm .
681027.123???
555. ”PS? photoreuling instrument.“ Hoscow. 1981, 2 pages. Intonation sheet.
um. no 0321. Series nvr-n-os-ou. (Input tron am).

See else No: 51?. 535. 590.

A.8.3. Processors and peripheral control devices
681e3"1810u
556. "Interface curl of the 'Elektronika 100-1' ninl-cormter.“ Agranov. A. A.,

Druyan. Yu. A., and Nevzorrov. V. A. MW“ rum. SERIYA 16.
WWW I GAMYADME mmr, 1980. lo 5, pp 52-55, ill.
Scientific-Technical Collection. TsllII "Dim“.

571.3--181.'¥
557. “Crate controller in a CAIAC standard for counnication with the ’Blektrm-
. 11:» 100-1' tau-pater.“ Dmyan, Yu. A. maauma TEXHIIIKA. SERIYA 14.
33mm 1 mm. 1980. No 5, pp 50-52. Biblio-

graphy. p 52 (I. items). Scientific-Technical Collection. TslIII "Blak-
tronika".

681.3.06
558. 'lelory interface nodule.” Druyan, Yu. A. mama PRMW'.
1981. Ito 1}. pp 25-26. Scientific-’Peckmical Collection. TdIII "Klektronika'.

' 6815335IW3.‘
559. ”Distinctive features of construction and min tectmicel parameters of devices

of conversion and conjunction." l’etrov, G. H._'139m9, A. P.. and Hendeleva.

A. A. vanes! mommmma. sauna m. 1980. lo 2, pp lu-so. Scientific-
Technical Collection. (mm tree cm).

681.3
560. "Coupling of 15 388—5 computers with a pulse analyzer.“ Host-kins. S. N.
Bz'yukhavetskiy. A. P.. nndKotlikov. Ye. N. EMMA“ mm. SERRA
7. TWMIYA. OMAIIZATSIYA PRGIZVWSTVA I WNE.3‘1981. No 2. pp
31-31.. Bibliography. p 34 (6 its-s). Scientific-Technical Collection. rem
"Elektrmikaﬂ
681.327.!»
561. 'Cmpline device.” Yaroslavl', 1981, 1} pages. Intonation sheet. Yaroslavl'

TsllrI, Ito lab-81. Coupling the work of an instrument for neamzrenent of analog
signals and a tape perforator for subsequent conputer processing of results.
(Input froa cm) .

See also lo #93.

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LBJ». licroproceeeare
68103250 $--181.‘h681.3--181.u8

562. "Application or aioroproceaeore and micron-pater»! Sham-in. V. P.,
Hunvddy. A. IL. and Tomboy”. V. A. AVWIZAWYA I rumm-
zrrsru WARM mamas-r1. 1980. No 9. pp 6~?. Abstracts. Scien-
tific-Q‘ed'nionl Collection. mom.

68]..”5em102
563. "Means of planning ammuor systole." Vanil'yev, I. 2.. andGorovoy.
V. R. EMMA“ mmn 1%1. . lo ‘6. pp Ito-bl. Scientiﬁc-
Tectmioal Gonoction. ragn "noun-mm

68103-‘18101‘8
561‘. 'rrende in develop-eat Wooten-puts”: of the sane type." loam, 1981.
5 pages. Opentive intuition, No 30.

681-3256
565. "(Jaime-J. m”¢prooeeeor on the basis of niahoimite of series
Kﬁuo" YQBUMQ '0 lo. M “V“, ‘0 V. WYA mmmm.’
1981. no 1.. pp 30.32. Bibliognam. p 32 (5 1m). Scientific-reunion
Collection. Tam “Bahrain".

See aleo Noe SM. 505. 51“. 59*. 588.

A.8. 5. storage Devioea
681.327.6xt681.332.6
566. "Logan analyzer of defects or magnetic tape stone.“ type XVI-61.“ Bum.
A. A.. and helov. A. V. In books 'Ponedovoy moisvodst’venno-tektniobeﬂy
opyt. Iapyhniyal inereniya. kcntml'no-inerltel'naya apparatura i Ietotly'
(Leading production and Technical Experience. Tests and Wants, noni-
torin; and naming Apparatus and lethode). Inmate: Abstract Collectim.
mu. loeoov. 1961. lo 1. pp 111.415. (Input m- m).

681.327.28
56?. "News in the area or seaipenanent max-y unit production.“ Ioecow. 1981.
5 pages. Operative infomtion. Tmm‘boroetroyeniya. lo 31.

681327.636
“A method of locating and Uncovering ream intuition on metic
“we. 28.013111. V. PO. Kumtin. '0 V0. m [“1881“, v. G! vm m0-
mnwm. 331mm 1m. 1980. No 7. pp 27-31.. nibnognpw. p 3!. (6 1mm).
Scientific-reclaim]. Collection.

568

681.327.6
569. “The planning of metio eta-age devioee.‘ Barker, Ya. I” and lovikov. A.
T. rm smsrv svuzt. SERRA Aw. 1%0. lo 2. pp 62-72. Bibliograpw.
p 72 (5 1m). Sdentifio-d‘ecMiQJ. Collection. rm: “Boo".
681.327.63“
570. ”Extend storage device on floppy metio disks based on a doneetic unchan-
ian.‘ Intonation card. Kiev Institute or Autontion. 110506., Kiev.

See also Nos “85. 1‘90, '82, 558.

170
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A08070
571.

572.

573-

57“ e

575-

576.

Other Assemblies and inmate of Oonpnters

681.326.35
'cenerator of impulses of the sane kind in the H-6000 process con+rol con-
puter couplex.’ Rebus. V. B. , and Zaplishniy, l. P. In book: 'Peredcvoy
prdzvodstmo—tmcaﬂy opyt. Ispytaniya. inereniya, kontrol’no-
izneritel'nsys apparatus. 1 netody.’ Intersector Abstract Collection. VIII.
ﬂoscou. 1981. lo 1, pp 8-9. (Input tron cm).

621.316.?22

”Pulse stabilizers of voltage in electric power systens of contenporary
mput-mtput devices.” cuter, L. a. vornos! mmmum. mun m.
1980. no 2. 9h-105. Bibliography, p 105 (9 item). Scientific-Teamioal
Collection. Input m- can).

681.3.068
'llodeminstion of types III-F and. III-U interpolntors.” Veronezh, 1980.
2 pages. Intonation sheet. Vorcnesh 'rsm, loSOO-BO. (Input tron ems).

681.3.068
"Application of generators of randon nunbers of continuous distributions
for Yes type counters.“ loscou, 1981, lb pages. Infomtion sheet.
cosnm, no 81-38. Series 1303.0u. (Input tro- ems).

621.316.7228681.327
“Calculation of characteristics of voltage stabilizers of couputea: peripher-
als working iron 3 dc network.“ Pcpov, V. IL. andGuter. 1.. R. VOPROSY
mmaoum. snnIn M, 1980.. No 2. 87-93. Bibliography. p 93
(u itels). matinemmm Collection. Input tron GPI‘NB).

721.326.332
"nae. Mariam” Squaw». v. v. on om v moms-

Lumen. “113351933. '30" vb. ”-59.

See also N08 “9“. “95. “96: “979 “980 “99'

579-

580.

APPLICATIOX W mm

681.327.33
"Analog-digital nodelling conputer couplex." Leningrad. 1980. 1} pages. In-
tonation sheet. Leningrad TsM‘I, No 77-80. Series 13.081. (Input fron

ems).

612:681.3
”Apparatus and progra- conplex for analysis or the functions of respiration
and blood. circnntion of the severely ill by neans of computers of a single
system“ Zonov. V. I. VOPRIBY RADIMMIKI. SERIYL M, 1980, No 7,
pp 121-126. stuiogrepm. p 127 (9 itens). Sdentific-ll‘ectmical Collection.

62]..31h.1.08?.92
'ﬂachine calculation of torroidnl transforners of static converters.“ Hoscow

1981, 2 pages. Intonation sheet. GOSIM‘I Ho 8145. Series 111mm (Input

tron cm .
621.3].h.1.08?.92

modelling processes of planning structural units under conditions of the use
of the Unified Systen of Auto-sted Design of computer hardware.“ Dronin. N.

A.. and Nagolkin. . A. u. voraosr mmnawm. mm m. 1980, No 7,
pp 102-109. Bibliography. p 109 (3 items). Scientific-Technical Collection.

171
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
533-

585.

589.

590 .

591 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

002.9.3.5I622.2“
"Experience in the operation of the 'Srvazhina' intonation-retrieval sys-
tem" AVTMTIZATSIYA I TMHMIZATSIYA WYAFOY “MOSH, 1980.
No 9. PP 26-28. Abstract Scientific-Technical Collection. "Hm.

681.3--181.‘I.00‘I
"Use or nimoonputers. in shade m autontic nonitoring and diagnoais of
the mm of olmmic “Vices.“ yum“. 30 ‘0' VII-mar. II. pep team.
“a Io. 0t do MAYA mm’. 1%. NO 1‘. pp ““70 Monti-£10-
Technical Collection. TslII ”nektronika'.

6ﬁemn6368103
”Use of conputere to calculate the econonic planning indicators of,louer
khozraschet subdivisions at an object.“ Chelyabindt. 1981, 1% pages. Intona-
tion sheet. Chelyabinsk Telﬂ'I, llo 215-81. In the ontonatic systen for nan-
agenent or a construction trust. (Input tron OMB).

6810336£0152
"Use of the electronic automatic conputer 'ZOyentron' in the calculation of
fixed assets.” Kirov, 1980. 2 pages. Intonation sheet. Kirov Tell! No
263-80. (Input from can).

681.3.06
'Developnent and experimental investigation of numerical algorithns
for . ‘ digital counter analysis of nonlinear electronic circuits in
static conditions." Sigorakiy, V. P.. and Kolyada, Yu. V. mama

Tums. 3mm 10. likroelektronnyye ustroystva. 1981. No 1. pp 39-45.
Blblioaamo P tub-1&5 (13 item). Sdeatlﬁcil‘omm Colloctlai. TsIIII

'Elektnnm‘o

62.037301211300177I668183
"Calculation of heat-conpensating cimuits of quartz generators by comter.”
Pelishok. V. A., Invclmk. Ye. 6.. andw V. 1. vomosr amount;
mm. SERIYA mummu. 19025.10 2, 106-117. Bibliography.
p n7 (5 itene). Scientific-Techucal Collectim. pflnput m. cm).

681.3.0683621.9--529

”Automated programing system.“ Oberg. G. A., and Popova, T. V. Ohm-- r ‘
MCI! V RADIOPRGIYSWOSTI. 1981. No It, pp 21-22. NIIEIR.

681.0%1810‘}
”leans or adjustnent of systens based on 'Blektronika’CS-ll‘aiero—oonpdter.‘
Bagirov. Sh. G. man mm'. 1981, lo 1t. p 1&7. Scientific-
Technical Collection. Tall! "aim”.

658.012.011.56.002.2
”WK-l} controlling tedmologcal coaplex based on micron-peters.“ Kotel'ni-
kov. Yu. 1.. Krochev. A. 11.. Obkhodov, v. A., and rmshpu'akoy. v. A.
man mama 1981. lo 1.. pp 65-68. nimogmpw, p 68
(5 mm). Scientificdl‘eclmioal Collection. TslII 'mekmuuks".

681.3.015
”Speech control device for a Iechianioal planning system.“ Kaaenetskiy, 1.. ll.
WWW ZA mm. 1981. No 10. pp 6-7. Inioraation Bulletin,

MEIR.
68103'6 0%2
“Conwter record-keeping and monitoring of mterials." Kuyhyshev,l , 2 pages.

Intonation sheet. Kuybyshev Tam, no lac-81. (Input m- cm).

172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
See also No: 9.0, 511. 525. 563

A.10. WEI! ms. ACME HACKER! SPATIGIS. cmm mm mom AND
W mums
681.33%

509. 'Technioel realization of the data trans-1331a: and processing tract of a.
' ~- standard colputer center of the USSR Goebank sector eutomted system" Ree-
akuov Ya. no. h'lw. Ya. '0. m Abmov. Ye. In Vm ”ma“

IKI, MA m.;19§0.-u,13;;pp 3-13. 111. Scientific-’Peckmicel Collection.
(Input tron cm).

B. MS 0! WIZATIU AND AWATIG‘ W cannot AND mmm-Tmum UORK

. .2
593. 'l‘he lat-11x2 electrophotographic apparatus.“ Intonation card. 2 hnika
Special Design Office. man.
77233812

59“. "The Eli-1212 electrophotognphic apparatus." Informtion card. am of Copy-
ing and Reproductim Equip-eat. 110821;. luteisi. 6
5k~758

595. "Investigation of lethods of paper grinding to create high-capacity mchines
for docunem destruction." Momtion card. SITE of Copying and Reproduc-
tion Equipment. 110626. Kutaiei.

69.3
596. "rho 'Orgtekst-ZD' organizetiond automton.’ Information card. mIorg-_
tekhniki. 130538. Hoecou.
001.5!678.026.3
597. 'Condncting research on the creation of Wipnent for application of
' bilateral polynez-ic protective coating on wide-fomt documents.” Inform-
tion cud. Mao! Copying and Duplicating Equipaent. 180826. ma.
. 25.23
598. ”The [fret-KM rotetor.‘ Infantim card. WIIorgteklmiki. 180516. Hoscow.
771.318.2.771.u27/.u292.n

999. Waiveral copying nohine 'Xerox-ZOBO'.‘ Taraeenko, A. A. TWRA.
ommzxrsms I mum mmwumo mum's'm. 1981. no
5, pp 1n-15. Sciatitic-Tecmuoel Collection. man. (Input ire-cm).

COPYRIGHT: Tsencul'nyy muchno-isnledovntel'okiy inetitut infomteii 1 tekhniko-
ekononicheekikh iseledovaniy priboroacroyeniya. sredatv avtomcizateii
1 elated: uprev1eniye (TeNII'rBIpribot-oecroyeniya). 1981

21/4
can: 1863/100

173
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JGJRNAL 'INSTRUMS. mus G AWNING! AND W SYSTW TS-Zsmslﬂﬁb-
mu: AND mmsmm'..a.znovmm 1m

Iloecow mam. sms'm AWMIZATSII I 5mm muma. 'rs-z. ma nous-
mwuogl Twang” I Gammon (mammu mm» in Russian no 4,
Nov-Dec pp 1-

Enxooipta] A. common comma!

A.1. General Questions 0! Computer Technology

63.13.06.003
600. “the question of estilating software cost.” loecov. 1961, 3 pages. Operative
Infomtion. Telmnpriborostroyeniya lo 1&5.

681.3
601. method of estilating the productivity of AD counter systens.“ Belmev.
v. vamoar mum-3mm. 3mm m. 1981. lo 2. pp 1u-22. m. Biblio-
grapm. p 21-22 (to non). Scientific-Teamioal collection.

68301'-181
602. 'llew stall and mini-counters of Japan and the USA." Glazov. 6. Ya. Moscow.
1981, 116 pages. TS-Z: Sudstva vyohislitel'noy teklmiki 1 W1. Tsln
TelIII‘rleribou-Ostroyeniya. llolo. Express Intomtion.

ﬂea-“181
603. ”New Deana of conputer technology in Romnia.“ Hoscov. 1981. 6 pages. Opera-
tive Intonation. leII'l'EIppiMrOstroyeniya lo #7.

681.3

60“. "New oonputers of foreign couponies.‘ Hosea. 1981. 7 pages. Operative
Intonation. Tamrnpribcrostroyeniyn lo 1&9.
681.325

605.. ”Estinting the effectiveness of construction and functioning of discrete con-
tore.” Kulakov. P. r. In book: 'Avtonatiaifohamyye sdstew upravleniya"
Autonted Control Systens). nur'kcv. 1%.}. 1'03, pp 62-63. Collection of
Scientific Hod-ks. Klur'kov Aviantion Institute.

A .2. Theoretical Questions

631.326.7M06
60?. ”Method of synthesis ofconpletely self—verifying digital automta.‘ Hamev.
V. I. can ma! V mmomaummm. 1%1. Noe 2-3. PP 159-163.
111. Bibliography: 5 its”. mm.

17!.
non omcul. use ONLY
610.

611.

612 .

A0“.
618.

621.

622.

623 .

681. 335.3
”Procedure for investigating We characteristics of quadratic aultiplioa-

tion units." Km. 8. l. vomosr RADIMRGIKI. SERIYA m. 1%.

lo 2. pp alt-so. amoaapbu. pp “9-50 (7 1m). Scientific-Technical
Collection.

681e30°53.6$0ﬂ2
”Evaluation of methods of digital coding of graphic ingormtion." Tomshsv-
dtiy. D. I. 03MB! MTG! V RADIOPRMSWI. 1981. Nos 2-3. pp Bit-9?,
111. Bibliography. p 97 (16 itens). '

681.3.06!6ZI.372.8.W9.7§
”Cmstruction of interpols ed electrodanaaic Iodels of connected aicroband
1ines." Gol'fin. A. 0.. Lenin. 0. 1.. and Sergeyev. A. A. can OPYTOI
V WWW, . 1981. llos 2-3, pp 15l-155. Bibliograplvp 1h» itens.
mun.

621.327.8
"Principles of construction of control systeas on the basis of programme
controllers.“ Shpakovtiy. V. I. can 0mm V mmsmmosn.
1981. 1307, pp 7-10. Bibliopphy. p 10 (7 itens). mm.

SGTVARB
681.325.65
”Autontion of debugging of software of Iicroprocessor system for control of
phototypesertting equiplent.” Bleykhmn. O. I. Gerasinov, I. V.. and Radion-
ov, S. V. WAR mmsrmmosr', 1981. No 1, pp 36-37. Bibliograpm,
p 3? (3 hens)-
621.9.06--529

"Automtion of of preparation of control program for amine tools with

numerical prom-led control.“ Putsina. T. H. MN W0)! V RADIOPRO-
msmuv:m. 'lo 8, pp 31-32. Inna.

moﬁ'6ae9006"529
'Autontion of preparation of control programs for milling mchines with
nuaerical program oontrol.By aeans of the res-1:022 oonputer." Kazan',
1981. Intonation shoot. Tatar rm, lio 103-81. (Input from cm).

681 . _
'Autonation of circuit planning ofdigital units on eluentary 1evo1."g'9é’
Urobushkin. V. 1., Kovalev. V. A., GW.I., et 31 m MTG! V
mmmosm 1981. Nos 2-3, pp alt-36. Bibliogzapnyl u items

mm' 681.3.06
'Autonted systea for obtaining and editing cmtrol ptmched tapes and techni-
cal docunentation.’ Klenov. V. 1.. and Khsykin, V. Kh. m men V PRO-
HYSWOS‘I’I. 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 56-57. 1111313.

621.31u.25/25
“Algorithm for construction of a. comication Iatrix for multifunctional
electronsgnetic transfoners.‘ sterey, G. P. MTRGINAYA PRMSHLBMM'.
1981. No 1. pp zit-25. Bibliograplw, p 25 (3 itols). Scientific-Technical
Collection. 1‘an "Bldrtroniks'. Algorithm for machine construction.

175
won OFFICIAL USE: ONLY
6318.

635.

636.

6161.

6152.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

621.372.061
”Algorithls for calculating transient processes in nonlinear circuits on the
basis of Villaby method." Il'in. V. IL. Uekov, V. I... and Frolkin. V. T.
IZVBBL‘IAYA VYSSHIKH UCHEBNYKH amnsssn. WWW. 1981, lo 6.
pp 53-58. Kiev Polytechnic Institute.

681030063681e300h‘9e77
" Software selection for modelling couplex active eleIents of hybrid integrated
cumtae” YuWich, Y“. VUKW’ Io Re. Hellkmv. I. Be. at 8.1. mm
mm V mmsmosn. 1981. Nos 2-3. pp 1010-105. Bibliography. nu
p 105 (5 1mm). 1mm.

681.32?.h
"Issuance of control punched tape for technological equipmnt." Sergiyenko.

S. 3.. and Klutsko. N. A. 03m mos V mmuusmmosu, 1981. Nos
2’3. pp 83.8“e MEIR.

681.3.015.6a.3.o15
"Interactive systen of plan formtion (DISPORP)." Agafonov. Yu. H. VGPROSY

RADIOEIMRGIIKI. SERIYA ASU. 1980. No 3. PP 71-75. Scientific-Tealmioal Col-
lection.

681.3.015
""Interactive working regine with AF’IPS of parameters of articles." Ogneva.
N. P. EMMA" Tm. Seriya 9. um I 81er WWA.
1981. No 2. pp 161-00. Scientific-’reclmioal Collection. 'l‘slIII "Elektronika".

62103001‘907500923621099.
"Progzu preparation for machine tools with numerical propelled control OF-72
in a systen of automted mfactnre of m a paper m.’
Zolot'ko. N. P.. and Zolot'ko. A. In. In books ”Avtantizirovannyye eds—
teny upravleniya.” Kharkov. 1981. No 2. p 1918». Collection of Scientific
works. Khsﬂkov Aviation Institute. Input fro. ems).

68103006‘6ﬁeﬂ6
"Set of programs for calculating noras of expenditures of nterials." Belo-

5lazava. L. L. 0311B" m V RADIOPROHYSMIWTI. 1981. lo 7. p 2?.
man.

681.3.06
"Set of programs for synthesis of control tests." Fedoseyev. V. D.. Harlarova.
V. 9.. Elyaahkevich. F. I.. eta al. only man V RADIOPRMSMNOSTI. 1981.
Nos 2-3. pp 52-55. mm

681.327.21/.22
mechanical graphic morosysten for automation of the developmt of radioelec-

tronic apparatus drawings." Zomlevich, D. l.. and lhksinova. L. G. 0mm
mos V RADIOPROIYMOSTI. 1981. Nos 2-3. pp 97-100. Bibliograpiv. p
100 (6 1m). NIIEIR.

681.326.?h.06
”Hachine synthesis of tests for combination circuits.” Zankovioh. F. G.. and

Skaotkov. I. n. m arm v mommsmosﬁ, 1981, Nos 2-3. pp 100-
102. Bibliograpm'. p 102 (1. items). mm.

. 681. .06 6 .
'loftware 01‘ semi-autonated system for technological process p ‘ 5?"51l?r1-

velovich. 1'. ll.. Udalova. Ye. 11., and Kalugina. v. v. om 0mm v RADIO_
“MOSH. . 1m. "08 2’3. PP 82'83e Bimmm‘ u 1ten80 NIIE’IR.

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
681.3.06
"Methodology of structural programing during development of autonated design
system software." Gurvich, Ye. 1., andKrapchin. A. I. 03m OPYTOI V
RADIOPRMSIWOSTI. 1981. Nos 2-3. PP 7-9. NIIEIR.

68193-06I62103003
“lodeling of of Isgnetic cut-off systems." ‘<.'.-Z!elijtht‘ev, H. R. 0mm ONTO!
v MW. 1981. Nos 2-3. pp 65-66. mm.

681.3.06:681.327
”lodificetion of translator tron the BIYaz language into the language of the
‘(ICA' data bank." Petrov, A. Ye. MAYA mm. SERIYA 9. 3:0-
nonika i sistelv upravleniya, 1981, No 1, pp 18-21. Bibliography, p 21 (lb
items. Scientific-Rommel Collection. leII 'Elektronika".

681.3.066
”An algorithn for detenination of the law of dietrihxtion of randon values."
Vel'k, R. P., and Zin'kovskiy, V. A. In bodu’Trogressivnaya tekhnika pro-
yektirovaniya progranlukh sistem obrabotki 11" (Progressive Technology
for Planning progzu systems of data proheseing . TeNII'l‘U, Hinsk. 1980. pp
123-135. Btu—tempts. p 135 (7 was).

681.3.06
"Organization of the analyzing part of a compiler from a language of the
AIBOL-68 type for Yes computers." Lebanon, N. A. . In book: "Avtomti-
zirovannyye sisteny upravleniya" (Automted Control Systems). Khar'kov,

1981, No ?. 136-137. (Collection of Scientific Works, Khar'kov Aviation
Institute . pfrnput from cm).

681.3.061658.512
"Organization of the SAPR 'Tekhnolog' data. base." Vil'chinskaye. I. G. 0314!)!

W“ V mmsmwrtg 1981, N03 2‘3. pp 80‘81e NIIBIR. 681 3 06

immense roamed the lam sons-yang, Tetaﬁdkov. Yu. A. 0m
0pm 7 momaﬁnossfg-issiynoa‘iaﬂﬁpp wan-11o. mumm O6
.3.

“Package of applied propane for analysis of linear electronic circuits.”
Kravnsmko. s. V.. and Sukhov, D. H. om 0mm V RADIOPMYSELMOSTI,

1981, Nos 2-3, pp 59-60. NIIEIR.

”Package of applied ping-ems for preliminary planning of micmpmcessor devices."
Popov, v. A., Skibsnko, I. 'r., Chmohenko, I. v.’, and Dergachev, v. A. In book:
"Avtomatizirovannyye sistemy upravleniya." 10mm”, 1981, No 3 pp 65-66.

C011 action of Scientific works. Khar'lcov Aviation Institute. Input from

:1 n g ’"' 681.3.06:621.396.6.001.63

”Package of applied programs for planning units with wire assembly." Gol'din,
V. V.. and Sidorov, S. F. OMEN OPTIC)! V RADIOPROHYSHIMOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3,
pp 23-26. NIIEIR.

681.3.06
"Package of programs 'Genorator of individual tasks'.” Voroehilovgrad, 1981.

4 pages. Intonation sheet. Voroshilovgrad TsN'l‘I. No 113.. Series Automated

cont-131 systems, means of computer and organizational tecrmology. [Input from
GPN'I‘B .

177
FOR OFFICIAL USE 'VLY
657 s

659 .

660.

661 .

663 .

668.

670.

671 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

681.}.06.002.513.5
"Packages of programs for loading intonation in archives of intonation-
Rmev‘l mm.” Viahin' V. Veg um”, Se As, “lanai-kw. ‘0 He. and
Pogapov. A. V. WMAYA m. SERRA 1. mm SVCh. 1980,
No 12. Scientific-Ibohnioal Collection. M11 'Elektionika”.

681.3.06
'isckages of programs for planning band plates and waveguide devices."
Zes'kina. G. V., Levin, 0. 1., and Orlov, V. P. can own: V moms-
mm. .981. NO! 2-3. pp $.61. mmR.

681.3.068621.3.049.75.001.63
"Preparation of arrangement and issuance of schematic doomentation in a cycle
of planning digital cells." Petrov, A. F. on om V mmomrsmm-
NOS'I'I, 1981, Nos 2-3. PP 42-44. NIIEIR.

621.9.06—529
"Preparation of control punched tapes for nilling machines with nmaerioal
prograsmed control with use of an interactive graphic system on the basis of
ARM-R headware." Yavich, A. 1.. Stompkovskiy, H. 8.. and Kml, S. l. om
om V MOWOS‘H. 1981, Hos 2-3, pp 66-69. IVIIEIR.

621 .9.06—-529
"Preparation of control programs for machine tools with nuerical props-led
control with the use of automated won: sites.“ Putsima, T. H. om om
V RADIOWOS‘I'I, 1081, lo 8, pp 32-33.. IIIEIR.

621.9.06—529
“Preparation of contaol programs for machine tools with nmerical pingra-ed
control with group data preparation point.” Kalugina, V. V., Petukh, I. P.,
and Bognl'kina, V. D. on om V WOWSH. 1981. no 8. P 33.
NIIEIR.

681.32
"Construction and yes of a data bank in a system of automated planning of ultra-
ssnie delay lines.“ Solov'yev, A. 8., Manon, L. V., and llaleysv, Ye. I.
on om V MOPWMOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 106-109. Bibliogapw;

7 1m. nmn. 681.3.06:621.396.6.001.63
"Prom-intonation organization and making up ouplete system of radioeleo-
tmic device planning." Hesterov, A. A. om om V RADIOPWYSH-
LENNOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3. pp 9-11. sums.

681.3.06:621.596.6.001.63
“Software of automated formation of textual designer documentation of radioelec-
tunic apparatus in an automated desigx system.” Yukina, S. A. om om
V MOWOSTI, 1981, lloe 2-3, pp 124-125. NIIEIR.

6810300153681e3006
"Software of interaction in the system IIIS‘FORP.“ Agafonov, ‘11:. m, and Deman-

enko, In. P. VOPROSY RADIOE'LBM‘ROKIKI. SKEIYA A50, 1980, No 3. pp 76-79.
Scientific-lbolmical Collection.

681.525.65.06
"Software of the system 'Elekon SF'.” Boriscva, Ya. 1., Vasil'yev, Ye. P.,

Lyshenko, V. 1., et al. WMAYA WHOM“, 1981, lo 2, pp 28-53.
Scientific-ﬂowed Collection. mm 'Blektronika".

178
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
672.

673.

674.

675.

676.

678.

681.

682.

681.3—181.4
"Planning of control system programs on the basis of microcomputers." Haslen-
nikov, In. A. M'ERONIIAYA W315 1981, No 1, pp 66—69. Biblio-
graphy, p 69 (9 items). Scienufio-ibdmicd Collection. M11 'Elektmonika".

“1030063658051
"Devolopsent and realization of a language of interaction of a designer with a
mini-machine planning complex.“ Ielehin, In. 11. om om V RADIOPROHYSH-
mom. 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 14-16. NIIBIR.

681.3.06:624.396.6
"Realization of an algorithn of arrangement of a sequential type." Artenov,

v. 13., mabov, L. P., and Snkhova, a. A. 0mm om v memosn.
1981, Nos 2-3, pp 163-164. mm.

681.327
”Raalisation of a package of prograns for Mt) mile of planning band
plates for the Yes computer.“ Zes'kina, G. 17., Orlov, V. P., and Sergeyev,
A. A. om 0PM V MOWOS'H, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 37-42. IIIEIR.

681.32:658.512

”Realization of software of sun data banks.“ Bolganov, V. P., Vamishev, m.
101., and Mn, N. I. om om V RADIOWSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp
118-123. MEIR.

6813000686580512
”Semantic anal is of input intonation in a technical doomentation output
eyeten." Bib ov, V. P., and Kiselev, B. V. om om V RADIOWEN-
nosn, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 146-147. 11mm.

681.3.061621.3.049.75.001.63
"System 01‘ prograne for automated output of assembly drawings.“ Gorin, :;S. V.,
and Yogorov, A. H. om om V RADIOWSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 20-
23. mma.

681.3.06
"Creation of a specialised operating eyeten oriented toward contaol of a sec-
tion of machine tools with numerical propelled control.” Balm, S. 11., and
Senko, A. 11. In book: “Avtomatizirovannyye sietemy npravleniya.’ Khar'kov,
1981, No 3, 199-201. Collection of scientific works. Xhar'kov Aviation
Institute. 71mm from ma).

681.3.06
"Specialised and branch hand of algorithm and programs." Ibehkieva, Ye. V.,
and Novoss1etskaya, H. S. Moscow, 1981, 14 pages. (TS-3, ASH). MII‘EI-
priborostroyeniya. Survey Intonation, 110 21.

681.3.066
"Conpantive classification of systems of interactive debugging." Gol'dberg,
A. P. In book: ”Pro esivnaye tekhnika proyektirovaniya 1)th sis-
ten obrabotki " agreed” Technolog for Planning Progrmed Iata
Processing Systems .- TeNII‘I‘Y. Minsk, 1980, pp 25-38.

681.3.015
”Structurisation of LPR-conputer intonation during solution of planning tasks

of optimization." Bordomssnko, V. A., and Grahal'ekiy, S. 2. VOPBOSY RADIO-
EIHTRONJII. SERIYA ASU,.1980, No 3, pp 80-83. ﬁbliomplvacp'ﬂl (3%“).573.
Scisntii‘ic-‘l‘ecl‘mioal Col1ection.

179
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
686.

688.

EUR UII'I'IL'IAI. vat. ONLY

681.3.06:536.21
"Universal pmgrem to solve the tum-dimensional stationary problem of thermal
conductivity for assemblies of electronic insteamta.‘ Bleyvas, I. 11.,
Zhhanov, A. 1., Kosheyev, V. S., and Shevtaov, V. l. mammn mum.
SERIYA 1. WWW SVCh, 1980, no 12, p 61. Scientific-nomad Col-
lection. man "Blektsonika'.

681.3.06
"Formation of a package of applied programs for construction of natbematical
models of objects of planning." Lebedovskiy, H. 8., Min, X. 3., and Shishkov,
B. A. In book: "Sovershenstvoveniye protsessov sekhsnisatsiii sboronnykh i
i mtaalmwkh rabot v svete reshmiy XXVI s'yezda KPSS. Material: kratko-
srochmgo seninara 22-23 sent. L.',' (Improvement of the processes of mechani-
zation of assembly and installation work in the light of resolutions of the
25th P congress. Materials of the short seminar 0! 22-23 Septuber,
Leningrad ,; 1981, pp 22-26. “Znaniye' Society, Lenina'ad, organized by
m. Bibliography, p 26 (5 items). (Input from m).

“1e3e063621e372e8
"Operation of complexes of program for modelling band and wave guides." Lap-
Bhin’ Ve Ie. 3010111078, Se Ne, qum, 3. Ge. at Ll. 0m 0m V ”0'
PROHYSﬂImOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 61-62, ill. 3112111.

See also Nos 611, 716, 726, 729, 730, 736

MS.

690.

691 .

693.

A.7.

694.

695-

OWNERS

681.3-185.4
"me high-capacity AS/9000 computer." Kalenetskiy, L. H. mm
3A mm. 1981, No 7, pp 9-10. Intonation maﬁa, 311313.

681.3—181.48
“Shall computers for economic calculations." Hen’shikova, L. A. IMIYA,
KONTML'. AV'NﬂA'I'IZA'I‘SIIA, 1981, No 2, pp 53-56. Bibliography, p 56 (15 items).
Scientific-weenie“ Abstract collection. MII'I'BIpnbonostmysniya.

681.3
"The 'Elektmnika M‘s-OO-O1' single-plate counter." Dorshenko, Yu. 1.,
Dshkhmyan, Y. I... Ota'okhov, In. Le. Polikarnov, H. 9., and Iskovlev, V. A.
ELEXTRONNAYA PROHYSHImOST'. No 1, pp 50-53. Scientifichechnical Collec-
tion. TsNII "Elektronika".

681.3-16’ 4
"Coupling of the 'Elektronika M‘s-OZD' micro-computer with an ASV'D-H object.”
Vashutin, v. 0., Rogozhin, v. v., and (minimum. v. P. mama mo-
HYSHLENROST', 1981, No 1, p 60. Scientific-'l'echnical collection. TsNII
"lektronika'.

W IESIGII BASE 0P OWNERS

621.3.049. 71
”Analyzer of logical states and time dispels.” Shlionovich, Is. 1!. V PROS!
WWW. 83171“ M. 1981, no 2, pp 69-83, ill. Scientific-Tech-
nical Collection. the W107 analyzer of logical states and tine diagrams
is intended to assure per-romance of won: on the creation of new digital com-
puter hardware using integrated circuits with a transistor-transistor logic.

91.3.049-771
“Large-scale integrated circuits on Mt keys.” Barinov, V. V., and Skvira,
A. V. mu ERMA“ WA, 1980, No 7, pp 3-113. Biblio-
gnm, pp 106-113 (270 items). 'rann 'Elektronika'.

180
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
696.

A.8.

A.8.1

700.

A0802.

701.

702.

703.

704.

705.

706.

681.332.32681.3.01
"The use of logical analyzers to search for defects in data processing aya-
tens." Hanonov n. n. vovaosx mmommm. 311mm 1m, 1981. n. 2,
a) 84-94, 111. Biblioaaphy, pp 92,94 (6 item). sciuuncdmcmm Colleo-
on.

621 .582.8.0l9. 3
”Method of constructing diagoatic nodels of analog hibrid integrated micro-
88300111190." Vomodakm’ "0 Go, TRIM”, V. K0, and YOROVIOV, A. P.
m SRBIB'I'V SWAZO? mm mm WEI“, 1981, Hp 2. ﬂ 90-94.
Bibliograplw, p 94 (6 items). Scientific-Ibchnical Collection. TsOON'l'I "Eros".

CW UNITS
General Questions
681.}
“System of nodeling digital devices with models of elements and aigiala of dif-

ferent degrees of adequacy." Leont'yev. K. P. 0mm 0PM V Rimm-
mmosn, 1981. Noe 2-3. pp 4549. mun.

681030063658051202
"Conml of a system of functional-logical planning of digital equipent.”
Bamaulov, Yu. 11.. Borieov, I. 6.. and lefelova, 8. Yo. om 0PM V
RADIOPWOS'H. 1981, lies 2-}, pp 49-51. MEIR.

Equip-eat for Primary Preparation and Input-Output of Intonation .
681.327.131621.382.3
"Analysis of the speed of the basic cell of 3 DE? tuneistorized reading
amplifier.“ Grigor'yev, N. C... and Selene. I. I. ammonium m.
SBRIYA 10. mommm US'EROYSTVA, 1981, No 1. PP 7-10. mmompw,
p 10 (3 1m). Scientific-Technical Collection.

681.3.06
”Interactive input of data in a system of auto-ated planning." Urobmhkin,
V. 1.. Gundina, ll. 1.. and Xhokhlova, I. s. om 01’!” V MW-
NOS'I'I. 1981. Hps 2-3, , pp 171-172. lama.

“1032736580512
"Use of a group point of data preparation in system of antoaated planning."
Petukh. I. P.. Kalugina, V. V., and nogul'nna, V. D. om m V Immo-
PROHYSMNOSTI, 1981, Noe 2-3, pp 85-86. 11mm.

681.327
"Method of starting data input during autonated planning." nil'ner. P. G.
om om V MWSTI, 1981, Ho 7, pp 17—20. Bibliography,
p 20 (9 items). MEIR.

681.527.2
"Multifunctional input-output device.“ Grekovich, A. V., Korolto, II. 11.. and
Aahironok. N. V. cm om V RAMOPWNOSTI, 1981. Roe 2-3, pp 175-
174. IIIIEIR.

681.327.?
”Organisation of input of starting intonation into SAFE 'ﬁekhnolog'." Hil'ner,

P. 0.. Hikii‘orov, S. P., and Polevnikova, V. '1'. on om V RARIOPMHYSE-
LENNOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 76-78. NIIEIR.

181
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“707-

708.

A.8.3.

710 .

711.

715-

714.

A.8.4.

715.

716.

717.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

681.324.072J
"'l‘echnical realization of multiplication nethod of information input into a
pmceee control computer couple: in: mountic pickups." Yaehin, V. A"
Gmemv, Y“. Me. My". V. 10. and ”no“, V. P. WWY‘ Pm.
HYSHIMOST'. SERIYA AWTIZATSIYA mum PROIZVOIS'N. 1981, No 4,
pp 28-30. Bibliography, p 30 (5 items). Soientii‘ic-ﬂ'eclmical Abstract col-
lection. 1711mm. (Input from arm-3)..

681032702
“Device for output on an oecillogreph of graphic infomtion Iron a computer."
Seakyen, G. 3., and Khachatryan, G. G. om om V mmommnmm,
1981, Noe 2-3, pp 175-116. BIIEIR.

”10-80119 Alb m-Wmcss

681.3.06
"Model of a hardvan-eoftvaue complex for coupling ehmd nulticonputer centers.“
mu", 0. V0. 0110358”, Y“. no, and mwum' B. G. MAYA
mm. SEEIYA 9,. Romain i eieteuy upmleniya, 1981, lo 2, pp 38-41.
monogram, p 41 (3 itene). Scientific-Technical Collectim. mum.

621.3.049.77:681.3
"Single-crystal keyboard controller." Blokh, Ye. 14.. Bodaahkov, x. 3., and
Pankin. V. Ye. mmm W', 1981. Ho 1, pp 38-40. Scientific-
Technicel Collection. nma. Intended ae_device for control oi“ keyboude of
manual data input into oonputerl.

Gala—181.48
"Coupling of 'Elektmnika-IOOI' mini-computer with Yes oonputeru.‘ Aniehkevich,
ll. 11., Zhelezko, B. A., and Pikhun. V. N. mammal mum. SERIYA 9.
EKONGIIKA I 818101! WVLUHA, 1981, No 1, pp 22-23. monograph, p 23 (5
1m.). Scientific-Technical Collection. rem "magma".

681.327.8
"Device for coupling the 1.37052 mph plotter with the m emitter/N
Namkin, v. s.. Shipilov, s. v.. m, 1.. 3., et al. om om v munc-
mysmmosn, 1931, Non 2-3, pp 177-179. mmn.

MICROPIDCESORS

send—181.4
"Main-line adapter for orgmiution of mlti-mazet complexes on the baeie of
nicro-conputere.“ Bychkov, Ye. 17., and Sirenko. V. 6. mu m-
LENNOST', 1981, No 1. PP 55-57. Scientific-Ronni»). Collection. Tam 'Elek-
tmnika".

681.327.2’

"Creation of a data base for micro-computers." Moscow, 1981, 5 pages. Open-
tive Intonation. ‘I‘eNII‘mtpitometxoyeniya, No 50.

681 .3.001.891.57
"Procedure for automating the structural etaee of planning nicibpmceeeor
oystean." "eaten“. V. Po. Eff-DOV, s. 80' m 611" V. To In bOOkC Am.
MATIZIROVANNYYE SISTER UPRAVLDIIYA". Kharkov, 1981, Ho 3, pp 9-11. Col-
lection of Scientific Works. Khar'kov Aviation Institute. (Input i‘m m).

182
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
719.

720.

722 .

726.

727.

728.

729-

730.

621.3.049.77:681.3
"Micro-calculator based on a single-crystal micro-computer.” Yegomva, Yu.
1., Kuzneteov, Ye. Yu., Lenka, L. 11., and Min, L. K. ELFX‘PRONNAYA MYSE-
LENNOST", 1981, No 1, pp 40-44. Scimtificdlbchnicel Collection. MI 'Elek-
tronika'. 'Ihe ”Elektmnika 33-36" nicmcalculator.

681.325.65
"Module of processor of the mien-computer 'Egektmnikh‘m-ST'.'Kazanteev,P. N”
“om”, Mo AW. me A0, “a sokolg Y“. He mmmn mm'.
1981, No 1, PP 47-50. Scientific-Technical Collection. M11 'ﬂek‘tz‘onika".

681.325.5—181.4
"New mm. develomente.” Operative Intonation. NII'EIpriboroatroyeniya,
no 58. Microprocessors of the mo: family and nicm-conputere with a new
architecture.

8615-48148
"Software of micro-computers for individual use." Belyayev, Ye. 0., Bomb'yev,
S. 3., Petrovekiy, V/ 8., and Khokhloc, H. H. mmmn MST,
1981, No 1, pp 61-62. Scientific-mechnicel Collection. TIMI 'Elektronika".

681e3250 5‘18104
"Microprocessor system planning.” Ivannikov, A. 1)., and Starykh, A. V.
ZARUBEZHNAYA ELB‘I‘RDNNAYA mm, 1980, No 11. pp 3-99. ‘l‘ell'II "mektronika'.

681 .325.6Sx621 .3.049.77
"System of complex standardization and unification of microprocessor means of
computer technology." Vasenkov, A. A. mmmn PW', 1981,
No 1. pp 3-7. Bibliography, p 7 (6 items). Scientific-Technical Collection.
Tenn 'Elektronika”.

681.3—181.4
”ant-o“ developent of «bums end domentation or progress for Mom-
conputere." Litavrin, A. A., and Radsiyevekiy, G. P. mmm MYSE-
LENIICST', 1981, no 1, pp 65-66. Scientific-Rommel Collection. 'PellII
”ElektmnikA".

681.3.06
"Means of programing 'mekmnika m' nicmcouputere on the basis of eeeen-
bler language." Savel'iohev, V. A. mmmn MST, 1981, No
1, pp 62-64. Scientific-Technical Collection. mm 'Elektmnika".

See also Noe 618. 654, 672, 734. 751. 755. 764. 769. 784.

A1805.

731-

732-

S‘IORAGE UNITS

681527.634
"Production and recording of data in a floppy disk storage." Kolodochkin, H.
V.. and Pavlov, A. H. VCPmSY mommnm. SERIYA m, 1981, lo 2, pp
51-56. Scientific-lbchhical Collection.

68162716816
"Long-ten analog storage device for systems or actuation." Shevchenko, I. P.
AV'ICMATIZATSIYA I XONML'NO-IMRIM'NYYE PRIERY V WWWAYUSBCHEY
I WWW Pmsammosw," 1961. Hp 3. 92 :5-37/ Scientific-weekni-
cal Collection. TaNIIBtettekhin.

183
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

681.327
733. "Construction of storage units of small intonation capacity on 121. elements."
Koehkin, V. V., and Chenidhayev, B. A. In book: ”Elekuonnyye netmyetva i
toohnyy pribory" (Electronic Devices and Precision Inch-meats). AllanAta,
1960, pp 90-96. Bibliography, p 96 (4 1m). Intervuz Collection of Scien-
tifio Works. Kazakh Polytechnic Institute. (Input mu m).

681.327.2
734. "Use of dynamic nain otoragee in niczoproceaeor ayabma." Kozevich, O. P..
Kupriyanenko, V. 11.. Katopta, Ye. Ye. VOPROSY RADIOELEX'RONIKI. SEEIXA m,
1981, No 2, pp 64-68. Scientific-dbohnioal Collection.

681.327.6
735. "Method of correcting errors of the addreae channel of a main neaory.‘ Niki-
forov, v. v., and Dolya, A. n. vpthsu mmmmmaom/ Seriya evt, 19809
No 13, pp 119-123. Bibliography, p 123 (5 item). Scientific-abound 001-
lection.

$1525.54;
736 . "Method of coding intonation for meiotic recording with enhanced acuity."
Khlopotin, V. S. VOPROSY RADIOM‘HDNIII. SERIYA M, 1981, lo 2, pp 57-62.
Scientific-“Meal Collection.

See also Nos 543' 747

A.8.7. Other Computer Aeeembliee and Elements

681.335.2
737. "Analog-digital converter with automatic zero correction." Syeoyev, V. 1).,
Gdaomvich, Y. 1., and Volkov, A. G. can om V MOPWSTI,
1981, No 7, pp 74-75, 111.. 1111313.

621-315-435-3
738. "Operational amplifier in hybrid-film execution." Basin, A. A. In book:
”Hiki- oelektronika v elekuoizneritel'noy tekhnike" (Microelectronics in Elec-
tric Heaaument 'l‘ochnolog). Trudy mm. Leningrad, 1980, pp 43-47, ill.
The melmé high-unlitivity operational amplifier is intended for for
measurement and computatiom equipnent.

681.325.36
739. "Use of generators of random nmnera of continuous variables for Yes conwtera."
Lyubertey, 1981, 4 pages. Intonation sheet. Branch of 005mm, 30 38. Sep
1.. 1305.04. (Input from m).

A.9. APPLICATIONS 01? W

681 3.01.01 3.“;8
742. "Automation of selection of an optima data proceeeing entail." Korimvekiy,
Le lo, Ku'u, Ve Ve’ "‘11., Ie Ac. and ”11”" Va Po “MAYA We
SEHIYA 9. mom I swam UPRAV‘LENIYA, 1981, lo 1, pp 23-25. Scientific-
'i’eohnioal Collection. mm 'Elektronika".

-. 631.3
744. “Intention- oti? data “on f r W control unit." Gin:-
ber‘; H: n;; is”. 3: v:: 9 ID ;.Yue.1e, 31311. cm OPY'NH V RADIO-

pmsmmom, 1981. Nos 2-3. pp 57-58. IIIBIR.

181:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
745.

746.

747 .

750.

751 .

752-

753.

754-

755.

681.3:621.3.049.75.001.63
" Automation of the planning of uhi‘ plstes.” Polgmkaya, z. 11., and Chibisov,
V. P. om om V momm, 1981, Bios 2-3, pp 32-34. XIII-11R.

658.012.122
“Automated system for disposis of best-stable objects on the basis of the
control couples H6000." Lysmko, B. V., Artenenko, H. 1., and Kononenko, 8. V.
In book: 'Avtomtisinovsnwye sistelq upravlsniya.“ Dm'kov, 1981, No 3, pp
171-174. Collection of Scientific lions, Kharkov Aviation Institute. (input
from m).

6210382868103
Automated systen of non oontml based on lion-computer." Petzovskiy, V. 8.,
and Sidorin, V. 8. WA“ WW3 1981, No 1, pp 87-88.
Scientific-hctmioal Collection. mm "Blektmniks'.

681033657047
“Questions of Ischine pmoessing of accounting and statistical reports."
Bolotins, Ye. 101., and Dopsyevs, H. D. murmurs mm. SBRIYA 9.
EXONOHIKA I 818151! UPRAVLEIIIYA, 1981, 802, pp 16-18. Scientific-momma
Collection. TsNII "Eneku'oniks'.

681.3—181.4.004
"Questions of orgsnizstion of nlti-nechine system." Sidorov, Y. 1)., and
Starovoitov, A. V. momma Pmsr", 1981. 1'0 1. pp 57-59. Sci-
entific-Technical Gelleotion. MII 'Elektmika".

681.3.015
"Interaction with the computer in tasks of electronic circuit planning."
Kuchem, V. Ya., Sokolova, L. F., and Yunvich, S. A. mmmn mum.
SERIAY 9. ECONOIICA I 818me UPRAVLEIIIYA, 1981, N02, pp 22-24. Bibliogmphy,
p 24 (3 itens). Scientific-momma Collection. M11 "Elektroniks'.

621070077368103
"The question of investigating the dynamics of nultioonneoted systems for con-
trol of won: by scans of digital computers." mm: H. 11., and twioh,
Ye. I. In book: 'Robototekhniks" (Robot Merings. Interns Collection
No 3. Leningrad Polytechnic Institute, Leningnd, 1981, pp 27-33. Biblio-
snptur. p 33 (4 men). (Input Iron mm).

681.327“?
"me question of calculating the rs‘dius of on opening obtained during the ne-
oording of intonation in an optical storage." mtayev, H. 11., Yoshkevich,
N. P., and Krasnov, G. I. VOPROSY momm. SERIYA HT, 1980, No 13,
pp 124-126. mung-aw, p 126 (a 1m).

681.3}4.01:681.325.5
"Correction of the systematic emr of melogbdigtal systems of dats process-
ing by nesns of a nicmpmcessor.“ Vlasova, V. 17., Konikov, A. 1., "saw, I.
11., and Hogtwsvs, 0. V. VOPROSY RAMORIEX'IROIIID. SERIYA M, 1981, No 2, pp
23-33, 111. Bibliompw, p 32 (3 items).

681.3.06:621.396.6.001.5
"Hacronodelling in an autonsted system for the functional designing of 0-

electronic devices.” Salomon, z. 14., Il'in, L. K., Kravchenko, s. V., awful.

om 0mm v mmommrsnmosn. 1981, Nos 2-3, ”139.143. Bibliogrsphy,
p 132 (9 item). men.

185
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1/10

758.

759.

762.

763.

764.

765.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

621.396.67
"Mathematical nodsls of antenna arr" and methods of their nuericsl recli-
ution." Gostyukhin, V. I... 6111102», K. 1., Klimhev, K. 6., and 'I‘rusov, V.
II. IZVE‘I'IYA VYSSEIKB um mm! 5883. momma!» 1981,
no 6, pp 15-26, 111. Bibliograpw, pp 26-27 (40 itens). Hit]: the use of com-

when.

62207‘68105
”Method of machine nodelling and analysis of linear resonance circuits with a
high quality factor." Sukhov, D. I. on om V marmosn.
1981, Nos 2-3, pp 135-136. IIIEIB.

622e76681e5
method of digital computer nodelling of the process of notation.“ Clank,
S. N. In book: 'Sistew i sndstva kontrolya i npravloniya" (Systems and
Means of nonitoring and control), 1980, lo 2, pp 20-28. Thematic Collection
of Scientific Works, vnm 'mmuvmun'. Bibliography, p 28 (5 its»).
(input from m).

658,152/26:[358.711.2:681.3.o_6_7
"Procedure of rational distribution of capital investments among territorial
organs of Goesnsb USSR by means of computer.“ Roam, 1. 1., Indocjmolpvn.
A. P., Kndinova, I. 8., and anlikhina, L. P. Haterisl'no-tekhnichsskoye
enabzheniye. Series 4. Application of nsthemtical methods, computer tech-
nology and office equipment in natsrial equipent supply. Scientific-ﬁch-
nicls Abstract Collection. Il‘leIITEIHS, 1981, lo 7, pp 3-4. (Input m- m).

681.3.004:658.512
"models for solving pmblens in automated planning systems.“ Hil'ner, P. 6.,
and 'I'itov, A. H. om m V RAMOPWSH, 1981, Nos 2-3. pp 86-
8?. NIIEIR.

621.3.049.771.14
"mooning and calculation of mtiomly integrated elenente of a hue-scale
integrated circuit." Vekshine, Ye. V., and Pursin, G. I. zuzmzmun
MW“ man, 1980, No 5, pp 3-52. Bibliography, pp 51-52 (60 item).
TsIIII "mektronikv.

621.9.06-529
"me sole possibility oi’ automating the registration of infomtion with sub-
sequent proceseing on a digital computer.“ Vartsnysn, V. lb, Ped'ko, V. 1)..
and Shaehkovs, '1‘. P. In book: "Avtomatiﬁm‘sistew nprav1eniys', 1981;,
No 3, pp 146-148. Ool1ection of Scientific Works. Khar'kov Aviation Insti-
tute. (Input from mm).

5836.04
"Operative systems of mnericel pings-ed contro1 on nioroporceeeor techno-
logy for lsthes end milling machines." Roshsnskiy, Yu. 2., ‘lVokmskov, V. V..
Khorlov, V. K., and Clumstsov, S. A. can OPY'IOV V RADIOWS‘I‘I,
1981, Ho 8, pp 34-36, ill. IIISIR.

"Software for conpletely autonated nschine shop.‘ Yevstifsyev, A. P., and Kho-

dosovtseva, E. V. om OPTION V BAIIIOPWYSEINOS‘I‘I, 1981, lo 8, pp 9-11.
Bibliography, p 11 (13 items). . IIIIEIR. Oonpletely autouted nachine shop
with use of a shop conputer. -

186
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
767.

768.

769.

770-

771.

772.

773.

776.

777 .

773-

658.5128681.3.004

"Organization of information retrieval in the SAPR (Automated Design System)
'Tekhnolog'.” Vil'chinskiy, I. 0., Hil'ner, F. 0., and Pekarskaya, T. V.
om OPTION V RADIOPROHYSIEMOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 78-80. NIH-31R.

621.3.049.75.001.63:681.3
"Distinctive features of machine planning of fine-wire installation plates.”
Crskovich, A. V., Pedorov, N. A., and Avdeyev, A. P. om OPTION V RADIOPRO-
HYSHLEHNOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 26-27. NIIEIR.

681.325.65
"Application of micropmcessors in lion-computers for radiometric data pro-
cessing.” Kuznetsov, V. 3., Tennik, A. K., and (Melanin, A. S. ELEKTROIINAYA
PROHYSHIMOST, 1981, No 1. pp 53-55. Bibliograplw, p 55 (4 items). Scien-
title-Technical Collection. TsNII 'Elektioniks".

681.3—181.48:622.692.4
”Application of micro-computers in the system of control of a. pumping station
of a main oil pipeline.‘ Bogdanov, K. S., and Prokborov, B. M. NEF'I'YARAYA
PROHYSEIENNOST', SERIYA AVWATIZATSIYA l mmTSIYA NEPTYAROY PRO-

MYSHIMOS'I'I, 1981, No 6, pp 10-14. Abstract Scientific-'Declmical Collection.
VNIIOENG.

"Application of computer in grouping of radioelectronic devices in machining
production." Terekhov, V. 1., and Shelekhov, V. D. 03112! OPTION V RADIOPRO-
MYSIILENNOSTI, 1981, No 8, pp 12-13. Bibliogrsprw, p 13 (4 items). NIIEIR.

681.3.06
"Principles of the automation of the planning and manufacture of hmctional
devices on artificial surface waves." Haleyev, Ye. 1., Movskiy, G. V., and
mbovitskiy, V. P. om OPTION V RADIOPRMYSHIMOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp
110-111. Bibliomplw, p 111 (4 11am). HIIEIR.

681.3.06:621.396.6.001.63
”Principles of the functioning of a subsystem for automation of circuit plan-
ning of digital devices and systems.“ Gurvich, Ye. 1., Krapchin, A. 1., and
Umbushkin, V. I. am om V RADIOPWYSLEINOS‘I‘I, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 16-
20. NIIEIR.

681.3.063621.596.6.001.63
”Prediction of error in production on the basis or a dynamic model." Shurgin,
Yu. P. mmmomn autumn. SERIYA 9. EXONOHIKA I 818191! UPRAVLENIYA,
1981, No 1, PP 7-10. Bibliography, p 10 (12 items). Scientific-Technical Col-
lection. TsNII 'Elektmnika".

681 . 3.06:621.5.049. 75
"Plaxming multilayered printing plates on Yes computer hardware." Abrsmov,
A. 'I‘., Bogdsnov, V. P., et 81. can OPTION V RADIOPROHYSWOSTI, 1981, 0
Nos 2-3, pp 12-14.

681.5:621.372
"Planning bend filters on a surface-active agent by means of an ARM-R05 auto-
mated working place." Kuzyk, 2. V., Vasilina, Z. S., and Grisbchuk, S. A.
OMEN 017mm V RADIOPROHYSHIMOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 62-65, ill. NIIEIR.

681.3.004:658.512
"Planning techmlogical equinnent using a. complex of Yes computer and ARM-H
hardware.” Plyuta, V. Ye., Koohagov, P. F., and Demon, V. S. om OPY'NH V

RADIOPROHYSWOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 87-91. Bibliography, p 91 (5 items).
NIH-:18.

18:
FOR OFFICIA USE ONLY
779.

780.

783.

784.

785.

783.

789 .

790-

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

52—758.1.001.631658.5£7t681.3
”Planning of panels for the automation of technological processes by means of
computer." Gal'chenko, O. 31., and stukaya, A. '1'. OMEN OPY'IOH V RADIOPROHYSB-
LNOSTI, 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 27-31. NIIEIR.

681.3001365803
"Development and realization of engineer-technologst interaction with auto-
mated workplace facilities.“ Titov, A. 14., Ruﬂcevich, h. V., and hil'ner, F.
6. 034521 OPY'I‘OH V RADIOPRGAYSIEMOSII, 1981, No 7, pp 16-18. NIIEIR.

“1.300686580512
"Hatching os systems of logical and technical planning.“ Barnaulov, Yu. H.,
Berdyshev, V. A., Zhuk, Ye. F" at al. om OPTION V RADIOPROHYSHINOSTI,
1981. “0’ 2"}. pp 114.117. “11.313.

621.317
"Improvement of me‘haological characteristics of measurement-t devices on the
basis of built-in microprocessor systems." Glukhinohuk, H. I. MECHANIZATSIYA
l AV‘IOMA‘I'IZATSIYA UPRAVLBIIYA, 1981, No 5, pp 52-55. Scientific Production
Collection. mm. The authors present the results of application of the
systems approach to improve the metmlogical clmraoteristics of one of the most
universal and complex peripherals—analyzers of spectra of electrical sipals.

681.3.621.396.6
"Standardisation of schsmtic solutions in automated planning of digtal equip-
ment.” Petsvohnk, A. 11., and Khodakov, A. V. cm OPTION V RADIOPRCHYSB-
Lmosn. , 1981, Nos 2-3, pp 158-159. yams.

681.3.06:658.512
"Data control in automated planning system»: Harksrov, Yu. K., and ‘lkschev,
D B. om om V MCPKHYMOSTI, 1981, nos 2-}, pp 102-103. NIIEIR.

621.9.06—529
"Device for numerical progrs-ed control." Latyshev, A. 10., Roshanskiy, Yu.
2., Dynskiy, v. P.. Bolonkin, v. 1., and Zinin, v. s. cm owns 1! RADIO-
PROHYSWCS‘I'I. 1981. Ho 8, pp 36-38. MEIR. me device was crestedoon
the basis of the "Elektnonika-GO" computer.

621.3.032.269.1
"Fomation of intensive nultiast electronic fluxes with low-voltage network
control." Il'uisdosl. v/ 1).. Galitskaya, I. 1.. Blems, 1. 11.. et a1. -

TRONNAYA MIRA. SERIYA 1. MTRONIKA SVCh, 1980, No 12, pp 19-24. Sci-
entific-Technical Collection. TsNII 'Elektmnika". It is shown tut structimes
of a multijet electronic flux selected on the basis of the balance of Coulomb
forces sake it possible to select on a conputer an election besm toning the
multijet flow by traditional methods of two-dimensional analysis.

55"6§7:65.012.2
”Economic-mathematical model or five-year planning of geological survey won:
for oil and gas under the conditions of Western Siberia." Alekseyev, Ye. Ya.
In book: "Avtonstizimvamaya sistsma upravleniya pmtsessos razvedki nesto-
rozhdeniy uglevodov 'l‘yumen": (Automated System for Control of the Process of
Surveying the ‘ryunen' Mrsearbcn Deposits), 1960, ho 154 pp 3-19. Trudy
Zapsdnaya Sibirsksya NIGEL Bibliopaphy, p 19 (3 itemss. Planning on the
basis of use of computers. (Input from GPM'B).

188
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
681.325.65

791. "Blectronlc lock with use of a ulcroproccuor." Bobrov. A. A.,
Yegorov. N. I. and Hedwdev, A. V. ELMROWAYA PROHYSEIINNOST', 1981.
No 1, pp 106-“. Sclcntlflc-‘rcchnlcnl Collection. Inﬁll "Blekcronilm".

COPYRIGHT: ‘l‘untul'nyy muchno-iuledovatcl'akly institut infer-atoll 1
tckhniko-ekononlchccklkh lsaledovanly prlboroatroyenlya. sredstv
avtonaclzatsll 1 out... upravlenlya (Tsﬂlnzlpriboroscroycnlya),
1981

217a
cso: 18631100

189
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(700 621.311.1.066
POWER SYSTEM AUTQ‘WHC mum SEMICONDUCTOR ELWTS

Moscow POLUPROVODNIKOVYYE Elm AMTmSKIKH USTROYSTV MOOSISTD! in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 18 Apr 81) Pp 2-6, 6—7. 605-607

[Annotation, excerpts from foreword and introduction. and table of contents from
book "Power System Automatic Equipment Semiconductor Elements", by Nikolay Il'ich
Ovcharenko, Energoizdat. 12,000 copies, 608 pages]

[Excerpts] In this book the operating principles are discussed, as well as methods
of technical implementation of analog and some digital semiconductor functional
elements of the measuring portion of relay protection, automatic emergency warning,
automtic regulation and remote control equipment.

Elements are classified on the basis of operations on signals performed in automatic
equipment in. the process of obtaining. transferring. processing, using and repre-
senting data.

This book is intended for engineers involved in designing and servicing automtic
equipment and automatic control systems and can be of interest to graduate students
and students specializing in electric power.

Functional elements of the measuring portion of electric power system automatic
control and protection equipment and their characteristics are discussed in this
book. The results are presented of a number of studies relating to the development
of functional elements and continuously operating and relay-controlled measuring
elements carried out at HEI's [Moscow Power Engineering Institute] department of
automation and relay protection by the author or together with V.G. Doroguntaev,
V.V. Budkin. 3.1. Bass. RN. ‘l'enkina and graduate students Yu.A. Len'kov. AM.
Chukhin et al. The author is grateful to these comrades for their scientific co-
operation and the possibility presented of publishing individual data.

The author wishes to express his gratitude also to the reviewer, Doctor of Techni-

cal Sciences Professor V.L. Benin. for his valuable consents on the mnuscript,
which have helped to improve it.

190
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The author will he very grateful to readers who forward their cements on this
book and requests that they be sent to the address of Energoizdat: 11316,
Moscow. H-lllo, Shlyuzovaya nah.. 10.”.

The measuring section has certain features occasioned by the specific nature of
the process of producing and distributing electric power, in particular, by the
danger of catastrophic consequences of tardy and faulty operation of automatic
equipment. Therefore, the measuring section must be characterized by high techni-
cal perfection.

The measuring section should, as a rule. be practically inertialess. The time of
its operation should not exceed the duration of a single nine frequency cycle.
Therefore, opportunities for "storing" informtion in the formation of signals by
statistical processing of many realizations of a random process requiring time are
excluded. The measuring section of the automatic equipment for controlling the
process of producing and distributing electric power must generate the proper signal
in practically a single realization of the random process carrying the information,
which requires use of the appropriate operating principles and makes the technical
implementation of this section exceptionally difficult.

Requirements for the measuring section of automtic equipment have become ever
stricter as electric power engineering has developed and the USSR Unified Energy
System (YeES SSSR) has been created. Therefore, the measuring section of automatic
equipment for controlling the process of producing and distributing electric power
should be implemented on the basis of the latest scientific and engineering achieve-
ments of information technology.

Under conditions of modern scientific and technical progress hardware for the im-
plementation of automatic control equipment is being developed and improved extreme-
ly rapidly. The development of'seniconductor hardware is the principal trend.
Integrated semiconductor functional elements represent today's level of the develop-
ment of information hardware.

CONTENTS Page
Foreword 3
Introduction 5
Chapter 1. Automatic Systems, Equipment and Functional Elements 8
l-l. Automatic control of production and distribution of electric power 8
1—2. Automatic control as an information process 10
1-3. Signals of automatic equipment 12
1-6. Measuring section functional elements 19
Chapter 2. Characteristics of lieasuring Section Elements 29
2-1. Functional characteristics 29
2-2. Information characteristics 37
2-3. Key functional characteristics of comparison elenents 50
Chapter 3. Properties and Characteristics of Semiconductor Elements 55
3-1. Semiconductor diodes 55
3-2 . Transistors 59
3-3. Characteristics of a bipolar transistor 65

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3-4. characteristics of field-effect transistors

3-5. Transistor connection circuits

3-6. Operating parameters of transistors

3-7. Thyristors

3-8. Hall generators

Chapter 4. Analog Comparison Elements

lo-l. Continuously operating diode comparison circuits

6-2. Key quantitative relationships

4-3. Characteristics of diodes comparison circuits

4-1.. Equivalence of two diode circuits

10-5. Features and characteristics of a 3-phase phase comparison circuit

4-6. mlitude-phsse diode comparison circuits

10-7. Time-pulse comparison circuits

6-8. Information characteristics of comparison elements with reacting
elements

Chapter 5. Discrete and Digital Comparison Elements

5-1. Discrete phase comparison circuits .

5-2. Analog-digital converters

5-3. Pulse-number signal comparison elements

5-1.. Binary signal comparison elements

5-5. Computing comparison elements

Chapter 6. Feedback in Active Elements

6-1. Peedforward and feedback in automatic equipment and its elements

6-2. Complex feedback

6-3. Kinds of feedback

6-1.. Influence of feedback on input and output impedance of a transistor
amplifier

6-5. Influence of feedback on errors and instability of gain

6-6. Negative feedback in a multistage aqlifier

6-7. Strong feedback

Chapter 7. Transistor Amplifiers

7-1. Kinda and features of automatic equipment amplifiers

7-2. Transistor amplifier stages

7-3. External negative feedback

7-4. Alternating-current transistor aaplifiers

7-5. Transformer amplifier stages

7-6. Capacitor amplifier stages

7-7. Measuring section alternating-current amplifiers

7-8. Transistor mean current amplifiers

7-9. Features of direct-current asplifiers

Chapter 8. Continuously Operating Heasuring Elements

8-1. Kinds of measuring elements discussed

8-2. Diode measuring elements with a single actuating quantity

8-3. Galvanomsgnetic measuring elements

8-6. Diode measuring elements with two actuating quantities

8-5. Galvanougnetic measuring elements

Chapter 9. Relay-Operation Measuring Elements; Galvanomagnetic ”ensuring

Relays
9-1. Kinds of measuring elements discussed
9-2. Design and features of converting section of measuring relays

192
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9-3. Gnlvnnonngnetic power-direction inntrunsnt relsyo 323
9-6. Resistance-type instrument relay: 328
9-5. Active power and frequency relays 335
9-6. Optimum pnrnnetern and indicators of gnlvsnonngnetic instrument relnye 338
Chapter 10. Ventures of Honouring Elements for Protection of Blectrotrsns-

mission Lines 362
10-1. Ensuring proper functioning and speed of response of instrument relays
during electronpetic trnnsient processes 362
10-2. Put-acting reverse-sequence power-direction relays 352
10-3. Pest-acting directional resistance relay 360
10-4. Measuring elenents for protection from double grounding 372
10-5. Features of neuuring section for differential phase protection of
system with low feult-to-enrth current 386
Conclusion 399
Bibliography 402

COPYRIcll'r: Energoizdnt, 1981

8831
cso: 1863/158 END

193
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY