Hm OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10017

28 September 1981

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 22/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS r"'lications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUELICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOOl'l
28 September 1981

USSR REPORT
CYEERNETIcs, COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(13000 22/81)

CONTENTS
HARDWARE
Building Video Terminals for On-Line Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . l
Optical-Fiber Pressure Transducer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Graph Plotters With Linear Electric Drive. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
External Memory Hith Random Access to an Automated Control System. . . 12
Raising Reliability of Semiconductor Read-Only Memory. . . . . . . . . 18

Mass External Storage Hith Sequential Access in an Automated
ControlSystell............o.............. 20

System for Automatic Monitoring of a Data Transmission Device. . . . . 22

Industrial Mini-Robots of Modular Construction With Discrete
Pnemtic Dr1ve. 0 O O O O O O 0 I O O O O O O I O O O O O O 0 O O O 25

Manipulator With Pneumoacoustic Sensor of External Intonation . . . . 30

Probe Manipulators for Investigation of Semiconductor Materials
andStructuresonPlates...................... 34

NevModelsonescomputers...................... 38
Date Teleprocessing System Hardware Combination. . . . . . . . . . . . 41

Aspects of the Employment of Peripherals in Automated Design of
Integrated C1rcu1cai O O O 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 0 O O 0 “3

Programmer for Microprocessor Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48

- a - [III - USSR - 21C SST POUO]

COD om" ‘ ' "C“ “N! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Multimachine and Multiprocessor Systems . . . . . . . .-. . . . . .
Yes 9004Key-to-Tape Data Entry Device. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SS mm

Software and Basic Applications of 'llektronika 85' Hicrocomputers.
SOF‘NARE

Text Editor with Developed System of Co-ands for Yes 08. . . . . .

Tools for Hodeling Real-Time Systus for the 'Bl'brua' Multiprocessor

cmputerooooaaoooaooooooooooooooooooo

Realization of PASCAL Language for 'Bl'brus' Multiprocessor
Comter caplex. O O 0 O I O O O O I C O O I O . I O O C I O C 0

Abstracts From the Journal 'PROGRAHHING', May-June 1981 . . . . . .
Microprocessor System Developer's Terminal. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Reliability of On-Board Systems

APPLICATIONS

Providing Information for Scientific Research on Complex Problem
of 'Power Engineering' by Data Base Teleaccess. . . . . . . . . .

Using Microcomputers in Pump Station Control System for Main Oil
Pipeline, O O C I I O O I I O I O O O O O O O I I O O O O O O O 0

Organization of Cmputer-Instrument Interaction in Systems for
Automation of Scientific Research with Variable Structure . . . .

Computerized Vibration Test Control System. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Using Computers in Hajor Construction Organizations . . . . . . . .

Automation of Hulti-Pass Sheet-Hetal Stamping Using Industrial

RObOtsOCl0.0..OO'OOOIOOOIOOOOIOOOOOO

Using Computers in Power Systems: Fran Experience of nonbass Power

systenooooootoooooooooooooooooooo...

Automated Power Control System With Third-Generation Computers. . .

Economic Effectiveness of Power System Automated Control System . .

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

53

61

63

120
121

128
131
134

160

161
167

150
152 '
156

163

166
170

172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

Abstracts Prom Journal 'AUTOHATIC CONTROL AND mWUTER
SCIENCB'.May-Junel98l.................._

Distribution of Regular Message Flows in Intonation Systems. .
Computerized Automatic Teaching Systms . . . . . . . . . . . .
Control Systems Design Automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Control Systems Design Automation in Organizations of the USSR
Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education. . . .

Some Evaluations of Efficiency of Parallel Computations . . . .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

176
180
182

186

191
198
F0R10FFKJAL.UGIiONLY

BUILDING VIDEO TERMINALS FOR ON-LINE INTERACTION

Moscow venom: 1 srs'rm UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 7-8

[Article by V. A. Stryuchenko: "Characteristic Features of the Building of Video
Terminals for On-Line Interaction")

[Text] Video terminals providing remote man-machine interaction permit on-line exchange
of different types of information in teleprocessing systems. This interaction is in the
nature of an informational conversation since it involves the operations of receiving.
storing, retrieving, displaying, processing and transmitting information.

Systems analysis of the structural organization of remote video terminal equipment and
of their operating algorithms with respect to functional characteristics has made it
possible to distinguish the inter-related functional parts in the structure of this

equipment as broken down into data display. data input and preparation (editing) and
data exchange (Figure l). Simultaneous operation of these inter-related control cir-

cuts with the participation of the human operator characterizes the functioning of
video terminal equipment.

In the stage of video-terminal design this structural division facilitates the develop-
ment of requirements for individual units and assemblies and the algorithms involved in
the functioning of video terminals and permits classification of video terminal hard-
ware.

Data display - this is the process of converting information from digital form into
screen displays or the documentation of data for presentation to the operator in visual
form and then the processing of this data. Data is presented in the form of either

text or graphic displays. of great importance in this regard are the principle of
image formation. image formats. the methods employed to extract individual fragments

and image quality. After visual perception of the information generated and making

his decisions the operator inputs and prepares data by means of a variety of input de-
vices: keyboard, light pen etc. The speed of this information-processing channel. that
is. the possibility offered of on-line data editing and input. to a great extent deter-
mines the capacity of the entire interactive subsystem. The data exchange process in-
cludes the conversion of information for transmission via communication links, execution
of exchange algorithms and conversational procedures and is governed by the rate at
which data is received and transmitted and by the interaction of the video terminal

with other teleprocessing system hardware.

Some of the control processes in video terminal systems are cyclical in nature and oc-
cur without operator participation. the regeneration of a display on screen, for exam-
ple, or mode synchronization, computer-initiated message output or diagnostic checks.

1 -.'
roe omcut use ONLY 1

I
I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of parameters: to reduce raster distortion and
image instability (static and dynamic) due to
external factors, improve the accuracy of the
addressing of image elements, brightness.
clarity (focusing) and to eliminate interframe
flicker. Degradation of these parameters may

- [In-emu-

The need to regenerate images on a CRT screen
and establish the required frame frequency to
insure a stable image dictate the use of com-

plex control algorithms to coordinate the par-
allel operation of display, 1/0 and editing

 

Figure 1. 1 _ data exchange; channels, which creates equipment redundancy,

2 _ control; 3 _ image; 4 _ the use, for example, of multilevel storage in

- display; 5 - print; 6 _ oper- the system and of high-speed parallel algorithms
ator; 7 - input and editing; in control. Figure 2, for example. shows how

8 - data input and preparation. the operational cycle of a video terminal is

complicated if it insures image stability in

all modes (Figure 2b) as compared with the
realization of successive cycles of video-terminal operation with interruption of the
CRT screen display during the time required for data exchange (Figure 2a).

video terminals, with the development of which are alwo associated problems with pro-
viding output to the screen of mixed information with the use of raster and vector (or
coordinate) imaging methods for editing graphic information. These problems are con-
nected primarily with the coordination of the time characteristics of image regenera-
tion and other operational modes.

One of the promising directions toward solution of these problems is the creation of

a video-terminal display channel using gas-discharge (plasma) displays (600). A matrix
imaging system. which provides good accuracy, stability and illumination characteristics
along with adequate resolution capability. permits generation of high-quality character-

graphic images on plane plasma display screens. The table below presents comparative
characteristics of CDD and CRT. The use of ac 600 in video terminals permits establish-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

editing. The small size and weight of the GOD permits convenient installation-at the

operator's work position.

 

I u~--;': ‘ _‘
a-——— m‘ in—
1 an MM” 0

'_'. ”NEE”

k‘e .‘ Jsv

   

0'3;qu

nuns-nan(l)

 
  

 
 

    

     

 

I

I

.__

l
,r:-j

r9“ ~ “134
u‘ 14“] ...-—J Li” . .—
_ 25 _. (1—42.49)--- .

‘1'

Figure 2. 1 - image display; 2 - query

input and editing; 3 — print; A - trans-

mission; 5 - computer processing; 6 -
reception; 7 - reception and editing of
response.

Video terminals with plasma screens
have virtually no analogucomponents;
all control functions, including dis-
play. are executed by digital compo-
nents. This per-its incensed accuracy
and stability of system parameters.
Fabrication of video terminals with
plasma displays at the sane time re-
quires taking into account a number
of special characteristics connected
with the use of GDD. For one thing,
because of the relatively low writing
speed (20 us) of the element, the use
of 000 requires that steps be taken
to increase the speed with which in-
formation is output to the screen.
which is in fact achieved by providing
element group writing on a panel by
means of informational analysis of
output data with the use of two ele-
ment writing speeds and image scan-
ning. It is also necessary to insure
the reliable firing (writing) of in-
dividual image elements over the

entire operating field. by introduction, for exaaple, of preparatory writing modes.
Information has also to be specially organized and edited on a screen providing se-
lective erasing and restoration of graphic image elements.

Table. AC GDD and CRT: Comparative Characteristics.

 

 

CRT
Characteristic AC 000 Kinescopes Special
Maximum resolution in number 512 X 512 600 x 600 2000 X 2000
of points (102bX1024) (1000X1000)
Minimum point size in mm 0.4-0.5 0.2-0.3
Maximum size in mm 300 x 300 600 X 400 250 x 250
Maximum brightness in ed 100 - 200 100-150
Color of illumination orange white white
(green) (green)
Number of brightness gradations 1 8 -
Geometric distortions in 2 <0.5 2-5 2-3
Nonlinear distortions in 2 <0.5 5—10 5
Image dimensional instability in X - 3-5
Scanning angle in ang. deg. >120 <90
Time to write (erase) any point 20 0.1-50 -
on screen in us
Image storage without regeneration Yes No limited in
3 storage CR!

Fiﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE10NLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 

Characteristic AC 600
Selective erase/write (edit) Yes
capability
Screen-control principle discrete
Maxim: supply voltage in V 250
Permissible supply voltage :2
fluctuation in 1
Maxim display depth dinen- 10-60
sions in In
"eight in kg 1.5-3

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Mashinostroyeniye". "Ptibory

8963
050: 1863/202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CRT

Kinescopes Special

l 131 ted in
storage tubes
analog
18 .000 20 .000
:5; :10

 

200-600 >500
10-15

1 aisteny upravleniya“, 1981
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OPTICAL-FIBER PRESSURE TRANSDUCER
Moscow P313031 1 SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 21-22

[Article by V. l. Busurin. candidate of technical sciences. V. I. Pasynkov, engineer,
and N. P. Udalov. doctor of technical sciences: Optical-Fiber Pressure Transducer"!

application of fiber light guides in the development of a number of optical and opto-
electronic instruments. including optical-fiber pressure transducers--OFPT [1-3].

Interest in OFPT may be explained by characteristics distinguishing them to advantage
from other pressure transducers: insensitivity to electromagnetic fields, high speed.
small size and low weight. Their high heat resistance (to the point of physical de-
struction) and thermal stability are the result of the absence of thermally unstable
components in the transducer's sensitive element. since with the use of light guides
the transducer's entire semiconductor component can be moved as far as desired away
from the pressure measuring area. Thermal instability due to changes in the modulus
of elasticity of the membrane may be virtually eliminated in this instance with the
use of a quartz membrane [4]. The absence of current-carrying components in these
transducers makes the latter indispensable in situations not permitting the presence
of current-carrying parts, when the immediate environment is dangerously explosive.
for example, or the medium involved is under high electric potential.

Fabrication of 0PTT conventionally employs either deformation of the reflecting surface
of the membrane deflecting under the effect of pressure [1. 2] or redistribution of the
light flux reflected from a moving reflector attached to the membrane [3). The linear-
ity and sensitivity of these transducers are determined by the geometric parameters of
the housing and the light guides. the distance between membrane and light guide. etc.
To obtain characteristic linearity, for example, it is necessary to increase this dis-
tance. which in turn increases optic losses [1].

the base of the prism. which causes partial destruction of TIR on the upper face of
the prism. Part of the radiation passes through the upper face and is absorbed in the

light-absorbing layer. The change in the gap thus produces a change in the intensity
of the reflected light striking the photosensitive bridge circuit.

For the steady-state characteristic of this transducer to be linear and pass through
zero. the initial gap between the light-absorbing layer and the upper face (base) of

the prism must be approximately 0.3 um.
5

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ducer with destruction of TIR; - mem-
brane; 2 - light-absorbing layer; 3 -

- seal; 6 - fiber light guides; 5 - photo-
sensitive bridge circuit; 6 - LED; 7 -

- housing; 8 - prism; 9 - cover.

Steady-state characteristic of
UV"? with solid light-absorbing layer: 0x.

”max - actual and maximum output signal

values respectively.

A gap of the order of a fraction of a
micrometer can be obtained, for exam-
ple, by applying a thin ring-shaped

film to one of the surfaces using the

tially reduced if a plastic material,
silicone. for example. is used for the

light-absorbing layer rather than the
glass. Despite the fact that this

narrows the temperature range, the

broad enough since the elastic and optical properties of
within the temperature range of -60 to +3so°c [6].

 

The broken

transducer characteristic for this case. It

Movement of the membrane in this instance
varied not the width of the gap, but the
area of (optical) contact. Irregulari-

by the expression Ux/Umax - h

h - depth of irregularity.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fabrication and assembly of OPT? with destruction of TIR would be still further
simplified if the light—absorbing silicone coating were shaped, for example, as a
semicylinder or a prism with its apex pointed toward the upper face of the prism and
attached by its plane side to the membrane.

Movement of the membrane will deform the aemicylinder (prism). which will change the
area of contiguity between the plastic material and the upper face of the prism (area
of optical contact). In this case the value of the output signal in relative units
will be computed in accordance with the formula

I (x. y) dyldx

where 10:. y) - distribution of intensity of radiation from fiber in plane of optical
contact; 06:) - analytical expression of cross section of fiber light guide as plane of

optical contact; c - f(v) - area of optical contact in the form of a function of the
deformation of the plastic layer; d - cross sectional area of fiber light guide as

plane of optical contact.

Linearity of steady-state characteristic with the given value for fiber diameter is
achieved by changing the form or radius of curvature of the light-absorbing plastic
coating.

The solid line in Figure 3 represents the characteristic of an OFPT with a silicone
coating in the form of a cylinder halved along its axis and having a radius of curva—

ture of 2 mm and a segment height of 1 mm; the cross sections of the fibers. arranged
at an angle of 45° with respect to the base of the prism, are in the form of a circle

2 mm in diameter.

The OFPT with destruction of TIR described here is distinguished to advantage from
transducers with reflecting membranes and moving reflectors by the fact that the
linearity of their characteristic curve does not depend upon the dimensions of the
housing or light guides or upon the distance between the membrane and the light guides,
which. first, permits substantial simplification of the computation and design of OPPT
and. second. makes possible a reduction of optical losses, since the light guides may
be brought as close as desired to the modulated surface of the prism without degrada-
tion of the linearity of the curve. Moreover. with respect.to speed OFPT with destruc-
tion of TIR exceed virtually all other pressure transducers because of their exception-
ally narrow range of membrane movement.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Pahler, R. H. and Roberts, A. S. Trans. ASHE. 1977. Vol 99. No l.
2. Application 2450080 (FRG).

3. Pat. 3789667 (USA).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘FK'IM. lISl-I ONLY

lc. PoddubnyY. S. A. "Quartz Glass as a Katerisl for Elastic Components and a New
Technology for Precision Quartz Hark." In "Perspektivy rszvitiys uprugikh i chuvst-
vitel'nikh elementov" [Prospects for the Development of Elastic and Sensitive Coupo-
nents]. Moscow: TsIN'l‘I elektrotekhnicheskoy prouyshlennosti i priborostroyeniya, 1961.

5. Udalov. N. P., Busurin, V. I. and Pasynkov, V. I. "Izneritel'nyye ustroystva na

osnove optrona s uptavlysyemym ksnslom odnogo tips" [Optron Measuring Devices with a
Single Controled Channel]. Moscow: MDNTP. 1978.

6. Andrianov. K. A. "Teplostoykiye krcmiycrgsnicheskiye dielektriki" [Heat-Resistant
Silicone Dielectrics]. Moscow: Energiya, 1966.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo 'Mashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

8963
C80: [863/202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GRAPH PLOTI'ERS HITH LINEAR ELECTRIC DRIVE
Moscow PRIEORY I s1srm UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 5, Hay 81 pp 23-24

[Article by D. V. Svecharnik, doctor of technical sciences and Yu. H. Osipov. engineer:
"Graph Plotters with Linear Electric Drive")

[Text] Linear electric drive has recently begun to be employed in instruments and in-
dustrial equipment [1-3]. The operation of these devices on inclined planes of motion
under the impact of external mechanical perturbations (vibrations. rolling, shocks)
presents developers with a number of new problems. the basic one being that of deter-
mining stability criteris for linearly moving drive components making possible the
achievement of a desired precision.

The authors have proposed a graph plotter with linear electric drive [4] in which the
linearly moving components, the inductor l and recorder 2, are "held" away from exter-
nal mechanical effects by the inertia of their counterbalanced masses (see figure).
Stability conditions have been computed for linearly moving drive cowonents in the
form 8171:! a 0. eiXZ - 0 where F12! - vectors of the forces acting on drive components

along axis Y; eiXZ - eccentricity between the centers of gravity of the components and

axes X and z.

A certain degree of error is involved in the satisfaction of these conditions in prac-
tice since all machine counterbalancing methods currently employed are intended to ap-

proximate these conditions more or less. Permissible imbalance Am 2 mm -myp may be

calculated from the equation for movement of the linear drive for coordinate l of the
graph plotter:

d‘l . .
(MM + In") ~37- + lmM—mypl 8r smou- (”'JIA I-myp)x

a u, 4;" 2» d!
xcr[ln('D‘+ DP )+j’:'-r D “8077+
2 ) d! d!

l
+2"‘('5+'D,- +hnw+D.—ﬁ+Fn.-°.
where mm1 - mass of linear motor inductor; m” — counterbalancing mass (recorder etc.);
gr - acceleration of gravitational forces; a - angle of incline of linear movement with
respect to horizontal plane; ch - coefficient of sliding friction; d - disaster of in-
ner ball bearing ring; D - external ball-bearing'diameter; dp - diameter of belt-drive
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roller journal; Dp - roller diameter; C - coefficient of belt rigidity; k - coefficient
of rolling friction; Io - moment of inertia of roller rotation; t - angular accelera-

tion of ball bearings and rollers; ks? ~ coefficient of internal friction; 0W - coef-

ficient of electromagnetic damping of motor; Fn3 - driving force of linear motor.

He will assume for the steady-state counterbalancing process a vertical line of drive-
component movement. an acceleration of external perturbing forces uh equal to 0 and

0 ﬁg I 0, while
I 2 dt
internal friction may be disregarded. Inertial forces 2!..(77-p—5;—) are small as

cut the power off to the linear motor. In this case, damping force D

compared with available forces. After conversion we obtain Am < 2mypA:(sin a - A).

a 4d,.) 4: 2k

where A~-h:(j;-+ D +—l;'+-7; - coefficient of component resistance numerically
p P

 

equal to the angle of friction.

From this expression it can be seen that component movement is possible when sin a > A.
Permissible imbalance with vibration and rolling

2m A in; sin
MN” ‘ _¥?..£Er_._-_”’

(3.. +3" COS ﬂ) sinn -- A (if + '1 3i“ 3) ;

I\:lu 6 - angle of action of acceleration a. 325—53,: [5]. where fa - frequency of vibra-

tion and rolling; 5a - amplitude of oscillation.

An experimental model was constructed with a linear electric drive for X coordinate.

the linear motor in which is a three-phase electric machine with an interdigital mag-
netic circuit. Tests for prolonged inclination and vibration stability on an STSOOO/
300 vibrator in various modes of linear motor operation have demonstrated the efficiency
of this method of counterbalancing linearly moving components of a coordinate of an
automatic recorder with accelerations of vibrational oscillations to 3.2 gr.

An expression has been obtained for computing magnetic conductivity in the air space
between the interdigital inductor and the secondary component with the two in varying
relative positions:

a .- -L- [' — "Igji—I—l—m]

where 6 - size of air space: 8 - l6h’lgn'6; C - ZOh’B/nad - coefficients for simplifi-
cation of recording (h - width of space on interdigital surface); f, g and S - coef-

l3
ficients presented in [3].

A FORTRAN-language program was written in accordance with this algorithm; a Yes-1022
was used to find computed values and curves were plotted of the values of conductivity

as a function of the shift of interdigital inductor and secondary-component surfaces
6 a f(£). 0n the basis of this family of curves were selected for obtaining maximum

modulation (Oman - (immUGmax and the maximum value for dG/de, which determines maximum

electromagnetic force. 10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kinematic diagram
of linear drive
of graph-plotter

coordinate: F1 —

Pk - vectors of

forces acting on
drive component
along axis X;

‘12 ‘ ‘42., ‘1x "
34X - eccentricity
between component

centers of gravity
and Z and X axes

respectively.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Use of a linear electric drive as proposed in the description
in [4] has made it possible to simplify graph-plotter design,
reduce the aneunt of auxiliary equipment required (compressor.
pneumatic system etc. [1, 2]) and metal consumption (due to
absence of solid ferromagnetic platform [1, 2] and i'prqve
reliability indicators: probability of failure-free operation
has been increased l.2-I.S-fold, average period of failure-
free operation 1.6-1.7-fold. The linear electric drive may
be mounted on a movable for operation in an environment of
external mechanical perturbations. which substantially'expands
its sphere of application in contemporary instruments and in-
dustrial equipment, in the manufacture of robots for example.

The manuscript of this article has 11 pages of text, 5 figures,
1 table and a bibliography of 5 entries; it is cataloged as
No. 1687 in TsNIITEI priborostroyeniya's [Central Scientific
Research Institute of Information and Technical and Economic
Research on Instrument Manufacturing] collection of deposited
works.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. "Components. Assemblies and Equipment," "Byulleten' ino-
strannoy nauchno-tekhnicheskoy informatsii TASS" [TASS
Bulletin of Foreign Scientific and Technical Information],
1973. No l. p 1568.

2. Belyavskiy, Ye. 1., Lyashchuk, Yu. V., Onegin, Ye. Ye. and
Yarosh. A. V.. "The Manufacture of Linear Stepping Motors,"
ELEKTRONNKYA PROHYSHLENNOST', 1979. No 3.

3. Svecharnit. D. V.. "Distantsionnyye peredachi" [Long-Dis-
tance Transmissions], Moscow: Energiya, 1974.

b. Inventor's Certificate 553651 (USSR).

5. Iorish. Yu. I.. "Vibrometriya" [Vibration Measurement], Moscow: Mashgiz, 1963.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistely upravleniya", 1981

8963
080: 1863/202

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

01X} 681.527.63.004J
EXTERNAL HMORY WITH WM ACCESS '10 AN AWATBD wNTROL SYSTB‘I
Moscow PRINRY I SISTENY UPRAVLFLNIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 3-5

[Article engineers A. v. Spirkov, v. N. Telezhenko, A. A. Podgomy and A. A.
Alfimtsev

[Text] mtemal memories with random access, which assure the storage of
large volumes of intonation and rapid access to it in solving tasks of the user
are an inseparable part of control problem-oriented complexes.

reliability, on the one hand, and also by reducing their dimensions, mass and cost
per hit of stored intonation, on the other, which on the whole is achieved by
applying new circuit solutions and.a new elementary base, a more improved techno-
logy for the manufacture of the external memories themselves and intonation car-
riers, and also by the creation of means of self-diagnosis.

Together with very dynamically developing ﬂexible magnetic disk stores and rigid

immovable disk stores, standard plugbin packet disk stores are finding wide
application.

The proposed 91-5407 plug-in magnetic disk external memory, intended for the stor-
age of large volumes of information and its operative input and output, was made
with the requirements of high reliability, compactness, standardization, operating
convenience, maintainability and self-diagnosis taken into consideration. In the
creation of the plug-in magietic disk external memory experience was used which
was acquired in the development of the A3283 plug-in magnetic disk stores control
device, which has recommended itself with users as a highly reliable part and one
convenient to operate. In particular, a series approach has been preserved toward
diagnosis: after the internal test promo of the device have been run, its reli-

in magmatic disk external memory.

The macroarchitecture of the plug-in magnetic disk cxtemal memory is determined
mainly by 12- and 16-dig-it program-addressable registers, the instruction code and
the interfaces for cmmmication with the stores of the complexes. Each program-

equipment, the sequence of data transmission and the performance of instructions
issued by the central processor. All the program-addressable registers are access-
ible both for the system and for the panel mode unit of the device.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I‘edmical Characteristics of Plug-in Magnetic Disk External Memories

Maximum mnber of connected Yes-5061 stores Up to 8
Type of intonation carrier Yes-5261 disk packet or
packet compatible with it

Data transmission rate in words per second 156K

Disk packet capacity in 1000 words 10

Data storage fomat Sectoral

Nunber of t ‘ ' _ _
cylinders 203 (including 5 spares)
heads 20
sectors 10
words per sector 256

Data words capacity 16

Instructions executed by plug-in mametic disk extemsl memories are divided
according to functional purpose into preparative and executive. The execution of
preparative instructions does not involve data transmission and therefore the
simultaneous working of several stores can be assigned. Execution of executive
instructions involves data transmission. Those instructions transfer the plug-in
magnetic disk external memories into an occupied state for all the time—from the
start of execution of the instruction to its completion. In that case the mne-
tioning of the device cannot be halted for the execution of any other instructions.

The microarchitecture of a plug-in magietic disk external memory is detemined by
a 40-digit word of a microinstruction and the composition of instructions of the
series K589 microprocessor complex. The microinstruction word consisting of 12
controlling fields assures control of the hmctional units of the operational

part of the device during the execution of instructions issued by the system's
central processor. The composition of the instructions of the microprocessor com--
plex consists of ﬂexible means of processing the internal information of the
operational part of the device for formation of the addressing sequence during the
running of microprograms.

It takes very little additional hardware to provide the possibility of referring
to the internal registers of the microprocessor. made of elements of series K589,
on the part of both the system's central processor and the panel mode units of the
device.

The Ski-5407 device has the following characteristics:

—the possibilities: a) of connection to the two independent computer complexes
Ski-3 and 314-4; ‘0) of work under conditions of normal and rapid tran-ission (dur-
ing extraprocessor data transmission); c) testing without an external store of
the efficiency of the controller equipment by running test programs with the use
of programable reasters simulating a small interface (an extemal memory inter-
face); (1) of work with disk packets without sector recesses; e) the possibility
autonomous initialization (marking) of a disk packet;

-standardizations in the design decisions and also in the scheme for realization
of the operational part and output on a "cannon bus" interface:

—architectural continuity of the device during connection of other external memor-
ies (for example, magnetic disk stores with a capacity of 100 Mbytes);

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IESI". ONLY

-—microprogram realization, which assures convenience of adjustment and operation,
and also the possibility of modifying the execution of instructions.

The programming of input/output operations in the system is performed by nine pro—
gram-addressable registers. The remaining three program-addressable registers are
monitoring registers and permit simulating the work of external memories on the
part of the external memory interface. The connectim of the plug-in magnetic disk
external memory to two independent complexes makes it possible to economize in the
application of additional external memories in a regime of distributed data pro-
cessing.

Common bus interface

Panel mode unit

Data buffer

Control unit

Interface switch
Interface controller
Microprocessor
Hicroinstructions memory
External memory communica-
tions unit

Hicroprogramed controller of
extemal memory control
External memory 0, 1, 7

ﬂﬁWJinH

5.:
OWG

H
H
I

 

Figure 1 presents a block diagram of the device. The plug-in magnetic disk exters
nal memory includes a controller of interface control, a microprogramed controller
of external memory control and the external memory. The black structure used in
the development of the controllers permits standardizing separate logic units. in
constructing devices for a similar purpose.

The controller of interface control is intended for connectim of the devicc: u. the
interface of a computer complex and assures the possibility of data transmission
upon internrption of the processor and direct access to the memory, and also con-
nection of the device to the panel mode unit. By means of a standard set of sigh
nalr. which is readily realized in a portion of the microprogrammed controllers,
connection of the controller of interface control with the microprogrunmed control-
ler of external memory control is assured. About 80 percent of all the external
memory units consist of constructively and electrically developed units realized in
such a manner that they can be used in creating other external memory devices.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or interface control reg'sters are derived which are cannon to most lmown external
memories. In that case, as is well-known, the problem arises of "translating" the
addresses of registers. In the pmposed development, address translation issolved
by means of bridges. The possibility of "translating" the addresses of program-
addressable registers by means of a semiconductor memory also is being studied.

tion of the disk packet taken into account is 12.8 microseconds. Thus the control-
ler of interface control must return to the oomon bus every 12.8 microseconds and
the transmission time correspondingly must not exceed 12.8 microseconds. As Fig 2

number of vords) the total time cycle amounts to 6.4 microseconds. Thus under
nomal data transmission conditions only 3.4 microseconds (6.4 - 3) will be pre-
sented to other devices (2 microseconds go for arbitrage in each transmission

Figure 2

"10.1.; v u." I)" m.-

.. 1 - Total cycle, 12.8 microseconds
2...."m'21‘: r.-:JC'535‘7,{TZ.Z”..-«n 2 - Oomon bus interface is
4" 5" we? . " occupied by plug~in magnetic

  

«pa-a 5a,. :
.‘wuu m .w! - . disk utemsl memory
“m l ”C ‘ “1°!“ “m“ - Oomon bus interface is free
. c- . . 37;?" -._.. for other devices
7 £2“ ' ‘ Rapid trananissim mode

Arbitrage
Transmission of two words
For transmission of two words

”£2”"'. 5.9 f" gonna: W
2 WmaJ-qumulw .., 0-7:?!
I

'13“

”“512 (hid!- 107:! w ..\.'.'I

o \Dm‘lmklhk \N
Ill!!!

Maw: ‘5'” 10mm... ”M 0:" 'lbtal cycle, 614 microseconds
""9" '" .I'V'W'” r‘“ . Nomad (ordinary) tron-ission
T T ' mode
t Inléc 4' gm.- .. I.“ J 1 - Transmission of one word
— -— go... ”I:

1% "plow ”V --::.'

FOR OFFICIAIJ USF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The noted features of the controller of the interface control permit creating
high-capacity computer complexes with a large number of peripherals.

In the development of the controller of external memory control the goal was pur-
sued of constructing an economical, .simple and also powerful in part of the equip-
ment and operating speed microprogramed device which permits, with great relia-
bility, determining the possibility of ﬁmctioning of the device as a whole with-
out loading the computer complex. At the present time the microprocessor set of

series K589 is the most accessible and satisfactory with respect to all the enum-
erated requirements.

0n the basis of available experience a l6-digit standardized microprogrammed con-
troller with a 40-digit microinstruction word has been created which'has permitted
programing the microprocessor with a relatively mall number of simple micro-
instructions. Additional equipment not included in the microprocessor set and

necessary mainly for organization of the connection of the microprogramed con-
troller of the external memory control with the controller of the comon bus inter-

face control and with the external memory, was required in a minimum volume in that
case.

The unit for connection with the external memory is constructed with consideration
of the specifics of the individual external memory. By means of that unit the
microprogrammed controller of external memory control is readily adapted to a spe-
cific external memory with not more than 36 interface lines.

he 'tructurc and architecture of the external memory must satisfy the requirements
of the minimum expenditure of time on the search for defects. The effectiveness of
we of an external memory in an automated control system is a definite function of

the means of diagnosis built into the design in the process of planning the article.

The microprogr-ammed realization of the controller of external memory control permits

observing the following basic principles of construction of means of diagnosis of
peripherals:

-a. minimum of additional built-in equipnent (of the total volume of equipment) for
the diagnostic procedures;

—a maximmn of inclusion of all component parts of the device by diagnostic proced-
ures;

-the possibility of assigning critical modes of operation to test the means of
protection of the device;

«the possibility of using automated methods of planning means of diagnosis;

—the connection of means of diagnosis with means of monitoring information trans-
mission;

--location of a defect precisely to the replaceable element.

The technical state of a plug-in magnetic disk external memory can be analyzed by
combined means of diagnosis: programmed, built-in, panel and extemal. Programed
mean: permit aving functional tests in order to test the general efficiency of
functional units and subassemblies of an article, and also of circuits for monitor‘-
ing information transmission during the execution of instructions to record and

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

1

read. Built-in devices am designed for giving diagnostic tests of the operational
part of the equipnent and external memory. Defects of the operational part are
located with precision to the element. Panel equipment is intended for aseigzing
effects to the nucleus of the operational part of the device, with indicatioh of

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "l'iashinostmyeniye".
- "Pribory i sistemy. upravleniya", 1981

2374
can: 1865/210

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.327.28

RAISING RELIABILITY OF SEMICONDUCTOR READ-ONLY MEMORY

Moscow PRIBORY l SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 5-6

[Article by V. Ya. Yurchishin. engineer, in the section "Automated Control Systems,"

"Development and Use of Peripherals in ASU's," (Thematic Selection. continued from
No 5. 1981)]

[Excerpts] It is important to raise reliability without resorting to a substantial
increase in apparatus outlays and a reduction in response speed. Meanwhile. the
wordlength used in the small computer system and especially in the peripherals is

8 to 16 bits. which makes it difficult to satisfy this requirement.

Since the failure rate of connected elements (in the load state) so substantially
:tceeds that of unconnected elements that the failure rate of the latter may be ig-
nored. and since PZU [read-only memory - ROM] is a nonvolatile device, it is
expedient to consider a ROM structure from the position of achieving a possible
shift of all or part of its equipment from the load to the no-load state. i.e. of
reducing the time the ROM has a load on it. This is possible, for example, if the
voltage supply is connected to the device or its individual parts for only that part
of the machine cycle sufficient to extract information from the ROM.

All three methods of ROM division are finding practical application. As a conse-

quence of this. not only is reliability enhanced, but power consumption is substan-
tially reduced too.

It is most expedient to use the described principle for raising reliability in ROM
based on LSI TTL with fusible links which have the properties of random restoration
of the burned out links and increased power consumption.

Shown in fig. 3 inot reproduced] is a structural diagram of this type of device.

Suppose a l6K-word ROM has a ll - 10'3 h'l. Then the reliability for 1,000 hours of
operation under continuous load will be R(1000) I exp (- 7tT) . 0.368.

For a device of the same size. made in accordance with fig. 3 with 1.’/'i'c - 1 and

ycle

capacity of the microcirCuits ND - 256 x a. the same reliability is achieved for.

SC
64.000 hours. With that. power consumption is lower by a factor of 10. The validity
of the derived reliability characteristics has been repeatedly confirmed by experi-
ments.

l8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY . .-

For LSI Ron's with fusible links, it has been noted that the failure rate (time to
restoration of the burned Out links) is a function of the supply voltage. If its
value is greater than rated, the failure rate increases. A sharp increase in the
failure rate has been observed when the supply voltage is raised to +6V.

This peculiarity led to accelerated conparative tests of LSI son's with fusible links
with a variable and constant load time. Two devices of identical size. 16K bytes,

in which identical information had been recorded were selected for the tests. One
device was connected to a circuit with a constant load, the other --in accordance
with fig. 3. The tests were conducted over a period of 300 hours. Supply voltage
levels in both devices were identical (the voltage drop in the voltage pulse shapers
was compensated for). The devices used were LSI ROH's with fusible links,'pro-
grammed on a series programmer and subjected to four hours of pre-burn-in.

Within 50 hours after the start of the tests, failures--restorations of fused links--
began to appear in the constantly loaded LSI ROM. Eight restorations had occurred in
this ROM by the end of the test (300 hours). The device with the lowered load
withstood the test without a single failure.

Similar tests on two 32K-byte devices showed 13 failures in the constantly loaded
ROM and none in the device made in accordance with fig. 3. Tests on smaller ROH's
also confirmed that reducing the load on the ROM leads to an increase in its
reliability.

Semiconductor ROM's made in accordance with the diagram shown in fig. 3 are used as
microprogram meuory in VZU [external storage units]: the SH-5407 with removable
Iagnetic disks and the SH-5003 magnetic tape unit.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye".
"Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

8545
C50: 1863/217

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.327.66
MASS EXTERNAL STORAGE WITH SEQUENTIAL ACCESS IN AN AUTOMATED CONTROL SYSTEM
Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEMY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 1-3

[Article by engineers V. V. Kovbas, V. K. Dragunov, V. M. Zuyko and V. I.
Kovbasenko, in the section "Automated Control Systems," "Development and Use of
Peripherals in ASU's," (Thematic Selection. continued from No 5. 1981)]

[Excerpt] Complexing of magnetic tape external storage units (UVPMl) is done by
including a nomenclatural UVPML, varying in the number of NHL [magnetic tape storage
units] used, in the UVK [control computer complex] (for example, using the A3116
UVPML in the M-6000 UVK and the SM-S301 UVPML in the SM-b UVK). Also included in
the control computer complex are a nomenclatural NML controller and a varying num-
uer of nomenclatural NML's equipped with a cable for communication with the NML con-
troller (for example, use of the A3181 MML controller and the Yes-5012 “Ml in the
M-6030 and M-4030-l control computer complexes). Developmental and operational ex-
perience shows that UVPML complexing must follow the modular principle by including
in the control computer complex a nomenclatural NML controller and the needed num-
ber of nomenclatural NML's.

Development of incorporated NML's and an NHL controller will yield certain advan-
tagea during operation of them in many systems.

The use in the first phase of SM computers of NMl's having a different interface
with the controller has led to difficulties in development of a controller allowing
connection of the NML's of the entire spectrum of the first phase of the SM compu-
ter system to the SM—B and SM-é control computer complexes. Second-phase magnetic
tape storage units will be produced only with a unified interface. Series produc-
tion of the SM-5301 UVPML has now begun for the SM—3 and su-a control computer com-
plexes; use of this UVPML allows connection of one to four IZOT 5003 or SM-5300
type NML's and also supports interexchange of recorded mangnetic tapes with a
32-bitlmm recording density among the SM, ASVT-M and Yes computer systems.*

Kovbas, V. V.; Kulik, A. 1.; and Ozhiganov, Yu. M., "Organization of External
Storage with Sequential Access in the Small Computer System (SM EVM)." PRIBORY I
SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA. No 5. 1979.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the aggregate, ench UVPML developer solves three problems: reduce cost, increase
reliability and expand the functional capabilities of UVPML's. Any engineering de-
sign is a compromise solution to these problems. The operating experience of the
A3181, A3116 and SM-5301 units in various ASU's indicates that these are highly re-
liable units that are convenient to operate. However, their hard wiring has pre-
vented expanding the diagnostics in the NHL controller; in the final analysis, the
availability of this capability would allow raising the operational reliability of
the units. Reliability and repairability are two very important characteristics of
many ASU's. They determine the capabilities of the system from the position of
solving its basic problem--control.

To improve the technical and operational characteristics of control computer com-
plexes that have the "Common Bus" (05h) interface, the second phase of the small
computer system will use the SM-5003 magnetic tape unit controller; this controller
will allow connecting to a control computer complex the SM-S3OS magnetic tape unit
or any other SM computer magnetic tape unit that has a 2 or 1 m/s magnetic tape
speed.

Use of the PK [phase encoding = P3] recording method allows increasing recording
density on magnetic tape. i.e. increasing the capacity of external storage and the
rate of operation of the control computer complex. With the PE recording method,
one reel of magnetic tape holds 40 Mbytes.

Basic Characteristics of the SM-5003 Magnetic Tape Unit Controller

Maximum number of SM-S305 tape storage units that can be connected: up to 4
Maximum data transmission rate in words per second: 63K
Recording method: PB and NR2
Recording density in bits/mm: with PE 63
with NR2 32

With the BVN-l_[non-return-to-zero - NR2] recording method, ones and zeros are re-
presented by a change or absence thereof. respectively, in the condition of tape
magnetization, while with the PE method-by a change in condition of magnetization.
In the process, if the bit value on a given track matches the value of the preceding
bit. for example, 11 or 00, the magnetization sense changes twice; if the values of
the preceding and following bits differ, the magnetization sense changes once.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye".
"Pribory i sistcmy upravleniyn", i981

8555
C50: 1863/217

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.66.004.13
SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATIC MONITORING OF A MTA TBANS'IISSIOH DEVICE
Moscow PRIBORY I SISTFHY UPRAVLHNIYA in Russian Ho 6, Jun 81 pp 8-9

[Ar-t7icle by engineers V. 1%. Kiselev, V. V. Apenasenko, and V. S. Blagoveshchen-
skin!

[react] The most important characteristic of an APB [apparatum peredachi dan-
nykh—data transmission device] is reliability of data tranmnisaion. It deter-
mines the effectiveness of operation of computer systems. Therefore monitoring
the work of the APD is necessary both in the stage of its manufacture and debug-
sing and in the process of operation. To enhance the quality of information
transmission, in a number of cases devices are used for protection against error
which do not always guarantee high quality of work of the APD, and in s nunber of
ceses, for example, in the transmission of information about physical expertnents,
it is advisable to create a systan for autonomous monitoring of the APD.

The reliability of functioning of an APD is detemined by the effectiveness of the
used methods of operative monitoring. The monitoring procedure must be organized
so as not to allow possible malfunctions and other disturbances in the work of the
equipment.

The structural diagram of an APD, made in accordance with requirements of the came
standard [1,2] and the described system for its monitoring, is presented on the
figure. The system of autonomous APD monitoring includes a control computer (an
“-400 in the case under consideration), an operator's console, a controller and a.
monitor unit and assures the execution of program and apparatus monitoring of all
the main APD assemblies and units.

ing programed monitoring a loop is organized (an information loop) between the
MD being tested and the computer; it permits dynamically testing the efficiency
of inb assemblies and units in "Reception" and “Rita. Transmission" modes. Organi-
zation of the loop provides a monitor unit, which is connected with the APB, on the
one hand, and the control computer, on the other. mring testing of efficiency in
the "Reception" mode the monitor unit synchrmously receives test combinations from
the computer and transmits them in sequential code to the APD input. In testing
the apparatus in the "Data Trasmission" mode the monitor unit synchronously re-
ceives infomation from the AP!) output and transmits received code combinations in
pamllel code to the computer.

The monitor unit is connected to the AP!) by the synchronization assembly and shift
register. The fomer generates cyclic pulses which assure synchmnous reoeption
and transmission. Exchange of data in a sequential code occurs thmugh the shift
register. 22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

1H1!!!
.._. . - .

l - AP!) 10 - Monitor unit

2 - Comunications channel 11 - Shift register

5 - Channel control 12 - Synchronization

4 - Telephone 13 - Manual control

5 - Modem 14 - CANAC main line

6 - Modem adapter (synchronous) 15 - Control computer
7 - Error protection 16 - Controller

8 - General control 17 - Operator's console
9 - Timer

The monitor unit is connected with the came main line throudm an interface, the
composition of which includes an instructim decoder CDDF‘, a service register RGSV
and a data buffer register R613.

The work of separate assemblies of the apparatus (masters, decoders, a progranmed
timer, etc) can be tested by the programmed monitor.

The software or a system of autonomous APD monitoring is mnstructed on the modular
principle and contains a number of test programs, each of which monitors one para-
meter of the apparatus. The composition of the program includes aniliary sub-
routines included directly in the test programs using them, assuring the prepara~
tion and adjustment of the entire system (see figure) for conducting tests. The
system software includes a program monitor intended for the selection and issuance
of any program from the list of tests. The language of directives is used as the
language of communication of the user with the system. The controlling directives
introduced into the computer through the operator's console with a "Consul" elec-
tric typewriter are received and analyzed by the program monitor. By means of a
directive a test number and the monitoring mode (single or multiple) canb'e assigned.

Upon conclusion of reception of the directive the monitor adJusts and starts the
selected test.program.

In the process of the work of test programs when necessary on the "Consul-260" type-
writer instructions are derived which require definite actions from the operator for
the conducting of further testing. Upon conclusion of the work the test programs
anslyze the information obtained in the course of the test and issue the monitoring
results to the operator.

Apparatus monitoring of the APD is accomplished by means of a manual control unit
which is a part of the monitor unit. The manual control permits testing the effi-

ciency of the apparatus by cycles and monitoring it in greater detail than with
the programmed monitoring. 23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The monitor unit, which is a. part of the autonomous monitoring system, consists
of a module made in standard designs of the CAHAC system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Kiselev, V. N., Apanasenko, V. V., and mwdov. Yu. N. "Apparatus for Trans-
mission of Inta of an mperimental mta Collection System." In the collection:

Tckhnicheskoye obespscheniye i zadachi vychislitel'nogo tsentra kollektivnogo

pol'zovaniyn (Hardware and Tasks of s Collective-use Center). Tomsk, Izdavo
TCU, 1977.

2. hpanasenko, V. ‘-!., Kiselev, V. IL, and Davydov, Yu. N. "Principles of Con--
struction of Data Tranmission Apparatus Software." Ibid.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nashiuostmyeniye".
"Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

2174
3:0; 1865/210

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unc 62-229-72
INNSTRIAL MINI-ROBOTS 0P MODULAR GOISTRUCTICXU V111! DISCRETE PNEUMATIC IRIVE
Moscow PRIMER I SISTEHY UPRAVLBIIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 22-23

[Article by engineers D. L. Krolik, S. T. Khsnuksyev, E. A. Human, E. A.
Onishchenko, A. D. Abitov, and H. n. Poyds J

[- Text] At the Design and Tecmologcal harem (Nsl'chik) a series of industrial
mini-robots with thematic two- or nulti-rsnge drives, operating with custoo-nsde
parts with s. ssss of up to 0.5 kg, have been developed. A corresponding combina-
tion of modules as a i‘motion of requiresents of the tectmological process penits
obtaining robots which work with intenediste positioning or with positioning st

two extreme ints. In that case the precision of positioning in both cases is
high enough 1 0.05 m).

It is far simpler to obtain the control syste- of a robot with intemediste posi-
tioning than systems serving similar purposes and having as the object of control
hydraulic and electric servodrives, including with step motors.

The mini-robots under consideration can be made up of five Iain modules: two-range,
lulu-range, elevation, rotation and transverse displacement (support). Each
module is an independent functional mit which Ins its on monastic drive, and if
necessary also memtic distributors, position sensors, dampers, valves, etc. The
meumstic drives work on compressed air with a. pressure of at least 0.35 "Fe. (3.5

Ire-force). Shown on Figure l is a diagram of the Bin-0.5-254PV pneunstic sini-
robot, composed of the first four nodules.

ﬂ

Figure 1. Diagram of the Han-0.5-254PV
mini-robot. '
s: to pneumatic distributors

K nun-on (mam-lawn”

 

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Two-range module 1 is made in the form of a pneumatic cylinder 3 with the possi-
bility of movement in casing 4. where brakes are installed to fix the memtic
cylinder in the necessary position along the axis. The stroke of rod 6 of the
pneumatic cylinder is 128 an. The cylinder is also filled with a rod stroke of
200 m. The rod is connected by the anterior 2 and posterior 8 cross-piece with
stem 7, which moves in guides 5. The stem prevents rotation of the rod around the
axis. 0n the anterior end of rod 6 there is a seat for fastening the clamp or
wrist of the industrial mini-robot. On each cross-piece a hydraulic damper is
fastened for deceleration at the end of the stroke back and forth. The action of
the damper is regulated by a set screw.

In the case of independent application the two-range module permits composing in-
dustrial mini-robots for positioning the clamp at two points with a stroke of the
latter of 128 or 200 mm.

The multi-r-ance module 9 represents a mematic cylinder 10 in which six complex
pistons are set, five of them with shanks (Fig 1 shown three pistons). The first
complex piston is fastened by projections behind the shank of the cover 12, the
next one behind the shank of the preceding one, etc. The sixth piston is connected
with the rod 1} which emerges througi the cover. The pistons from the first to the

sixth have strokes of 2 (2'). 4 (22), 8 (25), 16 (24), 32 (25) and 64(26)amrespec-
tivcly. Thanks to the constant feeding of compressed air into the rod cavity all
the pistons are shifted into the extreme rigit position. hiring the feeding of
compressed air from the pneumatic distributor mder any of the pistons the sixth
piston is shifted to the left by the amount of the stroke of that piston toward
which the air was fed, on account of the difference of pressures in the piston and
rod cavities. By thus feeding compressed air to all the pistons simultaneously or
in a definite combination it is possible to obtain a meumatic cylinder rod stroke
of 126 mm with a discreteness of 2 nu. The rod of the sixth piston has an opening
for a pin fastened on the pneumatic sylinder of the two-range module. The combin-

ation of two- and multi-range modules gives a smary stroke of the clasp of 254 m
with a discreteness of 2 Inn.

By adjusting the washers placed between the pistons the stroke of each piston is
assured with an error of about 0.01 In during a stroke up to and over 8 m respec-
tively. The srmary error, tests have shown, is in the range of 1 0.05 am.

which has at the top a developed flange for fastening the arm of the industrial
mini-robot. The pneunatic cylinder can move in the guides of a post 14 which is
the casing of the module. Piston 16 is fastened in the post. then air is fed into
the pneumatic cylinder (not shown on Fig 1) the casing of the pneumatic cylinder 17
moves, with the arm fastened to it. Brackets with pneumatic distributors are fas-
tened to the mematic cylinder flange.

The rotation module 15 represents a geared shaft with a flange, rotating in bear
ings set in the casing. The elevation module and arm of the industrial mini-robot
are mounted on the flange. Placed in the same casing is a mematic cylinder with
a strip which interacts with the geared shaft and rotates the flange sromd the
vertical axis. The rotation module assures the work of the industrial mini-robot
in cylindrical coordinates.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The transverse displacement (support) module (not shown on the diagram) is a weld-
ing station with guides on which a carriage moves. The remaining modules of the
industrial mini-robot are mounted on it. The transverse displacement nodule accom-
plishes the work of industrial mini-robots in rectangular coordinates.

Each module has pneunatic distributors and valves, and also sensors to obtain in-
formation about the sequence of the work.

The enmerated nodules were used in making up the planned RIB-0.545419% BER-0.5-

200K, PHR-O.5-254KS and HER-0.2-126PV robots, the main parameters of which are pre-
sented in the table.

Parameter '———W————.—M__°dL—__
m—o.5~254PV PER-0.2-126PV PHR-OoS-ZOOK Hm-o.5-254Ks

Number of degrees of

mobility 3 2
Amomt of horizontal
displacements, in m 254 126 200 longitudinal 254
'I‘rsnsv'erse 350
Discreteness, in m 2 - Longitudinal 2

Transverse 4, 5
Amomt or vertical

displacements, in mm 50/35 30 35
Positioning error,

in m Positional-cyclic Cyclic Positional-cyclic
Number of connections

with extemal equipment Up to 10 Up to 5 Up to 12 _ Up to 10
Miss of displaced load,

in kg oes 0.2 0.5
Dimensions, in mm 670x 340: 710 350: 220: 400 810x 220:: 600 805:: 7051 500
Planned cost, in rubles 8,500 8,000 3,500 6,700

On the basis of the work or the HUI-0.545% working in rectangular coordinates
a complex was created for packing blanks of pemanent magnets of complex form into
cassettes. Oriented blanks arrive over a two-channel vibrating chute to a stop
mounted on a support. The robot clasps two blanks with adjustable tongs, trans-

and transversely, on account of a combination of multi- and two-range cylinders).
Cassettes are automatically replaced in the complex.

a vertically moving wrist is a robotized stamping complex intended for automatic
feeding to a press, model KD-2124 with interchangeable punches, of previously
punched out charts of four varieties of parts of the amplifier chassis and for the

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the forced extraction of finished parts from the punch. The dimensions of blanks
in the direction of feeding the punch are 30-110 mm and across the direction of
feeding are 100-200 m, the blanks are 0.5-1.5 an thick and have a mass of 60-120
3 and the material is fermmametic.

Figure 2. Pneunokinematic
diagram of s robotized stamping
complex.

 

The complex operates in the following manner (Fig 3). hiring movement of the robot
rod forward the servo hook 2 separates the blank from the stack 3 and moves it into
the intermediate position on the loader 4 in template 5 for final coordination of
the blank. The electromamet 6 then attracts the blank fed to the leader in the
preceding cycle and sets it in the punch 7 of the press 10. Simultaneously the
extensible electromagnetic clasp 2 set on hinge 11 withdraws from the pmch the
part bent in the preceding cycle and drops it into container 8. Pnematic cylinder
"' is intended for raising and lowering the wrist containing the electmmaalet and

clasp during the withdrawal and insertion of the blank in the template of the loader
and punch.

A kinematic elevator-accmnulator with a step drive, developed in the Design and
Technological Bureau, is used to feed the stack of blanks under the hook.

The use of three different working organs on the wrist of the robot in combination
with the loader pemits extracting previously oriented blanks from the stack, de-
finitively coordinating the blank and setting it in the punch, extracting the fin-
ished part by force from the punch and dropping it in the container sutultaneously
after a single movement of the robot arm forward, which increases the productivity
and precision of work of the industrial mini-robot as compared with ordinary two-
handed rotating robots, and also permits dispensixg with a special valve device to
feed the part into the seizure zone.

According to preliminary data the working cycle of tho robotized stamping complex
must not exceed 3-3.5 days.

In the system of programmed control of a robotized stamping complex. provision is
made for the gathering of information by means of external sensors and blocking in
emergency situations. The main functions of the sensors are observation of the

upper level of the stack of blanks in the cassette; monitoring the left and right
positions of the robot on and the upper and lower positions of the wrist of the

robot hand, the correctness of placement of the blank in the punch, the removal of
the part fun the punch and the upper and lower positions of the press slide. The

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R6botized complexes, the work of which has been examined in the article, confim

the effectiveness of using robots of the industrial mini-whet series for the auto-
mation of technological processes.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'etvo "Hashinostmyeniye",
”Pribory i sisteny upz'avleniya", 1981

2174
050: 8144/1449

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UH: 621.7.077862-85
MANIPUIATOR VI'I'H I’NEII‘IOACOUSTIC SFNSOR OF EXTEMAL INFORMATIM
Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEHY UPRAVIJZNIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 210-25

[Article by A. n. Shel'pyakov, engineer, and c. P. Isupov, candidate of technical
sciences

age of the part through the working zone , the welding of non-rigid structures on
a conveyer, etc, can be done only with manipulators which have sensors of extemal
intonation. In spite of the variety of such technological operations, this is

comon to them: the need to search for a part when it is imprecisely placed on the

working position, with subsequent withdrawal of the manipulator hand into the work-
in}; zone.

Figure 1 shows a drawing of a very simple manipulator with a memoacoustic sensor
of cxtemal information (a memoacoustic locator) which permits withdrawal of the
manipulator hand into the zone in which the part is located regardless of the
position of that part (within the range of actiOn of the manipulator hand). The
manipulator contains a pneunatic drive 10 on the rod of which is a memoacoustic
sensor, consisting of a memoaooustic generator 6 of the type of a Hartman gener-
ator working at a frequency of 40 kHz, and an acoustopneunatic receiver , made to
utilize the effect of destruction of a laminar Jet by ultrasonic waves 1]. 'Ihe

absence of a part in the zone of action of the sensor reaches 2 kPa. The Output
signal from the acoustomeunatic receiver 4 is fed through the ST-SS "V019." fluid-
jet element to PP67-21 amplifiers l and 2, connected to the left and right cavities
of pneumatic cylinder 10. The guide 7 together with the printing element 8 permits
recording the displacement of the rod on the recorder 9 and detemining the pre-

cision of positioning of the drive at different velocities of its motion and dif-
ferent distances from the sensor to the object 5.

The manipulator works as follows. At the initial moment the piston with the sen-
sor is in the far left position. The sensor of external information is switched
into operation by feeding the feeding pressures p 1 and p 2 to the generator 6 and
receiver 4. In the absence of a part there are he reﬂec d ultrasonic waves and
pressure on the acoustopneunatic receiver 4 is maximal. It switches on the fluid-
jet element 3, as a result of which the amplifier 1 operates and the piston with
the sensor moves to the right toward the object 5. When the sensor reaches the'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1. Diagram of manipulator with

pneunoacoustic sensor of external infor-

mation:

p03 - feeding pressure of fluid-Jet
element;

X — coordinate of stoppage points;_

L - distance between object and pneumo-
aooustic sensor.

 

object 5 the acoustic vibrations irradiated by the generator 6 are reflected from
the object and impinge in the receiver 4, which leads to turbulization of the jet
in the latter and a pressure drop on its outlet. The fluid-Jet element 3 is
switched on, the amplifier 1 is switched off and amplifier 2 operates, as a result
of which the rod motion is accelerated and it moves to the left.

Upon emergence of the edge of object 5 beyond the limits of the zone of sensitivity
of the sensor, the pressure on the outlet of the receiver 4 increases again, and
this causes switching of the liquid-jet element 5 on, and the cycle is repeated.
Thus the drive accomplishes scanning motion aromd the edge of the object: during
movement of the object the drive overtakes it and again tracks the edge.

Figure 2. Distribution of coordinates

of stoppage points of the drive of a

manipulator equipped with a memoacoustic

sensor of external intonation at L s

a 200 Is:

1 a: 3; at drive velocities toward the
object (to the right) of 0.18 and
0.13 m/s respectively;

2 a 4: at drive velocities from the
object (to the left) of 0.15 and
0.08 m/s respectively;

 

m m1: absolute frequency of coordinates
‘ of stoppage points in the definite
interval X;
a N: total nunber of measurements.

Statistical processing of the recording of scanning motion permits determining the
precision of positioning of the drive. Shown on Figure 2 by a solid line are
experimental curves of the distribution of coordinates of stoppage points of the
drive at the distance L between the premoacoustic sensor and the object of 200 m.
Also given there is the amplitude of the seaming motion. The experimental data
are well described by Gaussian curves (broken lines). constructed by smoothing out
the empirical distribution 2]. The statistical processing was done on the
results of 50 measurements N I 50) at different drive velocities. The velocity
was changed by installing a valve in the mewatic line between the amplifier 1 and

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

constructed in the absence of a valve and curves 3 and 4 with a valve 0.7 m in
diameter. 1n the fomer case the amplitude of the seaming motion was 26.8 —,
and in the latter it was 19 m. The difference of drive velocities to the left and
right is caused by the difference in effective areas of the pneunatic cylinder pis-
ton on the left and right sides. The table presents stmlnary_data on the precision
of positioning as a function of the drive velocity v, where X is the coordinate of

the center of grouping of the stoppage points; 8 is the mean-square deviation of
positioning.

 

Positioning error

Vithout valve m
v in m/s 0.18 0.15 0.13 0.08
L in mm 100 200 100 200 100 200 100 200
gurve Ho (Pig 2) - 1 - 2 - 3 - 4
X in mm 0.97 1.52 26.7 28.1 4.5 4 23.6 23
S in mm 0.42 0.73 0.27 0.43 0.39 0.5 0.24 0.35
25 in m 0.84 1.47 0.54 0.86 0.78 l 0.48 0.67

The precision of positioning of the manipulator drive is detemined by the forces
of inertia of the mobile part of the drive, the time constants of individual ele-
ments of the systen, the hysteresis of the liquid-jet element and the curvature
characteristic pout s f(x)-the dependence of the pressure pout on the accusto-

pneumatic receiver on the displacement at. The curvature of the ctnwaoteristic is
affected, other conditions being equal, by the form of the body to be located and
the distance L (larger for plates and smaller for cylinders). The positioning
error is reduced with decrease of the distance L, which is caused by increase of
the curvature of the characteristic pout = f(x).

The maximun distance Lm at which the edge of the object is still traced depends
on the directional pattern and the feeding pressure of the sensor. In
addition, it is important to also know the influence of extraneous objects on the
tracing precision. By selecting the feeding pressures p01 and p02 of the genera-
tor and receiver, a distance L of 300 Ill was selected. It has been computed
that extraneous objects at a d cc of 500 m or more from the sensor have no
influence on the precision of tracing on the edge of the object.

(~hnn

wrl ' '/""T"I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-.

Shown on Fig 3 are the dependences of the distance L on the dimensions (B -
width, D = diameter) of plane and cylindrical bodiesmﬁr the following feeding
pressures of the circuit 1901 = 0.2 HPa and p01, po2 and p05 are 30, 10 and 7 kPa

respectively. Plane objects are traced at a distance L of up to 300 m,"and
cylindrical at a distance of up to 220 m. The distancguL can be increased by
increasing the power of the pnetnoacoustic generator, whichnﬁ achieved, in turn,
by increasing the "eeding pressure p 1. Noise immity of the sensor from extemal
sound sources is assured by selectin sensitivity of the acoustopneumatic receiver
only toward a definite frequency range [1] and a directivity of reception of
acoustic vibrationa. These measures are accomplished by selecting geometric dimen-
sions of the acoustopnematic receiver and execution of its input in the form of

a tube of a certain length and diameter.

A necessary condition of reliable work of a manipulator is careful soundproofing
of the acoustomeunatic receiver on the side of the mematic generator, as during
the interaction of direct and reﬂected waves interference is observed which leads
to false operations.

Experimental investiations have shown that a tracin system (a mematic drive
with a pneunoacoustic sensor of extemal information permits remote tracing of an
object of different form with an error of $1.5 m and withdrawal of the manipulator
hand into the zone where the part is located when the latter has a nanme c113 -
sition on the working area. In that case the part can be both imobile and mob 1e
with a velocity not exceeding that of the manipulator drive.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Shel'pyakov, A. I!" and Isupov, G. P. "Fhrperimental Investigation of the
Transition of Laminar Flow Into Turbulent lhder the Effect of Acoustic Vibra-
tions." INZIE-NEmo-FIZICHFSKIY ZHURNAL. 1978, Vol 35, Ho 3.

2. rim-444:2. Feetodika statisticheskoy obrabotki empiricheskikh dannykh (Proced-
ure for Statistical processing of Empirical Data).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye",
"Pribory i sistemy upmvleniya", 1981

2174
cso: 8144/1448

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621 .317.729.2:62-229.72

PROBE MANIPULATOR? PCP. INVESTIGATION OF SB’LIWNNC'IOR MATERIALS AND STRUC‘IVRES ON
PLATES

Moscow PRIBORY I 3151‘?!“ UPRAVLENIYA in Russian :10 6, Jun 81 pp 26-27

[Kr-tide by engineers a. N. Rachkin, E. c. Gasilov, B. I. Kudagin, end A. H. Gor-
bacheva]

ﬁery The need to improve and further develop the technology of production of
semiconductor materials and structures on plates poses the paramount task of in-
creasing the effectiveness of laboratory and industrial monitoring of their qual-
ity. In that case an especially important role is attributed to monitoring methods
which have high metrological indicators.

"0 monitor those parameters it is necessary to assure a reliable electrical connec-
tion between the object being monitored or investigated andthemeasuring apparatus.
misting probe installations do not guarantee reliability of the parameters being
monitored, are imonvenient to operate and, as a rule, are made by the users
themselves under one diameter of the bases being monitored. Series-produced equip-
ment of the type of "Zond A4" and "Zond ASH", used to monitor the parameters of
integrated microcircuits and monitor semiconductor materials, and also structures
on plates, prove to be economically disadvantageous, and their use to monitor
electrophysical parameters by existing one-, two-, three- and four-probe methods
presents considerable technical difficulty, and at times is completely impossible
without major modifications of the design.

At the Penza branch of the All-Union Scientific Research Technological Institute
of Instrument Making three modifications of probe manipulators have been developed
which can be used to monitor the charge carrier concentration in epitaxial layers,
the surface potential, the density of the surface state, the size and stability of
the charge in the dielectric and on the interface, etc, by the method of volt-
Paraday characteristics. Probe manipulators assure precise installation of probes
on.the base to be monitored thanks to the application of micrometer screws, which
permit making a precise displacement of probes in all three planes, constant force
of the probe needle spring on the base, monitoring of bases of different diameter,
low capacitance in view of reduction of the metallic mass of the needle-holder and
the use of high-frequency connectors and high-frequency cable which eliminate ad-
justments.

The manipulator desigl makes it possible to use them in both laboratory investi-
gations and in the composition of measuring equiment in the process of debuaping
and monitoring of individual parameters of technological processes of production
of semiconductor instrunents and microcircuits.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1. Single-probe manipulator
l — base; 2 -- stand; other key
nmbers explained in text

 

Figure 1 shows a single-probe manipulator. The displacement mechanism 4 assures a
smooth rise and fall of the probe tip 3 on a base according to a given law, elim-
inates the probability of shock of the probe tip against the base and guarantees
smooth rise of the contact pressure to the prescribed amount. Thus the base is
protected against damage and the probe tip against bluntness.

The manipulator assembly includes a set of movable tables 2, intended for the
arrangement and fastening of bases with diameters of 45, 60, 75 and 90 am. The
bases are fastened with a vacuum suction device. The measurement sigmal is taken
and issued by an HR 50-2-22 cable and an SR 50-731? high-ﬁequency connector, which
pemits assuring a stray capacitance of not more than 10 pF.

 

Figure 2 presents a schematic diagram of a two-probe manipulator; its technical
characteristics are given in the table. It consists of a base 1 on which are
arranged two movable probe-holders 2 with probe tips 5, a replaceable single-
coordinate table 11 and a stand 4 with a microscope 6.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFK1M. USE ONLY

 

Mani ator
I-‘arameter
single-probe two-probe universal
Diameter of bases to be monitored, mm 45.6-75.9
llunber of probes 1 2 1-8
Probe contact pressure, Rs 0.6 Controlled
0.05-0.6
Displacement of object stage, mm
on X coordinate - 25
on Y coordinate 125
on 2 coordinate - 5 '
Displacement of probe-holder with probe, mm
on X coordinate 50
on Y coordinate -
on Z coordinate 17 15
.‘dditionnl angular rotation of probe-
hsl-Jcr, angular degrees Within limits
of object stage 15
E-ksstening of bases on object stage By means of vacuum
Dimensions, mm 215x220x215 490x460x235 600x510x235

'Ehc removable stands permit arranging bases with diameters of 45, 60, 75 and 90 mm
on them and fastening them with a vacuum suction device. The handle 9 of the stand,
with the base of a cam-screw mechanism fastened on it, assures smooth rise and fall
of the stand 11 by 3 me. By means of the handle and micrometer screw 10 the stand

with the base is moved in the range of :25 mm with an error of positioning not
worse than :10 micrometers.

'rhe probe tips are firmly fastened and have the possibility of independent movement
on the X and Y axes, which is important when the sharp probe is precisely installed
on a structure or contact area. For the installation of probes at a selected point
of a monitored base it is necessary to move the probe-holder with handles 7 and 8
for the necessary distance along the X coordinate, and then with handle 9 raise the
stand to contact the needle of the probe with the base. The moment of contact is
set upon ignition of sigzal bulb 3.

Just as in the single-probe manipulator the use of RR 50-2-22 cable and the SR 50-

75? high-frequency connector greatly reduces the stray capacitance arising in the
measurement circuit.

The universal manipulator presented on Figure 3 permits solving a wider range of
measurement tasks and implementing various methods of measuring semiconductor
materials, epitaxial layers and structures, for example, one-, two-, three-, four-
and rive-probe methods. The universal manipulator is mounted on a base 1 where a
replaceable two-coordinate stand 6, intended for the arrangement, fastening and
pesitioning oi‘ mi-'rocircuit bases with diameters of 45. 60, 75 and 90 mm. Plates

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are also fastened by a vacuun suction device. By means of handles 2 and 10 of the
micrometer screws precise movement of the stand along each of the X and Y coordin-

ates by 125 m from the middle position is possible. The positioning error is not
more than :10 micrometers. -

0n stand 9 is a ring 3 which can be raised or lowered by 15 mm by means of handle
4. In recesses o." the ring as mam, as eight modified probe-holders 5 with probe
tips 'I can be arranged. Designwise they are similar to probe-holders with probe
tips of a two-probe manipulator and have the same possibilities.

By means of a binocular microscope 8 mounted on a separate stand it is possible to
not only monitor the quality of contact but also to establish the required distance

between probes, for example, in monitoring the resistivity of the microcircuit
bases.

Probe manipulators of all types include tungsten probe tips, but the installations

permit using probes or tips also or other types, for example, nickel, depending on
the measurement tasks.

Probe manipulators of the described types can be connected to measuring apparatus
of any type without modification and are suitable for the solution of a very broad'
spectrum of tasks of measumment and monitoring.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostmyeniye".
"Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

2174
csc: 1863/210

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEV How 0? Yes COMPUTERS

Moscow PRIBORY l SISTEMY UPRAVLF‘NIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 30-31
[Zrticle by A. B. Shirokova, methods specialist of the "Computer" pavilion, Inhibi-
tion of Achievements of the USSR National Hconomy7

ﬁezg "New Models of Yes Computers"-such is the name of an exhibit which has
been opened in the "Computer” pavilion, Exhibition of Achievements of the USSR
National Economy. 'IVo operating computers of the Yes "Wad-2" are being demon-
strated there now: the Yes-1055 and the Yes-1045. The Yes "mad-2" is a further
development and improvement of the Yes “mad—1" computers. It represents a family
of program-compatible third-generation computers with a unified software system
and a single list of peripherals and data processing equipment ﬁ-ﬂ. The Yes-1035
and Yes-1045 computers are intended to solve a wide range of scientific-teemiical
economic, information, logical and special tasks in an autonomous mode of opera-
ticns and in a mode of systems intonation processing. They have program and in-
formation compatibility with the Yes computers produced earlier.

The Yes-1035 computer is a stationary universal computer which replaced the Yes-
1022 computer, with an operating speed of 140,000-160,000 operations per second.
The capacity of its main memory is 256K bytes and it Occupies an area of 110 m2.

In comparison with the Yes-1022 the Yes-1035 has been provided with additional
ruirdware and software which enhance its possibilities: a rechargeable micmpmgram
memory, a diagiostic system, means of increasing reliability, high precision of
computations with a floating point, and compatibility with the "Minsk-32" computer.

1% provide rechargeability of the microprogram memory, the computer has an inte-
grated circuit control memory capable of storing microprograms charged into the
memory from the console panel magnetic tape store. If necessary the user can
replace micmpmaams stored in the memory. This equipment assures simplicity and
convenience of change of the computer configuration. By means of a special set of
diagnostic microprograms charged, if necessary, from the panel store, defects are
automatically located and indicated. The microdiaylosis system checks the working
capacity of the processor for 10-15 minutes. Reliability is enhanced in the fol-
lowing manner. hiring reference to the main memory or the micmgram memory a cor-
recting code is formed which serves for checking the presence of error. Upon the

appearance of a single error the information is corrected, and a double error only
is recorded.

Provision also is made for automatic repetition of instructions during malfunctions.
During the appearance of a malfunction in the processor, control is transnitted

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the repetition microprogram, which restores the situation preceding the mal-
mnction, and transmits control to the section of the microprogram where the mal-
function occurred. ihus upon the appearance of random malfunctions normal func-
tioning of the processors is assured. The error is registered in the memory for
analysis. High precision of execution of computations with a ﬂoating point is
realised by an instmction system which includes aritlnetic instructions which pro-
cess operands with a floating point with a length of 128 digits.

0n the basis of application of software and hardware for simulation of "Minsk-32"
computer programs, the conversion of programs into source languages and data trans-
fer the compatibility of the Yes-1035 computer with the "Minsk-32" computer is as-
sured, and this permits using the extensive ﬁnd of' applied programs developed for
the "Minsk-32" computers, thus freeing the user from costly reprograming.

The central unit of the Yes-1055 includes a central processor and channels con-
stmcted on the basis of a. single standard rack (Yes-2435). The main set is com-
posed of a central processor with byte-multiplex and two selector channels, a

main memory, processor power equipment, an operator's panel, a panel magietic tape
store and periphemls-(nuametic tape stores with a control, interchangeable magnetic
disk stores with :1 control, punched-card and punched-tape input/output devices, data
preparation devices). In the unit demonstrated at the exhibit new magnetic disk
stores with a capacity of 100 Mbytes (“995066) were displayed for the first time.

The Yes-1035 computer software contains a disk operating system DOS/Yes, an operat-
ing system OS/Yes, software for the realization of compatibility with the "Minsk-32"
computer and a set of tecl'mical servicing prey-ems.

The Yes-1045 computer is included in models of Yes second-line computers. Its
capacity for solving scientific-technical and economic tasks is 870,000 and 530,000
instructions per second respectively. The capacity of its main memory is 1-2 Mbytes.
As regards design, the processor, input/output ehzmnels, main memory and power sys—
tem are arranged in three standard stands: the processor and channels in the first,
the main memory with a capacity of 1 I-lbyte in the second, and the power system the
channel-channel adapters and the logic retranslator in the third.

A number of new possibilities are provided for in the Yes-1045 computer: virtual
memory facilities, an expanded set of instructions (as many as 183), high-speed
channels and a ﬂexible structure. The virtual memory facilities assure the crea-
tion of an expanded simulated main memory with the use of interchangeable magnetic
disk stores. The virtual memory permits the programmer to use as many as 16 Hbytes
of addressable memory in his program and eliminates the need to designate fixed

regions of the real main memory for the program, and the operating system distri-
butes the memory dynamically. .

Ehe him-speed channels (byte- and unit-multiplex) assure connection of a broad set
of peripherals for various functional purposes to the computer. The carrying capa-
city of the input/output channels is 5 “bytes/s. The ﬂexible structure permits
creating various configurations according to the requirements of the user.

A matrix processor, means of direct control and organization of a two-processor
complex, chamel-channel adapters and a logo retranslator can be used in the
Yes-1045 computer. Application of a processor connected to the Yes-1045 computer.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

across :1 special interface increases the effectiveness of the solution of problems
in image recomition, the processing of geophysical data and other specific tasks.
By creating a comnon field of the main and external memory for the two processors
working under the control of one operating system, two-processor systems are con-
structed. Multimachine complexes are organized by means of channel-channel adap-
ters, means of direct control and the general field of the external memory. An
operating system assures the work of each computer in a complex.

Depending- on the requirements of the user the functional and operating possibili-

ties of the computer can be expanded through the introduction of additional hard-
ware.

'I'ne Yes-1045 computer software has a powerful operating system 03 Yes and the fol-

lowing sets of programs: technical servicing, non-autonomous tests of equipment
and microdiaemostic programs.

On the basis: of the exhibit "New Models of Yes Computers" in the "Computer" pavil-
ion specialists can obtain qualified consultations on hardware and software of Yes
computers. Consultations are provided by staff members of the Scientific Produc-
tion Association "Algorithm" (Moscow) and the "Computer" pavilion of the Exhibition
of Achievements of the USSR National Economy. One can become acquainted at the

rzviJion with the 1981’ schedule for the holding of consultations on Yes computer
hordware and software.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Yeﬁ-1035—elektmnnaya vychislitel'naya mashina (The Yes-1035 computer). Mos-
cow, Vneshtorgizdat, 1980.

2. Incktromaya vybhislitel'naya mashina Yes-1045 (The Yes-1045 Computer). Mos-
cow, 1979.

3. Katalog Yes EVE-l (Yes Computer Catalog). Moscow, Stioyizdat, 1980.

COIYBIGi"; Izdatel'stvo "I'Iashinostroyaniye".
"Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

2174
cso: 1863/210

40

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DATA TELEPROCESSING SYSTEM HARDHARB COMBINATION

Moscow PRIBORX I SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp S-b

[Article by v.1. Khomyakov. candidate of technical sciences, and Yu.H. Omel'yanchuk
and V.P. Kozyr', engineers: "Features of the Design and Application of Data
Teleprocessing Equipment")

[Excerpts] One possible variant of a K15 [hardware combination] for small ISS's
[information reference systems] and 108's [information control systems] has been
developed at the Scientific Research Institute of Peripheral Equipment (Kiev) [5].

Key Technical Characteristics of Hardware Combination

Interface with computer Multiplex channel
Carrying capacity in bytes/s 20 K
Number of channels (together with US

[interface devicel) Up to 32
Type of communication channels which can be

connected Two- or four-wire assigned non-

multiplex telephone and tele-

graph communications channels

and physical circuits
character code in transmission through

channels:
Telegraph “TR-2H
Telephone ROI—7

Transmission range through assigned telephone
lines in km, respectively for four- and
two—wire connection systems with transmission
speeds in bits/s of:

200 and 600 25-20 and 10
1200 and 2600 16-12 and 8-6
0800 and 9600 10—7 and 5-4

Transmission range through assigned telegraph
communication lines with transmission speeds

of 50 and 100 bits/s in km 15-8
-Interface with terminal equipment 82 (V26) interface
Method:
of data exchange with terminals Semiduplex
of establishing coamunication Automatic
41

FOIlOFFKJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of data transmission
of modulation in transmission of data through
telegraph channels

of modulation in transmission of data through
telephone channels

Combination of number of telephone and tele-
graph channels in UUPD [data transmission
control device] and US-l [interface device]
units

Size of picture on screen of video terminal
in an

Number of:

Characters in line
Lines

Size of character in mm

Character set

Formation of display

Regeneration frequency in "2

Capacity of buffer storage in bytes

Input and editing facilities

Sequential asynchronous

Uni- and bipolar direct-current
signals (60 to 25 mA)

Bipolar direct-current low-level
signals (1 0.76 mA)

Variant
250 x 190

56 (64)

20

5.5 X 3.5

96

On television raster
50

1280

Keyboard and tag

In order to produce hard copy of the information read out on the screen. the abili-
ty to connect a printer to the nu [buffer unit] of the VT-l video terminal is
provided. The hardware of the STD [data teleprocessing system] can be expanded

by adding to it asynchronous modems (e.g., Yes-8006's), used for considerably in-
creasing the number of remote video terminals, as well as by connecting type
DZM-180 high-speed printers which serve the purpose of printing out data from the

video terminal's screen.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Haahinostroyeniye".
1981

8831
cso: 1863/216

42

"Pribory i sistemy upravleniya".

FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC (621.39 6.001:68l.322):681.327.00

ASPECTS OF THE EMPLOYMENT 0F PERIPHERALS IN AUTOMATED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIKCUITS
Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEHY UYRAVLENIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 6-7

[Article by v.6. Tabarnyy, candidate of technical sciences, and V.A. Hironchenko
and “.1. Lobak, engineers]

[Text] The development of microelectronic technology has confronted developers of
integrated circuits (18's) with a number of problems associated with the combined
miniaturization of electronic components and computer hardware (SVT) units. The
employment in this equipment of made-to-order integrated circuits which have con-
siderably improved the technical and economic indicators of SVT has necessitated
the creation of comparatively inexpensive but efficient automated design systems
(SAPR's) for IS's (SAPRIS's). This is due to the fact that microcircuits made to
order are often produced in relatively small lots. as the result of which the time
required for and the cost of designing them are decisive factors.

As testified to by know-how gained in the development of SAPRIS's in our country
and abroad, these requirements are satisfied most completely by SAPR's functioning
in the man-computer dialog mode. Such systems have been given the name interactive
(ISAPRIS's).

Usually the most formalized stages in the design of integrated circuits are per-
formed automatically in an ISAPRIS, such as checking and diagnosis of input data,
various transformations, numerical modeling of electrical processes, production of
control data media and the like. In the dialog (interactive) mode problems are
solved which have not been formalized at the present time. For example, at the
structural design stage the problem arises of placing topological figures on a
plane surface with the possibility of deforming them for purposes of reducing the
area of the integrated circuit chip. This problem can be solved effectively only
by the combined work of a human being-the developer of the integrated circuit--
and a computer, whereby the designer is assigned the creative role in this dialog
and the computer makes a constant check of the permissibility of his actions and
makes possible the required transformations of numerous data.

This article elucidates know-how gained in the development of the first phase of

an ISAPRIS for integrated circuits employing HTS [metal-insulator semiconductor]

transistors, which makes it possible to create integrated circuits to the fourth
degree of integration for microelectronic elements and computer hardware units.

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ISAPRIS which has been developed represents a complicated multiprocessor and
multifunctional dialog system of the human-computer type having in its structure
the following pieces of equipment: computing complexes (M-4030 computer, SM-é
UVK [control computer complex]) with a basic combination of peripherals; special-
purpose peripheral and terminal units (a KPA-lZOO coordinatograph, EM-709 graphic
information coders, an A5122 graphic information readout and preparation unit
(USPGI), AP7251 and AP7252 graph plotters, A5433 EPP graphic displays and a wide-
format AS4310 graphic screen-type designer's console (an Shc EPP—2)); interfaces,
connection equipment and office facilities; ASVT 2.2 [modular hardware system]
OSRV [real-time operating system] and DOS [disk operating system] operating sys-
tems; control, service and applied programs of the system; and organizational and
methodological support systems.

The technical characteristics of the peripheral and terminal equipment in the above
list determine many characteristics of the system as a whole. For example, one
important characteristic is the requirement of the necessary coordinate precision
with good response of the system in the process of dialog between the designer

and computer. With regard to response the peripheral equipment can be divided
arbitrarily into equipment with comparatively poor response (coders, graph plotters
and coordinatographs) and equipment with relatively good response (graphic dis-
plays--the designer's screen consoles). This has resulted in division into three
basic steps of the process of dialog designing at various stages of the develop-
ment of integrated circuits:

”reparatory, at which large arrays of data (functional and electrical circuits,
chtches of the topology of integrated circuits) are entered by means of graphic
data readers and the data are processed in the computer together with a check and
diagnosis of errors (fig 1).

The dialog per se, when the editing of texts and drawings takes place, along with
the input of new relatively small fragments and manipulations with groups of graphic
items; these operations are performed by means of the graphic display. which is

the integrated circuit designer's basic tool at his automated work place (ARM).

The output of design results onto graph plotters and coordinatographs for the final
documentation or a check and the preparation of new modifications at individual
stages of the development of integrated circuits (fig 2).

At each stage the requirements for these peripherals are determined by such morpho-
logical variables of representations of the integrated circuit being designed as
the functional diagram. sketch of the topology, electrical circuit diagram and
topology.

The semiautomatic graphic information coders used in the ISAPRIS which has been
developed make it possible to code points, lines, outlines and characters of
various types with a sufficient degree of coordinate precision and with acceptable
speed. When working with the USPGI the designer does not have to be concerned
with the horizontal placement of a drawing on the base of the plotting board, since

"shrinkage" of the material on which the circuit is represented is automatically
taken into account in the USPGI. The existence of a direct link between the USPGI
and an SH—b UVK makes it possible for the developer to carry on an active dialog

with the computer already at the stage of the entry of graphic data, which

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

considerably shortens the time for the correction of errors at the labor intensive
stage of entering and checking source data.

 

Figure 1. An Integrated Circuit Designer's Automated Work Place; Stage of
Coding Large-Scale Integrated Circuits with an IBM—709 Coder

 

Figure 2. Stage of Drawing Large-Scale Integrated Circuits on a KIM-1200
Coordinatograph

45

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR(ﬂHﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY

The basic means of enabling a dialog mode in thc ISAPRIS described are graphic
displays-designer's screen consoles, the A5433 EPP and A56310 Shc BPP-Z. The
presence of a graphic display possessing broad capabilities in the representation
and editing of graphic and alphanumeric information gives the interactive mode
considerable flexibility.

At the disposal of the integrated circuit designer are three screen console operat-
ing modes--text, mosaic and vector--each of which provides convenience in the de-
signer's work at a specific stage in the development of a microcircuit. Line seg-
ments and an extensive set of characters can be placed on the display's screen

in two simulated layers and are isolated by means of intensified image brightness,
which makes it possible easily to distinguish individual sections of a circuit.
Capabilities for the selective formation or erasure of individual sections of an
image, shift and rotation of fragments of a circuit ensure an effective and effi-
cient editing mode.

The units for reading out graphic information in the ISAPRIS are, in addition to
the display. an AP7251 roll-type graph plotter and a KPA-lZOO coordinatograph. The
AP7251 serves the purpose of displaying functional and electrical circuits or
fragments of them and various graphs, i.e.. is used when high coordinate precision
is not necessary. The KPA-1200 coordinatograph, which possesses sufficiently good
accuracy with relatively slow response, is used when reading out the integrated
topology of an integrated circuit.

In the ISAPRIS under consideration the interactive mode to one extent or another
;ffects all stages of the design of integrated circuits and in the end result
determines the serviceability and vitality of the system as a whole.

Data arrays entered into the computer and obtained by means of it in the dialog
mode are constantly checked. Diagnosis is carried out in various aspects according
to the maximum reasonable number of criteria.

The arrangement, scale, type, form and nature of the graphic and symbolic data read
out to the peripherals used in the ISAPRIS make possible visibility, simplicity in
reading, completeness of representation, familiarity of form to the user, and the
possibility of direct reading without additional processing.

In the dialog mode the user can select the data processing mode, inhibit or permit
the execution of specific procedures while entering the appropriate instructions
by means of the display's control keys and select optical tags or working instruc-
tions. Furthermore. the system's internal supervisory routine automatically ad-
justs for the operating mode specified, executes the appropriate routines and
selects the required peripherals.

In the ISAPRIS the computer hardware and peripheral equipment are arranged accord-
ing to the hierarchical principle: A basic "-4030 computer is used at the top
level for solving problems of great dimensionality, e.g., functional and electrical
analysis of integrated circuits, of the arrangement and preliminary tracing of ele-
ments on a chip and the like. An A5633 BPP graphic display is offered to the de-
veloper for the "—6030 computer for the purpose of dialog. A small SH—é computer
provides the designer's group with several automated work places (up to four),
having in their composition an A54310 Shc EPP wide-format graphic designer's screen

46

FOR1)?FK]AI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

console and an A5122 USPGI. Communication between the SH-b and H—bOBO computers
is carried out at the level of the transfer of data recorded on magnetic tape.

The peripherals included in the structure of the ISAPRIS have hardware for func-
tioning in the packet processing node with time sharing (with dialog and without
dialog in the design process) and the independent mode, which gives the system
considerable flexibility.

The ISAPRIS which has been created is a system of the open-end type and makes it
possible to add both new programs and new peripherals. The comprehensive approach
used in developing the ISAPRIS and the level of software and hardware have made it
possible to create a relatively inexpensive system enabling the flawless design of
integrated circuits containing up to 10“ HIS transistors. The use of this system
guarantees, with considerable shortening of the time required for designing inte-
grated circuits, the development of technical solutions which are not inferior in
quality to those produced by the nonautomated (manual) method.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya",
1981

8831
C80: 1863/216

67

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.325.5-181.48
PROGRAMMER FOR NICROPROCESSOR DEVICES
Moscow PRIBORX I SISTEHY UPRAVLBNIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 23. 26

[Article by A.H. Gladkov and N.V. Nagayets, engineers, and V.A. Teslenko, candidate
of technical sciences]

[Text] The choice of program storage and its loading are included among the major
problems facing developers of microprocessor devices and systems. Reprogrammsble
storage units (PPZU's) at the present time have found extensive application as pro-
gram storage units for microprocessor devices. For example, in the creation of

any microprocessor device. even with the presence of ready software and a formally
debugged program. the problem arises of checking the good working order and correct-
ness of the functioning of the microprocessor section together with other sections
"r the device. At this stage it is feasible to use a PPZU as the program storage.
In the creation of small-lot and unique devices and systems it is not economically
advantageous to use as a program storage programmable ROM masks--in this case also
PPZU's are appropriate. The use of them in microprocessor devices and systems
increases their flexibility and makes it possible for the user himself to modify
both the operating algorithm of equipment and the exchange of information between
units.

The entry of data into a PPZU can be accomplished either with a computer provided
with the appropriate interfaces, or by means of special units--programmers (load-
ers). which must be provided with the appropriate keyboard and display making it
possible to change information in the PPZU and to check its entry.*

A programmer developed by the authors is discussed in this article. Its structural
diagram is presented in fig 1.

The programmer is designed for working with devices or systems executed on the
basis of a microprocessor (MP) of the K58OIK80 type (or having a similar instruc-
tion word length). The basis of the programmer is an electrically reprogrammsble
storage unit possessing the capability of automatic erasure, entry and readout,

and a RAM of the static type. A tape reader and a patch panel located on the front

*Lukichev, N.I., Nayfel'd. V.L. and Rog, G.V. "Reprogrammable Semipermanent
Storage," PRIBORY I SISTEMY UPRAVLENIYA, No 11. 1979.

48

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

panel of the programmer serve the purpose of entering data into the storage.
Data line and address line display units are provided for the purpose of checking
the data entered. An address assignment unit assigns the address of a number.

2 Mn .-
n uhps an ruuuu

, ""“ﬂ ='
u “57%? —

. :-
Il-Iﬁzgw ==r.‘

—
’—
_
p—‘

0—.

F
a
.—

ﬂ Il-l- I I .1

J u a ‘
5) «7- u '0—

”gran... =

w... I
h .‘= =
7 3" .‘==
”‘11. §
ﬂ noun >—-i! 5
mm". =: i x
In uauu 10) g
9) :5"; ""5; -
Figure 1. Structural Diagram of Progratmaer
Key:

1. Operator's console, patch 7. Program debugging unit
panel. automatic control 8. Data line display
unit 9. Address line display

2. Microprocessor of device or 10. Data line
system 11. Address line

3. PPZU 12. Control line

10. RM

5. Address assignment unit
6. Tape reader

Comication between individual units of the programer and other devices is
accomplished through a data line for data, an address line for addresses and a
control line. The prograauer has several operating modes: entry of data into the
programer; transcription of data within the programmer; operation of the program-
mer as a program storage with microprocessor devices or systems; transcription of

data from the programmer into the storage (PPZU) of microprocessor devices and

systems; program debuggin mode; check of the operation of the microprocessor of
microprocessor devices an systems.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The entry of data into the PPZU can be accomplished either directly or via the
RAM. In the latter case an important disadvantage of a 1’?le is eliminated. in-
volving the loss of data in the entire array of the storage when it is necessary
to edit (erase) the contents of a single storage location.

Data enter the RAM or PPZU from an eight-bit data line. In turn data can enter
the data line from the patch panel located on the front panel of the programer.
from a tape reader. from a microprocessor (in the check node), a RAH and a PPZU.

The capability of transcribing data from a PPZU into the RAM is also provided in
this unit.

Data entering the data line are displayed on the data line display in octal or
decimal code. The display mode is selected by the operator. The entry of data
can be accomplished either optionally, for any address, or sequentially. beginning
with a specific prespecified address. The address line is 16-bit. The code of
the initial address is entered byte by byte from the data line by the operator.

A built-in program debugging unit makes possible the step-by-step running of
programs with the connection of a microprocessor device. The step-by-step debug-
ging of programs can be performed from any prespecified address, since a mode for
halting a program at a specific step is provided. The address at which it is
necessary to halt the running of a program is entered in the programer's memory.
'a'hen this address agrees with the current address the prograamner generates a

"Stop" instruction and transfers the microprocessor into the mode of the passing

of instructions according to machine or instruction cycles. A display of the
address and state of the data line takes place with each halt of the microprocessor.

It is possible to check the contents of any storage location in the program de-
bugging mode. When an error is detected the entire array (256 lines) of the stor-
age in which the error is detected is transcribed from the PPZU into the RAM.
After elimination of the error the array is again transcribed into the PPZU.

An important disadvantage of electrically reprogramable storage units and, con-
sequently, of microprocessor devices, too, designed on the basis of PPZU's, is

the limited data storage time (3000 to 10,000 hours) with the power cut off. as
well as the gradual erasing of information in the readout process. For the pur-
pose of eliminating this disadvantage it has been suggested that these micropro-
cessor devices be provided with a special memory regeneration subroutine. Regene-
ration consists in sensing by the microprocessor of the contents of a specific
storage location. of switching the PPZU over to the entry mode, and of "thoroughly
recharging" the same storage location. By using a microcomputer's RAM it is
possible to carry out this procedure for specific arrays of the storage.

A flow chart of the regeneration routine (23-byte capacity) of the K5801K80 micro-
processor is shown in fig 2. It functions as follows. The initial address is
entered in register pair HL, and the final address of the storage field to be
regenerated into pair BC. The microprocessor reads into register A the contents
of the storage location whose address. M , is indicated by register pair HL.
After this follows an extended cycle for the entry of the contents of register A
into the storage according to the same address. with this a readin pulse 10 as
long is formed by means of hardware. Then follows the byte-by—byte subtraction

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the contents of pair "L from the contents of pnlr BC. It the result of the
subtraction equals zero, then this means that regeneration of the entire specified
storage field has been accomplished and the routine has finished its job. with

a non-zero result the contents of pair of registers HL are increased and a return
to the next read cycle takes p1ace-entry according to label H3 .

   

 
     

A more
maxi-la ~Ull)

Figure 2. Flowchart of Regeneration Routine: H, B, L and C represent

general-purpose registers of the microprocessor and Z is a bit
of the condition register

Key:
1. Start 4. No
2. Address of beginning of array 5. Yes
3. Address of end of array 6. Return

Regeneration of the PPZU according to this subroutine can be performed both on
the instruction of the operator and automatically each time the microprocessor

device is turned «I. This subroutine can be included among test subroutines for
checking the working order of the microprocessor device.

Key Technical Characteristics of Programmer Developed

Capacity of memory in bytes:

RAM 6 K

PPZU 4 K (with the possibility of increase to
16 K)
51

FOR OFTWCJAI.US£10NLY
INJR OITﬂC3AI.IJSEZ(MQLY

Readin tile in microseconds:

RAH 0.5 to 1 3
PPZU (10 to 20) ~ 10
Readout time in microseconds:

RAH 0.5 to 1

PPZU 1.2 to 1.5

The programmer comes in a unified frame with overall dimensions of 480 x 680 x 260
m.

COPYRIGHT: Izdacel'atvo "Maehinostroyeniye". "Pribory i aisteuy upravleniya",
1981

8831
C80: 1863/216

52

FOR‘OFFﬂJAl.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hurrmcuma AND mnnocasson SYSTEMS

Moscow NOVOYE V ZHIZNI, NAUKB, TEKHNIKE: SERIYA "RADIOELBKTRDNIKA I SVYAZ'":
BVOLYUTSIYA VYCHISLITBL'NYKH SISTEH in Russian No 3. Mar 81 (signed to press
12 Feb 81) pp 42-56

[Chapter 6. "Hultimachine and Multiprocessor Systems." from the monthly "Radioelec-
tronics and Communications" serial. "Hhat's New in Life, Science and Technology": "The
Evolution of Computer Systems,“ by Professor Yevgeniy Pavlovich Balashov, doctor of
engineering science. author of [2 books and 96 inventions. specializing in computer
hardware. and Arkadiy Petrovich Chastikov, docent. candidate of engineering science.
author of over #0 scientific articles and many inventions. Izdatel'stvo "Znaniye".
38,260 copies, 64 pages]

[Text] In tracing the history of computer hardware development we can observe that
efforts to enhance the capacity and reliability of computer systems proceeded in two
directions: first, improvement of hardware, primarily by increasing speed of operation,

and second. realization of new architectural ideas and principles of organization of
parallel computation.

Progressive miniaturization based upon semiconductor electronics approached its physi-
cal limits when limitations associated with electronic lithography became operative.
This finds expression in the fact that voltages cannot be reduced in proportion to the

dimensions involved; the electrical fields in integrated circuits therefore increase
with a reduction in linear dimensions. Closely related to hardware miniaturization is

the question of density, that is. the number of components or circuits per unit of sin-
gle-crystal area. while power dissipation has proved the most serious limitation upon
achievement of high density.

Taking this into account. the second direction now holds out the greatest promise for
success in achieving the desired objective.

The development of multimachine and multiprocessor computer systems has been one of the
dramatic examples of the appearance of new architectural solutions and principles of
parallelism. Three principles underlie the development of these systems: parallel
execution of a large number of operations. variability in structure and uniformity of
design.

The idea of multimachine and multiprocessor systems was first mentioned in the works of
the Soviet scientists E. V. Yevreinov and Yu. G. Kosarev and in those of D. Slotnik.
although the Soviet priority must be pointed out here. since the first work by B. V.
Yevreinov and Yu. G. Kosarev. "0 vozmozhnosti postroyeniya vychislitel'nykh sistem

53

FOR 0F11C1AL USEICMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

project, while the technical realization of these ideas was accomplished in our country
six years before (the Minsk-222 homogenous general-purpose computer).

The idea of creating multimachine and multiprocessor computer systems was further devel-
oped in the works of the Soviet scientists V. H. Glushkov, Yu. S. Golubev-Novozhilov,

A. V. Kalyayev. H. A. Kartsev. G. P. Lopato, B. N. Naumov, V. V. Przhilkovskiy. I. V.
Prangishvili. V. S. Seminikhin. Ya. A. Khetagurov, V. G. Khoroshevskiy et al., as well

as in those of the foreign scientists D. Kholland. H. Leman, L. Koktsely. G. Vang. H.
Flin [transliterated] et al.

A multimachine computer system consists of several computers, each of which functions
under the control of its own operating system and has means of exchanging information
with other machines. Multimachine computer systems found their fullest expression in

Figure 6a is a diagram of an
_. homogenous computer system.

—-—-"- A switching unit (K), the com-
puter (3) and the system oper-
ations unit (I) comprise the
primary machine (4). The chan-
nels and switching units form
the communications network be-
tween machines. The switching
unit generates a set of connect-
ing functions permitting estab-
lishment of communication be-
-- tween a given machine and its

immediate neighbors. The ad-
Figure 6: l - system operations unit; 2 - adjust- justment register determines

ing register; 3 - computer. 6 - primary machines. the type of connecting function,

that is. by changing the contents

of the adjustment register it is

possible to predeterminc any
switching between input and output switching unit terminals. Figure 6b shows the topo-
logical layout of primary machines in an homogenous computer system.

 

   

 

work on the planning and design of the first homogenous computer system, the Minsk-222.
was begun in 1965 by personnel of the 30 AN SSSR [Siberian Department of the Academy of

Sciences of the USSR] Institute of Mathematics together with the design bureau of the
Minsk Works imeni G. K. 0rdzhonikidze under the direction of G. P. Lopato. State Prize

winner and corresponding memebr of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, and V. V. Przhi-
yalkovskiy, State Prize winner and works director. the first model being turned out in

April I966. The Hinsk-ZZZ is an homogenous ring computer system with a partially modi-
fiable structure and two-way channels of communication between the primary machines.

Sé

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
The number of computers in the system may vary from 1 to 16. Minsk-2 or Minsk-22 com-
puters are employed in the primary machines. ~-

The basic advantage offered by the Minsk-222 homogenous computer system was demonstrated
in the fact that with the large capacity of its internal memory as compared with the
Minsk-22 and the high speed of its communication channels it substantially-reduced the
time required to solve complex problems--by some S-lO-fold. 20-fold for some problems
with a system having three primary machines. -

Work on subsequent homogenous computer system designs built further on the experience
accumulated in designing and operating the Minsk-222. The following year. 1967. saw
the development of an homogenaus real-time linear control system. It was designed to
control technical scientific experiments and production processes.

One of the promising directions in the development of multimachine computer systems
would then become the construction of these systems on a minicomputer base.

In 1976, working in conjunction with the Severodonetsk Impul's Scientific Production

Association. personnel of the Institute of Mathematics. 80 AN SSSR. engineered the
design for the HINIMAKS program-switched minicomputer system. The HINIHAKS is an homo-

geneous system with program-adjusted channels of communication between primary machines.
Bach primary machine comprises a computer complex (H-6000 or M-7000) performing an in-
formation-processing function and a system unit interfacing.between primary machines.

It is interesting to note that the ratio of the cost of the system unit and that of the
HINIHAKS processor does not exceed 0.5, while this ratio for multiprocessor systems
with a common bus with the RDR-ll computer processor is 1.2.

The HINIHAKS system may function autonomously. as part of high-capacity concentrated
computer complexes or as part of distributed computer networks. it lending itself to

successful utilization for both solving scientific and economic problems and process
control.

Among later developments of homogeneous computer systems we should mention a minicomput-
er system (SUHHA) created in 1977 on the basis of the domestically manufactured Electro-
nika 100 and Blektronika 1001 minicomputers. a system oriented toward operating as part
of automatic systems controlling industrial production processes. The Institute of
Mathematics. SO AN SSSR, and NITsEVT [Scientific Research Center for Electronic Comput-
er Equipment] have now engineered the design for a general-purpose homogeneous computer
system based upon the Yes-1060 computer. Its overall speed is determined by the number
of Yes-2060 processors and by ratings may range from 2 to 20 million operations per
second.

The development and manufacture in our country of homogeneous computer systems is an
important achievement in the sphere of building multimachine computers with program-
mable structure.

There are many similarities between multimachine and multiprocessor systems. since they
both serve the same basic purpose--simultaneous execution of operations in the system.
while distinctions. frequently not entirely clear-cut. are based upon frequent use of
the term "multiprocessor processing" in cases in which it is not properly identified.
There is, however. an important difference between them, a difference based upon the
degree and limit of partitioning: a multimachine system comprises a number of individual
computers (even if there may be direct communication between them). while a multiproces-
sor system is most frequently a special-purpose computer with multiprocessor units. It

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0le

ct multimachine
tems than to con—

difficulties connected

is simpler to constru

mould be po
ystems from serie

truct multiproces
1th realization o

sor systems requiring
f the full extent
development of the principles of multiprocessor
sought in the depths of analog computing technology and the
An analog computer is in fact an example of a

mlltiprocessor system. in which there occurs parallel processing (solution) of tasks
(systems of differential equations) in all operating units of the structure. 80 there

we have them, new turns in the dialectic spiral.

rtrange as it may seem.
>rocessing are clearly to be
urinciples of analog analog computation.

porated the ideas of multi-

omputers have incor
h permitted the simultaneous

had 20 adders. whic
ion Operations.

h the first ENIAK. digital c
The ENIAK's arithmetic unit
f several addition and subtract

Beginning wit
processing.

execution 0
he first time incorporated in the

2 for military application. Total
een all four processors.
he A80? (automatic oper-
Hork on the

sors was for t

factured in 196

A modular design with identical proces
was divided betw

Burroughs D—825 system. which was menu
system storage, which comprised 16 modules.
The creation of one of the firs

sting and scheduling program).
development of various types of multiprocessor system

undertaken in many countries.
:et us now move ahead to a discussion of the principles of the or
nrocessor systems. but first let us define more fully the present-day concept of this
“Rational Standards for Information Proces-
ing two or more data—

type of computer. The American dictionary,
system as “a computer incorporat
definition is incomplete. The re-
ed control is without doubt extremely

sing.“ defines a multiprocessor

processing units with integrated control." But this

quirement that a multiprocessor system have integrat

important a an integrated one-operation system; but this definition does

not encompass the concepts 0 ing and interaction. which constitute the essence
A multiprocessor system must be able to partition

of multiprocessor processing methods.
th all combinations of memory and
An important fea—

ganiaation of multi—

internal memory among all processors a
processor. Figure 7 shows the basis of multiprocessor organization.
ture of the interconnection is
the level at which it occurs.
The level at which interconnec—

  
    

 
 
  

proceasor systems
machine systems. where a data
aggregate normally consitutes

the unit of interaction.

Maw."
Mum-m

  

Mud-y n
' ”airman:

ely the combination

fied concepts of
d interaction at

ully character-
and software

It is precis
of the ampli
partitioning an
all levels that f
ises the hardware

active system;
processor; 2 —

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as a system incorporating two or more processors of approximately equal capacity and
which have access to full storage and 1/0 channels, the system as a whole being con—

trolled by a single operating system providing interaction between processors and
programs at the level of jobs, tasks. data aggregates or data elements.

The system of interaction and such important factors as topology and the functioning

of the central part of the system provide the key to classification of multiprocessor
systems.

F. anlow and a number of other authors have identified three very distinct organiza-
tions employed in multiprocessor systems: systems with a common bus. those with matrix
switching and systems with coupon storage.

The common bus system is a version of the simplest interaction having a common channel
of communication linking all functional units (Figure 8). The common bus system is em-
ployed in the fabrication of small, simple multiprocessor systems. simple in the sense
that the interactive subsystem may consist of no more than a multiwire cable.

The advantages this system offers include the following: low hardware cost, a simple
interactive subsystem and easy modification of hardware structure; its drawbacks lie in
the facts that overall system capacity is limited by bus transmission speed, bus failure

is accompanied by major system malfunctions and that enlargement of the system by the
addition of other units may reduce overall capacity.

Figure 9 illustrates the organi-

zational principle of systems

with matrix switching (matrix
T_______________._.___.______________ organization). System storage

. is organized such that each of

its modules may send or receive
information from any processor
or 1/0 unit via any bus running
from the processors and 1/0
units.

  

' The address of a word transmitted
(2) _ via a bus is decoded at each mat-

' ‘ rix node to determine the storage
module into which the word should
be written or from which it
should be read. The operation in
any given storage module does not
depend upon operations executed
in neighboring modules.

I“.

Figure 9. Key: 1 - storage module; 2 - proces-
sor; 3 - i/o.

One of the special features of this system organization consists in the fact that it
incorporates the most complex interactive subsystem. although its functional units are
simple and cheap (control and switching logic is located in the matrix nodes, decoders
and switching units); enlargement of the system is theoretically limited only by the
capacity of the switching matrix. which may be increased within the limits imposed by
the initial structure; reliability of switching, as well as that of the system as a
whole. is insured through segmenting and redundancy. which makes it easy to differen-
tiate the system to eliminate malfunctions. This organization is. generally speaking.
economical only for multiprocessor systems.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

If control and switching logic and random priority selection lean toward storage mod-
ules, the result of multiprocessor organization will be a system with common storage
(multichannel storage) (Figure 10). This organization theoretically fully corresponds
to both single-processor and multiprocessor structures.

Each storage access channel in
this system is assigned perma-
nent priorities insuring the
access of any unit of the system
to the various storage modules.
All channels of the common mem-
ory are identical from both the
structural and functional points
of view. These channels conven-
tionally take the form of a se-
ries of cable connections; to
which channel an 1/0 or computing
processor is connected is there-
fore of no importance; the prior—
ity of each system unit's access
to storage is established by ac-
lection of the connector.

 

Figure 10. Key: 1 - processor; 2 — storage mod-
ule; 3 - 1/0.

This system organization requires expensive storage modules. since many of the control
and switching circuits are connected to these modules, as well as a large number of
cables and connectors. Different modifications of the system are determined by the
..nher and type of available storage access channels. The structure with common storage
permits the achievement of high capacity levels throughout the system.

The development in the 1970's of high-capacity computer systems with speeds into the
tens and hundreds of millions of operations per second represented a further elabora-

tion of multiprocessing thinking directed toward increasing system capacity and the
achievement of a high degree of parallelism.

High-capacity computer systems are broken down on the basis of architectural character-
istics into SISD, MISD. SIHD and EIHD structures.

Let us now look at some characteristic examples of high-capacity computer systems: con-
veyor, or pipeline; systems. matrix. or vector, systems and associative systems.

The idea of the pipeline principle of control organization. which achieves a high de-
gree of parallelism in the processing of command and data flows, belongs to Academician
S. A. Lebedev (1964); he referred to it as the "water line" principle. He had still
earlier (I957) put forward the idea of employing combined operations in a computer. In
pipeline. or conveyor, computer systems, the processor consists of a conveyor (pipeline)
of information processing units, in which the output data of the i-th processing unit
become the input data for the {+1 unit etc. Storage modules store externally generated
data as well as intermediate results transmitted from corresponding processing units.

The computation process is thus broken down into a number of steps, each of which has
its corresponding processing units and storage modules. each processing unit receiving
its own flow of commands. Because of the parallel operation of the units of the entire

conveyor in "filling the pipeline." the end processing unit puts out the computation
results at short intervals of time equal to the time required to execute the slowest

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
step, althOugh the theoretical total process time is equal to the tota1~time required
for processing by all units.

The STAR-100 system (STAR - STring and ARray). built in 1973. is a typical example of

a pipeline computer system. The system's processor comprises three pipelines, each of
which consists of as many as 30 information processing units. Two of the pipelines

are for the execution of operations with a floating decimal point on data vector

pairs. the third for processing data not organized in vectors. All processing units
operate in parallel. each of them operating with either specific data vector elements
or with scalar elements. System storage comprises up to 32 modules and stores programs
and data. The STAR-100 system has a capacity of approximately 100 million operations
per second. It should be pointed out that higher capacities have been achieved in later
versions of computer systems incorporating the pipeline processing principle (200 mil-
lion operations/s with the Cray-2. 300 million operations/s with the SUPER STAR).

E. V. Yevreinov and V. c. Khoroshevskiy point out that "pipeline computer systems repre-
sent the limit to the modification of serial computer architecture. Possibilities of
increasing computer speed by means of pipeline information processing are therefore
essentially limited: when results are transmitted via a conveyor. the sequence of
operations cannot be of arbitrary length. if only because of the ramification of the
computation process."

The matrix multiprocessor organization underwent further development in high-capacity
matrix, or vector. computer systems. This system is a matrix of identical processors
comprising an arithmetical logic unit and storage and which is controlled by a single
flow of commands. Information may be exchanged between any processors in the matrix
via a communications network. A single control unit exercises direct control of the
matrix. Centralization of the control unit and a high degree of parallelism in infor-
mation processing and storage permit substantial increases in system operating speed.

Uncompleted plans for the SOLOMON, the first matrix computer system, were published in
1962. A modified version of this system was technically realized in May 1972 in the
ILLIAC-IV matrix computer system. This system has a speed of 200 million operations/s;
1: comprises 6.106 electronic components, occupies 930 m3 and weighs 75 tons. The
lLLlAC-IV matrix consists of 64 identical processors for executing operations over
vectors. Its control unit consists of special-purpose PDP-IO and PDP-ll computers.

The processor may be in either a passive or an active state: in the former instance
it is inhibited from executing commands from the control unit but permitted in the

second.

The ILLIAC-IV system is employed to solve complex, large—dimension problems (systems of
linear algebraic equations, linear programming. matrix arithmetic. rapid Fourier trans-
forms etc.); since the system is controlled by a single command flow, its structure

permits parallel execution of identical operations on 64 data sets written into proces-

sor memory.

The capacity of the ILLlac-IV may be compared with that of high-capacity third-genera-
tion computers taking the example the solution of a linear programming problem with
10,000 variables and 0000 limits. A third—generation machine requires 6-8 h to solve
this problem. the lLLIAC-IV less than 2 min.

A drawback to the matrix systems consists in the fact that in the passive state some
processors may remain idle for long periods of time; it should also be pointed out

59

FOR 0F11C1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that difficulties have arisen in the establishment of communication between processors;
but despite this. the creation of matrix systems constitutes an important achievement
in the development of computer system architecture.

Advances in integrated technology and the creation of large-scale integrated circuits
have made possible the development of a computer system. differing somewhat from the
matrix system and having an SIMD structure, referred to as an associative system. The
essential component of this system is the associative memory. in which. as is known,
words are located on the basis of their content. In an associative computer system a
large number of linked processors comprise the associative memory. The creation of an
associative memory is based upon utilization of logical principles. Each word contains
enough logic to compare it with a known word. The associative processor employs this

type of associative memory as internal memory. each word and its corresponding logic
comprising a processing element.

In contrast with the Neumann architecture, comparison takes the place of summation in
an associative provessor and is performed by a process similar to scanning a table.
Since the search operation (table-scanning procedure) is executed in parallel with all
words in memory, the associative processor can sum with a high degree of parallelism.

The Staran-IV system. developed by Goodyear Aerospace in 1971 and having a speed of

40 million operations/s. was the first associative computer system. The system was

modernized in 1972; it had a speed of 500 million operations/s and was being used in

an airport air-traffic control operation. The Staran-s, Staran 3-500 and Staran s-ISOO
.sociative computer systems have been developed or are being developed.

in 1971. Bell Telephone and System Development came out with an interesting version of
an associative computer system referred to as PEPE (Parallel Element Processing Ensem-
ble). It has a capacity of 300 million operations/s. This system has much in common
with both matrix and associative systems; it is therefore sometimes referred to as an
associative-matrix system. although it does have its own special features. For example,
the system is capable of processing two independent flows-of commands. while in contrast
with the ILLIAC-IV system its basic processors do not interface directly with their im-
mediate neighbors. The ultimate objective of the development of the PEPE system is the
creation of a system comprising 288 basic processors. each with a capacity of 1-5 mil-
lion operations/s, operating under the control of a CDC-7600 computer.

Associative computer systems. which are an efficient means of processing large files of
information. have only a single control device. which decreases the reliability of the
system and narrows its range of applications.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Znaniye". 1981

8963
C80: 1863/203

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

YES 9004 KEY-TO-TAPE DATA ENTRY DEVICE

Riga AVTOHATIKA I VYCHISLITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA in Russian No 3. Hay-Jun 81 p 100

[Advertisement for data entry device by exporter VTO "Isotimpex"]

[Text] The Yes 9004 device is intended for direct recording on magnetic tape of
information entered by the keyboard. It provides the capability of finding a
particular block of data to check it and correct the data on the tape when necessary.

The unit has a built-in buffer storage that holds a full block of data before re-
cording it on tape. This allows immediate correction of errors in input noticed by
the operator and elimination of them by backing up the storage address and entering
the correct character.

The data on the magnetic tape is recorded in blocks with a length of 80 or 160
characters. The device has a keyboard interlock that operates during recording on
tape and the read cycle after recording which allows the operator to maintain a

constant rhythm in entering data from the keyboard.

During the write cycle, the contents of buffer storage are not disturbed--the data
is preserved for checking which is effected with immediate read out after writing.
Data read from tape is compared bit by bit with data in storage.

In the "checking" mode, data blocks intended for checking are read and input to
storage one after the other. Each character of the block is re-entered using the
keyboard from the source document. The code of the input character is automatically
compared to the code in storage. When both codes are identical, the operator may
continue checking.

In "retrieval" mode, a particular data block is automatically retrieved by comparing
each block recorded on tape to the identifier previously entered in storage from the
keyboard. Retrieval is executed at the rate of about 1,000 blocks/minute.

Each Yes 9004 can have a block-by-block display of the current data block.

At the customer's option, the Yes 9004 performs the following operations: copying

of data from one device to another. data printout from magnetic tape to printer,
and data entry from a card reader.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Specifications:

recording density 32 bits/om

recording method- Rz [return to zero] - 1

tape speed 39.6 cn/s

buffer storage size 160 bytes

block length 80 and 160 bytes

record format by 1 0

basic operating modes data entry, checking and retrieval

other modes program entry, program checking. printing,
entry from card reader

programs 2 independent

display block-by-block

power 220V 110-151

Exporter: VTO "Isotinpex", Sofia, ul. [street] Chapayeva, 51.

Telephone: 7361. Telex: 022731, 022732.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Zinatne". "Avtomatika i vychislitel'naya tekhnika", 1981

8545
C80: 1863/223

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

85 HICROCQIPUTERS

UDC 681.32-181.48(67+57)
SOFTWARE AND BASIC APPLICATIONS OF 'ELBKTRONIKA SS' HICROCOHPUTBRS

Moscow MIRRO-EVH "ELEKTRONIKA SS" 1 IX" PRIHBNENIYE in Russian 1980
(signed to press 3 Nov 80) pp 86-153

[Part of chapter 6, chapter 5 and conclusion from book "'Elektronika 85' Microcomputers
and Their Application", by Mark Petrovich Gal'perin, Vladimir Yakovlevich Kuznetsov,
Yuriy Aleksandrovich Haslenikov, Vladimir Yefimovich Pankin, Viktor Panteleymonovich
Tsvetov and Aleksandr Ivanovich Borovskoy, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio",

30,000 copies, 160 pages. This third installment completes the translation of this
book. The first two installments appeared in the USSR REPORT: CYBERNETICS,

COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY, JPRS L/9703 (PP 100-108) and L/9766 (pp 1-73)]

[Text] 6.3 Resident Facilities for Automation of Programming

Two large groups of microcomputer users can be identified. They differ by how
they use standard microcomputer software. The first group includes users who use
microcomputers for series and mass produced articles with one type of program in
R0! (read-only) memory (this group of users willingly and readily uses cross-SARP
[facilities for automating program development], and is interested in the develop-
ment of these means); the second group includes users who use microcomputers for
small-scale control systems. laboratory research. teaching purposes, and control
of sets of equipment whose configuration changes quite frequently, in other words,
that class of applications where the use of permanent memory is possible only for
various standard algorithms of the given class but the principal specific programs
change frequently. This class of users requires the formulation of "at-hand"
resident facilities that accelerate the process of formulatingspecific programs
during frequent readjustment or during actual operation of the systems.

Resident SARP of microcomputers of the Elektronika 85 family have been developed
and continue to be developed to meet the needs of this group of users (see

Figure 4.8 below). A distinctive feature of the development of resident SARP is
their full language compatibility with corresponding cross-facilities. which pro-
vides a simple transfer of raw texts from the technological computer to the micro-
computer and in the other direction.

It should be observed that the choice of the first realization of a second-level
language for resident facilities (as also for cross-facilities), the BASIC

language. results from a number of factors, among which the following are singled
out: convenience of program development and debugging in the interactive mode;

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     
   
    

 
 

Ir winner mango gummy!
may-Jl~.Jun-Imu CI ' 1

    
    

”mun-nu. mnmupkamm-

AMI! (2)

  
     
 
 

  
 
     

  

‘/"'

. / /,', .

// fluﬂlvlnyd

,: arm-via; . .
, a .(6)

. . z. . , / /
,1 1 (5) Mums/“Cafe

   

   

“AIM-n.» B "may.” l"'"1 n m,

L—Juﬁw to
Figure 5.8. Resident Microcomputer SARP

Key: (1) Resident Software of the Elektronika SS Hicrocormuter;
(2) Machine-Oriented Languages;
(3) Procedure-Oriented Languages;
(4) Symbol Assembler;
(5) BASIC:
(6) Macroassembler;
(7) Debugging Unit;
(8) Developed;
(9) Under Develop-em;
(10) Planned for Development.

 

availability of a fund of ready-to—use programs (subroutines); the possibility of
use in series-produced Iicrocomputers and the widespread current use of BASIC.

A version of this language that is analogous to the version used extensively in
the powerful calculators of the Hang Labs Company, with well-chosen texts that
accompany the dialog process and funds of algoritlns used in the processes of con-
trol and data processing, was used for the Elektronika SS microcomputer. A user
of the Blektronika SS microcomputer, equipped with a translator from BASIC, is
able to work in the cowutation and programming modes and correct and debug pro-
grams directly from the console, using a keyboard and the input-output tape punch
of a teletype. '

An important feature of the translator from BASIC is the possibility of introduc-
ing blocks that insure compatibility between the Specific software of the Iicro-
computers of the Elektronika 55 family and models that are not included in this
family. Moreover, a translator from the language built on the compilation prin-
ciple makes it possible to prepare programs for single-board and single-chip
microcomputers. This approach speeds up the programing of specific programs
for control systems based on these kinds of microcomputer configurations and
offers the possibility of efficient debugging of these programs within a

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

simulation complex based on a multiboard microcomputer equipped with this trans-
lator.

The realization of BASIC language in the Blelrtronika 85-02 microcomputer relies
on a hardware fixation of the software of the language in ROM LSIC's [large- '
scale integrated circuit]. the development of several versions of the language
calculated for work with a broad assortment of peripheral units and permitting
enlargement of their number and interlinking with versions of dispatcher sysr
tem, and modification of algorithms of the language during the operation process
and when building up the functional capabilities of the microcomputers [22].

To improve the effectiveness of resident program debugging. it is also useful to
design and set up a resident debugging complex in the ROM 1.516 of the Elektronika
55-02 microcomputer. The complex is made up of programs together with the per—
ipheral units of the microcomputers (the Kvant video monitor display and a func-
tional keyboard). The structure of the editing-debugging complex is shown in
Figure 4.9 below. The editing-debugging complex provides the following services:
program debugging (including debugged texts; formulation of input punched tapes
for the SARP with texts prepared for realization in the ROM LSIC; representation
and editing of data on the display screen).

The subsystem of editing-debugging complex programs that organize the process of
debugging specific microcomputer programs offers the programer broad opportunities
to monitor performance of the program being debugged with extensive indicators
of the elements that are monitored. Special software-hardware facilities greatly
speed up debugging, reducing its interpretation costs from 15-20 comands for one
con-sand performed to three comnds.

The subsystems "Dialog with the Display Corrector" and "Dialog with the Program
Editor" edit original and debugged texts of program. This process is controlled
by the functional keyboard.

These facilities fully insure resident debugging of target programs at their own
level and preparation of data for introduction to the system to automte the de-
sign of ROM LSIC's.

The punched tape version of the editing-debugging complex has the capability of

parametric retuning for black-anddwhite and color displays with arbitrary screen
size, various combinations of peripheral units, and changes in the volume of main
memory [23]. Figure 4.10 below gives a structural diagram of the use of resident

means of automating program development.
4.6. Software.

Basic principles. The extensive use of microcomputers in different sectors of
the economy inevitably means that in addition to professional program developers
of software systems based on preceding generations of conputers. a broad range
of nonprofessionals in this field of activity. with or without experience and/or
education in the software field. will be involved in designing the software of
microcomputer-based data control. processing. and transmission [DCPT] systems.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

luau: (
r unmivnnu

-m

Figure 4.9.

FOR OFFICIAL “SI-3 ONLY

.‘nra ﬂour
[n-mﬂrum "mur-

s

I")!
,3. , rm"-

M "ﬁll.

Control of Resident Complex (20)
Dialog with Debugging Unit; (21)
Dialog with Display Corrector (22)

Dial; (23)
Stopper; (2“)
Tuner; (25)
Initiator; (26)
Representation; (27)
Representation of System Datm (28)
Stops for: (29)
(11) Security: (30)
(12) Command; (31)
(13) Counterlist; (32)
(16) Address List; _ (33)
(15) Code List; (34)
(16) Condition Codes; (35)
(17) Address Boundaries; (36)
(18) Impermissible Entry; (37)

(19)

Boundaries of Values; (38)
66

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 

(nun! t A -
‘mmpwn'urﬂnm |
"it

Resident Editing-Debugging Complex

Ongoing State of Process;
Lists of Stop Conditions;
values of Common Registers;
Memory Domain;

Input—Output Domain;

Marker Control;

Text Expansion and Compression;
Input to Screen from Teletype;
Reading a Page of Memory;
Writing a Page into Memory;
Turning a Page;

Input from Functional Keyboard;
Input Editor;

Recopying;

Listing Special Points;
Retrieval;

Recoder;

Insertion and Deletion;
Monitoring and Security.
Key :

(l)
(2)
(3)
(’4)
(5)
(6)

(7)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
      

  

II and
[Jam-v51)
Annular“ n

     
   
   
     
       
 
  

 
 

[femur
_ n ma: met-.4

II I: 0 mm! A"
ﬁﬁmﬂmnm Ip-
anamm cut-men: mu cm:-
9 mur-npmmt

mumps!"

enrol-mun

(11)

  
 

 
  

I t nu
luefng'kicmlugl

__ neu~or(l3)
' — W‘W
‘ es')_.. amulukamlau (11.)

    

Figure 6.10. Development of Target Programs on the Microcomputer.

Applied Algorithm in the (8) Loading Translated Programs in

Language of the circuits; Microcomputer;

Punched Tape of Program (9) Scanning Programs on the Micro-
in Autocode; computer from the Console in the
Programs in Autocode; Real or a Prototype System;
Insertion of Changes; (10) Error;

Punched Tape in Loading (11) Correction of Algorithm;
Language; (12) Required Speed;

Translation to Loading (13) Transfer of Data;

Language; (11.) Branch to Action.

Blanks of Programs in YeSKD
[Uniform System of Design
Documentation] Formats;

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time, most of these systems work in real time, have more than one
job. and interact with different pieces of peripheral equipment. This re-
quires that these systems have special organization of control over problem-
solving and exchange with peripheral units. But the development and debugging
of such means is one of the very most difficult questions in the field of de-
signing the software of control systems.

It follows from this that equipping series-produced models of microcomputers
with facilities developed by specialists who have considerable working experi-
ence in the field of control technology and have mastered all the possibilities
offered by the different models of the microcomputer family is an essential job
for the enterprise that is developing microcomputers. This solution also re-
duces the labor-intensiveness of developing target software and improves the
quality of its work through the use of standard software that has been thor-
oughly tested in a large number of applications.

There are two possible ways to realize this software: on punched tape (or
magnetic tape) and in a permanent memory unit. Because the primary area of use
of microcomputers (with respect to extent and national economic efficiency) is
in the sphere of controlling equipment in the immediate vicinity of data
sources, not in the sphere where tape and disk storage (application of mini-
computers) are widely used, alternate feeding of such programs from punched

tape complicates operations and reduces the reliability of the microcomputer-
based hardware.

Therefore, the best way to achieve these facilities in microcomputers is by
storing programs to control problem-solving and exchange with peripheral units
in an ROM memory. Despite a certain "conservatism" in this solution and a cer-
tain redundancy in each variation of it for insuring the maximum capabilities
within given constraints. this method successfully pays for itself through
simplicity of content and use, and maximum reliability.

This approach was followed in designing the dispatcher systems of the
Elektronika $5 microcomputers, which are delivered with particular versions as-
signedin the ROM LSIC. This makes them. for the programmer-consumer of specific
software, inseparable from all the other hardware of the microcomputer. This

is what gives us the right to call dispatcher systems program equipment.*

Two versions of dispatcher systems have been developed and are used for

Elektronika SS microcomputers: the teletype version and the modular version.
Both were developed taking into account a number of general principles. A num-

ber of basic concepts were assumed in the dispatcher systems whose generalised
structure is represented in Figure 4.11 below.

* The authors also think that any program means (dispatcher, automation of pro-
gramming. and the like) delivered to the customer in the permanent memory
of a microcomputer can be classed with this specific equipment.

 

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

(1) mm... on: (2) 00¢an

 

Figure 4.11. Structure of the Dispatcher System.

Key: (1) External Environment; (6) Debugging, Interaction. and
(2) Operator; Editing System;
(3) Initial Start; (7) Input—Output Control System;
(4) Timers; (8) Problems;
(5) Problem-Solving Control (8) Input-Output Devices. .
System;

 

A problem is the work of a sequence of wounds that determine the specific pro-
gram. The sequence is initiated through a system of interrupts. The problem
is the basic unit of specific software. A bit position in the RPPR [possibly
register of program interrupts] corresponds to each problem (or group of prob-
lems). The bit positions must be arranged in conformity with the priority of
the problem or groups of problem as determined by the algorithms of system
work. The larger the number of the bit position in the RPPR, the higher the

priority of the problem or group of problems will be. Certain problems are
interrupted by others depending on a given security matrix. The initial

security matrix, which is fed through the dispatcher system in the process of
initial launching of the system, is triangular. Necessary corrections in it

can be made by entering the necessary codes in the No 2 col-Ion registers of all
groups.

The supervisor is the part of the dispatching system that provides the multi-
programming and real-time modes. The basic functions of the supervisor are:‘
parallel performance of problems; performance of problems in conformity with
established priorities; including problems on the initiative of hardware or a

program; one-time or cyclical solutions; controlling the work of the timers;
and, organizing queues for the peripheral units.

The macrocolmnand is an element of the language for interaction between problems
and the supervisor. It requests subroutines that are included in the dis-
patching system. These subroutines are used to expand the language of the
system of microcolputer comands. In this case it is necessary to perform

certain system procedures. The problem receives the result of performance of
the macrocollnand in the form of a return code.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFFNJA1.USE|)NLV

The macrosubroutine is a supervisor subroutine initiated by a macrocommand.

A mscrocode is the initial parameters (alphanumeric information) that are in—

serted in the macrocommand for the work of the macrosubroutines. The standard
part of a macrocode contains system information, while the functional part re-
flects the specific features of the different macrocom-ands.

In functional terms the dispatching system includes the supervisor, control of
input-output, and facilities for interaction with the operator.

Control of input-output interacts directly with the peripheral units assigned
by the problem. In this case the processes of input-output take place both
simultaneously and in parallel with problem-solving.

Facilities for interaction with the operator make possible interactive communi-
cation with the system, offering certain debugging devices and editing out-
putted information.

The teletype version of the dispatching system (TVDS). The minimum configura-

tion of a computing system based on microcomputers includes the microcomputer
itself with a teletype adapter and the teletype itself, which provides the
capability of feeding data from a keyboard or punched tape and outputting to a
printer or punch. The TVDS was designed to control the work of this system.

The TVDS is delivered in the above-described configuration with an Blektronika
45—01 (02) microcomputer, and is also available with an Blektronika 85-12
microcomputer. The basic purpose of both configurations is to provide de-
bugging complexes based on single-board microcomputers for processing equipment.
At the same time, the specifications of this dispatcher system and the supporting
hardware delivered in these configurations are also entirely adequate to serve

as the basis for designing corresponding data control, processing, and trans-
mission (DCPT) system.

The minimum configuration of the computer system based on microcomputers de-
termined the volume of the TVDS program, which is 1,024 words (the minimum
memory construction - two ROM LSIC's). These LSIc's are located at addresses
6800-67PE on the board of the Elektronika 85-01 (02) microcomputer (addresses
6800-77FE are free and may be used for target and standard programs). The
LSIC's with monitoring and preventive microcomputer tests are located at
addresses 7800-7FPE. Where the TVDS is used in the Elektronika 35-12 computer,
one of the zones of 1,025 words is connected to the addresses of the TVDS
(6000-67PE). The second zone of 1,02b words may be connected to the addresses
7800-7FFE and the tests may be arranged in it.

Problems are engaged following interrupt signals by means of the supervisor pro-
gram START. The new problem is engaged by program by the microcolmend REQUEST,
and the work of each problem is ended by the microconmand OUTPUT. when the
problems interact with the teletype the microcommands EXCHANGE and HAIT are
used.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIHCJAI.US£1DNLY

. u
The TVDS includes all the above-listed cowonents: the supervisor, the tele-
type driver (program to control interaction with the telegraph), and editor
of text information outputted to the telegraph. Data exchange with the telegraph
is organized by the telegraph driver through the macrocode EXCHANGE. and the dis-
patching system provides for several of the most widely used types of exchange
(text, code, and numerical).

The facilities of the dispatching system insure the console mode of work of the
TH [expansion unknown] (entering "l" or zeroing the bit positions in the
"console“ cells) and initiation of a problem from the telegraph keyboard. The
editing facilities make it possible to print different tables by the principle of
filling in "gaps" in the text headline.

The nodular version of the dispatching system. This version is figured for
microcomputers with a comparatively broad assortment of adapters for peripheral
units, telegraphs, photo reader. tape punch, and 3PM [expansion unknown]. Like
the TVDS, the modular dispatching system (NBS) organises problem-solving, ser-
vices interrupts. controls timers, and interacts directly with the peripheral
units ordered by the target problem. Other major distinctions between the H05
and the TVDS. besides the broad range of peripheral units serviced, are the
availability of a program mechanism that makes it possible to include new pro-
gram modules for communication with additional peripheral units in the HDS. and
the expanded assortment of facilities for communication with the operator, in-
cluding additional possibilities of program debugging.

The HDS is designed only for the appropriate configurations of Elektronika
55-02 microcomputers. In this case this machine can be used as a debugging com-
plex for systems with single-board microcomputers and broad possibilities of
using data input-output and preparation equipment and as the foundation for
constructing systems to control data processing and transmission with a broad
range of target programs that require elaborate facilities for dispatching
(supervising) jobs occurring in real time.

The comparatively powerful configuration of a computer system based on micro-
computers necessitated the use of a program level and a microprogram level in
the H05. 0n the program level the HDS occupies 3K words at addresses 6000-7778,
which means that they are allocated together with the monitoring-preventive
tests on a single board of the permanent memory unit in the microcomputer.

The microprograms of the HDS occupy 2K words of the microprogrsm permanent
memory. Problems are engaged following interrupt signals by means of the START
program. Program control of the state of a problem is accomplished by feeding
the macrocodes REQUEST, ABORT, and EPISODE; work with the timers is determined
by feeding the macrocode TIMER, which is used basically to trigger any timer.
The problem interacts with peripheral units by means of the macrocodes EXCHANGE,
INTERROGATION, and CANCEL. The problem can also use service macrocodes avail-
able in the HDS.

The HDS edits information that is being prepared for outputting to peripheral
units, and organizing facilities for interaction with the operator makes it pos-
sible for the user himself to determine the necessary type of editing by means

71

FOR O‘NWCJAL USEICHHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of an appropriate program written by his in the editor language. In addition,
facilities for interaction with the operator enable a user to control the micro—
computer in the language of dispatcher directives, and one of them (INSERT) offers
the possibility of monitoring the coarse of performance of programs to print out
the memory, the state of the interrupt system, and the contents of the general
register during performance of these commands.

Autonomous exchange with peripheral units. The problem of minimizing hardware and
debugging programs in the Elektronilta 55-21 microcomputer is solved by putting
programs for exchange with the teletype. photo reader, and punched tape and pro-
grams that organize the debugging regime through the teletype in the ROM LSIC.
This approach makes it possible to construct a debugging complex directly on the
basis of this machine and additional main memory modules without drawing on more
elaborate models of the family. The programs for autonomous exchange insure full
logical interaction with peripheral units through a digital input-output unit
located in the microcomputer without additional'm's [microprocessor functional
modules]. These programs are also controlled (0N, OFF, TRANSFER, from regime to
regime) through these digital input-output units. These programs also contain
transfer subroutines (see Figure 15.12 below).

Control of the performance of programs is done by means of teletype. During
this process it is possible to start and stop a program and order printing of the
addresses of the cos-sands being performed and the contents of the registers and

assigned memory during performance of the particular comand [9].

  
 

  

Mums-ms “-21-
(2)
um

  
   
    
    

I
My"

Hunt chums
(Olsen!)

(6)

Figure 6.12. Minimum Debugging Complex Based on Blektronika
85-21 Hicroconputer

Key: (1) Main Henry Module; (3) Teletype;
(2) Blektronika 55-21 Processor (6) Photo Reader;
Main Memory, Permanent Memory. (5) Tape Punch;
Input30utput LSIC (Pour Cir- (6) Model of Object (Object).
cuita ;

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.5. Preparation of Information for the Pabricstion of ROM LSIC's

The use of microcomputers in DCPT systems led to the use of 80“ memory program-
mable by photo masters to realize the progress of the target algorithms. In ad-
dition, the convenience to the microcoaputer user was significantly improved if
the standard software of the operating systems. blocks of standard subroutines,
blocks of debugging facilities, and translators from assembler languages and high-
level languages were designed in the form of software in ROM memory modules,

either permanent or replaceable depending on the type of software and/or the con-
ditions of its use. This type of realization of software, which is not new in
comparison with certain earlier Iachines such as the UMlNKh, Elektronika K-ZOO,
and others, acquires a number of special characteristics in the microcomputer that
force one to somewhat modify the approach to this realization, concentrating

greater attention on it than was given to ROM memory in earlier generations of
control machines.

The impossibility of operational corrections of a semiconductor permanent memory
that is programble by photo masters makes it necessary, on the one hand, to
raise the reliability level of debugging and, on the other hand, to absolutely
preclude the subjective factor in the process of preparing debugged information
or making ROM LSIC's, turning this process over entirely to the computer. The
fact that the basic elements of the storage and processors are of the same type
(see Table 4.2 below) shapes the general approach to designing both the logical
structures of the microcomputer and its RON data storage circuits, using in both
cases the same system for machine design of LSIC's. Therefore, combining cross-
facilities of automating prograa development with a system for machine design of

Table 6.2
Ferrite Perman- Semiconductor
Parameters of Eggparison ent Memory Permanent Memos!
Possibility of Automated Receipt Yes Yes
of Documents
Automated Manufacture Yes Yes
Possibility of Operational Yes No

Correction after Fabrication

Common Basic Elements in Storage No Yes
and Processor

LSIC's, in other words setting up an integrated system to design microcomputers
[26], provides the information base for automatic transmission of information on
target programs to the subsystems that design the photo masters for making ROM
LSIC's (See Figure 4.13 below). The importance of this kind of integration is

obvious for series production of single-chip microcomputers with special-purpose
RON memories.

73

FOR 0F1ﬁC]Al.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1) ' mailman e um».

um WM". MIR W'NN

 

Figure 4.13. Integrated System of Machine Design and
Automated Progra-ing for Hicrocomuters

Key: (1) Software of Integrated Systems for the Design of Hicrocowuters;
(2) System for Control of Design;
(3) System for Machine Design;
(lo) System of Resident Software;
(5) System for Automation of Program Development;
(6) Structural Design;
(7) Program Equipment;
(8) Organization of Computations;
(9) Logical Modeling;
(10) Operating Systems - Editors. Libraries, Translators;
(ll) Cross-Means for Automation of Programing - Translators, Loaders;
(12) Logical Synthesis;
(13) Specific Programs;

(16) Modeling Program of the Command System;

[Key continued next page

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FF“JAL.USE(NNLY

[Key to Figure 4.13 continued]

(15) Topological Design;

(16) System 1. System 2, System, ... System i;

(17) Information Exchange;

(18) Design of Photo Masters;

(19) Programs for Interactive Debugging Through Display;

(20) Design of Tests;

(21) Circuit Engineering Design;

(22) Programs for Automation, Orders for non LSIC's and Documentation;
(23) Information Software Subsystem;

(26) Integrated Information Bank.

________.———-——

The program basis of this integration was the information software subsystem of
the data archives. It was developed to solve the problem of comprehensive de-
sign of LSIC's and is used successfully in both the systems for machine design
and in cross-facilities to automate the development of programs for microcom-
puters delivered on DESK-6 computers. A distinctive feature of the information
software subsystem is its successful organization of a two-level data archive
which offers great opportunities for working with arrays on magnetic tape and
drums using a set of programs [25].

The formulation of a large number of information-control systems based on micro-
computers with ROM memory to realize target programs forces the developers of
microcomputers to solve the problem of organizing the process of ordering the
necessary ROM LSIC's for these systems. It should be observed that the order may
involve three types of memory. The first is program equipment devised by the de-
veloper of the microcomputer (dispatching system selected for the particular ap-
plication, the required assortment of standard subroutines, facilities for
interaction with the operator, and the like). The second type is standard pro-
grams developed by the microcomputer user for the given class of apparatus (for
example. various programs for statistical processing of the results of measure—
ments for monitoring-measuring apparatus based on microcomputers). In different
configurations these programs may be included in the particular apparatus cre—
ated on the basis of the microcomputer. The third type is the target programs
of the particular type of apparatus.

Because series production of microcomputers with R0! memory imposes the require—
ment of maximum standardization of the one nonstandard element for this type of
production, the ROM LSIC, a number of techniques have been developed in practice
that make it possible to reduce the assortment of these nonstandard elements.

One of the main techniques is to arrange the corresponding programs in volumes
that are multiples of the physical design pattern of the RON LSIc's of the
Blektronika SS microcomputer. Moreover. a number of programs. regardless of their
spheres of application, have been realized in transferrable form. which makes it
possible to allocate these ROM memories in any place that is convenient for the
user. The same technique is recommended to users to perform standard programs of
their own class of applications. This purpose is also served by devising versions
of operating systems and other program equipment.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IW)R(MﬂﬂC1Al.U5E10NLN

These measures were the program basis for reducing the assortment of ROM LSIc's

ordered.

The organizational basis for series production was the system of de-

sign description of these LSIC's, correlating them with the number of the system
in which they are used, the number of the board in the microcomputer, and the num-

ber of the place on the board.

The number of the ROM microcircuit is determined
by the microcomputer user taking into account all three parameters.

This is done

during the distribution of ROM memory base while developing the system and is
transmitted to production in the form of a composition table for the order of

microcomputers with the particular ROM memory.

This system also permits simple

borrowing of programs (and ROM LSIC's) from one system for a microcomputer being

used in another system.

An automated system for ordering and producing documents in conformity with the re-
quirements of the Unified System of Design Documentation has been devised and is
operated on BESH-6 computers to spare design subdivisions from the cycle of order-
ing and routine documentation of the information part of ROM LSIc's. This system
enables the customer to do this work independently and monitor whether the docu-

mentary information corresponds to the required text [26].

An important feature

of this system is that it is figured for a user who does not need knowledge in the

area of designing photo masters and developing appropriate documentation.

The ac-

tions of the user amount to sequential performance of operations determined by

appropriate instructions.
Table 4.3 below.

The basic stages of work in the system are shown in

Table 4.3

____ Principal Stages of work Remarks

Inclusion in the list of users served.
Hriting the ROM composition table

into the archive of operational refer-
ence information.

Subdividing the memory field of the ROM
memory into coding tables of the ma-
trices of replaceable (information) lay-
ers of the LSIC and writing the corre-
sponding information on target programs
into the working archive.

Recopying information from the working
archive to the intermediate archive with
printing out the coding tables of the re-
placeable layers of the ROM LSlc and
notice of the fact of recopying.

Topological design of the replaceable
layer of the ROM LSIC and writing in-
formation in the archive of control
information for drawing a photo master;
outputting the set of design documents
and information.

76

Copying information into the working ar-
archive and printing it out on demand
are permitted.

Printing out the contents of the inter-
mediate archive on demand is permitted.
Recopying may be done only with the use
of a special password.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considering the above and also the practices employed in development and series
manufacture of microcomputers for information-control systems, it may be con—
cluded that preparing information for the fabrication of ROM LSIC's is a complex.
independent process that begins after specific programs are debugged. This system
is based on integration of systems for machine design of LSIC's and automation of
development of microcomputer programs, and to carry it out requires an organized
and program-based system to insure a contemporary level of series production of
microcomputers with target programs in ROM LSIC's.

“.6. Designing Specific Software

The initial stage in the development of the specific software of microcomputer-
based equipment is working out technical specifications and composing a functional
description (the stage of analysis and design. see Figure 4.16 below). It does not
differ from the analogous stage of designing software for minicomputers [27]. The
following stages have specific features resulting from the use of control micro-
computers to realize the functions of control of data processing and transmission
in apparatus, instruments, and systems.

Experience with developing DCPT systems showed that in addition to the general
patterns in development of system software on the basis of control computers which
manifest themselves during the design of such systems, there are two special fea-
tures related mainly to their high level of series production and the relatively
small volume of software. In the first place, there is an independent stage of
design which occurs at an intersection of software and hardware development and
defines the boundary between functions realized by software or hardware. In the
second place. cross-facilities for automating development during the design of
target software have a greater role.

Selecting Hardware-Software Cogpatibilities. With a given microcomputer speed
there are different variations for program realization of functions (minimization

of cost, but often with a loss of productivity), use of standard microcomputer
functional modules (a certain increase in cost, but also an increase in produc-
tivity), or hardware realization (maximum cost and productivity). This problem is
solved by an iterative process which it is desirable to converge by the time that
debugging of the program target algorithm begins.

The large numbers of microcomputer—based systems and the need to achieve the maxi-
mum national economic effect from the systems demand careful work on the questions
of optimizing hardware-software compatibilities based on the possibilities of and
expenditures for designing the system and the efficiency of their production.

This raises. in turn, the question of working out appropriate methodologies and
using software based on the principles of selecting optimal solutions from mul-
tiple variations to preclude subjective factors in evaluating realization of
algorithms for the work of s DCPT system. This question is also timely in the de~
velopment of such systems based on single-chip microcomputers. It follows from
this that it will be important to organize the corresponding work as an inde-
pendent phase of the process of designing target software.

In this phase of design functional (development of decision-making techniques
and performance by the system of its specific designation of data control,

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key :

(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)

(5)
(6)
(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
  
  
 
 
  
    

I: t
4.7m: Wm...

I‘mqwtlommr raunqunmnuv
mumuun nu'cnuu (2)

 

I'c when" ulna-gamma!
I (3)
ﬂotsam

       
 
   
  

 
   

.1"me S 6 )
Iu mural“ m, hymn "an ” h'
I 2"” I" ’3'”? n/wlwrzmlm rerun-nut} mm“
L _____ —- W
_______ I'upahmu

  
   

”ﬁrpmphnr u ( 8 ) mumpmuul (Finn!
annular u whim»
on? J'HIUN nupt-
JON) unrlm "Pf '
manna: rum -
nPI/nuuuu rum -

would
(7) ________

      

   
     
      
    
 
  
 

Remy-worm: rum-0hr

-"’"‘","L".‘" ”Mi ' '1)‘

  

 
 
   

Mann-run up“! an
mummy" 17 um um

    

nun-nu u wlﬂllltﬁ
urnqnmwn ”lull! 10)

Figure 4.14. Order of Designing Microcomputer Specific Software.

Technical Specifications for Article;

Development of Functional Description of Article;

Development of Algorithms;

Delivery of Documents and Setting Up Systems for Automated Program
Development on General-Purpose Computer;

Working Out Hardware-Software Compatibilities;

Deliver of Essential Modeling Facilities;

Programing and Debugging of Specific Program on General-Purpose
Computer (or Microcoaputer), Specification of Hardware-Program
Compatibilities;

Development of Hardware;

Manufacture of Hardware;

Electrical Interlinking of Hardware and Modeling Facilities;
Comprehensive Testing of Hardware and Target Software;

Functional Testing;

Order for ROM LSIC's;

Experimental and Industrial Use of Article.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

processing, and transmission) and structural (formulating target problems that
insure maximum efficiency in use of microprocessor equipment and a high level

of technological suitability for design in the system as a whole) problems are
solved [28].

In this stage (see Figure $.15 below) design is characterized by singling out the
algorithms of the channels of infomtion exchange between sources (sensors) and
microcomputers in the working algorithm of the system.

We will use the phrase channels for exchange of information between the control
microcomputer and data sources (sensors) with which the particular microcomputer
is linked during formulation of the DCP'I' system to refer to the software-hardware
facilities that carry on digital (coded) data exchange (with essential preliminary
processing) between the memory of the control microcomuter and the data source
(sensor).

The term "exchange channel" consolidates the concepts of interaction of the con-
trol microcomputer with input and output devices for communication with the
processor, with facilities for interlinking the human operator and the machine,
and with facilities for communication between the particular DCPT system and
remote data sources (sensors). This consolidation is accomplished on the condi-
tion that any of the above-enumerated variations of interaction has cor-on
parameters: amount of information exchange in a unit of time; frequency of ex-
changes; preliminary processing algorithm.

In order to estimate the microcomputer resources required with respect to speed,
memory, and essential hardware support the exchange channels in the system are
represented by distinct but interrelated blocks, each of which is realized by
one of the feasible software or hardware techniques. The initial calculation is
made on the basis of standard means of interaction with the environment available
to the user within the given configuration of the microcosmuter and assuming
maximum use of the program level of realization of the exchange channel. This
initial condition is based on the propositions that, for one, the use of these
facilities accelerates the development of the article and simplifies further pro-
duction and, for two, programing is a more highly automated process of design
than hardware development.

If total expenditures for all channels in terms of memory value, speed, or num-
ber of standard interaction facilities with the external environment necessary

to accomplish the exchange exceed the amounts assigned in advance. the channel
that uses the most resources is singled out and the type and configuration of ad-
ditional hardware necessary for it to significantly reduce these expenditures

is determined. The operation can be performed simltaneously for several chan-
nels based on the ratio among total expenditures obtained, expenditures for a
channel, and assigned expenditures. After this the next estimate of resource
expenditures is made and compared with the assigned constraint.

After the hardware-software compatibilities are worked out, the hardware and soft-
ware parts of the article are developed.

79

FOR OFFICI‘L USE ONLY
Key: (1)
(2)

(3)
(lo)

(5)
(6)

(7)

FOR10FFKHAI.USE(NNLY

Nanchang 1 )

 
    

0 mm! and
ﬂag; gaps-vi Wm:
comm (2)

      
      

 
 

   

”$2,?” «Wm no ml:-
4! an 725

 
 
 
 
 
 

um Jumps»:

   

  

(6) ,
we snmnm

1m in: mpga
cm macaw -
m new

    

       
     
      
 

00qu usual-mum»
l ;

5'. mm mamas:
u muting. u
n 5 Wm

      
 

Figure 10.15. Process of Working Out Hardware-Software
Compatibilities in DCPT Systems

Development of Algorithms;
Singling Out Algorithm of Exchange Channels fron Algorithms of
System Work;

Selection (Specification) of Variations of Realizing Exchange Channels,
Evaluation Programing;

Estimates of Expenditure of Resources for Each Channel, Determination
of Total Resource Expenditures;

Do Total Resource Expenditures Exceed Assigned Expenditure“;
Introduction of Hardware Support for Channel with Maxi-um Resource
Expenditures;

Establishing the Software-Hardware Breakdown in the System, Working
Out Particular Technical Specifications for Hardware and Software
Realization of Exchange Channel.

 

The questions of designing the hardware part of the article are the basic spe-

cialization of those development workers to whom this book is addressed, and
therefore are not considered here.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HUN:

Programming and Debugging. Figure 4.16 (below) describes the jobs involved in
this stage.

After development of the algorithms of system functioning and preliminary coordi-
nation of the hardware-software breakdown of Emotions the specific software is
progressed in machine language. assembler language, or the high-level language
with which the microcosputer is equipped. It can be stated with confidence that
it is wise for the developers of the specific microcomputer software when formu-
lating problems with a volune of more than 1,000 words to program in autocode,
not machine code. The convenience of modifying programs during debugging with

these volumes of work will repay expenditures for additional (compared to study
of the system of comanda) incorporation of facilities for automation programming.

W”
muo-
uenuiul W

#ng35 (1)

if

*5

mun n .r

«elm men»: r "W" '0
Lumen Wan mun-«u
«moi Ikmlnlna

--——-——-—-—-+
5

' mo woolly" #-

    

. nu amps/twp.
”J9

 

Figure 4.16. work to Program and Debug Target Algorithms of
Systems for Control, Processing, and Trans-
mission of Data.

Key: (a) Two-Step Design Procedure;
(b) Development of working Circuits, Programing;
(c) Debugging Program Using Cross-Facilities;
(d) Development of Model on Two—Machine Complex;
(e) Experimental Operation on ROM Memory;
(f) Work in Series-Produced Apparatus on RON Memory;
(g) Development of Model on Microcomputer;

[Key continued next page]

81

I-‘OI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 6.16 continued]

(I!)
(1)
(J)

(k)

(1)

(n)

Experimental Operation on Main Memory or Semipermanent Memory;
One-Step Design Procedure;

Development of working Circuits, Specification of Hardware-Software
Compatibilities, Coding Specific Algorithms, Development and Debugging
of Programs that Simulate the External Situation;

Translation, Autonomous Debugging of Specific Programs, Comprehensive
Debugging of Groups of Specific Programs Using Programs To Simulate
the External Situation;

Analysis of the Selection of Hardware-Software Compatibilities and
Time Parameters of the Algorithms of System Work. Modeling Under

Real Conditions (in a Two-Machine Complex);

Test of the Work Stability of Algorithms in Real Environmental Con-
ditions;

Check of the Quality of Specific Software with Multiple Use Under
Real Conditions.

The next stage of design is debugging specific software with cross-facilities

for automating program development (see Figure 4.17 below). These design facili-
ties make it possible:

1.

2.

3.

To develop programs parallel with devising the hardware framework
of the system and its coupling with the microcomputer in a model
of the object or a prototype of it.

To use the significant (compared to microcomputer) resources of
general-purpose or large control computers,above all the memory
and external units, for automatic running of a large number of
debugging variations. varied documentation of results, accumu-
lation and storage of libraries of programs, and other jobs

for which these computers are well-equipped in terms of hardware
and software capabilities.

To model the external situation using programs realized on the
machine being used and connected to the specific programs of the
microcomputer through the modeling program of the system of
commands; this approach can be used not only in the stage of
designing the concrete hardware on the basis of a microcom-
puter, but also in the process of research or predesign work
to choose the work algorithm of the hardware, optimize pro-
posed hardware-software compatibilities, and determine ade-
quate quantitative characteristics of the specific software.
This is especially important during the development of hard-
ware with new technical characteristics or based on new
working principles (the possibility of an investigation using
such facilities is substantially higher than the possibility of
reproducing the same results on the debugging stand).

82

FOR‘OFFKHAI.USE(NVLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 6.17 continued]

(16) M220 (M6000, Yes Computer) - Translation. Loading, Running,Debugging
and Monitoring Examples Using a Modeling Program of the System of
Commands (If Preliminary Debugging on the General—Purpose Computer
Use Not Done);

(15) Initial Text of the Program;

(16) Information for Ordering ROM LSIC's;

(l7) Object;

(18) Teletype;

(l9) Microcomputer - Translation. Loading, Running Debugging and Monitor-
ing Examples (If Preliminary Debugging on a General-Purpose Computer
Use Not Done, Running Comprehensive Examples, Functional Testing);

(20) Microcomputer - Loading. Running Comprehensive Examples, Functional
Testing.

For microcomputer-based systems with specific software and a volume of l-lOK
words. precluding this stage and employing one-stage designing leads to a great
increase in the time required to work out the model on the microcomputer (2'-3')

and to a possible loss in time with two-stage designing. This occurs chiefly
for two reasons.

In the first place, when developers use one-stage designing of specific software
in the period of working out the model on the microcomputer, they have to work
with "raw" programs for an extended time. Because interaction with the hardware
occupies a significant volume of software in control systems of this class. it
becomes difficult to assess the causes of incorrect work: mistakes in algo-
rithms or programs, mistakes in (or failure to observe) the hardware-software
compatibilities adopted, and incompletely developed hardware. In addition to
the ordinary technical difficulties associated with the search for causes of
incorrect system work. natural psychological problems of interaction among spe-
cialists in programming and electronics in all stages of design. which de-
termine how quickly a control system based on computers is set up, become more

complex. The availability of check variants of specific software developed by
means of cross-facilities and simulation programs accelerates the search for the

area of the errors by simplifying interaction between programmers and the hard-
ware developers. Hardware test programs developed on the basis of algorithms
coordinated with the hardware developers can also serve this purpose.

In the second place. the time for development of the model, which is restricted

to concrete periods. and is partially spent solving the problems mentioned above
during one-stage design. narrows the range of testing, which increases the num-

ber of unidentified errors and the likelihood that the microcomputer ROM memory

in series-produced hardware will have to be adjusted.

But when the volume of specific software is within the range of IR words. these

solutions are possible where stage 2'-3' is conducted carefully and there is ex-
perimental operation of the apparatus or device on main memory or semipermanent

ROM memory (4') for an extended time in sufficient volume. '

F0l.OFF1CJAl.USE|DNLY
IKHIOFFKJAL.USE(MHLV

Unfortunately, it is not possible to give a precise time evaluation of such

work because of the large variety of types of equipment, the conditions of con-
ducting stages 2'-3' and 4', the qualifications of developers, and other organi-
zational and technical matters that affect the time and quality of development
work. At the same time, experience with these developments on a number of
microcomputer-based devices and equipment shows that under fairly favorable con-
ditions the developers of devices and equipment who spend 10-16 months on the
first stage of design of microcomputer-based systems can complete the work if
the volume of specific software is not greater than lK words. Furthermore, it
is possible to use either two-stage or one-stage designing of the specific
software. -~

Examples of such projects that were conducted in periods of time close to those
indicated are the development of the spectrophotometer based on a single-board
microcomputer with two-stage design of specific programs and the development of
a general-purpose digital regulator with one-stage design of specific programs.
These and_numerous other developments. including the development of a software
user station, demonstrated that the labor-intensiveness of designing 1K words
of a multipurpose microcomputer using the indicated facilities (stages 1-4 [6'])
takes 10-17 person-months. This figure is reduced by one-fifth to one-half when
designing the following types of microcomputer-based apparatus; this is the re-
sult of experience with the use of its hardware and software facilities. the
debugging system, and institution of a clearcut procedure in the design process.

Cogprehensive debugging. The decisive stage in the preparation of specific soft-
ware from the standpoint of high-quality work by series-produced microcomputer-
based equipment is working out programs on the microcomputer along with hardware
framing within the model or experimental equipment (see Figure 4.17 above). This
stage provides the final test of whether the ideology of constructing specific
programs and the selection of hardware-software compatibilities were correct and
also refines the principal time characteristics of microcomputer work within the
equipment. When describing this stage it is advisable to compare hardware and
software facilities for doing it.

These facilities include: a microcomputer equipped with resident facilities for
automating program development (a translator from autcode. a loader. and software-
hardware support for monitoring program codes); and, a two-machine "microcomputer -
M220" (or H6000 or Yes computer) complex with cross—facilities for automating
program development (translator from autocode, loader, and modeling program of

the set of commands).

There are two advantages to using only a microcomputer interlinked with a model
of the object or an experimental prototype: the absence of expenditures for
setting up a two-machine complex and putting the appropriate software on it; the
speed with which work begins on the_model, which is determined entirely by the
time required to deliver the appropriate microcomputer and connect it to the
framing hardware. For enterprises whose technical policy is moving toward de-
velopment of microcomputer-based apparatus, devices, and control systems, however,
this way is acceptable only for initial development using microcomputers and only
within the restrictions mentioned above.

85

R0! 0FF1C1AL.USB¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

computer processors and input—output units together with a model of the object.
The cross-facilities put on the "old" computer of a two-machine complex provide

bugging: interlinking the microcomputer of the complex with the model of the
object or the experimental unit; debugging modeling programs in the real-time
scale of the external situation; testing the work of specific software and func-
tional testing of the model (experimental unit) to make the decision on experi-
mental operation of the articles using ROM memory or main memory (or semi-
permanent ROM memory).

Therefore. in those cases where it is possible to use cross-facilities for auto-
mating the development of specific software on a general-purpose computer that
is not part of the two-machine complex, it is always advisable to do so to re-

duce the time of stages 1, 2, and 3 of development of the microcomputer-based
articles.

ln completing our description of this stage, we must note that its final phase
is functional testing. This term is used to describe a new process in the de-
sign of apparatus. devices, and control systems. Its appearance resulted from
the fact that in the construction of microcomputer-based articles most of the
functions or the main ones are accomplished by program techniques, while the re-
mainder can be done only by hardware framing whose proportion will steadily
diminish as the speed of multichip microcomputers increases and the practice of
designing single-chip microcomputers is introduced. Therefore, testing programs
that realize the working algorithms of the article before they are reproduced

on the ROM memory, the regular medium. is becoming a distinct and essential part
of the process of designing specific software, and the nature of execution of
the hardware framing at this moment no longer plays a significant part (the only
important thing is that it have complete functional correspondence to the planned
future realization). Moreover. the testing of specific software, and of the
article or a model of it in practice. should be done by those programs and
methodologies which must be used for stand testing of experimental units of the
article (on ROM memory. main memory, or semipermanent ROM memory with specific
software).

In view of its completeness from the functional standpoint and a certain condi-
tional quality from the standpoint of the framing and using auxiliary debugging
facilities (of the two-machine complex . such testing is called functional test-

ing (as distinguished from testing experimental units, where the form of hardware
and software is determined by existing standards).

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FTWC]AI.USE(NNLY

Following the results of functional testing conducted on the model after its de-
velopment (3 or 4, 2'-3') a decision is made on transmitting information on the
specific software for the manufacture of microcomputers with 80" memory for ex-
perimental operation and/or stand testing of the microcomputer-based articlee'or
preparation of an article for conducting these stages with storage of information

in the main memory or semipermanent ROM memory of the microcomputer. Stage 3
usually concludes with transmission of information for the fabrication of ROM
LSIC' 3 because the facilities for conducting this stage insure high reliability
in the specific software. At the same time. the results of functional testing
conducted upon completion of the work and stage 2'-3' do not always testify to
the possibility of fabricating ROM LSIc's, and require experimental operation on
such an information medium as the main memory or aemipermanent ROM memory for

a more detailed check of the article in different work regimes.

The care taken in preparing specific software using all debugging facilities be-
comes an even more important factor when single-chip general-purpose micro-
computers built into the equipment are used. The correction of specific software
in multichip microcomputers requires redesigning of replaceable layers and the
replacement of all or several ROM LSIC's,which are just one of the functional ele-
ments of the lizrocomputer. when a single-chip microcomputer is used the analo-
gous correction process is a more complex "surgical" operation with all the
conditions of fragmentation of design of particular elements of this chip.

In conclusion, several deductions can be made.

1. The use of cross-facilities for automating programming is not only a tech-
nique to improve the reliability of programs. but also a way to reduce the
design time for microcomputer-based articles by combining stages of the develop-
ment of specific software with other stages of article design.

2. The debugging of an article using a two-machine "microcomputer - general
purpose computer" complex (with a large control computer) insures high—quality
specific software in series-produced equipment, beginning with the first models.

3. The importance of using all facilities for debugging specific software in-
creases with the use of single-chip computers in apparatus. instruments. and
systems [29lr

Chapter 5. Key Trends in the Application of Blektronika 85 Series Microcomputers
5.1. Principles of the Use of Microcomputers

At the present time. two gradually diverging trends are observed in microcomputer
engineering.

The first trend, which is represented by the RDR-ll/OJ, Blektronika-bo, and
Elektronika-NTs computers has been called the "microminicomputer" trend. These
machines are characterized by an endeavor to make maximum use of the opportunities

presented by a high level of LSIC integration to increase computing capacities.
microcomputer memory volume, and the speed of the input-output channels.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second trend typically uses a growing degree of LSIC integration to cree

ate functionally complete computer configurations with a minimum number of func-
tional modules or LSIC's. This trend developed with the appearance of single-
board microcomputers and functional modules for then. Single—chip micro-

computers are a logical extension of this trend.

It is very important to choose the correct family of microcomputers when be-
ginning to design an instrument. aggregate, or system based on microcomputers.
In this connection all applications of microcomputers can be classified in the
following four groups:

1. The microcomputer is used in a particular system in place of a minicom-
puter employed (or planned for use) earlier. The chief advantage of the micro-
computer in this case is its very low cost and high degree of series production,
which makes it possible to use a control computer in places where this was prac-
tically impossible before owing to economic considerations or the impossibility
of obtaining the required number of machines. Thus, it can be said that the
microcomputer is a means to setting up inexpensive and large-scale automated
systems for industrial processes and other systems of similar functional design.
It is important here that the microcomputers have sufficiently elaborate periph-
eral units. This group of applications is characteristic of the Blektronika-GO,
Blektronika-NTs, and Elektronika-SS-02(Ol) microcomputers. It should be ob-
served :hat the relatively low speed of the latter does not limit its applica-
tion in many cases because long years of experience with setting up automated
control systems for industrial processes have demonstrated that the speed of the
ninicomputers included in them, machines such as the Elektronika—loo and
Elektronika-KZOO is far from fully utilized.

2. The microcomputer is used as a computer built into a particular device or
instrument, and the computing capability of the machine is .v important charac—
teristic while no additional functionarelated to controlling equipment work are
assigned to the machine. The Elektronika 85-12(11) microcomputer can be used as
a computing unit if its speed and main memory volume are adequate in the spe-
cific case. But this application is not typical for this microcomputer; it is
more characteristic for the LSI-ll single-board microcomputer of the DEC company
[30], which has fairly high speed and comparatively large main memory volume,
but requires the use of additional equipment to organize interaction with the
controlled equipment.

3. The microcomputer is used as a supervisor, a built-in block to control a
machine tool, aggregate, or instrument. Such applications usually produce the
greatest advantage from the standpoint of reducing the labor-intensiveness of
fabrication and cost of the equipment, improving its reliability, and giving it
new qualities in fast processing of measurement results, convenience of operator
work, and the like. The most important quality of the microcomputer for this
group of applications is maximum functional completeness in a minimum configura-
tion. In this respect, the single-board and single-chip models of the Blektronika
85 family of microcomputers are superior to other microcomputers because, as has
already been observed, they have on one board (one chip) not only a processor and
main memory. but also parallel interface circuits to 32 inputs and 32 outputs,

interrupt circuits. timers. and main memory. It would take at least four boards
to realize such a configuration from, for example, LSI-ll modules.

88

FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY
INJR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lﬂHE(NNLY

s.tm
4. The microcomputers are used within a hierarchical system of computing fa-
cilities. in decentralized systems. He know that decentralization of this type is
a way to increase the flexibility and vitality of a system, while the low cost of
microcomputers has eliminated the main obstacle to setting up such systems. 'It is
necessary to decide which level of the hierarchy is determining when selecting
the family of microcomputers to construct such a hierarchy. Thus, if it is
necessary for the hierarchy to have minicomputers with large computing capabilities
and an elaborate system of magnetic tape and disk external memory, but the lowest
element of the hierarchy is not too critical with respect to volume and cost of
the microcomputer included in it, preference should be given to machines such as

the Elektronika-oo, which is compatible with the SH-S. SH-h, and Blektronika 100/
161 minicomputers.

By contrast, if the principal objective of the hierarchical system is to achieve
maximum economy in data control and processing at the lower level and the re-
quirements for speed and volume of processing information at the second level of
the hierarchy are not too great. preference should be given to the series of
signed for setting up small configurations. The Elektronika-SS family of micro-
computers makes it possible to construct such systems. For example. the
Elektronika SS single-board or single-chip microcomputers can operate as super-
visors in equipment, and the Elektronika 85-02 machine can control a group of
equipment and, if necessary, be linked by telephone and telegraph channels with
a general-purpose computer located at a significant distance away.

5.2. Survey of Mic-ocomputer Applications

In beginning our review of the basic applications of Blektronika-SS micro—
computers in different sectors of the national economy we propose the following
procedure to the reader. We will try to identify the distinctive functions given
to microcomputers which are fairly general in character and, with some modifica-
tion. occur in many applications. Let us review some "characteristic functions"

of microcomputers.

1. Replacement of rigid logic with program logic. This is one of the most ob-
vious ways to use microcomputers. It basically involves building equipment
based on microcomputers that generally coincides in functions with series-
produced equipment with medium and low levels of circuit integration, discrete
electronic components. relays. or mechanical elements.

2. Building control elements for automatic regulation systems. The application
of digital control machines in servo-systems has long had a solid theoretical
basis. Thanks to their low cost and high degree of series production, micro-
computers provide a technical basis for constructing this type of servo-mechanism.

3. Constructing digital automation circuits. As a general-purpose programmable
element with main memory and the capability of working in real time, the micro-

computer makes it possible to realize almost any logical expression where
parameters coming from outside and ongoing time may operate as variables.

89

INJR OFFICIAL USEZCMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibility of realizing functions (2) and (3) simultaneously by means of
microcomputers is also extremely important.

4. Providing interaction with the operator. The inclusion of a microcomputer

in a particular piece of equipment, measuring device, machine tool, or data
transmission unit makes it possible to give this equipment means of communica-
tion that only large computer-based systems formerly had: representation of in-
formation in the most convenient and visible form; monitoring the correctness of
operator actions; suggesting the order of actions, and so on. This provides such
a substantial increase in the productivity and error-free quality of operator

work that in many cases it will be the primary, and even sole, function of the
microcomputer that is built into the equipment.

5. Interface organization. This function is assigned to a microcomputer built
into equipment that is capable of working with a particular collective-use line.
In this case the system of conductors, the set of service signals, and the time
chart of data exchange for such a collective-use line differ significantly for
different fields of engineering. Examples of such standard collective-use lines

are the Csmac standard [31], the JBB-688-75 instrument interface, and various
communications interfaces.

6. Conversion of information during its transmission (reception) through commu-
nications channels. This microcomputer function may amount specifically to
introducing (removing) noise-proof coding during the transmission (or receipt)
of messages. carrying out a procedure to compress information to increase the

carrying capacity of the communications channel. organize transmission of vari-
able parts of formalized messages, and the like.

‘
7. Decentralization of computations and control. Without touching on the gen-
eral problem of organizing multimschine complexes based on microcomputers. we
will simply observe that the small size and low cost of microcomputers make it
possible to bring the machine very close to the source of information and con-
trol object, and ultimately to build microcomputers into them. Together with
functions (5) and (6) this is one of the ways to save expenditures on communi-

cations lines. and improve the flexibility. rearrangeability. and vitality of
DCPT systems.

The functions reviewed above do not comprise all functions that are presently
given to microcomputers, to say nothing of those that will be in the future.

The very same functions may be realized in different equipment by software or by
functional modules that supplement the capabilities of a single-board micro-
computer. SOme of these functions may be realized on circuits with a medium de-
gree of integration because microcomputers do not have adequate speed. Finally,
when realizing certain functions they may all be done by one microcomputer or

a particular machine may be assigned for each function, even if there is no prob-
lem with speed. composition of memory, and input-output devices. The choice of
the particular engineering solution is a very important part of the process of de-
signing microcomputer-based equipment.

90

F0R40FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us consider how these problems were solved in building a number of instru-
ments and systems based on Blektronika SS microcomputers.

5.3. Data Transmission Equipment

This class of equipment is characterized by extensive use of third-generation
electronic components. Therefore, the basic problems facing this equipment are
reducing the labor-intensivenesa of manufacture. raising reliability, improving
capability for series production, and reducing size and power consumption; these
can be solved well by using the microcomputer as the principal component.

The programmed user station based on the Elektronika 55-01(02) microcomputer
is a characteristic example of building such equipment [16, 32] (see Figure 5.1
below).

 

Figure 5.1. Programed User Station

The purposes of setting up such a user station were: a significant reduction in
the labor-intensity of manufacturing user stations; realization at the programmed
user station of a structure adaptable to changes in algorithmic requirements for a
particular article; application of concepts which would make it possible to util-
ize continued growth in the technological parameters of microcomputers (level of
integration and speed) without revising the article as a whole.

The user station constructed on the basis of microcomputers is designed to trans-
mit data by telephone and telegraph lines (separate and switchable) at speeds of
$0, 100, and 200 bits per second. The microconputer in the user station provides
information exchange with Ridm R60 and Perfom R35 punched tape input-output u..lts,
a Konsul-26O electric typewriter (COST [State All-Union Standard] 13052-74) to

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

print out messages and prepare and edit data; a unit to convert signals at the
C2 interface (Modem-200 TG [expansion unknown] signal convertor), and a user
station control console.

The reliability of transmission by characters is no worse than 2-10'6 in a com-
munications channel with a probability of error of 10'3 per character. The
block data transmission technique (with 15, 30, or 45 characters per block) is
used with waiting for a response to the transmitted block. Data is transmitted
with a matrix even parity check. and errors are corrected by repeating trans-
mission of the block. The basic requirements of the national data transmission

network are net in the programs for interaction with a communications channel in
the microcomputer.

Figure 5.2 below presents a structural diagram of the programmed user station.

Its working algorithms are realized by means of programs and microprograms with a
total volume of 21K words and modules for communication with the console of the
user station (digital input-output boards), the Modem (board for coupling with the
signal convertor), with the electric typewriter (board for control of typewriter

mechanisms), and with the tape punch (board for coupling with the photo reader
and punch).

r

 

Figure 5.2. Structural Diagram of the Programmed User Station

Key: (1) Blektronika 85-01(02) (6) Hith Electric Typewriter;
Microcomputer; (7) With Photoreader and Tape Punch;
(2) Microprocessor (Memory. In- (8) User Station Console;
put-Output Control) (9) Electric Typewriter;
(3) Coupling Modules; (10) Modem 200;
(4) With User Station Console; (11) Photo Reader;
(5) With Hodem; (12) Tape Punch.
92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are several distinctive features to the realization of these algorithms.

In the first place, flexible distribution of user station functions among differ-
ent levels of realization (program, microprogram, and hardware) made it possible
to find an efficient solution to the problem of minimizing expenditures for per-
formance of these functions. Moreover, during review of the work algorithms of

the limits of the group could be independent of other groups. The most typical
examples of such groups of problems are: control of problem-solving and exchange
with external units done in the form of a dispatcher system; work on a communica-
tions channel defined by a type of protocol adopted within the particular data
transmission network, and preparing and editing messages before transmitting them
on the channel. In the second place, the hardware used in the user station is
standard models for coupling with peripheral units included in the Elektronika 85
family. In the third place, during development of user station software per-
formance of the functions of controlling problem-solving and exchange with

The construction of a programmed user station based on the Elektronika 85-01(02)
microcomputer confirmed all the advantages of developing this type of DCPT system
on the basis of multipurpose microcomputers compared not only to "rigid logic"

but also (with respect to a number of key parameters) compared to microprocessor
sets or specialized microprocessor systems.

Among these advantages we must list first the fact that in this realization the
user station is a standard microcomputer program to work as the terminal equip-
ment of a data transmission networ . This means that the development of the
user station amounts to formulating the specific software using everything
necessary from the set of general microcomputer software accumulated at the par-
ticular moment (recoding and editing programs, dispatcher systems, dialog pro-
grams, and so on); then it involved design formulation of the elements of the
microcomputer together with the required peripheral units. This is the principal
advantage of using such basic elements as compared to any others. In addition.

These methods of realizing algorithms also provided an opportunity to use cer-
tain specific user station programs (exchange on a communications channel in
networks with analogous protocol, data preparation, monitoring data transmission.
and the like) in other DCPT systems. And making them in a form independent of
the initial address (in movable form) and correlating the appropriate program

volumes to the design unit (ROM LSIC) makes it possible to borrow existing ROM
LSIC'S directly.

Finally, the technical-economic parameters of the user station can be improved by
the use of microcomputers of a particular family developed on the basis of new

93

FOR OFFICIAL USIZCNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basic elements. This improvement can he accomplished in two ways: correlating
existing specific and standard software with the new microcomputer or devising
a fundamentally new article with characteristics that improve all the parameters
of the user station Built with the preceding generation of microcomputers.

The first method produces a reduction in the number of microcomputer elements
used in the user station (the number of LSIC's and boards) while also reducing
the cost of each element and expanding such technical characteristics as the in—
crease in transmission speed on the communications channel and the introduction
of additional procedures. The volume of reprogramming in this case does not ex—
ceed 10-15 percent of the total volume of the programs.

The second method assures maximum use of new microcomputer characteristics that
make it possible to significantly decentralize functions by employing the multi-
machine method of realizing user station algorithms (the latter is particularly
important where single-chip microcomputers are used in the systems).

Therefore. use of the Elektronika 55-21 microcomputer in the above-described
user station permits us to consider that it can be used in two ways.

1. It is possible (see Figure 5.3 below) to take the Blektronika 85—21 micro-
computer and transfer all available specific software to it (user station

algorithms realized on the microprogram level of the Blektronika 55-01 micro-
computer should be done at the program level). Communication with peripheral

      

Mqan( 9)

"nut-qua.

Figure 5.3. Centralized Structural Diagram of

a Programmed User Station Based on the Elektronika
55-21 Microcomputer.

Key: (1) Elektronika 55-21; (6) Modem-200 (2600);
(2) Memory; (7) Photo Reader;
(3) Digital Input-Output MPH; (8) Tape Punch;
(4) User Station Console; (9) Common Line.

(5) Electric Typewriter;

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

units is organized through digital input-output modules. If the speed is inade—

quate a second microcosputer is connected in and given only the functions of
exchange with peripheral units. -...

2. It is plausible to devise a comletely distributed system that realizes user
station algorithms with a set of ﬁlm's [microprocessor functional nodules]

devised to expand the functions of the Elektronika 55-21 microcomputer and also
several Blektroniks 85-21 microcomputers that perform the functions of specialized

Mars and machines to process essential (specific) information (see Figure 5.4
below).

 

Figure 5.4. Distributed Structure of a Programed
User Station Based on the Elelttroniks SS Microcomputer.

Key: (1) Modem-1.800; (9) 85-21 Interface;
(2) Elektronika 35-21; (10) 16h Interface;
(3) Memory; (11) Teletype;
(6) Con-non .Line; (12) Console;
(5) Teletype KPH; (13) Magnetic Tape KN [Expansion
(6) Photo Reader-Tape Punch um; Unknown];
(7) Digital Input—Output MPH; (11.) Photo Reader;
(8) Elektronika 85-21; (15) ‘l‘ape Punch.

 

The availability of facilities for automating program development and system de-
bugging that have been tried and mastered by the developers of user stations make
it possible during establishment of the technical specifications of the new gener—
ation of microcomputers of this family (that is, 2-3 years before their series
production) to work out and model the structures and software of modifications of
user stations employing these microcomputers, which greatly reduces the time be-
tween the start of development of the basic element and production of the new
article when cospsred with the sequential method of designing. This approach was
successfully tested during the development of the above-described user station.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.b. Instrument Making

Microcomputers as measuring instruments are used for the following purposes: to
improve the precision of measurements; to automate the work of the instrument
and the measurement process; to increase the productivity and reduce the errors
in operator labor; to introduce the functions of quick processing of measurement
results; to provide the possibility of using the instrument within a measurement
system; to improve the economic characteristics of the instrument -— reduce
labor-intensiveness of manufacture. size, and power consumption.

Let us consider how these objectives are achieved when the Blektronika 55 micro-
computer is used in various instruments.

A radio measurement instrument based on a single-board microcomputer. As an ex-
ample let us consider the application of the Elektronika 85-11 microcomputer in
a multichannel generator of code sequences, giving special attention to automa-
tion of operator interaction with the instrument and the organization of the
instrument interface for work within a measurement-information system - two

microcomputer functions that are very characteristic of its application in
measurement instruments [33].

Code sequence generators are designed to test information systems. communica-
tiont channels. and multifunctional digital units by outputting binary code
sequences up to several thousand bits in length with a frequency up to several
dozen megahertz on several channels simultaneously. Two types of problems arise
with the construction of such an instrument. The first relates to insuring the
high-frequency characteristics of the output cycles of the instrument and is
solved by employing high—speed switching elements. The second arises from the
necessity to realize vary intricate logic in the work of the instrument and from
the abundance of raw data that must be fed to it before work begins. It is this
type of problem that determined the following basic objectives in development of
such an instrument based on microcomputers: organization of operator interaction
with the instrument; interlinking the instrument with an LK? [collective

use line]; maximum automation of instrument work; self testing of the instrument
and its particular assemblies during the operations process.

The high-frequency part of the instrument (see Figure 5.5 below) consists of a
high-frequency block. a buffer memory unit, and output stages. Information on
the work regimes of the instrument and the code sequences that have been formed

is stored in the long-term memory and does not disappear when the power source
of the instrument is shut off. Information is outputted from the main memory of
the generator through the buffer memory. All these blocks are interlinked with
the microcomputer, but the work of each of them and transmission of data among
them is controlled by hardware. The instrument panel and console are interlinked
with the microcomputer.

Let us consider the basic functions of the microcomputer in greater detail.

Operator interaction with the instrument includes feeding parameters that de-
termine the work regimes of the instrument from a keyboard; representing

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.5. Structural Diagram of a Code Sequence Generator.

Key: (1) Interface Board; (6) Buffer Memory;
(2) High-Frequency Block; (7) Console;
(3) Panel; (8) Long-Term Memory;

(4) Blektronika 55-11 Microcomputer; (9) Output Stages.
(5) Main Memory of Generator;

parameters and instrument work regimes being fed on the panel; monitoring
parameters and code sequences being fed. indicating the results of monitoring,

and stopping the work of the instrument when errors are detected in the informa—
tion.

Unfortunately. the instrument does not adequately provide for the possibility of

suggesting the essential sequence of actions to the operator. This is because of
the limited capabilities of the panel that is used.

The use of a compact keyboard, replacing several dozen multiposition disk switches
and tumblers became possible only thanks to program realisation of interactive
functions. and indeed it is not advisable to realize these functions themselves

with "rigid" logic (not using microcomputers). It is very important that the
digital information is fed to the instrument from a keyboard and represented on

the panel in decimal form and the conversions from decimal to binary and binary
to decimal form which are central for work of the instrument are done by a program.

Program monitoring of the procedure for feeding parameters and shaping code se-
quences pursues two purposes.

In the first place, it precludes mistaken actions by the operator in controlling

the work of the instrument, selecting work regimes. and feeding parameters. This
is very important because these preparatory procedures alone require the operator
to press up to 200 keys on the instrument control board. Undetected errors lead

to incorrect measurement regimes and, ultimately. to significant unproductive ex-
penditures of time during instrument operation.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0F‘ﬂC]Al.USEtDNLY

In the second place, monitoring the meaning of each parameter fed, comparing it
with boundary values, and checking permissible ratios among several parameters
that are fed provides a check not only on the correctness of operator actions
but also the correctness of the raw data, which determines the regimes of the
measurements made 6, the instrument. It is clear that these objectives cannot
be accomplished in principle without a computing machine, a built-in micro—
computer.

Realisation of interaction functions is quite universal and can be reconended
for various measuring instruments. Their development is being furthered by alpha-
numeric indicators. for example the Kvant video monitor with a display adaptor
functional module (the Kvant was described in Chapter 2). This makes it possible
to carry on diaglog in natural language, output for the operator, a diagnosis of
malfunctions and information errors with comments, to suggest the order of per-
formance of manipulations on the console, and so on.

The functions of organizing the interface include: electrical coupling with the
LKP; realisation of the algorithm for instrument interaction with the LKP; insur-
ing the possibility of remote control of instrument work; insuring transmission of
arrays of coded sequences on the LR? from the central computer or other data
source.

The collective-use line (LKP) with which the instrument is linked corresponds to
international standard JBE-488-1975. More than 300 types of neasuring instru—
ments capable of working together in measurement systems are produced following
this standard [34]. The introduction of this standard is taking place parallel
with development of microprocessor engineering. and its realization in various
instruments involves the use of hardware-software techniques in different propor-
tions - primarily by hardware when it is necessary to achieve high speeds of
data exchange and mainly by software when it is necessary to conserve equipment
and there are no rigid speed requirements.

The standard line contains 16 signal lines, eight of which serve for two-way
transmission of coded messages represented by sequential bytes whose binary bits
travel along the line in parallel. Further, three lines serve to transmit a se—
quence of interrelated signals to establish communications and control the trans-
mission of a byte of information, while five lines are for general control of the
line, including signals for clearing. remote control, service interrogation, and
the like.

The standard envisions an asynchronous mode of data transmission and combined work
by instruments with different speeds. Up to 15 instruments can be joined together
into a system at one time.

In the generator we are considering the interface functions are given almost en-
tirely to the microcomputer, and only the coordination of the levels of signals
and power of output circuits is done on a few dozen integrated circuits with low
and medium degrees of integration. Such an economical solution proves possible
because the low speed of receiving raw data on an LKP, 100 bytes per second, does
not affect the operating characteristics of the instrument (its productivity and
frequency characteristics).

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Feeding infatuation to an instrument through an LKP. alongside the possibility
of working in a measurement system, makes it possible to feed code sequences
automatically, not manually. This greatly increases the productivity of the
instrument and the reliability of the information being fed.

The function of organizing the instrument interface under consideration is also
very general for a broad class of instruments. It is wise to include it in most
of the new instruments being developed, even if present needs for such inter-
connection are not obvious. The new quality which the instrument receives in
this case may open up entirely new spheres of application for it.

In many cases the realization of the interface will be defined as the primary
and even the sole function of the microcomputer in the instrument; the approach
is especially timely where single-chip microcomputers are used.

The functions of automating the work of the instrument are in large part synono-
nous with the preceding functions; the instrument can also realize automatic
selection of the frequency range.

The functions of instrument self-monitoring include checking the correct opera-
tion of particular assemblies of the instrument (the microcomputer itself and
discrete assemblies) by feeding standard test combinations and testing the cor-
rectness of the information being generated.

As already indicated, all of these functions have been realized on a single-
board microcomputer without additional functional modules. The programs have a
volume of 1,024 words. All that was needed for further development of instrument
characteristics in this case was to increase the volume of the programs.

The change to an Blektronika 85-12 model with an 30H memory voltne of 2,068 words
made it possible to use software to control the long-term memory, realize a
large part of the internal organisation of the instrument, and expand self-
monitoring functions. Increasing memory volume by 1,024 words as a whole made
it possible to save more than 500 integrated circuit bodies.

An optical instrument based on a single-board microcomputer and a set of func-
tional modules. As an example let us consider the application of the Blektronika
85-12 microcomputer in the SF—29 spectrophotometer (see Figure 5.6 below). we
should give special attention to two other functions of built-in microcowuters,

functions that are very important for their use in measuring equipment - quick

processing of measurement results and maximum possible automation of instrument
work [35].

The spectrophotometer is a fairly complex physicomechanical instrument with an
elaborate electronic part. It is designed to measure the spectral transmission
coefficients of liquid and solid transparent substances in the working domain

of the spectrum. These coefficients define physico-chemical parameters and the
quantitative composition of the substance. The principal component parts of the
instrument are (see Figure 5.7 below): a monochromatic light source (mono-
chromator). light filters, a sample feeding unit, a detector cell, a panel, an

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.6. The SF—29 Spectrophotometer.

 

automatic recorder, an Elektronika SS~12 microcomputer, an Elektronika 35-121
alphanumeric printer. a keyboard, an Elektronika 85-123 teletype micro-
processor functional nodule, and a teletype.

Key: (1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

 

Figure 5.7. Structural Diagram of a Spectrophotometer
Based on the Elektronika SS-lZ Microcouputer.

Honochromtor; (7) 817—12;
Light Filters; (8) Panel;
Sample Feeding Unit; (9) Manual Correction Block;
Detector; (10) Automatic Recorder;
55-121 MPH Alphanumeric Printer; (11) 35-123 MPH Teletype;
Keyboard; (12) Teletype.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The spectrophotometer works as follows: the monochromator emits a beam of
light in conformity with the available wave length. The light passes through
the light filters and the sample being tested, which is located in the sample
feeding unit, strikes the detector, which gives out a signal whose amplitude is
proportional to the transmission coefficient light. The signal goes from the
detector to the alphanumeric printer, from where it is received by the micro-
computer, processed, and outputted to the panel, automatic recorder, and tele-
raph. The microcomputer sees that the monochromator uses the required wave-
qength, sets up the corresponding light filters, controls the programmed sample
feeding unit, receive the signal free the alphanumeric printer, processes it in
conformity with a program assigned by the operator, and outputs processing re-
sults to the panel, telegraph and automatic recorder. Raw information can be
fed by the operator through the manual keyboard or telegraph.

The microcomputer in the spectrophotometer is used for these purposes: automa-
tion of instrument work; quick processing of measurement results; remote control

of instrument work and recording measurement results; organizing operator inter-
action with the instrument and instrument self-monitoring.

The function of automating the work of such instruments, which involve high-
speed, precision processing of movements to measure the working wavelength in
the process of measurement,and a fairly complex procedure for moving cassettes
with samples and light filters in conformity with an assigned sequence, is espe-
cially important .

For this reason, in the first place, the microcomputer controls the servo-system
at variable speed depending on the magnitude of the necessary movement. The
feedback circuit uses a 17-bit converter to change the angle of turn to binary
codes. In the second place, the microcomputer performs the role of a time-
program unit that issues conmands to measure samples at assigned time intervals.
These briefly described functions of the microcomputer related to automation of
instrument work are quite characteristic and in some cases can be primary for
work within an instrument assemblage. This is especially important for single-
chip microcomputers.

The functions of quick data processing in similar measurement instruments may be
developed almost without limitation because ultimately spectrophotometric inves-
tigation of the properties of materials may he concluded by processing the data
on general-purpose camputers. A spectrophotometer that is not linked to a com-
puter does not permit any preliminary conclusions directly during the measure-
ment process and cannot be included, for example, directly in an industrial line
in complex contemporary production facilities. For many models of spectro-
photometers. therefore, an interlink with a ninicomputer is envisioned. This
makes it possible to carry out fairly extensive data processing right at the
point of measurement. However, such solutions can be used only with the most ex-
pensive models of spectrophotometers, because of the comparable cost of the
instrument itself and the minicomputer.

The use in the instrument of a built-in microcomputer which replaces a fairly
large volume of discrete elements and integrated circuits necessary to realize

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the functions considered above enables us to speak of the practically "free"
introduction of quick processing functions in the instrument.

The SF-29 spectrophotometer realizes the following algorithm for quick data
processing: computation of a smoothed quantity; computation of the first and
second derivatives from the smoothed quantity; computation of the integral for

the spectrum; and fintion of extreme points on the teletype and automatic re-
corder.

An algorithm for noise-free measurement is also realized. It enables the instru-
ment to operate in noise conditions. Such an algorithm can be realized only on

the condition that the microcomputer is a built-in, unremovable part of the
instrument.

It follows from all that has been said that an increase in microcomputer re-
sources. above all memory volume. makes it possible to expand the range of algo-
rithms for quick data processing and to realize a specialized language in the

instrument to sinplify the procedure for operator interaction with the instru-
ment.

The functions of remote control and registration of results are provided by a
functional model for control of the teletype and a program for exchange with the
teletype. They make it possible not only to output measurement results to the
printer but also to feed raw data for automatic control of the measurement pro-
gram. The teletypa is not the only any in which raw data can be fed. By using
the teletype channel the instrument can be connected to a coaputer to which mea-
surement results are transmitted for storage and subsequent processing, and then
the program of this work is returned to the instrument. It can be considered
that the availability of output to a telegraph channel is one of the ways to
realize the instrument's interface functions by means of microcowuter.

The functions of self-monitoring and organising dialog in the spectrophotometer

do not differ in principle from the analogous functions in the code sequence
generator.

The described instrument can be switched to new, more sophisticated models of
Blektronika SS microcomuters for basically technical-economic purposes. in ad-
dition to the purpose of expanding memory volume for calculation problem.
These technical-economic purposes may be reducing the number of functional
modules (for example, by virtue of the fact that the digital input-output module
of the Elektronika 85-21 microcomputer has 1.5 times more lines than the corre-
sponding module of the Elektronika 55-12 microcomputer, and the lines of this
module and the machine itself can be switched easily from input to output and
vice versa). and also switching to the microcomputer various functions which
were realized on ‘l'l'l. [transistor-transistor logic] circuits in the SP-29
instrument because the Elektronika 85-12 microcomputer was not fast enough.
These functions involve controlling the step motors of the instrument. The in-
creased speed of the Blektronika 85-21 microcomputer also makes it possible in
certain cases to reduce the volume of programs.

102

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTNCLAL.USE‘0N1V

A spectrum analyzer on a single-board Elektronika 85-12 microconputer. This is
a measurement instrument, in the particular case designed for harmonic investi-
gation of electrical signals or signals being converted to electrical ones [36].
The microcomputer, operating in parallel on ‘7 frequency channels does the fol-
lowing: feeding of information from the measurement part; outputting informa-
tion to the video monitor; weighing frequency spectra for each frequency chan-
nel; averaging measurement results in each channel for n measurements; computing
the spectral density of output; peak and exponential averaging.

This application of the microcomputer is also interesting because it is fairly
universal and the microcomputer in whose 80! memory these problems have been
realized can be used as part of various instruments and systems which re-
quire the entire set of programs or some of them. Manufacturing such micro-
computers is very convenient for the supplier enterprise because it does not re-
quire them to fabricate new types of ROM LSIc's, and for the customer because

it makes it possible to sharply reduce the time required to develop equipment by
using an already developed assembly component. Those applications as facilities
for preparing the sphere of utilization of single-chip microcomputers are espe-
cially important because they make it possible to turn these devices into uni-
versal LSIC's of fairly broad application.

The search for these applications is being carried on by a number of scientific
collectives. Proposals have already been made today to equip microcomputers as
finished articles with programs for statistical processing of measurement re-
sults and algorithms for fast Fourier transforms.

The chromatographic information processing device built on the basis of the
Elektronika 85-02 microcomputer is an example of the use of microcomputers in
analytic instrument making [37, 38].

Chromatographs are widely used to analyze compounds and identify components of
complex compounds in the chemical, oil refining, and gas industries and also in
the key problem of environmental monitoring. Chromatography is traditionally a
field of instrument making where computing procedures are considered an in-
separable part of the measurement process and are done by specialized computers.

Attempts have also been made to interconnect chromatographs with general-

purpose computers. However, either they failed to fully realize the required
computing and logical functions or they resulted in the development of devices
that were too expensive and cumbersome and not reliable enough. The use of
microcomputers made it possible to eliminate these shortcomings. The Elektronika
55-02 microcomputer processes data received simultaneously'from five chromatographs.
while processing the chromatograms the microcomputer determines the zones of in-
tegration (beginning and end of the peak), the area of the peak, the time of

arrival of the apex of the peak, the concentration of components in the mixture,
and so on. _

In such measuring devices, whose modes of use are quite complex and varied, the
idea of using the microcomputer as a time-program unit which carries on the ex-
periment according to a definite program selected by the operator from a set of

103

FOR OFTWCJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

program stored in the ROM memory or according to a program put together by the
operator during preparation for measurement and the experiment, is very useful.
To do this it is desirable for the device to realize a language that makes it
possible to describe the program of the experiment in conventional form. It is
natural that when a microcomputer is Built into the unit, the construction of
such a language is entirely feasible.

The economic impact of the use of a microcomputer in such a device comes first of
all from reducing data processing time by several orders and, consequently, from

the possibility of using this information on a real-time scale. directly in the
course of the industrial process.

Chromatographs are not the only kind of analytic instruments that need fast data
processing and automation of the experimental process by means of microcomputer.

Other such instruments are roentgen quantometers, diffractomsters, micro—
analyzers. and the like.

The further reduction of microcoaputer cost, the development of series production
of single-board models of microcoaputers and HPH'a for them, and the transition
to single-chip microcomputers spread all these advantages not only to complex
measuring units and instruments, but also to siapler measuring devices that are
widely used.

5.5. Medicine

Imroving the precision and objectivity of testing and processing the results of
analyses and measurements quickly are key challenges in modern medicine and meet-
ing them involves broad use of microcomputers. The low cost and large-scale

use of microcomputers make it possible to convert various articles and system
for data processing from unique models accessible today only to the largest re-
search centers to mass-produced inexpensive articles that are siamle to use and
accessible to any medical institution.

The application of microcoaputers in laboratory testing equipment has much in
coupon with other classes of measurement instruments considered above. The
principal goals that can be achieved here are: an increase in the labor produc-
tivity of the laboratory worker; simplification and reduction in the cost of
instruments; the possibility of instruments working in a system. above all under

conditions of clinical diagnosis laboratory centers vhich do mass preventive ex-
aminations of the population.

Let us look at several examles of medical equipment built on the basis of
Elektronika SS microcomputers.

The photoelectric densitometer for electrophoresis, built on the basis of the
Elektronika SS-ll microcomputer supplemented with an alphanumeric printer. per-

forms the folloving tasks: conversion of a voltage proportional to the magni-
tude of light transmission; taking logorithms; integration of the electro-
phorogram along the entire length and in the segments bounded by minimums; compu-

tation of the concentration of cmonents of the electrophorogram; outputting
results to the display and the printer.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The calorimeter of serial laboratory analyses, based on the Blektronika SS—ll
microcomputer and an alphanumeric printer module, performs these functions:
conversion of a voltage proportional to the magnitude of light transmission;
taking logorithma: constructing and periodic correction of the calibration curVe;
calibration of measurements; outputting results with an indication of the "norm-
psthology" boundary and symbols to identify the specimen with results.

Expanding the number of problems solved by the calorimeter in a biochemical
autoanalyzer makes it possible to insure programmed control of blocks that feed
cassettes containing biospecimens, precise dosing of chemicals; and, synchronous
control of thermostat, shifting. and transporting units [39].

The automated observation system for the condition of cardiology patients [4],
constructed on the basis of Elektronika 85-11 and Elektronika 55-01 microcom-

puters, is a hierarchical system consisting of cardiomonitors at the bedside and
a central position.

The bedside monitor, which can work not only within the system but also inde-
pendently, is figured to serve one patient. Its microcomputer performs initial
processing, analysis of the electrocardiosignal, formation of the diagnosis

and alert signals, storage of cardioaignals in the pathological sectors. detection
of this signal and the condition of the patient, and transmission of data to the
central position.

The central position is designed to monitor and display the current condition and
history of development of the disease of eight patients, to predict a worsening
of the condition of the patients, and to output report documents. In this case
the Elektronika SS-Ol microcomputer performs additional processing of the data
received from the cardiomonitor taking account of information from clinical ex-
amination and analysis for a more precise diagnosis of the patient's condition.
forms an evaluation of trends toward change in the condition of each patient{
predicts a worsening of the condition of the patients, records information, dis—
plays it in conventional form, and permits the doctor to interact with the system.

There is no doubt of the importance of rapidly organizing series production of
these systems and supplying them to as many hospitals as possible. It is beside
the point to speak of the economic impact~of these systems; they are built to
control serious cardiac illnesses in human beings.

The biotechnical unitfor occupational selection is also a hierarchical system
constructed with microcomputers of the Elektronika 85 family. The single-board
model of the machine is the basis for constructing the vork position of the test
subject and carries out initial processing of the subject's reactions signals to
the test assignments that are given as well as processing physiological data on
the test subject. The multiboard Elektronika 55-02 model carries on secondary
processing of evaluations received from the work positions, allows the instructor
to interact with the computer system, and so on.

without dwelling on the importance of supplying modern, automated, mass-produced
andinexpensiveequipment for the process of evaluating the professional suita-
bility of persons for many specializations such as pilots. air traffic

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

controllers, and energy system controllers, we will simply offer some informa-
tion on the benefits that can be obtained by constructing such systems as
decentralized microcomputer-based systems [41]. In comparison with a system
based onm 11—6000 couputer. the microcomputer system provides: a savings of
more than 100 square meters of space for a classroom with 20 work positions;

a reduction in service personnel from 5—7 to two persons; a significant improve-
ment in working reliability; and, an increase in the level of standardization

from 70 to 90 percent. The microcomputer system costs. at a maximum. one-
third of the cost of a similar complex constructed on "rigid logic."

5.6. Automation

The general—purpose digital regulator [62] is a simple device in which the use of
an Elektronika SS-ll single-board microcomputer as the primary part gave the
regulator a number of very important features.

In the first place, it has available a broad set of software correcting elements
that realize the six most widespread laws of regulation: proportional; integral—
differential; proportional-d1fferential; aperiodic; proportional-integral; pro-
portional-integral-differential. The possibility is also envisioned of switch-

ing from one law of regulation to another during the working process following
an external signal, as well as the possibility of changing tuning coefficients
within a broad range.

In the second place, it offers the possibility of using the regulator in dif-
ferent regimes and receiving the control action in either digital or analog form.
with unipolar and multipolar signals, and the like.

In the third place, it has a very flexible procedure for emergency protection
against overload and incoupatibility, as well as procedures by which the regu-
lator monitors itself during the working process and upon starting.

In the fourth place. it offers a simple link-up with a higher-level computer in
hierarchical control systems.

Such a regulator was built for the first time as the lowest element in a multi-
channel system to control the loading of complex aviation design elements during
the testing process. Several dozen such regulators work under the control of

one minicomputer. After it was built. however. its suitability for controlling
other types of testing machines became obvious. Later its application to an even
broader class of objects for processing control inputs with frequencies up to

two hertz became apparent.

The only restriction is the cost of such a regulator, which is 2,000-3,000 rubles.
This is entirely feasible for complex objects where the above-listed benefits of
the digital regulator are especially important. It must be kept in mind here

that rapid growth in the degree of integration is already today making it pos-
sible to build such a regulator in the form of a single-board design which

reduces the price severalefold, and the transition to single-chip microcomputers,
and further to those which have analog-digital and digital-analog convertors on

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FF1C1AL USEZCNNLY

one chip, will make the general-purpose digital regulator unit a mass—produced
article of the electronics industry available to construct practically all types
of servodrives without a limitation based on the frequency of the control input.

For this reason, as already observed above, the algorithms of the general~
purpose digital regulator are extreaely interesting as an example of standardi-
zation of an algorithm which converts a microcomputer with programs in ROM

memory from a special-order item to a universal element of electronics en-
gineering.

A control system for a ventilation unit [43] is another example of a control sys-
tem based on the Blektronika 85-11 microcomputer that is designed for technical

processes that require maintaining a constant speed of airflow with changing
values of the cross—section of the airflow and air temperature and pressure.

Unlike the analog and static regulators ordinarily used for these purposes,

the microcomputer-based system feeds assigned and measured parameter values with
the necessary accuracy, computes control actions with the necessary accuracy,
outputs the values of the basic parameter being regulated in a ready-to-use
form that does not require additional computation based on formulas, monitors
the work of the equipment, analyzes emergency situations, and makes necessary
decisions on the further work of the equipment.

The software that has been developed provides high working reliability for the

unit as the result of monitoring and analyzing trouble and broad application of
tabular methods of computation with interpolation of results to compensate for

the comparatively low speed of the microcomputer.

The use of a microcomputer in this unit makes it possible to eliminate manual
operations and raise productivity by 10 percent. Maintaining the assigned air
flow speeds automatically and reducing the time required to switch from one
regime to another provide a considerable energy savings.

5.7. Questions Relating to Organizing the Application of Microcomputers

The effect of the application of microcomputers in a particular field of en-
gineering cannot be enjoyed simply by making correct technical and algorithmic
decisions. As has been observed more than once already, a broad range of pro-
duction and organizational questions must also be resolved.

The methodology of work on the application of microcomputers is worthy of inde-
pendent study and description. We will treat only certain matters which we

consider most important: selection of paramount applications; organization of
interaction between the microcomputer supplier and customer; and, forming the
collectives to develop equipment based on microcomputers.

The selection of priority applications is an extremely important task, because
the success of the first development is a good guarantee that work will con-

tinue on the application of microprocessors, not only in the specific collec-
tive, but often also in the entire branch of engineering; by contrast. failure

107

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

may discredit the very idea of application for many years. A large majority

of the cxauples of microcomputer applications that we have considered can be
acknowledged as successful not only Because they went through the experimental
stage quite quickly and supported the development of series—produced models of
equipment with new characteristics, but also because they were followed by a broad
assortment of microcomputer—based equipment. For example, the spectrophotometer
we described was the forerunner of a series of different classes of spectro-
photometers equipped with the Elektronika S-S microcomputers and,uost importantly.
of a broad assortment of optical instruments in which the technical, algo-
rithmic, and organizational experience obtained during development of the spectro-
photometer was employed in one form or another.

So, what application should be chosen first? Of course, it shOuld be the one that
is efficient and can be done quickly. Evaluating the efficiency of micro-
computer applications in different devices was discussed earlier, but we should
discuss the question of speed separately. The concept of speed of application
has two components: speed of development and speed of organizing series produc—
tion. These components differ and the ratio between them will differ in dif—
ferent applications. so from a series of possible developments it is necessary to
choose the one which can be brought to the stage of a prototype (or model) in
1-1.5 years. and the manufacturing plant for the article should be able to expend
minimum resources for the transition to production of this article. This
period of time for production of the prototype enables the technical leadership
to evaluate the advantages of the new article quickly, while the effect of pro-
ducing the new article with minimum expenditures will interest the production
services in further introduction of this type of article. This approach ulti-
mately insures the earliest possible beginning to repayment of those expenditures
which the state has incurred to develop the new generation of computer equipment.

In view of this, we will try to determine what form of development based on micro-
computers can insure the necessary speed of realization of the expected impact.

The following classifications can be used for the types of development that employ
microcomputers:

1. Modification of a system now being produced (setting up a
new system) or particular elements of it, in which all com-
puting facilities or part of them are replaced by micro-
computers;

2. Developing, on the basis of an existing article. new equip—
ment in which new essential functions are realized by means
of microcomputers;

3. Switching existing mechanical, electromechanical, or electronic
parts of series produced instruments that perform data control,
processing, or transmission functions to microcomputers;

Each of these types of development has its own strengths and weaknesses when se-
lected as the priority microcomputer application in equipment, an instrument, or

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(N‘LY

a system. Let us consider each of them from the standpoint of design time,
training cadres, efficiency of results, and the speed at which series production
of the microcomputer-based article Begins (see Table 5.1 below), always rememo
bering that the enormous economic impact which this new generation of micro-
processor technology can produce will be received only when series production and
operation of this equipment begins. As the table shows, the first form of de-
velopment is inferior to the other two, despite the positive value of one of the
decisive factors in successful development - the technical readiness of spe-
cialists to carry it on? - because of the great length of time between the
beginning of development and realization of the impact of the use of microcom-
puters, the relative complexity of this type of development itself, and the
multiplicity of technical questions that must be answered in the stage of intro-
ducing DCPT systems in series. And the long wait for the (first) positive
results in this new area - designing DCPT systems based on microcomputers —
certainly does not have a very good effect on the attitude toward this unques-
tionably progressive method of development and toward the participants in it.

Even considering the fact that in most cases the programming on the microcomputer
must be done by the equipment developers themselves, who are specialist in elec-
tronics engineering (often working together with engineer-programmers, which we
feel is the best combination). the second type of microcomputer-based development
is much preferable to the first if only because the volume of specific software
is usually less than in the first case and the positive impact of the use of
microcomputers becomes apparent in the stage of the working model. But in this
case the costs, in time and effort expended to put a new, with respect to design
and function, instrument into series production at the manufacturing plant and

to incorporate its use by the customer should not be forgotten.

In view of this, the third type of development is the best. Hhile its advan—
tages are just as apparent, it has the shortest realization time from the idea

to receiving a practical impact because changes in the article already produced
are minimal for the manufacturing enterprise, the customer has already mastered
its sphere of application, the scope of production is fixed, and there are other
beneficial aspects that usually accompany a series-produced article. The success
of this type of development depends entirely on the designers of the article and
does not involve questions that usually arise during new development such as sup-
plying data sensors and transmitters, organizing communications lines, selecting
a new configuration of assembly components, changing fixtures. and the like.

Organizing interaction between the microcomputer supplier and customer is far
from a trivial matter. During the development of the Blektronika 85 family of
microcomputers several organizational-methodological principles were worked out
and employed to build the equipment and insure interaction between the micro-
computer customer and the supplier. These were made the basis of the algorithms
for work to apply general-purpose microcomputers (see Figure 5.8 below).

This algorithm makes it possible to partially overcome the conflicts between the
short periods of incorporation of microcomputers with an assigned program in ser-
ies production and the long periods required to develop and incorporate series

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050067-9

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

¢<:1<|¢ c. 4I¢.:
wcuuauuauscna on»
we 2,3305 oau .3

I I'Wlll hue I‘
unoauugu uo

ouauua vouusuu Any

11!.«1 will II- . uua .-

Imlsocoo Meson can unuuva nouavox
.ouauoauacus nun mo naoco>uo=0ucu

nouanaououuua
gag: ouuoa vauuu

 

zaouwuuo vocuauOuon "no anacoon Huaucux oovooz Iuonad van uooo ucoanuavo «Huang uo ucoaoooanom
Y .ooaa ucuauuo vuo
m saw: owqxawauouna
no auaxougaou Amv
W “oaowunu we now»
U uuoauavoa awwuov
% .ucuua nanns new vow: ANV .uuw was .nuOdcu:u 0
a acauauuuuauua on» uncoauocsu no: on“ abacuwaoaouu aunv wwo anon n
N am ouuuunq 3m: usu Iaaou cu aguuuowua awash .vonuououa coauua
W «o acuuunvoua unausv osu mauwwapuv lacuna osu no auudoao 0:» odouuuu
R oaaua uuzu occuunosv mo huwxoumuoo Adv aoaaouucu .quau hauanuao so: >HH¢¢0ﬂuuaau
N no oosouon voaoaoa "no ooaauon asuvu: wovooz no >uu>wuu=u0ua uoououucu mo ucuaaouo>un
.couuosv
noun ouuuuw now avuou .ouaa
nun uaoauu noonno 0:» name» we wanna: «when
couuo can .uaoanuaum >Ho>uuanamaou Any
«cud macauouacaa uuuuﬁno ugu no
nsou .muomcow .mouua such :0 wcwwwanov mo .wunoHo>~v
Iauoou mauuaaaoo Add oouovcoaov any “aosu madam mu awuohn nouns «Hog:
unsu «on can sauna» new uuauuauuau new» a as uoonao osu no nouauaou ououaaaouououx
ouuucu as» ao~o> uwsnov van uaoumzu o>uuquuucuau wo>0umau an uuuu an“: ucoanqsvu
Ion zuuau cu too: 0:» mo xuaxuaaaou adv uovowz cw munﬂmm< .wcaucsouuu o>uuau nouaaaoo waauau
no ouswoon voaauon "mo ouaaoon aaauxuz uoz qucaac Ham» a o>uw cu uﬂaouuuao Ixm mo ucoaouaunax
coauuzvoum wouuom cauh muncuuuh nuaamux no auuusnaououuqz so
no ucosaoau>on vac :muaoa uuwuu auscuuauuu venom unuanoHo>oo

unaccuuun no «age

we cash

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050087-9

2007/02/09:

APPROVEDFORRELEASE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
  
 
  

(aWﬁMWM mm»; "haw

    
    
   

u ”Radon [remand
mun-.771 ‘ swun-

    
  
 

n 011mm:
:- “Mm!!!
runwa-

 
      
 
 
  

Rim unwind u
MM" momma-o ; macho M -

0mm: "(Mun-u up: ﬂ lulu m I!
only!” I! W
0 MM

 
 
     
   
  
 

    
  

a mm nupo- I”
I! Mr #1! how
ml ammnw

 
 

II "I". mm
c all

  

   

”WWII”: Im-

mmmn JIM
“WWJI‘M

 

IIJ Jun u: mm-
mu-iu WW

   
 

   

”Honda-up "If Migran-
mm" nu uno-
Ju Mm denim

   
 

    

Figure 5.8. Algorithm of Work To Apply a Microcomputer.
(a) Work of Equipment Developer;
(b) Joint Work;
(c) Work of Microcomputer Manufacturer;
(1) Familiarization with Technical Specifications
(2) Discussion of Possibilities of Application;

[Key continued next page]

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 5.8 continued]

(3)

(4)
(S)

(6)

(7)

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

(12)
(13)
(14)

(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)

(21)

Choice of Primary Areas of Application, Evaluation of Equipment
Interface;

Selection of Priority Application and Essential Modeling Facilities;
Development of Algorithms and Working Out Hardware-Software
Compatibilities;

Delivery of Documents and Setting Up Facilities To Automate Program
Development on the General—Purpose Computer of the Equipment
Developer;

Programing and Debugging of Microcomputer Programs on General-
Purpose Computer;

Development and Manufacture of Necessary Hardware;

Electrical Interface of Modeling and Hardware Facilities;

Delivery of Modeling Facilities;

Manufacture of Microcomputer without ROM LSIC's for Equipment
Prototypes;

Full Testing of Equipment;

Ordering ROM LSIc's for Equipment Prototypes;

Fabrication of ROM LSIC's and Supplying Them to Microcomputers for
Equipment Prototypes;

Selection of Next Application;

Manufacture of Equipment Prototypes;

Manufacture of Microcomputers without ROM LSIC's for Series Samples;
Testing Equipment Prototypes, Correction of Documents;

Ordering ROM LSIC's for Series Samples;

Fabrication of ROM LSIC's and Supplying Them to Microcomputers for
Series Samples of the Equipment;

Series Production of the Equipment.

 

production of systems for data control and processing based on them. This is true
thanks to the following measures:

b.

Purposeful and coordinated selection of primary and priority
microcomputer applications (Stages 1-6, Figure 5.8);

The use of standard software for automating program development,
produced on general—purpose computers for microcomputers, and the
use of modeling facilities (Stages 6, 10);

Combining the production of microcomputers without ROM LSIC's
for equipment prototypes with the stages of design and develop-
ment of models of the equipment (Stages 5, 7-9, 11, and 12);
Combining the production of microcomputers without ROM LSIC's

for series samples of the equipment with the stages of test-
ing its prototype (Stages 16, 18 and lb, and 17).

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stages 1 and 2 (familiarization with technical specifications and discussion of
the possibilities of using microcomputers) largely determine the decision to use
the particular type (family) of microcomputers in the proposed equipment. Dur-
ing these stages the fundamental possibility of using the particular family of
microcomputers and the extent to which the efforts of the equipment developers
and the interests of the microcomputer supplier coincide are determined.

Interests of the Equipment Developer

Receiving essential auxiliary facili-
ties. help in incorporating new methods

of design, concrete help in development
(above all software), guarantees of de-

livery of computer equipment with the
required specifications

Interests of the Hicrocppputer Supplier

Rapid introducibility of development
(above all the priority development),
efficiency of use of microcomputers in
equipment, stability of annual consump-
tion of a sufficient number of similar
(with respect to non LSIC's) micro-
computers

The final document of these stages is the protocol (contract, decision). which de-

fines the following:

the prospects for use of microcomputers in the particular

class of equipment: the list of basic areas of application; the stages and

times for conducting priority development work to apply microcomputers; mutual
guarantees of approximate deliveries and consumption of microcomputers for
periods of five and seven years; times for supplying equipment developers with
the necessary documentation on the microcomputers: times for setting up facili-
ties to automate the development of microcomputer programs on general-purpose
computers; times for setting up modeling facilities for comprehensive development
and stand testing of the equipment developed.

A questionnaire survey of the expected microcomputer user is carried out in Stage
2 to evaluate the information value of the documents distributed concerning the

microcomputer, to identify the most "attractive" (the term ”attractive" should

be understood in the broad sense, referring to those spheres of microcomputer ap-
plication which provide the maximum national economic impact) spheres of micro-
computer application from the standpoint of the equipment developer, to receive
an idea of the level of readiness of the equipment developers to employ micro-
computers. to clarify the directions of development of ways to step up equipment
development based on microcomputers. and to analyze the suitability of current
and future microcomputer characteristics.

Stage 3 includes selection of the basic applications and evaluation of the set of
equipment. 0n the basis of a reconciled list of basic areas of application a
list of equipment to which the application of microcomputers is unquestionably
efficient is composed. It is considered here that the first and third types of
development usually provide a reduction in cost. dimensions, and power con-
sumption of the equipment, while the second increases the productivity of the
apparatus itself or of the man—machine system. These advantages always occur
when the necessary series production of microcomputers is guaranteed.

During the process of working out this list for each type of equipment there is
a preliminary assessment of the hardware-software division of functions, that is,

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a determination of the basic functions assigned to the microcomputer and the
functions which for some reason or other are to be kept in the old element base.
This assessment makes it possible to clarify the configuration of equipment for
interface with the microcomputer.

A contract on delivery of the necessary documentation concerning SARP [facili-

ties for automating program development] and microcomputer hardware and putting
the microcomputer cross-SARP on the general-purpose computer most accessible to
the equipment developer is concluded.

It is very important in this stage to determine the nucleus of the collective of
equipment developers and to begin training them to use microcomputer-based de-
sign software and hardware.

Stage 6 involves selection of the priority application and choosing essential
modeling facilities. We have already considered this above.

At the completion of Stage 4 the enterprises that are manufacturing the micro-
computer and the equipment developer compose a document that specifies the
assortment of chosen types of modeling facilities to be delivered (or leased),
the time when the equipment developer enterprise will provide information for

the fabrication of ROM LSIC's, the times for delivery of microcomputers with

RON LSIC's and their number for an experimental batch of equipment, and the times

for the beginning of series deliveries of microcomputers with an approximate num-
ber for the first two years.

Stage 6 includes the delivery of documents and setting up the SARP on the
general-purpose computer. The enterprise that is manufacturing the micro-
computers turns over to the customer the documents necessary to realize the
priority and prospective applications according to a list agreed upon in the
stage where the contract was concluded on delivery of documentation and setting
up the SARP on the general-purpose computer.

Setting up the SARP on the general-purpose computer of the equipment developing
enterprise is a similar "capital investment." In this case the enterprise that
is manufacturing the microcomputers takes over the functions of training the

first group of specialists in writing programs for the microcomputer, consults
on the use of software and (where necessary) supplementing it in relation to

the particular sphere of application, and the functions of escorting the SARP.

Practical design of the microcomputer-based equipment begins with Stage 5, the
writing of algorithms and coordination of the interface (see Figure 5.8).

The main job in this stage is to divide up the control contour or element of it
for realization at the program (microcomputer) or hardware (interface) level.
The most important criteria that determine the boundaries of this division for
the given functions are the speed parameters of the microcomputer being used and
the economic efficiency of realizing the function at the particular level.
Establishing this boundary is in essence formulating the requirements for the
hardware and software of the particular equipment to make it possible to program
and debug specific programs on the general-purpose computer (Stage 7) parallel

11h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with development and manufacture of models of the equipment (Stage 8) and inter-
connecting models of the equipment with.modeling facilities (Stage 9).

For the developers of the microcomputer-based equipment the comprehensive system
testing (Stage 12) completes development of the ideology of application, making
it possible to carry all its decisions (at the program level) to full satis-
faction of the assigned specifications without any redesigning (and the related
production questions of modification of boards, wiring. and the like). Stage 12
should conclude with functional testing of the system conducted by the de-
veloper together with the primary user and the manufacturing plant, recording

of data that insures fulfillment of these tests, and supplying this information
to the supplier of the microcomputer for the fabrication of ROM LSIC's

(Stage 13). It is wise to begin a new cycle of equipment development in this
period (Stage 15).

Stages 16, 18, and 21 are nlrried out by the equipment developer according to
normative materials adopted in the particular sector. The microcomputer for
the equipment may be delivered well ahead of existing schedules for building
experimental and series-produced samples of the equipment (Figures 16 and 17)
thanks to the advance manufacture of microcomputers without ROM LSIC's and
supplying them to microcomputers as it becomes necessary to carry out the
corresponding deliveries (Stages l9 and 20). This circumstance further reduces
the cycle from development to introduction by improving the organization of
Stages 16, 18, and 21 and reducing the time they require [64].

The question of forming the collective for the first microcomputer application
is especially timely for an enterprise which is first encountering the problem
of introducing computers directly in the sphere of data control, processing,
and transmission. The complexity of this matter is reduced only slightly even
when the enterprise has specialists in the operation of general-purpose com-
puters and the formulation and solution to calculation and economic problems.
The approaches to these jobs are different in many ways.

Host of the examples of applications of Elektronika 35 computers that we have
considered were developed by collectives which had not done prior work on
setting up computer-based systems and questions of programming. They con-
sisted of specialists in designing the equipment which was to be switched to a
microprocessor footing.

As the first years of work and experience developing several dozen types of
equipment on a microcomputer base demonstrated, the minimum size of the group
of specialists to develop the first experimental prototype of a piece of
equipment whose complexity is evaluated from the standpoint of application of
microcomputers in it by a program volume of l,000-2,000 words is three persons.

A microcomputer with this memory volume can replace an electronic block con-
taining 600-500 series 155 integrated circuits.

The labor-intensiveness of developing circuits to interlink the microcomputer
with the other parts of the instrument and to develop the programs of its
work are considered here; all the specific work of designing the instrument

115

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

itself, manufacture. and independent adjustment (to the point of interlinking
with the microcomputer) is not taken into account. This collective can develop
an experimental prototype on the basis of an existing model of the controlled
equipment in 10-10 months, including time for retraining specialists.

who are the best members to make up such a group. and what functions should the
specialists in it have?

One of the members (usually the project leader) should be a specialist in the
design of the particular type of equipment into which the microcomputer is being
built. It is absolutely essential that this specialist have a detailed
knowledge of the characteristics of microcomputers as facilities for information
control and processing and it is not necessary at all for him to be a spe-
cialist in computer structure and the subtleties of programming. He will
receive the necessary knowledge in these matters during the development process.

It is wise for one of the other group members to be a trained electronics spe-
cialist capable of studying the microcomputer at the structural circuitry

level. This person should have a detailed understanding of the power supply
system and output circuits of the microcomputer. its timer circuits, and the
interrupt system; a general idea of programming technique is also necessary.

The second member should be a programmer who has already mastered all the pro—
cedures of programming in machine code and autocode, can handle the scaling
procedure for work with a fixed-point computer, and has studied the micro-
computer interface (but not the parameters of the signals being interconnected!).

Both these specialists should understand the characteristic features of the work
of the equipment that is to be automated and the technical objectives which
should be accomplished by use of the microcomputer. The simplest way to train
these specialists is to select them from the developers of traditional elec-
tronic assemblies and blocks or automation systems for the particular class of
equipment. Experience shows that it is simpler and easier to train these
engineers to be microcomputer electronics specialists and engineer-programmers
than to "introduce" a professional programmer and computer designer into the
collective that has developed the equipment on the basis of microcomputers.

How should specialists be retrained to do this job? The simplest, but not the
fastest way, is independent study of the foundations of computer technology

and programming and then mastering the particular model of microcomputer. The
many books in this area will unquestionably help. The authors hope that the
present book will also make this training somewhat easier. Another way is the
schools for raising the qualifications (advanced training) of engineers.

Higher educational institutions have many such schools. Many of them have
already taken on the exceptionally important job of rapidly teaching the tech-
nology of applying microcomputers to a very broad range of specialists in
electronics, automation, and programming who work in various sectors of the
economy. It is particularly efficient to organize this training on the sectorial
principle because it is very important to combine study of the material base of
the sector while making specialists aware of the economic and organizational
aspects of the application of microcomputers in the particular sector.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this reason, institutions of higher technical learning should make the study
of microprocessor technology and programming an inseparable part of the training
of specialists not only in computer technology, but also in the fields of auto-
mation, measurement technology, radioelectronics, and radio measurement. The
fundamentals of microprocessors and the capabilities which they offer should be
studied also by future "consumers" of microcomputer-based equipment: production
engineers, machine builders, and others so that they will later be the moving
force in formulating demands for the control elements of equipment and develop-

ing fundamentally new types of equipment based on microprocessors. After all,
the most promising areas of microprocessor application are those which have not
yet even been discovered.

Training cadres is an important aspect of the overall problem of rapid, wide-
spread introduction of microprocessers in the economy and a timely solution to
this problem should be a focus of attention for leaders at all levels.

Conclusion

It would be advisable here to review certain aspects of the technology of pro-

ducing LSIC's which are closely linked to the development and application of
microcomputers.

The first aspect is the maximum feasible degree of integration of elements on
one chip. If we limit ourselves to a consideration of H05 technology. in 1979
memory circuits with 65,000 K words and up to 300,000 transistors in regular
structure on a chip were developed, as well as single-chip microcomputers with
$0,000-100,000 transistors in irregular structure on the chip. The minimum
geometric dimension of these elements is 3-6 microns. The possibilities of
planar technology have not been exhausted today. In the near future it is clear
that the minimum dimensions of the elements will be lowered to 1-1.5 microns.
Along with the reduction in the size of elements there is a trend to increase
the size of the chip as optical mechanical equipment becomes more sophisticated.

This means that in the near future the number of transistors on a chip will in-
crease by at least one order, and the speed of LSIC's will also increase be-
cause of the decrease in the length of the channel and the reduction in the
volume of the circuits themselves. This raises a basic question: how should
these new capabilities be used from the standpoint of building microcomputers?
There are two possible answers. The first is to develop a general—purpose
microcomputer on a single chip that has all types of semiconductor memory (main
memory, ROM memory, and semipermanent ROM memory), all types of input-output
channels (digital parallel and sequential, and analog channels of different
speeds), and linkage units with terminal devices on one chip. The second way is
to develop specialized units with the most efficient use of the capabilities
offered by contemporary semiconductor technology for each particular application.

The shortcoming of the first solution is that it does not make full use of the
capabilities of the chip for the specific type of application; the diffi-
culty with the second solution is that it overbroadens the assortment of micro-

computer LSIC's, which in this stage of the semiconductor industry can lead to
the problem of a broad assortment of special-ordered LSIC's, which already

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11C1AL USE:(M§LY

existed before the age of microprocessors. A compromise solution is evidently
needed: develop fairly universal devices which allow the moat diverse applica—
tions, and create a limited number of specialized models of microcomputers for
the most common technically and economically sound applications. Therefore,
consideration of the spheres of application of microprocessors and microcomputers
is a key issue in the development of this area of microelectronics.

Of course, at the new level of LSIC technology there will be not just single-
chip microcomputers but also fairly powerful functional units to build new
generations of computer facilities, including single-board models of the next
level and more complex units. It is important in this case to emphasize the
use of completed units. which the microcoaputers are, as the most widespread
means of automation.

Because the development of microcomputers and organization of their production is
not a goal-in-itself. but rather a means to automating a large number of instru-
ments and devices used in the national economy, we should caution once more
against the possibility of widespread introduction of microprocessor tech—
nology in the national economy lagging behind the growth rate of production of
microprocessors and microcomputers and the rate of development of new, more
sophisticated models of microprocessor technology. Therefore, we should also
direct attention to one of the most productive methods of reducing the cycle
from development of the new basic element to introduction of equipment based

on it: the method of designing equipment after ratification of specifications
for new microelectronic units parallel with their development.

The principal prerequisite for successfully doing this is continuity of the

generations of microelectronic devices, which is secured by preserving all the
basic characteristics of the microcomputer family as their technical—economic
indicators are improved. This book has demonstrated this proposition in de-
tail. He need only add that the very first model of a single-chip micro-
computer in the Elektronika 85 family corresponds fully with respect to
functional capabilities to the single-board Elektronika SS-ll microcomputer,
while significantly surpassing it in speed. This approach by the developers
and producers of microcomputers makes it easier to solve the problems of organ-
izing application. speeding up the beginning of use of articles based on the
technology by 2-3 years.

The second aspect of the technology of LSIC production is the economically ac-
ceptablc volume of production of microprocessors and microcomputers.

Group methods of technology used in planar technology presuppose simultaneOus
fabrication of a set of articles shaped on a silicon plate. The number of
uusable articles per plate in addition to the percentage of output of usable ones
(the eternal problem of production engineers and developers) is determined by

the size of a chip and the area of the silicon plate. The diameter of the plates
being processed is increasing from 40-60 to 75-100 millimeters with a trend
toward a further increase. Despite a certain increase in the size of the chip,
the output of usable chips per plate increases significantly through an increase
in the diameter of the plates that are processed. Thus. increasing the

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

complexity and functional completeness of the articles is accompanied by growth
in their series production.

The development of articles with submicron geometric dimensions to the elements
is a further stage in the development of LSIc technology. Electronic and
roentgen lithography are the basis of this technology. Without going into a
discussion of the problems of this stage, vhich are related both to the tech-
nology of achieving such dimensions and the physical limitations of supersmall
structures, the authors emphasize once again the consistent development of the
technology of superlarge integrated circuits and, as a result, the appearance of
new problems in the application of these articles. And if the readers of the
book, along with development of the application of models of microcomputer
series already developed, look into the future use of microcomputers in the
national economy the authors will consider their Job done.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1980

11,176
CSO: 1863/188

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

SOPTHARB

UDC 51 : 681.3.06
TEXT EDITOR WITH DEVELOPED SYSTEM OF COMMANDS FOR YES OS

Moscow PROGRAHHIROVANIYE in Russian No 3. May-Jun 81 (manuscript received 7 Jul 80)
PP 39-48

iArticle by N. N. Bczrukov, Kiev]

{Excerpt} The editor has been used since August 1979 and experience has shown that
the user performs editing much faster with the help of NEATED than with the aid of
the standard Yes 05 editors. Although the NEATED command system is rather large,

it is mastered by the majority of users within about a month. Also, the user need
not master all commands right away: he can restrict himself to a subset (for exam—
ple. addressing by using the logical numbers of the lines and the insert-delete com-
mands without the update modifiers). The other commands may be mastered as the

need arises.

Among the shortcomings of NEATED is the large amount of storage needed for its oper-
ation (on the order of 80K) which is almost double that needed for simpler editors.
However, this shortcoming is becoming less perceptible in connection with the trans-
ition to computers with a main storage size of several Hbt. At the same time, user
comments indicate that practically any transformation of text may be performed by
using HEATED (although not always simply). HEATED has been used to convert programs
from FORTRAN—IV to PL/l.

NEATED is included in the NEAT program package [14—16] developed at the UkSSR
Scientific Research Institute for Psychology.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Programmirovaniye", 1981

8565
C80: 1863/226

120
UDC 681.3.016.001.63
TOOLS FOR MODELING REAL-TIME SYSTEMS FOR TRB 'BL'BRUS' HULTIPROCBSSOR COMPUTER

Moscow PROGRAMMIROVANIYE in Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 81 (manuscript received 18 F95 80)
pp 69-56

[Article by K. G. Suleymanov. Comel']

[Text] Program tools for designing real-time programs for the
"El'brus" MVK [multiprocessor computer complex] are described
in this article. Programs are designed in the specially
developed Opal language. The tools have been implemented on
the BBSH-o computer and consist of an Opal translator and a
model of the "El'brus" HVK which includes a model of OS.

1. Prerequisites for Development of Tools

Described in this article are the program tools developed on the BESH-6 computer
with OS DISPAK and designed to be used in developing real-time programs (RV-pro-
grams) implementable on the "El'brus" multiprocessor computer complex (HVK) [1, 2].
Development of these tools was necessary for the following reasons:

a) there was no "El'brus" machine at the time tool development began. The avail-
able "El'brus" interpreters on the instrumental computers could not satisfy the
real-time program developers, since they could not interpret the "El'brus" operating
system and multiprocessor capability [3]. with these interpreters, it was not pos-
sible to execute multiprocessor jobs for working off the interaction of the pro-
cesses of the jobs between themselves and with the operating system; and

b) the traditional method used in designing complicated systems is (program) simu-

lation. However. use of this method in designing real-time programs entails certain
difficulties.

The languages usually used for simulation most often do not coincide with the
language for implementation of real-time programs. Therefore, in the simulations it
is not possible to adequately reflect the static structure of the text of real-time
programs. Consequently. there remain unresolved questions of structuring and ensur-
ing correctness [4-6] that are of paramount importance in developing real-time pro-
grams. considering their large size and complexity.

Great difficulties arise in organizing joint execution of a model of a specific com-
puter and a model of a real-time program within the bounds of one simulation langu-
age which prevents adequate reflection of the dynamics of functioning of the real-
time program. Questions of development of the additional 08 layer oriented to oper-
ation in real-time are unresolved;

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

c) control and analysis algorithms that support the required functioning of ob-
jects of the external environment and realized in the real-time program do not re-
main unchanged throughout the development phase. In addition, development of some
control algorithms may outstrip development of other algorithms, while certain al-
gorithms may be fully defined only at the very end of the development phase. All
this creates a very unstable situation in programming and requires creation of
corresponding instrumental software allowing the developer to make operative changes
so that as a whole the real—time program remains clear and easy to analyze.

Within this article, a real-time system (SRV) is considered the aggregate of the
hardware. the computer operating system and the real-time programs. The principle
difference between a real-time and a conventional program is as follows.

During execution on the multiprocessor computer complex. the real—time program
synchronizes its actions with the events occurring in the outside world in "real
time." Execution of conventional jobs occurs in "virtual time." Of course, this
does not mean that there are no external events with problems solved in "virtual
time." Such events may be, for example, the end of an exchange with external stor-
age, receipt of a message from the operator, etc. The composition of external
events for "virtual-time" problems is rather limited and lends itself to system-
atization.

A fundamental feature of the external events in a real-time program is the impossi-
bility of standardizing these events to charge the operating system with the func-
tions of synchornization and bufferization of the information circulating between
the external objects and the real-time program.

In connection with this, the need arises of transferring to the realotime program
certain functions usually reserved for the OS. These functions may be: dynamic
determination of process priorities; processing interrupts from external objects;
determining critical time intervals for operation with certain special devices. etc.

A very important characteristic of a real-time program is that it requires large
computing resources and is usually the only job functioning in the real-time system.
Consequently, the logic of operation of the entire system is largely concentrated in
this one job. This fact has the following important consequence. Usually the 08's
implementing multiprogramming contain general-purpose algorithms to distribute com-
puting resources. These algorithms achieve efficiency in use of computing resources
"on the average." This is because under the conditions of limited resources and

the inadequacy of information on the "behavior" of the jobs in the multiprogramming
mix, the latter cannot effectively affect the procedure for allocation of resources.

In the real-time system. the operating system can more precisely consider the need
for resources by the processes of the sole real-time job, and the traditional list

OS job directives for reources may be expanded with so-called "prompting directives."
These directives, essential for real time, may be instructions on changing the

status of file residence, relative priorities of processes, etc.

To realize the prompting directives in a "special layer" of the OS nucleus, one has
to develop, possibly. privileged procedures for organizing the corresponding reac-

tions to these directives. It is evident that these procedures must interact har-
moniously with the appropriate procedures of the OS nucleus.

[22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Description and Method of Use of the Tools

It is assumed that refinement of the real-time system specifications, development of
the real-time program structure and the possible adaptation of the 05 to specific
real-time applications are done on the base of a complex dynamic model. Usually in
such models, a basic part is the real-time program model, while the characteristics
of the machine and operating system are drawn in largely for working off time de-
lays. In this work. a different approach is taken to build the complex dynamic
model of the real-time system. Its basic part is the model of the machine and oper-
ating system. To adequately represent the real-time program in the complex dynamic
model, the special language. Opal. is proposed for describing the behavior of the
problems. This is due to the features of the "Bl'brus" HVK [7] in which the real-
time program is implemented:

a) multiprocessor capability;

b) orientation to programming only in high-level languages; and

c) high dynamicity of allocation of computing resources supported by hardware
((tegovskaya) architecture) and the operating system.

In accordance with these features of "el'brus," the Opal language:

a) provides facilities for "splitting" the real-time program into parallel pro-
cesses;

b) allows description of the structure of programs to be implemented in high-level
languages with a block structure, in particular in "El'brus" Autocode [8]; and

c) offers language constructions for using the basic dynamic properties of the
machine.

Opal syntax and semantics have been realized in a way that lets the developer con-
centrate only on those features of the real-time problem that affect the overall
system operating situation.

Opal's orientation to the "El'brus" MVK is expressed in that there are no fixed
types in the descriptions, and information address type values have been introduced:
indirect words. descriptors. procedure labels and semaphores. Value types are
checked dynamically during interpretation. Interpretation of the Opal program al-
lows concealing from the user system interrupts and transferring to the interpreter
calculation of model time. Local data of procedures and blocks of the OPAL program
are loaded into stacks Just as data of the modeled procedures of 05.

In connection with the difficulty of modeling the main memory of the "Bl'brus" HVK
on an instrumental machine. there is no capability of operating with values of files
outside the stacks in the language. This means the language has no facilities for
assigning a value to an individual element of a file outside the stacks and fetching
this value. These facilities exist only for files in stacks, the sizes of which are
limited to the stack sizes. The statement for operating with files outside the
stacks, that is available in the language. models only time delays for processing
these files in the user mode and operation of the storage control procedure in the
system mode.

The language has statements to call procedures for interfacing the "El'brus" MVK
operating system with the user. The interface procedures are the 06 procedures in-
cluded in the user context, i.c. can be started from user programs. Also included
in the language are the usual facilities for modeling discrete systems: time delay
statements and situation query statements.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The time delay statement allows simulating calculation of varying duration in the
processes of the real-time problem in the course of which nor actions are performed
that affect the operating situation. Situation query statements allow obtaining
information on the effect of the behavior of the real-time program on the operating
situation.

It is necessary to note that in developing the language there was no aim to make it
as close as as possible to the "El'brus" Autocode. First. this would have caused
too great an extension of development time. Second, it is very doubtful that within
the bounds of the instrumental machine a model of the operating system and an inter-
preter of the full set of the "Bl'brus" HVK instructions could be realized jointly
that is sufficiently convenient to operate. Third, the tools developed pursue a
more modest (but very important!) goal: to help real-time program developers com-
prehend ways of mapping external process control algorithms to the "El'brus" HVK
computing structures and the dynamics of interaction of real-time program processes
between themselves and with the operating system, and thereby promote in the spirit
of structured programming {9] a reduction in conceptual space separating the exter-
nal process control problem. formed more or less precisely in terms of problem-
oriented concepts. and its program realization on the "El'brus" MVK.

1. Static models

2. Administrative system

3. Program in OPAL

4. Real-time system developer

752‘” 3:5,?“ 5. 03 model
(4) 6. Translator
7. Interpreter
90 I -
”a (41% 8. Statistics
' 9. Program in internal representa-
tion

 

The set of tools contains the following components: a) translator from the OPAL
language in internal representation; b) interpreter of constructions of internal
representation; c) model of the operating system; and d) the administrative system.
A schematic representation of the organization of work using the set of tools In
shown in the drawing.

The simulation cycle begins with the stage of so-called static simulation of the
individual algorithms or groups of algorithms. Static simulation may be done in
either "El'brus" Autocode or another high-level language. Static simulation reSults
give the real-time program developer a more accurate notion of the problems solvable
by the system and estimates (even if rOugh) of execution times and storage amounts
required for the algorithms.

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The information derived in static simulation is then used to map the algorithms to
the "El'brus" HVK computer structures in the OPAL language.

Then the program in OPAL is translated into a program in internal representation
which is an analog of the "Bl'brus" HVK instruction set. An OPAL development cri~
terion was minimization of the number of constructions of the internal representa-
tion since this simplifies realization of the interpreter. The internal representa-
tion now consists of 43 constructions. (There are about 250 instructions in the
"El'brus" HVK instruction set.)

After this, the program in internal representation is input to the model of the
"El'brus" HVK which consists of the interpreter, the administrative system and the
model of the operating system. The operating system model contains basically the
models of the procedures for management of storage and processes. This is because
the most critical computing resources in the real-time system are main storage and
central processors.

All components of the set of tools have been realized in the Yarmo high-level
language and connected as a component to the STRELA instrumental complex [10]. This
complex has the status of a conventional user job in OS DISPAK. Thanks to this con-
nection in operating with the set of tools one may use all the basic components of
STRELA, including the archives and editor. Also, subsequent modifications of STRELA
offered the capability of interactive operation with the set of tools.

The abundance of descriptive facilities in the Yarmo language and its nearness in
this sense to "El'brus" Autocode simplified writing the models of the 05 procedures.
while the machine orientation of Yarmo made it possible to efficiently realize
replacement of the stacks.

Then the statistical information derived in executing the program on the model of
the "El'brus" MVK are processed and analyzed by the developer to detect errors and
insufficiency of resources, etc. Insufficiency of resources may be taken care of by
adding appropriate rccccrccs to the machine vnnfigurntion or changing the algorithms.
Errors in the program are eliminated directly in OPAL since the translator achieves
unambiguous correspondence between the internal and OPAL representations of the pro-
gram.

The corrected OPAL program is again input to the translator, thereby starting a new
cycle of real-time system simulation.

3. Results Obtained

The OPAL program is a certain description of the block structure of the text of the
parallel (multiprocess) real-time program. The level of detail of this description
may be different for different parts of the real-time program and is selected by the
developer as a function of the status of development, investigative aims set, etc.

In any case. there must be detailed descriptions of the actions associated with gen-
eration and/or use of features essential to organization of the computing process on
the "El'brus" HVK. including declarations of semaphores and semaphore primitives.

It is well known how complicated the parallel program can be that has interaction of
processes organized on the base of the semaphore technique [11]. In studying the

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

textual structure of the parallel real-time program, the developer may, for example
in style [12, 13], prove the correctness of operation with common data (semaphores
of critical intervals) and the correctness of event synchronization of processes
("private" semaphores of processes) and may construct program structures similar to
conventional critical intervals and monitors [16-16] etc.

But for development of the real-time program, it is not enough to study just its
structural aspects. Study of the dynamic aspects of the real-time program is also
required for this. This study is done using the model of the "Bl'brus" IV! on
which the OPAL program is executed. In the process, the following questions are
resolved:

whether the strict time limits on control of the external objects are adhered to is
determined;

the algorithms for planning priorities of processes are worked through;

the equipment configuration needed for realization of the real-time program is
determined for the "El'brus" MVK (number of central processors and size of main
storage); and

the possibility of using the mechanism of dynamic allocation of storage available in
the OS for the "El'brus" HVK is determined. There may be three unpleasant cases
here.

with unreasonable use of generators of local storage in procedures frequently being
called, the mathematical storage of "El'brus," very large in size (232 words),
which is allocated to a problem without reuse, may in principle be exhausted. The
overhead in time for operation of the 08 procedures for storage management may be
great. There may be an insufficient amount of physical main storage in "El'brus."

In the first two cases, careful use must be made of the language constructions lead-
ing to advancement of the indicator of free mathematical storage and to an increase
in storage fragmentation. In the third case, the computational algorithm must be
changed or the physical size of main storage in "El'brus" increased.

In operating with the set of tools, the mechanisms for the real-time program commun-
ication with external objects may be worked out preliminarily, in particular the
scheme for processing interrupts from the external objects and the principles for
organization of information exchange with external objects. The tools may also be
used for training. For example, in studying the various aspects of interaction of
the parallel processes in a multiprocessor machine.

***

The set of tools were checked in simulating various structures of program realiza-
tion on the "El'brus" HVK of several practical real-time systems. The results ob-
tained showed the practical usefulness of the tools in choosing and designing struc-
tures for real-time programs. If the size of the OPAL program does not exceed #000
lines, then the entire set of tools fits within the user address space on the BBSH-b
(32K words) and a rather fast interpretation of the OPAL program is achieved. For
different real-time systems, a different slowdown was obtained--from 0.9 to 70-fold,
i.e. in simulating one second of real time, approximately from one second to one
minute of BESM—é time was expended.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

be
5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

COPY

8545
C50:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Burtsev, V. 8., "Tendentsii razvitiya vysokoproizvoditel'nykh sistem i
mnogoprotsessornyye vychislitel'nyye konpleksy" [Trends in the Evolution of
High-Throughput Systems and Multiprocessor Computer Complexes], Moscow. ITMiVT
[Institute of Precision Mechanics and Computer Engineering], 1977.

Babyan, B. A., "Osnovnyye printsipy progrannnogo obespecheniya MVK 'Bl'brua-l'"
[Basic Principles of "El'brus-l" MVK Software], Preprint No 5, Moscow, ITMiVT,
1977.

Ivanov, A. P. and Semenikhin, S. V., "Operatsionnaya sistema MVK 'Bl'brus-l'"
["El'brus-l" MVK Operating System], Preprint No 2, Moscow, ITMiVT, 1977.

Wirth, N., "Toward 3 Discipline of Real—Time Programming," CACM, No 8. 1977.

Hansen. P. 8.. "A Comparison of Two Synchronizing Concepts," ACTA INFORMATICA,
Vol 1, 1972, p 190.

Ouicki, S. and Cries. D., "An Axiomatic Proof Technique for Parallel Programs
1,“ ACTA INFORMATICA. Vol 6. 1976, p 319.

Pshenichnikov, L. Ye. and Sakhin, Yu. Kh., "Arkhitektura mnogoprotsessornogo
vychislitel'nogo konpleksa 'El'brus'" {Architecture of the "El'brus" Multi-
processor Computer Complex]. Preprint No 7, Moscow, ITMiVT, 1977.

Pentkovakiy, V. M., “Osnovnyye kharakteristiki Avtokoda MVK ‘Bl'brusm [Basic
Characteristics of the "El'brus" MVK Autocode], Preprint No 6. Moscow, ITMiVT,
1977.

Dal, 0.; Dijkstra, 3.; and Hoare, c., "Structured Programming, Moscow, Mir. 1975.

Chinin, G. D. et 31., "Complex of Software of an Instrumental Computer," in the
book "Sistemnoye i teoretichcskoye programmirovaniye" [System and Theoretical
Programming], Kishinev, 1974.

Courtois, P. J.; Heymans, P.; and Parnas, D. L.. “Concurrent Control with
'Readers' and 'Writers'." CACM, No 10, 1971.

Dijkstra, E. w.. "The Structure of the 'THE' Multiprogramming System," CACM,
No 5, 1968.

Dijkstra, 8., "Interaction of Sequential Processes," in the book "Programming
Languages," Moscow, Mir, 1972.

Hansen, P. 3., "Structured Multiprogramming, CACM, No 7, 1972.

Dijkstra, B. U., "Hierarchical Ordering of Sequential Processes," ACTA
INFORMATICA, 1. 1971, p 115.

Moore, C. A. R., "Monitors: An Operating System Structured Concept," CACM, No
10, 1974.

RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Progralnirovaniye", 1981

1863/226

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.06

REALIZATION 0F PASCAL LANGUAGE FOR 'EL'BRUS' HULTIPROCBSSOR COMPUTER COMPLEX

Hoscou PROGRAMMIROVANIYE in Russian No 3. Hay-Jun 81 (manuscript received 13 Aug 79)
pp 62-64

[Article by S. V. Vdovkin, A. A. Kubenskiy, S. S. Lavrov and V. 0. Safonov,
Leningrad]

[Text] Described are the source language of the PASCAL
compiler for the "El'brus" multiprocessor computer complex
and the general principles of realization and structure of
the compiler. Some characteristics of the compiler and
an evaluation of the realization are given.

In recent years, the algorithmic language PASCAL has become more and more popular
[1]. The language contains convenient facilities for defining and processing
structured data, including sequential files; it has the necessary set of control
consrructions and apparatus of procedures that allow parameters-variables and
parameters-procedures. These facilities are specified in a simple, clear and uni-
form form. which makes PASCAL programs more intelligible and lends them special
elegance. Another merit of the language is the strictneas and compactness of the

definition of its syntax. The language allows solving a broad class of problems,
but it is most popular as an instrumental facility for developing system programsand
as the basis for a study of programming [2].

An effort is underway in the computer center of Leningrad State University to im-
plement PASCAL on certain computers.

A PASCAL compiler has been developed for the "El'brus" HVK [multiprocessor compu-
ter complex]; the compiler is intended for any class of users (students. system
programmers, application program developers) and provides for obtaining an effi-
cient working program, convenient facilities for debugging and correcting programs,
output of information for the user with a varying degree of detail. and disengage-
ment by the user of part of the dynamic checks to obtain a more efficient version
of a program that has already been debugged.

The "El'brus" PASCAL compiler. just as any programming system for the "El'brus"
HVK. is accessible in the computer environment which now includes part of the re-
quired capabilities: system of files for storage and editing of texts (programs.
in particular), and a general-purpose interface for compilers that supports connec-

tion of modules in other languages, for recompilation and independent compilation
of procedures.

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Features of the Scurce Language. The authors of the realization strived to keep
the source language as close as possible to that described in [l]. The only change
in the syntax of the language, compared to the standard, is that in the construction
"set." the type of elements is explicity specified.

0n the other hand, to make fuller use of HVK capabilities. some expansions have been
introduced:

the standard scalar types "short integer." "short real" and "long real" have been
added;

in defining the file type, file attributes must be specified. otherwise they are
established by default; and

in the selection statement. an alternative can be specified to be used when there
is no alternative to the computed value of the selector.

In a number of cases where the treatment in [l] is not very clear, additional con-
ventions were adopted; the most common are cited below.

a) The service symbols of the language, printed in [l] in boldface (begin. array.
case. function, etc.), are graphically indistinguishable from identifiers, in accor-
dance with the version of the language. which is admitted by its author himself [2].
Consequently. one may not describe in a program an identifier matching one of the
special symbols.

b) Standard identifiers of types, procedures. functions. constants and variables.
just as ordinary identifers. may be redescribed by the user.

c) Previous description of procedures and functions is not required. An identifier
of a procedure (function) may be used prior to its definition. V

In the rest of it. the language has been implemented without any restrictions.
except natural quantitative ones which are rather few for the "El'brus" HVK (for ex—
ample. identifiers are distinguished by the first 80 letters).

2. General Structure of the Compiler. The syntax of the language constructions
presupposes, in the opinion of the authors, selection of one of the methods of top-
down analysis and text scanning from left to right. In the majority of cases, the
construction is recognized by the first lexeme: if-for a conditional statement,
record-—for type of record. etc. Only in certain cases is a look ahead by one
lexeme required. Thus. global analysis cannot improve the quality of neutralization
of errors. and the recursive descent method is used [6]. combined in the necessary
cases with the mechanism of passing through to the expected lexeme. It is possible
that the more precise conformance to the syntax described in [1] has created the
traditional difficulties associated with identification of names of procedures and
functions. One-pass translation of a program. in which identifiers of procedures
(functions) may be used prior to definition. requires construction of massive list
structures for applicable occurrences of all global identifiers and inefficient re-
peated scans of these structures. Therefore. the decision was made to introduce a
second pass as the most natural in which definitive identification is made. The
following logic structure of the compiler and process of translation was adopted.

The compiler consists of blocks for the first and second passes. The first-pass
block is formed by the subroutine for lexical analysis, procedures for processing

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

descriptions and procedures for analysis of the statement division. The block re-
ceivcs for input the file containing the program text and the set of translation
conditions. Output (and input for the second pass) are: table of identifiers,
syntax graph of descriptions that contains all necessary information for both passes
and code generation, set of local syntax graphs corresponding to the divisions of
the statements of the program, procedures and functions, and a file of constants.

Performed on the first pass are complete lexical and syntactic analysis of the text,
complete semantic analysis of the descriptions (with identification in the descrip—
tions) and construction of the graphs of the descriptions and statements. In the
statement divisions, identification is made only in "variable" constructions in the
left parts of the assignment statements (since according to syntax, a function de-
signator without parameters may not be encountered in them).

Errors detected in the first pass are localized to the smallest elementary construc—
tion (description, statement, expression). Regardless of errors, after completion
of the first pass. the second pass block is started which consists of procedures

for analysis of the internal representation and the program generator of codes.
Performed are a trace of the tree of descriptions and the statement trees, complete
identification, semantic analysis of statement divisions (in particular, semantic

computation of types) and code generation. Code is generated only when there are
no errors in the program.

3. Characteristics of the Translator and Evaluation of the Realization. As results
of testing have shown, 8000 to 9000 usable instructions of the "El'brus-l” MVK are
required for processing by the translator of one line of input text (which contains
30 to 40 characters, i.e. one to two descriptions or one to two statements) on the
average. Since the average instruction execution rate on the "El'brus-l" HVK is

1.500.000 operations per second, the translation rate is 9000 to 12000 lines per
minute. With these parameters, the translator is not inferior to, for example, the

BESH-6 PASCAL system [5] (taking into account the difference in speed between the
"El' brus- l" HVK and the BESH-é). The translator performs certain optimizations of
ob1ect code. for example computation of constant expressions and calculation of the
static components of addresses of variables during translation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Jensen. K. and Wirth, N., "Pascal User Manual and Report." 2d corrected ed.,
Springer Verlag, 1978.

2. Hirth, N.. "Systematic Programming: An Introduction," Moscow, Mir, 1977.

3. Babayan. B. A. and Sakhin, Yu. Kh., "The 'El'brus' System," PROGRAHHIROVANIYB,
No 6. 1980.

k. Bol'ye. L., "Methods of Constructing Compilers," in the book "Programming
Languages," Moscow. Mir, 1972.

5. Pirin, S. 1., "implementation of the PASCAL Compiler for the BESM-6 Computer,"
in the book "Obrabotkn simvol' noy informatsii" [Processing of Symbolic Informa-
tion], issue 4, Moscow. VTs AN SSSR [USSR Academy of Sciences Computer Center],
1978.

COPYRIGHT: lzdntei'stvo "Nauka". "Programmirovaniye", 1981

8545
CSO: 1863/226 130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ABSTRACTS FROM THE JOURNAL 'PROGRAHMINC', HAY-JUNE 1981
Moscow PROGRAHHIROVANIYE in Russian No 3. May-Jun 81 pp 95-96

UDC 681.142.2
AN APPROACH TO CONSTRUCTING A GENERAL-PURPOSE SCHEME 0? LANGUAGE. SBHANTICS
[Abstract of article by V. A. Tuzov, Leningrad]
[Text] A version of a general-purpose scheme of language that may serve as a means
of describing the semantics of programming languages is decribed in terms of compo-

sitions. The-essence of the scheme is demonstrated in examples. Bibl. of 9 titles.

UDC 518.5:681.162.2
SUBSTANTIATION OF ALGORITHMS FOR CONVERSION OF LARGE-BLOCK PROGRAMS

[Abstract of article by V. N. Kas'yanov, Novosibirsk]

[Text] The author introduces a class of statement schemes with storage that are

models of programs. the elementary statements of which may have an internal struc-

ture and operate with composite informational objects. nibl. of 7 titles, 2 figures.
UDC 681.3.06

COMPUTER GRAPHICS IN PROGRAM BANKS

[Abstract of article by V. P. Shampal. Tallinn]

[Text] Discussed in the article is an approach to equipping program banks (BP)

with computer graphic facilities (5H6). The suggested approach is characterized by

the presence of high-level graphic facilities. Computer graphic facilities for
program banks have been realized by using the Yes PRIZ instrumental programming

system. Bibi. of 12 titles, 4 figures.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0ND?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.142
A METHOD OF PLANNING 0F CALCULATION CHAINS

[Abstract of article by Yu. A. Bukhshtab. A. I. Gorlin, S. S. Kamynin. D. A.
Koryagin and E. Z. Lyubimskiy]

[Text] Principles of constructing an algorithm for planning of calculation chains
are described. The algorithm is a modification of the well-known forward wave algo-
rithm that allows substantially reducing the number of nodes of the exhaustive

search tree. Bibi. of 5 titles. 1 figure.
UDC 51 : 681.3.06

TEXT EDITOR WITH DEVELOPED SYSTEM OF COMMANDS FOR YES 05
[Abstract of article by N. N. Bezrukov. Kiev]

[Text] Described in the article is the HEATED editor that has a powerful and
flexible system of commands. Realization of the system of commands is based on
using symmetrical lists. Structurally. the editor is constructed as an interpreter
of a one-pass programming language: the syntactic analyzer controls the block of
lexical analysis and semantic subroutines. Bibl. of 16 titles.

UDC 681.3.014.001.63

TOOLS FOR MODELING REAL-TIME SYSTEMS FOR THE 'EL'BRUS' MULTIPROCBSSOR COMPUTER
COMPLEX

[Abstract of article by K. C. Suleymanov, Gomel']

[Text] Described in the article is a set of program tools for designing real-time
programs for the "El'brus" multiprocessor computer complex. Programs are designed

in the specially developed OPAL language. The tools have been realized on the
BESH-6 computer and consist of a translator from OPAL and a model of the "El'brus"
multiprocessor computer complex which includes a model of the OS. Bibi. of 16 titles

1 “9“” unc 681.3.06
DETERMINING BLOCKING morons or JOINTLY pnocassro rues

[Abstract of article by Yu. V. Trifonov, Gor'kiylV

[Text] Described are the statement and methods of solution of the problem of
selecting blocking factors of files located in direct access storage and used in
several jobs. Bibl. of 10 titles.

UDC 681.3.06
REALIZATION OF THE PASCAL LANGUAGE FOR THE 'EL'BRUS' MULTIPROCESSOR COMPUTER COMPLEX

[Abstract of article by S. V. Vdovkin, A. A. Kubenskiy, S. S. Lavrov and V. 0.
Safonov. Leningrad] .

[Text] Describedare the source language of the PASCAL translator for the "El'brus"
multiprocessor computer complex and the general principles of realization and struc-
ture of the translator. Some characteristics of the translator and an evaluation of

realization are given. Bibl. of 5 titles.
132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 681.3.06
PROGRAM REALIZAIION OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS ON SYSTEM OF SMALL MINICOMPUTERS

[Abstract of article by A. I. Kirov, V. A. Litvinova, Ye. I. Dubinina and V. N.
Taralova]

[Text] Described are the structure, algorithms and modes of operation of the
NORMIN IPS [information retrieval system] realized by using the HAHPS (DIAMS) opera-
ting system. DIAMS has been adopted on Soviet SH type minicomputers and has a num-
ber of advantages with respect to construction of information systems.

The NORMIN IPS uses normalized natural Russian language for representation of texts
of documents and queries. Bibl. of 4 titles, 7 figures.

UDC 681.142
SIMULATION OF OPERATING SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by N. A. Krinitskiy and T. F. Chernova]

[Text] A model of an operating system and the language for describing the simulated
object are discussed in this article. Bibl. of 13 titles, 1 figure.

UDC 681.142
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE IJK TRANSLATING COMPLEX
[Abstract of article by 0. I. Raul
[Text] Discussed in the article is the ideology of a complex that is intended for
translation of programs from various source languages for various machines in a com-

puter network and in various programming systems. Bibi. of 11 titles, 1 figure.

FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF THE ATTENTION ROUTINE AND MANAGEMENT OF PRIORITIZED
SELECTION OF PARTITIONS IN THE YES DOS OPERATING SYSTEM SUPERVISOR

[Abstract of article by Yu. D. Kolyakin and S. A. Vaganov, Hagnitogorsk]

[Text] Described is the functional organization of the attention routine of the Yes
DOS supervisor that expands the set of operator instructions. and the instructions
for management of prioritized selection of partitions. Bibl. of 1 title, 2 figures.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo "Nauka", "Programmirovaniye", 1981

8545
C50: 1863/226

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A

UDC 681.3.06

MICROPROCESSOR SYSTDi DEV‘EwPER'S TERMINAL
Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEHY UPRAVLBNIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 4-6

[Article by A.V. Bogachev. engineer. and 8.8. Zabara and A.D. Hil'ner, candidates
of technical sciences]

[Text] Microprocessor facilities represent a new and promising trend in the de-
velopment of data processing and control facilities [1]. But the application of
microprocessor facilities simplifies systems based on them, but not the design
process itself. The designing of microprocessor systems (HPS's) represents the
development of hardware based on a selected microprocessor and the creation of
software-~P0 (system and applied programs) which implements specific functions of
the system. Furthermore, programing and the debugging of programs comprise the
major and most labor intensive portion of the design process. The proportion of
costs for the development of software is growing steadily and, according to esti-

mates of the majority of specialists. has reached 90 percent of the cost of the
entire system [2].

The extensive introduction of microprocessor facilities for controlling different
types of equipment and systems in real time and the need to reduce costs for the
development of software for them necessitate the creation of special automated
design facilities, so-called microprocessor system design systems (SPH's).

One of these systems is that developed at the Scientific Research Institute of the
Desiyi of Microprocessor Design Systems (Kiev) and implemented on the basis of a
problem-oriented complex (POK) for programing microprocessor equipment—the POK
ASPROH [automated system for designing microcomputers], executed on the basis of

an SM-la minicomputer with its real-time operating system (08 RV). The design of a
specific 8PM based on the POK is accomplished by the addition of special packages
of programs and certain special hardware modules. Functional hardware and software
of the basic POK ASPROH are primarily adjusted by means of these facilities for
operation with a specific MP8. The use of the POK ASPROH makes possible two

main steps in the debugging of software and microsoftware (software, below):
isolated and combined.

Isolated debugging is performed by the software simulation (interpretation) of

programs at the level of the machine representation of a specially created lan-
guage, HIKROSLENG (practically at the source level). Here the checking of algo-
rithms and computing processes is carried out with the revelation of the main mass
of relatively simple errors. But the software interpretation and simulation of

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the functions of a microprocessor cannot provide a guaranteed check of programs
[3]. Combined debugging and a check in the actual MP8 being designed are re-
quired. For this purpose it is necessary to enable interaction between the SPH
and HPS being designed for the purpose of copying programs debugged in isolation,
entering into the MP5 data simulating the functioning of external objects and for
reading out to the developer (operator) the results of checking programs on real
UPS equipment.

The fulfillment of these requirements is made possible in the FOX ASPROM by the
presence in its structure of a developer's terminal (TR), which is discussed in
this article.

Design Concepts and Capabilities

The following are the key concepts in the design of the developer's terminal:
dispersed processing of data in the SP“, dialog interaction between the developer
and the 8PM and the HPS being designed, and universality.

By universality is meant the ability to tune the developer's terminal to a micro-
processor of a specific type from a broad class of microprocessor facilities just
by connecting an additional emulation module.

For many Hrs's a check on real equipment is performed by the intrasystem emulation
(VSE) method [a]. This affords the developer the ability of access and control
required for working with a microprocessor and its internal registers, as well as
an emulation storage for the purpose of modifying programs in the debugging pro-
cess:

By the VSE method, which assumes emulation (substitution) of the microprocessor
of the HPS being debugged by its hardware analog (instrument microprocessor),
built into the emulation module.

By direct control, i.c.. by direct coupling of the developer's terminal with dif-
ferent points of the equipment of the UPS being debugged.

The instrument microprocessor is connected to the MP8 by means of a cable terminat-
ing in the pin section of a connector built into a jack in the HPS microprocessor
being emulated. Direct control is accomplished via a coupling module connected

by means of prods to various contacts of the integrated microcircuits of the HPS
being debugged.

Emulation of the storage of the HPS being debugged means the substitution of the
entire storage or a certain area of it with an individual instrument storage con-
tained in the emulation module and not dependent on the storage of the SF". The
instrument storage is furnished with means of connecting it to the internal line
of the MP8 being debugged with the presence simultaneously of the ability of
access to the latter through the internal line of the developer's terminal, which
makes possible the modification of programs in the debugging process.

The terminal possesses the following capabilities: of debugging and simultaneously
testing programs and equipment; of step-by-step tracing of the execution of a

135

FOR OFTJC1A1.USEIJNLY
F0R40FFHJAI.USEZONLY

program; of tracing the implementation of programs in the program tracing mode;
and of executing programs in real time.

In the program tracing mode the developer's terminal runs the program in real time,
tracing addressing limitations and the identification of registers specified by the
developer in debugging. Here the tracing facilities (trace storage) make possible
the storage of 128 operations executed by them.

The terminal includes a logical analyzer for analyzing address lines and data lines
(up to 32). When the developer assigns a halt point the state of lines is repro-
duced in 64 cycles preceding the specified halt condition. This makes it possible
to establish through which real program the processor reaches a specific state and
where control is them transferred to.

The terminal makes it possible for the developer, after isolated debugging of pro-
grams on the central computer. to load (copy) a prepared program into the instru-
ment storage of the developer's terminal and to carry out combined debugging in the
dialog mode. The program checked can then be transferred to the central computer
for putting out technological documentation (wiring tables. punched tapes for a
mask. etc.) or upon the developer's instruction the developer's terminal "programs"
(burns in) the integrated circuits of the ROM.

In addition, the presence in the structure of the developer's terminal of a gene-
ral-purpose processor. a working storage of sufficient capacity and a display
makes it possible to use it for the preparation of texts and for editing programs
in the independent mode.

Structure and Composition

The developer's terminal is in the form of a modular design whose basis is an 141
internal interface (multibase). The central section of the developer's terminal
is constructed on the basis of an SH—1800 microcomputer whose universal processor
(K580) makes it possible to control all modules and peripherals of the developer's
terminal. A second processor is included in the emulation module and performs the
functions of the processor of the NPS being developed.

A block diagram of the developer's terminal is shown in fig 1. The module for
coupling with the 05h ("common line") accomplishes coupling between the developer's
terminal and SH series computers which have an output to an OSh interface. Ex-
change is accomplished through direct access to the storage with words of 16 bits
each with a speed of up to 200 K bytes per second over a distance of up to 10 m.

The floppy disk (NGHD) external storage is implemented on the basis of a dual
RlXASD storage unit and is designed for storing the operating system. Source pro-
gram modules or object modules produced in the debugging process can also be
stored in the floppy disk storage unit in library form.

The 1/0 modules make it possible to connect to the developer's terminal periphe-
rals, including a tape punch station, a printer (PU) and a display module. All

control and debugging instructions are given by the operator (developer) from a

keyboard and all information regarding the debugging process is displayed on the
screen of the display module.

136

INJR‘OFTWCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.
Key:
1. Central processor (K580) 16. Programmer
2. RAM (65 K X 8) 17. Console
3. To SM-b 18. Module for coupling with MP8
4. Module for coupling with 08h l9. Unified interface
5. Emulator adapter 20. Emulation module
6. 141 internal interface 21. Connecting cable
7. Module for coupling with modem 22. MP5 to be debugged
8. To modem 23. Emulator. MP [microprocessor]
9. Floppy disk storage controller 24. Emulation storage
10. Floppy disk storage 25. Trace storage
11. IIO modules 26. Logical analyzer lines

12. Input from punched tape
13. Tape punch

16. Printer

15. Display

The programmer console makes it possible to enter the codes of the debugged program
into the ROM. implemented with series K556RT4 microcircuits (KSSGRTS'a are proposed
in the future).

The module for coupling with a modem makes it possible to couple the developer's
terminal with synchronous and asynchronous modems or signal conversion equipment
having an output to an 82 interface. The presence of this module in the composi-
tion of the developer's terminal makes it possible to place the terminal at a con-
siderable distance from the central computer.

The developer's terminal also includes an intrasystem emulator (VSE) which operates
in real time and makes possible direct coupling between the MP3 to be debugged and

137

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR‘OFFKWAI.USE(NVLY

the SPH. The intrasystem emulator is functionally and structurally divided into
two modules: one for coupling with the HPS and one for emulation. One represents
the hardware of tne VSE, independent of the type of microprocessor (HP) in the
HPS. and the other includes the instrument microprocessor and the emulation and
trace storage units and is replaced when changing the microprocessor in the HPS.
This module is conneced through a unified interface.

The terminal's software consists of a software system (SPO) and test facilities.
The former includes a monitor routine. linkage routines (module drivers), a text
editor program. a debugging routine. and routines for servicing floppy disk libra-
ries. The test facilities consist of a basic combination of tests and a set of
tests. The basic combination is designed for testing the key instructions of the
central processor (TsP), loading instructions and instructions for starting the
TsP's test, and individual tests for servicing system equipment. The set of tests
serves the purpose of checking the working order of modules of the developer's
terminal and of locating malfunctions.

Key Technical Characteristics of Developer's Terminal

Central Processor

Word length in bits 8
Clock frequency in MHz 2
Maximum capacity of storage in bytes 64 K
Instruction set Determined by archi~
tecture of K5801K80
microprocessor
Display
Number of:
Characters in a line 80
Lines 24
Character set 96

Floppy Disk Storage

Capacity of storage in bytes 2 X 256 K
Average access time in ms 483

Common Line Interface Module

Data rate in bytes/s 200 K
Distance from computer in meters 10
Setting of check points Up to 2 (for address;

one of two addresses;
data; address and
data; state of
testers; chassis
ground)

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Connection of testers:

Input 16
Output 16
Capacity of emulation storage in bytes 16 K
ROM programming K556RT£
Supply voltage in volts 220 + 102. - 151
(50 i 1 Hz)

The keyboard is alphanumeric, digital and functional. The debugging mode is step-
by-step, cyclic, tracing, real time. The structural design is in the form of a
table and pedestal.

The key design concepts and the capabilities of the developer's terminal have
been verified at the present time. Development is under vay on a number of
"user's" developer’s terminals tuned to the most popular microprocessor sets in
practice, series K580 and K589.

Bibliography

1. Baums, A.K., Gurtovtsev, A.L. and Zaznova, N.Ye. "Hikroprotsessornyye
sredstva" [Microprocessor Facilities], Riga, Zinatne, 1979.

2. Uotson, R. "Comparison of Industry-Produced Programming Facilities for Micro-
processors," TIIEIR, Vol 64, No 6, 1976.

3. Lipayev, V.V. and Kaganov, F.A. "System for Automating the Technology for the
Development of a Set of Control Programs for Microprocessors and Microcompu-
ters," UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYB SISTEHY I MASHINY, No 1, 1980.

6. "Diverse Design Facilities." BLEKTRONIKA, No 8, 1976, pp 57-66.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya".
1981

8831
C80: 1863/216

139

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USETONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

RELIABILITY OF Oil-BOARD SYSTEMS-~‘rhis mathematical article describes the use

of statistical methods to determine the accuracy of on-bosrd automated control
systems. These methods are classified in terms of the task, the know information
and the equipment utilized. [By B. S. Sinitsyn, doctor of technical sciences]

[Editorial Report] [Moscow IZHERENIYA, KONTROL' , Amnu'rsm in Russian
No 3, Mar 81 pp 103-52]

CSO: 1863/252-A-P

11.0 I

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPLICATIONS

UDC 002.6

PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON COMPLEX PROBLEM OF 'POHER
ENGINEERING' BY DATA BASE TELEACCESS

Moscow VESTNIK AKADBMII NAUK 5558 in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 12-17
[Article from the section "Reports of the Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences")

[Text] A terminal has been installed at the Institute of Atomic Energy imeni I. V.
Kurchatov that allows institute associates teleaccess to the information file of the
International Center of Scientific and Technical Information (HTsNTI) [ICSTI] to re-
trieve information from this file on the complex problem of "Power Engineering in
the interactive mode. The system has been implemented on standard hardware and

uses the standard programs for the Yes EVH [Unified System of Computers]. At a
meeting of the Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences, L. N. Sumarokov. director
of the ICSTI, reported on the service provided to TAB associates in this teleaccess
mode.

L. N. Sumarokov noted that modern information technology provides for making up a
common computer information file--the so-called data base--from the various domestic
and foreign source files, automated on-line output of information items on specific
problems and teleaccess to the data base, including retrieval in the interactive
mode that allows successive refinement of the query as answers are received. Such
retrieval is performed in the section of the information network linking the ICSTI
and the IAE.

The information base in the ICSTI system includes a file of secondary documents pre-
pared by the VINITI [All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information -
AUISTl]. a file of Rab reports and a number of international files. The system has
been implemented on the Yes-1060 computer. The software includes the standard oper-
ating system 6.0, the "Kama" operating system for management of the data teleproces-
sing mode and the "Dialog" applications program package.

The ICSTI computer file now holds about 500,000 documents on the subject of "Power
Engineering" with an annual increase of about 300,000 documents. Thanks to the use
of modern information technology. a group of 8 to lo people is sufficient for file
management and operation.

The AP-6b terminal, included in the Yes computer peripheral set, was installed in
the TAB.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The file is accessed through telephone lines. Retrieval in the interactive mode
from the individual subfiles with a size on the order of 100.000 to 150,000 docu-
ments (all information is divided into such subfiles due to the limited amount of
disk storage) takes 15 to 20 minutes. About 3.000 retrieval sessions per year can
be performed using the two terminals now in operation. The experience gained at the
ICSTI while servicing TAB associates is of interest in many respects.

The fact is that in the next two to three years. information organizations may make
up and operate retrieval files containing about .5 to 1 million documents, that is
files comparable to the ICSTI "Power Engineering" file (disk storage size is the
limit). At this stage it is probably advisable to begin developing problem-oriented
files on the major areas of science and technology defined by the comprehensive

development programs: power engineering, fuel, raw materials, agriculture, biology.
food, light industry. transportation, etc.

The necessity of continuing to assimilate existing information technology and means
of accessing information and expand the scale of remote retrieval in the interactive
mode. i.e. real access to files. is becoming obvious.

ICSTI is now organizing service for the Institute of Radioelectronics (the terminal
here will not be a subscriber station, but a minicomputer that substantially expands
the capability of retrieval and processing of data in the teleaccess mode), the
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry imeni H. M. Shemyakin. the Moscow Engineering
Physics Institute and other institutions.

Another serious problem is occurring in connection with what has been said. In
addition to the files of scientific and technical information being created in the
information agencies, services and subdivisions. the leading institutes are forming
so-called factual data banks based on the results of their own research and develop-
ment. Unfortunately, these banks created at the institutes are not registered any-
where today and the very formation of them is not coordinated with anyone. As a re-
sult, access to these banks is made difficult for "external" organizations. Solving
this problem would raise sharply the efficiency of making use of scientific research
results.

Also, it is not simply a question of the division of the range of problems, but of a
unified, coordinated data compilation plan that guarantees each organization's bank
will be accessible to all others. In addition, acquiring and processing integrated
information and building unified banks of scientific, technical, commercial and
market information are a separate problem.

After the report was made, A. P. Aleksandrov, acamedician and president of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, remarked that IAE scientists were still not used to using the
terminal, but that those who had mastered it were very satisfied. It is used
especially often in preparing dissertation works and reviews.

Continuing this thought. L. N. Sumarokov said that usually work on each new subject
begins with a thorough retrospective retrieval of information on a certain range of
problems. As for habit, the case is the same as in general when a computer is intro-
duced in a scientific institution: Those who have occasion to use its services at
least once usually continue doing so later on and in time the number of users builds
up. After all. modern display terminals are rather simple and require no special

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

knowledge of programming and computers. Questions are formulated essentially in
natural language and refined over the course of the retrieval; upon request, you can
quickly get a printout of any documents of interest.

After his report, L. N. Sumarokov was asked a number of questions.

Replying to the question by the late academician N. V. Hel'nikov on the possibility
of comprehensive analysis of information, forecasting and preparation of analytic
surveys, L. N. Sumarokov said here it is only a question of cooperation between in-
formation specialists and analysts. Information specialists can only prepare very
enriched resources for analytic scholars. Analytic surveys, prepared on the basis
of information from ICSTI files, were demonstrated in an exhibit at the Presidium
of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Academician P. L. Kapitsa stressed that using teleaccess to files of information in
machine-readable form makes it possible to not only compensate for a reduction in
the inflow of literature. but also to achieve more expeditious distribution of in-
formation than the traditional periodicals.

L. N. Sumarokov responded to P. L. Kapitsa's request for a teleaccess demonstration
on the premises of the Presidium that ICSTI specialists had demonstrated that before
and it was considered inadvisable to repeat it at this meeting of the Presidium.

In answer to academician A. V. Fokin's question, L. N. Sumarokov reported that
essentially any text appearing on the display screen could be printed out upon the
user's request. Moreover. the user may obtain not only the text of the abstract
shown on the display, but also a microfiche or full-size copy of the original report
itself-if. of course. it is available in the institute's holdings. The convenience
of the interactive system is that thanks to gradual refinement of the query as in-
formation comes in. the user may obtain a printout of just those documents that are
of immediate interest to him.

The information files are compiled from the most varied sources, the speaker noted
in answering academician N. s. Gilyarov's question. The data files containing
factual information are built from the data banks of various leading institutes and
several commercial data banks purchased by the center. The basis of the scientific
and technical information files containing reports on scientific publications is
formed by the AUISTI's REFERATIVNYY ZHURNAL (th) in machine-readable form, a domes-
tic file of information on scientific research work performed and several other
files. In all, the ICSTI information base now combines about 10 source files, in-
cluding foreign files, each of which is continually being supplemented. The techno-
logical problem in building aunifieddata base on the basis of these different
files consists primarily in achieving compatibility of the various files. recorded
in various formats and organized in various ways. The capability of accessing the
complex of these heterogeneous files as some unified information file has to be

provided.

Concerning academician P. L. Kapitsa‘s comment on the need for verifying the valid—
ity of the information input to the system, L. N. Sumarokov expressed the opinion
that such checking is rather the job of scientists, and not only information
specialists.

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. l. Mikhaylov, director of the AUISTI, took part in the discussion on the report;
he noted the progressiveness of information service using a terminal system. The
AUISTI contributes to the organization of this service by sending information agen-
cies large information files in machine-readable form. It now puts out on magnetic
tapes abstract journals on biology and chemistry, and physics is in the preparation
stage. 0n the whole, about 700,000 secondary documents are now put out on magnetic
tapes. A priority task is organization of output on magnetic tapes of information
publications on machine building. (Academician A. P. Aleksandrov, president of the
USSR Academy of Sciences. remarked during the statement that files on materials
technology and metallurgy, especially on strength and resistance to corrosion, are
absolutely necessary.) with sufficient capacity to transfer the entire AUISTI
REFERATIVNYY ZHURNAL to magnetic tape and with sufficient amount of machine storage,
information could be grouped by any combination of features. forming magnetic tapes

sources available in domestic holdings.

Unfortunately. the terminals available at the AUISTI are capable of operating only
at short ranges and the image quality on the screens is very poor. AUISTI has de-
veloped an automated system that is to operate in the mode of a network and terminal
links. Over the five—year plan, 22 information centers are to be connected to this
system. However, the lack of necessary equipment and, mainly, communication lines
is hindering the realization of this system. But the fundamental and technical
problems of teleaccess have essentially been solved: The "arr-so" all-union exhibit
was in operation during the fall at the USSR VDNKh [Exhibition of Achievements of
the National Economy]; 3 terminal was installed there that allowed entry to the data
banks of the AUISTI. the INION [Institute of Scientific Information on the Social
Sciences (USSR Academy of Sciences)! and the sector center for instrument building
and automation equipment. Special communication lines were allocated for this and
the system operated quite satisfactorily.

In reply to A. P. Aleksandrov's comment on the possibilities of using the SM-4 mini-
computer as a terminal, A. I. Mikhaylov said that this machine has only 66 charac-
ters and it is very difficult to send formulas using it. Hungarian video terminals
are preferred at the AUISTI.

To improve the information service for academy specialists, the technical base for
scientific information activity now has to be developed first of all.

operation of a system linking the information consumer in a scientific institution
to the data banks in an information agency. This is found to be very efficient even
with existing equipment with all its shortcomings. And in this case, Ye. P.
Velikhov stressed. the institutes have to be encouraged to connect to these systems.
The simplest way to encourage this is to establish a centralized resource for the
data equipment.

Academician N. C. Basov supported the proposal to set up a centralized fund and

added that the effort to build the data banks has to be coordinated and planned, in
particular to build banks of various physical constants and measurements. for

164
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

example. for optics and spectroscopy. N. G. Basov stressed that we generate a lot
of data in this field, but nobody is collecting, systematizing and recording it.

Another aspect of "information technology" that the academy should get involved in
is the recording c; machine media of operating manufacturing instructions. Abroad
in general, working drawings are now often a thing of the past. The data needed is
recorded on perforated tape which is then used to control the operation of automatic
machine tools. When necessary, the information recorded on tape may be transmitted
over comunication channels. even between continents.

Also very promising is the use of small sections of magnetic tape for recording com-
mercial, bookkeeping. accounting, etc. documents. For example, in England, a con-
siderable portion of office paperwork is now duplicated on magnetic tape. This
practice greatly simplifies automation of accounting, acquisition of statistics,
office records, etc., while the recording on magnetic tape of invoices can simplify
many warehouse operations. '

A. P. Aleksandrov remarked that such efforts in the academy are underway jointly
with a number of ministries. Test sites are being set up and groups of automated
machine tools with remote data entry and centralized control installed in them. And
the first automated warehouses are operating in the country.

Academician N. P. Fedorenko supported the suggestion of encouraging formation of an
information network within the framework of the USSR Academy of Sciences. One way

of forming a unified information network for the Academy of Sciences of the USSR is
to establish collective-use computer centers to serve a number of institutes. Insti-
tutes today are trying to set up their own computer centers which is an inefficient
waste of equipment. A strategy for utilizing computers within the entire academy has
to be worked out. in particular, the Section of Social Sciences and the Central
Economic Mathematics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences (TsEHI) at one time
proposed setting up a collective-use computer system for the scientific institutions
of the social sciences on the base of the TsEHI VTs [computer center].1

8. S. Pospelov, nasociate member of the USSR Academy of Sciences [AS], remarked that
the problems of the strategy for using computers to handle scientific information
tasks will soon be discussed in the Coordinating Committee on Computer Technology.
However, formation of a unified information computing network for the AS must be pre-
ceded hy a large effort to establish the overall concept of distribution of academic
data banks and to structure the files of scientific information.

Academician Yu. A. 0vchinnikov, vice president of the USSR AS, noted the importance
of the work carried cut in the lCSTI and IAE. The results of this work are helping
introduce a new concept of information work in the scientific institutions and train
scientific workers in using modern methods of information service.

Yu. A. Ovchinnikov emphasized the impossibility of establishing data banks resting

exclusively on domestic files in the institutes, for example. of a biological or
chemical type. Where possible, foreign files must also be used along with domestic

1 See: vasnux AN sssa. 1977, No 9. pp 74-86.--Bditor

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

data bases. for example. the abstract file of the AUISTI on magnetic tapes. Thus,
not one of the accessible domestic and foreign files corresponds to the problems of
the Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry imeni H. H. Shemyakin--a different classifica-
tion is needed, a different approach. The institute expends a great deal of effort
on classifying and entering information into its own bank. But in return, when the
files coming into the institute are reprocessed with the participation of its asso-
ciates, a unique information file is obtained in the output. In principle. it is
quite possible to sell this file abroad--the value of it is very great.

It is also very important, Yu. A. Ovchinnikov stressed, that all the work that L. N.
Sdmarokov reported on is being performed on domestic equipment. The experience of
using this equipment for solving scientific information problems and for working out
interactive retrieval in the teleaccess mode is extremely useful for developing this
form of information service in other USSR AS institutions.

In recent years, Yu. A. Ovchinnikov continued, scientists have begun to better under-
stand how necessary it is today to get the scientific information they need. As be-
fore. we are not the first ones who do not like to leaf through journals. As before,
we all like original articles and we always enjoy the chance of working with them.
But it is clear that this is not the main route to obtaining information. And the
dissemination of the know-how gained at the ICSTI is an urgent problem; it is useless
to expect some special decrees or meetings to solve it. The bureau of departments
has to take decisive measures for this.

At the end of the discussion, academician A. P. Aleksandrov, president of the USSR
A5. emphasized the need of a unified policy in developing information and computer
systems in the USSR AS that achieves both economy of resources as a result of intro-

duction of standard developments and compatibility of the information systems being
created.

In the resolution adopted, the USSR AS Presidium noted that the activation of the
"Institute of Atomic Energy imeni I. V. Kurchatov-ICSTI” section of the information
network raises information support to research on the complex problem of "Power
Engineering" to a qualitatively new level and approved the work performed by the
ICSTI on developing the information network for teleaccess to data bases of scienti-
fic and technical information.

The presidium considered it advisable to disseminate the expertise of this work and
instructed that a proposal be prepared to form a centralized fund to finance it in
the institutes of the USSR AS.

COPYRIGHT: izdatel'stvo “Nauka”. "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

85b5
CSO: 1863/215

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 622.692
USING MICROCOMPUTEPS IN PUMP STATION CONTROL SYSTEM FOR MAIN OIL PIPELINES

Moscow ANTOHATIZATSIYA I TELENEKHANIZATSIYA NEFTYANOY PROHYSHLENNOSTI in Russian
No 6. Jun 81 (manuscript received 28 Apr 81) pp 10-11

[Article by K. S. Bogdanov and B. H. Prokhorov, VNIIKAneftegaz [All-Union Scientific

Research, Planning and Design Institute of Complex Automation in the Petroleum and
Gas Industry]]

[Text] Developing automated process control systems to pump oil through main pipe-
lines involves using microcomputers in the pump station control system (SUNS).
Domestic industry is assimilating production of microcomputers such as the
"Elektronika 85-01," the single-board "Blektronika 85-11" and "Elektronika 85-21,"
the 95-300, the "Elektronika NTs-0.3" and the "Elektronika-60."

The pump station control system, as a rule, contains the following basic subsystems:

the subsystem of automatics that effects program control of starting and stopping
the station pump units, program control of starting and stopping auxiliary mecha-

nisms, automatic protection of the pump units and station as a whole and the equip-
ment status alram system;

the subsystem for maintaining the station pressure parameters;

the subsystem for metering and monitoring electricity and the complex of electrical
protection for the equipment in the electric substation; and

the subsystem for transmitting information to the regional dispatch point (EDP).

As a rule, this device is the control point for the system of telemechanics (KPTH)
for the main oil pipeline.

In each subsystem, a microcomputer performs its functions.

In the telemechanics system control point (KPTH), the microcomputer executes the
following programs:

distribution of time between the various problems in accordance with specified
priorities;

formation of buffer files and initial processing of data;

control of operation of devices;
realization data compression algorithms;

formation of messages for transmission over communication channel;

147

FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control of reception-transmission as a function of the structure of the communica—
tion channel; and

data conversion for reproduction of information.

In the electricity metering subsystem, the microcomputer has to perform:

computation of summary half-hour active and reactive power in the hours of operation
of the power system with maximum load;

storage in memory of the maximum values of summary active and reactive power in the
hours of operation of the power system with maximum load; and

computation of power consumption as a whole.

As is known, a subsystem for program control of a pump station may be made by vari-
ous methods: using only hardware for automation without using a computer; using a
computer in which the basic functions and tasks of the subsystem are realized by
software; and using both a computer and automation hardware jointly.

The authors compared and chose the best structure for building a pump station con-
trol subsystem by the minimum of resulting outlays for system operation based on
the known technique for selecting hardware complex structure.

The analysis and comparison of three considered alternatives for building a pump
station control subsystem showed that the most expedient is the version without com-
puters (i.e. without microcomputers).

This is also confirmed by the following considerations:

1) computer operations are not required to effect protection of technological
equipment, the alarm system and input of reserve; and

2) each channel of a logic device has a limited number of sufficiently reliable
elements. Calculations show that the channel-by-channel reliability of the logic

automat is higher than the reliability of these channels when a microcomputer is
used.

Specialized logic devices have individual control channels while a microcomputer
effects all actions through a central processor.

Using a microcomputer in the subsystem for maintaining pressure parameters in a pump
station is advisable since analog regulation systems under the conditions of opera-
tion in pump stations have a number of fundamental shortcomings. The specific na-
ture of operation of a system that regulates delivery of a pump station is that it
operates in the mode of limiting pressure from the top and therefore operating
pressure is always below the control setting.

Bogdanov, K. S. and Prokhorov, B. PL, "Technique for Selecting Hardware Complex
Structure for Oil Pipeline Control System," SNT [Collection of Scientific Trans-
actions], "Problcmy razrabotku sredstv avtomatizatsii i avtomatizirovannykh sistem
upravleniya v neftyanoy i gazovoy promyshlennosti" [Problems of Development of
Automation Equipment and Automated Control Systems in the Petroleum and Gas
Industry], Institute of Automation of the USSR Ministry of Instrument Making.
Automation Equipment and Control Systems, Kiev, 1977.

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Building a microcomputer-based subsystem will allow qualitative improvement of its
functioning.

From a consideration of the capabilities of using microcomputers in a pump station
control system. it follows that it is advisable to make use of microcomputers in
those subsystems where performance of complicated logic operations of the computing
process is required with storage of its results and generation of control actions.
Using microcomputers just for elementary problems (like starting and stopping pump
units or auxiliary mechanisms) is unwarranted and economically inexpedient. These

tasks can be successfully performed by simple and reliable logic equipment for
automation.

The derived results formed the basis of developments of new automation apparatus
for main oil pipelines, namely. the UVTK—lOO complex of telemechanical devices
(TsNIlKA [State All-Union Central Scientific Research Institute of Complex Automa-
tion]) and the BLIK-l complex of pump station automatic equipment (VNIIKAneftegaz).

The control point for the UVTK-lOO complex, installed in the pump station, is built
with the "Elektronika-éo" microcomputer and performs the set of programs mentioned
above. The main advantage of the UVTK-lOO complex obtained through using the micro-
computer compared to the telemechanical TH-lZO is the switch to the sporadic princi-
ple for transmission of all information. In the UVTK-lOO control point. part of

the microcomputer memory is intended for technological programs developed in
accordance with user requirements.

The BLIK-l complex of pump station automatic equipment is built on the base of a
specialized logic device made with integrated microcircuits and a set of series
instrumentation. The main advantages of the BLIK-l complex compared to the
"PUSK-71" apparatus now being produced are as follows:

1) expansion of performable functions through incorporation of units to control
inlet chambers and start-up of the scraper and the panel for a local dispatch point;

2) enhanced sensitivity and stability of the pump station pressure regulation
system; and

3) a higher level of reliability through incorporation of test monitoring of mal-
functions of the logic device and redundancy of its power sources.

In building a pump station control system based on the UVTK-lOO and BLIK-l complexes,

the panel for a local dispatch point may be omitted and its functions may be per-
formed by the microcomputer of the UVTK-lOO control point with reproduction of
information on a display.

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organizatsii, upravleniya
i ekonomiki neftegazovoy promyshlennosti (VNIIOENG), 1981

8565
C30: 1863/224

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 68l.325.5-181.b

ORGANIZATION OF COMPUTER-INSTRUMENT INTERACTION IN SYSTEMS FOR AUTOHATION OF
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH WITH VARIABLE STRUCTURE

Riga AVTOHATIKA I VYCHISLITEL‘NAYA TEKHNIKA in Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 81 (manuscript
received 18 Jun 80) pp 81-91

[Article by S. N. Domaratskiy, 0. S. Zudin and 0. Vaynio]

[Excerpts] A characteristic feature of recent years is the widespread introduction
of distributed computer networks into the practice of operation of industrial and
scientific organizations. Networks unite centers consisting of several computers
that interact with each other and exchange data with the network through a common
processor [1]. These centers may be in fixed locations or even on mobile platforms,
for example, on ships intended for oceanic research. Radio and space communications
may be used to include these centers in the network. Single-center computer net-
works located on scientific research ships ("18) of the USSR AN [Academy of
Sciences - AS] unite laboratory systems for automation of scientific research (SANI),
automatic navigation equipment. meteosynoptic data acquisition systems and data
acquisition and processing centers. Laboratory scientific research automation sys-
tems contain computers, data input, output and display devices and a substantial
number of scientific instruments. A feature of the functioning of the majority of
laboratory scientific research automation systems in ship systems is the variable
composition of equipment and the need for frequent and rapid recanfiguration of the
system in the process of operating with orientation to various experiments. This
article is aimed at generalizing the experience of organization of computer-instru-
ment interaction in laboratory scientific research automation systems with a vari-
able structure gained in the process of a joint effort by Soviet and Finnish speci-
alists on developing the Integrated System for Automation of Scientific Research for
the USSR AS scientific research ship. "Akademik Hstislav Keldysh," at the shipyard
of the "Khollming" A0 [joint-stock company] in Rauma (Finland).

In conclusion. let us note that organization of instrument-computer interaction in
laboratory scientific research automation systems should be based on standard inter-
faces; of these. the HEK [International Electrotechnical Commission - IEC] bus is
preferred for the majority of ship scientific research automation systems. To match
instruments with this bus in the composition of laboratory scientific research auto-
mation systems, it is advisable to have several general-purpose IK [interface cards]
on the base of microprocessors and BIS [LSI] programmable logic. The suggested
structure of the interface cards allows matching to the 12c bus any instruments with
parallel or serial input and (or) output of data used in oceamologic research, and
in addition. allows expanding instrument functions when necessary. The suggested

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
interface card is used in several laboratories on the "Akademik Mstislav Keldysh"
scientific research ship to interface various measuring instruments and sounding
devices to computers. The suggested structure of the program that interprets the
FSF [functions included between sections 82 (instrument functions) and 83 (interface

functions) to match data formats] provides protection from an unsanctioned change
in the instrument address without reducing the flexibility of the system as a whole.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Zinatne", "Avtomatika i vychisiitel'naya tekhnika". 1981

8565
CSO: 1863/223

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 62—658.012.011.565.001.b
COMPUTERIZED VIBRATION TEST CONTROL SYSTEM

Kiev IYERARKHICHESKIYE AVTOHATIZIROVANNYYE SISTEHY OBRABOTKI DANNYKH in Russian 1980
pp 47-52

[Article ”Computerized Vibration Test Control System," by Yu. P. Koval'. B. Yu. Han-
drovskiy-Sokolov, P. H. Siverskiy and A. A. Tunik from book "Hierarchical Automatic
Data Processing Systems." Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. Order of Lenin Institute
of Cybernetics]

[Text] The automatic vibration test control system (ASUV-S) is based upon utilization
of "first generation" control algorithms. The ASUV-3 is designed to generate control
signals with a desired spectral matrix for regulation of a three-component vibration
process as well as for statistical processing of rapidly varying signals from vibration-
acceleration pickups or other high-frequency pickups.

Among other types of systems performing the same tasks, digital vibration test control
systems are considered the most promising [1], since with a minimum of adjustment time
these systems permit maximum approximation of computed manipulated variables to real
processes occurring during transport and under other product operating conditions.

It is necessary to state two assumptions with respect to control of random vibrations:
a) steady-state parameter conditions; b) normality of the law of distribution [2].

These assumptions assume that the statistical parameters characterizing the vibration
are steady-state parameters and that the vibration state of the object may be considered
a superposition of random processes generated by independent sources.

A basic task in the development of vibration-test control systems accordingly consists
in selection of the method of producing a random process with the desired spectral ma-
trix at the output of a dynamic system consisting of a number (from 1 to 3) vibrators
and a test object.

The ASUV-3 employs the following control algorithms:
adjustment (governs amplitude of control signals for identification mode. adjusts
amplifiers;
identification of amplitude-frequency characteristics (for determining matrices of
amplitude-frequency characteristics of an object with a three-component force genera-
tor);
zero approximation (to compute manipulated variables taking task and amplitude-fre-
quency-characteristic matrices into account); -
iteration control (to correct manipulated variables obtained on the basis of preceding
algorithm taking nonlinear effects into account) and

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

analysis (for spectral analysis of signals from vibration-acceleration pickups during
testing of the object).

The system is adjusted for test conditions with respect to 16 or 32 matrices of spec-
tral densities uniformly distributed throughout the frequency range.

The following are the basic system technical characteristics:

the ASUV-3 system permits control of random vibration spectra within the frequency
ranges 1-250 he and 8-2000 Hz;

control is based upon the use of 16 or 32 averaged frequencies;

the dynamic range of control of process amplitude values is 40 dB;

only natural spectral output densities are controlled;

signals are analyzed over a frequency range of 0-10 kHz;

mode adjustment time using the H—6000 computer is approximately 30 min;
control mode assignment error is roughly 10 per cent;

interface capacity is 10 binary characters.

The ASUV-B system is designed for operation with electrohydraulic and electrodynnmic
vibration test stands. The system consists of the following series-produced devices:

an H-6000 (with 32 kbyte internal memory) or M-7000 (SH-2) control computer with periph-
erals (Konsul teletypc, DZH [expansion unavailable] alpha-numeric printer, SIGD [expan-
sion unavailable]). The system also incorporates the following special—purpose devices:

high-speed Fourier transform processor and interface (with vibration test stands). The
figure is a block diagram of the ASUV-3.

The purpose of the individual devices is as follows. The computer, the system's central
processor, is designed to control all system devices and perform computations in accor-
dance with control algorithms. The computer controls exchanges of data files between
the PBPF [expansion unavailable] and communication devices, the 3?? processor with re-
spect to job input and other external devices. It should be pointed out that since
system mode-adjustment time is governed entirely by computer speed, the use of the
N-7000 or SM-Z should decrease this time substantially. System job input and operating

mode selection: vibration test stand control - analysis is performed in conversational
mode with the system via teletype or Konaul unit.

The SICD display is designed for visual scanning of initial. intermediate and computer
output data. Visual scanning permits monitoring of the computation process during ad~
justment of the system for the desired mode and the introduction of corrections if nec-
essary. Information is illuminated on the SIGD as graphs in output-frequency coordi-
nates. Graphs may have l6 or 32 ordinates.

The special-purpose BPF processor performs within the system the function of executing
the direct or inverse Fourier transforms.

The interface is designed to provide exchange of number files between the computer,
vibration test stand amplifiers and vibration-acceleration pickups. The ASUV-3 sys-
tem has a three-channel communication device. Each channel has a code-voltage conver-
tor, a band filter anu an Output amplifier with output to the vibration test stand
amplifier. The input channel consists of a matching amplifier, a band filter, a scale
amplifier, an analog nemury and a voltage-code convertor. Converter capacity, 10 bi-
nary digits. is selected taking into account the dynamic range of the vibration test
stands (approximately 60 dB). The coefficient of amplification of the normalizing
amplifiers is selected on the basis of computation of optimum signal transmission
with the transmission coefficient for the entire interface channel near 1.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOK OFFICIAL

USE ONLY

The frequency range of the transmitted signals is determined by the type of vibration
test stand: [-250 Hz for electrohydraulic and 8-2000 Hz for electrodynamic stands.

with the use of a timer the computer controls signal emission frequency.

The computer

also selects the operating mode of the communication device depending upon the control

algorithm.

 

 

  
   

 

 

 

 

   
   
     
 
  

 

" " ['1 nu l"
L ”’ ML] "“427 37ng LZL’LWZ ('27—
| . .
1.14 ||‘:| 'r-l“ L; ‘ I-tlﬂc-INA'w-‘L VJ 7’: —_'
Iii-Law) L ”.7319: ’ .
; -- f7 " L LL:
L.;;"|..':',’L8) """‘Lds(9L"" ' '(5) (L, a];
, L ..... - . -. ,
”'7'th who? {lilj-I-i —-l (”Wei-4'31;
-’ . ---- .I .I I!
L L;1,L!LI2L2»§2«L:2> 7
1:1, ,i ; L I LL}, may” 1" W
J1 ‘ i l | IU}}E:’-—l_/:![_€I .15)
live/7,5116} '
LL L£L_..L_ AI]! LPN—2L6) L
l

 

   

\‘\ V; ‘ \“iGKN—J
1"!!! ). - ~-

Figure: Block diagram of ASUV-3. l - R6 [expansion unavailable]; 2 - 11' pulse convert-

er; 3 - “-6000 computer; 6 - SH-Z H-7000 computer; 5 - voltage-code converter; 6 - 3??

processor [expansion unavailable]; 7 - RC [expansion unavailable]; 8 - AZU [analog mem-

ory; 9 - BU [control unit]; 10 — HU [scale amplifier]; 11 - filter; 12 - amplifiers;

l3 - UH [output amplifier] llo - 0 [meaning unknown]; 15 - object; 16 - V [meaning un-
known.

 

ASUV-J software is designed to organize automatic vibration—test control and for

spectral processing of sensor data. The operating system, which has been developed
taking the special characteristics of the operating system of the computer used into

account. establishes the sequence in which system operating modes are executed and
communication between operator and system. The operating system consists of a control
program, programs providing communication between operator and system and special soft-
ware. Jobs are input for processing both by program through a sequence of control
operators and from a control console.

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The system and its software are designed so as to permit structural enlargement and
the introduction of new control. processing and monitoring modes. The system is thus

open for expansion.

FOOTNOTES

1. Getnanov. A. G. et al., "Avtomaticheskoye upravleniye vibratsionnyni ispytaniyani"
[Automatic Vibration-Test Control]. Moscow: Energiya. 1978.

2. Krendell, S. [Crandall]. "Sluchsynyye kolebsniya" [Random Oscillations], Moscow:
Hir, 1967.

COPYRIGHT: Institut kibernetiki. I980.

8963
680: [863/205

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 69.003 : 658.3.012.22

USING COMPUTERS IN MAJOR CONSTRUCTION ORGANIZATIONS
Moscow EKONOMIKA STROITEL'STVA in Russian No 3, Mar 81 pp 41-45

[Article by A. F. Sergiyenko, candidate of economic science, chief of the PEU
[Economic Planning Administration] of the Clavtyumenneftegazstroy [Main Administra-
tion for Construction of Petroleum and Gas Industry Enterprises in Tyumen Oblast];
V. S. Belichev, director of the IVTs [Information-Computer Center] of the
Glavtyumenneftegazstroy; and A. A. Hezhlumov, IVTs department chief]

[Text] In 1973, an information-computer center (IVTs) was established in the Main
Administration for Construction of Petroleum and Gas Industry Enterprises in Tyumen
Oblast; it was based on the Yes 1020 computer with subsequent use of AP-6b inter-
active terminals; the center was established to improve the organization, planning
and management of construction of facilities around the oil and gas deposits.

It was assumed that using computers in the IVTs would first of all help the con-
struction subdivisions of the main administration in the stage of engineering pre-
paration of the construction work. For this, centralized storage in computer
memory and use of normative and reference data was planned to be used in forming
individual facility and consolidated schedules for construction and installation
work, checking the balance of plan tasks with the level of resources on hand and to
be allocated, determining the need for materials, equipment and manpower, calcula-
tions of normative standard net production and the like. It was assumed that in the
IVTs, there would be concentrated all the basic plan, accounting and budgetary cal-
culations and organized the centralized storage of a common reference information
base on the course of activity of all subdivisions of the construction organization,
the compilation and calculations of network models, the calculations of long-term
and annual calendar plans for contract activity, the calculations of the need for
resources by the physical amounts of work, the deficiencies by measures being de-
veloped and others. It was intended that the lVTs would provide information to all
the subdivisions of the construction organization on the numerous questions neces-
sary for normal operation. It was believed that the IVTs activity would make it
possible to reduce the number of personnel engaged in the various levels of manage-
ment of the construction work. Seven years have passed, but the expected effect
from the introduction of the computer in construction work implemented by the main
administration has not been obtained. In analyzing this situation, many reasons

were uncovered that prevented accomplishment of the tasks assigned with the aid of
the computer.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First, the construction industry is organizationally and legislatively inadequately
prepared for the introduction of complex automated management systems. Thus, it
makes no sense to transfer to a computer the existing technique for planning basic
tasks and economic indicators only from the level reached, since the existing eco-
nomic services of the construction organization are successfully handling this with
less outlays for labor and resources. And the reaults of calculations, based on

a direct account, using network methods of planning. etc., obtained with the compu-
ter when management decisions are made. are purely informative, since they still do
not have a developed base. For example, in planning the workers' wage fund it may
turn out that substantially fewer resources have been provided for the planned
amount of work by budgetary pricing than that obtained in planning from the level
reached. However, this still does not mean that the decisions will be made to re-
duce the workers’ wage fund for the planned period, since this may undermine the
production economics of the organization. Such a situation may become only the
basis for analysis of the reasons the disparity resulted and for finding ways to
eliminate them as quickly as possible; such a situation may be caused by both an im-
perfection in the budgetary pricing system and mistakes in organizing and planning
construction work. To introduce into the practice of construction work a planning
system based on a direct account, in our view, the conditions required are coverage
by this system of planning of all construction organizations in a given region and
the presence with that of an approved procedure for calculating plan indicators.

Second, up to now, established plan indicators do not balance with physical resour-
ces allocated and exiscing production capacities of the organizations. For example,
if computer calculations show that the work program outlined by the plan cannot be
fulfilled with available production capacities, even taking into account the possi-
bility of increasing them, this still does not mean that plan tasks will be reduced
when the calculations are presented to the appropriate higher authorities. In such
cases, a recommendation is usually made to find reserves of the necessary size to
make up for the shortages in production capacities, to raise the level of organiza-
tion of production, to improve the technology of performing construction and instal-
lation work, to introduce achievements of science and new technology, but not to

change the plan tasks.

of course, both in the first and the second case, it cannot be said that the calcu-
lations made on the computer were not needed, even though they did not yield the
results desired. They were needed to keep management properly informed when
decisions are made on managing the construction. The effect of this information
may even be considerable, since the director of the organization sees the real pic-
ture of the disparity in the decisions made and may forecast his solutions, gradu-
ally "pull up" the actual level of organization of production to that stipulated by
the computer calculations or find ways to eliminate the deviations noted. However,
it must be especially noted that under the current organization of planning and
management of construction work, outlays to prepare this type of information are
very substantial and at times are not offset by the effect obtained from making use
of it.

Therefore, before preparing any information for a computer, there must be thorough
consideration of just how necessary it is to making decisions on management and what
is the expected economic effect from using it in the practice of managing construc-
tion work. In addition, it is not always possible to achieve the required objec-
tivity in the calculations, which lowers the effectiveness of using a computer.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

Third, the precise calculations made on a computer, for example, for requirements
for physical resources are not always the basis for allocation of them, because
physical resources are aften allocated being guided by nonformalized considerations
or grounds for which manual calculations are quite suitable. Naturally, the ques-
tion arises, why them are these precise calculations necessary if in other organiza-
tions they are trusted in the same way as manual calculations?

fourth, when the computer was introduced into construction work, neither the organi-
zation directors nor middle level managers were prepared for this. None of them
got into the potential capabilities of the computer for improving the organization
of management of construction; all were occupied with current duties; the needed ex-
perience of introducing computers in related organizations was not there; there were
gaps in the relations between the ASU developers and the top level of management of
construction. As a result of this, the mid-level management staff of the main
administration was engaged in using the computer.

The computers were loaded with ank kind of problem to ensure maximum utilization of
them. In the first place, there were strong attempts to use the computers to auto-
mate office operations: wage accounting. accounting of physical production stocks
available in bases and warehOuses, compilation of consolidated statistical reporting,
etc. In the process, by decisions of the main administration, these functions were
not assigned to the information-computer center.

Fifth, the information-computer center was charged with the responsibility of col-
letting the information for all subdivisions of the main administration, but was
given no rights at all to ensure this acquisition. As a result, the main administra-
tion subdivisions did not deliver the information to the IVTs on time and the

quality was poor.

Sixth, implementation of the tasks described above was to have achieved a reduction
in labor outlays and numbers of administrative and managerial personnel in the sub-
divisions and staff of the main administration. But this did not happen; the number
of workers is not being reduced. but growing, in particular, through staffing of the
information-computer center. The labor outlays for the noncentralized creation of
the program and information base for the tasks mentioned above through the efforts
of just the information-computer center are very substantial, and the introduction
and use of them in the construction industry unprepared for automation are so inef-
fective that this must be stated: the computer capacities in the main administra-
tion at this stage of development of production relations established in construc-
tion are great and must be reduced.

It seems to us that the same situation with the use of large computers exists in
other major construction organizations too and this question should not be ignored.
It is not a question of whether or not it is necessary to ease the work of econo-
mists or accountants, since hardware facilitating accounting and computing opera-
tions is badly needed here. But for these operations there is small hardware:

microcomputers, minicomputers, accounting machines. data recorders, etc.; for now it
is simply inefficient to use for these purposes large computers with the modern

level of development of peripherals and networks of communication in construction
organizations.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As is known, construction is a very complex economic mechanism because of the varie-
ty of processes and resources fitted in than, the plurality of participants in the
process and the diversity of their activity, and the peculiarities of the conditions
for performing work, in particular, in Western Siberia. These complexities engender
a host of unresolved problems in equipment. technology and organization of construc-
tion. To solve many of these problems, computers, of course, are not needed, since
they are most often solved by simply following the rules of the $81? [construction
standards and regulations], and observing the decisions of the work organization
plan and work accomplishment plan (POR and PPR). But there are a number of problems
where a computer would be invaluable, for example, for centralized storage of common
reference information on the cOurse of activity of all subdivisions of a construc-
tion organization, compilation and calculation of network models, the labor plan,
long-term, annual and calendar plans for contract activity, need of resources by
physical amounts of work. miscalculation of measures on developing oil and gas
industrial deposits. etc.

Information of a varying degree of consolidation is needed to make a number of plan
calculations based on the normative base that exists in construction and for the
level of the main administration. The computer can be an invaluable aid in consoli-
dating information too. Here roughly are those questions in which, in our opinion,
it is necessary to use a computer in construction organizations.

Computer operation practice in the main administration shows that on the scale of a
construction main administration, it is necessary to establish an IVTs with a
powerful hardware base for processing, storing, transmitting and displaying informa-
tion, a ramified network of communication throughout the entire region and centrally
developed machine programs that reflect approved techniques for calculating techni-
cal and economic indicators. The activity of the IVTs is currently being restruc-
tured at the main administration to raise the efficiency of using computers. An
effort is underway to set up a centralized bank of normative and reference informa-
tion as the base for building a management information system for the main admini-
stration for decision-making. The hardware for the information-reference system is
based on two Yes 1033 computers and data teleprocessing equipment, in particular,

by using the AP-64 and AP-70 interactive terminals. Using these interactive termi-
nals equipped with displays. the main administration management staff can have ac-
cess to all computing facilities and become a participant in the computing process.
As a rule, workers at the lower and mid levels of the management staff of the main
administration compile the appropriate information for preparing managing decisions.
It is prepared by various functional subdivisions of the main administration and by
each office individually through its own channels and methods of acquisition; there-
fore, the same information coming in from various sources is often contradictory and
unobjcctive. Creating the centralized normative-reference bank using the computer
hardware complex and data teleprocessing equipment will make it possible to put
preparation of information in good order and preclude cases of contradiction, dis-
tortion and duplication of information.

Workers in the lower and mid levels of the management staff of the main administra-
tion will have to continually maintain the centralized information-reference bank in
working condition by independently adding to and correcting the information stored in
the computer. As a result, all workers on the management staff of the main admini-
stration will be using common information.

59

FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time, these very workers themselves become participants in the automa-
tion process. Hhile expending their labor to create the information base, they en-
counter the computer hardware and the specific problems and difficulties in collect-

ing and processing the information which are solved more simply by these same
workers on the management staff.

In addition, the IVTs is performing the preparatory work associated with carrying

out the decisions stipulated by the decree of 12 July 1979 by the CPSU Central Com-
mittee and the USSR Council of Ministers concerning the improvement of the economic
mechanism in construction. The normative-reference base and software are being de-
veloped to carry out the engineering and economic preparation of the work. Pass-

ports are being compiled for objects-analogs that are formed by the computers on the
basis of budgetary documentation. part IV of the norms of the Construction Standards

and Regulations, YeRYeR [regional unified unit cost rates], YeR [expansion unknown],
price lists, dictionaries and reference books.

It is necessary to note that in petroleum and gas industrial construction, in plan-
ning. and especially with the development of unitized sets construction, it is pos-
sible to use the concept of "object-analog" with a certain degree of error. This is
the reservoirs, separators, automated measuring facilities, boiler flues, gas puri-
fication facilities, etc. After calculating on the computer according to the budge-
tary documentation and norms of the Construction Standards and Regulations the need
for the resources to build these facilities, and after making the necessary refine-
ments according to the working drawings and other project-estimate documentation,
selected data will be able to be adopted as the normative-reference information

for the objects-analogs.

For linearly extended facilities, external networks and communications. the set of
the amount of work and resources for performing it for a unit of expanse of these
facilities is taken as the analog, while for a shop of compressor and pump stations-
for one aggregate of a specific type (capacity, performance).

In the process of forming passports for the facilities, the computer makes it possi-
ble to consolidate unit work, to make an automatic distribution of the work and re-
sources selected from the Construction Standards and Regulations by performers with
regard to established specialization, to make an element-by-element breakdown of di-
rect outlays (i.e. the possibility emerges of singling out the cost of physical re-
sources from the total cost of the work), to determine the full cost of the work
with regard to plan accumulations and factors of limited outlays, and to determine
the estimated (normative) labor-intensity and wage fund both for consolidated types
of work and for the facility as a whole. The set of objects-analogs may correspond
to an advance startup complex, the project as a whole, a program of work for a plan
period, etc.

In addition, the computer is used to form facility-by-facility network (linear)
schedules of construction and installation work. After correlating these schedules
to the established deadlines for completion of construction of the facilities and
combining them into a single schedule for construction. the computer is used to make
a disrribution of the amount of work and resources for performing it by quarters of
the planned year and to check the balance of the plan with the resources with output
of some recommendations on necessary changes in production capacities of the con-
struction organizations and suspenses for performing the work for commissioning the
production capacities and facilities on time.

160

FOR OFFNJA1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. with the help of the computer, a consolidated priority schedule is derived for
commissioning production capacities and facilities with a distribution of work by
performers and deadlines for delivery of materials and basic equipment. Based on
the calculated data, for each performer is built a long-term brigade flow with re-
gard to transfer from facility to facility. With the data on the analog facilities
stored in the computer as normative-reference information, based on the title lists
of the projects that are now an invariable plan document, one can computer the need
for materials, equipment and manpower by performers for the entire period of con-
struction as well as the need for resources to fit Out specific deposits.

Construction industry workers have to learn how to use the developed system and
with the aid of the computer prepare definitive solutions, specifying different
versions of input information to obtain alternatives of possible solutions. The
psychological barrier, which still exists, in our view, in many production workers,
with respect to automated management systems, has to be overcome so that they
become active users of the computers rather than just observers and critics.

we would like to touch on the questions of cost-reduction, stabilization and in a
number of cases even reduction of the number of workers on the management staff when
the computer is used in major construction organizations.

The reduction, carried out annually. in pay costs for administrative and managerial
personnel in construction organizations on the scale of four to six percent for all
practical purposes is not achieving its goal. The limited allocations. introduced
several years ago, for pay of management staff are also not yielding the expected
result since with the introduction of them, the management staff has essentially not
been reduced. but the construction organizations have been permitting overruns and
sometimes significantly exceeding the established limits.

In our view, there is now a real possibility of reducing the cost of the management
staff and the number of workers on it. This is what has to be done to accomplish
this:

transfer as much as possible all procedures for calculating technical and economic
indicators of plan activity of a construction organization to a computer, after
reinforcing this by a special decision;

organize the flow of information for reporting only through information-computer
centers with orientation to making use of the existing pool of ASU hardware. With
that, by-passing the IVTs to send any report and information to higher authorities
has to be categorically prohibited;

using the computer hardware and communication facilities, organize centralized
acquisition, storage and presentation of information in any combination of it for
management decision-making;

develop and use strict, scientifically substantiated normative provisions, confirmed
by practice, for the number of management staff personnel of organizations; and
increase the responsibility of organization directors for, and stir their interest
in, proper use of computer hardware and complying with the normative provisions
stated above.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This conclusion can be drawn from what has been said: To raise the efficiency of

introduction of computers and mathematical methods in the construction industrv, it
is necessary to extensively enlist workers at all levels of the management staff of
a construction organization to create and maintain a centralized information-refer-

ence bank and to perform computing operations with the aid of the computer and data
teleprocessing facilities.

In the Summary Report by the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th party congress, it
was pointed out that a seemingly simple and very prosaic cause-a proprietary

attitude toward social property and the ability to fully and expediently make use of
everything that we have-has become the core of economic policy. To achieve this is
an important task in all sectors of economic practice.

COPYRIGRT: Stroyizdat, 1981

8545
C50: 1863/220

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UIXJ 62l.73:621.7.077
AUTOMATIC)! 0P MULTI-PASS SHEET-MHI‘AL STAMPING USING MNSTRIAL ROMS

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 6. Jun 81 pp 25-26

[ Article by Doctor of Technical Sciences Ye. I. Senenov and Candidates of Tech-
nical Sciences 8. A. Skomdmov. H. A. Kryuchkov and B. Suleymanov]

[Text] Analysis of the advisability of using industrial robots in sheet-metal
stamping shows that one of the most effective areas of their application is the
automation of multi-pass stamping on single-position presses. which are widespread
at the present time in sheet-metal stamping shops [1-)].

Among the main factors affecting the arrangement of robot engineering complexes
for sheet-metal stamping and the composition of their equipment are the technology

of production of articles, the production rate of tr: complex and the possibilities
of production areas.

 

".‘he figure shows a variant of the arrangement of a robot engineering complex mount
for the multi-pass stamping of the casing of the reflector of an electric train

lamp. This robot engineering com lex was developed in the All-Union Correspondence
Mechanical Engineering Institure Moscow) and made up according to a tectmological

163

FOR OFVW‘JAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

principle with installation of the equipment in the sequence in which the techno-
logical passes are made. It contains a twin-crank double-action press 3 with a
force of 1000/650 kH, accomplishing the first operation of parts manufacture, a
sheet-metal feeder 4 which feeds sheet-metal blanks lubricated on both sides from
a packet into the position in which the blank is seized by the hand of an indus-
trial robot; 3 single-crank press 1 with a force of 1000 kl! which accomplishes the
secon operation of parts manufacture; a stacker of parts 2 which stacks finished
parts and two industrial robots 5 and 6, which service the presses and auxiliary
transport and orienting equipment.

The work of all the robot engineering complex equipment is accomplished in the
following sequence: the industrial robot 5 seizes the sheet-metal blank (420x 330):
x l m) lubricated on both sides, issued into the position of seizure by the sheet-
metal feeder 4, transfers and places it in the die of double-action press 3, and
then industrial robot 5 again moves into the position of seizure of the next sheet-
metal blank, and the press performs the first operation, drawing. After the draw-
ing of the part on press 5 has been completed in the upper position of its sliding
bearings the blank is ejected from the matrix and the hand of industrial robot 6
grasps it and with a circular motion transfers and places the blank in the die of
press 1, where the second operation is performed—holes are punched in the blank.
After that operation has been performed and the blank is ejected from the matrix
the industrial robot 6 transfers it to the parts storage 2 and sets it on the
clasps of the latter. The stacker stores the blanks in trays.

Other variants of arrangement of the equipment and the use of single industrial
robot and of a press with interchangeable dies are possible.

If the stamping is accomplished without oiling tie blanks or they are oiled by
special equiment, for example, jet spray nozzles, set in the stamping zone, one
can use instead of sheet-metal feeders stackers of parts or devices for feeding
sheet-metal blanks into the position where they are seized by the industrial robots.

The sheet-metal stacker is desigied so that after a package of sheet-metal blanks
has been loaded on the motor-operated table the feeding rollers are pressed against
the upper sheet of the stack of blanks. Upon comand coming from their drive
mechanism the rollers start to rotate and, interacting with the upper sheet as a
result of forces of friction which arise between the roller- surface and the sheet,
force the latter into the slot between the support strip and the strip of the
equipment for limiting the number of fed blanks, and then between the lubricating
rollers. Here the sheet is lubricated on both sides and is set in the position of
seizure by a robot. The diameter of the feeding rollers and the gear ratio of the
rotary mechanism of the feeding roller were selected so that they assure the push-
ing of the sheet through the slot during one tum of the feeding roller.

With increased height of the package of sheets, upon the signal of the correspond-
ing sensors the drive mechanism for elevating the sheet feeder table is automatic-
ally switched on; with it the table with the package of sheets is automatically
set in the starting position.

The work of the parts stacker during stacking of intemediate blanks in trays con-
sists in this, that after the stamping the industrial robots transfer the blanks

164
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to horizontal shelves of rotating levers. During vertical movement below a special
cross-piece, vacuum or magnetic clasps contact the blank and the rotating levers
are withdrawn. The blank is held by the clasp and stacked on the tray and the
stacker is also retumed to the initial position upon issuance of a contend from
the sensors.

Intermediate blanks can be fed to the industrial robots and later transferred to
the stamp tool by the parts stacker.

To set the filled tray a device for rotation of the load-bearing plate is provided,
on which there is a special cross-section. hiring movement of the cross-section
with vacuum or magnetic clasps the blank is drawn off the tray, transported ver-
tically and at on the horizontal shelves of the parts stacker rotating levers. The
blank is moved further by the robot.

When necessary the parts stacker can assure feeding of blanks from the tray in a
single pass, the reception from an industrial robot of blanks oi' the next pass and
their transport with a 180° tum upon the oommd of control for stacking in an-
other tray.

Industrial robots of robot engineering complexes are equipped with clasps which
assure the possibility of grasping only one sheet-metal blank and a system for
monitoring the grasped blanks. All the robot engineering complex equipment is pro-
vided emergmcy blocking devices which eliminate breakdown of the main or auxiliary
equipment when malfmctions arise in the work of equiment. The complex is suc-
cessfully iunctioning at the Riga Car Building Plant.

The main hmctional units of robot engineering complexes are being demonstrated in

the Mechanical Engineering Pavilion of the Ebrhibition of Achievements of the
National Economy of the USSR.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Noritsyn, I. .\., and Vlasov, V. I. Avtomatizatsiya l mekhanizatsiya teklno-
loacheskikh protsessov kovki i shtampovki (Automation and Hechanization of
Technological Processes of Forging and Stamping). Moscow, Mashinostroymiye,
1965.

2. Rovinskiy, G. :l. Pressovoye oborudovaniye listoshtampovocl'nykh tsekhov (Press
Equipment or Sheet-Metal Stamping Shops). Moscow, Mashinostroyeniye, 1960.

3. Selyanin, P. N. Promyshlennyye roboty (Industrial Robots). Moscow, Hashim-
stroycniye, 1975.

COPYiiIGﬂT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniyn", 1981

2174 ,
cs0: 8144/1447

165

FOR OFFTPTM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.311-51:681.3
USING COMPUTERS IN POHER SYSTEMS: FROM EXYERIENCE 0P DONBASS POHER SYSTEM

Moscow PRIHENENIYE EVH V ENERGOSISTEHAKH: Iz OPYTA DONBASSENERGO in Russian 1981
(signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 2-5. 181-182

[Annotation. preface and table of contents from book "Use of Computers in Power Sys-
tems: From the Experience of the Donbass Power System". by Il'ya Osipovich Kneller,
Energoizdat. 8000 copies. 184 pages]

[Text] In this book. the author covers the questions of using computers for real-
time supervisory and organizational-economic control of a power system. He discus-
ses the basic stages of introduction of computers in power systems; the questions of
acquisition. processing and transmission of information are considered: he describes
the basic problems solved by using computers. Considerable attention is paid to
questions of organization of operation of computer centers and subscriber stations
in power systems. Technical-economic substantiation of use of computers is illus-
trated with examples.

This book is intended for power system engineers and technicians, and for design and
scientific research organizations engaged in development of ASU's in power
engineering.

Preface

Modern power engineering is a complex system. It is characterized not only by the
presence of a large number of elements making up the system with multicircuit direct
and feedback couplings. but also by certain special features: continuous generation
of power and the complex nonlinear dependency of the basic technical-economic indi-
cators on the process of generation and distribution of power and heat. Power gen-
eration and distribution depend to a considerable extent on weather, time-zone and
other conditions.

The Donbass power system is one of the largest in the Soviet Union. The latest do-
mestic power equipment is being assimilated and operating in the power system:

pilot models of the 800,000 kw units at the Slavyanskaya and Uglegorskaya GRBS's,
the 800 kV DC Donbass-Volgograd power transmission system and the 750 kV AC Donbass-
Western Ukraine power transmission system.

The electrical networks of the power system cover a territory of over 600,000 km2

and provide a centralized supply of power to industry, railroads, agriculture and
the population of Donetskaya and Voroshilovgradskaya oblssts.

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II uuuld hr lmpnﬂﬂlblc to control this complex and large power system today without
using cybernetic methods. A major area in the efforts to improve power system con-
trol over the last decade has been the extensive use of computers.

Due to the complexity of the Donbass Power System as a controlled object, without
computers it would be impossible to solve the problems of optimal distribution of
resistive loads between power stations, to make an economic selection of operating
units, to compute the steady state of flow distribution in the main network, etc.

Realization of a number of optimizational calculations, the performance of which is
possible only with a computer, yields a substantial economic effect.

The amount of organizational-economic information is continuously growing, especial-
ly under the conditions of centralization of control functions. Efficient proces-

sing of the large number of indicators (over a billion per year) would be impossible
without the extensive use of computers, informational and managerial hardware.

In the Donbass Power System, where introduction of computers began in 1964, they are
used in three main areas.

1. A computer is used for real-time supervisory control. In the first stage, com-
puters were used for individual calculations of steady and emergency states. Later.
programs for optimizational calculations were introduced, an information computing
system for electrical calculations was established, and cathode ray tubes (CRT's)
were introduced for output and input of information. Development of an automated
system for supervisory control (ASDU) with automatic input of information and
management of optimal states in real time is the next task in this area.

2. Computers are used to improve organizational-economic control. A brief list of
this work: definition of plans for generating electricity and heat. analysis of
sale and cost of power, accounting and distribution of physical resources and per-
sonnel, mechanization of accounting and calculation operations, development of
information computing and information retrieval systems for the generating activity
of the power system. Full mechanization and automation of all computing work under
the conditions of centralization of the functions of power system control is the
most important task in the current stage of improving the control of organizational-
economic activity.

3. Computers are used to control the process of the large-capacity power units.

The information computing systems that control the 800 HR units at the Slavyanskaya
and Uglegorskaya GRES's effect monitoring of the technological parameters and calcu-
lation of the technical-economic indicators of operation of the units and carry out
a number of functions for monitoring pre-emergency and emergency operations. This
monitoring and calculations are performed in real time and create the prerequisites
for maintaining an economic mode of operation of the units.

The successful introduction of computers in the power system was based on the works
on theory and practice of cybernetic control of a number of scientific research,
design and training institutes {1-6. 27].

At the end of 1976, more than 200 programs were in operation in the power system to
solve problems of various classes on nine second-generation computers installed in
the computer center (VTs) for the power system and in the facilities.

167

FOR nrerrru. "CF ONIV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The new stage of Introduction or computers. begun in 1975, is characterized by third-
generatinn computers being put into service. the systems approach to solving a num-
ber of problems with a common data bank, the development of complexes of interre-

lated computers operating in the real-time mode, and by the development of an
automated control system (ASU).

The purpose of this book is to bring out the experience of the Donbass Power System
in using computers to solve problems of real-time supervisory and organizational-
economic control. The author set himself the task based on the experience of one
power system to illustrnte the stages of introduction of computers; the development
of an information base and system for acquisition, transmission and processing of

information; operation of computers and solving a number of problems with them; and
the effectiveness of using computers.

A considerable portion of the material presented reflects the results of a multiyear
effort by the associates of the department of the ASU for the Donbass Power System.
and the author is grateful to V. R. Drachev, Ye. A. Kardasheva, A. 1. Podol'skiy

and others for assistance rendered in preparing material for the book.

Please send comments and suggestions on the book to: Izdatel'stvo "Bnergiya",
113114. Moscow, M-llb. Shlyuzovaya nab., 10.

The author
Table of Contents
Preface 3
Chapter 1. Main Stages of Introducing Computers in a Power System 6
1-1. Use of the "Ural-2" Computer for Power Engineering Calculations 6
1-2. Use of Second-Generation Computers ll
1-3. Development of an Automated Control System Based on Third-Generation
Computers 16
Chapter 2. Informational Characteristics of a Power System 19
2-1. Quantitative and Qualitative Characteristics of Information Flows 18
2-2. The Information Acquisition and Processing System with Use of
Computers 27
2-3. Practical Methods for Checking the Validity and Accuracy of
Information 30

2-4. Organization of Information Flows in the Problem of "Optimization of
Conditions and Calculation of Technical-Economic Indicators for the

CRES" 39

Chapter 3. Department of the ASU for the Power System 65
3-1. Structure of the ASU Department. Hardware Operation. Organization

of Calculations with Computers 65

3-2. Operation and Development of General and Special Software 78

168
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 4. Problems of Real-Time Supervisory and Operational-Technical
Control
4-1. Optimal Distribution of Resistive Loads
4-2. Calculation of Steady State of Power Network
6-3. Calculations of short-Circuit Currents and Selection of Settings
of Relay Protection Using Computers
4—4. Data Bank for Power Engineering Problems
h-S. Calculation of Real-Time Technical-Economic Indicators

Chapter 5. Problems of Organizational-Economic Control
5-1. Information Processing System for Problems of Organizational-
Bconomic Control
5-2. Main Centers for Information Acquisition and Processing
5-3. Complex of Programs for Fixed Capital Accounting
S-é. Computerized Accounting of Commodity Stocks
5-5. Solving Plan and Economic Problems with Computers

Appendix. Effectiveness of a Power System ASU

References
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

8545
CSO: 1863/235

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.311-51:681.3
AUTOMATED POWER CONTROL SYSTEM WITH THIRD-GENERATION COMPUTERS

Moscow PRIMENENIYE EVH V ENERCOSISTEMAKH: IZ OPYTA DONBASSENERGO in Russian 1981
(signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 16-18

[Section 1-3 from book "Use of Computers in Power Systems: From the Experience of
the Donbass Power System", by Il'ya Osipovich Kneller. Bnergoizdat, 8000 copies,
184 pages]

[Text] 1-3. Development of Automated Control System Based on Third-Generation
Computers

In 1975. the M-4030 and "-6000 third-generation computers were installed in the

power system and development of the power system ASU began. The main features of
this stage:

1) establishment of the multimachine computer complex made up of three M-6000 com-
puters (set numbers 2, 8 and 9). the H-4030 and the Yes-1040 computers; implementa-
tion of interms‘hine exchange of information; diagram of the information computer

complex of the ASDU iautomated supervisory control system] for the Donhass Power
System is shown in fig. 1-3;

2) operation of the H-6000 computers in the real-time mode with input of tele-
mechanicnl information from power system facilities;

3) development and implementation of the IVK [information computer complexes] (in
real-time node) for real-time supervisory control of the power system; CRT's

(alphameric and graphic) are used extensively in these complexes for information
display;

4) introduction of specialized and general-purpose data banks. development of
information support system; introduction of the computer collective-use system;

5) computer operation in the multiprogramming mode using the ASVT DOS, Yes DOS and
Yes 05 (H-4030) operating systems; FORTRAN. COBOL, PL and other algorithmic
languages are widely used;

6) development of information acquisition system using data transmission equipment
(APD) and subscriber stations (AP); direct input of information from APD (without
perforated tape) into computers;

170
Key:
1. “-6000 computer No. 1 with standard set No. 2
2. H-6000 computer No. 2 with standard set No. 8
3. M-6000 computer No. 3 with standard set No. 9
4. H-4030 computer
5. Yes-1040 computer
6. UTM -— telcmechanical equipment
7. UUMD -- magnetic disk storage control unit
8. RS -- interface splitter
9. STCI -- television graphic display system with five displays
10. [ch -- supervisory information display unit
11. Dialog -- CRT information display system
12. Tst - central supervisory station
13. CRT
14. SK? -- collective-use system
15. Yes-7906

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. 1981

8565

cso: 1863/235 171
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.311—51:681.3
ECONOMIC EFFECTIVENESS OF POHER SYSTEM AUTOMATED CONTROL SYSTEM

Moscow PRIHENENIYE EVM V ENERGOSISTEMAKH: IZ OPYTA DONBASSENERGO in Russian 1981
(signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 174-177

[Appendix from book "Use of Computers in Power Systems: From the Experience of the
Donbnss Power System". by ll'ya Osipovich Kneller, Energoizdat, 8000 copies. 18‘
pages}

[Text] Appendix
Effectiveness of Automated Power Control System

The quantitative values of the economic effect achievable in solving optimizational
problems may be derived by using an algorithm. the essence of which consists in the
following: Power system operating conditions have to be modeled twice for a common
period of time (T) with a computer-once for manually maintained conditions and once
for those maintained with computers; then the economic characteristics of these
models are compared. For the problem_of optimizing distribution of resistive loads
among power stations, this algorithm consists in the following.

Using the computer, the total fuel consumption for the power system (vactual) is

calculated for the period of time T on the basis of the actual load curves for the
power station units and the corresponding KhOP [incremental rate characteristic] of
the operating composition of equipment (when conditions are maintained manually).

For this same period T, the computer is used to perform an optimal distribution of
power system curves among the power stations and fuel consumption Voptl is

defined. This calculation is made for the same incremental rate characteristic and
composition of units. and then the difference is determined

15v - v

actual - voptimum'

This difference 15V is also the maximum possible savings in fuel obtainable in solv—
ing the problem.

In the Donbass Power System. computer calculations were made for 60 days in 1974
using this algorithm and the following result was obtained: fuel savings were 0.3
percent or 1.113.000 rubles per year. In the process. the assumption was made that
the initial values of all factors coincide with real values. and the control actions

172
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

(optimal power station load curves) derived in the calculation are realized without
deviations. In reality, the error in determining the initial factors and realizing
control actions may be very substantial. Quantitative estimates of the effect of
optimizing power system conditions when errors are present may be derived through
statistical evaluation of the results of the cybernetic modeling of the processes
of movement and processing of information [3].

As a result of statistical calculations to estimate the effect of accuracy of input
information and degree of realization.of calculated optimal curves on the optimiza-
tion function-fuel consumption in this problem, the value of the economic effect
was reduced to 0.23 percent or 790,000 rubles per year.

A similar algorithm was used to calculate the economic effectiveness of the IVK
[information computer complex] "Optimization and Calculation of GEES Technical-
Economic Indicators.“ In the mode “Actual" of this complex, fuel consumption

Vactual was determined for past periods according to the actual load curves and

power characteristics of the units (see section 1—2). For these same periods. in
the mode "Optimum." fuel consumption voptimum was calculated with optimal distribu-

tion of the actual curve of the power station loads among its units. The maximum
possible fuel savings was derived as the difference between actual and optimum fuel
consumption. The economic effect was determined using one GRBS as an example.
Statistical processing of the calculations made daily throughout 1975 in the modes
"Actual" and "Optimum" showed that the maximum effect corresponds to a 1.3-percent
reduction in fuel consumption equivalent to 650,000 rubles per year. Due to a num-
ber of technical limitations (shutdown of mill systems, slagging of boilers, etc.),
the optimal curves could not have been fully realized; therefore, this economic
effect has to be reduced. To identify the economic effect reduction value, an
effort was made to determine fuel consumption reduction dependency on the degree of
realization of the optimal curves. Calculation results showed that this function
is linear. Realization of optimal GRES curves is no more than 45 percent, which
reduces the lVK economic effect to 0.58 percent of annual fuel consumption. This
complex of programs was introduced in three power stations. To analyze the economy
of the optimal conditions for operation of the Donbass Power System high voltage
networks. a series of calculations were made as follows. Optimal transformation
ratios were defined according to the program for optimization for one of the condi-
tions (winter peak). Then, on the assumption that these transformation ratios are
shown in the corresponding facilities, calculations were made for a series of
balances to compare the power loss before and after optimization of the conditions.
The average reduction in loss for 15 conditions (9.5 + 1 143.4 MVA, or 4.5 percent)
shows that substantial savings can be obtained for numerous different conditions
even in the case of establishing under different conditions the same transformation
ratios (optimal for one of the balances). The total savings for the power system
through power loss reduction in the main network was 280,400 rubles per year.

Calculations on selecting optimal schemes in distribution networks have been made
over a number of years in the power system. Calculations for 36 Donbass cities
showed that power losses can be reduced 5 to 30 percent thanks to optimization.
For example. in zhdanov'a distribution network. power losses in the calculation on

the original network were Factual

were P = 1086.7 kw. Thus. loss reduction in the network was 520.7 k".
optimum

FOR OFFTCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With a period of use of highest load by consumers of Thighest load = 6000 h and

cos - 0.9. loss time - 4300 h and power savings through loss reduction was
520.7 X 4300 - 2,239,010 kWh.

Table A1 shows the values of annual economic effect from introduction of the pro-
gram for selecting optimal schemes in distribution networks for 36 Donbass cities.

 

Table A1
Savings from optimi- Outlays for compu- Annual savings,
Year zstion, rubles ter calculations,rubles rubles
1973 177,100 5,900 171,200
1975 158,100 5.900 152.200
1975 52,900 1,900 61,000
Total ' 378,100 13.700 364.400

Let us now consider the effectiveness of an organizational-economic problem. of
importance from the point of view of mechanization is the problem of maintaining
customer accounts for power sales. In the Donbass Power System, there are up to

2 million customers which on the average make up to 20 million payments per year.
To maintain the accounts and monitor payments coming in, the power sales division
has large staffs of accounting workers and supervisors who manually sort receipts,
make various spot checks and financial calculations, and determine the completeness
and timeliness of payments for power. It is quite natural to wish to ease the low-
output manual labor by taking advantage of the large pool of modern computer equip-
ment. The question arises of what equipment to choose and Just what the degree of
mechanization should be to make it efficient for processing the large number of
payments coming in. Besides the traditional manual method, there are two possi-
bilities for solving this problem with punchcard equipment and with computers.

Let us briefly describe each information processing scheme and make a technical and
economic comparison of them.

The Punchcard Machine (SPN) Processing Scheme. The receipts paid by customers at
savings banks come into the computer center's information receiving group. are re-
corded and then sent to the punchcard group. Checking for correctness of punching
is done by verification of the punchcards and counting checks.

The checked files of cards are sorted on an electronic sorter and fed through a tab-
ulator with the VP-3 calculating attachment. As a result of the processing of the
power sales receipts, the following printouts are made: "Arrival of Payments by
Savings Banks and Transfer Dates," "Distribution of Payments by Personal Accounts,"
"Results of Hork of Supervisors for the Month," and others.

Computer Processing of Receipts after They Are Punched. Put on computer magnetic
tape (Ml) for each customer are the personal account number, rate, meter number and
reading and the address. Also recorded in the personal account are the meter read-
ings paid for and payments received for the last 12 months. Receipts paid by custo-
mers are punched on cards, verified and sent to the computer for processing. The
cards are loaded on magnetic tape as they come in during the entire day; at the end

174
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the day. a report is put out on payments received by savings banks and transfer
dates. The payments recorded on tape are sorted by account number and posted to
customer personal accounts. Upon request, printouts may be made on: payments
received by savings banks for any transfer date, work indicators for power sales
sections, information on accounts not paid. results of supervisor's rounds, payments

by events, as well as personal accounts. This algorithm has been implemented on
the "-220 computer.

Let us compare the effectiveness of maintaining accOunts by the methods described
using an analysis of outlays for processing of a document.

Calculations for the technical and economic comparison of the information Vrocessing
methods for customer accounts were made using the example of the Gorlovskoye Depart-
ment of Power Sales with payments received of one million receipts per year.
According to the procedure developed by the TsNIITU [Central Scientific Research and
Technological design Institute for the Organization and Technology of Control], the
total cost of outlays for processing information is calculated by the formula

+
ctot ' cwage + csmart celec + crep + cmat + caux + cother

where cwage is the fund for fixed and supplementary wages of personnel allowing for

social insurance deductions; ca is total deductions for amortization; C is

mort elec
cost of power consumed by equipment; crap is cost of spare parts; cmat is cost of

materials; caux are outlays associated with operation of auxiliary equipment and
implements; and cother are other expenses.

Consolidated in table A2 are the results of calculation of Outlays for manual,
punchcard and computer processing. Thus, with the algorithms described for organi-
zation of calculations, using the “-220 computer for customer accounts is not

effective; the method of processing receipts using punchcard machines turns out to
be more economical.

Table A2 Processing Method
Indicators Manual Puncheerd Computer
Wage fund, rubles 22,032 15,076 7,718
Amortization deductions. rubles -- 1,286 694
Cost of power consumed, rubles - 314 174
Cost of spare parts. rubles -- 1,639 1,003
Cost of materials, rubles -- 959 400
Outlays for auxiliary equipment, rubles -- 479 250
Other expenses. rubles -- 95 95
Outlays for calculation by computer, rubles -- -- 20,200
Total outlays. rubles 22,032 18,648 30,336
Outlays per receipt, kopecks 2.2 1.8 3.03

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. 1981

8545
C50: [863/235

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

ABSTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 'AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCE'. MAY-JUNE 1981
Riga AVTOHATIKA I VYCHISLITEL'NAYA TBKHNIKA in Russian No 3, May—Jun 81 pp 97.99

UDC 681.32d
INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION SERVICE BASED ON COMPUTER NETWORKS

[Abstract of article by Kh. M. Khinov, A. V. Butrimenko, V. N. Kalachev and A. Ye.
Umnov]

[Text] The international information service made available by distrubuted data
banks based on computer networks is a rapidly growing type of information services.
Its export is a very unique form of international trade in which the sale of the
commodity. information and data processing services in this case, does not reduce the
supply of it in the exporting country and does not require any nonrenewable national
resources at all. The major features of the data banks and computer networks are
described. An analysis is made of the current status and prospects for development
of the international market for information services. Discussed are the organiza-
tional-legal questions of setting up and operating international computer networks
which are being worked out intensively and for which there is no historical
experience. Bibi. of 9 titles. 3 figs.

UDC 681.324

DEADLOCK DETECTION DURING INTERACTION OF INFORMATION PROCESSES IN COMPUTER NETHORKS
[Abstract of article by E. V. Zinov'yev and A. A. Strekalev]
[Text] A model of distribution of data elements of processes functioning in parallel
based on Petri nets is discussed. A method is suggested to detect deadlock groups
based on computation of the matrix rank of the deadlock of blocked processes.
Bibi. of 5 titles. 7 figs.

UDC 681.32:519.7l3
DESIGN OF DISCRETE INDUSTRIAL CONTROL DEVICES BASED ON PROGRAMMABLE LOGIC ARRAYS
[Abstract of article by c. Franke and V. P. Chapenko]

[Text] Discussed are different structural realizations with PLM [progranmable logic
arrays . PLA] of control devices resistant to races and chatter of input signals.

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Standard realizations with PLA meeting these requirements are suggested. Three

parts of PLA are singled out: the part representing the conditions of transitions

in the device being designed, the part reflecting the conditions of stability of

the device and the part reflecting the conditions of issuance of output signals.

In PLA structure synthesis. the corresponding PLA parts have to be filled in as a
function of the selected structural realization by the standard form in accordance
with the control graph that describes the device being synthesized. The suggested
method requires few outlays for synthesis. Questions of optimization of the PLA
structure in the process of synthesis are not discussed. Bibl. of 9 titles, 6 figs.,
3 tables.

UDC 519:7
NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF ELIMINATING UNESSENTIAL VARIABLES
[Abstract of article by A. A. Sapozhenko and L. M. Karakhanyan]

[Text] It is proven that eliminating unessential variables with minimization of
partial Boolean functions can lead to exponential growth of the complexity of the
DH? ﬂisjunctive normal forms] derived. Using Akers' algorithm as an example, it is
shown that heuristic algorithms of minimization that use the operation of eliminat-
ing uneasentiul variables may obtain DNF significantly different in complexity from
the minimal as well as DNP that are not deadlock. Bibl. of 9 titles, 7 figs..

1 table.

UDC 519.713

COMBINED IMPLEMENTATION OF SWITCHING FUNCTION SYSTEMS BY A PROGRAMMABLE LOGIC
ARRAY CIRCUIT

[Abstract of article by Ye. S. Bul']

[Text] Suggested is a technique of synthesis of a circuit of programmable logic
arrays (FLA) that implements the system of switching functions, specified in the
set of compositions, as a function of the number of arguments that exceed the num—
ber of PLA inputs. Discussed is a method of determining subfunctions with decompo-
sition of the initial system for selected breakdown of the set of arguments. An
algorithm for selecting the breakdown of the set of arguments is suggested that
allows obtaining a circuit of the minimal or close to minimal number of PLA through
decreasing the multiplicity of the combined decomposition of the functions of the
system. Bibl. of 8 titles, 6 £135., 3 tables.

UDC 519.711.7:681.324
GLOBAL OPTIMAL STRUCTURAL SYNTHESIS
[Abstract of article by D. l. Hladenov and T. A. Stoilov]
[Text] Discussed are questions associated with global optimal structural synthesis
of a data transmission network. The suggested approach has a more general nature.

it is shown that the optimal solution to global structural synthesis cannot be de-
rived using existing solutions to partial problems. The single extremal problem

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cannot be solved in view of the mutual effect between these problems. These effects
are investigated and a general problem of global optimal structural synthesis is
suggested that is formed by the composition of partial problems and which considers
the effect between them. The solution to it is given based on the theory of coor-
dination using the solution to the partial problems. The synthesis is effected by
a single computational logic procedure. Bibl. of 11 titles. 2 figs.

UDC 681.32$.6

CALCULATION OF DISCRETE DEVICE FUNCTIONING VALIDITY TAKING PASSIVE HARCIN 0F
MONITORING TIME INTO ACCOUNT

[Abstract of article by A. H. Romankevich and A. D. Gorozhin]

[Text] Formulas are considered that allow raising the accuracy of calculation of
the probability of detecting malfunctions of discrete devices with monitoring, that
have a passive margin of monitoring time. Bibl. of 1 title.

UDC 681.324:681.3-18l.48
HMLTINICROPROCESSORS IN PACKET SHITCHING NETNORKS
[Abstract of article by J. Sexton]

[Text] This article covers the problems of using microprocessor systems in packet
data transmission networks. Discussed are the trends in development of these sys-
tems. new approaches in solving the problems of systems architecture, organisation
of storage. ensuring reliability. flexibility. restoration of operating capability,
etc. Examples of specific systems are given.

TRANSPORT FUNCTIONS IN X.25 NETVORK UDC 681.326

[Abstract of article by N. Zibert, Yu. S. Podvysotskiy and S. V. Rotanov]

[Text] Functions of the transport level of a system built on the base of the

NKKTT [International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee] recommendation
X.25 are discussed. DisCussed are problems of choosing a list of performable func-
tions based on the relationship between the service offered by the network level
and the service required of the transport level. Bibl. of 9 titles, 7 figs.

UDC 621.317.755
STROBOSCOPIC CONVERSION OF PULSE SIGNALS HITH RANDOM PHASE
[Abstract of article by V. C. Karklin'sh and K. Ya. Krumin'sh]
[Text] Analyzed are nonlinear distortions that occur in stroboscopic coversion of
square pulse signals in the case when the phase of the strobe pulse relative to the
signal being converted is unstable. A comparative analysis is made of the distor-

tions characteristic for analog and discrete stroboscopic converters; ways of
eliminating or minimizing the» are given. Bibl. of 2 titles, figs. 4.

178
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 519.266
DETERMINATION OF STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF RANDOM TIME INTERVALS

IAbstract of article by D. V. Kutsevalov]

iText] The author solves the problem of determining moments of distribution of ran-
dom magnitude by moments of sampling distribution when the sampling values cannot be
precisely measured. He derives an expression to determine the moments of distribu-

tion of an arbitrary order that is applicable to a broad class of distributions.
Bibl. of 2 titles, 1 fig.

UDC 681.325.5-181.4

ORGANIZATION OF COMPUTER-INSTRUMENT INTERACTION IN SYSTEMS FOR AUTOMATION 0F
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCN UITH VARIABLE STRUCTURE

[Abstract of article by S. N. Domaratskiy, 0. S. Zudin and O. Vaynio]

[Text] The authors consider questions of organization of computer-instrument inter-
action in laboratory systems for automation of scientific research that form single-
center computer networks of the scientific research ships of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. They introduce the concept of the process of conducting an automated ex-
periment and consider the interaction of processes occurring in the different instru-
ments participating in the experiment. They point out the advantages of using
standard interfaces; of these. special attention is paid to the HEK [International
Electrotechnical Commission - IEC] instrument bus. They give the structure, des-
cription and example of use of the universal interface card of the Inc bus, built on
the base of a microprocessor and specialized microcircuits of programmable logic

and suitable for interface with the system of the overwhelming majority of instru-
ments with parallel or serial input and (or) output of data that are used in
scientific research automation systems. They consider questions of building pro-
grams that interpret functions of interface with the IEC bus of specific instruments
through the universal interface card. They describe the methods used to organize
laboratory systems for automation of scientific research on the multipurpose scien-
tific research ship of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the "Akademik Mstislav Keldysh."
Bibl. of 16 titles, 6 figs., 1 table.

UDC 519.512
CORRECTNESS EVALUATION OF HXPONENTIAL DISTRIBUTION USAGE IN CLOSED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
iAbstract of article by V. D. Mal'shakov. A. R. Timoshenko and M. B. Tamarkin]
[Text] The authors discuss a two-phase closed queueing system that is a subsystem
of a computer complex with two instruments A and B and two queries. With this exam-
ple. it is shown that using exponential distributions achieves determination of op-
timal solutions by the composition of phases of the system of the given type.
Bibl. of 5 titles, 1 fig.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Zinatne", "Avtomatika i vychislitel'naya tekhnika", 1981

8545
C50: 1863/223 179

FOR OFPTPTAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'ML USE ONLY

UDC 519.72

DISTRIBUTION OF REGULAR MESSAGE FLOWS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Alma-Ata RASPREDELENIXE REGULYARNYKH POTOKOV SOOBSHCHENIY V INFORMATSIONNYKH SISTEHAKH
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 19 Jun 80) pp 2-4

[Annotation and foreword from book "Distribution of Regular Message Flows in Information
Systems". by Vil'zhan Havlyutdinovich Amerbayev. Vladimir Ivanovich Vasil'yev, Igor'
Mikhaylovich Curevich and Ivan Timofeyevich Pak. Izdatel'stvo "Nauka" Kazakhskoy $88,
1,000 copies, 144 pages]

[Text] Playing an important role in the creation of computer centers and the develop-
ment of collective-use information systems is the distribution of regular message flows
circulating within them together with random information flows. There has to date ap-
peared no publication systematically presenting from a unified point of view the prob-
lems associated with the organization and distribution of regular message flows within
information systems. The book here offered the reader to some extent fills this gap.
It examines the distribution of regular. including periodic. message flows within com-
munication—channel switching centers and messages in information-processing centers

comprising large information systems. It presents examples of practical utilization of
methods now developed.

The book is intended for scientists and engineers involved in the planning and design

of information systems with regular message flows as well as for instructors. graduate
students and upper-class students in corresponding VUZ departments.

19 illustrations. 1 table, as bibliography entries.
Foreword

Constituting one component of the infrastructure of contemporary society is a variety
of systems for collecting. storing. transmitting and converting information. Because
of the diversity and complexity of the problems arising in connection with the develop-
ment. introduction and improvement of information systems. and in view of the urgent
need to insure the effective operation of higher-level systems. there arises the need
to define and solve a number of problems associated with the distribution within infor-
mation systems of regular. or determinate, information flows.

The book poses and discusses the problem of determinate time distribution of regular
flows in information systems. Information concerning the coordinates of an n-dimen-
sional object flows periodically or in accordance with a number of fixed algorithms
into one or several communication or processing channels (servicing units). which time-
distribute the messages. The fact that simultaneous transmission of information con-
cerning two or more coordinates is impossible requires solution of the problem of

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time-distribution of the information within the channel of communication. the estab-
lishment of time-distribution criteria in various situations and. by employing these
criteria. organization of optimum transmission of the data.

The first chapter of the book provides a brief survey of the methods of multiplexing
channels of communication. including time-distribution methods. It presents examples
of information systems employing time multiplexing (distribution) of regular. or deter-
minate message flows. It enumerates typical tasks in distributing regular message
flows associated with construction of telemetry and computer systems as well as of data
transmission systems.

The second chapter describes the most widely employed means of distributing message
transmission periods based upon knoun methods of quantizing continuous messages. It
contains expressions for calculating the message transmission periods providing the re-
quired precision.

Discussed in the third chapter are a number of methods of calculating message transmis-
sion duration. Some of these are based upon utilization of the procedure of optimum
quantizing of continuous messages; others take into account the fact of the utilization
of a single communication channel for transmission of messages from several sources of
information. Employing the uncertainty relation as a limit. the authors calculate
optimum fidelities and. thereby. transmission durations with exponential and quadratic
loss criteria.

The fourth chapter is devoted to a discussion of methods of analyzing and distributing
determinate (primarily periodic) message flows.

Chapter 5 describes the apparatus employed in study of the problems of distributing
combined (determinate and stochastic) message flows in a channel of communication. It
discusses the steady-condition and gives expressions for determining the vector describ-
ing the states of the system. It presents analyses of maximum and average queues. a
simulation model and results of statistical modeling. M. A. Hedrish assisted with
preparation of material for this chapter.

The sixth chapter contains examples of the use of the determinate distribution methods
presented in the book to calculate a number of information system characteristics. It
gives expressions for calculating communications channel parameters (throughput. band
width. signal power). Discussed also is the problem of optimum selection of message
transmission durations. The chapter describes a procedure for making optimum selection
of methods of employing information transmission and processing equipment.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Naukn" Kazakhskoy SSR. 1980

8963
CSO: 1863/206-A

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

COMPUTERIZED AUTOMATIC TEACHING SYSTEMS

Minsk AVTOHATIZIROVANNYYE onucuavusaculvz SISTEHY NA nszs rvn in Russian 1980 (signed
to press 6 Jun 80) pp 2, 169-170, 175

[Annotation. appendix and table of contents from book "Computerized Automatic Teaching
Systems". by A. F. Chernyavskiy (ed.). A. H. Hukharskiy. A. V. Orlov, L. V. Strikeleva.
A. I. Tarnopol'skiy and N. I. Zelenkov, Izd-vo 360 in. V. I. Lenina, 2000 copies. 176
pages]

[Excerpts] This book discusses the problem of the pedagogical application of computers
and various aspects of its solution using automatic teaching systems (ATS). 0n the ba-
sis of experience accumulated in the development and introduction of an experimental
computerized teaching system (EVOS-BGU) [the experimental computerized teaching system
of the Order of the Red Banner of Labor Belorussian State University imeni V. I. Lenin]
and analysis of existing foreign ATS it sets forth requirements imposed upon automatic
teaching systems, principles governing the planning and design of the hardware involved
and associated instructional methods and software. It presents results from the expe-

rimental operation of an automated EVOS classroom. It also indicates basic directions
for further development of ATS.

The book is intended for specialists in the development and application of machines in
the instructional process and in the professional training of staff personnel, methods
specialists and instructors. It may also be useful to engineers and students involved
in the planning and design of conversational systems and automatic control systems.

Appendix

Table 1. Foreign automated teaching systems
_______________________________________________________________________________

 

 

Name of teaching Year of in- Co uter Type Number
system, country stallation mp student positions Remarks
position
CLASS (US) 1961 PHILCO-ZOOO movie screen, 200
input console
Stanford Univ. 1963-69 PDP-lo. PDP-l, tEIEtVPES. 200
(US) POP-8 displays
PLATO-II (US) 1962 ILLIAC-I slides on tele- 2
vision screen
PLATO-III (US) 1964-1969 CDC-1604 television mon- 16 hours of in-
132 itor. keyboard structional ma-

terial
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Year of in- Type Number

 

stallation c°'°“ter student positions Remarks
position '
1971 Cyber-170 Plasma pan- up to 1008 2500 hours of
e1, keyboard instructional
material in
60 disciplines
1970 IBM-1130. 16 displays
PDP-s
1970 IBM-360/75 Storage up to 60 Complex num-
oscillo- bers. elec-
graph, trical engi-
keyboard neering
1971
ICL-1904A up to 210 Mathematics
in the school,
Instruction in
programming
(1973) Colored Mathematics,
displays. English
special
teletypes
Teletype, 15 Applied sta-
slide pro- tistics, phys-
jector ical chemistry
Inn-360/30 Slide pro- 16 Self-checking
jector. type- in physics,
writer English and
chemistry
1976 Display 5 Self-checking.
presentation
of informa-
tional mate-
rial
IBM-370/135 Display Chemistry
PDP-IO Graphics 2 Organic chem-
displays istry. stereo-
chemistry

____________________———-—-———-—-—

Table 2. Automated teaching systems in the USSR

________——_—————————-

 

 

 

VUZ Year of in- Computer Student position Number work
stallation positions
iVlRTU 1962 Dnepr-l Slide projector, 16

toggle switches
183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
System VUZ Year of in- Computer Student position Number work

 

___ stallation positions
MVTU 1968 Minsk-2 Indicator light.
10 keys
MVS Belgosuni- 1970 Minsk-2 teletypes 6
versitet
Repetitor MEI 1971 Setun' 5 buttons
Pedagog Kiev National 1973 Dnepr-Zl Teletype 7
Economic In-
stitute
MIIT 1974 Ural-Ibo, Teletype
Nairi
M351 1975 Minsk-32 Teletype
LETI Minsk-22M Teletype up to 16
Student Gor'kiy Uni- M-222 Keyboard 7
versity
EVOS Belgosuni- 1975 Minsk-32 Display 16
versitet screen
consoles
SADKO ZIL plant 1975 Minsk-32 Videoton-340. l6
vtuz televisions
MIFI 1976 Minsk-32 Videoton-340 8
ESPO MESI 1976 Yes-1020 Yes-7906 l6
ATOS Belgosuni- 1979 Yes-1022 Special ter- 16
versitet ninals

———.__———————

Key to acronyms in Table 2 (in order of appearance): KVIRTU - no expansion available;

MVTU - Moscow Higher Technical School imeni N. E. Bauman; Belgosuniversitet — Belorus-

sian State University imeni V. I. Lenin; MEI - Moscow Power Engineering Institute;

MIIT — Moscow Institute of Railroad Transportation Engineers; MBSI - Moscow Institute

of Economics and Statistics; LET! - Leningrad Electrotechnical Institute imeni V. I.

Ul'yanov; ZIL plant vtuz — ZIL plant higher technical educational institution; MIFI -
- Moscow Engineering Physics Institute.

Table of Contents

From the authors ..............................................................

Introduction ..................................................................

Chapter 1. Psychological-pedagogica1 aspects of the use of computers in instruc-

tion OOOIOIOOOOOOOOIIIOOOOOOIIDIOIOOOOOO.0..IIUOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOO. 1‘

1. Problems 0f methodology ....................................... H
2. The program of classroom instruction .,.,,,,,..,,...,,,..,,,. m
3. The training step and its structure ........................... m
4. Problem structure ............................................. 2!
5. Informational material ........................................ a
6. Statistics in ATS .................. ...... ..................... x
7. The system of preparing a program of instruction. The place and

role of the instructor inlgz ATS .............................. m

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE?
Chapter 2. ATS

l.
2.
3.
k.
5.
6.
7.

Chapter 3. ATS

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

software ... .......... .......................................

General characteristics of the basic components of ATS software
The author's source language ................................
Means of analyzing responses ................................
The problem of adaptive control .............................
The structure of teaching programs ..........................
The compilation and interpretation of teaching programs .....
The control program .........................................

hardware ....................................................

Hardware structure ..........................................
Terminal equipment ..........................................
Special-purpose hardware for group ATS ......................

Hultifunction information displays for ATS ..................
Special teaching-system control processor ...................

Chapter 4. Experimental study of the computer-aided teaching process .......

1. Experimental computerized teaching system ...................
2. Automatic VUZ television teaching system ....................
3. EVOS information flows ......................................
4. Dynamics of the computer-aided teaching process .............
5. The problems of the quality and effectiveness of EVOS operation
Appendix 0......O...IOIOOOOOOI...OOOOOOOCOIltolI.0....IOOOIOIOCOIOOOOOOOOOOO

Bibliography

onooao-oo-ooooosooso-ooeooooaoaooooooeoooooooaoaoooooooaooco-ao-

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 860 in. V. l. Lenina. 1980

8963
cso: 1863/204

185
\

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTROL SYSTEMS DESIGN AUTOMATION

Moscow AVTOMATIZATSIYA PROYEKTIROVANIYA SISTEM UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 3, 1981
(signed to press 5 Feb 81) pp 2. 203-205

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from book "Control Systems Design Automation",
issue 3 of a collection of articles, edited by V. A. Trapesnikov (chairman of the
editorial board). I. V. Prangshivili, V. L. Bpshteyn, A. G. Msmikonov. I. G.
Dmitriyeva and D. M. Berkovich, based on papers presented at the All-Union Confer-
ence on ASU Design Automation held in Suzdal' in April 1979, Izdatel'stvo "Finansy i
statistika", 12500 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] This collection covers questions of methodology of designing automated sys-
tems for control of production. and features of design and reliability of control
systems software. In the collection of articles. the authors analyze the structural
algorithmic approach and control of automation of systems of design based on
full-scale. expert and model experiments.

This collection is intended for scientific research, dcnign and educational
institutions concerned with the problems of design automation.

METHODOLOGY OF DEVELOPMENT 0? DESIGN AUTOMATION SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATED ENTERPRISE
CONTROL SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by V. V. Yvdokimov]

Author discusses basic principles of system to automate design of automated enter-
priaecontrol system (SAPR ASUP). He discusses methodological questions of construct-
ing a generalized economic mathematical model of an enterprise management system and
decomposition of it. He covers the basic principles of automating design of an AS“?
data processing system and brings out the methodological questions of the technology
of design of ASUP using SAPR facilities.

METHODS AND MEANS OF AUTOMATED DESIGN OF CONTROL SYSTEMS SOFTWARE IN THE YAUZA-6D
AUTOMATED PROGRAMMING AND DBBUGGING SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by V. V. Lipayev, L. A. Serebrovskiy, P. A. Kaganov, B. A.
Korepanov, M. A. Minayev and A. A. Shtrik]

Authors discuss general problems of automating design of complexes of control pro-
grams and means supporting technology and process of development. They give

186

')R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

functional schemes of the YaUZA—bD automated programming and debugging system (SAPO)
and systems included in it, brief description and technical characteristics of them.
and structure of the set of documentation for the SAPO.

SEHIOTIC SYSTEMS OF DESIGN
[Abstract of article by Yu. I. Klykov]

Author considers principles of constructing semiotic design systems and ways of
developing them. He analyzes reasons for weakness of design systems based on formal
models. He shows need for developing semiotic design languages.

FTOHATION OF DESIGN OF AUTOMATED PROCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS (AUTOMATED SYNTHESIS)
[Abstract of article by V. V. Solodovnikov]

Author deals with questions concerning one of the most complex stages in designing
automated process cntrol systems that is aimed at satisfying specified requirements
for dynamic properties and accuracy of the system.

He analyzes the features of the ASUTP design automation process and list the require-
ments which must be satisfied by the algorithm for automated synthesis.

He presents the principles of the frequency method of synthesis and theory of coor-
dinated control that can be used in developing the composition of special software
for automation of A501? design.

OPTIMIZATION IN AUTOHATED DESIGN OF CONTROL SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by I. V. Safonov]

The author presents the experience of stating and solving optimization problems in
designing algorithms and programs for automated control systems and data processing
systems. He formulates a series of new statements of problems of optimization
design of real-time algorithms and gives an example of solving one of these problems.
He notes the need for interactive optimization in working out design solutions.

MODELS AND METHODS OF AUTOMATING DESIGN OF MODULAR DATA PROCESSING SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by A. c. Hamikonov. A. A. Ashimov. V. V. Kul'ba, S. A.
Kosyachnko and c. z. Kaziyev]

Authors discuss models and methods of automating basic stages of design of modular
data processing systems (SOD). They offer a general structural scheme of a system
for automating design of a modular data processing system and the basic principles
of its functioning. They consider the features of stating and solving problems of
optimal synthesis of software and information support for SOD.

187

MR [\WV’WH IIQP ONIV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTROL SYSTEMS DESIGN AUTOMATION IN ORCANIEATIONS OF THE USSR MINISTRY OF HIGHER
AND SECONDARY SPECIALIZED EDUCATION

[Abstract of article by I. H. Hakar0v]

Author describes status of developments on creating systems for automation of
planning and design that are underway in the USSR Ministry of Higher and Secondary
Specialized Education. He discusses the makeup of a standard center for automated
design and engineering approved by the USSR Ministry of Higher and Secondary
Specialized Education. He gives brief characteristics of program complexes oriented
to solving specfific problems of control of concrete objects. He discusses prospects
of creating automated teaching systems.

SOME EVALUATIONS 0F EFFICIENCY 0? PARALLEL COHPUTATIONS
[Abstract of article by E. A. Trakhtengerts]

Author considers capability of parallel computations with various types of multi-
processor computer systems and gives evaluations of efficiency of parallel computa-
tions for certain types of equations.

STRUCTURE OF DEVELOPMENTAL AID COMPLEX. AUTOMATED DEVELOPMENT OF INFORMATION
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by V. G. Volin. V. A. Gruzman. V. I. Seniehkin and V. L.
Epshteyn]

Authors describe the functional algorithmic structure of the developmental aid com-
plex ARIUS [automated development of information management systems] that implements
procedures of analysis and design of information management systems. They discuss
questions of automating analysis of information flows and building an integrated
data base; they give informational design of special-purpose management system and
fundamental scheme of its development.

SYSTEM CONCEPT OF THE MARS COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATED CONTROL
SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by E. N. Khotyashov]

Author discusses a model of a hypothetical object (hypothetical model) that is the
basis of the MARS system, and systems for development and running of the hypotheti-
cal model and model of the object. These models afford a choice of the hardware
complex and data base structure and enable developing a data base management system
and data processing programs in ASU's. He describes a method of modernizing

a functioning ASU.

[88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHARACTERIZATION CONTROL IN CONSTRUCTING HIGH-SPEED COMPUTER AIDBD DESIGN SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by V. A. Gorbatov and N. V. Fedorov]

Authors discuss the problem of developing high-speed computer aided design systems.
for the solution of which is used the principle of characterization control. This
approach allows efficient reduction of the computational process in searching for
optimal solutions which support development of high-quality digital equipment.

An illustration of the efficiency of characterization control is the "Control-21"
automatic system for design of complex logic structures.

USE OF FORMULA LANGUAGE TO FORM DATA BASE AND SOLVE INFORMATION LOGIC PROBLEMS
[Abstract of article by Kh. K. Brutyan, L. V. Mkrtchyan and S. A. Sorokin]

Authors propose a program system belonging to the class of general-purpose systems
to automate design of information support. System is intended for automation and
design of data bases and oriented to solution of accounting, calculating, planning
and other problems.

AUTOMATED EXECUTION OF DESIGN DOCUMENT
[Abstract of article by L. V. Sazonova and Yu. A. Sokolinskiy]

Authors discuss capability of automating execution and drawing up of design docu-
ments containing calculations and explanations for them through automatic generation
of the calculation procedure while processing source text that specifies technique
of calculation in input language. They describe the grammar of the language,
algorithms for the generation program and document editing procedures. They present
results derived for some subset of the input language.

STRUCTURAL ALCORITHHIC APPROACH TO CONTROL OF DESIGN SYSTEM AUTOMATION
iAbstract of article by A. S. Grinberg and Ya. A. Shabad]

Authors discuss approach to control of design system automation based on expert
model and full-scale experiments. They suggest organizing these experiments in the
form of a periodic competition of various alternative ASP [automated design systems]
according to the results of which an evaluation of each ASP alternative is formed.
In accordance with the evaluation. a choice is made of problems of design subject

to automation in each ASP. and corresponding objects of design are assigned to the
ASP. This control orients the development of the ASP to achieving end results.

189

FOR OPPIPIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USE OF SIMULATION IN AUTOMATED DESIGN SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by C. C. Chogovadze]

Author discusses problems associated with use of simulation in automated design
systems (SAPR). He Suggests concrete solutions for SAPR, a design object of which
are integrated control systems. A flow model of an enterprise is used in the pro-
cess. He analyzes the problem of substantiating the technical specification for
an ASU by results of a system survey and the problems of automating the system
survey .

The design solutions for the problems in question allow constructing a technique
of design for large program systems for the purposes of organizational and
technological controls.

IDENTIFICATION OF PRODUCTION OBJECTS IN THE PROCESS OF CONTROL SYSTEMS DESIGN
AUTOMATION

iAbstract of article by M. i. Abezgauz, R. l. Mayzus and A. S. Grinberg]

Authors discuss methods of building control objects based on consideration of
structural properties of initial statistics. The suggested algorithm supports
construction of models that consider the dynamic properties of models. Automation
of construction of models is considered a process that supports selection of
indicators in an automated data processing system.

COPYRIGHT: izdatel'stvo "Finansy i statistika", 1981

8545
C50: 1863/234

190
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTROL SYSTEMS DESIGN AUTOMATION IN ORGANIZATIONS OF THE USSR MINISTRY OF HIGHER
AND SECONDARY SPECIALIZED EDUCATION

Moscow AVTONATIZATSIYA PROYEKTIROVANIYA SISTEM UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 3. 1981
(signed to press 5 Feb 81) pp 80-87

[Article by I. M. Makarov from book "Control Systems Design Automation". issue 3 of
a collection of articles. edited by V. A. Trapeznikov (chairman of the editorial
board). I. V. Prangshivili, V. L. Epshteyn, A. G. Mamikonov, I. c. Dmitriyewa and

D. M. Berkovich, based on papers presented at the All-Union Conference on ASU Design

Automation held in Suzdal' in April 1979, Izdatel'atvo "Finansy i statistika",
12,500 copies.208pages]

[Text] Control systems design automation is a major national economic program for
full automation of production. Considerable attention is paid to solving it in the
higher school. Collective-use systems are being established in the country's VUZ's
that make it possible in a new fashion to train highly qualified specialists in
automatic control systems and conduct scientific research on the program for control
systems design automation for the various sectors of the national economy. In the
Moscow Institute of Engineering Physics, a collective-use system is being established
that includes the Yes-1060, Yes-1033 and Yes-1022 computers with the corresponding
peripherals (alphameric and graphic displays. plotters). At Moscow State University,
development is underway on a system based on the high-throughput multiprocessor
"El'brus" computer with virtual storage and corresponding peripherals.

The collective-use systems under development will allow holding classes with 400 stu-
dents simultaneously in the field of automation of design of various types of complex
dynamic systems. Considerable attention in the process will be paid to development
of learning systems that allow instructors to give lectures and practical classes in
auditoriums with extensive use of electronic digital computers.

At the MI?! iMoacou Institute of Engineering Physics]. MAI [Moscow Aviation Institute
imeni Sergo 0rdzhonlkidze] and MVTD [Moscow Higher Engineering School] imeni N. B.
Bauman. standard study centers have been placed into permanent service for automated
design and engineering that are equipped with alphameric and graphic displays and
connected by high-frequency cables to unified series computer systems. In the study
centers, laboratory exercises are carried out, homework assignments are performed

and course and thesis projects are worked on; students study the characteristics of
the stability, quality and precision of the control processes for various types of
automatic systems (both with and without prescribed structure).

191

mu mil-7r?" "SR ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Successful operation of these study centers to a considerable extent is determined
by the level of the interactive systems the designer or engineer uses to coulnunicate
with the computers. Two interactive systems have been developed at the MIFI: for
editing and debugging of programs (PRIHUS) and for organization of work with appli—
cation program packages under the conditions of control systems design automation
(DIAL). An interactive system was developed at the MEI [Moscow Institute of Power
Engineering] to analyze automatic control systems. All these systems have been in-
plemented on Yes computers and service up to 12 displays simultaneously.

3
Development of software for the collective-use systems with time sharing requires
organization of data banks that can be used by all the country's VUZ's. Work on
establishing data banks is underway at many VUz's. However, this large effort is
still poorly coordinated and there are reasons to believe that the lack of a common
technique for building a data base can lead to partial incompatibility of it. To
solve this exceptionally important problem, the work of the respective vuz's has to
be coordinated centrally through the Scientific and Technical Council of the USSR
Minvuz [Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education] after coordinating
it with the USSR State Committee on Science and Technology.

In the country's VUZ's. this scientific research is underway: methods of automated
design of systems to control aircraft for various purposes are being developed (HA1).
methods of automating the processes of design and engineering of servo systems for
manipulator robots are being worked out (MVTU), application program packages for
analysis and synthesis of digital optimal and adaptive complex control system are
being created (HIFI), application program packages for identification of control
systems are being developed (MEI). and complex programs for optimization of auto-
matic control systems are being developed (HFTI [Moscow Physico-Technical Institutel).

Much attention is being paid to creating powerful complexes for autcmatioa of pro-
cesses of control systems simulation (efforts are underway at the HIFI, the MAI and
the HIREA [Moscow Institute of Radio Engineering, Electronics and Automation]).

In addition to the Yes computers, the complexes include analog computers. With
regard to the complex nature of modern automatic control systems and the need for
real-time simulation. high-speed algorithms are being developed for integrating
massive systems of differential equations.

In the VUz's, extensive training of user engineers is being conducted; they know how
to perform design and engineering work by making use of systems of automated design
and engineering. For successful training of cadres and performance of scientific
research on automatic design systems and software suitable for them. study centers
for automated design (fig. 1) are being set up on the basis of unification of the
Yes computers (Yes-1022. Yes-1033 or the Yes-1035 and Yes-1060). This computer sys-
tem can be developed as a result of adding on computer hardware. The first phase of
the system is to be built with the Yes-1022 computer (with 512K of main storage)
with the OS version that supports multiprogramming. The second phase is to include
a Yes-1033 (Yes-1035) computer forming with two Yes-1022 computers the first phase
of a three-machine computing complex. The third phase is to include one Yes-1060
computer, four Yes-1033 (Yes-1035) computers and eight Yes-1022 computers united
into one computing system.

As seen from fig. 1, the computing system can support simultaneous operation of
eight study centers. Two versions are being proposed for equipping the study centers

192
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Russian "BC" I English "Yes"
‘ .

“-1“

 

Fig. 1. Standard hardware composition for automated design study centers of the
USSR Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialized Education

Key:
1. ATaPU [alphnmeric printer] 2. UGPI [graphic information preparation
unit]

with peripherals: one for control systems designing (frequency characteristics,
transient processes, control laws synthesis) and one for control systems engineering

(preparation of structural schemes and working drawings). Equipment composition is
as follows:

Study Center

Peripherals 235135 Engineering
Alphameric Displays 12 8
Graphic Displays 2 6
Plotter l l
SH-4 Computer - 1
Graphic Information Preparation Unit - 1

[93

FOR OPPTPTAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the automated design study centers, 15 students can work simultaneously; in the
automated engineering study centers-—l3. During his period of study in a VUZ, each
student must work 60 hours in the automated design and engineering study centers.
Under these conditions. the proposed hardware composition will allow supporting the
holding of all types of training activities for the following number of students
per year:

Study Center

 

Phase Design Engineering
I 500 570
II 1000 1140
III 2000 2280

Scientific research will also be performed in the study centers for automated
design and engineering. When the amount of source information in the fonm of
structural schemes and graphs is rather large. it should be input into the computer
system through the SM-é computer using the graphic information preparation unit.

The USSR Minvuz has approved the standard study center for automated design and
engineering. Individual subsystems of this study center have been implemented at
the HIFI, MAI and the HVTU. In 1980, all study centers in the ministry's chief
VUZ's will be equipped with the standard hardware.

The problems solved in designing control systems and the composition of the software
for the interactive system of automated design are illustrated in fig. 2. In the
process of automated design, the following problems are solved:

linearization of dynamic equations;

control system structural synthesis (selection of composition of transducers,
selection of structure of control laws, parametric synthesis);

control systems analysis (study of stability, controlability and observability,

evaluation of quality and precision. as well as the effect of nonlinearity on the
behavior of the control systems);

digital realization of the control laws;

mathematical modeling of the control system being designed; and

formation of output documentation (characteristics of the system and digital
control computer).

Software includes the DIAL interactive system for solving problems of control sys-
tems analysis and synthesis, the interactive system for simulation and the system
for preparation of output documentation.

The DIAL programming system offers the user an interactive language, facilities for
creating and debugging programs written in the DIAL language, facilities for creat-
ing. storing and modifying user programs and data. facilities for operation with
application program packages. and the capability of supplementing application
programs with modules in the FORTRAN-Iv and PL/l languages.

It shOuId be noted that design programswritten in the DIAL language have Russian

names and are stored in a special library. Thanks to this, one can express the
mnemonic of the subject field in the titles of programs. In the programs them-
selves, modules that solve assigned problems in design can he called.

19¢
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key : am aruuur 14mm

1. source data input

2. DIAL interactive system

3. linearization of
dynamic equations

4. synthesis of structure of
SAD [automatic control
system]

5. selection of composition
of transducers

6. selection of structure of
control laws

7. parametric synthesis

8. system analysis

9. stability

10. controlability and
observability

11. quality and precision

12. consideration of nonlinear
characteristics

13. analysis of self-excited
oscillations

1h. digital realization of
control laws

15. decision

16. repeat calculation

1?. complete coloulation

18. interactive simulation
system

19. mathematical modeling

20. refine calculation

21. documentation system

22. documentation

23. characteristics of
SAU [automatic control
system]

2b. characteristics of control computer

 

Fig. 2. Control systems design automation ‘
software

The main modules are:

iinoarization of equations by the method of least squares;
synthesis of control laws by the quadratic criterion of quality;
computation of eigenvalues and vectors of matrix of system under study;
computation of transfer function;

computation of frequency characteristics;

computation of integral of square of error;

computation and construction of root locus;

computation and construction of transient processes;

analysis of self-excited oscillations; and

computation of discrete laws of control.

195

FOR OFFiCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The interactive system services simultaneously up to 16 users at remote terminals.
The DIAL design sysrem operates in the mode of interpretation. i.e. each statement
of this program is stored in source form and executed immediately. Thanks to this.
the traditional stages of the batch mode of processing are eliminated (compilation
and editing) which makes it possible to quickly solve engineering problems and in a
short time debug the needed programs to design control systems.

As a result of automated design of the control system with any structural scheme
(described by differential or difference equations up to the 100th order). optimal
laws of control can be found. and logarithmic frequency characteristics, amplitude-
phase characteristics. root loci and transient processes can be built. The corres-
ponding characteristics derived as output documents on the graphic plotter are
shown in fig. 3. From the figure it follows that 40 seconds of machine time is
required to construct logarithmic amplitude and phase frequency characteristics for
ID points of amplitude-phase characteristics. as well as characteristics of a
transient process. and 90 seconds of machine time is needed for building the root
locus. Consequently. automation of the process of control systems design is per-
formed about 20-fold faster than with conventional methods. The precision and
validity of results derived are also enhanced.

Other automated design systems are under development too in institutes of the USSR
Hinvuz. Thus, for example, at the MEI. the MASS software has been developed for
automated modeling of continuous systems of automatic control described by small
orders of differential equations or specified structural schemes. The MASS system
software uses a language of directives and statements which makes it possible to
put into the computer the structural scheme of the system under study. to effect
input of parameters of this system. to achieve conversion of the input structure.
to perform integration of differential equations and perform parametric optimiza-
tion. Program results are tables and graphic materials output on an alphameric
printer.

Language directives are used to organize user communication with the MASS system
and control of sequence of data input and computation process. Statements are
intended for input of source information. The MASS program system has been imple-
mented for H-6000 computers and Yes computers with the disk operating system.

Software developed at the Chelyabinsk Polytechnical Institute makes it possible to
carry our calculation of continuous discrete as well as nonlinear systems of auto-
matic control with Yes computers also by using the language directives. The dis-
tinguishing feature of the program complex is the capability of making a working
design of electrical machines for actuating mechanisms of automatic control systems.

At the HVTU imeni Bauman. efforts are underway to automate servo systems by using
application program packages for modeling and calculation of systems in the batch
processing mode. At the Leningrad Institute of Precision Mechanics and Optics.
software has been developed for designing optical-electronic instruments and
devices of control systems.

The USSR Hinvuz coordinates efforts of the VUz's in the field of development of
automated systems for design and engineering. For this purpose, under the NTS
(Scientific and Technical Council] of the ministry. the Scientific Methodological
Council on SAPR iAutomated Design Systems] has been established; this council has

196
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prepared the necessary technical documentation on systems for automated design and
engineering of control systems and has introduced it in a number of VUz's and
scientific research institutes of the industrial ministries.

A complex program of efforts has been worked out to develop automated teaching sys-
tems which will allow raising the quality of instruction of students in the field
of automated control systems. Data banks will be established in these systems

that the VUZ's can exchange with each other, since subsequently it is planned to
combine the computer centers of our own VUZ's into a common computer network.

(1 lazuluamjm rem-rm ' nun-hi min)" (3)

 

(2) mum-pm a quad hem-luv: a team! (2)

a muuihwiqnwur 'hvuldWNNWﬂl .

    

Fig. 3. Output characteristics of control systems being designed (function is
analysis of dynamic systems; number of programs is 12, package size is

160K)
Key:
1. Logarithmic characteristics 5. Time of calculations for 100 points
2. Time of calculations for 10 points is within 40 seconds
is within 60 seconds 6. Root locus
3. Frequency locus 7. Time of ca1Cu1ations for 50 points
4. Transient process is within 90 seconds

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Finansy i statistika". 1981

8545
C50: 1863/234

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

SOME EVALUATIONS 0F EFFICIENCY OF PARALLEL COMPUTATIONS

Moscow AVTOMATIZATSIYA PROYEKTIROVANIYA SISTER UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 3, 1981
(signed to press 5 Feb 81) pp 88-100

[Article by E. A. Trakhtengerts from book "Control Systems Design Automation",
issue 3 of a collection of articles, edited by V. A. Trapeznikov (chairman of the
editorial board), I. V. Prangshivili, V. L. Bpshteyn, A. G. Hamikonov, I. G.
Dmitriyeva and D. H. Berkovich, based on papers presented at the All-Union Confer-
ence on ASU Design Automation held in Suzdal' in April 1979, Izdatel'atvo "Finansy
i statistika", 12500 copies, 208 pages]

[Excerpt] In conclusion. let us note that with parallel computations, a substantial
increase in computation rates can be achieved by converting in the translation pro-
cess cyclic computations of scalars into vector instructions. At present, several
algorithms for such conversions have been proposed [21], their convergence has been
proven and they have been implemented in translators. These algorithms are complex
and do not convert all types of loops.

In computing systems with multiple flow of instructions, several sections of pro-
grams can be executed simultaneously. As a function of the structure of computer
systems, the interrelation of flows of instructions may vary since each flow of
instructions is a completely independent problem. Flows of instructions can form
subtasks of one problem. In the latter case. the association by data is preserved
between suhtssks. but each subtask is, as a rule, a rather large program and is
poorly associated with the other subtasks by control.

Finally, a program may be subdivided into relatively small parts, sufficiently
closely associated with each other by both data and control. Subdivision of pro-
grams into these concurrently executable sections can be performed directly by the
programmer or automatically by the translator.. An algorithm for formal subdivision
of programs into these sections is described in [22].

The emergence of concurrently executable sections of programs requires development
of special mechanisms to synchronize the computing process. This problem arose
already in the stage of multiprogramming and to solve it there is a rather well
developed apparatus of semaphores and monitors that accomplish the task [23-27].
These facilities are relatively easily implemented in translators, and a large
number of linguistic constructions has been developed to describe them [28].

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Finansy i statistika", 1981

8565 - END -
CSO: 1863/234
198