FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10531

9 May 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 31/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT

(Pouo 31/82) .

CONTENTS

SCIEIICE AND TEGINOLOGY

Characteristics of Hitachi :i—280H Computer Described
(Kenichi We, at 31.; NIKKI]: ELBQ'RCIYICS, 1 Feb 82) .... 1

Overseas Petrochemical Projects Face Difﬁculties
“'13” mm Sﬁmw. 18. 19m82) ODOOOI'OOOIOOOOOOOIOOOO 3h

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 POGO]

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLWY

CHARACTERISTICS OF HITACHI “-2803! C(HPUTBR DESCRIBED
Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 1 Feb 82 pp 156-182

[Article by Kenichi Furumaya (chief), Toshihiko Ktaka, Katsuhiko Takizawa,
Fumiyuki Kobayashi. Chikahiko Izumi of Dept. of Development, Kanagawa Plant. Hit
Hitachi, Ltd.]

[Text] Abstract by Nikkei Electronics

The H-280H is a general-purpose large computer which has
1.3-1.6 times more throughput than the conventional
H-ZOOH. In order to realize this throughput, various
improvements have been made in the systems and in the
semiconductor technology. Regarding the system, they
are not basically different from the 14-2003. However.

the H-280H has delicate cortrol. for instance, disorders
in the pipeline are reduced“ by subdividing SS (storage to
storage) type instructions for piocessing. In semiconduc-
tor technology, the degree of integration of logic-in
memories and high-speed bipolar memories is doubled and
quadrupled respectively to give latitude for the expansion
of buffer memories. Also, the main memory capacity is
enlarged to 32 M bytes from the conventional wins: 16 H
bytes, and the channel throughput to the maxim- 96 bytes/
sec.

The systems for users who utilize large computers have recently increased in
scale rapidly, and the mode of use tends to be increasingly diversified. In
line with this trend, computer makers strive continuously to develop new
large models with better throughput.’ 2 5 7

The IIITAC “-280“ (called "-2801! hereafter) is the top model of the HITAC M
series due to its larger scale, greater versatility and higher performance.
It is better than the H—ZOOH annomced in 1978.1

The H—280H was developed under the following guidelines.
(1) Improvement of Throughput
Using the latest hardware technology, the speed of the logic system was raised,

and firmware such as a system expansion mechanism and a VIM (virtual machine
assist) mechanism, was incorporated.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(2) Emphasis on New System Mechanism Support and Future Expandability

It is supplied with a main memory which exceeds 16 H bytes and can acco-odate
over 16 channel connections, and a 3 H bytes/sec high-speed channel connection.

Also, it has room for future expansion of the main storage, expansion of the
buffer storage and connection for a high-speed I/O unit.

(3) Improvement in Reliability/Maintainability

highly reliable parts were used, and it is fully equipped with an automatic
recovery function and a maintenance function.

(14) Relaxation of Equipment Conditions

Aiming at space-saving and energy-saving, cables for connecting peripherals
(discs in particular) are more extendable than in conventional models. Also,

an optical channel adapter was provided to make it possible to use optical
fibers in lieu of I/O cables.

(5) Improvement in Opernbility

The console function is fully equipped, and the automatic-run function is
reinforced.

Among the above developmental guidelines, the most important item is the im-
provement of throughput suitable for the top model.

Throughput of computer systems has two aspects: a capability based on how fast

a job can be processed and a capability based on how many jobs can be processed
in a given time. The former capability is demanded by large-scale science and
technology calculations, while the latter capability is demanded by on-line sys-
tems for bank deposits and seat reservations. Recently, demands for processing
many jobs in a given time, such as on-line processing and conversation process-
ing, are on the rise, and improvement of system throughput has tended to be
stressed. However. with the progress of science and technology, demands for
high-speed processing of large-scale science and technology calculations (one
job) are also increasing.

In November 1980, the U.S. IBM introduced a new large computer, the H-308l
(Model group D). This model is said to have a great improvement in perform-
ance over the same company's model 3033, which was the top of the line until
then. Also, it was highlighted because of its double-headed processor.6 In
the case of the double-headed processor, two processors operate in parallel,
and the capability to process many jobs in a given time is the sum of the two
processors. however, the capability to process a job at high speed may some-
times he determined by the capability of one processor, reducing capability,
in this case, to half of the total throughput.

With tnis background in mind, we developed a high-performance processor which
greatly exceeds that of the H-ZOOH, incorporating a single processor in order
to meet the two demands-—improvement of system throughput and high—weed process-
ing (of one job).

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

The M—280u can use practically all the software, peripherals and terminals of
the existing M—series as system components. It is considered that a system
composed of this processor, a VOS3/SP (virtual storage operating system 3/sys—

spindle) to be supported by these, along with a Chinese character printer and
a video data system, can very well accommodate diverse user needs.

1. Processor Outline

Figure 1 shows the external appearance of the H—280H system. Figure 2 gives

an example of the architectureofa two—unit close—linked multiprocessor.

The M—ZBOH is the sister machine of the M-ZOOH, and its external appearance and
logic structure are similar to the M—ZOOH. HOwever. it is a processor designed

for high speed and high reliability using newly developed high-integration LSI
and semiconductor memories.

 

Figure 1. External Appearance of the M—ZBOH Processor

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2. Chart shows cw
:tural limit: incorp

Lt
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Realization of Throughput 1.3-1.6 Times Greater Than the H-ZOOH

Table 1 gives the general specifications of the H-28OH in comparison with

the M-ZOOH and the M-180, which were yesterday's top of the line models. The
system functiOnal specifications of the “-2808 were expanded, for example,
doubling the main storage capacity and the channel numbers connectable to the
system compared to the H-ZOOH. Also, the channel total data transfer capabil-
ity is approximately four times better than the H-ZOOH, to a maximum of 96 H

bytes/sec/processor.

Table 1. Architectural Couparison of H—280H With Conventional H-200H and
H—180. System specifications of H—28OH are expanded in main storage
capacity and in number of connectable channels.

 

 

Item n—zsou H-ZOOH H—180
Main storage maximum capacity
(M—byte) 32 16 16
capacity (It byte) 6’. 61¢ 32
buffer control system, set associative set associative
storage column x line 64x16 256x4
block size (byte) 64 64 32
address
translation setup, entry x level 256x2 256:2 128:2
buff" number of entries 512 512 256
maximum number of IOP 4 3 2
I/O maximum number of channels 32 16 16
channel
total data transfer
capability 96 26 16
Integrated array processor yes yes yes
System expansion mechanism Standard Peripheral Peripheral

 

In performance, the M—280H has a throughput 3.5-5 times and 1.3-1.6 times more
than the M-180 and the M-ZOOH, respectively. Figure 3 gives an example of a
specific performance comparison when some jobs were processed. In this case,
the assigned jobs consisted of two technical calculations, one general compile
job and one Cobol office calculation. With the standard “-2803, performance
about 4.5-5 times superior to the H-180 (1.4-1.5 times superior to the H-ZOOB)
was obtained inhandling the technical calculations and the general compile job,
while performance 5 times superior (1.6 times to the H-ZOOB) was obtained in the
office calculation. In calculations using a H-ZBOH with IAP (integrated array
processor), performance was approximately 6 times and almost 16 times better

in handling the respective jobs.

5
FOR OFTWCIAI.IHSE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«my-1| (2)
0159172 (3)
.umaquws-r (b)
WQIV (5)

o
7.0
'1
s

s

C

a

2

I

M480 ”-2”?! “-2.0“
“MM “4”"
[AP "D IAP H5

 

Figure 3. Example of Performance in Bench-ark Test-Program

Key:

(1) perfomnce ratio (lo) general (compile) job
(2) technical job 1 (5) Cobol job

(3) technical job 2 (6) with IAP

The throughput of technical calculations using this system with IAP is equiva-
lent to approximately 10 HFLOPS (million floating point operations per second).
This range of performance is close to that of a supercomputer, and is very
difficult for a general-purpose computer to achieve.

The high—speed processing of the 14-280“ is primarily derived from the
shortened nachine cycle tine; Inorder to shorten the machine cycle time, we
have developed the latest hardware technology beginning with a maximum 1.500
gate/chip high-integration high-speed L81 and logic systems suitable tothat,
as will be discussed later in this article. Also. high speed is achieved by
incorporating a systm which was designed to shorten the operation execution
cycle in respect to some instructions.

Upgrading of Element Integration and Expansion of System Specifications

In the following, hardware technology, logic systems and system specifications
newly deVeloped for the H—280ﬂ will be listed in comparison with those of the
H—ZOOH.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l. Hardware Technology

Logic LSI withHaximum Cate 550/1500. Improved approximately two-thirds compared
with that used for the H—ZOOH in terms of speed power product.

Logic—In Memory Element. Used for address array of the buffer storage. The
degree of integration is double that of the H—ZOOH.

a K Bit High-Speed Bipolar Memory--maintains 7 ns-element-level maximum access
time and is used for control storage and buffer storage. The degree of inte-
gration is quadrupled compared with that of the H-ZOOB.

66 K Big High Speed n MOS Hemory--used for the main storage. The degree of
integration is quadruple that of the H—ZOOH.

18 Layer Backboard. Improved in wiring density 33 percent. to 18 layers,
compared with the H-200H. The backboard of the H-ZOOH has 15 layers.

2. Logic Systems

The logic systems adopted in the H—280H took basic parts from the M-ZOOH, but
those parts were also further strengthened in several ways. What the H-ZBOH
took from the basic logic systems1 of the H—ZOOH are: (1) sophisticated
pipeline control. (2) microprogram distribution and layout, (3) 64 K byte
high-speed buffer storage accessible every l/2 machine cycle, (4) 512 pairs
of address translation buffers (TLB). (5) high-speedcomputation mechanism
calculable at 1/2 machine cycle, (6) 8 or 16 way interleaves of main storage,
(7) integrated array processor (IAP).

In the M-ZBOH. the following further points were reinforced making the most of
the characteristics of these logic systems.

Reinforcement of Pipeline Control

Development of primitive resolution function.
Augmentation of branch instruction control.
Augmentation of pipeline disorder factor detection capability.

Improvement of capability to recover from pipeline disorders.
Shortening of computation cycle numbers of decimal arithmetic instructions.

integrated array processor instruction expansion
Firmware provided as standard.

3. Expansion of System Specifications
Maximum Main Storage Capacity Expanded to 32 H Byte

That of the conventional M series is 16 H bytes. In order to expand the main
storage capacity, it is necessary to exppnd the effective address from 24 bits.
Therefore, the page table entry which translates a logical address to an effec-
tive address was expanded.

7
INDRIOFF1C1AL USIZCM‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Maximum Connectable Channel Numbers Expanded From 16 to 32

The channel throughput was enlarged to accommodate an increase of system file
capacity and improvement of the processor's internal processing speed.

11. Logic Structure and System Improvement

A big problem in improving processor performance is the architectural method
of the main storage system.

Many of the current general-purpose large processors have a bihierarchical
storage system comprised of high-speed buffer storage and comparatively low-
speed main storage. The H-ZOOH also used a bihierarchical storage system.
When striving to enhance the performance of a single processor mainly by up-
grading the speed of the machine cycle. it is necessary to improve the speed
of the main storage in proportion to improvement of the machine cycle in order
to enhance the total performance proportionately to the improvement in the
machine cycle.

0n the other hand, demand for a larger main storage capacity is also increas-

ing. This is because systems that perform in parallel conversational process-
ing, batchprocessing, data base processing, etc, all in the same system, have

increased, and a large main storage capacity suitable for these systems is

in demand. These needs are especially prevalent in regard to large computers.

In other words, there are two things demanded of the memory-improvement in the
speed of elements and upgrading of the capacity. However, from the aspect of
semiconductor technology, a project to achieve higher speed and integration not
only encounters technical difficulty but also raises costs, making it difficult
noimprove the cost performance ratio. Therefore, a general solution to this
problem boils down to the adoption of a high-speed buffer storage.

An average instruction execution time Tavg of a processor with a buffer storage
can be expressed as

7

Tavg - Tb + % - Tacc

The inverse number to this, MIPS (million instruction per second), is often
used as an index for performance. Tb is the average instruction execution time
when all instructions and operands are present in the buffer storage. Tacc is
the access time of the main storage viewed from the processor. N indicates the
incidence rate, once in so many instructions in cases where data to be

accessed cannot be found in the buffer storage. Accordingly. (1/N)-Tacc
expresses time taken for the main storage access in case the buffer storage
does not contain data as an average overhead time/instruction.

(1 - l/N) is the probability of the presence of the necessary data in the
buffer storage, and is sometimes called the hit ratio of the buffer storage.
The buffer storage hit ratio is determined by the buffer storage capacity and
the nature of a job or a program. When a buffer memory is 64 K bytes, gener-
ally the ratio will be in the 85-99 percent range.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Incidentally, by accelerating the processor machine cycle, Tb can be propor-
tionately reduced. However, (IMO-Tact remains the same if no further measures
are taken. and the total performance sometimes may not improve in proportion
to the machine cycle. Consequently, it is necessary to raise the previously
described hit ratio, that is. increase the value of N (enlarge buffer storage
capacity) to enhance the total performance.

Giving Expandability to Buffer Storage by Upgrading Element Integration

Concerning the above described architectural problem of the memory systems, the
following guidelines were observed for the development of the H-ZBOB to avoid
the complexity of memory architecture as a whole.

(1) Elements for the main storage were highly integrated to enlarge the storage
capacity and to give it future expandability.

(2) A bihierarchical memory structure was adapted, and expandability was
giver. to the buffer storage for the improvement of the buffer storage hit
ratio.

In line with these guidelines, for the main storage use, a highly integrated

64 K bit n Mos memory was developed which was suitable for enlargement of
capacity. Also, for the buffer storage use, a 6 K bit bipolar memory was
developed. in consideration of future expansion, which was four times more
highly integrated than that of the 11-2003. Intensity of integration was doubled
for the logic—in memory (to be described later), also for the sake of future
expandability.

Meanwhile, in order to reduce Tb. a basic policy was set to develop high-speed
and high-integration logic 1.51 to be packaged at a high density to improve
the machine cycle. This idea to inrove performance by high-speed high-density
packaging will be discussed further later, but at present, specific examples of
improvement in logic systems implemented in conjunction with this will be

given.
Further Strengthening of Pipeline Control System

The architecture of the H—ZBOH is shown in Figure lo. The internal makeup of
the central processing unit (CPU) is similar to that of the Ill-2001i and con-
sists of a storage control unit (500). an instruction control unit (10), an
arithmetic unit (EU) and a service unit (SVU). -

The M—280H is characterized by the fact that the inside of the arithmetic
unit (EU) is subdivided into a general arithmetic unit (GU) and a floating-
polnt unit (FU), each working as independent logic unit.

As described above, by giving an independent control and memory to each
separate general arithmetic unit and floating-point unit, it is possible to
shorten the arithmetic loop time required for calculation (fer example, time
taken for work register contents in a fixed-point addition executed by a
general arithmetic unit to be added up and returned to the work register),
which eventually shortens the machine cycle.

9
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIA-RDP02-00850R000500060044-2

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09:

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

   

mean: 05 we 330320.: 0.33 .e 9.59;

gunk—m 3333M ".2. H

Ba
55;

hﬂ33.h|b

 

 

       

95. m. .n...

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: CIA-RDP02-00050R000500000044-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Regarding GU control storage, the storage capacity is doubled compared to the
H-200Il for the purposes of supporting an intervirtual memory communication
function, providing various firmware as a standard. and shortening the arith-
metic cycle numbers.

To realize high-speed operations, the standard operation width is 64 bits. The
main calculators are, for instance, a serial adder, a parallel adder, a shifter
and a multiplier-divider (BSA).

Next, improvement of the pipeline control system, improvement in reducing the
arithmetic cycle numbers necessary for execution of general instructions, and
a contrivance for vector processing in an IAP will be described as samples of
improvements and contrivances achieved for the instruction processing system.

‘I. pipeline control system, similar to the “-2008, flows as shown in Figure 5
when typical instructions-40': instance, / a, Compare, etc—are consecutively
given. In processing consecutive typical orders such as this, the 10 can
transmit an interpreted instruction to the GU at 1 machine cycle pitch. The
EU can process this at 1 machine cycle pitch.

The following are possible factors that disturb the above described pipeline
control.

(1) Absence of instructions created by the delayed instruction read-out due
to the concurring operand read-out and instruction read-out to the buffer
storage.

(2) kecution of branch instructions.
(3) Execution of SS (storage to storage) instructions.

(4) Absence of operands by waiting when operands are read immediately after
they are written.

(5) Becution of a system control instruction.

(1) is the absence of instructions which occurs when the operand readout of
an instruction given four instructions prior to the instruction which met be
presently read-out concurs in the same machine cycle in the flow of the pipe-
line shown in Figure 5, and the instruction read-out in such a case, is put
on hold.

To solve this situation, the system was tempered when the H—ZOOH was being
developed, so that the simultaneous operand read-out and instruction read-out
become possible in the same machine cycle in relation to the buffer storage.
Specifically, it was designed to give access to the high-speed buffer storage
two times in 1 machine cycle-l machine cycle was divided into a former-half
and a latter-half cycle, and the former-half cycle was used for the operand
read-out and the latter-half cycle was used for read/write operation. This
system is adopted also in the H-28OH. As a result, this problem was completely
solved.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

 

610010"

 

Figure 5. Flow of u—zaon Pipeline Control

Key: H—ZBOH pipeline example operation of
IF: instruction read-out instruction
D: instruction decode and address calculation control
A: address translation unit
0?: operand read-out
. operation of
. instruction execution } arithletic unit

(2) is a pipeline disorder during a branch instruction execution due to the
absence of an instruction until an instruction is readout from the branch.

In case of the branch instruction, the next instruction is read as an operand.
Therefore, an instruction from the branch can ba'exacuted at the sane tine as
the execution of the instruction given three instructions later, considering
that the data read as an operand is executed as an instruction according to
the flow chart of the pipeline in Figure 5. '

This flow cannot be essentially avoided. however, in case's negative result

is obtained when deciding whether or not to branch based upon the judgnent of
branching conditions, for instance, in dealing with conditional branch instruc-
tions, the waiting tine for the results of the judpent of the branch conditions
becomes wasteful pipeline disorder time since the only thing to do in reality

is to execute the next instruction.

In order to minimize this tine, for example, if there are no instructions to
change the condition code (CC) before the execution of the branch instruction
after the execution of an instruction which deternines the cc to be used for
the judgment of branch conditions, branching can be contesplsted during that
tine. Specifically, in Figure 5, where instruction(l) is an instruction to
determine the CC for judgsent of branching, step (6) is a branch instruction,
and intermediate (2) and (3) are instructions not to change the cc, branching
can be contemplated while executing steps (2) and (3). Such a systes was par-
tially adopted in the H-280h to speed up the processing.

12
FIIICHWWCIAI.USE(NVLY
ma OFFICIAL use ontv

SS Type Instructions Loaded on the Pipeline Flow

Next, referring to factors (3), (A) and (5), curtailment of pipeline control
disorders derived from these was stressed. As an example of efforts in
achieving this goal, let us talk about a high-speed processing method loaded
on the pipeline processing flow for SS-type logic operation instructions.
which are often used in office calculatuxlprograns, on-line programs and con-
trol programs.

In the conventional processing of SS-type instructions, pipeline processing
was often suspended when these instructions were interpreted because of
pipeline processing difficulty due to the procedure where data read from the
main storage (or buffer storage) was computed and written into the main
storage (or buffer storage).

As a specific instruction, let us think of a love character (HVC) instruction.
HVC instruction is an instruction to transfer operands of a certain number of
bytes designated by the L (length) field of the instruction from the field
designated by the second operand address to the field designated by the first
operand address.

For simplification, we shall assume that the length of an operand is 60 bytes,
and the operation of the instruction is completed after 5 readings and S writ-
ings, 8 bytes at a time. Under this condition, we shall assume that 8 byte
loading and 8 byte storing will be executed 5 tines each, and initatively,

8 byte load instructions and 8 byte store instructions will be repeatedly
processed. By treating this as repetitious consecutive processing of load
instructions and store instructions, HVC instructions can be put on the flow
of the pipeline processing. The flow of HVC instructions in such a case is
shown in Figure 6 (b).

In the flow of the MVC instruction executed in Figure 6, the first operand
address is computed in the D1 cycle to keep the address available in the
address register. The (0?) cycle is not required for HVC instructions, but it
reads out operands in an SS—type logic operation, which uses even the first
operand for the operation.

The second operand address is computed in the DZ cycle; the second operand is
read in the 0? cycle using the above address and written into the first
operand address in the E cycle.

Subsequently, 8 is added to the first and second operand addresses and 8 is
subtracted from the operand length L. and the processing from the same D2
cycle will be repeated.

Hith this arrangement, the pipeline processing as shown in Figure 6 (b) can
be executed. Figure 6 (a) shows an imaginary computer processing flow without

the above described concept. The time to execute the instruction following the
HVC instruction is approximately cut in half.

13
FOR‘OFIIC]AI.IEH!(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       

(1) nlzzua55:5ensuuuuxsnnnnmzlaa
cum:

(2) |

swam l

(3)

“m.nnumn
I.-
mum

.-
man“
I.-
(a) mama
.\|\'C'a'.r ---

 

Ib|(5) MVC: mrerxlwuf-Jﬁis‘
(6) C]: m'c mmne 4 7n-

 

 

Figure 6. Pipeline Flow of HVC Instruction Processing. The nuberofmachine
cycles is nearly cut in half in the 14-2801! mated to conventional

computers .

As an exanple of speed enhancement by reducing the number of arithmetic cycles,
a decimal arithmetic instruction can be given.

In the decimal arithmetic instruction, provisions for a special arithmetic
circuit are nade when there is a speed-improving effect. At the same time,
enhancement or speed was sought by adding specific microprogram routines to
respective flows, when, for instance. the processing flow changes due to the
difference in the length of operands even within the same instruction.

In Figure 7. decimal instruction performce ratios of the 14-2001! and the
H-ZBOH are shown. 0n the average, regarding the 6 instructionsnaddition,

1’;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

h“ III E“ ‘ III. E.

(2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)

Figure 7. Deciml Arithmetic Instruction Performance Comarison

Key:

(1) performance ratio (5) rounding

(2) addition (6) binary conversion
(3) multiplication (7) compression

(Io) division

multiplication, division, rounding. binary conversion and compression-«he
performance of the 11-28011 has improved about twofold over the 11—20011.

With improvement of the arithmetic systems such as indicated above, the “-28%!
achieves a throughput 1.5 times greater than the 11-2003 in the Oobol office

calculation programs shown in Figure 2.

0n the other hand, for science and technology calculations, it has an IAP
add-on mechanism which is unique logic mechanism. The IAP add-on mechanism
as shown in Figure It consists of a vector data buffer, a vector address

adding mechanism and special microprograms.

The IAP converts the innermost side D0 100p written by Portran into a special
vector instruction and processes it at high speed using an arithmetic pipe-
line system which is practiced in supercomputers. '

The processing rate at this time occasionally reaches seven-eight times faster
than the cases processed by normal instructions.” However, the entire program
Is not processed at such a high speed. Generally, as shown in Figure 8, the pro-
cessing rate of the entire program becomes 2.5 times faster when, for instance,
80 percent of the program execution time of a normal instruction is converted
into that of a vector instruction, and that portion is processed four times
faster. The smaller the percentage of theportion which cannot be processed by
the vector instruction, the faster the entire program processing rate.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

F———_——‘————

(2)t—_‘

(1) N“ 7 It It (3)
lic’i’nﬂﬁﬂ It!“ '4' “7 f bbﬂlill‘" 5.
"‘13 .

      

 

(0

IAI’HJOM

L___

——_.——_--——._----..- . -.--.-.-

,,
It.

Figure 8. Normal Instruction Processing Tine and Processing Title by IAP

 

Key:
(1) normal. instruction processing (3) portion which can be processed by
(2) portion which cannot be processed vector instruction

by vector instruction (6) processing by IA?

The ratio of this vector instruction processing is designated as vector effi-
ciency, and if vector efficiency is designated as a and the high-speed pro-
cessing ratio (acceleration ratio) of the vector instruction processing is
designated as K, the imprnvenent level of the entire progral eutecution tile 8
can be obtained by the following equation:

I

8' a+K(l-e5

As indicated above. inprovenent of vector efficiency is inortant for the
improvement of general performance. The H-ZOOB has provisions for 18 instruc-
tions mainly focusing on four fundamental rule arithmetic vector instructions
and vector nacro .instructions such as an inner product, product sum and
suction.

In the D0 loops of a science and technology calculation program. the D0 loop,
which contains conditional sentences (I? statements), appears cnparatively
frequently but is not suitable for processing the above described four funda-
mental rule operation and-acro instruction by vector instructions.

In the 31—2808. a new vector instruction has been added aimed at facilitating
vector processing of this DO loop with conditional sentences, in order to

improve the vector efficiency.16 Simultaneously a Fortran coniler was devel-
oped. which automatically converted DO loops with conditional sentences into

16
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a vector instruction. By this development, we canexpect automatic improvement
in vector efficiency and an improvement in the processing rate associated with
it.

III. Channel Logic Systea Design

The channel is under a centralized control system whereby one 0/0 processor
(10?) controls all eight channels, and 10? is highly densely packaged using
1.51 with 1500 gates to make a more conpact architecture than the 14-2008. One
10? unit and eight channels are housed on one backboard. 10? is given an
image of an independent 1/0 operation specialty processor with an internal
control storage, and has provisions for future functional expansion.

Generally, channel logic consists of an 1/0 interface operation control
channel, a data transfer control which controls the data transfer operations
relating to the main storage, and an 1/0 instruction control which controls
activations and interruptions. Figure 9 is a block chart which indicates the
architecture of an 1/0 processor with 8 channels connected.

The channel unit contains byte multiplexer channels and block multiplater
channels, and the maximum two units of the former and the eight units of the
latter can be connected per one unit of 10? for a versatile connection. The
block multiplexer channel, in particular, is equipped with asynchronous
transfer function which transfers data at high speed to lake 3 H bytes/sec
data transfer possible. The conventional maximum 16 channel limit was in-
creased to 32 channels, and the standard block multiplexer channel data
transfer speed was upgraded from 1.5 H bytes/sec to 3 H bytes/sec, to achieve
an overall throughput increase of approximately fourfold and to make provi-
sions for larger files and a better system throughput.

Data transfer control and 1/0 instruction control have many interchannel
common operations and are independent of the 1/0 interface operations.
Therefore, they are concentrated and compact as a common control. The data
transfer control contains data buffer register and address register groups for
data transfer. It sends addresses to the min storage in accordance with the
read and write requests from the channel to the Iain storage and reads or
writes data from or into the main storage.

The 1/0 instruction control has a special control storage. Complicated acti-
vation and interruption processing are controlled by the microprograns within
the control storage.

Also, the 1/0 instruction control has a channel storage which stores unit con-
trol words (UCH)--information that controls the 1/0 device. The unit control
words can be connected to the channel and must be provided with as many as the
number of simltaneously operable 1/0 devices. In the past, 256 words (8 bit
address), equivalent to the number of addresses of 1/0 devices affiliated with
the channel, were provided for the byte mltiplexer channels in consideration
of the connection of the conunication lines, but 256 words were not necessarilj
provided for the block multiplexer channels, considering that the number of
simultaneously operable 1/0 was small. In the "-280“, 256 unit control words

17
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

data tramfer

res-hi.
control
3 to rs

channe
storage

 

Figure 9. I/O Processor's Logic Structure. Consisting of mtually indepen-

dent and overlapping channels, data transfer control and 1/0
instruction control.

are provided for all block nultiplexer channels in consideration of the
capacity increase of the mass storage system 0188). The 1/0 instruction con-
trol centralizes and nanages channel neaories that store the unit control
words. Unit control words. for instance, store details of channel co-and
words delivered fron software during activation, and the status information
is renewed with the progress of the channel operation. After the completion
of the operation. part of the details will be reported to the software as

interrupt information. Table 2 cowares specifications of the new model with
the former model.

18
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Comparison of Channel Specifications

 

 

Number Item H-280li "-2001!
l 10? number/CPU lo 2
2 number of channel/10? 8
3 number of channel/CPU 32 16
lo types of channels
byte multiplexer channel maximum 2/10? maximum 2/10?
block multiplexer channel maximum 8/10? maximum 6/10?
5 number of U0"
byte multiplexer channel 256 256
block multiplexer channel 256 610
6 transfer speed
byte mltiplexer channel maxi-1m 100 maxim 100
block multiplexer channel maximum 1.5
(H bytes/sec) maximum 3 (maximum 3)*

Thigh-speed block mltiplexer channel

Channel Speed Acceleration by Independent Parallel Operation of Three Basic
Units

For the acceleration of the channel operation speed and compaction of archi-
tecture. lead control and parallel control are required just as in processors.
In a processor, as a basic concept. the instruction control unit, the arithm-
tic unit and the memory control unit, known as the three basic units, are
designated to perform their respective Emotions independently in parallel for
the enhancement of the speed.

Similarly, in 10?, the channel unit, the 1/0 instruction control unit and the
data transfer control unit can perform their respective functions independently
in parallel. while mltiple channels of the channel unit are performing 1/0
interface data transfer operations in parallel, 1/0 instruction control can
activate the next 1/0 instruction received and can execute interrupt handling
of I/O operations already completed. Data transfer control can process data
transfer requests fron multiple channels one after another. Specifically,
eight channels, 1/0 control and data transfer control can mutually overlap

and operate. Figure 10 indicates the state of overlap operations.

Figure 10 shows the state of overlap operations in terms of the relationship
of the respective operations to tile. assuaing that channels A and C execute
writing into the 1/0 device (reading from the main storage) while channel 3
executes reading (writing into the main storage) from the 1/0 device after
three channels, channel A, channel 3 and channel C, are activated.

FOIOFFICIALIEEONLY
I] II I] [l I] I] [l [I Ell/M-Iu-MSI
*8 llﬂllll llﬂllllﬂl
(sycowcc
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this manner. sufficient transfer capacity has been given to the present
high-speed file magnetic disc unit with a capacity of 1260 H bytes/spindle
and a data transfer speed of 3 H bytes/sec. As for the IOP throughput, the
10? has provisions for connecting even higher transfer capacity channels when
a high-speed file is developed and I/O interface data transfer capability is
improved in the future.

IV. Improvement of Semiconductor Element Technology

In conjunction with the above described logic system improvements, we decided
to develop a new high—speed high-density LSI and to devise high-density
packaging with it.

Assuming that the 1.3-1.6 performance improvement over the M-ZOOH would be
achieved basically by improving the machine cycles, a circuit speed goal and
an integration goal for elements were determined. Assuming that an average
delay/row of gates including wiring delay and loading delay is called a system
delay. this system delay must be accelerated at least 1.3 times and more. If
this can be achieved only by improving the gate switching time, the machine
cycle improvement ratio "y" will be expressed as follows, where "a" is the
percentage of gate switching time delay to the system delay and "x" is the
switching time improvement level:

1

(l-a) + a

 

if a - 0.6 and y - 1.3, x - 1.6, which means an improvement of about 1.6

times is necessary. The machine cycle was improved from both angles: for LSI
with maximum 550 gates, 60 percent acceleration was planned, and circuit delay
time 0.7 ns was improved to 0.45 ns. Concurrently, packaging density was en-
hanced by admixing LSI with maximum 1500 gates to shorten the wiring delay,
which contributes to the system delay.

Adoption of Three-Dimensional Packaging System Similar to the H-200K

The packaging system of the H-ZSOH uses three-dimensional packaging which con-
hines two types of substrates called package and backboard just as in the
H-200H, with increased package density/capacity.

Figure 11 shows a large high-density substrate (package) of approximately

40 x 20 cm size for loading LSI and HSI. In the "-2803, as in the M-ZOOH, L8!
is admixed with M51 and $81 in consideration of gate-pin ratio (ratio of
integrable number of gates to a given number of pins). In one package, a
maximum of 20 L31 and 20 M81 and 881 can be packaged.

As a connector to connect this package to the outside components, a SO-mil

(1 mil = 25.6 um) pitch connector is used; 580 pins in all, combining front
and back terminals. can be used. The substrate is composed of glass-epoxy and
has a total of 10 conductive layers. The grid pitch is designated as 75 mils
to enlarge the wiring capacity of each layer for the facilitation of high-
density packaging.

o

21

FKHI(NHHCIAL USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure ll. Package Loaded Hith LSI

The backboard is the substrate on which a package is housed. On one sheet of
backboard, 2h packages can be housed as a standard. An entire backboard can
house 50 K-ZOO K gates, and has a total of 18 conductive layers. The wiring
capacity is upgraded compared to the backboard (lb layers) used in the “-200“.

Semiconductor Process Technology Improved From the Conventional 3 pm to 2 um

The semiconductor technology used for the H-ZSOH is in principle an improve-
ment in speed or integration over that of the H—ZOOH. However, the basic
technology used in developing these semiconductors is markedly reformed from
that of the M—ZOOH.

To improve the speed and integration of semiconductors, the switching speed
must be upgraded and the power must be downgraded by reforming the semicon»
ductor process. The following semiconductor technologies were developed using
the technologies reformed for this purpose—~2 um photolithography technology,
dry-etching type microwiring technology, process technology such as three-layer
wiring technology, and technology such as LSI automatic design system, LSI
diagnostic system and test system.

1. Logic 1.81

The logic LSI was improved in two different ways: 60 percent acceleration of
the speed of the conventional 550 gate LSI without changing the number of
gates; achievement of high-density packaging of logic with a better gate-pin
ratio by a newly deveIOped maximum 1500 gate L81.

2. Logic-in Memory Element

As a new logic-in memory element, an element which can house a blbé bit memory
and a 770 gate logic circuit was developed. The integration of this element
is ahmostdouble that of the M—ZOOH. Since this logic-in memory element is
called IA (index array), we will refer below to the one developed for the
H-ZOOH as IA 1 L81 and the one developed at this time as IA 2 L81.

22
ll)R‘0¥1ﬂ(]Al.USIZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. High-Speed Bipolar Hemry Element

A new high-speed (access time 7 ns) and high-integration (’0 K bit) bipolar
memory element was developed as a memory element to be used for buffer
storage and control. This memory has the same access time but is integrated
four times better than that used for the 14-20011.

4. Main Storage Use 61. K Bit n HOS Maury Element

As a memory element to be used for main storage. a 610 K bit memory element was
developed. The capacity of the main storage was upgraded by designing to have
virtually the same access time as the 16 K bit memory used in the 14-2001! with
this memory packaged in the main storage. Tables 3 and lo show specifications
of logic and high-speed memory.

Table 3. Comparison of Logic LSI of the 11-2801! and the H-ZOOH

—_—______—————.———————————————_——

 

It- H—ZBOB M-ZOOH
_____________________________._
1500 gate [.81 nunber of gates maximum 1500

circuit speed 0.8

number of pins 108

average power (H) 3.5
550 gate LSI number of gates minus 550 maximum 550

circuit speed 0.65 0.7

number of pins 108 108

average power (H) 3.3 3.3

_—_________—__._—.—————————————

Table 4. Comparison of Logic-in Memory and High-Speed Bipolar Memory
Element Devel- Element Devel-

Item 05d for “-2801! oped for n-zoou
logic-in memory number of memry bits 61106 3072
element number of gates 770 470
memory access time (ns) 6.7 6.7
average power (H) 5.2 3.9
bipolar memory number of memory bits 14096 1024
element memory access time (ns') 7 7
average power (W) 1 0.8

______——____—_—————————————

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1500 Cute Mnstersllco LSI Packaged in the Same Package as the 550 Gate LSI

While a process with a 3 ma miniaturization was used for the $50 gate 1.81 of
the H-ZOOH, the miniaturization was further advanced for the high-speed 550
gate 1.51 of the H-ZBOH by designating 2 pm as the smallest size emitter.
Consequently, speed was accelerated from 0.7 ns/gate to 0.45 ns using vir-
tually the same circuit current. Besides the miniaturization of transistors,
the chip size was also reduced to two-thirds in terms of area ratio, from 5.7
III! square to 4.5 In square, by reducing the aluminum wiring width and span.
This size reduction increased the nmber of chips to be obtained from a wafer
of identical size.

0n the other hand, a maximum 1500 gate masterslice model gate array 1.81 was
developed using the 2 pm process for the achievuent of high integration.”
A photo of this chip is shown in Figure 12. This [.51 uses a high-speed 861.
system just as in the 550 gate LSI. Its power voltage is -lo.5V and there are
88 external input/output pins, which are packaged on the same 108 pin flat
package.8 The basic circuit is composed of three input ORIROR. Hired/0R and
Correct/AND are manipulative and can be used as logic gate equivalents, con-
tributing to the higher density of the logic gates. One block is constructed
with these four basic circuits, and this block is lined vertically and hori-
zontally in a matrix, with the wiring channels running between the matrix.

An automatic layout and automatic wiring program handles gate layout and inte-
grate wiring. If the wiring channel capacity is too small, it takes too such
computer time for layout and wiring and it may take design time for manual
wiring in case the unwired space is left to the end. On the other hand, if
the wiring channel capacity is too large, the chip size will increase. The
optimum number of channels was determined based upon the results of the 550
gate LSI, and 1500 gates were successfully integrated on a 5.8 III square size
chip. The reduction of the chip size leads to reduction of costs and allows
the use of the same LSI package as the 550 gate 1.51.

The automatic layout and automatic wiring programs were remodeled for use
in the !.500 gate LSI; they can complete layout and wiring virtually within the
same time as in the 500 gate 1.81.

In order to package the 1500 gate LSI, which is three times more integrated
than the conventional LSI, while holding down the electric consumption to the
same level on the same package, the following innovations were made. Speci-
fically, the current of the basic circuit was reduced to one-third that of

the 550 gate LSI, but the on—load activation current was set at two-thirds.
Furthermore, compared to the conventional two-layer wiring on the chip, a
three-layer wiring technology was developed at this time; the power wiring

was transferred to the third layer while the logic wiring was installed on

the first and second layers. In addition to this arrangement, the wiring pitch
was 30 percent more densified. The power current is the same as with a 550 gate
gate LSI, so that the latest LSI can be used jointly with the former 1.51.

In using LSI, a 1500 gate 1.81 is used for the logic with a good gate-pin ratio,
and a 500 gate LSI is discriminately used for other irregular logic. This
proper use of 1.81 resulted in an increase in packaging efficiency, improvement
in total system packaging density and shortening of machine cycles.

2h
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘1‘- .
'u ‘

‘.9 ”kiwi-v?

-Eﬁm

men--

It- 4- v.

F R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8t.- ” >51. .1. 3.... ”g .3332: “go 523 "a
15:52:! ”H3 .5395 "(u Iii " an: . taint-gm "30

    
  

023.. can

Iooaou uﬁud. , <0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Doubling the Nulber of Bits and Gates of Logic-in Memory Element

Tlu- logic-in memory element has a cannon use for the address translation
buffer (TLB) and the buffer address array (BAA) of high-speed buffer storage
(BS). In the M-ZOOH. the memory array and logic were cut out and a 3072 bit
and 670 gate IA 1 LSI was developed‘1 so that this element could have cannon
use for both a 256 column at 2 line TLB and a 64 colmn x 16 line BAA. In the
H-280H, IA 2 L51, practically the same circuit speed and doubled integration
level was developed to facilitate the improvement of BS packaging density and
to make provisions for future capacity expansion.12 Figure 13 shows the inter-
nal block chart of an IA 2 L51, and Figure 14 shows an example of its applica-

tion to the BAA. This application method is the same as in application exam-
plel concerning the M-ZOOH.

  
   

  

Figure 14. IA 2 L51 Example of
Application to BAA (buffer address

array). The dark box shows part
added in IA 2.

buffer storage

address
buffer storage

    

 

 

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--.-~m.n u -. "I .
i . ' -—

{11"

Figure 15. Pictures
IA 1 L51 (8) and
IA 2 LSI (b).

I‘D-Iii

i
E
i
7v.
o

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
u
N
0
E
S
.u
L
A
m
0
m
F
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l‘he IA 2 LSI and high-speed bipolar memory are designed to be sufficiently
reliable even against alpha-ray obstacles. Generally. soft errors due to
alpha rays are more liable to occur in proportion to the advancement in inte-
gration and speed of the memory. However. it is proven that the soft error
ratio was held below 30 FIT (l PIT: one defect out of 109 parts 8 time) accord-
ing to operation results of the l K bit memory for the 11-200}! with provisions
for countering alpha ray obstacles such as improvements in circuit‘technology,
chip-coating and quality of packaging materials.15

In addition to this achievement, the In K bit memory, IA 2 L51, which incor-
porates radiation instrumentation, quantitative analytic technology for
uranium and thoriua contained in very small amounts in packaging materials
high purity. high heat-resistance and improved flexible coating materials,“
also realizes a soft error ratio equivalent to that of the l K bit memozy.

The high-speed 61. K bit n MOS memory element used for the main storage unit is
slightly slow in access time compared to the 16 K bit element. However, the
overall performance of the main storage unit viewed from the storage control
unit was made to be the same as when a 16 K bit was in use by using many of
the previously described 550 gate and 1500 gate 1.51 in the peripheral logic of
the memory and storage control for the compaction of the overall space.

Figure 17 shows a picture of a 66 K bit n nos memory element.

Complete Supportive Setup for Development

In the above, we have focused on the merits of the logic systems and system
specifications and hardware technology that support them, comparing them with
the H-ZOOH.

A higher speed was achieved for the 14-280}! based upon the H—ZOOH using high-
speed LSI and high—integration saliconductors, and simultaneously it was
designed to meet the needs for sophistication and versatility of the system
by extending the framework of system specifications such as expansion of the
main storage capacity and expansion of the connectable channels. These expan-
sions of specifications also have much to do with the progress of the semi-
conductor technology.

Likewise. improvement and development of performance evaluation technology,
design automation technology. logic verification simulation technology, cir-
cuit delay verification simulation technology, LSI RAH test technology

and package diagnostic technology are important. in addition to the develop-
ment of logic systems and hardware technologies for the development of a pro-
cessor such as this. Fair and honest efforts to improve these technologies
are the foundations for the development.

In conclusion, we would like to express our determination to make use of the
technical experience obtained in connection with the development of the “-2808
as resources for our future efforts to develop a better system.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RAH Chip.

m
n
t
1
B
K
[4
6
a
f
o
e
r
u
t
c
1
P

I'll-I33. 6' i l .1

Figure 17.
10.

11.

12.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

Nkazava, Funnoya and Odaka: "Fastest Comercial General Couputer With a
Pipeline System Strengthened by 1.81 Technology," NIKKEI ELECTRONICS,
26 Dec 1979. No 228, pp 104-130.

Hatauzaki: "Eacamination of Internal Structure of Large Computer 1m 3081,"
NIKKEI ELECTRONICS, 22 Jun 1981, No 267, pp 172-200.

Horikoahi, IL, Nagaahilna, S., Purumaya, K. and Okada, T.: "An Example
of LSI-Oriented Logic Implementation in a Large-Scale Computer, The
11-20011,” DIGEST 0F PAPERS CMPCON SPRING, pp 62-65, Feb 1980.

Chiba, T., Furumaya, K. and Hoaoaaka, 8.: "Packaging Trade-Offa for an
LSI-Oriented Very High-Speed Computer, The NITAC 14-2008," IEEE TRANS.
on CENT, Vol CHHT 4, No 2. pp 166-172. Jun 1981.

Izumi, Homoae, Hosoaaka and Kobayaahi: "Development of KITAC “-2803
Processor,” HITACHI HYORON, V01 63, No 9, pp 43-48, Sep 1981.

Saito, Furukatau, Hiki, Tokunaga, Hatanabe and Tomita: "High Speed
Technology and Architecture of Large Computer ACOS 1000," NIKKEI ELEC-
TRONICS, 11 Hay 1981, No 264, pp 174-200.

Hirakuri, Ueno, Tauchimoto: "Large Computer H—380/382 With Improved
Performance by Trihierarchical Henry System and High-Density Technology,"
NIKKEI ELECTRONICS, 11 Hay 1981, No 264, pp 176-200.

Ohtsuka, K. and Dani, T.: "Design of a 108 Pin VLSI Package With Low
Thermal Resistance," DIGEST 0P 3RD EUROPEAN HYBRID MICROELECTRONICS
CONFERENCE, pp 94-99, 1981.

Maaaki. A., Harada, Y. and Ikeda, T.: ”Optimization of the Oxide,
Iaolater Transistor Structure for ECI. Haateralice LSI'a," ESSCIRC'77
DIGEST OF TECHNICAL PAPERS, pp 128-129, Sep 1977.

Anzai, A.. Ohya, Y. and Nitta. Y.: "High Speed Bipolar [.81 Technology,"
IIIGH SPEED DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY CONFERENCE DIGEST, 2-2, Jan 1981.

Hotta. A., Ogiue, K., Mitausada, K.. Yanaguchi, K.. Inadachi, H. and
llinai. M.: "Bipolar Memory LSI Chips for Computer," IEEE INTERNATIONAL
SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS CONFERENCE (ISSCC), DIGEST OF TECHNICAL PAPERS,
THAN 9.1, pp 98-99. Feb 1979.

Odnka. H., Ivabuchi, M., Ogiue, K., Kitaukawa. 6., Yamaguchi, K. and
Inadachi, 11.: "A Nev High-Speed Logic-in Memory VLSI for Main Frame
Computer," ibid., Feb 1982, to be published.

Inadachi, 11., Home. N., Ymguchi, IL, Ikeda, T. and Biguchi, 11.:
"A 6 no lo kb Bipolar RAH Using Switched Load Resiater Memory Cell,"
ibid., THAN 9. 6, pp 108-109, Feb 1979.

32
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0Fi1CJAl.USE1DNLN

1a. Hitausada. Nishikawa, Nulata. Ringo. Taunano. Shiraau. Sahara and
Hakino: "u-Ray Blocking Seniconductor Coating Material 'PIQ.'" Proceed-
inga from FY-al National Convention of Semiconductor-Material Sector of the
Society of Electronic Comnicationa, Proceedinga No 65. Oct 1981.

15. Takizawa, Kato, Ogiue, Mitauaada, Yanaguchi and Inakata: "Dependency of
a-Ray Related Software Errors on Cycle Tile in Bipolar RAH," sale aa
above, Proceedings No 64, Oct 1981.

16. "Portran for Interpreting Repetitive Operations in I? aentencea in no
Loop Into Vector Instructions." NIKKEI ELECTRONICS, 9 Nov 1981, No 277,
pp 96-99.

17. Kawabe, Unetani, Takanuki, Hurayana. and Odaka: "BITAC HeZOOﬂ Integrated
Array Processor (TAP)," DENKI TSUSHIR GAKKAI GIJUTSU KENKYO HOKDKU,
3680-99, pp 67-75, March 1981.

18. Tanaka: "High-Speed Technique for Science and Technology Calculation
Computer.“ NIKKEI ELECTRONICS. 3 Aug 1981,80 270, pp 122-136.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-HCGraw-Hill, Inc 1982

89b0
CSO: 4106/62

33
INDI‘OFIICJAl.lEli(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

some: AND TECHNOLOGY

OVERSEAS rmommcm. Homers PACE DIFFICULTIBS
Tokyo union KEIZAI sannnm in Japanese 18, 19 Mar 82
[18 Mar 82 p 7]

[Text] Overseas petrochemical projects, staked with rosy drea- are having a
difficult tine. Following the Iranian petrochenical business. which has be-
cone alnost a "corpse." the Singapore pstrocheuical enterprise is faced with
difficulty now that Hitsui Petrochenical Industry has expressed its desire to
withdraw. The enenies of overseas projects include country risks sonstines,
and inflated raw nterial and construction costs at other tines. Diffi-
culties which assembling and processing industries will never experience can
crop up because of the sheer size of a project. However, overseas expansion
is an mavoidable course for Japan's petrochqsicsl industry. because it has a
decisive handicap in the area of raw naterials. Petrochenicel [industry]
circles are searching in earnest for the desirable format for overseas
projects which can ilprove profits and reduce risks.

A Sigh Upon withdrawal by Hitusi Petrochenical

"The inevitable has cone." In late February, when it beta-e known that
Hitsui Petrochenical had decided to withdraw fro. the ethylene glycol (36)
undertaking, which is the nucleus of the Singapore petrochenical project, the
leaders of industrial circles all sighed equally.

The Singapore petroche-ical project was started in late 1971, before the first
oil shock, upon the request of the Singapore Govern-ant to Sunitono Chedcal
Industry for cooperation. The original plan was to use naphtha (crude gaso-
line) produccd by Singapore's petroleu refinery base. which is one of the
leading bases in the world. as the raw naterial and to produce a consistent
series of petrochenical products, including ethylene. high-, nediun—, and low-
pressure polyethylene. polypropylene, and no to be distributed over the South-
east Asian narkets.

At that tins, the project was supposed to be couplets with three i-portant
conditions consisting of raw nterial. narket and infrastructure. However,
after the oil shock and the consequent rise in the cost of naphtha. which is
produced fron oil, it becane clear that they could no longer coqete with the
0.8. and Canadian petrochenical industries, which use cheaper natural gas as

31.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the raw material. Nevertheless, the project was pushed forward according to
schedule. In 1975, a basic contract between the Singapore Government and
Sumitomo Chemical Industry was signed. and in 1977 the project was upgraded
as a national project The project was launched with a hidden Achilles heel—
"high raw material costs."

Remaining Group Heaters Conduct Bitter Negotiations

0n the other hand, the price of BC in the Southeast Asian market dropped to
120-130 yen per kilogram, thanks to the offensive launched by 0.8. and
Canadian products. In the case of the Singapore project, "160 yen per kilo-
gram is the profit line, based on calculations that take into consideration the
cost of raw materials and of plant construction. It cannot be lowered any
further," (according to Mitsubishi Petrochemical, which participated in its HG
enterprise). Under present circumstances, the Singapore petrochemical busi-
ness must be prepared to lose if it wants to sell in the Southeast Asian
market.

"We are already bearing the load of Iran Petrochemical and can bear no more
overseas burdens," explained Naritada Tannawa, president of the Hitsui Petro-
chemical, to the other members of the consortium. But it is quite evident
that a loss of confidence in the prospects for a profit on EG from the Singe-
pore enterprise was the major motive for its withdrawal.

The members of the EC enterprise consortium that were left behind after the
withdrawal by Hitsui—Hitsubishi Petrochemical and Nippon Shokubai Kagaku
Kogyo, together with Sumitomo Chemicalubegan negotiations with the Singapore
Government concerning stopgap measures necessitated by the withdrawal of
Hitsui Petrochemical. The Singapore Government is reluctant to raise its con-
tribution rate, however, and bitter negotiations continue.

Singapore was not alone in feeling the impact of the offensive launched by the
petrochemical industry based on natural gas.

Korea Suffers From the Same Difficulty

Korea's Honam Petrochemical is a complex built in the Yosu area through a
joint effort by Korea and the Hitsui group (Hitsui a Go, Kitsui Toatsu Chemi-
cal. Hitsui Petrochemical, and Nippon Petrochemical), which carpeted with its
rival the Mitsubishi group and won the contract. The leading role played by
this project in the modernization of the industry was much talked about. ‘lhey
went into comercial operation in the fall of 1979. but they are operating in
the red today. The reason for this is the fact that its EC, one of the main
products. cannot compete with 0.8. and Canadian inorts. Fiber products con-
stitute an inortant part of Korea's exports. so the manufacturers are seeking
cheaper raw materials in order to cut costs.

The raw material situation is just as serious in Korea as it is in Japan. So
far, its ethylene costs approximately 200 yen per kilogram, which is higher

than Japan's 170-180 yen. It is quite obvious that Korea cannot compete with
U.S. and Canadian inorts. At this juncture, the price of naphtha has dropped

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

smeuhat. but the Japanese (Mitsui & Co.) are apprehensive about Whether
this can become a decisive factor by which profits can be ilproved."

The Saudi Arabian Petrochemical enterprise participated in by the Mitsubishi
group received an unexpected blow amid this worldwide relaxation in the de-
Iand and supply of oil and the consequent reduction in the cost of oil. All
the participating members had expected to reap a plus-alpha profit, aside
from the petrochemical business, from the bonus crude oil they are to get
over a period of 15 years starting in 1986, when the petrochemical enterprise
begins comercial operations, as a reward for their contribution to the de-
velopment of the enterprise.

The irony of the matter is that the price of oil dropped rapidly in January
when advance shipments of the bonus crude oil began. Crude oil whose 68?
(official sale price set by the government) is lower than that of Saudi
crude—such as Iranian crude and North Sea crude—has even appeared, so the
situation that existed last sumer, when the price of Saudi crude was lover
than that of other crude, has been cowletely upset.

As a result, the advantage of "cheap Saudi crude" has been lost. The disap-
pointment to the participating melters has been especially great, because al-
most all participating members had counted on the profit they would get from
the bonus crude to make up for the risks that go with projects in oil-produc-
ing countries. If the relaxed state of oil demand and supply persists, bonus
oil can turn into penalty oil. Cries for help have been heard.

The greatest enemy of overseas projects used to be the country risk. The
Mitsubishi group is still bogged down in the quagmire of the Iran Petrochemi-
cal project as a result of the Iranian revolution and war. In recent years,
new types of difficulties, including the cost differential for raw materials,
have begun to cast ominous shadows. The distress in petrochemical industry
circles can only deepen. .

[19 Mar 82 p 8]

[Text] Since the year before last, petrochemical industry circles have been
jostling around overseas expansion plans centered in the United States, Canada
and Australianincluding, for exawle, a Canadian and Alaskan petrochemical
base project undertaken by the Mitsubishi group consisting of Mitsubishi
Chemical Industry and Mitsubishi Corporation; a South Australia petrochemical
base project, jointly participated in by Asahi Chemial Industry and Mitsui
Toatsu Chemical; and a vinyl chloride intemdiate raw material project in
Alberta, Canada, by Mitsui & Co. The aim of these projects is to use the
abundant natural gas as a raw material and to produce basic chemical products
and intermediate raw materials which will have a cmtitive edge in advanced
nations where the political situation is stable.

Revised Feasibility Study

The UFO (Iran-Japan Petrochemical) enterprise has shown us vividly the fright-
fulness of the country risk (the risk to the investment due to the host

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cauntry). Moreover, after two oil shocks, natural gas has become a cheaper
starting raw material than naphtha (crude gasoline) refined from crude oil for
the production of ethylene-from one-half to two-thirds cheaper, based on the
cost of ethylene. It is quite natural that petrochemical industry circles
would look to advanced nations with fewer risks and abundant natural gas.

Even these new ventures, however, are not without unemected miscalculations.
First of all, the crude oil price, to which the. movement of the petrochemical
products aarket and the raw material costs in Japan are directly tied, has
dropped. Executive Director Kenjiro (Ira of Hitsubiahi Corporation, which

is pushing ahead with a petrochemical base project in the province of
British Ooh-bis, Canada, lamented about his headaches: "Us figured that

the project was feasible if the price of crude oil went up to $60-$70 per
barrel. But in reality, the price may dip below $30 per barrel, and construc-
tion costs are ballooning as a result of inflation. Therefore, even if the
project is approved, we must reevaluate the feasibility study. The actual
operation date mat be pushed back further and further."

No matter how cheap the natural gas may be, it after all is only a portion of
the total cost. Unless the movement of petrochemical products can be ac-
tivated against the background of rising oil prices, there is no appeal to
plunging further into development and ilport activities with huge investment
sums. The Alaska project, which requires a much larger investaent than the
British Columbia project because its industrial base needs to be fixed first,‘
has begun to be referred to as a ”let century project" in some sectors, so
completion of this project has been pushed further into the “future.

Red Ink Unavoidable for 5 Years

“nether or not the South Australia project undertaken mainly by Asahi (Itemi-
cal Industry can take off depends in large measure on how many Japanese
manufacturers of vinyl chloride are willing to participate and how much as-
sistance the provincial government is willing to offer to fix the industrial
base. There is no way of knowing whether or not the project can materialize.

The worldwide slump in petrochemical products and the recent situation whereby
0.5. and Canadian chemical products can be imported cheaply are making it

very difficult to implemm new overseas projects. According to Hitsui & 00.,
which is making plans to manufacture vinyl chloride intermediate raw mater-
ials in Alberta, Canada: "Apart from trade in products, more and more enter-
prises are exercising caution when it comes to investing" (General Chemical
Products Department): This is an indication of how difficult it is to im-
plement a project.

Petrochemical industry circles have their hands full just coping with this
unexpectedly severe doaestic slump. Although petrochemical industry circles
have begun to make preliminary moves to capture the natural gas of advanced
nations, they cannot help but be cautious when they think of their own re-
sources. Hiroshi "atanabe, executive director of hitsubishi Chemical Indus-
tries, which is participating in Canada's British Columbia project and the 11.8.
Alaska project, revealed a cautious attitude when he said: ”One must be

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"prepared to operate in the red for the first 5 years, because overseas
projects are so capital intensive. In contrast. nimble domestic facilities,
which have been almost completely depreciated, can somehow weather it for

a while, even if raw material costs happen to be high."

In the long run, however. Japanese petrochemical industry circles must fol-
low the path of international production. lhe Industrial Structure Council,
which is investigating relief measures for the petrochemical industry, has
pointed out: ”To expand into overseas regions where cheap raw materials

and fuel are available to develop and iQort—these are the sole keys to
survival for the Japanese petrochemical industry." Anid all this, a mater
of a new type of overseas expansion plans have attracted attention. niece
plans include a joint venture between Dow Chemical and four Japanese firms,
including Kanegafuchi Chemical Industry, in Alberta, Canada, and a joint
venture between hitsui 'l'oatsu Chenical end the 11.8. Bistron Co.

"Toyota-type" Strategy Surfaces

The joint venture with Dow Chemical consists of separating the existing fac-
ilities of Dow Canada and absorbing then among the participating firms in
order to supply vinyl chloride intermediate raw material to the four Japanese
investor firms. The contract for the joint venture is expected to be signed
by May. On the other hand, Mitsui Toatsu is to establish an acrylonitrile
production base in the United States within 1-2 years by utilizing surplus
facilities owned by Bistron, which is the chemical enterprise branch of the
11.8. [firm] Standard Oil of (bio. These projects are cowarable to the
"Toyota" strategy of utilizing existing GM facilities—unlike Nissan Motors,
which is constructing a new plant in the United States on its own.

"If you buy an existing facility today, you can start operating tomorrow.
There are no uncertainties related to construction, and there are fewer risks
as well. Nor is there any need to bear the interest burden for a period of
2-3 years while construction is under way. Instead of building large—scale
new plants. it is time for Japanese enterprises to go out into the world, and
especially the United States, and put to good use those plants that are not in
operation," declares the head of a large colraercial firm.

In fact, in recent years many American enterprises have been approaching big
Japanese petrochemical and consercial firms about plant sales. Participating
in production is an existing facility or, to go one step further, purchasing
existing plants seems to provide Japanese petrochemical industry circles
with an effective strategy for realizing their overseas expansion plans.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060044-2

aaua<

nooa

moan

mums

owon

 

can:
uwwuoh

0333353

oo>uuu>wuov vogue a:o«ua>
can .oaouhaoun .o:ou>:uu

Houuounl Bun

ouwwvuaHOuuu awakenso
Haaw> .avoo owuosoo

Haﬁuouua sun ouuaeoﬂ
Inuudu ovauoano uh:«>

kuuouua sun
muonvoauoucw ovuuoHno
leaca> .avoa caunauu
ocuuanoua .oaoahauu

auosvoum

nanuoun .Hquaaonu aauaoa «snail

.uuo .uaom an .Huoaaogu ”Hasm
.1396 :8 £35.35 ”3126
ﬁnaﬁnaauux .aoauauonuoo «guanaou«z

.ouo .ou-u
Ida-.6 .8 3.391 .8 a «9.3":

nuance

H8328 :8 $353qu 33528
23.33:. 55265 H8328 3:
:56 2:. .3355 :8qu 33:.
.buaéﬁ H8128 «533093.

mania

cuuvucno nosuo ouunu can .hadaaou
undue «£dn< .Haoaaénoouucm
«saunnauax .ouuuunsvsu aneuaonu
23€3§.§:383033€3§

ouauauunsw

  
  

 

uuogh no woman aucu «no Huauuom

 

OWOD gaun-

omoa .38:

avg—Io . I» won:

.238 .3251

cocaoo
wdnlbdoo Jouuuun

nauuuuoa

:owuusuuncoo nova: uuuaoum acousonuouuom odomuo>o uoﬁqx

39

END

Nihon Keiza1 Ski-buneha 1982.

.
0

0106/93

COPYRIGHT

9113
C50:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060044-2