FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10472

21 April 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 24/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

non OFT-10A]. USE ONLY
non

ms publications contain information priurily fro. foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also froa news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforaation was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor
nation was smarised or extracted.

Unfuiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Times within itm are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Govermeot.

COPYRIG‘I' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHIP OF
mmms REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAI DISSEHINATION
0? THIS PUBLICATION BB RBSTRICI'ZD FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/10472

21 April 1902

JAPAN REPORT

(rouo 24/32)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Suzuki's Raelection Predicted by Roma
(Blnlbuni loans; m JAPAN soomac JOURNAL, 30 Nor 82)...... 1

Confrontation Between Realm, 30kt Gnkkai Seen
(‘l‘akehiko nkahashi; MIMIC“ DAILY NM, 25 hr 82)......... 3

Ko-ooo Factor in Elections Examined
(“n31 Hakim; “EMILY YMURI, 26 hr 82)....oososssssos 5

Editorial on Hainberger's Proposal
(Bumrm; m1 Emuc ms. ”hr 82)sasooossossoosssooo 6

300mm

Shipbuildcrs Expand Business in Non-Shipbuilding Fields
George Nakamra; INDIBTRIA. lb: 82)......................... 8

Mailman-Defining Facilities to Be Discarded
(mON K312“ 8311.0“, ‘ mt 82)soosoossoss'ssosssoscosss'osos 18

Cardboard Industry For:- Depression Cartel
(Shinichi Kain-k1 Interview; 3mm SANGYO SERUM,
19 hr u).0COOOCOOOOOOO0.0000000000DIOOOOOIOOIOCOCVOOCCOCOC. 20

scram: AND momma

Accurate Instrumntation for Ssh Plant Operation
(ski-um" ““088“; mmr. m ”)00000900090'0000009000 23

Sensntic Gap in Computer Architacturc
(Noriyuki nnibaysshi;13ClmOCRA‘r, Jan 82).. 62

Fifth Generation Couputsr Project
(Wxnt. J“ a)...0....0.0...OOOOOOCOOIOOOIOOOOOV0...... 6o

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 P000]

FOROFFICIALUSIONLY
MM urn. CAI. t-nr. UNIJ

Polynric lbtarials in mectmnics
(mmmt, Jan a).0..I'OIOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO0.000.000.0000

Yanaguchi Satellite (bnmications Center
(mmme’ Jan a).....IOCOOQIOOOOOIOOOIO...000.000.0000..

Acoustic mission Technology

Polarizing Optical Fiber
(mmmMT’ m82)......OOOQIOOOOOOOOOQO0.000000000000000.

100w Hind~Power Generator
(nmmr’ Jm 82).oeosooososoasses‘oosoososoeosooosoosooo

Gospetitjcn Around VISI's
(nwmmr’ J” a)0.00........OOOIOOOOIIOOOOOCOCUO0.00....

Arduous Efforts Made To Complete Comications Agreement
(NIHON KEIZAI SBIDBIN, 15 Mar 82).

Revision of Postal Services Agreement Reached
(NIKON KEIZAI SBIBUN. 16 Mar 82, NIBON KOGYO SNDBUN,

19 “If 82)....000000oases-seeoasesssosososoossoseososooaoso.

Circuit Use fcr '0thers' Approved
Liberalized Data Comications

Background of Gomications Agnennt
(NINON RBI“! SNIHBIN, 17, 18 Mar 82)......................

New Uses of Circuits
rest for Efficiency

Liberalization of [hats Comications unsatisfactory
(mo SHIPBUN, 18 lb: 82)..

Freer Data Comminations Seen
(SANKBI snmw. 18 hr 8r)................................

Plans for Uranium mrichmnt Prototype P1ant Fired Up
(DENKI SHINBUN, 3, lo Feb 82)...............................

Division of Expenses
'DBNKI SHIEBUN' Editorial

‘lbyota Strengthens Position ‘lhrough Strategic larger
(Show Nochi; BUSINBS JAPAN, Mar 82)......................

monlight Project Succeeds in Iecycling Energy Research
(nkehiko Shinura; BUSINESS JAPAN, 1hr 82).. ... ... ...

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

91

95

98

101

103

106

109

112

118

125

127

129

136

138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SUZUKI 'S WONG! PREDICTED BY mum

Tokyo TEE JAM mono Jm in English 30 lb: 82 p 10

(Political Scan. column by samba: Kauai:

"mum's Rulcccton 19 Certain,
But..."]

[Inc]

In the mid-t 0‘ W m I!" mmnmmmmmen
WMBIWWM wan-mumwmmmm

‘muupcawvmmmm (ampliﬁed WWW
beam ' mm

mm m “M m- u.“- m W on w
mmmmwuwhwmun ﬁnd-chalet mantihm
mmwmmmmumw Wmmmmauwmw~
and muummw moan-sauna mum
mWWmh‘W-‘W'WP" 'mmamwmmu
A n.ummecunuh-W’* thmechan
mud lot m '3‘ W ‘o'mlawmub mo
‘mmmwmenmm "Wmmmmmbym
muqmwmmJ-w magnum”
ovumhmcmmvﬂlmtmd' mmWWlﬂMh

mxomamcwuaocmmu ”M“‘”Jmu°‘°um
Adriana-nun Mam can. up WWW. WM
don ol the Japan: mum-I nanny: m memnﬂ?‘ w
muwmumuumumou mmmwoym W”
“MW '0 do. :cgnbgwhgmﬂm
mm MM ,
but to «Ilia “law hen '73:, a. :
m para-M Mum W W W
Jamaal“ gunman“. tmcmummmtm-
Mumtouunmmm 11min» MM‘
(mmmcwmaonmoum. bituminous! common
Steady mummtmm mum who
cndtheLDmemwpn-wm mlnduuduntmmwhauxn
WWW-nmmmw Mien «a: ﬁscal m In at: wont.
Mumbmdmmucotﬂccm swmmmmm “we:
mwpdlochnmﬂuuquIm 1mm B to
mmysysmnolmmdcmﬂou WPBMAm.m mud

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ill-mum! Km». to a Nikon Kola! do-

1982 Th; Ithon Kaizni Shllbun, Inc.

COPYRIGHT

6120/ 223

€50;

FOR OFFICIAL USIONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

COUFRONTATIOII BMEN KOHEITO, $0M cam: 5m

Tokyo MINICIII DAILY NEWS in Englieh 25 til: 82 p 2

[Nagotacho Dotngs column by rakehtko Takahaehi:

Between Kometto, Solut Gnkkat"]

[Text]

TheKomellolea

Why

momma

athaiedvnieed
to

EEEE
35%

Dietvuhlﬂl
oilsmemheu
timed

in November 198 a pot
calledKoemiSeiii
Reomei (Clean Politico
Federation «stormed. Alter
tsmverevoo h theilotne
oi Carnation election to m.
an Iotra~Diet not» called
Komeihalnseetw.

A political petty called the
Komeito was. iormally
established It lay in. The

no to advance hto

htheiuzunmeleetlonilve
Komeito members were
elected.

Following a sveeplhg ad~
uncetheKomeitoettmhledln
thedualelectloosiorthellouee
ot Repreeemativee and the
limolCotmeillorslolmaod
itnouhaenseatsmtheiiouse
oiiteomentativeeandzsmthe
House oi Cot-lemon. As the
aecoredlargeetoppositloaparty.
next to the Japan Socialist
Party.theitomettoma

strong voice in the political
world.

:35
E 53%

Atthetlmewheoittirnad-

raoeed into the Diet. the
Komeile carried out

movemeota aimed at

‘i'hts recent attitude oi the
Itomelto la arousing
Wooden lo the Soka
Gahhalaho.Ameetlo¢oi8oha
Gehal youths h the Sham
dhtrietvaeheldoolarehtt.
Ala gatheriogheldaiterward
hymemheuottheoilicerclaa.
voices oi dhsatistactloo were
heardahouxthexomeitohemg
seen as having relations with
Taoaira.

"We desire that the Korneito
Diet members act by returning
to the starting point" was one
statement that was heard The
atmosphere was that the
Komeito Diet members will he
asked to do ao more pattively
hithahltore.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"swtle Confrontation

mu OFHCMI. USE ONLY

POLITIML an 800101116101.

. "nu Romeo Factor”)

(0120/ 223

ISO:

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EDImRIAL 0N Harlem's PRONSAL
Tokyo ASABI EVENING NEWS in English 30 III! 82 p 7

MWWWM MmM MMMMMMMWMMM. mm ,M .MMmM WWMMMMMM MMM

“mama .MMWMWM Maw mm.“ Mmm wwmm

mm mun «ma d.wa m a. M m m
WMHMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMWMMM MMMMMMMMMMW
.M L. J M...» M. ..u M MA .M m”... Mum
MMMMMMWMMMWMMMMMMWMM MMMMMM MMMMWMMMM
MM MMMMM MMMMWWMMMMMM.-MM MMM ML
MMNWW MWMMMM MMMMW mem.
.m m mud mummwam “WWW Wmmm rum nmmsmm memeu
MMM. MMM MM :MMM MMMMMMMMMMM MMMMMMMM MMM

[3d1tor1a1:

[Tut]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mmxmmmw x m in m ._
.MWM ”hum” WWW ”Knmwwuwﬂ
w.“mm..w» .me {Mr mg
m. M 3%; m. mm ﬁg
.uum.m 1" J. a m m Wm.“
mm mm M: mm wwwwm “mm“
mm... a?
N: mm? m :mmm

“ﬁatmmmﬂmn umnmaw 9.

WI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Auhi “2’s“; Rm 1982

COPYRIGHT :

6120/ 223

CSO:
IV” Vi Il‘lluu Vve: with.

summons mm wsmrss no m-snpmmm mws
Tokyo Imusma in English Vol 12, No 3, liar 32 pp 9-15

[Article by George Nakanura: "uajor Japanese Shipbuildsrs Expand Business in
Non-Shipbuilding rields']

[heart] has moves

Topia now sud: talked about in Japanese industrial circles are industrial
robots, nsdlatronics. nicroccquters, bio-ass and biotechnology, to cite a few.
All these are industrial areas that are calsihred to have great dances of ex-
pansion in the near future, and aajor Japanese shipbuilding fires are trying to
join plans to industrialira products in these fiela in one way or another.

he Japanese shipbuilders also have strong interest. in the nation's defense in-
dustry. Last Dacenber, the Japmese Govern-ant published the national budget
for fiscal 1982 beginning on April 1, 1982. The budget, subject to Parliamen-
tary approval, provides an outlay of 82,596,100 nillion for defense expendi-
tures. The figure represents an increue of 7.75“ over the previous year.

he growth rate exceecb the originally-set ceiling of 7.5., while the growth
of other appropriations is curbed to a bare union: to reduce deficits in state
finances. ‘l‘ha ratio of defense spending to the gross national product is 0.93%
Indications are that the Governnent will continue to give top fiscal priority
to defense buildup and that the ratio sill aost likely to surpass it of our in
fiscal 1984 or 1985. (n the other hand, the shipbuilding industry 11013 a na-
jor sector of the nation's defense industry.

Another area that Japanese shipbuilders are trying to put their hand to is the
ocean developoent indutry in vhid: they can sake better use of their technol-
ogy than in my other areas of indmtry. The bminess of offshore structures,
centering on submarine oil drilling rigs, enjoyed its first golden era during
the past year or two. Subsarine oil drilling projects are being carried out

in the North Sea, the Gulf of Herico, the Po Bai (Gulf of dainll) and sons
other areas. In the Beaufort Sea (in the Arctic Ocean), Due Petroleua Co. of
Cmada and najor oil oospmias plan to laundn oil drilling projects, and neces-
sary equip-ant has already been ordered. ‘lhe obtainable snout of undersea oil
deposit: in the Arctic Ocean area is estimated at 320,000 aillia: barrels in
the Middle Best. The world's ocean develop-ant is steadily expanding to the
icy waters. Japnese shipbuilding fins are losing no tile in preparing for
ocean develop-ant in the icy waters in the ascend golden era.

MWWMY
The diallengo to a notice of new gmeh inducers.“ by njoz Japaneee ehtp-
builders to in June with the policy that they have been pursuing since 1975 -
to "bewait with ehipbutldtnq‘ - to enter new man of bmtnou.

The Beginning of 'Breaking with Shipbuilding'

in 1975, when lapanese shipbuilders experienced'lhe
adverse effects of the oil crisis, they strongly felt that an
unprecedentedly serious recession would come sooner or
later. As they had feared, new diipbuilding orders stopped
coming in I977. This state continued through 1979, plung
ing the shipbuilding industry into what might be called a
"destnrctive recession."

The industry tools all sorts of measures to save itself
from the predicament. Maior dtipbuilders cut their produc-
tion iacilities by 4096 (35% for the entire shipbuilding
industry, including srnailer shipbuiiders and related busi-
nesses). set new rules to control operation rates. formed an
Hui-depression cartel, suspended the recruitment of new

' school yaduates. cut wages and curbed overtime work. A
series of drastic measures. unprecedented in Japanese indus-
try, was inevitable for corporate survival.

While trying to reduce dtelr extra weictt. the ship‘
builders did not target to lake t '- More measure, that is.
to expand the non-shipbuilding business — the inclination
toward "breaking with shipbuilding," so to speak. The
stnrctural charts in l975 was not the first. During the
l9SOs. managers of some shipbuilders tried seriously to
balance sales equally between shipbuilding and land equip-
ment business However, during the period between l950
and I975. dtipbuilding orders continued to increase. and
the supply aid demand situation was rather stable as a
whole. Theteiore. shipbuilding did provide a stable source
ol income. Executives in chame ol shipbuilding dominated
business in a shipbuilding lirm, while those who promoted
land equipment business-were compelled to submit to
unduly cold treatment

However. shipbuilding ﬁrms laid the loundations for
land equipment business in those years through efforts by
the promoters 0! land equipment business and through
business mergers. This enabled the expasion ol laid equip-
ment business enrich. in turn, reduced the ratio of ship
building to total sales. as stated in the (allowing section.

Giant“ in the Earning Ratio

Figures to be given below are comparisons in the sales
ratios of shipbuilding aid land equipment business of
Japan's seven top shipbuilders between two hilyear terms
- the first half of die March I982 term (April I, i98i~
September 30. i98i: the late term) and the ﬁrst hail oi the
March 1975 term (the early term). The seven are Hitachi
Shipbuilding l Engineering (Hitachi Zosen), lshilrawaim-

9

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
curt Va than» vet. Una.-

Harima Heavy industries (lHl). Kawasaki Heavy industries,
Mitsubishi Heavy industries, Mitsul Engineering 5 Ship-
bulding, Nippon Koltat and Sumitomo Heavy industries
(alphabetical order).

In Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, shipbuilding accouncd
for l“ and laid equipment 86% in the late term, ascom-
pared witlt 38% and 625 irt die early term.

in "it. the shttilar ratio was 30:70 for the late term,
and 37:63 for the exly term. In the late term, the ratio
of shipbuilding rose to 30 due to sluggish business in laid
equipment, while the sittila ratio for the previous corre-
sponding term was 23, a typical ratio in recent years.

In Kawasaki Heavy Industries. the ratio for the late
term was 26:74, as against 24:76 for the ezly term. As
in the case of lHl, the ratio of shipbuilding was hiyier
that those of other years because of stasis" land equip-
meet business. The ratio oi the previous corresponding
term was l5:8$. During the past 3~4 years, the ratio or
dtipbuilding has been between l0% artd 20%, except tor the
first hall of the March l982 arm. Among the seven ﬁrms,
the ratio of land equipment business is quite hidt, along
with Mitsubishi Heavy industries and Sumitomo Heavy
Industries.

In Hitachi Zosen, the ratio for the late term was 3| :69.
as against 60:40 lor the erly term. The ratio of shipbuild-
irtg and land equipment was completely reversed.

ln Mitsui Engineering J: Shipbuilding. the ratio [or the
late term was 39:6l, as apinst Sdzlé for the evly term.
In the cases of Hitachi Zosen ltd Mitsui Endneering r.
Shipbuilding, the ratio of shipbuilding had been hitterthat
that or land equipment until the March l978 term when
the ratio was reversed.

Their corporate images as leading shipbuilders an:
gradually changing. as the figures show.

in Sumitomo Heavy Industries. the ratio for the late
term was 20:80 (and l5285 for the mid-l98l terml, J\
against 36:64 tor the ezly term. The reason why the ratio
of shipbuilding was low at this point is that the company
rneryd with Sumitomo Machine Industry and Uraga Heats
Industries in l969.

Nippon Koltan is a steelmaker, rather than a shipbuilder.
in tact, the sales ratio of shipbuilding business in the luv
term was only 6%. It was such a small percentage that we
do not state comparative ratios.

From the abovementioned oompaatlve ratios or ship-
building and land equipment business of the seven major
dripbuilders, we can point out the following

Firstly. Mitsubidti, lHl and Kawasaki have maintained
the shipbuilding ratios of about 20% during the past three
or tour years. although this may not be true [or the first
halfoftheMarchl982term,becauseotsluggishlutd

10
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
equipment business in that haliyu period. The con-
tinuanoe oi the nonshipbuilding ratio oi about 80% means
that the policy oi "breaking with shipbuildim” is nearing
its end. '

Secondly. as mentioned erlier, Hluchi aid Mitsui had
had larger ratios for shbbullding that laid emipment until
iiscal W“. The ratios were reversed in the iolowing yes
no thereafter. Their shipbuilding ratios dropped to 30% in

the mid-wet term. The ratio oi shbbuilding and land
equipment in the order backlog was 34:66 ior Hitachi and

«:56 lot Mitsui. The iall in the shbbuldlng share is not
a temporaty phenomenon. Althoupt the corporate names
oi Hitachi Zosen (Shipbuilding l: Engineerim) and Mitsui
Zosen (Enp'neering l: Shipbuilding) carry strong ima's oi
shipbuildets, they may become disservice to their business
operations before long,

Thirdly, the sh'mbuilding ratios oi Nbpon Koitut ltd
Sumitomo Heavy Industries I'll. irom 5% to 19% at the
highest. Nbpon Koltan's main line oi business is steelmak-
ing, while that oi Surnitomo is precision and construction
madtlnety.Whentheytry toupand Mbusimthey
will explore non-shipbuilding areas. including ocean
developmentThey will probablybethaiitstamongthe
seven to "break with shipbuilding."

The business results in fiscal 198] mean a “decltation
for business recovery" by the shipbuilding industry. They
also show that sh‘pbullders are divided into three business
patctns aid that there are moves to chat: a big current
the shipbuilding industry is following.

Toward the Fital Goal

ln I975 the seven maior shipbuil'dets attempted takeoff
for a “break with shipbuilding," and the atmnpt raised the
share of land equipment business, thoudt sliﬂttly. But none
oi them believe that they have completed their structural
chan’ toward "breaking with shipbuilding." The contents
ol‘ their technoiop‘cd development, mdium- and longtetm
programs and equipment invesunent indicate that the
shipbuilders ate p‘vhg priority to the expansion of non-
shipbuilding business.

Stated below are their business prospects. aiming at
increasing non-shipbuilding business. '

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is not only the leader oi the
lapaneso shipbuilders but also a big business oi tt. ""lﬂ-
try, and its product lines are quite diverse. To be nond here
is that many of these products have top shaes in the
domestic market. This tneans mat Mitsubishi is the price
leader oi these products, Mtich shows its very strength. The
iitm's sales for the annual term ending Mach 3t, m2,
are estimated at ¥l,600,000 million - the biggest among

dilpbuildars (except ior Nippon Koltan, whose shipbuilding
~shate is very small).

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NM Ul‘tl‘ IAI- Us‘ef. \II‘IJ

its product lines cover land, marine ltd anonautic
equirintent, and it ranks high in the production scale of all
these Moducts its sales will probably reach 0.000.000
million in a few years. Mitotbishi is now placing emphasis
on coal liquefaction technology, atomic energy did other
energy related business. defense-related business and the
production of industrial robots. The firm wim a three dia-
mond trade marit will renin its high position in inane:
industry in the future

lsltikawaiimaiiarm Heavy indusuiea estimates its
sales for me March 1982 term at V700.C00 million, aid
aims to become a ¥l,000,000 million business in lw3 or
l9“. ll the aim is achieved, ll-il will be the mend
Vl.000,000 million business in the shipbuilding industry,
lollowing Mitsubishi Heavy industries (exdudim Nippon
Koltan). The medium-range pm is supported by land,
maritime and aeronautlc equipment business. tilt is giving
priority to the manufacnue of engines for ms, the
nation’s next mainstay lighter plane, ocean development
and energy. The firm is stepping up afﬁliations in tech
nology with Toshiba Corp. to prepare for the era of
“mechalronics.”

The tie-up with the leading electric equipment matter
will have peat potentials lot business growth. ‘

it is noteworthy that till is participating in three oi the

I2 projects for research rid development. which are being
conducted under the "research and development system
for basic technology lor nertt pneration industry,"design-
ed [or industries to develop hUt technology with govern.
ment support for use irt the 1990s. The three projects con
cern (a) line ceranics. (b) hiﬂperiormanoe controllable
crystal dloy and (c) compound materials. Since all the
I? projects are aimed at unexplored areas oi technology,
the partic‘oation in such proiects may bring great success
to the (inn.

Kawasaki Heavy Industries estimates its sales for the

March l982 term at ”50000 million lthopesto increase
the sales to Vt “W000 million in 1990. The ﬁrm has two
strong areas oi business - defense-related equipment and
industrial robots. In the “one field, the Mn is the ohiel
contractor for me manufacture ol the Defense W's
next gneration mediumlass trainer planes The contract
will total about #300,000 million. It is also the biggst
supplier of submarines to the Maritime Self Defense Force.
A rise in the nation's defense spending will benefit Kawa-
salti.

The firm is the nation’s top supplier of industrial robots.
The dorrtestic marltet of such robots is still smal, with i980
sales being #78300 million. The firm estimates its sales
at robots in 1982 at $1,000 million, and plans to raise the
sales to snow million irt 1984. The iirm's robot sdes
have risen at at annual rate of about 40% during the past

12
NI! OFFICIAL USEONLY
live years The Japan Industrial Robot Manulaeturen
Attenuation eiiimates that the nation's robot sales will
reach #290,000 million in I985 and ¥600.000 million
in I990. The market is not very big. However, 70! of the
indusuial robots manufactured in the world are now being
operated in Japan. The Ministry of lntematiortal Trade
and Industry (MlTl) this year began giving help to develop
intelligent robots. The industrial robot is a promising prod-
uct in view of these facts.

Industrial robots now in use are “First Generation
Robots." which re good for repeating jobs to achieve mass
production, such as welding, painting ad transporting The
intelligent robot that MlTl wants to develop is . second
generationrobot which would havethefollowinglunctions:

i) Smhlfunctioﬂmtion);

2) Operating function (action);and

3) Deciding function (Wt).

MlTl plans to spend .$0,000 million during the seven-
year period starting tltis year to develop hide-performance
robots. The emergence of mtype robots would inevitably
expand the robot marltet. in this field, Kawasaki Heavy
Industries is quite promising. and therefore it is quite an
attractive manufacturer. .

Hitachi Zoten sets its sales tarpt for the March i982
term at “40,000 million. As earlier stated, the company's
sales ratio of shipbuilding and land equipment is 3I:69.
The company is trying to improve the business structure
in an effort to reduce dependence on shipbuilding. The
efforts the compmy is melting include comrnerciai produc-
tion of newly developed products, development of basic-
technologies, expansion of production facilities aid
development of energyosaving technology.

Hitachi has been active in reducing dependenceon ship~
building as it had to dosofor orrvival. ln I978thecom-
pany created the Offshore atsiness Headquarters and
made Osaka Shipyard (in Sakai) a plant specializing in the
manufacatre of ocean structures, and Arialte Shipytd also
a plant to battle offshore structures. This ntove was
successful. and in I981 the convany wilted the world's
5th larpst manufacturer of submarine oil driling rigs.
To further expand business in «in development and
launch lullscale development in the Arctic Sea, the com-
pany included ocean (icy waters) development in its ten
maior projects. It plans to beo'n worlt this yet to build an
icy water unlt to be used for experiment at a cost of
¥l,$m million.

The company has set shipbuilding, landbased machinery
and offshore structure as its three main business pillars. It
is now trying to set the 4th and 5th pillm to achieve laser
'owth. Candidate lines for die 4th pillar are said to be
generalpurpose land equipment, such as heat pumps and
rotary prestx

13

FOIOFFICIALUSBONLY
I'UI UI‘I'ILIAI: ”Oe- UIVLI

Milsui Enp'neerin d Shipbuilding estimates sdes to:
the March 1982 term at 7350.000 million and aims toraise
the sales to V5209!” million in 1985. As in the case oi
Hitachi Shipbuilding l: Enpneering. the company is trying
hard to reduce dependence on shipbuilding lt watts to
launch iuliscaie business in the manufacture of chemical
plants, boilers for power pneration and the like, hwincto
develop intoaueneral encineerlncﬁrthecompanyisan
euly corner to the oeeandeveloprnent industry,alon3vlith
Mitsubishi Heavy industries. It has dready expanded its
business in the ﬁeld of the manufacture oi offshore oil
drilling rigs, modules, plant hm aid oceat engineering.
The company, therefore, appears tobeplacmemphasis
on oceandeveiopmentinreducindependenoeonshipo
building,

The company has been active in icy waters development.
Since 1975 se hea been conducbing veri-
om “pestilence wing an ice force lee-
outing tote: built: at Rice Sam in
mettle. In the nu year it conclu-
ded e busineee tie-up usugenent: with
hrctec Inc. of the United Statue to re-
ceive date lid experuee on offehoze
engineettng. ouch ea trays to room:
on in 191 states-- and compound: of ice
iorce on the oiishore structure. The development oi
icevcovered sea is being spotliehted in the world, and
Japan's maior shbbuiiders are seen as suppliers of various
condiment necessary for such development. This the
development oi imred sea is a big area oi bus‘rtess in
theiuture.

Nippon Kolrn is lapan’s second lamest stetlmalrer,
iollorwin; Nippon Steel. in Nippon Koltan, shipbuilding is
under the heavy industry division, lid. thereiore, the
situation is diiierent from otha shipbuilders. Sales for
ﬁscal 1980 (April. l980~Msch, l98l) totaled ¥l,423.300
million. Oi this, the iron and steel division carted
¥l,l66,000 million, and the heavy industry division
”56,700 million, of wich land equipntent earned
¥l$$,000 million and shipbuldin; ¥l01,700 million. Shlpv
holding accounted for only 7% oi the total sales.

The problem is how Nippon Kolwi will diversify its
lines oi business to reduce the hiﬂt ratio oi steel business.
in other words, it is trying to “break with steel business."
rather that to "bruit with shipbuilding." it is inst impoy
sible for theheavy lndustrydivisiontoyowintothesiae
oithesteeltlvision.Thequestionishovlnwchthei”irm
canreducedtewbetweenthetwodivisions.

The firm is now trying to expand business oi the heavy
industry division, such as energyrelated business, steel
plant iaeilities, pollution control facilities and ﬂoating
platforms. It is lapan'sonlybullderoiioebrealters. namely

16
IO. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"Fuji" and "Shine." it is also building in Its Teu Research
institute an icy water tank, maturing 21.3 m long. 6.0 m
wide and 2.0 m deep, which is equipped with a refrigerating
unit capable of cooling the tanlt to ~25'C. the freezing
point of sea water. The Vin!) million tank is to be com-
pletedaheadofas'enilarfaoiiityunderconstructionby
Hitachi. Therefore, it will be the first tank of its Itind in
loan.

The development of offshore technology in the ice-
covered sea is a maior pillar for business diversification to
correct overdependence on sud business.

Sttmitotno Heavy Industries is also in a situation differ-
ent from other firms. Sales for the March 1980 term totaled
#225,000 million and those for the March 1981 term total-
ed 7263.600 million. Sales for the March 1982 term are
estitnated at ¥280,000 million. The sales ratio of shipbuild
ing during the period rms from l5$ to l9“. The policy
of "breaking with shipbuilding" is advancing fairly well
as in the cases of Mitsubishi and Kawasaki Heavy industries.
The ratio appears to be in an ideal rang.

However. the firm plans to out the ratio of shipbuilding
further because of special conditions the company's ship-

' have. The firm's shipbuilding facilities include a
I6,800gross~ton building berth at Uraga Shipyard for war
ships and a 2t0,000gtwton dock at Opparna Shipyard for
merchatt shbs Therefore, it is difficult to maintain him
operation rates for shipbuilding facilities. Under the
circumstances. Sumitomo is striving to expand business
in the mnufacture of steetntalting facilities. precision
plastic molding machines, offshore chtutes lid odter
non-shipbuilding lacllities.

The Future

The business strangies of the seven maior shipbuiiders
to "break with sh’pbuilding” can be boibd down to the
following three points:

i) To expand the marlret share of favorite or promising
lines in the existing land equipment sector.

2) To enter the robot. defense and ocean development
industries and develop new when.

3) To pursue oflenslve but ﬂexible policies to readily
meet ehanms in the businessenvlronmentmd smoothly
carry out the mediun'rrutp prom

All thesevenmaiorshbbuildershavetaltenreeordnew
orders, while having recordhigh backlogs of orders. Their
financial situation has recovered. in fiscal 1901 all but
Kawasaki paid interim dvidends for the first time in four
yeas. At the time of such business recovery, investments
inreseuehanddevelopmentaswell as inth andeouip-
mm are concentrated on non-shipbuilding fields. A Iarpr
amount of investment will be made in l982 than in l975
when die industry was dominated by the sense of crisis

15
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
0'0“ WPILIAL U3: URL!

created by a recession lollowing the ﬁrst oil crisis.

The moves to "brealt with shipbuilding." in no way.
mean that the sh'obuilders are withdng lrom shipbuild.
ing business and relucmt to talte new shbbuilding orders.
All their eﬂorts are desired to regain a proper supply and
demand situation for the world's shipbuilding industry.

The Imanese shipbuilding industry has come to a tum-
ing point with all the seven maior shipbuilders taking larp-_
scale meastns to"‘brealt with shipbuilding.” However,
nothing parantees that their iuture will be rosy. When
many lapanese shipbuilders branched out into the ﬁelds at
big machinery. Plat facilities, bridges and other steel-frame
structures from the l9SOs to the 1960;, they met strong
resistnee from specialized makers. And, only a few
attained satisfactory linancial results, when they entered
the new fields.

If the speciﬁc land equipment market a shipbuilder
enters is small. the entry will cause serious market con-
tusion and lieroe price competition that may malte it
dilliaiit to make both ends meet. Therelore. the "break-
with~shipbuilding" operation by big shipbuilders does not
warrant optimism. But they still will have to chailenp new
ventures, because new shipbulding orders are limited in
volume.

I! the maior shipbuilders cal the expansion of non-
shbhuildlng business at the time o! the unprecedentedly
serious recession in 1978 an “exodus lor survival," they
may call the current operation an "operation to build a
brill. to the 21st century."

Alter having read this article. many readers overseas
may have a question why the maior louse shipbuilders
would move toward the same direction. in the writer‘s
view,thenurchintheidenticaldirectionhasbenthe

source oi energy for the fast development of Japanese
industry. ironically, such an industrial behavior means that
laanese people or enterprises lack identities.

At the present stne. it is dfficult to draw a conclusion
on whichol‘thetwo-adashinlhesamedirecllonby
many businesses or the establishment oi Identity - is
important. Out the latter will probably become more
important in the mend halfofthe l990s.

named-nee tn toe-Owens! See [Bond Icon]

‘no nee: the enqtneeung challenge in icy eaten, Jeoeneee chipbundere ere
engeged 1n mics- reeeerch ltd Onion-en: eociviuee.
exoexpt: tron the more on the "ottehoze 00'0le 1n the Ice-covered Seee“

pubuehed by maul. Shipbuilding e mountings

' menus. hoe been cemtnq out: the It e D proper. in title field with cooperation
o£_ Jepn notional 011 Cozy. and hroteo, Inc. of the United sue».

16

MOWUSEONLY

on following to the
experiments were started in 1915 in the (Idiots): See off the coast of Menu
in Hokkeido, the northernmost islend of aspen.

For neesurenent end enelysis of ice losds. e cylindricel tower, 9.5 esters in
height with e 2.5-.ter dineter, leter converted to conioel shops of 11.4
meters in height end with e diueter of 5.5 nters et the weter line, wes
erected some 600 esters off the coest.

With e view to finding the Optin- types of structures to be used in ice-
covered sees, verious tests hsve been conducted to study the effects on ice
loeds with regard to:

l) dieneter of colts-1s end ice thickness:

2) cnneengle md friction betwem structure end ice:

3) nwer of colums, ice orientetion end je-ingy end

4) the first-yes: pressure ridges, both non-oonsolideted end seni-consolideted.

The coepsny's efforts ere elso nede in the neens of trensport in ice-covered
sea which include:

1) high powered icebreeking ship:

2) icebreeking apply boet;

3) icebreeking berge wiﬂ: speciel self-driving devices: end

4) hoVercreft end other types of ewhibimn vehicles.

Overell resesrdm end develop-mt work releting to icebreeking ships is being
cerried out. including hull fore design for nininun ice resistence end sexism-
neneuverebility. ice-resistence propeller desigx end hull structure design,
taking ice collision force into eccomt.

In edditim to resistmce tests. self-propelled turning tests end resistance
tests in rigid ice condition, respectively, theoretioel work is elso being
cerried out.

(”PYRIGHT: Dienond need Oo., Ltd. 1982

C50 : 4120/218

17

FOIOFII'ICIALUSEONLY
0'“ 00.09“.- »eu Vl‘ul

ECONOMIC

ALUMINUM-RZIINING FACILITIES TO BE DISCARDED
Tokyo MIHOM [BIZAI SIIMBUN in Japanese 4 Mar 82 pp 1, 7

[Text]

A plan for disposing of facilities by the aluminum-refining industry
circles. which are aiming at freeing themselves from the serious structural
depression, has been firmed up. On the 5th, MITI will show the Industrial
Structure Deliberation Council Aluminum Sub-Committee (Chairman: Tokyo
University Professor Tadao UCMIDA) a basic plan for the stabilization of the
aluminum-refining industry (facilities disposal plan based on the Specific
Depressed Industries Stabilization Temporary Measures Law), in respose to the
report by the Deliberation Council. According to what was revealed by a
sounce concerned on the 3rd, this plan is to the effect that among the
facilities with an annual aluminum ingot output of 1,136,000 tons, which
facilities are possessed by six aluminum-refining companies, those for an
annual output of u2u,ooo tons, accounting for 37.3 percent, will be discarded
(rartly frozen) during two years -- fiscal 1902 and 1903. Among the six
companies,‘two are to maintain their present facilities as they are.

During thethreeyears from fiscal 1982 to 198%, the aluminum-refining
industry circles can import a1uninum ingot without paying any duty (9% at
present), with an amount equal to the total amount of the facilities to be
discarded or frozen as the limit. However, it is thought that the way for
the re-vitalization of the industry circles will be still thorny.

The aluminum-refining facilities disposal plan, which MITI has been
checking into, is based on the report by the Industrial Structure Deliberation
Council Aluminum Sub-Committee in October last year, and the result matches
the "structure for an annual output of 700,000 tons by domestic facilities"
called for by the report.

According to the source concerned, the largest amount of facilities is
to be disposed of by Mitsubishi Light Metal Industry (Mead Office in Tokyo;
President: Yoshio SUZUKI; capital: '10 billion). It will dispose of
facilities with an annual output of 160,000 tons at its Naoetsu Plant.
Showa Light Metal (Head Office in Tokyo; President: Takehiko HAYASMI;
capital: '17 billion) also will reduce its facilities to less than
half the present amount. Two companies ---Mitsui Aluminum Industry (Head Office
in Tokyo; President: Isao KAHAGUCMI; capital: $13,500 million) and Sumitomo

18

FOIIOIFIIAI.UIEGIVLY
Light Aluminum Industry (Head Office in Tokyo; President: Satoehi neppu;
capital: '18 billion)--uill not dispose of their facilities, as initially

scheduled.
Four Companies To Discard or Freeze Aluminum-Refining Pacilities

(Commentary) New facilities structures of'six aluminum-refining
companies have been firmed up. However, four of them are to discard or
freeze their facilities. Hitsui Aluminum Industry (Head Office in Tokyo;
President: Isao KAHAGUCHI; capital: V13,500 million) and Sumitomo Light
Aluminum Industry (Head Office in Tokyo: President: Satoshi BEPPU; capital:
V18 billion) will retain their present facilities completely.

Hitsui Aluminum is to retain its present facilities because it is
regarded as capable of maintaining its international competitive power,for
the reason that it obtains electric power for refining at its Hiike Plant
(in Fukuoka Prefecture) by thermal-power generation with powdered coal.
Also. Sumitomo Light Aluminum is aiming at surviving through an energy
conversion under its plan for a change from oil-burning to coal-bourning
at the thermal-power plant operated jointly with Tohoku Electric Power for

its Sakata Plant (in Yamagata Prefecture).

As to the disposal of facilities this time, it has been decided that
all facilities will be discarded at two plants -e the Naoetsu Plant (in Niigata
Prefecture) of Mitsubishi Light Metal industry and Omachi Plant (in Nagano
Prefecture) of Shows Light Hetal. However, the moves of Sumitomo Aluminum
Refining, which is the biggest compsny of this kind, are also to be noted.
It has three plants -- the Isoura Plant (in Shims Prefecture), Toyo Plant
(in Ehime Prefecture), and Toyama Plant (in Toyama Prefecture). Among them,
the Isoura Plant is suspending operationscompletely because of the reduced
production of ingot, and therefore, the possibility is great that the
facilities here will be completely discarded or frozen. however, the
Company is racking its brains also on the handling of the Toyoma Plant
where the cost is the highest. This company says that "We want to decide
which plant is to be retained,_according to the contents of the stabilization

basic plan." Therefore, it is fluid at present.

The facilities disposal plan this time will serve as data for the
apportionment of aluminum ingot imports free of duty. MITI intends to
decide on frameworks for duty-free imports for the various companies in the
light of the following three points: (1) The amount of facilities to be
disposed of; (2) the amount of ingot imports; and (3) the amount of remaining
facilities. It seems that the frameworks for duty-free imports in the

industry circles as a whole will be 393,000 tons in fiscal 1982, and
"2“,000 tons in fiscal 1983 and 198“. Theequivalentofthe tariffs amountingto

a little more than ¥iO billion annually will contribute to the improvement

of the profits among the six refining companies. However, many of the six
aluminum-refining companies are in a state close to excess liabilities,

and. moreover. it is difficult to hope for a rapid rise in the price of
aluminum. because of the depression in the US. Therefore, it is expected that
it will become difficult to maintain the facilities for 712,000 tons,

which are to be retained this time through the industry circles.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shimbunsha 1982
19

illltﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USI(lNLY

CSO: 6105/81
a-.. -ooovooo— .-- —.-~e

BCONGIIC

CARDBOARD INDUSTRY POEMS DEPRESSION CAR‘I'BL
Tokyo 813131 SANGYO 33mm! in Japan”: 19 list 82 p 13

[Interview with Shinichi Kaisaki, chairman of the Japan Corrugated Cardboard
Industry Association Depression Cartel Preparatory Conittee. by Reporter
lirogsmi; date and place not specified]

[Text]

Corrugated cardboard ‘itTd'Es'tT'y—éi‘rcles have started to nova toward
forming a depression cartel. Both the Japan Corrugated Caraosrd
Industry Association, corposed of big aanufacturers concerned, and
the National Federation of Corrugated Cardboard Industry Associations.
centered on the nediun and snail manufacturers concerned. have begun
to make preparations through the establishment of their respective
experts comittees. The possibility is thus becoming stronger that
in corrugated cardboard industry circles. an "all-indmtry cartel"
set-up will be established for the first time. This paper asked
Japan Corrugated Cardboard Industry Association Depression Cartel
Preparatory Committee Chairman Shinichi KAIZAKI, concurrently Tomku
President, about the situation in the indmtrial circles concerned and
future prospects. (Reporter HIROGAHI acted as interviewer.)

 

Question: Why is it that a mood calling for the formation of a
depression cartel has recently cone to mount suddenly?

Answer: “the situation has become difficult since around the susner
of last year. After the beginning of this year. our deficits have
increased still further. The prices of raw materials for corrugated
cardboard have not dropped since the sharp rise in chip prices the
year before last. This has given an ispetus to our suffering from
difficulties. Both corrugated cardboard manufacturers and corrugated
cardboard-consuming industry circles had thought that the prices of
raw materials would decline, sooner or later, but the actual situation
is not so. In particular, corrugated-cardboard users strengthened their
request for the lowering of corrugated-cardboard prices in anticipation
of a decline in the prices of raw materials. Therefore, corrugated-

20

summon“
cardboard manufacturers have also accepted [the request for] the lowering
of the prices, because of their speculations as to their share (market
holding) rates, and due to the excessive competition. The prices of
corrugated-cardboard sheets have decreased by as much as about 20‘, when
compared with the level seen around the spring of last year, and those
of corrugated-cardboard cases, by about 10%. me trend, in which

raw material prices are hiyz, while manufactured product prices are low,

has thus become clearer.

Question: The absolute amount of demand has not decreased so greatly.
As far as can be said from seeing the data on demand and supply, it is
also felt that you cannot be said to be .in straitaned circumstances.

Answer: To be sure, the amount of demand for 1981 decreased by . .
only 3‘. or so, compared with the preceding year's level. From the beginning,
however, the corrugated cardboard industry has had a low rate of payabil ity,
and moreover, the cost burden has become very heavy, accompanying the
doubling of raw material prices. In addition to the thoroughgoing
implementation of economization measures by users, business is becoming more
:tsunnnt. It is expected, therefore, that this year, too, the amount of
demand will probably be on the same level as in the preceding year, or
drop from the preceding year’s level. Since around the autumn of last
year, some coupsnies have been reduced to deficit management. At present,
"0‘ of all manufacturers concerned are probably suffering from a deficit.
in the case of my Company, the interim settlement of accounts for February
showed a real deficit. In corrugated-cardboard industry circles, there
are about 300 companies jostling one another. If this situation continues
as is, then some companies will probably go bankrupt.

Question: when will a cartel be formed?

 

Answer: To begin with, I went—'tomc'ondiict' surveys on the situation
concerning the payability of’ the manufacturers, affiliated with the
Japan Corrugated-Cardboard Industry Association, and the operation rate.
thus obtaining necessary data for submitting an application, as quickly
as possible. In order to obtain approval, it is necessary to have
the actual situation understood fully by the fair Trade Couission
and user industry circles. At the present stage. it is difficult to
say definitely [that a cartel will be formed] from around what'time.
Anyway. my true intention is to carry out [the formation of a cartel]
as quickly as possible.

Question: In the case of corrugated cardboard, it is an order-
receiving indmtry. Therefore, will a production-adjustment cartel,
intended for inventory adjustment. achieve satisfactory effects?

Answer: In the case of big manufacturers, I would like to restrict
the number of days of operation and the length of time for carrying out

21
POI OFFICIAL [El ONLY
operations through the formation of a depression cartel on the basis of
the Anti-Monopoly Law, and in the case of medium and small enterprises.
under the co-ordination clause based on the Medium and Small Enterprises
Organization Law. This is an order-receiving industry; therefore.

it is not felt that excess stockpiles are putting pressure on
management. Recently, however. there are also many enterprises which
are carrying out production in anticipation of an increase in demand.

Companies concerned will go bankrupt together unless they take action for
a cartel. There are no differences at all in the degree of severity.

between big enterprises and medium and small enterprises. I am
fully aware that there are difficulties different from those in the

case of the inventory-adjustment cartel formed as to machine-made paper.
I also intend to explain the special nature of corrugated-boardcard
industry circles to the Fair Trade Commission, taking time.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shilbunsha 1982
CSO: 6105/81

22

IOIKOIIIJA1.Ull1MHLY
ACQJRA‘I‘E INSTRJHMATIGI FOR SAFE PLANT OPERATICN

'rokyo decrement in august: V01 15, No 1. Jan 92 pp 11-19

[Article by shinsaku Kinugase, Salon Brigineoring Division iioleuahin-Bloctric
Works, Ltd.)

[Text] l. Introduction

An important responsibility placed on modern technology
is that of preventing serious industrial accidents originating
in plants. Particularly in Japan. a country of huh population
density. where such accidents could result in a major catastro-
phe. a variety of measures are being devised as a pressing
national need.

This paper describes the means of assuring plant safety,
laying partlarlar emphasis on the use of appropriate instru-
mentation among the measures being taken for accident
prevention. Proper instrumentation is regarded as an effective
means not only of assuring the safety of plants but also of
maintaining quality and production This is achieved by
allotting instrumentation the task of monitoring and controlling
normal plant operation and detecting and/or taking effective
countermeasures in the event of abnormal conditions occurring.

In detail. instrumentation for safety must include methods
for intensiﬁed types of interlocks and emergency shutdowns
(widely used in conventional instrumentation). exceptional
control function to cope with iowprobabllity emergencies,
increasing the reliability of measurement and control instru-
ments. introducing oniine diagnostic techniques for industrial
equipment. and adopting rational man-machine systems suitable
for safe operation. Also required, to secure the above system
functions are effective training for operators and management
for maintenance of the instruments.

These problems are too extensive to deal with brieﬂy.
This paper therefore, covers only the problem of how to
provide safety instrumentation systems; emphasis being laid
on techniques for detecting abnormal conditions.

Locum m Mumolhtm Mo least my auto
Time

-------- d

No change In Changes in m v‘ubiea/ end-econ Wm”.
etaea variables eontrolteote by muse.” inductive

Fig.1. Abnormal State in Time Process
23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CU“ VI’I‘OSORU uva— Vi‘aad

2. Normal and Abnormal Operation in Plants

Machines and apparatus within an industrial environment
are regarded as operathg normally when they are ninnirg
as originally planned. Abnormal operation results in a decrease
in production. a drop in product quality. and on occasions
accidents. To secure safety. it ”a necessary to detect abnormali-
ties as early as possible. and promptly talte appropriate counter-
measures.

There are many levels of abnorunlityl) One levelmsy
denote slight abnormality. not affecting overall plant operation.
Another may denote a state for which. when detected. it is too
late to do anything. Fig. I outlines abnormality gradins.

In service. plants generally deteriorate as the materiah
ofwhich they aremadearegraduallyaffcctedovertimeby
abrasion. fatigue and corrosion. in many cases this padual
deterioration may not be readily apparent. but be a latent
source of accelerated degeneration in the future. If deterioration
progresses so far as to cause abnormality of state var'hbles.
this abnormality can form excessive stress and thereby acce-
lerate deterioration. A self-propagating state occurs. multiplyiru
the rate of deterioration and rapidly aggravating the situation.
ultimately nothing in a major failure.

The process of hidden (dormant) deterioration generally
takesa fairly longtime.$ornegradesoftrouble directlylead
to the self-propagating state without pasa’ng through a dormant
stage. Since an accidental failure or an exceuive disturbance
can lead to this nil-propagating “chain reaction.” detection
of trouble in the early stages. followed by prompt action. is
very important in aecurim the safety of the plant.

3. Disaster Generating Process - Self-Propagation of
Abnormalityaw

There are various generating patterns for disasters in plants
In some cases. pressure or temperature in a ccntaher can
rise excess'veiy reuniting in a fracture or explosion. In others.
despite temperature and pressure complying with design
standards. inner material defects can cause a sudden fracture.
In general. the ccmrnon denominator in these plant disasters
is that. in the ﬁnal stage. abnormality is dramatically increased
by the multiplicative effect of several factors leading to a
disaster.

Disasters occur by chance; failure of components including
auxiliary apparatus. energy supplies. and measuring and control
Instruments. disturbances such as misoperation. power failure.
sudden changes in the quality or quantity of charged materials
and changes of load. acts of God such as earthquakes or lighten-
ing. or ﬁre spreading from a neighboring location. Develop-
ments in the final stages may be so rapid that disasters are
effectively instantaneous.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘_

Let ua take a procure ml for example. If one of the
bolta which aecutea the end plate to the cylinrlrical veaael
breaks. an increaaad tension la applied to the other bolts. This
can“ thou bola to auooauuuy broak,
bunting the and plate

 

TIM.

Fig. 3. Different We: Against Abnormal State With
Time

Fig.2 chow: the “chaimeactlon” prooes. Failure modes
(such a leakage. cracks. and trip of rotation or operation)
occurﬂn‘ in a plant or its componenta. Inch an auxiliary
apparatus and matting and control instruments. can all be
.repreaented by symbol: at follow. The probability of break.
down I mouth; in time dr is P/dr. The failure probability
function P,’ is a complicated nonlinear function of auto

. variable x of the particular plant. Thus.

25

MWMONLY
P/IPllx.,x1....x..!/ (|)

If failure 2 occurs. state variable x of the plant changes.
causing P; to change through a feedback reaction. in other
words. variations in the state variable caused by failure can
result in excesive stress. succesiveiy iiducing other bruit-
downs and rapidly leading to a serious situation.

The state in the period in which x can be returned to
0(the standard value)by manipulating variable u. i.e.. the
controllable time duration. is called off control. This state
includes the following two cases: one that permits automatic
return to the normal state. and the other that. if left as it is.
leads to an emergency state. The operator changes the set
point of speciﬁc control loops at his own discretion or true:
to accomplish a return to normal through manual operation.

An emergency state is when state variable can be returned
to the safe area by manipulating variable u. if this is impossible.
a disaster occurs If the change ofx due to z and u can be
expressed (as it can for most cases) in the form

Ari-:10] exp a/lz..z;. . . .zm.ui.u;. . . . Up]! (2)

the situation is regarded as an emergency when

G]I2|21....Zm.u|.ll3....llr/ <0 (3)

for all a: otherwise. it is a disaster. This is because. if even one
a; is positive. state variable x; increases with time t. leading
to an accident. If. on the other hand. one a] is negative. r,‘
converges to 0. resulting in only a temporary emergency..0l
course. to keep 01 negative. variable u must be given an
appropriate value. it other words. to prevent a disaster. it is
essential to take appropriate action in the abnormality stage.

Since state variable x changes at a speed corresponding
to the time constant of the plant. and failure 2 takes time
to occur. it taltes some time for an abnormality to develop
into an accident. Thus. disasters can be prevented by taking
appropriate maaatres in the early stage of abnormality. Thus
the importance of detecting and diagnosing abnormality can
be appreciated.

Large ultimate output ,v generated by a plant. for which
the plant is responsible. is called a disaster. y is a tremendous
emission of substances or energy that. among other factors:
is harmful to humans: causes trouble to residents outside
the boundaries of the site: and causes public agencies including
fire trucks to be dispatched to prevent secondary disasters

Figure 3 shows an example of emergency action taken.
indicating a process in which state variables. initially normal
are suddenly disturbed at point 0. Case l indicates a simple
disturbance which subsequently returns to normal without
external intervention. Case II shows a return to normal after
manual intervention at point A. Case Ill illustrates emergency
cutoff applied at point 8 because of an emergency shutdown
preventing continuous operation. Case IV illustrates a runaway

state as a nasal: o: no pnventaeiva action
being taken. Swift: asset! arctic: was taken
at point C, but emission of energy could not:
be stopped, running in a catastrophe at:

point D.
26

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cutoﬂ’actionwas tskenatpohtc.but enassionolenergy
muldnotbestoppeduenaltinghacatastropheatpointD.

4. Methods of Detecting and Diagnosing Abnormality

Needless to say. the most desirable way to prevent
udder)" is to detect defects and deterioration whle in the
dormant state. Diapestlca in industrial equipment” are very
effective for this. and are a powerful means of preventative
maintenmce. However, use of this method is limited and
diil'icult to apply for onetrsam hepaction (OS!) to detect
abnormalities when the state vuiablea are apparently un.
affected. Thus. it most caaas.equipment diagnosis cannot but
be performed during shutdown maintenance (80“). inevitably
lengthenhg the inspection period. ln-addition. it is Weetive
against random failures which ocntr without warning.

For this reason. additional mesatres of avoiding accidents
must be taken into consideration by detectirrg abnormality
early in the runawayatate.This paper mainlyrevlews these
means. Technical methods uud hdividually are not different
in essence from disarostics in industrial equipment. But
emphasis is laid on diameais followirg the occurrence of
abnormality in the state variables.

Section 2 We that in order to prevent accidents,
measures be talten to detect abnormality prior to the actual
occurrence of an accident. For this purpose. it is mft‘tcient
to detect and obaerve abnormalities in the state variable.
The methods of detecting abnormality. classified mame by
differences in procaing detected hicrmation, are as folows:

1) Method Aimed at Detecting Abnormality in the Special
State Variable

This method drawsattentiontolargechangesinthestate
variables that will have major effects on the saletyofthe plant.
such as temperature in furnaces. preanrre in preterm vessels
and liquid levels in tanks. A typical example is conventional
upper and lower linit alarms h common use. This method is.
solo speak.ihelastfortforsecuringsafety.ltcannotbe
abolished even if an advanad alternative detecting or diagnostic
system is adapted. However. this method is llnited in
anticipating abnormality because it is not able to provide
sufficient time allowances prior to catastrophes.

2) Rational Decisions Resulting From Use of Fixed Algo-
rithms

Abnormality is determined from an overall evaluation of

collected data of multiple variables deviating from predeter.
mined mathematical relations. There are many levels of

algorithm. ranging from simple to complicated. Typical methods

used are the comparison of alpbraically calculated values.
setting a number of high and low slarrn output limits in a

logical computation. and usbg these two methods together.
Another method is used for eatimathg speciﬁc state variables
(state observation). by computing a number of variables to
reduce the procuring required for method (1). This has
the drawback of requiring dew lid production algorithms
for each plant. Yet. it is regarded as the most powerful method

27
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a was v. n ewe-u s..- Va econ

for diagnosing future abnormality.

3) integrated Determination From Evolutional Algorithm

. Ir. a large production system. even if each unit of equipment
8 regarded as being safe(a state which may be called local

safety), the safety of the system as a whole (total safety) must
Still be maintained. For example, if a protecting relay opens
hub in response to slidtt overheating of motor for a cooling

water pump.itwmhaveaaeriouset‘feetontheother‘eom-
pcnents.

Operators controltheoverallnfetyoftheplantbyobaervhtg
the operation of each individual component. Advanced deci-
aionanuiredforthiscanhardlybeformedbyaf’nted
algorithm. The possibilities of ushg computers for this are
mined and proposed as the course of future technical trends.
Detals will be described later.

5. ArrangingDiagnosis of Abnormality by Matrix

Since there are a large variety of plants and multifarious.
specific failure modes. and there are. in practice, numerous
methods for disposing abnormality. Once a method ofdiegno-
sis is established. applications can be extended to similar
situations. Thus. an attempt is being made to classify methods
of diagnosing abnormality.‘l'able l showsapropoeed method.

The firstcohrmnontheleftddecontainaroughlyclasalﬂed
plants and auxiliary equipment. In the field of statistics and
pattern recognition. collections of common individual cases
are called clusters!) The top line contains clustered failure
modes. On this matrix. which is prepared beforehand. methods
of detecting abnormdity are written at the intersections of
thereievanthorizonealandverticallinee.Dashes(—)lnthe
table denote that there is no relevant abnormality or failure.
A question mark (2) denotes doubts about the effects of
ponibie action. Table l is largely complete. yet acme of the
methodsgivenrmynotbe applicableormaybeineﬂ’ective.
Table 1 indicates that tb pmaently established techniques
for detecting abnormality are only the visible peak of an
iceberg. Thistable.aotospealt.irdicatestheneed for abnormal-
ity detection. At the same time. it gives a direction for applica-
tion ofslmilarmethodsandtlntsisimportantineyrtematising
techniques for detecting abnormality.

ltmaybepoarible thatclustertableallteTablelare.in
practice. too approxinete. For example. heathg furnaces are
notaltvaystheaame.‘l‘hoaeintlrepetrochemicalindustry
are quite different ‘i'l structure and working temperature
fromthcaelnthelronandsteelhdustry.3ecnisefallure
modes are different for particular equipment it different
hdustries, a specific table must be prepared for each industry.
In addition, Table l lays emphasis on OSl. dealing with
Wicchhdustrialequipmentaecondarily.Althoudtit
hvolves these problems. the table is presented as one item
toberavievedindevelophgandprovidingdiagnoeticieeh-
niques for abnormality. Other matrices related to this abject
have been publidied by other naeardiers")

28

FOIOII'ICIALUSEONLY
6. Diagnodng Abnoemellty Feom Simple Algoeithms

If a speciﬁc state variable lmpostant to the safety of a
plant cannot be measured directly. other telated values must
be meeaued and calculated to ﬁnd the state variable. FtA
shows a tuyere leakage detectlon system for'blaat furnaces.
lnlets fot hot blast air are called tuyeres which are made of
hollow coppet blocks to allow cooling water topaesthmuglt.
Tuyem gradually neat due to bum lossathidttanpetatutea
Holes inatuyete mull incooltngtvatet entenngthefumaces.
causing an explosion. This is my dangetous. so. inlets and
atletsforcoolhgwatesatepmvldedwlthhswvom
ﬂotnnetets ot pulseontput type electsenwaettc llotvnaetets.
antloutputpulsesatepa-edtomrdblecoonmdﬂov
monlton.

Mutandetectalﬂltdlﬂ'eeenceshﬂowbemen
lnletandoutletandglvemalanntvhenholeeatestﬂlmll
«touglanottobedangesouaSenaeesasertoteoognlu
abnotnnlltywhentbtotalbedvalueofpnleedﬂfetence.
osthe totalvahteotleahpvatetnxceedtaepedﬂclevel.
Ahﬂowhstoppedanddefecdve tuyeeesmtepheed.8tnee
300e40myemuemaﬂyeeedtogetlw,theyatedealtwlth

mic
metenpeovltleamhmnacwsacyolOJSandatenomlly
only mt. uptolilyennsrhgldentlcellnstalleuon
andamblentumanneoondltlenaandbymaklngadequate
adjustments {or dlffetencea between metals, settings foe alarm
trﬂgestngbymeansolllowdll‘feseneeacmbellmltedto 30.5%
oeleae

Fh3 damtheesamtlahofamonltosusystentfathe
itellthlcltneesdlrectlybelovthemoldlntheconthm

mating equipment" in the lion and steel hdustsy. Molten
ateeldelhesedatatempentuteofOehsmeauredbyan

Now assuming that theme melting point of the steel It on.
thedenstty oftheeteellsm(tlnrelsnopracttcaldtffermee
between solld and molten steel). the speciﬁc heat ofthe molten
steel lsC/.thelatent heat olthel‘uston of the eteelishm, the
Qeclﬂc heatol'watetlstandthedensltyofwateeism.
theothetdhnenatonsasedetennhtedasglvenlnFﬁj.
mm that the temperatute of the steel portion dlnctly

belowthemoldlsunlfomovettheplanepetpendlcularto
the ttavellhg ax.s ofthesteel bat Le. thehonzontalplme,

and that heatetaltenawayonlyby coollrg watetmthe
mold.theceoassectlonalam3:ofthentelljustemerging

29

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
gbgoghiibg 40‘...

30

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
111111111111

 

,
5
z
E
\\\\\\\\\

 

¢= .m

‘I’w‘ AW
(tune on ’@
w - - -

mm

Flee. muuuocummsmmetm
Fm'l’um

iiomthe moidanbeobtained imnamptemmoi
l‘eet helenoe u follows:

Cw”. AT al-om

s,-— ._ q-

hm‘} v hm cf (0

Thebuic theotyfot thitisudeeetibedehoveJhoushln
practice alcuietiom m potion-med um computers on the
basis of move compliated models. and emptied data togethet
with oonections.

in We: to: ehnoemiity. lune emu due to defective
mes-am instrument: at felittte to opente due tobmkdowne
ungiveriee to Memohtthhm.
vet-iota: teduntent Were luchded intheeolieetionoi‘
impoﬂlm Mutation. Dueiized and hedtup system effectiw
ly increase the telhbiiity of immanent; yet they we not
they: eppiieeble because manna must he ptoviiled with
tell-diagnostic function

In the 2 out of 3m.time unite ofm instrument
In pmvided it penileltomeech point. ifoneot‘the
three units gives a divet'ent output at wading. it is eliminated
{tom the WWII! and the melee! mean of the remit:
uuubytheothertwounitsieueed.lnevey.thiuyuemha
a kind of ptobebiiittc Mastic function. if the wtpuu of
the three unitemx..x. endx,.titeesttmudm3.neamt
to 2 wtof3.cenhecompuwdwithemiaoeomputet.orthe_
like. from the following equation.

X'ﬁ, It”) 33“;
+ +
(x -x P" x -x 3" x -x " (5)

,_1___1_

lx.-x,)1" [in-n)!" *(Xi-X. pn

 

 

 

«- l
x.-.
2

i

when n is any positive integer. The gate: n it. the bettet the
vsiil'nlle; but nanny an n of 2 is sufﬁcient.

31
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7. Rational Determination Using Complex Algotitlu'ns

Plantamustbebelhno’edwitlt teepecttomatetialsand
enemy. If these are apparently not it balance. it mould be
assumed that thmbeithnaleekaamorahnotmalw
emhuonorthateomethinglsmngwitltthemm
inattumants. If the telatlonitlps between pmam end ﬂow
do not meet a ptedetenninad mathematical model, it is hiduy
ptobable that pipelines at «distant element an ﬂounder
control values may have (ﬂed to that completely. Genetally.
any exceat or laclt of ﬂow of matetial and may in and out
of a plant will teammate as time panes. causal; potential
wines. such as temperature and ptesnm. to become abnormal.
Therefore, one may conclude that diagnosis by ﬂow should
be nude print to diagnosis by potential value, and thus is a
(letinble method of dignodsfor abnormality.

HWMI. chodtiu by ﬂow hm to rely on slldtt deviations in
IMl: between inlets and outlets and this is difficult bee-me
"‘ the limited aoouncy of instruments. as described euller.

 

7m

Fig. 5. Stall Wall Ynloltnats Communion swam

Fortunately. in plant: in pineal. oonsidetably data is available
from htttumsnta monitoring annual opentlon. and it is
poultletoucettaintltemolabnotmelttyandfunltet
toeatimatetltapodtlonol‘failureonthebulsoftltemoet
tumble value: or the statlatieally most ptobabls data
'obtainedchompaﬂq data from diffmnt mums.-

MOWUEONLY
enebnomllﬂwlhesyu .u MninFig.6
lfdueuuenhnofﬂowlntlnllnehmmdtobex. and

wrmmmmmemwmm

conuol value and the nozzle:
x . CvIUI V5: ‘72 '9: sz-Pa (6)

 

.Fig. 6. Troubh Dmi- Svmm

Table 2. 05mm 13mm Logic Computation

 

where Cylu} and C" m values ptoponloml to the mailed
CV. Assume lhal the tandem values (values for noun-I open-
lion) of (Wu) and Cu are Cqu) and Cm. mpecuvely. and
deviations from the standards In 4cm» and ACn.From
equation (6). apptoxlmue ﬂow when. .x. and x, indicated
by the ﬂowmeler. the control value and the nozzle. (espec-
uvelymfollom:

x I)!
x; - Cm (u) ¢£‘:7, (7)

Xe'cno W;- )

33
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
PW WI'ILIRI. U59 ‘1th!

Usmg this and the 2 out of 3 method result of equation (5).
the most reasonable flow value 2 can be obtained. And here.
error Ay of the ﬂowmeter, and deviations Acmr) and AC"
of the control value and the nozzle can be expressed as follows:

Ay Iy-i
ACyIu} 3 Cyollll-a VP. -P3 (8)
ACn ' Clio-3 VTi-Ti ‘

If Ay. ACyIu) and AC" exceed control limits. the process can
be regarded as being abnormal. and the location of the break-
down can be ascertained.

There is another method of diagnosing abnormality. It
discriminates input data into three thresholds - high. inter-
medhteandlow-snddhgnosesbymeansofsiogictabie.
Table 2showstheicglctable for Fig.6.‘l'hisisnotableto

checkdisordersinﬂowmeters.butlsabietodetect disorders
at other positions. This method allows microcomputers to be

used for automatic diagnosis. requiring far fewer resources
than for the abownuntioned algebraic calarlation. Thus. it
is widely applicable to parts other than the most important.

The above two methods are primarily for static observation.
As they concentrate on the rationality of ﬂow. static observa-
tion is enough. In practice. there are many plants in which
attention is required to be given to abnormalities in dynamic
duracteristics.

For noise from rotating machines and engines, Vibration
from piping and combustion variation from furnaces. vibra-
tionalandacousticmodesserveasimporcant information for
detectim abnormalities. Particularly in the ca: of rotating
machines. acoustic modes consist of distortion waves with
the number of revolutions as fundamental waves. permitting,
in most cases. abnormalities to be detected through mode
variations of harmonic waves Extensive information on
abnormalities can be collected by attaching acceleration type
oscillation pickups to engines and analyting the output by
PF!“ (Fast Fourier Transformation) and examining graphic
PW“ Wu”) ll ),

One of the problems with frequency analysis is the difficulty
in determining a prior: the relationships between ebnormal and
vibration modes. So. in most cases. an algorithm must be
empirically determined for each machine under disnosis.
On the other hand. attention may only be required. for specific
machines and equipment. to one or two kinds of high-frequency
power, and in nich cases OSI is feasible only by providing
a simple bandpass filter.

Another method which has attracted attention as a means
of diagnosing abnormality is time series analysis!” This uses
as an information source random dgnals having no fundamental
waves. Presnire. ﬂow. temperature and other appropriate state
variables detected iii the plant at fixed hterval ATare sampled
and the data obtained therefrom is stored in the computer.
ifthe latest data isasnsmed to bex:.andtheprecedingdata
to bexr-r.x;-:.-— .x... — . we can obtainxr from:

M

X! ' Z ler-t t er (9)
III

MWWMY
where egiawhite noleelorameano.Miaihite.andthecurrent
value ia free from theeffecuoldata before theM-th value.
Equation (9) repreaentt the All model (Auto-Revenue Model).
As the name implies. once codl'icienta o,.o,.--.e. are
detennined. a current value it automatically determhed from
the peat values.

The calculation mama) to: dctcnnhlna e and
M from a aeriee of data are omitted. but it la important that
one can repreaent the occurrence of abnormality by a variation
Ii o orMi'ordata collectedin the plantJllththiamethod.

too. great effort: it analyaiaaretequiredto logicallyaaaociate
variationah theARmodel with trouble hequipment. Bobcver,

tidamethodiabeimatudiedfor lppllcationainm‘
abnormalities in atomic power 3.10)") for «ample. and
itlahopedthatltarillproveu

In addition.ltiacooidetetlthatvibrationmalyairand
time aerheanalyalahaveuaenthllytheaamemathematical
basis. It it duncteriatlc of vibration analyaie that attention
is round on power meetra with phase information omitted
from Fourier trarul‘onnation. and this analyda is applicable
in t‘:.: diagnosis of system: having fundamental frequenciea

8. Diagnosis for Abnormality by Evolutional Al-
gorithma

For nnall-ecale ayatema. diapering abnormality la poaaible
bytheuatoi’ratherdmpieloﬂc.ForWW¢ma.the
nixed algorithm requh'ea enormous effort: in ita dew. So.
an attempt it made to uae computers for total control that
has conventionally hen performed by operatora rely“ on
"skill and experience.” An ample it given below, in which
ﬁnal judgment la alweya lell to peraonoel with preliminaries

may to computera.

concept it altotvn in Phil. It may be auumed that the
safety of each loop is aaaured. for example. by the method
deacrlbedinSection7.Cootrolvariablexiauaed eaarepreaenta~
tive value to compoee an input group. input (multivariable)
x is converted into wtput y (monovariable) by translating
algorithm 41. where y take: at the moat the follow“ four
values:

y-o both aaiety andqualltyare acceptable.

y - l rate. but quality not acceptable.
y - 2 rare-emergent atate; talre prompt action.

y - 3 emergency atate;apply emergency enroll. and report
to divldona cemented.

The tranalatim algorithm giver the lirat trial anawer

)0 '40 [XI

However. the operator, at hie own dlaaetion. door not preaa

the pudabutton witch for M. but pm the relevant push-
button witch only when he coneideray-l. 2 or 3._When the
"translating algorithm melee: a different decision from the one

35
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Indication rm Push button
1 l
. 2
Output y a 3

Fig. 7. Integrated Data Procession System

the operator makes, the translatina “tuition a automatically
revised to finally give

Yn' MIX) (10)

In this way, A: is trained to the level of the operators as it
experiences a variety of cases so that it an monitor abnormality

it place of the operator.
For mathematically training A}. GNDl-l (Group Method of

Data Handlinﬂm”) is applicable. GHDH is characrerized
by its ability to identify multivariabls nonlinear functions
withsratheranallarnotmtoidata.andisaritedtothe
minute-.34;
Anasnimedexunpleol‘theresuitofthetranslatingsl-
aoritluntrainedasdescribedaboverdtowninF'gj fora
Mmsional application. Generally. the initiating algorithm
shouidrneetthei‘olloving requirements:
1) input must not exceed the upper lirnitperntitted for
theplant.
2) Input must not be below the lower limit to enable
reaction. (Any natural stoppage of reaction is dangerous.)
3) In respect of material balances. input must have a pro-
portional relationship.
4) In connection with other state variables and set points
in the plant. input must be villain a certain distance from the
set points.
lnotherrrords,“ ispreainted thatthedupewiilbecioee
to a shell structure with the corners of a multidimensional
:ilipsoidhsvingthesetpointatthecentercutoi‘i’ontheatr-
ace

When the system shosvn in Fig.7 notices abnormality.
the operator begins to mine decisions. That is. mohines are
not yet able to perform advanced dimosis and processing
They handle routine monitoring jobs. ﬂeeing the operators
to take charge of advanced work which only they can perform.
This is the principle of this systern.

POI OFFICIAL USEONLY
9. Warning Operators of Abnormality

The method described in the preceding section hat a
drawback in practice. Moat plants are generally operated

 

Fin. 8. Example oi Translation Algorithm

safely. Therefore. it is moot unlikely for a situation to
occur where an emergency shutdown la nquited. Therefore.
ittalteaaverylonatirneforytoexperlencethevalueaOthrough
3 in a ﬁnale plant.

To begin with. aafety ahould not be built on the hair of
each plant's or peraon'a experience of accidents. Guidelinee
for plant operation ahould be eetabliahed on the hair of logic
acaunulated a prior: in theconviction this much aal'ety must
be certain. and analyda of disaster: experienced both in Japan
and elaewhere in the world. All operator: and plant engineers
have been tn “open situations.” and have made guidelines
for operation by combining their own experience with informa-
tion from every corner of the world.

The ability to aecure aal'ety without past experience of
acctdenta is an advanced human function; computer: can
neverdothia.1'hernethodlntheptocedin3aectlonalao
dependa.inthiaeenee.on humabilityJethereanyeasier
method of attracting this human ability? However skillful
operator: may be. they audit fail to take appropriate measure:
in an emergency under the heavy mental burden of monitoring
a largenumberol'lnatrumenta.1'hiaeectlonreviewewamin¢
technique train; the learning ability of operatora.

Fig.9 ahowa multipoint display (overview display) of bar
graph using CRTs. This system displays the state va‘iablea
of each part of the plant as orignal data on Cll'l‘eJt is able
to dlaphy lab-200 points. The bar graph. by nature. has no
speciﬁc features. Operator: watch a bar paph and judge “the
plant isall r'ght” or “archandnrdtaaectionieabnormal.”

37

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In other words. operators observe the entire pattern made up
of the indications of individual points and improve their
.cognitive ability through their own learning faculties. Pretently.
overview display Blnwldeuculmostbecommeseential to
instrumentation for safety. It has only the drawback of
containing too many indication points to' permit an easy
understanding of the whole image. thus allows local points
whichmaybeabnormalyetunlnﬂuentialontl'tewholesystem
to affect understandh; of the whole image.
Fla.l0dtowsenotherdisplayusiunnooth coordinate
patterns developed by Dr. Yunnakiﬂml. technique of

Fig. 9. Overview Oilolav

displaying multivariablee train; a star graph is very old. But a
whole irnegedisplayedbythisrnethodwasdifﬂoulttorecognize
aetheoornerswere toojeued. Ihlsmethodheremntheother
hand. usesacontinuouscurveastheedge.1'heradilare
normalized. and the disphy system is Wt! to display a
neat circle for normal sister. The circle distorts for abnormal
states and it is easy to learn how to read images. Presently
this method is applied in medical diamoeis with remarkable
results. and also is expected to play an important role in plant
operation. Unlike the overview display. it is able to deal with
only 12(sameacloclthours)variablesbut thistsnotadls-
advantage.‘l'heetateveriableeofeachpartot‘aplanteanbepre-
reduced to several main components. Of course. an algorithm
mustbe deaiped andproduced for analysisot‘main components.
since it is important for overall understanding to reduce
variables.

The present writer proposes the Harmony Method.” which
uses a major harmonic tone for example. do-mi-eo. to represent
several mairtcornponentaAtoneisraieedhalfatonewhen
any component exceeds its upper limit. and is reduced half
a tone when my component exceeds it- lower limit. When
an operator pressee a button. a harmonious chord sounds
from speakersiftheplentlsnormal.ltbecomesadlscord
if the plant becomes abnormal. alerting workers to the situation.

38

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
In short, the method aims to accelerate human learning by
making workers metinctively aware that something is wrong.
as with a distorted circle. in case of abnormality.

l0. Conclusion

The problems of control for plant safety. particularly
techniques for detecting abnormalities. have been reviewed.
But. the problem of what measures to take or how to apply
emergency shutoff in accordance-with the results of diagnosis
has been completely omitted. This is because the method of
shutoff varies from plant to plant and is technically relatively
simple. Instead. abnormality is occasionally seen in the failure

 

Fig. l0. Smooth Polar Coordinant Pattern

of shutdown values to close or safety values to open during
shutoff. Conventionally. this trouble was considered to be
“improbable." and not taken into account in designing. In
fact, it is unreasonable to expect controls which are only
operated once in several years to "\vork properly." Such
exceptional conditions must be taken into account in designing
meaatring and control systems for safety to increase the
reliability of the total system by means of multiple protection.

Also. interlocks very effectively prevent misoperation.
However. this means has not been described here because
Interlock systems vary from plant to plant. But. to mention
key points. interlocks today are limited to operation in
instrument rooms, and are not designed for the overall plant
site. This occasionally invites the mistake of freely opening
and closing hand valves in the total area of the yard. Extending
the interlock system will no doubt be a heavy economical
burden, but the basic concept "it costs as much as is necemry
to buy safety"must be recognized.

Finally, to summarize technology for detecting abnormalities
some of the methods and techniques described in this paper
are already in wide use. while those described in Chapter 7
and onward have been ﬁrst proposed by engineers including
the writer. There is. now. growing demand in society for the
assurance of safety. and to meet this demand, a variety of
devices and proposals must be attempted. The writer believes
that efforts nust be continued to "achieve higher safety" by

steadily accumulating good 5e9ults over a long period.

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.-.. -...s..._ ~ -_ v...-

and onverd heve been (Int propoeed by engineete including
the witet. Then It. now. rowing demend In eocIety fot the
sentence of tefety. end to meet this demend. e miety of
device: end propose): must be ettetnpted. The mite: believe:
that eﬂ’om met be contented to “echieve higitet nfety" by
steedily eowmletinuood teeth: over e long period.

Reiceneee:

I)

1)

IO)
II)
I!)
I3)
Id)
I5)
)6)

I7)

I.)
i!)
20)
2|)

Select: Pteeeet end Fetete Technology Int Detecting end
Pudietiq Abnoentelitiee: Aetoteetion 24-2 (I979).

Sen: ‘I’eennotoey foe Detectine end moieties Aoeoetnelitiee in
Meeeenial System; Repoete {tout the Sympodute on SICE
Teeeeouo rot Detecting end hedietine Abeottnelitiee. Nov. I3
(I978). . .
Kitten-z AWIW i‘a Detection Abaonnelitiee; ante et I)

(I979).
Kitten-z D'tecomie‘ end Weaning of All-om! Stem; ante

es 2)(I978).

Snail Issue on Dummies end Seiety in lndutuiel Equip-tent;
I or the SICE 15-5 (I976).

Yeeei end l'eteebo: Scions CUM Oonpiexity; Kodenoe
line Beck: (3297) (1976).

Ed: Neaeeity 0! end Peohlene in Tedtnoloey foe Detecting
end hedietiee Abeotteelitiee; Staple tutti: et Aonomeuty
Detection )tetnod; nine et ”(1970).

0mm: Conoepte end hectic of Detecting Abnotntel‘ttiee in
Steeivoeite: eente I I) (I979).

Kin-gen: liner to Dub! Sefety leeteetneetetion System Fton
tne vapoht o! teen-mu )iekete: tietetleb Ito-t Senioe 1.
Ineteeetentetion ad Oontnl Tm Item. June Men.-
teeet Aeeoehtioe (I977).

Ono: Dleeeodee Abeoeetelitiee In Romy )teoteeee; eente ee 2)
(I979). '
Ono: Ohm Abnoenteiitiee h Rotety Iteottieee; tune ee I)
(I979).

Kohtele: Uneahedietioe‘l‘neoeyeodlteAppIicetion. Ioiihe
an: I6-6 (I977).

Otte. ‘l'ekeeciti end Soede: Dede Stedy on Lethe Cuttine Tooie o!
hedietieelilevithe‘l'hedeeieelodﬂ;neteee2)ﬂ97l).
Meudm:$tetietialneelydeendConteolot
Dunk smile; Sdena 0o. (I974).

Ahihe: mt le Intonation Steam m; Methanetieel
Science 3 (I976).

Ando. Kenmoto ad Yea-tote: m of m Conteol
”me by The Settee Anette; nu ee 2) (I978).
M.Weo.lndue.m¥oneeeveeod Ililne: Detection
drmurummmeymmnm-
mane end Moment ee ”(1978).

TM): Dyueiee end Control o! Popuhtion. htt [III]
Wmumdmsa “-10 (I972).
liedeendSewuni: Geoop Netlod ofDetenendlngendlodeI-
in ofcoteplee 81mm.) o! the SIC! 14-2 (I975).

Yeneeeiti. Nobete eed tibenettn: Pettetn Dieptey tot Stem
Dunne; eeete eh ”(1979).

humid. Nobete end iihneke: Petteen Duh) Iot Stem
Mane ee I) (I979). -

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(”PYRIGBT :

50:

4120/21?

mum

22)
23)

24)
25)
26)
27)
22)

29)

)0)
J I)
32)
33)

34)

Shhul: Introduction to [05% W3W (I967).
Told ted “but: utlee of Rebuity (Locum oe [chalky
End-own): Tokyo Donia Uetvetttty (I972).

Toyota: W W retain-e end {a ”plume; J of
too Slit 13-50914).

Special lane on Imam Safety; Wet Tea-om
2-6 (1974).

SMI): New Fro-tut oi‘ Safety Embark-lee. 5mm
ud Salem] of tie SICE 13-10(1974).

smut Dodo o! Idem (Eloctm Montana Em
Sedu):Covon Co. (I975).

Coapllod Under the Sum of the W0 nod Hot-o
doe [mm m. um; Guide to Satay Immuno-
Syttem—ﬂow To um no mm. Mety loan-tambo-
in Plats; The [mu-made. Control Andean (1975).
Imminent-doe neurology (on am not Opotedoeﬂumhb
(toot Sedan I. Immune end Coettol ream Nod-c.
lam Imam Mt!» (I975).

Fol-{c been. (a lmmndoeﬂm Sedoo 3 o! the noon
Mum (I915).

Boulpauot on“ Technology; (MSe-tooool’tleeoove
moth (I915)

W: Mano-d 8-!er Instr-nonhuman”. no Coetrol
21-7 (I917).

Klan-z Omtaf Rom ud New Imam; Anton.
ttoo 22-43 (I977).

Kieeute: PtoceuConttol tot Safety; bemoan 9-7 (1976).

1982 N51 actuating Ila-eaten 60., Ltd.
'W UI'IILIAH 09a. Ul‘LI

SCIENCE AND “carom

satnmc GAP IN ”OUTER WM“ ‘

‘noltyo 'i‘BCliNOCRM' in English Vol 15, No 1, Jan 32 pp 20-28

[Article by Noriyuki. Kalbaynahi, haietant: Professor raculty of Engineering.
Hiroshima University]

‘7'“) Introduction

This paper takes up the structural problem of the semantic
gap existing in todays's oornputer systems and discusses a
method for its solution. First. the paper analyzes the basic
principles of current computer systems (method for integ-
rating a basic computation model. the computer architecture
and the language system based upon it, to set the stage for a
a discuaion on basic and derivative problem. Then it examines
the adverse effects on the computer system environment caused
by the semantic gap between the computation model assumed
by men (programmers) and the computation model which is
the basis of actual computer systems. Next. it introduces ea-
amples of the author‘s approach to their solution and discusses
their effectiveness. Lastly. it presents general opinions.

Athird of a centuryhas already passed since the world's
first computemhe ENIAC.was born. innovations in computer
technology and changes in the data processing system en-
vironment made during this period are drastic enoudt to malte
us feel that we are now living in an entirely different age. A
glance at the period produces these examples: surprising im-
provements in computer performance specifications (i.e..
execution speed. storage capacity. equipment scale. etc.).
technological innovations for elements of computer hardware
logic which demarcated computer generations ranging from
vacuum tube to VLSI. the increasing importance of software
and the enlargement of its scale. changes in computer system
organization (from centralized control to decentralized con-
trol) and dedgn (from gate-level design toPMS(Processor
Memory Switch)-level design), and diversiﬁcation and ad-
vancement of computer applications fields.

However. although technological progress has been re-
markable. the basic architecture (framework) and principles
supporting computer systems remain virtually unchanged from

102

”BONUSEONLY
those eetabiiehed 35 years ago. The basic frensetvorit refers
to the architecture of the computation model. hardware, and
software (oparationg system and languages) Introduced by von
Normans.

Recently. thharehitecturehesgivenrise to thecriticlem
from various computer scimce fields that a date preceding
system based upon it contains hindamental drawbacks which
cannot be overcome only by tedtnological innovations. A
particular objection is that arch a system does not rem any
software principle but only the hardware logic based upon
the technoiodcai standards valid h the ENIAC era. This
complaint is not overly exqgsrated since the effects of a von
Neumann type system upon software are not all desirable;
some ofthem are proving tohaveadverseell‘ecteonsoﬂware
productivity and relhbility and thus the entire system. This
problem lays at the heart or computer systems but has been
left untouched to data. With only the coovsotionai computer
system improvmtent method complying with the bade princi-
plaseetabihhed for pioneer machines. it isdiﬂicultto
build up a data processing system meeting the requkernents
of the l980's. A new architecture combhing hardware and
software principles different from those of von Neumann is
needed in the coming era. _

The presence of fundunental problems not solvable merely
by innovation is being reooatined and their solutions are being
directed at the principles of current computer systems. Fun«
damental questions are behg preetnted and eil‘orts for ob-
taining aruvers are beingmadehreepectivecomputerecience
fields. A requirement of the Hal's is the consolidation of
these efforts Into a new trend. ihe‘creltion ot‘e new concept
(computation model). and the rebuilding of a basic computer
system structure based upon the roadie. Example attempts
already made to aceornplishthhtaeleretprogreaahthetheory
(of a new computation model and computer architecture).
advancement of hardware technology (e.g.,VI.Sl technology).
establishment of new software technology fields (e.g.. soltware
engineering), and recognition of the need for avoiding software
crises. etc. -

Today‘s computer systems are loyal to the principles of von
Neumann. Langueges developed for themshow clear traces oi:
having complied with the von Nat-neon type architecture.
Von Neumann type languages appeared and spread only because
of the existence of von Neumenn type computers: and this in
turn further moored the position of von Neumann type com-
puters. resulting in the survival of computers containing fun.
Jsmentai drawbacks and their becomhg the mainstream of
:oday’s machines.

The biggest factor brineine about the above situation it the

heir of an adequate theoretical beds forthetechnology-oriented
.Iwelopment cycle of an entire data processingAsystem... Al-
Iiouut present computers are becoming increasingly stylists h
.~tternal appearance and their specifications are continually
Improving. thus succeeding in deepening the impression of
their huh “intelligence”. they oonteht fundamental internal
:ontradictions.

it can be argued that the computer system deshn environ-

43

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
~ -.. -...-..._ - .. -.--.

ment prevalent it the BNIAC era and today's counterpart are
completely opposite. in the former. not only were software
principles and applications unltnown but also simpliﬁcation of
hardware was mandatory to minimiu cost. In the latter,
however. the costofsoftwareoccttpies‘lOtoMofthetotal
and thetrendtowardanlncreaselnthlsratloisexpected to
continue. Under these circumstances. simplification of hard~

ware only results in complicating cogly software. in addition
today's microelectronics. represented typically by ViSl tech-
nology. provides hardware logic at a surprisingly low cost.
Given these circumstances, hardware dmpliﬂcatlon and the
resultlng “over generality” of computer architecture is not
only not useful but fatal to the total system.

The causeof the defects in current computer systems lies
in the up between the computer architecture optimum for
procaine a job and the low level computer arcltitecture ac-
tually applied. In this nose. it can be said that the ultimate
goal ofthecornputaraymistomlnhniuthisppﬂhese-
mantle up). To mlnimiaa this I”. Optimization of the
allotment of roles to hardware and software is important.
The result is to add weiﬂtt to the hardware role and prepare a
better environment for software design and execution.

Before ending its introduction. this paper continua its
ground for approaches to the conquest of the semantic up.
The approaches are broadly categorind into two: one aiming
attradualimprovementsonthevonNeumanntypearchi-
tecture and the other pursuing the development of an entirely
new computer system architecture based upon a new com~
putatlon model. The standpoints of both are very’ closely
related h a sens. It is not sufficient to have only the latter.
Nor can it be foreseen that the latter becomes the mainstream.
the malnstrearn will be a mutually beneficial combination of
lutlh,

The following chapters present problems in current computer
systems seen from the viewpoint of the semantic up and
approaches to their solution.

l.Sernantic Gap

From the standpoint of a computer architecture researcher.
this chapter discusses the semantic up problem of the present
computer architecture and its visible and hvlsible adverse
ctt‘ects upon software environment.

i-i. Role of Computer Arcﬂtecture udVonNeumann Type
ComputerArchhaeture '

ll). Computer Architecture:

First. this section defines computer architecture: the ter-
mmology “computer architecture" having recently become
popular as its importance has been recognized. The fact that
thecoocaptwasfirst htroducsdlntothsdesiutofthelnld
system/360 is of important minesnce. in 196‘. the chief

listener of the mt system/360. Amdahi. deﬁned a computer
architecture as follows:

\

b6

NIWMONLY
“A computer architecture is the attribute of a computer
system seen from the viewpohtt of programmers. It is a con-
ceptual structure or functional operations abstracted from the
mechanism of data flow. control scheme. W. design. physical
feasibility.etc."

lnkufornnlmthedeﬂnitionccuidbeexpmsedasc

“A computer architecture to the basic knowledge about
computer hardware operations which is necesmry for writing
provamsinamachhelaw(l.e..lrnowiedpeofinstruction
formats and kinds. addressing scheme. IIO operations. etc)“

Howver.theabovedeflnitioncannolonoercorrectiy
express the essenthi concept of the architecture ofa current
complicated computer system. The concept ha now broad-
ened. lt lspenerally recognized that architectureshouidbe
defined in a broadersenaetopasptheframeworhrequisites
which determine thebasicperformancaofaoomputersystem.
Therefore. the fonowina definition may be appropriate.

“A computer architecture is the method used in the design
ofacomputersystemtoconetruct theaysternthroudtasyn-
thetlc perception of hardware and software technologies.”

The method determines system attributesuchasio‘ical
specifications. conﬁguration. construction elements to be
selected. date procaine modes. method for allottina functions
to hardware and software. and their interface level. The tech-
noiogywhichsynematically pursueathhmethodmeysppro-
priately be called “synthetic computer system enineerlne.”
Today's objectives in a computer architecture are improvement
of processing efficiency by moving software functions to
hardware functions. reduction of burdens on the operating
system. ﬂexibility of the computer system structure to various
proceun modes. and versatility. expandability. and appli-
cability of the system.

(b) Von Neumann Type Computer Architecture and its

Current Problems

Most of today's computers have the characterisch offered,
by von Neurnann. The characteristics are:

(I) Stored prostam scheme

(2) Sequential program execution

(3) Identical treatment of data and instructions
(4) Linear addresdn; to storage space

Almost all commercial computers today faithfully conform
to these characteristics When judged from the standpo'mt of
the current technology level and results of ccrnputer system
research. the characteristics do not mirror those of prudent
synthetic considerations for dedrable system commotion.
They are what were selected to comply with the old tech-
nology level and solve old hardware cost problems. In fact
characteristics (2). (3). and (4) only serve for simpliﬁcation of
hardware logic. Considerations for software logic or for essen-
tial programming methodology are not embodied in any of the
above characteristics. The present structural software problems
(low software productivity. abnormal enlargement of software.
low proceseina efficiency. etc.) are not innate; software is corn-
pelled to deal with the problems although a computer archi-
tecture should deal with them.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL one. ONLY

l-2 Semanticanm’

This section clarifies the nature of a semantic gap by first
deflnhg it and then descriiing its historical transitions in line
with the currem trend ofprograrruninglanguage research.

Generally (in a broad sense). a semantic gap refers to the
difference between an abstruct computer architecture or a
computation model muted by a proyammer and an actual
:omputer architecture. Semantic gaps can be classified as
ollows.

l02-l. Semantic GapeSeen in Programming Process

(a) Semantic GapTypel

Asemanticppofthisrypelsdefhedin“Mvanmin
Computer Architecture"(‘) written by Myers. it is a yard-
aticltofthedifferancebetweenacomputatioumodelprovided
bya megramminaianguageandanactualiyimple-
mented computer architecture. The yardstick is a clear basis
for the complexity. reliability. and efficiency of the system
software in a current computer system. Contraction of a
semantic gap of this type prevents the system software (op-
erating system. compilers, data base system. etc.) from being
abnormally enlarged and thus overly complicated.

(b) Semantic Gap Type II

A semantic gap of this type is the difference between a
user (programmed-assumed abstract computer architecture
and a computation model provided by a [aids-level programming
lamage. It is a yardstick of the software productivity actually
felt by the programmer.

One thing to be noted here b that users of conventional
W languages (FORTRAN. COBOL, etc.) are sometimes
forced to write machhedependent programs. This means
that even these von Neumann type languages cannot blind the
programmers to all hardwaredependent characteristics. The
next semantic gap type is introduced to explain this situation.

(c) Senmtic Gap Type ill

Assmanticgapofthisrypeisthetotaiol'atypelanda
type II semantic gap. It is thegsp between a programmer-as-
sumed distract computer architecture and an actually imple-
mented computer architecture.

2-2-2. Semantic Gaps Seen Front Hierachical Abstract
Machines

An effective method for deﬁning a computer system which
contains both a large operating system and a data base system.
is to build abstract machines one by one upon a bare
machinel'WWW) (See Figure 2.) This method provides
for reducing of the large semantic gap existing between the
bare machine and that of the final abstract which is considered
as an application machine.

At preaent. the application machine is built by software
thus reuniting in enlargement of the software and lowering of
reliability.

2-2-3. Historical Transitions of Semantic Caps

1.6
POI 0m USE ONLY
mrmtttmhmm O‘NWWNWWW
Ions-nee-

Fig 1. Relations Someon'l’heoe TynesotSemeotie Geo

Figure 3 shows the historical transitions of sentantic gaps.
(a) User's Abstract Machine Level

The level of a user's abstract machine heUrtens as its
applications are extended and advanad.
(1:) Computer Architecture Level

Little changes have been tnade in the levels of computer
architecture. Although many varieties of computer architec~
turehavebeenproposedonetrial-andemrbaritheyhsve
hardly contributed to reduclm the semantic gap. They make
only the following two contributions:
l) Provision of logical addre- space mstead of physical

address space.
ii) Provision of virtual storage eliminating the need for
concern over the main storage capacity.

These two free pregame from restrictions on program the and
storage system environments.
(c) momma mm Level“)

The level of a programming Wage determines types] and
II semantic gaps.
(i) Machine Language and Assembler language

11relevelol‘smachlnelanguageisequaltotheleveloi'
computer ardritecture. The level of an assembler homage is
almost equal to it.

(it) Von Neumsnn Type High-level [arranges

Fromm knot-ea culled huh-level W
(FORTRAN. COBOL. etc.) were introduced around 1960
and are still in use today. An objection has arisen from
results of recent programming researches to calling them as
trial—level. The reason for this is that they lack fundamental
programming methodology since they were basically premised
on von Neumann type computer models (hardware logies).
(iii) ‘Trouam-Deta Structure 0 Algorithm" Type Languages

47

MOWUSIONLY
Typical of those lawman is PASCAL Having the capa-
bility to deﬁne data structures, this launapa ls appraised as
it has proved that this capability is as important as program
abotlthsn. The capability provides a cleat distinction between
PASCAL and the previoualy mentioned languages (i) and (ii)
which do not dismount: data (mum and attributes) from
htstructlons (codes). Once a data type (a structure and at-
trﬂtutes) has been defined. the data not only allows manip.
ulation by lttstnsctlons at a high abstraction level but alao
contributes to improvement of ootnplledlme error checking
capabilities.

(vi) Abstract Data Type

Abstract data and law based upon it were introduced
bysuchasplendidldeaasbomonlyoncelnasol’twareen-
sheeting decade. The languqe employs an ideal synthetic
pmcnrnmhu methodology which pile: up ptopant modules
with abstract data one above another. The abstract data has
the following characteristics:

(1) All the attributea or abstract data. called data object.
and operations allowed on it are deﬁned.

(2) The object allows “Informatlon hiding" which maltea
it unneoasaary for the user to be concerned about its physical
implemtatlon.

(3) Employit; a concept called “enforcement.” the
object can be accessed only by predeﬁned operatlons and not
directly by physical GWOM

bounces of this type are CLU. Alphard. Concurrent Pascal

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig.3.mu1’ypuofs'mmic60

Modulus, ate. ADA now being amped by MUS.“

mtofbcfmlumctidmol’thbtypo.

We: the Wyoming W dimmin-
guaau which min the x calculus UM! compilation model

but'dbcuuion of time h omittod.

Whatilould benotcdbmitthlt Mum
(iii) and (iv) differ minimally from (i) md (ii) in that the
tonne: have the capability to build an mammal abduct
muchine asp-bran). Although this «nobility of tyya (iii)
language PASCAL it still Wt. tint of the type (iv) lan-
Mﬂ bucheat. Onovhoreconimthattbomof
a mm; pm mu in itmtiu abduction: sup-by-
stepmdemploymametbodwhidimppomthhpmcedun
will ﬁnally min at MW

MmMJlIebalciduofuymunmimW
dutim the put mcothkdcentmy made a90-deyeetumnt(ill)
and a mm mm nt (vi).

69
ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
o
‘
6. 8.8.5.5800
a

I 5.5.33...

 

50

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Note that although the programming language levellhas been
greatly heightened. the computer architecture level remains
unchanged. This situation increases the burden on software
to a more and more undesirable extent. (See Fig. 3.)

l~3 Camandlhntltaofmcapa

This section analyzes the causes of the semantic gaps dis-
cussed in the preceding section and discusses the adverse effects
of the ups. This tasit is accomplished on the basic requirements
for a user-ashamed abstract machine and a desirable computer
architecture while comparing the von Neumann type archi-
tecture with the idea of the recently advanced programmhg

I'm-sco-

ioJ-l hm Principles

(a) Deterministic logic vs Nondetermhlstic logic

Von Neurnann type computers premise a deterrninisticiogic.
However. an advanced information processing procedure reﬂect-
ing a man’s thinking process or creative activity cannot generally
be expressed by a sterotyped algorithm but by a non-determi~
nisuc logic“). Weapons indisputable for advanced data pro-
cesting are a nondeterministic logic and a heuristic logic. if
these are absent. an overhead of reﬂecting the nondetermirtistic
It‘rﬂc upon a deterministic logic is produwd thus causing a
semantic up. Besides. procedures such as those in pattern
recognition require processing involved in ambiguityu”
From now the importance of a technique for processing ant-
biguity will increase. '

(b) Control Flow vs Data Flow.

in a von Neumann type computer. data is processed accord-
mg to a control ﬂow which is subordinate to the control flow
of instructions. However. the recent trend toward parallel
processing and functional languages has proved the superiority
of data ﬂow for describing and control‘tng parallel processing“).
The proof is a conclusion that since parallelism and asynchron-
rzation are solely determined by data dependency. casting
spotlights upon data dependency is more advantageous. In a
current computer. the burden of detecting a parallel processing
possibility from instructions (executed according to a control
now) throudt their data dependency and of guaranteeing its
asynchronization are left to the system software and user. The
execution environment of the computer is based upon the
control ﬂow. This situation is a typical semantic gap.

(c) Sequential ProcessingvsParallei ProceaIng:

A processing principle of von Neumann type computers is
sequential processing. Jobs generally contain routines which
can be processed in parallel. However. since today's computers
and languages are based on the von Neumann model. these jot”
cannot be expressed as they are but their straight forward ex-
preadons must be converted to sequential siogorithms. it is
desirable to naturally reﬂect the processing characteristics of

\

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
jobs upon the execution environment. From this poirtt of view.

the principle of parallel proccsdng is superior because it im-
poses fewer restrictions.

I-3-2 Numerical Processing

Computers were originally developed for scientiﬁc compu-
tation. However. their numerical procesing features contain
fundamental problems.

(a) Fitted Precision vs Variable Precision:

Present computers provide only the ﬁxed precision feature
because of hardware restrictions. Therefore. when a user-
requires a certain precision (for example. $0~digit precision is
required for computation related with nuclear power). he must
program a precision feature of his own. At this time, he must
of course confront the problem of hardware dependency. As
can be seen. even this kind of fundamental requirment is not
satisﬁed by present computers. The harmful effects of fixed
precison are subtract errors. truncation errors. and rounding
errors. The variable precision feature is indispensable for avoid-
ing these.“)(‘)

tb) Error Free Computationzf‘l

Present computers are based upon fixed length words as
described before. This also results in subtract. truncation and
rounding errors being intrinsic to the computers. The.con-
sequences of these errors are that numeric data specified by
users cannot be expressed correctly in the computers and that
an effective precision cannot be obtained. Therefore. for est-
ample. a user trying to solve quadratic or matrix equations must
first study the theory of error, accomplish error analysis. and
carefully program the results of these efforts to obtaki comet
answers. This means that a series of steps not central to the
problem at hand is required. that the execution efficiency
decreases. and that the programming overhesd increases. The
situation remains the same when a high-level language is used.
To get rid of this semantic gap. a computer feature assuring any
number of effective digits (precision) is indispensable. The
feature also contrniutes greatly to the improvement of fraction
computation.

Even in the numerical processing field where von Neumann
type computers are in their element. a semantic gap due to the
low ~level computer architecture still exists as seen above.

t-3~3 Data Environment

This section discusses the mechanisms related with data types
the importance of which Is increasineg recognized in the pro-
mm 13mm wogldjl) (0 a) (7) a) 0)

(a) Data Dependency vs Data lndependency:

The concept of data independsncy pertains to data base pro-
cessing. Data independency means that application programs
accessing a data base need not be modiﬁed even if attributes
and structures of the data base are modified (for example. if
integer type data is changed to floating poirtt type data). Unless
this characteristic is provided. a great overhead in modifying
programs must rentlt. The minhnum asstmnce for avoiding
this requires the programs to exclude instructions accessing
data structures or affected by\data attributes. In a computer

52

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
architecture providing this assurance. tags and descriptors
should hopefully be used; resulting in there being no more
information concerning data definitions than the tags carried
by the data itself. The architecture guarantees complete data
independency by this means. greatly contributing to proyam
development. maintenance. and reliability. The above concept
isone ofthebasicprogr ‘ language taoftoday.
(b) Non-Self Data Type litition vs Se f Data Type De-
ﬂnition:

A result of ncent programing hnguqe development clearly

indicates that data types are the starting point of programming
However. there is no distinction between data and instructions

nor assurance of data types in present computer systems. For
this reason. software reliability cannot be guaranteed during
execution. data environment errors cannot be checked. and
debuuing functions are meager thus resulting in the creation
of a large type II semantic gap.

The aboveproblem canbesolvedifeachdatacellcontalns
information indicating its type (attributes and structure). This
self-definition capability is also a factor indisputable for the
assurance of data independeney described in the previous
section. Furthermore. it may help the solution of the problem
described in section 2-3-2 since it facilitates the expression of
variable length words. The itnportance of the capablity has
long been recognized but is now reviewed from a new angle
urged by apprehensions resulting from present software prob-
lems and proposals for remedial action rrtade by recent pro-
gramming languages. The most basic principle in a future
computer architecture will be this data type self-deﬁnition
capability. Also. the data environment must be strongly sup-
ported to fill the gap between the present computer architecture
and the compuation model of a programming language.

l-34 Addressing and Non-Numerical Processing

(a) Linear Addressing vsStructural Addressing:

A von Neumann type computer provides linearly addressable
storage space so that data with complicated structures and
variable length data must be copied by instructions to the linear
space for access by mstructions it is a fatal semantic gap that
the storage system cannot copy the data structures by itself.
since the worlt load is placed on user or system software thus
depriving programs of productivity. causing coding errors. and
hindering programming abstraction. The information hidiu
concept (for eliminating the need for knowmg physical data
object formats) deserted in section 2-2-2 gives a remedial
measure in this reprd. so does the data type self-deﬁnition
capability (tags and descriptors) described in section 1-3-3.

(b) Address AddressingvsContent Addressing:

The most intimate and trite semantic gap is the one related
to the data awess method. it has long been recognized that
for a data base processing data access by content (content
addressing) is far superior to data access by address (address
addressing). Althoudi the basic principle of the former ls
relatively simple. because it encounters the difficulty of gener-
alizing output formats. its realization is still awaited despite
its popularity and associated lively discussion. However. the

53
won OFFICIAL USE ONLY
importance of content addressing (as well as associative pro-
ceedng) for solving the semantic gap will Increase as future
computer applications proceed to sophisticated data base
processing. Recently. a concept extended from the concept
of content addressing and called context addressing has been
proposed. This concept aims at automatic access according to
contextual meanitp. This function is expected to minimize
the semantic gap inherent in data base processing and is thus
attracting keen attention.

l~3-$ Capability

Von Neumann type computers completely lacir features
related to capability and protection. This fact means that they
do not basically asure system reliability. For this reason.
they have difficulty in sufficiently guaranteeing security. which
is a more important consideration than rotection.

(a) , NonCapability Addressing vs pability Addresung:

Capability addressing entree that only the authorized pro.
cess correctly accesses user-defined data structures through
authorized operations. Present computers do not have this
concept but provide only simple protection features functioning
on main stome bloclts. They entrust the main responsibility
for reliability to users. who have therefore to prepare various
check procedures and systems whiclt are not essentially related
with the algorithm of their problems. This situation is another
semantic gap caused by the low level computer architecture.

(b) No Data Type Check vs Data Type Check:

As repeatedly stated. von Neumann type computers com-
pletely neglect functions to support a data environment. Their
architecture does not prepare a means to assure the reliability
of software during its execution. Hence a semantic gap arises
between this architecture and the notion that provision of
complete data type checlr functions contributes greatly to the
enhancement of software system reliability. debugging effici-
ency. and program productivity. These functions support the
data type alf~definition capability described before and check:
(I) Whetheraprocesshasanaccessrhht.

(2) Whether an operation and a data type are authorized.
(3) Whether an attribute (eg., a value range) defined by a
data type is violated (exceeded).

Unless the above functions are provided at the architecture
level. they have to be provided by the programmer or system
software (mainly compilers). The responsibility for providing
the functions is an annoying overhead on each programmer or
compiler and produces an extremely adverse effect upon the
system‘s execution efficiency. These constraints are the results
of the semantic gap.

2. Sematic Gapleu Composer Architecture

Based upon the analysis in Chapter t of computer architec-
tures. causes of semantic gaps. and their results. this chapter
discusses cttrrent approaches to a computer architecture with
fewer semantic gaps.

51¢
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2-1 Prereqohites for Sen-tic Gepieea Composer Archhecture

This section rounds off the prerequisites (i.e.. needs and
seeds) for a semantic gapless computer computer architecture
and their conceptions.

2-l-l Needs

Needs for a semantic ppiess computer architecture have
repeatedly been described in Chapter 1. The needs derive from
the conception that in the current rum into the personal com.
puting age. a computer with bare. mere. and superflchl high
performance (huh speed) does more harm than good. in
today's societies filled with M, amounts of infomrstion. the
most important thing is to solve software problems (problems of
reﬂecting men's intellecturel activities upon computer systems).
The solution requires good computers but not computers such
as the above.

It can be broadly asserted that a computer architecture pro-
viding a good software environment and powerfully assuring
productivity and reliability should be the .next generation
computer architecture.

2-l-2 Seeds

A semantic gepiess computer architecture can grow from two
seeds. One is the hardware technology level now typicaly
represented by VLSl technology which is sufficient to realize
the features described in Chapter 1. At the present level. the
reserve power hrouﬂrt forth by the VLSI technology should
be directed not to the pursuit of higher computation speeds
but to the dissolution of semantic pps. Although a satisr
factorily synthetic methodology for dissolvlu them has not
yet been established. establishment of methods for dissolving
particular ones is fairly promidng and progress has been made
in the theory of its features. The seeds of a semantic gapless
computer architecture are VLSI technology and a theory
supporting software engineering. programming languages. and
a computer architecture synthetically.

2-i-3 Basic Concepts
As outlined in the previous two sections. a semantic gspleas
computer architecture has its prerequisites. Future computer

systems will generally be used with high level languages. There-
fore. the use of these languages (i.e.. abstract data type lan-

guages) in the above architecture is premised in the followhg

discussion. Besides these. lunctional languages are being spot-
lighted but their full-scale realisation will require much time
because of the difficulty of their irrrmigration to the present

emironment.

As described in section 1-2-3. sample attempts have already
been made to fill the semantic gaps between programmers and
programming languages (cg. modularity. data type abstraction,

parallel processing description capability). The greatest ob-
)(‘CIM from now is to attain a reliable and eflicient este'cution

environment by consolidating the progressive and superb coo-

\

55'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ceptions of these new languages Into a computer architecture.
Approaches to this objective differ fundamentally frorn those
toward the attabtrnent of a conventional high-level language
machine which orientates about a particular von Neumann
type hut-level language and thue is a von Neurnann type com-
puter. Only the basic concepts consolidated as above can
truly be universal and indbpeuable for mechanisms of future
computers.

The design of a future computer architecture requires op-
timum allotment of roles to hardware technology and software
technology. Present computers represented typically by von
Neurnann type computers pay no concern to factora necessary
In the software world. The fact that these computers are now
the measureem would perhaps frﬂhten anybody.

2-2 hidhoddogyfuMGepl-Compascmctare

In the course of progress of an informstionoriented society.
software has long been playing the leading role of intellectual
production activities. From the viewpoint of the current pro-
gramming methodology. the so-called “high-level" languages
such as FORTRAN, COBOL. and PL]! used at present give rise
to thedoubtz‘1iowcan theybe at ahighlevel?"becausethey
cannot answer “Yes" to the following questions:

(1) Can program ecrpreulone be logically structured?

(2) Can problems be exprencd usirg the concept of data
abstraction?

(3! Are users freed from describing low level procedures
which are basically irrelevant to their problems solution‘.I

t 4) Can parallel processing and its aynchroniutlon be des
mind?

(5) lies due consideration been paid to sutorrutic pro
granunlng (e.g. for checking the eligiblity of a program)?

(6) Is it unnecessary for programmers to consider hardware
characteristics (word length. internal uprearion. precision)?

(7) Are the programming methodology and the program de-
sign compatible with the computer architecture?

(8) Are the roles of the compiler auntie! to the reduction of
the semantic gap between the external architecture (problem
expreuion level) and the mental architecture (ecrecution level)?

Positive answers to these questions will lead to a tide of
programming languagu. that is, structured or abstract data type
languages.

is) Abstract Data Type Architecture:

An approach to a computer architecture which strengthens
functiorts to capreu and manipulate data structures and attri-
butes is introduced below. The objective of the approecit is
common to various other approaches to a high-level computer
architecture for improving a fundamental defect of a von

Neumann type computer. -
The above functions provided by the so called “highlevel”

languages suchasPOR‘l'ltANandALGOLcaenothelpbeing
found wanthg. They bury the expresion and manipulation in
program algorithms thus providing an obstacle to structured

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
software design. Dudes. very few current computers have s
stsndard data structure manipulation function. The least of
these computers berely support the "suck structure” indispen-
sable i'or controllingthe program execution environment. Re-
consideration of this situstion has recently sveltened recogniton
ofthe importsnce oidats structures Torsnesvthebssic
prone-tuning method. structured progrsnuning hummus such
ss PASCAL. CLU. end AWARD employ the concept of
“program - data structure + slogrithms" meanitg that deﬁning
dsts structuressndattributeslsesimportsnt tosprogsmas
defining algorithms. They provide language meditations
requiring data structures end attributes to be deﬁned before
describing slgoritluns which manipulate the date. This h the
philosophy of structured progentrning. An extendon of this
philosophy allows procedures msnipulsting the date structures
to be defined in addition to the structures end attributes. By
this feature. merry errors which could conventionally be de.
tected only during Wm esteetttion cert nosv be detected
during program compilation. This {centre is celled copulation
of data structures end operstions.

On the other hsnd. sn epplicstion heating in importance
is date base processing oi-ths non-procedure. Thisprocs-ing.
which‘isone ol’ the weakestpcintsoi’svonNenm-tntype

computer. executes procedures manipulating data structures.
data structures.

As seen above. improvement of astem efﬁciency requires
pmision of:
(I) Dsts structure expression and manipulstion cspsbiliiy
(2) Data lndependency (extensive seperatlon of data attri-
butes from instruction attributes)
(3) Management of variable length dsta by the erchitecture

in conclusion. functions to be attained by s dsts structure-
oriented hidI-level computer architecture are:
(I) Supporting structured storage spsce instead of linesrstor-
sge spsoe for the advanced dsts structure expression cspsblity
(2) Extensively sepemlng dsts from instructions
(3) Providing edvanced dais structure manipulation instruc.
tions

These may be attained through the use of tag end descriptor
concepts. Approsches to the attainment will be fescinsting
since these functions supersede the basic data procesahg func-

tions or the operating system of s highvlevel [engine machine.

3. most!

The basic erchitecture of todsy's computers was established
decades ago. At that time. importent system techniques sup-
porting the systems (eg. multioprogremming. multi-processhg.
virtual storage. 755. network srchitecture. and dsta base) were

not known. Frsnltiy speelth'ig. computer development staffs
must have been unable to foresee how the utilization of com-

puter systems would chsnge and their appllcetions wouid
expand. To cope with this uncertainty. they set the computer
architecture (machine instruction set) at a very losv level end

57-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OVA Ute as-ann. UH.- Vu‘hl

mainly plum universality-t; satisfy all needs. were of
payim the‘high price”of com withdevelopmental difficulties.
This approach must be compulsory when thins are unknown.
but entails the construction of hum software upon the low-level
architecture. which is the ham cause of today's software
crises.
‘l'hecriserrneanthatthereisauestupbetweentheimsge
ofsystem dedunrs about thedesian ofa systemand ltsactual
computer architecture. They also mean that software is more
and more complicated though hardware is simplified. For
example. the objects of hardware design have shifted from
gates (basic transistor circuits) throuyr register transfer modules
(8TH: [C or MS!) to processor memory switchesa’llS: 1.8!)
while greatly improving the productivity. maintainability. and
relhblllty of hardware. The present computer architecture level
corresponds to the are design level. At thislevel.softwarede-
veloprnent must confront a vest many dlfl'icuitieeand requires
craftsman-like skills. However. to cope with the processing
overhead caused by abnormally enlarged system and application
software. computer manufacturers have mostly been striving
for the improvement of processor and memory cycle speeds
instead of strivim for the improvement or even modification
(addition of instructions not conﬂicting with the architecture)
of the weakest point (low-level architecture). (For example.
since its introduction the processing speed of the IBM system/
360 and 370 has been increased it!) times under the same
architecture.) This approach would have been a rather natural
selection under the two conditions; the rapid progress of semi-
conductor technology and the difﬁculty of developing bulky
and completely new software. However. a new environment
has recently been created for fundamentally reviewing the
computer architecture level. as follows:
(I) From various experiences of system and application soft-
ware derinn and implementation. the recognition of software
features which should be supported with at the architecture
level has been st_ .
(2) Hihperformance mini-and microcomputers to be de-
veloped from now will not be restricted by existing software
properties. and their architectures can be established relatively
freely. They wﬂi expediently employ huh level architectures
to nduce their total system devleopment costs.

As summarized above. this paper explained the present
situation of computer systems synthemed under the concept
of semantic gaps and considered their solution.

“emcee:

(I) Myers. 6.1.. “MW h amputu Arebitectue". John Wiley
QMNewYort. "910].

(1) Chohen. 1.. “Non-W ”teapot“ Surveys.
Vol. ll. No. 2. pp. 19-94. [1979].

(3) rmwmmuwwmm
was". Computer. Vol. 12. No. I. pp. 4249419791.

(4) M.W.A.’.hudahthe0eunudlmplsmentationofm
m m". Col". Vol. l3. No.1. '9. 14-23. "919].

MWLIEEONLY
(5)

(6)

(7)
(U)
(9)

(l0)
(ll)
(12)
(I!)
(14)

(l5)
(l6)

(I1)

(I!)

(19)
(N)
(2|)
(22)

(23)

(2‘)

Goto.8..otoL.‘PLAﬂ.AWtotNu-abd.mou
mmam‘.lm.«mmmsmm
«mom-n.” 102410.119”).
mnum-Amwmam COW”!
- A: M My W to am 130W
olm Eum'.hoc.olthom Ann-1W0“
Coupon: W». p. 3141. "919] .
m1x.wwmtwum
[1912).

m. u.mmmmm*.m~
pom. Vol. 13. No. 3. pp. 61-11. [mo] .
mwxumnmnnm-Acomuwm
onOndudhuuhthDouTypoo‘.ho¢-olmw
Anon! 97-point on Coupon Mm. pp. 201-“.
[I915].

Yunnan! MM.“Wmmoomo-A
Sonny". Coopodu Sum Vol. 9. No. I. pp. 3-21. [1911].
M. 1.0.. UM. 6.1.. ad Day. LL. ”no Anthem. of
WWW-Squaw mnmum
Fm Vol. 61.".69l-701. [[972].

mm Hunt. WT: AlOpouduSyouuNodm
W Would Iy Flmvm". hocofmom
mmwtuwmmuonnm
Syuom (Io “”1982;

Duns. EM. ”I'M Sum-to of "I. TAB-WW
8mm“. Conn. ACH. VOL II. No. 3. pp. 341-3“. (1968] .

m. 9.3.. “no Nachos of o mlwm Symon”.
Conan. A04. Vol. II. N04. pp. 238-241. [1910].

Lister. us. ml Sum. PJ.. W Wm". Sow &
WV“. 7. No. 5. ".613623. [1971].

Wall. W.A.. on 11.. “HYDRA; 1h. Kama o! a “hm-or
Oponm Smut". Como. A01. Vol. [7. No. 6. pp. 337-345.
[197".

Woo. IL. on at. ‘Opomhp Symon mm W
Hanna". Rec. «MICRO [0. pp. [19-133. [1917].
Wmlquun'vwwomfothdmb
W: h [and “cam [Plum/Sonny. Sum".
Compom. Vol. I]. No. 3. pp. 3340. [1910] .

Lhkom. Ml. “no body: o! the Von. Opt-m System”.
Cum. ACI. Vol [5. No. 3. pp. “4436. [1912].

Homo. A.R.. Woo. An 09m“ 37m Mn Conan".
Comm. A01. Vol. l7. No. IO. 9'- 549-337. [191‘] .

Icahn. T..aol..'Al£8AMumy.(hpobloofAnoohdu
810M Mammo- M Macy lamb-mo". hoe. of
NCC. Vol. 46. pp. 941-954. [[911] .

loam“. hoc. “COW“ no. (mo om) moon. ,
buttons)“. M. a IL. MM M Odo-M lamb
pmmo Poclty rulm.hoc.oluomo
USA. JAPAN Coupon: Cooluoooo. pp. 8043. [1918] .
Kant-yum. N.. a oL. “Elia W Comm. Mouton Ap-
pmto WMGm’Mcdmm.
(to opp-s) [1909].

Knuth-yell. N.. d 0.. “SPIRIT: A Now W Danton
Coupon: hplom Plath-“Mom Hold-Illum-
oot Coomunuoo". hoe. club. In new Ooohooooon
mu Con-who 3m pp. 159-111. [I919].

382 Fuji. ﬂax-toting hunch 00., Ltd.

7

~59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Full-scale research and development for the fifth generation
computer, which will be much more humanlike in its capabili-
ties than today's state of the art computers, will begin from
April of this year.

The project team has set the early 1990‘s as the target
date for completion of a prototype fifth generation computer.
in the process of RAD. interim results of this project will
be incorporated in arch areas as 0A (office automation).
CAD/CAM (computer aided design and computer aided manu-
facturing) and software development. The project is to be
carried out under the leadership of the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry. 'through joint 'study by unlversitles,
research institutes and companies. as well as foreign researchers
and governmental organisations

This project is so ambitious that there can be no guarantee
of its success at this time. Only the enthusiastic endeavor
of persons contributing to the project can overcome the
difficulties which will confront their research efforts.

2. What Can the Fifth Generation Computer Do?

it is expected that the llfth generation computer will be
able to think. make judgments and sense its environment
much as humans do. it is s totallynewconcept in computer
history. We can brieﬂy outline its functions as follows:
I) It will be able to see and judge dimension and shape
of objects and discriminate color. It will also be able to accept
spoken requests and give its results in natural language. .
2) It will have the ability to propose appropriate methods
of solving specialized problems. For example. if supplied

with the medical history of a patient. it could consult its
reservoir of medical information and advise a physician on
the precautions and possible treatment of the case in question.

3) Whenauserstateshisfinalobjectiveandoutlincss

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
working process. the computer will be able to program itsif
to achieve that objective.

4) The computer will describe the appropriate working
proass according to the specific requirements of a given job.

5) rIt will be able to detect and remedy problems within
itsel .

Professor Tohru Motoolta. chairman of the Preparatory
Study Committee for the Fifth Generation Computer. nsrnma-
rized in "The Proaeding of International Conference of Fifth
Generation Computer Systems”°the goals of the computer
project as follows:

i) To increase the levels of computer intelligence as well
as their affinity for cooperation with man.

The five human senses can fulfill their functions only when
backed up by the knowledge necessary to understand the
information obtained through them. in order to raise the
levelsof computer intelligence and increase their affinity for
cooperation with man. it is absolutely essential to provide
these computers with knowledge related to their respective
ﬁelds of application and the means for putting these to
practical use. it will also be necessary to develop a computer
equipped with associative inference. and learning functions
to process that knowledge more effectively.

Such requirements can be met by improving man-machine
interface. and further researching understanding patterns such
as speech. voice. graphics. hnages and objects. the comprehen-
sion of daily language. and knowledge bases.

2) To process the ability to act on behalf of human beings
as well as the ability to assist man in the development of
unknown fields. -

So that man and computers will be better able to share

the burden of work related to environmental changes in our
society. arch as energy conservation and problems related
to the aged etc..- the intelligence level of computers will have
to be increased to the extent where they can comprehend
the environment. So as to expand the capabilities of our
sensory omns with—the aid of computers; development of
sensor technology. and functions such as pattern collating
abilities where a computer is connected to these sensors to
'extract the distbtctive features of what is sensed, as well as a
parallel procesairg ability for real time procesang is necessary.
3) To enable various forms of information to be made
readily and easily available when necessary.

The information available through present information

processing systems is highly lirnlted with respect to the kinds,
amounts and forms of information we come in contact with

in our society. it is new to reduce the gap and facilitate
instant access to a greater amount and wider variety of informa-

tion. It is also important to develop a means of access which
enables the easy and accurate retrieval of information needed
at that time. Also important is a support system for clarifying
the many vague requests made in the real world and essential

_.

 

' This article mainly refers to the poceeding motioned.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Isl-uni 9...... 38...}:
9.180... 93%.}:3.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
z‘li’ggié-j‘ggs
iéizéisézgazéml

 

63
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY
n was won-yo...- —- c we»...

technology for enabling computera to be applied to nqto
standardized jobs Itch as CAD and decision making support
systems. .

Computer networks which are capable of accusing die
tributed data baass. and knowletbs baaea and capable of
understandingthe meaningofquestionaandglvinganswers
are also inportant.

0) Acquisition of new perceptions by sinuiating unknown
altuationa.

it h expected that we will be able to acquire knowledge
of unknown durations by means of lam scale simulationa
in a variety of fields ntch as science and technology. manage-
ment. administration. lid society. Through realization of
ulua-hghepeed computers using high-speed devices and parallel
procedng.predaeairnulationwlllbemadeposibleinfields
where Imulation ha been impossible to date.

Front the standpoint of the user. fifth generation com-
puters mould function as mated below:

i) Easy to use functions capable of being utilized even
without professional knowledge.

System‘s of this kind mould be equipped with

(a) functions for the inputting and outputting of Informa-

tion by way of sentences. speech and voice. graphics. imagea

and the like,

(b) functions for the proceadng of information in a

conventional manner by meant of daily language and

”Phi,“ '

(c) functions for storing common knowledge as well as

ones capable of utilizing the apeeialud knowledge for each
field of application.

2) iiuman arbatitute functions capable of Judgment and
decision making.

Ideally, judgments ‘molvlng logic should be left up to the
computer while the data neceanry for important decision
makings. is provided to the user.

The following abilities should be developed.

(a) functions which enable automatic retrieval of related

information out of vast amounta of stored data in response

to inquirea.

0)) functions which enable conclusions to be drawn from

inferences based on atored data when an unknown problem

isgiven.and

(c) functions capable of learning and storing for sub
sequent uae solutions to new problems.
3) Functions capable of ﬂexible conmurationa appucable

loawideratlgs ofioba.
In order tobe able to freely select efficient system coni'igura:
tionarsqronaivetovariouanonatandardiudjobsinawide

vsriatyofapplied lielda.thefollowhgare required:
(a) functions capable of conatntcting a aystem opurwrn

610
F0! OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
4) Functions for faclitating progranun'mg.
Effective utilisation of acctrmulated software and improve-
ment of software productivity require:
(a) functions enablim a computer to write and modify
its own programs.
(b) functions enabling a computer tojudge and process
matters of council sense without instructions from man,
and
(c) functions able to cope eaaly with different types of
computers as well as additions to existing equipment.
5) System functions which are reliable and can be used
expediently.
From the standpoint of system conﬁgurations. the following
are neceaary:
(a) compact system functions havurg higher cost per-
formance ratios.
(is) system functions capable of aophistiated distributed
processing between distant points.
(c) highly reliable functions arch as, functions able to
recover automatically and minimize tlse adverse effects of
uni-functions. as well as functions to facilitate verification,
arid system functions of huh maintainability. and
(d) sophisticated functions to prowct secrets.

3. Why Isthe Fifth Generation Computer Necessary ?

The idea of fifth generation computers sprung front recon-
sideration of conventional type computers which are based
on thevonNeumannmodel. ln theearlydaysofcornputer
development hardware was so expensive that (issuers tried
to minimize production costs. These early machines were
designed around the sequential control of stored program
system as propocd by von Neumann irt 1946. Dedpters tried
to minimize the functions of computersandtouaethemat
a high rate of efficiency to achieve better cost/performance
ratios. Accordindy. today's computers have defects from the
standpoint of recent technological developments in the field.
These defects are:

I) Poor Ability in Non-numerical Data Processing

Today's computers are designed nuinly for carrying out
numerical calculations irrespective of whether they are und for
scientific or business purposes. and have a minimized function
to process characters or image data and the like.

Today‘s computers are not equipped with the necessary
functions to process non-numerical data such as sentences.
symbols. speech and voice. graphics. and images, etc. However
computers are expecwd to be developed which will be capable
of associative and inference proccwng such J3 [uttem matching
functions which deserve the name of artiﬁcial intelligence.
Computers such as 'these will be required to widen the areas
in which information processing can 2 applied. diversify
the forms of processing. and realize information systems
that have a high level of intelligence. Computers with new
architectures are also hoped for which not only have increased

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ivan Honey-nu - on. spas..-

procesdng capabilities. but also can put to practical use
information management such as data bases and knowledge
bases. Computers with new promssing functions are desired
to anpmve man-machine irtterface by developing easy-to-use
computers capable of being good assistants for man and to
effectively extend the range of the human senses. -
2) Limitation in Processing Speed and Other Capabilities
Due to Sequential Control and Unear Memory Model

The performance of conventional computers has been
hcreawd largely through improvements made to their sepante
elements. and efforts to improve the system itself have thus
far proven fruitless. However, since the high-speed operation
of elements themselves has a limitation imposed by the speed
of light. combined efforts from the standpoint of both
elements and systems should be made from now on to improve
the performance of computers. One effort made thus far in
terms of systems is parallel processing. This is not only
essential for largeacale numerical calculation such as partial
differential equations and for simulators for various systems.
but is also needed for speeding up inference and auociative _
processings. Various parallel control systems should be put
to practical use which include proposed data ﬂow control
that is basically different from conventional sequential control.

Due to the diversification of fields of application and
advancements in LSI technology. the merits of distributed
processing have come to be looked at in a new light. Distribu-
tion of processing can- roughly be grouped into two catego-
ties. One is a regional distribution form in which processing
functions and data bases are located near persons in charge
so that various resources such as hardware. software. data
base and the lilte can be shared by many through communica-
tions lines. The other system comprises distributed functions
wherein processors of different kinds desiyied for dedicated
uses are connected to each other via high-speed buses and
the like. thus replacing a system having a relatively small
number of processors of one kind connected to a common
main memory. The former should serve as a means for realizing
a huge information system designed from the standpoint of
users. and the latter should be put to practical use as a means
for reai'zing systems which meet diversiﬁed demands.
3) Software Crisis — increase in Software Cost

The cost of software development is ever increasing. and
many difficulties have been encountered in improving the
productivity of such.While architecture has been proposed
which can accept highievel languages with ease. and attempts
have gradually been made to change‘OS into ﬁrmware.
emphasis is still placed on the utilization of software hereto-
fore accumulated. and old and inconvenient architecture
models are followed. Efforts are required to prepare environ-
ments in which architecture suited for the new age centering
around new applied fields or areas can be introduced. When
software can be programmed with incremd productivity as
a consequence. diversified architecture will also be made
possible. thus opening up prospects for future computer
science and engineering.

66

FOIOFIICIALUSEONLY
4. Image and Concept of the Fifth Generation Com-
puter

Fifth generation computer systems will be expected to
have the following basic functions:

(a) Problem solvingand inference functions.

0:) knowledge base management function. and

(c) intelligent interface function.

The: functiorts will be realized by software and hardware
systems respectively. and will be aimed at maximum scales
and performances such as those which follow:

The problem solving and inference function will be airrwd
at a maximum performance of le - l G LIPS’.

The knowledge base management function will be aimed
at performance capable of retrieval of a knowledge base
required for inference within several seconds. with a core
data base machine having a maximum capacity of 100-
LOOOGB.

The intelligent interface system will be aimed at making
conversation with a computer through the medium of well.
graphics. and natural languages etc.. a possibility as well as
enabling the exchange of information in a form which is
natural for man.

These functions will be combined into a single general-
purpose machine having a system configuration which can
meet various performance requirements in s-variety of applied
fields.

These functions may be arranged so as to serve as machines
in which any one of the functions is reinforced. and as machine
they will have a common programming larguage.

The fifth generation computer system will be aimed at
sufﬁcient general-purpose functions and performance require-
ments to realize systems for machine translation. question
answering and utilization of speech. pictures and images
systems which will be basic and common for a wide variety
of applications in the 1990's.

The target performances of the basic application systems
perceived here are shown in Table i.

4-l. lnrqeoftheFlfthGeasrstleaCempeurSyssem

The ﬁfth generation computer system will be considered
from two different points of view in order to get as general
an image as possible.

The first point of view is a conceptual view_ of a hierarchical
structure includinga humansystem,a modelingsystemanda
machinesystem.andlsceoteredonhowthelevelofthe

man-machine interface will increase with respect to its present
level.

 

Note: 1 UPS tlogial laferances per Second) means one inference operation of sylleglsm per second.

One inference operation on a present computer iscoaadered to require l00- l .000 steps.aad
nence l LIPS is equivalent to I09—l.000 [PS (instruction per ac).
Mactinet of the present generation are of approximately l0‘- l05 UPS.

67

FOROW'ICIALUSEONLY
00000 v0 0 00.0400. -. w... 03.0.0

'03—... >0 2.9.513. gm

      
        

        

  

 

3.80.0 0.8.08.0 .0809... 2. .g 03.0.. .0 :0.-
3§ig!g.3>0.0 .00.. u: .30.: 000 .03...‘0..0...0.0>00£.
9.0.... 0003.0 00.6.2.8 05.80... 000...... .‘lia... .0 60.8.5. 3.2.00 000‘s... .0...I¢o 0: 00.8.5. 80.3.... 3.00.38...
00.00000
58:15.3 v.
0. is 5.! 0000.39... 6000.30... 2005......
00.100.08.052! 300.580.000.538 8.3.0.00 IN.
intact-2.00. 8.358.893.8330: 05.233.808.- 0
> .0 00.0.00. .. 0" 0000.305. 20....- .0.. .30.! 0... I.
00!... 0.382020 . 3.0.5... 3.32:8. .038. .0. c1550....
30.00.... 162.00.51.20... .8. 0!... 0100 00.3 .303? 0:... m
5.). 05.30... ‘00 0090.306! 00 6080.5. 3:...» '00 0.0.3008 00... ‘00 >8; 00.00:... '00 0.0.30.5. M.
5:83.0- 8!) . 8 a
6 m
.00:
£§¢3§° . m
m Nth-1'. i
. _ 0.0.00.0 0 .0 02.000080... 5.8.0.0..
E8... ..o.\u.o7( 88820
2.03.0.0 c0200... . . I .
00.3100: 00.3003 . stall. 0:0 .0. 07.0 I..- .0 O. O 00....

2.00.0...02‘0...‘00...05...00.0-.

   

I u .50.:
3:0 .0: 8.0. ( .0 00.80000... o... .. 30......- l: S 90.8. 301.85.
5.000.. .00. 0.0.3.0. «.000 .0 0... .00.. 88000... 9.0
00
0.509000 0.0.. 300 5.3 0500].. 00.0.... 2.0.5.5. 0030.000 02.0.0.0: 0032.... 0000:— ..008 05.30... 0:...
0....) 08.: 00.000... .83'0 00.5.20 '00 .0580. 20.0330. g 0.0.30.0 02.0.00...

  

’3‘:
i... a S). 00 5'05." 0‘...

Sega 0.2.68 02.22.00 :6 .o aft-.0 . 0.0-...
Fig. 1. An Example of the Fifth Generation Computer Systems

The second point of view deals with the fifth generation
computer system more speciﬁally. and dtows how components
are combined into the system as software or hardware. Since
itwouidbedil'llcuittodescribethesystemlnitsoverall
conﬁguration. it will be divided into an application system,
mtrware system.andahardwaresystemtoprovideanlmage
ot‘ the coni'turstions for each system.

The application system corresponds to part of the human
system in the hierarchical structure described above. the
software system corresponds ma‘mly to the modeling system.
and the hardwaresystem correspondaprimarily tothemochine
system.

The imageot‘the ﬂfthpeneration computer aystemcanbe
grasped more clearly by combining the foregoing two points
of view.

I) A Conceptual Image of a Fifth Generation Computer
System

As shown FbJ the ﬁfth generation computer system will
be oriented toward processing knowledge Information and
will have quite a m logic capability. lls greatest feature
will be that interface between man and computer will greatly
approach the human level.

Conventionally. man-mschine interface ins been via proce-

durllprouminslanguages.‘l'oaolveaprobiemwiththe

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tabtaz. 11min Reasarchand OavatomntoltneFihn
GenerationComoutaISVsum

ﬁ-t) Mummm

1-2) Cranium-vacant

r-at Minnesotans-amusement

1—4) Winchtunmmum
m

1-.) Apollo‘maolvlnoavm

2-" ism erase Wt eyaram
2-2) woolen m and Inter-rec ever-n
2-2) Inﬂow lneartaaa mm

3-" “dominant-atria

3-2) 'unettonolmaenlno

3-3) RWMJMm

Ht Manama-ammo»
3-" outlaws-sacrum

Hi tnmmmmlm

O-tl om function mm

4-2) W mm

4-3) on .0. Mo

4-“ urn-om What convocation Mina

o-li Oil's-twat nun-«tactile. communication
avaeorn

5-1) vurmnm
I-2) Intelligent vur CAD W

0-1) tnsattlaant min. mean

0-2) Knowledge base «to system

0-2) Omactlon W to: eornoutor
architecture .

0-4) ommmommmm

'I-tl omrw mm

 

help of a computer. man has first had to describe, model and
program the problem. Humans and computers have been able

to understand each other only through programs thus prepared.
With ﬁfth generation computer systems. however. the
Mcription and modeling of a problem will take place at
interface. In other words. computers will be able to understand
problem descriptions and from that express a model. and
synthesize a program based on arch modeling. Man will be
able to communicate with computers by using speech. natrrral
languages. pictures or images with a certain extent of freedom.
To realize such sophisticated capabilities. both software
and hardware should be functionally improyed. Fig.3 shows

a conceptual image of such a system in which the machine
system indicates future hardware. It can be understood from

this Figure that the machine system has functions much
higher in level than those of conventlonal machines. If we
compare the old with the new in terms of programming
languages, conventional machines use procedural languages
on the basis of sequential execution. while the new machine
system will use logic programming languages or program
solving languages for tn'alanderror logical inferences.

The modeling (software) system illustrated above will be
highly effective software for arch hardware and will serve

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mainly to perform meta-inference functions for problem
solving such as understanding problems and synthesizing
programs. Since the level of logic programming langunes is
quite high. the modeling system can he a man-machine interface
during the period of transition before the ﬁnal object is
accomplished. However, input processing in the form of

everyday language, pictures. or images etc.. in order to
minimize the incompleteness and vagueness of inputs. is

indupensahle if we wish to allow the next stage of development.

.mm

   
 

.WW

. amt-sumo

'. ' An"
.1 '
LKU:IIO:

'2'
E

Fig. 2. An Example of Hierarettieaily Organized Logical Model of the
Knowledge information Processing System

Conversely. a function will he nemy to add some vagueness
and incompleteness to orhinal responses for obtaining sum-
marized outputs. . _

The modeling system includes an intelligent communication
system capable of understanding speech. natural languages.
pictures. and images at that point when it interfaces with the
human stem.

The si3r'iteli'gent communication system itself will be reamed
us a sophisticated knowledge information processing system
having modeling and machine systems such as described above.

The ﬁfth generation computer system wrllalways utilize
knowledge required in aries prowesing. beginning with inputs
such as meeh, natural languages. picture or usages from
the human system. and extending to understanding these
inputs. synthesizing and executing programs around them.

71
9 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and generating responses. Th3 knowledge itch-oer a know-
ledge oflanguagea,lotowledgeofimages.knowledgeof
problem domains. and knowledge of the mechanisms and
data expresion ofthemachinesystem.allstoredina
knowledge base.

With tlte functions of the machine system being sophisticated
and uplifted by themcdelingsysteminthisway.ourability
to process information will be greatly improved.

2) An Image of the Continuum of an Application
System

Structures common to various systems etch as intelligent
CAD. intelligent 0A. htellbsnt CA]. and intelligent robots
whichwillalsoberealtzedinthefifthgeneratiooccmputer
system are shown it Fig. 4.

Allapplicaticnsystemsareoomposedoftlueesubsystems.
namely. interactive. processing and management. These three
subsystems will be proportionally different from application
system to application system. These subsystems are illustrated
in Fig.5.showtrg their mutual relationship and internal
operation to chrtfy the various functions they perform.

Speech. natural W. pictures. images or their com-
btnationsareuaedtoputaquestiontothesystem.The
interactive system utilues the knowledge inherent in the
larguage or picnirea to analyze a structure (commotion)
and convert it into an lntemal (intermediate) expression etch
as an antornical tree. Then. an analysis is made of that
meaning in context and a description of the problem is
extracted from that. This. however. is incomplete due to
omissions and the like. Knowledw used here about context
and background knowledge. which it used at this time. is
information related to the background and flow of the
conversation taking place. The processing system converts the
incomplete description into a complete description using its
knowledge about problem domains. and generates an answer
to the description. At this time. operations such as effective
uttlua'tton (hference) of the knowledge of problem domains
and storage (learning) or new knowledge are effected. The
generated answer is then converted into a summarized answer
by getting rid of unnecessary. self-evident information. There-
after. this summarized answer is converted by the Interactive
system into an internal expression. which in turn is converted
into an external expression understandable to man. In this
way. one conversational cycle is completed. During this cycle.
the management system oversees a variety of knowledge for
effecting common operations of inference and learning.

3) An image of the Composition of a Software System
An image of the composition of a software system for

Fig. 4. System Structure

73
Vol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 5. “mod «woman and Int-ml Damion: oi the Three summon in on
Application Sam

76

MOMMUSEONLY

3
E
i
5
g
5
E
é
E
realizing various epplicetion systems is shown in $3. 6. the
softwere system directly reflecting the structure of epplication
systems.
(1) Butt: softwere mtems

Theawillbethecoreofellsystemsendconsistofe
problem solving end inference system. e knowledge has
utenegement system. end en httelligent interface system. These
systemscorrespond respectively totheproblemsolvingend
inference mechine. the knowledge has menegemertt mechine.
end the intelligent interface mschine.end rney be defined es
those which cennot be constituted as hardwere in reelizirg func-
tions.
(2) Intelligent systemstization mpport systems

These will be a group of system which. in designing end
producing (systematization) optimum infomtetion proceedng
systems for venous epplicetions. will have knowledge of
what is to be produced. production processes. and the like
for greatly reducing the emount of work which men will do
in systemetization. The: systems mclude arbsystems which
leed from a strict speculation description language and e
described specificetion to what is to be produced. or s

 

Fig. 0. Conceptuel Disorem of the Com-
position ot e Fifth Gerteretion Computer
Sottwere System

arbeystem for verifying correctness. and a subsystem for
simulating operations. end the like. It elso comprises three

75

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
upport systems. tint is. an intellhent programing system
for handling programs. a knowledge baa desigt system for
handling a knowledge base. and an intelligent VLSI des'yn
system for handling VLSI chips and computer architecture.
(3) Intelligent utility systems

“less will be a group of systems which will provide
sophisticated functions to facilitate utilization of the system
itself. These will be comprised of a mum for maintaining
transferability to transfer stored programs and data bases
from existing corranercial machines to a target machine. a
system-explanation and education system for explaining the
functions and use of the overall system and subsystems and
for regarding to user's conarltation. an intelligent trouble
disused: and mahtenance system for automatic inspection
and recovery lid for pridance and consultation about inspec-
tion and repair of corlpllated trouble, and other systems.
(4) Basic knowledge base

Univernl knowledge used by the system itself and by the
userswillbearrangedasbaaicknowledgebaaeswhichare
components of the foregoing systems and are employable in
application systems which users will make. There are largely
three knowledge bases: a general knowledge base similar to
common sense; a systems knowledge base which will gather
knowledge related to systems; and an applied fields knowledge
has which will gather knowledge about certain applied fields.
The general knowledge base includes bases of basic words of
everyday use. basic sentence patients and basic scripts. a
has of dictionaries of various langliqes and sentence con-
struction rules. and other has related to natural languages.
The systems knowledge base includes bases containing specifi-
cations for the system itself. such as a processor specification
description base and an operating system specification descrip-
tion base. a language manual base. a program module base
containing programs which are highly usable. and other bases.
The application knowledge base includes a VLSI design tech-
nology base. a computer architecture base. a basic program
base. and other bases.
(5) Basicapplication systems

This group of systems will be developed as basic application
systerns and have respective fetal target performances. These
systems will be very valuable and will be a source of knowledge
bases and sophisticated-function modules commonly usable
by various application systems. The systems are largely
classified as follows:
Machine translation system
Question answering system
Applied speech understanding system
Applied picture and irnqe understanding system
Applied problem solving system
4) Future of Hardware System Structure
(I) A profile of fifth generation computer systems

Fifth generation computer systems. covering all sizes from
the small ones for personal use to the large-scale computers.
will find application in various fields. These will include
machines for exclusive use as well. incorporating particular
strengthened functions like the existing data base machines

76

I70! OFFICIAL US ONLY
Fig 7. Basic Continuation oi the Filth sensation Computer Systems

grouped into a eontnunity by a local netwotlt.

The computets in this community may be classiﬁed accord-
ing to their abilities. but in so fat ss they will sitase a common
ptosnmming language. they may be looked upon as members
of a new computes family.

From the standpo'mt of tlteis basic aofttvm interface. these
computes: shall have the functional cotnponents. ‘l hese
are listed below with the conespondin; components (in
patentheses) ol‘ existing computet systems:

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(a) Problem solving and inference machines (CPU)
(h) Knowledge base management machines (Memory and
f ding system with virtual memory)

(c) lntell'gent interface machines (IIO channels and

devices)

These three components will form part of each computer
system. A general-purpose fifth generation computer system
will be equipped with each of these machines in substantially
the same proportion. whereas a small system with the same
structure will form a general-purpose fifth generation per-
sonal computer.

A computer system with enhanced problem solving and
inference computer. This will find application in ﬁelds like
consultation requiring professional knowledge. calling for
strong ability to infer. Systems with reinforced knowledge
base management function will be called knowledge base
computers. Like the existing data base machines. they will
be applied in fields mouiring storage of ‘Knowledge‘ in large
masses.

Computers incorporating an enhanced intelligent interface
function will he provided with an interface with variou-
interactive media. speech. picture and image as well as those
based on natural languages. it will be possible to use these
machines independently or in combination.

Figure 7 shows a conceptual image of the general fifth
generation computer eonfhuration.

Computer functions will be available at various levels and
their combinations will create a wide range of machines
covering both the small personal computers and large-scale
machines incorporating each function to its maximum extent
(2) Profile of the structures of machines serving different

functions

Hardware architecture shaping the functional components
will be based on a combination of six machines. These are
the six machines that are being studied as the likely candidates
to establish the new architecture. The machines will be so
combined by adopting the distributed function architecture.
namely by applying modulariaation. adoptation. and micro-
programing techniques

For smaller computers of moderate performance. a firmware
base architecture built on the innovative von Neumann
tedtnique will be adopted. Language interfaces will center
on new languages of both the predicate logic and abstract
data types. Thus. the results of study on both the logic
programming machines and abstract-data type support machines
villi be made use of in programming.

For the powerful large-ecale computers. data flow machines
include; functional machines will serve as the core technology.
For the problem solving and inference computers. the execution
part in the logic programming machine will use a large-scale
data flow mechanlsrn for its execution. and the knowledge
base will be processed by a small-scale high-speed relational
algebra machine. The relational algebra machine will use a
aritable data flow mechanism for its execution.

A large-scale knowledge base computer will use as its core
a largeecale relational data base machine including a relational

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I Dmlomnl Schedule lot 50:

      
    
  
 

manna

 

mom a! but: monologues

w mum lot w mum:
”can. VIOJ (Mum)

—§

no W 000 an:
won. m million
3560!: 035822-
009339. I... .5939: is
{9.32. .8822 3810 o

 

EB.)- ‘O’ :23". 5:. c .3

0.03:0. .o 5:820

3292!. 5.3.5.883 .

£08 .3) .
b.3085: co:2:-§>o

2:38.320 .555: 3.5.2.3 .
238:5.- Ioﬂlzl at: .
03-.5—55‘

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
algebra machine. Results of studies on the abstract data type
nipport machines will also be uud.

The mpporting hardware in the intelligent interface system
will include a V181 processor for exclusive use in speech and
a signal processors Data flow machine techniques. including
functional machine techniques will be used frequently in
huh-speed operations.

The data flow machine will constitute the basic exectition
mechanism for high-speed processing. and hence should be
taken up as one of the. main subjects for research and
development.

A number of atstomiaed VLSl’s are ind spensable for the
nuchines. and, therefore. development of VLSl-CAD to
produce atchVul's in a short period is to be treated as the
most important theme from the standpoint of packaging.

(3) Macro image of the fifth generation computer structure

Fifth generation computers will be linked to communication
systems to form a global network suitable for various social
organizations. Potentially. each node in such a global network.
that is, each computer site. will constitute a system connected
by a local network to two or more computers The local

network. capable of highspeed data transfer. will connect
computers of different functions. including the smaller personal

computers. thus making up a general-purpose group (commu-
nity).

As the macro image suggests. a ﬁfth generation com-
puter system will be a collection of computers serving different
functions: a small. general-purpose personal computer, a
knowledge base computer. and a problem solving and inference
computer all connected by a local network.

In principle. the component computers will have a common
ptogramming language. These computers. therefore. will form
a computer family linked by a common language even though
they may be intended to serve different purposes with one
or the other of the functions enhanced.

A structure of this nature will help build up a ﬂex-hie
computer system mitable for the intended applications. As
the above suggests. hardware and software research and
development for fifth generation computer systems should
be carried out so as to allow them to be connected by local
and global networks.

5.R&Dl’rogram

The Fifth Generation Computer Project is to be carried out
over the next 10 years. (Table 3) Based on the results of
three years study by the Fifth Generation Computer Study
Committee. R a D will be divided into three pluses. In the
first 3-year phase basic technology R a D will be completed.
In the second «year phase subsystems are to be developed and
in the final 3-year phase a prototype computer will be devel-
oped as a result of total system integration. Referring to the
prototype. private companies will produce their own com-
mercial models to be put on the market.

81
FOR OFFKJAL USE ONLY
(Wu-no.
'I.

how-van..-
*0.”
IL!

k.- M‘

All

I. “C an.“

AI-i

audio-.—
“3

Im“
was.
m“

M. .‘C
w“

”- twan—

”mm
mu..-

novm AM

...-...“..\\‘\.u

I“ UI'I'ILIAI. oar. UNLI

.-.~ ”~- ~ '~~

_ ®m_m==-

Mum-Ia-
“cu—nu
ml.- .
It.“ -
~ Mdma ‘6

humu-
”out.
can...”
map—-

“~00“..-
*0.“
”W
"mu
Inn.-

 

@« .m I

f -_ ----_--_— --

wm I

"""""""""'""'C"""'

    

 

| I -------
I .
1 ' -
. .
' . I
\------~---- -

. f""""" ....\n
mummﬂﬂﬂmummw I m~mm |-_-_____
w I “ “ -----~-
unwmmmmmw“~m“ L---- ..... ------.'
”an”... I

f I
9 'l' '

3’

r‘""--‘ ------ -‘
MW ' may—ovum» I
our—wean : Int-Manna». :
__ 4 ~""' I
l
I u
\-----_-----—_-l

“‘ MCIHWNM
- “COMM“
”mantle-helm“.

Hg. 9. Sup: in Round: and Oualopmom of Thoma Roland to Basic

Sohwunmkchimm 82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The budget tor the project is estimated at around "0.5
billion for the ﬁrst phase. For the next ﬁscal year beginning
in April, I982. the govemment has approved V500 million for
the project. For the second and third phase some VlOO billion
will be needed.

Themes in research and development of the Fifth Generation
Computer system are shown which contain six themes. The
R t D are classiﬁed into four divisions as shown in Fig. 8.

The most important aspect of the project’s R a 0 rs
architecture development. Professor Hideo Also of Keio
Univeristy will head this section of the project. This section
will do research on: parallel processing. efﬁcient software
production, efficient data base management. distributed func~
tion systems and mathematical and logical algorithms. Fig. 9
shows steps in R & D of themes related to basic software and
architecture.

Development of a new programming language to be sub-

stituted for the conventional von Neumann languages is one
of the major hurdles of the project. Loﬁc programming

languages and functional programming languages are expected
to be developed and should provide parallel programing

capability and program veriﬁcation to improve soﬁware reiia
bility. One of the moat promking new languages is extended
PROLOG. which will be designed on the basis of simple
inference like a logical syllogism.

Though the major theme of the ﬁrst pha: will be language
development. research on some bade software and hardware
elements will also be carried out. A ﬁrmware base sequential
syilogism machine will be developed in the fast phase asa tool
for parallel processing inference software. For the knowledge
base machine development. the project team will begin with
conventional realtional data base machine architecture which
will then be developed into the ﬁnal inference machine
architecture.

The details of the R a D program are as follows:

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run VI fly-mu wél‘. unul

29:323.: gggtgz o
29:389.. 3203.03.31 o
as... l!‘i3.§33¥o§0¢.§siag

89; 632 8.33.... 3 .363: 0
ti
{ES-33%.! Egan!!! I032? O
.i: .033 g.“ 39.: v0 '36,: O
49!. 32385. 8.338- ... 8.. 93...... .2 68.5. 2.8.8.!

igos§32i£§%33i§§!$¢( o

gzzgg3gzuzgii‘sﬁ 0

£300 Ill-:05 .0 ’55:; 3 80.5.0

sugii‘zﬁ‘vgs'oeaiiiggoﬁ o

Sui-u :-

:gz’sgpgigoﬁzivﬂaosgi-Eiii o
23.8. ”3333.93.33.32 0

38:83.80 9.. so)...

it!!!
5%! 3 Ezgzggg
o v

3.3;). >390... I; o SCI {3; 3‘35
0 62‘}: 2.20,: c. .3930 it. .393 .0. £2
osiggio3i‘go
cot-32:33 I: o .0 a; 3| it

Eggs-0.90:5 .n..

10s

visors I... .80 .g O‘Qi‘U age.
.6 .501»... 8!: 3:38.. 32). 8. it
05'!!! .5333 a .0 :3 3| it

goggle-.3 d.-

.g :33“: 3...
4.3.: 92208.: to 00..“ 9| .3! 9. 92.358
3 :3. 5.35:... $08.85. .2 cue-0.5.... 33:...
g .333! 60.58.5300 .2 5!. .0 51

iii ...

.izlgzs’gi.

E0320 ’3 tac.£ {.0 die.- 651 .0530:
0.... 2.9.0:... ’55.»... :38: c9336: «.30 4

‘3‘». $0.30.... in .

|||||||||||||||II|IIII||||||IIIIIII||II ,

810

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.23 no. 0.6. 230.5320. 0.3.. .33.: 2.0.03 05 .o 90:20.:

.40” .0; 8.0.5.59... as. 08.»

I8. 8.2.12.6...{3 pixies; I8. 2.3283!!-

.e81‘é»33:§30§3¢3§3¢o§50¢0.§
t§§§3:§.§:3‘83.33 at... p .

                      
     

3.390... Es 6533.3?0 8.390.: 08:21:83....It3’3
.ii:§§83§8§8§2.3 o Egg-1093000330833
.iéi ggiﬁigoﬁc.
giigzxggﬂiaig

23‘»- 09.0.2... 339.3... ‘32; .~.«

3.3 poo! «0.1.9 .30. .0 3.3.50.3; ":98 .1... 3.
13505:. 0

.0835
8898.89.99. 283.28....5 .o .253! o..- 828» 9.28 .2... .2
.Elotoan:
968.589.0003 988.... 08d .0 3.6.32 93.028. v.98 618:2:
05210000.!!! 0

§SEI.SS£3§.§_3§83§

.‘ogigoigaiifglsﬁ. {5.339.185}:
gaggeoggz gggzszsa'golgu
I”; g‘liio.§ COED-1550.000.

130.323‘.§.i.3..§ 3382...:
guii‘o‘zx O

3i§§3£¢£53
.ssig.o€.o§-3'i§lg
gal-Iii .N
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02J09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9

6.0.3.23...

2.3.5.333 60.8298 333805.303;

coggiogaoEQo-gg—c.§

_ 32§§§§.°§i§§o
. 05385053335200}.- .pﬂ

   

 

3:33:39!
gggao‘getgiig
c9.-ig.o§§9¥on§!il

£38330. 3;“ .ﬂ

.iioﬁzﬁgtg
.oggeo-ax.s3§.§§8§o§55 .3... It:
g‘glﬂon‘i.:§n§oal§§§.lh .3

.co..§.!..59..é!.. 58:! 30.333.00883058‘. is: .9
do: 3'... .0. {go-I £3.05 1.200an 39.8

Ei.)2§.‘§'3.i§33§.gigs .3
ggggtgo‘gggg

£3. §§!¢.g§§oisgggu§3.§ .5

 

 

 

 

.33 2.5.12 .83.... .3 2!...- ¢u¢ll 2:5! .5... E...»- !F .3
dictate-8.39s... .ggtsgxgssgﬁ.
to:
3.30002... 5.! 833.228.. 0... to: 8 :3. all .3... Eon->- 2... a.
.158 a...
3:832. .- :9! I 03.3.80. 8.29.. 5! 303...: 33.0.9.5! o...
3......»- 3 £2.20 2.9 v..- .oaaoEOo .33 5.3 no; on 9 San-00> .3

.igsiggagl

"in... 9.38:9. .5 3.5. 6.... £326 :88. o... 826.... 3.3!. of. o .03.... o..- g coo-3.... .23... 9.330.... ‘26....
_ 2. .o geese... v..- ga. 3.2.3.0380

68.58... 05503.69: ui.I—¢. :0 2.9.8.6 .309 . 0.0.3... .0. 0:02.503 0 .0 2.0509030 v... i
5000- .o 902...... 35—... ..o in 2.0.5.08 €9.33; 2:59.13... ( o 50-;- ouo‘l... 3.9:)... ﬁn
|I|I||Ill|| I II I

 

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEAsE: 2007I0ﬁ09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9

0.300250 90.000». 3 90.00000 00.55005. 5.!

.3) 0:8: '60 000...... .80.. 0‘— 5.’ 5000.53

.3> g 0032-8 09 06308.3: 9‘ .0 u;
2208.300. 6030‘). 303.0 .Q

005000.: 0:05:02; .3> 0000330005.)!

3;.gisigiiisftgtnglta. 8000060!‘30§0¢.£32£60§0¢0§82
0.350.353.5203: §!.§§§.0§
0559‘!§§IE§§0§<§E§¢23 323.300.52.00... 0.9 m
[sooiiv‘gop 00§0510iﬂn
1230:0000; 0
00 .3000. 20:05.5...»

20-000.. veplnbpfzz 3.8000000102081050 800.8 .055 .0.
p!- co.|.0. 30.5.1.3
0..) 3009:5030 3 00.30:!“ 88.030: 0.000.; 0 65.0003 080.00 03.0.5000.

.33 203.023 00.1 izlgililgix
Sig-38.3icﬁigspugig. .2 guinea-cocolgﬁlécogc
..3§i080.0§053§0.u§8=2. .3 2.286583 .3.

6.038000%?!"

01.223000:- 0500.83309380000302008320531.

00)- 80‘ 000300. 060.502 000.000 3:000 98.. .3000 .0 33.30.0000 .5 0030.0 3 20.32.00 023:. c. 3.0.00.3. 0000003
.0550... :ggiuouiilir
i303§50§§l£302§§3008uviz-£020.00 .: 3§§g55g( '

Ogal°p "22.0000 00.0200... 900 .00. .0. 3.00000 0904 .3
0007300. 3.3.5.000 0000...}: 9.0.6291: 8. £3000 £390! a.
03 00. to. ”22.2000 3.900... 3. 3.803 :25 .:

3.9003 0305 0 _ 6003‘.

._ 00020:: 0‘ .0 .2005)- 0000 309 0.3:. .0 0.0.

005:3: n.- 0. 0.... .000. .( .090. Sci .2 _ 05 00:35:00. 0500..- 300:3! 0...... 300.3000 3

0039.2 0.3 605 0.0:- »02 £0.0- E€0:.. :. _ 0.93: :0 05—00....03 05:00:. 0 00.0.50 0- tuit‘u

0.0000005 3...: 0.0— :. 360‘... 300.0000 .0 E32 0 ‘ 05:09! 00900.0 .08 ...... ,. .

llllﬁ|lll||.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9
«33.58.800.000;
§¢.i3i.3>8%3=.!§s§0§.2
2.03003. 53:093-350.!8330 53.0550002003- 0
400000....
1:32§§3£.§383:..§§0§05¥
003.805.535.33‘9635003330000550‘855
gs§038§.3.§3§§§"§2.§
.88l08.|§>:§8>::0<§§.8¢2:
§.09000¢0.a0¢.50000 0
.60.:
2.935020%. 90023209339053.135530550100
iiisicoiguizgiuilazsﬁ.
50080.2-086.
I§I§§l§.§.§§54.§§25
gussv‘gggtaﬂxs 0
.§?E!.I!%:i£££o
gs.§.3g3.s3i.¥fli
.8§!6$.§tiigg.§<§zua.
iggigcagsglﬁ
801800 .0. 603...... 50...... 6.! E... 3.9.04 9.0.! 5.82.2:
§.§3§.§.g§!.60¢.§. 0.00.3.0 0

 

gziii.

r00!!!l¢00!59¢0§0.i§

§:.§.3§->¢0.o.§
géoxeaiis 0:200:23... .2605! .n 0

         
    

 

.00 3-3 0. t... 00.0- .0 .3... do... .00 000! 0
6004‘. . .0000 .0 0000.50.30 =0: .3 00.030 9 8:00.03 3.30.0
‘28 80.. 80.060 3500:0235. 0- 00003.00 00 .3! Clo-s. 05808.0
1.0.00 0 .003 20.0.6. 00 3.3 .6040! v .3000 .0 80033.0 3.000.; 0
83.60 0000-
.5... I... 0...... .3004... 00. I 0! 8:85.. 5.88.0 .o 32.00830 0

5:35.00... 000.3. or £033....-

o..0c3.. .0. 63.0.0053 10.5.00. 0... 0.2.00.0. I000-

...0... .0. 05.30:. 300.30.380- 0 .0 2.00.00.260
0:200... §§ao§o 3.9.0.5... 900.5! ..

         

303‘ 29‘ .0 ‘3 0“ .6 .0 30;}: 2- S. 30323 g 0*.

3.3.3.0.. “.000... 800 0
«0.3.3.580... 00- i..... 058000.; 0
.0 08.. 3 0... "3.0000“. 0

30:." 2.3.- l-IO O _ 3

80100.30. ...... at...“ 005-000.; 0 _ 0.09 3.0000;— ociuuo 00009.3... .0 in:
00 oo— 0. 03 ”3.00000 0 _ 0... 0.00 309 0.5.00.0 .0. 033.0. 0.0.08.5}
005:8... 3.2.301w 3. C0 5:! 0:200... 0.00.3.2: 0 .o 2.06.0908

00.50... 300 300 .. 0
4839!! ‘2‘: ‘5 359.88). 0 so
.53 9 31:58 cot-95:8:- 3808.63.82.33
23.8.5.0

’g3.§§ga n q

 

all

glixl‘3‘nglis‘}i£§ i;-

23§53§§§1§ igigiga$¢3§

.‘cuit §;g$;:3¢!§:!§3‘s§
123.333.05

cisgalgeiooticggguoﬁﬁ.
doe-.30.... 35.189.088.5583332

gi:8§§3¢8%3£i§:.3§§3.

EQIStiEI“!
.guoi‘.i.i3§£
gaggligoigigl

giui2§>§¢oﬁigt
£33800!!! 6..

.:§§3=0933900.¢939
§o~§3§95§§g2.£038§§(
6.3!... 3.3!. S .58!!! ens-'30 "‘99 3...: .2
5.023. 8.98 $3.02....-
gslg .0. is 38.3.30 0
652.200.38.300 .0. §o(
60.3.5323: 282300;;
.§£02.§i§g28§( "Egsa.
6685...... i323;-

 

its!
i:§.%lgo‘gingici:
§§:.§€g8§0 o

.!§0}03.§
.gigitlo: .2;
.iigigiioogougiia. Eggsggzzg
63.2.9.0 :évoiozt.!2§o‘
§:.i.§i8§o3§§ .§:;g.i asp-9:85;:
ii‘iio3ui :Ecﬂsl‘g 0:: tv‘ii
.igig’:5§¥.,§§§ .0038 92.0.0000 3.0%:- fig-3.0..
§‘§::§:.5§2.H§§.8c23 59:35.003 25.... 35303-209930

Conclggdichtvcono-oz.’ siéga o itE-iic. .7.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9

IUI Ufl’.‘ Int. ‘qu- U.‘I.I

       

    

Imus.”
vmmwummwu
o

W! at mwuwuﬂcwumw '
www.mmmummm :

«www.mmmow
www.mmmnuwm.
WM-mmmmuom
Womanizmm-Mimm“
ammovmnmmmww
”dim-”boom
W.unm~dmeIUI-CAO

o

 

I
1.1 Moan-“Mama”

7 Wu

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Fuji Marketing Ruouch 00., Ltd.

C80: 4120/}17

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9
POLYMERIC annulus m IRWICS

Tokyo maniacs» in English Vol. 15, no 1, Jan 82 pp 48-49

[went]

Withtbeedvmceofdcctronicehrecentym.polyrneric
umbhmmchdevelopcd.8nnior unterilleinctec-
trontct. Here. the preeent eituetton of polymeric rrreter‘nte is
won by introducingenoutiine ofepeperdeltveredbyl’rofeaor
Shops-ﬂoor Kytnttu Untventry.

l. mm

Die most important problem to be overcome by trmtettng
mteriets used in electronic equipment and devices. is to realize
nrperior beet-rcdmnt properties.

‘l‘beworkinsyntbetiztngmpoiyminrecentyemuut
satisfy such is not somnutubtemurretberrnuchdeveloptng
workiedongtheltrmot’improviuthernoicculumuctum
of the beet-resistant polymers already synthceind. One
exempietetrrudeprepolyrncrhemtructivernoieculetend.
Because this polymer does not contain vohttie components
mohareeiduelcolventedtierutubietorneetrequtremenn
n a melt-curable or rnelt-proccuibte beet-restctent potyrner for
use a an etectricel inruhttu materiel. Representative poly-
rneric inﬁll-ting materials used in high-density tntegretton of
so-cetled microelectronics. are potytrnide end epoxy reﬁne. and
:o.ireremtrcndso{bothoftheeerem:redeecrtbedu
follows:

Anintmthi'upoctofpolymideuledcovidcly.htlte
development of poiyirnide boindotoqutnuottnodtm (PIQ
resin) by Hitachi. The difference in chemicel structure be-
tweenPlQendordimrypolytrnidebthltPchontetme
tedder structure tum good them-l nobility in the polytrnide
ctuin.

N/C0\ /
«m/ \c/R" '
\c I ‘
'_N
O (3|.Rgimmm)

P‘lQﬁtmanbeforrnedbycoettngPlQprepotymercn
silicon wafer tilted-I. end curing at JSO‘C’ in a nitrogen
atmosphere. This ﬁlm can endure beating in eir at 450°C for
5 hours.

The success of NO as a passivation material has come as a
surprise abroad. and the electronic industries in America and
Europe are now investigating use of polymide materials for
multilayer VLSl's. And further. a surface treating agent. such
asan organosilane compound like gsmmaamino-propyltriethoxy
n‘lane. is presented to improve the adhesive properties of poly-
irnide on silicon wafer material.

As for epoxy rain. the development of improving its
heat-resistance and controlling viscosity in applying it to device
packages.isactively proceeding. Oneexampleisthehigh-
molecular-weight linear epoxy resin. developed by Western
Electric. which is possibly cross-linkedwithhldidensity.

1mm“

1he success of electrofaxphotoaensitive materials using poly-
meric semiconductor materials has motivated applying the
sensitisor to the polymer for laser printing, And the subject
is now established as a national project. These activities are
intendve. but exact information about developments is not
readily available.

The following photoconductive polymers are now being
studied: (1) linear s conjugated polymers such as polyacetylene.
(2) polymers such as polyvinylanthrathene. which have con-
denaed polycyclic srornatic hydrocarbons in their side chains.
(3) those such as polyvinylcarbazole. which have complex cyclic
aromatic compounds in their side chains, (4)polymerscontain
ingallylarninein their sidschains. (5)thoeesuchaspolyimide.
which contain aromatic or complex rings in their main chains.
and (6) charge-transfer complex polymers. which are obtained
by doping low molecular compounds into the above polymers.

The photoconductlve polymers developed have for the most
part features of the so-called separation-type function. in
which are and composite structures consisting of two phases.
that is. the phase generating carriers by photoimdiation. and
the other phase of drifting carriers. And further. the tendency
of obtaining desired materials by polymeric semiconductors
only is becoming less. whereas that by combining with other
materials is becoming greater. For example. the following are
the typical laminated function-separated photoconducting
materials: (l) polyvinylcarbszole as a charge migration layer
and amorphous selenium as a charge generation layer. (2)
Wine/polycarbonate (chats! mace) and ore-nit: pie.
ment such as squalilium (charge generation). and (3) 2,5-bis(4-
diethylaminophenylHJonadiazole/polyester (charge migra-
tion and thioindigo derivatives (generation).

There are some photoelectric transducing materials using
polymeric substances such as (I) trinitrofluorenon/POIYVinyl-

.carbazole. (2) polymeric thin film dispersed by phthalocyanincs.
(3) polyacetylene doped by a small amount of electron-acceptor
molecules. among which polyacetylene type materials will be
studied much more for future development.

1MM

92

FOR 0'.’FICIAI. USE ONLY
Resist is an important material in electronics; essential to
the manufacture of many electronic devices. among which the
VLSI is the most important semiconductor device.

Photoreslst. which has been widely used for some time. has
now reached its highest level. and methods of designing the
material are considered as being almost fully established
although there have been some slight improvements.

The current main projects in research and development tend
to be for infrared (deep UV) resist. electron beam resist. and
X-ray resist. Research projects expected to lead to new
hit-performance resists have been much reported at a meeting
of the American Chemical Society last year. Main research
concerns deep UV resist and electron beam resist. among
which. one of the important projects is the development of
materials to chemically modify esters of polymethacrylic acid.
as previously.

A noticeable new tendency is the bold idea ol‘ applying
organic semiconductors to resist. but it will talte much time
to accomplish tlte development because of economical aspects
and sensitivity.

Cross-linked polymethaa'ylates have been developed, thus
appearing as a positive electron beam resist with good thermal
stability and dryetchlng property as: (l) poly(methylmetha-
crylateco-methacrylic acid), and (2) poly(methylmetltacrylate-
co-methacryloyl chloride).

These copolymers contain comonomer units of lo molc%,
poublc to be crossiinlted. There are mixed and formed into
a coating film. and thcn. by low-temperature heat treatment a
weakly cross-linked resist film can be prepared.

Furthermore. binary and ternary copolymers. which contain
any suitable monomer unit in the backbone of polymethyl-
methacrylate, have been developed and are expected to be
suitable as new deep UV resist. These copolymcrs are as
follows:

( I) poly(methylmethacrylate-co-3-oxlmino~2-butanone meth-
acrylate)

<5": <3":
—CHQ-(l:-CH1—C

I
C'O C'O
r r

O 0
I I

CH;
CH,-

N 0
a I
C—C-Cll,

(2) poly(methyl methacrylate-oo-3-oximino-2-butanone meth-
aerylateco-methacrylonitrile)

g": 9": 9'"
-Cll1-$-CH1-C-CH1-C-
C I
(E'O (:‘0 CN
0 9

CH, O
I

l“
CHS‘C -C -CH)

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVO‘ vanes—a-uu . u. ~.-~n

The latter has a sensitivity 85 times greater than MA as
a deep UV rerist. and the sensitivity can be increased two or
three times higher by adding a photosenntiur. And further.
the following polynitroarnide is receiving attention as a new
deep UV resist.

f“: C“,
I
— -~-Qo-Q—~-c-o
\

N0, NO,

0.0

IBM has plans for a new electron beam resist. using a thin
ﬁlm on substrate formed in a gas phase by reacting bromide
with tetrathiafulvarene (TI'F) which is well known as a com-
ponent of organic semiconductor. Also. a negative resist is
reported. using a thin ﬁlm doped by Cllr. into a new polymer
synthesized by binding chemically TTF to polystyrene through
covalent bonds. The following chemical reaction is used
between TTF and CB“:

hv
1T? +C8r. ——° TIT-Br; (0.5‘x $0.8)

It has been reported that a resolution of LNOA has been
obtained by using this resist in a coating ﬁlm with 6.000}.
llrlcltneu

382 Fuji Marketing lie-card: 00., Ltd.

7

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
YWCRI SATELLITE MICK?!” came

‘noityo EMT in English Vol. 15, No 1, an 82 pp 49-50

[Text]

KDD's satellite communications center in Yamasuchi
Pi .t'ecture is the western entrance of international communica-
ut-ns with Japan. Since its opening in May l969. it has been
expanding as the main ground station to deal with such work
as station-lactation communications. marhe satellite com-
munications over INTELSAT satellites. and tracking. control-
ling and testim satellites themselves.

Nowthecenterhasitsowncommuniationspartiesof
31 destinations in 29 countries, to which about 656 citcuits
are working. Further, it is now preparing to start a newnurine
satellite service our WARSAT. in February. 1982. All
facilities were completed in December. l98l and the center
is [airing pester importance in sharing in international
communications. to and from Japan.

KDD. Japan's international communication mono , has
two satellite contnninicationa centers: one in lbaragi Pre ecture
which aims at having accesses to satellites over the Pacific
Ocean and the other is this Yamqttcht' center from which
satellites. both over the Pacific and Indian Oceans are
accedble.

The Yamuuchi center is located inthe western part of
Honslus. Japan's mainland. about l3ltm away from Yarmguchi
City. This location was chosen as the Indian Ocean satellite
can be directly observed with no interference from domestic
microwave paths, since it is amounted by mountains. and
little noise exists in mite of being fairly near to a town center.
ltisalsooutoftheowaaionalcourseofpasainatyphoons.
and seldom experiences earthquake tremors.

The center has three main jobs - stationary satellite
communications. marine satellite communications. and tracking.
testing, controlling and maintenance ("Cd“). Stationary
satellite communications have3i partydestinations in 29
countries. which have been connected mainly over the Satellite
[V and. now. the center is addhg Satellite V over the lndian
Ocean in December to which relevant facilities have already
been prepared.

Marine satellite commnications services have been offered
to ships on the Indian Ocean since November l978. though
the marine .teilite is now a private one. COMSAT. As the
awn... -._,_, v. .ua

as vno

E. 06030...
>... 8-3.... I...» b its-Shit» >... \
D ta .v . é... rt. 4 “I q
ll: ./ .. ........... as; .888 so.“ .. ...\n\\\ ..
I; , w. .§> S... .5335 \i‘ .\
. I ,. £03.: . .
958-883... .... .. oil-883
Hooch: i‘
00
£3

23:. 8.5.5568 532.2. 3 :2:_3:¢8.. 3

n“ 8......-
. In :39... .
234.»!

96

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
global system of WARSAT Item to work. the center ls
now toewltelungludulilutomeetthuym.

m a m «a. mum. M has landed
ladle operating l4nunlteu‘l'heeenterisoneot'8'l'l‘cm
ofﬁce: for INTEISAT. It is actively during its modalities.
for 83th tlutvu launched In December. I981.

11' center hameihtuound “6013:.de
four min one: luve penboln antennae. 27.5 meters in d‘nmetet.
for Satellite IV. We! diameter for the Satellite V. til-meter
diameter for Merit“. and ”meter diameter for M.
Most output-power tube: ere "In. while that for the marine
atelllte is only 3 crymon.

As for inhoos phat at the center. 41mm equiement
is the dialltl converter of“! standard ml: that lathe sole
one used in Japan. and other equlpment lull the most advanced
available.

The center‘s tenet is to offer hiﬂuyqtallﬁed commonwe-
tions throughout the world.

382 Fuji mutating Renaud: Co., Ltd.

7

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ACOUSTIC EMISSIW TBCHNOWY

mxyo mommi- 1n angush Vol 15, No 1, Jan 82 pp 51-52

[worst]

Whenever a house collapses. caused by an earthquake. a
creaking sound is always heard before it ﬁnally crashes down.
Similar to this phenomenon, before any object fractures. a
similar small creaking sound. inaudible to the human ear. is
generated. without fail. Acoustic Emission (from here called
AB) Technology. which is detection of arch sounds by
ultrasonic sensors and using them as an application of non-
destnsctive inspection of pressure vessels. has been making
rapid progress towards cornmercialuation. Such vessels are
quite common in the chemical industry and elsewhere.

To loolr at the present status of AE technology. which
quite rapidly, has been gathering much attention recently,
whenever an object fails. this never happens suddenly or
abnsptly. When a force is applied to an obiect. the object
deforms. When the force applied exweds a certain level.
plastic deformation which imparts permanent transformation.
occurs even after the release of the applied force. Around
the transition boundary from defamation to plastic deforma-
tion. a small creaking sound is always generated. As this sound
has a frequency of l05-‘l-lz. it Is a kind of ultrasonic wave.
And as the human ear is only able to hear sounds below
20km. it is unable to be detect such a sound.

Acoustic waves in Al! originate from slight sideslipping
of small crystal structure portions. or from extension of old
cracks existing in the object of up to several loum, when
a force is applied to it. When such a force is applied.
cracks In the object lteep extending, generating the creaking
sound until the object Visibly fails.

Therefore, if such squeaks can be caught by a special AB
sensor. the real danger can be detected much earlier prior
to any actual occurrence of largeocaie failure of the object.
An Ali sensor acts as a kind of stethoscope and uses a
piezoelectric component, to convert mlcropressure fluctuations
into electrical signals. And by using two or more sensors in
combination. it is possible to establish the position of cracks
in m object. A crack occurring in a metal late can be detected
and the position pinpointed within 2 a cut millimeters. It is
said that Dr. Kaiser of West Germany who. in the early
l950’s. measured sounds originatin in metal when a force was
applied. was the originator of AE research activities. Later
on in the l960's. actual applications of AB technolcgy being
used in inspection. in the fields of rocket. akcraft and other
forms of engineering in the United States. actually started.

Recently. applications of AB technology in Japanese
industry. arch as in the inspection of pressure vessels. machinery
surveillance in factories and elsewhere. have begun to be put
into practice.

Application Example NOJ
Nippon Steel Corp. has been effectively instaiiim AB

equipment for airveiilance of steel plate roiling mills. As the
rolisintheaemach'mesapplyarollmforceofseveraihundred
tons.evensslhhtcracit.aay.inabearis§atpportforaroli
shaft. could lead toadan'arousaccidentbycontinuing to
usentdtamachine'rthoutappropriateaction.

However.torrplaoeuchabearimnspportwithanew
onemaytaitemanydaysanditiaimpoadbletoatopa
production line for arch an extended period. Therefore any
crackedportionsareuaially repairedbyweldhgorbyadding
mechanical bracing. On such occasions. if AB equipment is
installed. anyreoccurreneeof the trouble at the welded area
or repaired cracks. is swiftly detected. By observing any
changir; status of acoustic emisdona without stoppim the
entire production line. various methods. esch as easing the
force applied to the particular rolls or further repairs can
be performed as timely action.

Extending of a crack which. could not be detected by
ultrasonic detection equipment. can now be identified by
ﬂuid itisposaibieto stops rollingmii! timelybeforeany
real danger arises.

Application Example No.2

An application. as forecasting technology for gas emission
accidents in mines. is also underway. Prof. Watanabe of
Hokkaido University has installed several sets of AE equipment
at various mines in the Hokkaido and Kyushu areas. to
establidt theposu'biiity of usingAEasaforecasting tool.

In mining operations. estplosives are md to break out
thecoalfromthesearns.butoftentherearegasemiaslons
created by the disturbance of the rockbed endodnit Nd!-
pressure gas. ieadim to weakened strata and landslides occur-
ring. it issaid tltatmore titan Wolves-«Mon accidents
occur irnmedistely after arch explosions. However. the number
of immediate emissions or nonreiatad or delayed emissions
after blasting using explosives have been incressing.

Raisingoi’paspresairelscsussdbytheremotenessof
present coalsesmswluchgodeeparanddeepernomeover
l.000m from the earth's surface. and such phenomena make
more diiiicult to predict pas ernissions..but according to current
research. an acoustic emisdon frosts as far away as l0m from
such a dariasrom location can be detemd. The accuracy.
of beiru able to predict a pas emisdon depends on the absolute
probability improvement. by the installation of A8 equipment.
Thus the development of easily operated portable A5 equip
ment has been receiving iteen interest.

Application Example No.3

The inspection of presnsre vessels used in petroleum
refineries. chemical and power generation plants has been

99

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'HLIAL ‘13:. URL!

attracting been attention .8.” applications for A5 technology.
in order toavoid poaaibie w,pm€ vealetiutreeeive

high-internal premte are required under various regulations.
to pass regular periodic inspections. On such or similar occa-
sions. or to verify that a newly built preamre vessel can
withstand the designed procure ratlm, the ml is subjected
to a hiﬂter procure. Wt than normal rating. lnadvertantly
accidental bursting of the vessels can occur. This is why there
is a desire to apply AB technology during arch inspections
to make detection early and to avoid any 'poedbie danger.
In the case of ushg ultrasonic detection or using other
technology for inspection of giant spherical tanks. over30rn
in diameter. inspection may take over a month. However. with
AS technology where it is posdiie to set a- large nurnher of
AE sensors simultaneously on a giant tank. it is posn‘ble
deterrnlnetheprcsenceofaacltsvithinadayorso.

Nippon Steel has been subjecting arch premre vessels to
AE inspection via its mbddary. as a contract starting 2 year:
ago. and it is now receiving a dozen or so requests yearly
from chemical and power generation establishments.

Besides the above applications. inspection of structural
objects. such as bridges and lughways. monitoring for quality
control in spot weldim operations. much used in automobile
production processes. are some of the empiea of the expanding

applications of AE tedutology.

t82 Fuji. ttarkeung neonatal: Co. , bed.

I

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
pouuuzmc MIC“; IIIBR

Tokyo namocm in august: Vol 15, lo 1, Jun 82 pp 52-53

‘1‘“) The gamma: ubontuy (211.) m mama a
muse-madam. AWwaldlm~
ﬂoaatpmnt.bluoytounopualﬂwlmluamwom
Ma.,mtunnlyuﬁmmop6cdpcm.f0tmplo.by
Wiummmmmmpmnum-
cﬂ'ﬁdmcy mnllnmopﬂcdoﬁocuocdndopu.ay.mopdal
hmfnometct. so u to New optic-l “be to “humanity
mama.

mmudmomjmdmbpdbyﬂLwﬂlm
mmtmtmumwumwahuuaﬁmcm
nun-mil. hisbeeanaetouunuuchnotonlynquhu
mmnurumNtmm-hl.buuhommuu
ndmologtocoauolpohmuonmmwopud
ﬁbel.

Conventional! um forldumodubdonhumployod.
mannmchumpomumunﬂlmﬂtaapm.

the MWWwac-ummbm
Mam. ﬂamlymdmmodmunopdalﬂw

2&3?
e
E
5

'%
§
53
E
i
5 V“ V. O 5HR~ UV.- Us VUJ

Aluminum
(m lav-i
, , /

    

I .
around surloee tingle mo eotleol "oer Core

Fig. 1. Pokemon Device Using Optical Fiber
Developed by ET L

811. used s wire saw to makesgroove about idoumwide
but only 65m deep in the middle portion end SO'ﬂOOan
radius on I 5x lGxZOmrn qusrtz subetrstenhen theyburied
s l2$urn diameter single mode fiber (core dimmer is 451m)
In the move with epouride resin end ground the exposed pert.
After grinding the atrfeoe, they spplied oil with a matching
reﬂective index. simoet with the nrne refractive hdex 1.468
ss thet of the quartz mbstnte. Further, they positioned en
aluminum piste which hsd undertone minor iinishim. end
fixed it usingsﬂessplste,onwhidtinsomesms,metsiﬂim
ind been deposited. Into this polsrizin: device thus con-
etrueted, 81']. applied on lie-Ne Isser besrn in the experiment.
The lie-Ne laser beam pescd through s motor-driven math;
polsrizer to undergo circular polsrizstion. then through e
Bsbinet oompenntor. then projected to the option! fiber.
Next the light was divided into two elements st the polarizing
device: s Y-mode element whose vector wss vertical to the
substrste end an X-rnode element whose vector wss horizontal.
Of them. the Yurnode element wet subjected to interference
of the siuminum piste and disappeared. leaving only the X-
modesione intheoptieel fiber. PioueZihowssnexunpie
of the experiment‘s reunite with aluminum eveporstion.

‘
O

  
 

‘

than. in ton to"

Inelneslon ratio (60)

0.. t 2 re
mane lento Moe. M)
100m MIND-m3 Gammon

mo rem 1n Inqueh Vet 15. lie 1. Jan e2 pp sa-se

[1‘0“]

    

The Suuhhiel’lanl’ronaotlon'ieadmtmnofthemey
or Industrial Science and Tedanolog has mainly maimed
the epedﬂoations foe an upetimental tooaw wlndpow
senetator. With this move Japan has officially begun develop-
ment of whedpower. althotdt he! aetivitiee it the ﬂeid thus
{Sat have been lasing compared withﬁniope and the United

mes.

The windpowet generatonalready developedlnthisoottntty
have a capacity of only a few kilowatts while thoee developed
in othet countries are mach larger by comparison (see Tabb I).

These small aenetaton are need at poem supplies foe
telegraph and televieton npeaten and are also need by Ionic
pirate citizens. Devioee of this type .eneme AC power which
is :onvetted to DCpovetwhldtintumlauaed tochatge
hamlet. This method levels the efficiency of the .eneaton
tematitably. Considedng the expense. such geneteton have
limited Ippllcltion. The main means are the low enemy
density of wind potter. and its large variations.

Mp0"! sensation has not been oonaideeed important
in lapenthusfarbecaueeoftheretylamvariattoninwind
may the to the topouaphy and location of the countty.

Homermwillbepodbletodevelopwlndpwetgemtion
hJapanifthemtofpmgenentedeanbeheldoon.

Table i. Omani Statusoi W 8mm Developed
in Selected CouMﬂee in Europe and the 0.8. (date

ootteetedbvtMSunahlne'tanl-teedouemrel

UAW/IRA
a VA U. I Dunn van. VI‘I-I

sum dew: such hmmhuom mun/mm Mod
bytluSmMmeiﬂboﬁntog-umemu
vindvdodlyabonautlndnudwmmufuucn
www.mmthmtofmmwdua
constant value. benqmocyoftbmuddmm

 

Fig. 1. MM. of IMW Pilot Windmill

mtwﬂlnbobokcptmt. Usingtluuptocodum
the Wmmwﬁﬂboopmwdhconjuncuonwuh
comet! power lines. In odm comm this memod has
Mmuoptcd.

thmilkuodfocundpm madmmpmnﬂy of
an an type. The countcncm {owe type windmill. u
upmwdbyuum(mm).wmdnlmams
supporting cup~llko vhd Woman!» and efﬂckntly u
mmmmcmmummmc.
ﬂullﬂtypevlndnﬂludﬂusvlndmmondum
prhdph n andrplm'swinpmomnpoodpmdum greater
M).dmdncﬂkincyofuuﬂun¢whdmminmm
mu wind velocity. loan. wind mtg ls pmponioml to
tilt cube of wild valodty. (In lifting {om typo windmill '-
unnlly mod for m pan-don in via oﬂuefﬂdcncy.

lnmwtndndlhdumonxhkpmﬂtltovinddlub
donmdhmnnbmdmhr:11u8uml’hn’s
Memplmnhomulromubmdnuﬂtypepwlm. ,

Bulk oxpcrhnenu on the pew winduﬂl wand

”1‘0““th M ontoryushga
l/ZSmhmoddfotwlndmmlm Wannabe! of blade:

bunnﬂytvoottlnmand lhotutwindmln undtwo. The
mohhmbbdugutlyhcmcouvhjhnﬂngeﬂkbucy
mylfcwpetmtuldam-bbdopmpeﬂuisnfetoonddat-
mdnhﬁhfnqumcyoflyphoomhhpm. Whenwind
wlocuy exceeds: (Inﬁnite vmowm condiuon).'the
mmwumwmmmunuuonzo
www.mwwmummmwmdnm.
thmbhdthblmpodbhtoholdaﬂthm

f
E

10‘

MWUSEONLY
COPYRIGHT:

C80:

4120/21?

bhydmliallyconuoﬂtd.
MWhl-‘w Llhedhmetotof
29.4m.mdtheheuhtofthopmpoll¢tub528m. The
mtcthlofthebbduhGFRP. ﬂammwoftho
mtot,$ltpm.isduu0duptol§00tpmbyanuluplhtto
dﬂnlhcmmot.vhidnhaDCInkIym. Umphch
Mmuolmdfmqmcyconuottommlmmbc
unkmum.uupoablotonpplyubhobcukpm
hdepundcatofvindnlodtymlaﬂmnodndocuicm
netwotk. Mlylhﬂmahduptopouddu. lfdthpﬂotvind-
uﬂlbumdulﬁhophnhtoconm-Iumul
windmillmiunapdtyoflm.

1982 m3: Marketing Nature: 00., Ltd.
comma amp VIBI'S

Tokyo am: an branch V01 ts, no 1, Jan 32 pp 54-55

[1‘83]

Hltacri. Ltd. announced on December 11. I98! that it
would begin ule of 256K-bit RAM WSW as samples to
about too uaer companiea from autumn. this year. Thur.
theae new unite are expected to put into commercial applica-
tion by the aprin of 1983. The production rate will lnctﬂu
from a volume oftenaol' thouaanda In early I983 to hundreds
ofthourandabytheendofl983.

Aa a remit of the announcement by Hitachi. 256K VLSl'r
will appear on the market three yearaearlier than expected.
and competition among the maker: will auddanly htenalfy.

When 64K RAM'awereM aold at aarnplealntheautumn
of I980. the price of one unit war V20.000. but after only
one year. it aharply dropped to V2.0m. At preaent. the price
la about V1200 but it la expected to drop to “.000 before
long. Usually the price of [Ce follow: the "Learning Curve"
theory propoe‘ed by the Boston Consulting Group of the US.
which state: that price drope 30% with a two timea lncreaae
In production. Therefore. a high-production maker can decrease
tlucoetperurut.andlncreaeehteprotlt.therebyphtma
greater market alure. The higher market rhare in turn leads
to lncreaaad prorhrctlon and even more favorable conditions.
Thaae are the practlcalconclualonaofthe “laarninaCune.”
The fact that Japaneae eemlconductor makers have become
believera in this theory haa triggered confuaion In the 64K
RAM market and created ﬁction between Japan and the US.

When the teclutical oonalderationa for marketlnp64K MM’:
were aatiafled. Japane- rnakera began lntendve efforts to
expend production independent of actual demand. In the
semiconductor lnduatry lt la generally coneidend that im-
portant new producta are htroduced about every four yeart.
The market for 16K W'a haa continued for four yeara. and
the greater ehare waa held by the American aemlcondttctor
Industry. When the ace ol'MK RAM‘a arrived. all the bi;
makers of aernlconductora In Japan announced that they would
be auppliera ol’ the product. Mltaubiahi Electric Corp.. the
lateccrner in the 16K RAM market. joined the group. Oki
Electric lnduetry Co.. which had no positive achievements.
announad It would atrpply 64K RAM'r. Oki Electric we:
followed by Sharp Corp. ln April last year. All theae makers
are carrying out that pure. lilaaaturalthat priceaavllldrop
with the inereaae of production. independent of real demand.

it the price of 64K We drope to VIM per unit.the
pnce will become comparable to that of IGK RAM’a. Then.
the uaera will naturaly nleet 64K W‘ainatead of l6K
it-xM'abecauae o! the better coat/pa rformanoe ratio of the
former. Tim. the denmd for 64K RAN‘ e hae grown rapidly.
Ilsa reeuh, “KRAM'e are notv replacine 16K RAM'ein Japan.
and further. demand for than her been greatly expanded
abroad. According tooaevietv overhali’thedunandinthe
world is aupplied by Japan. It is believed that 8 to [0 million
MKRAM'aweremamfaeturedin l981. andover60million
villba manufactured inthevotld thlayear. Andthepriceper
unit ta approadiine to about two-thirds of that ofa 16K RAM.
this situation it one reaaon for the friction concarnht; remi-
conductora between Japan and the US. Although the growth
in demand for IGK Wahaa stopped. its production has not
diminished.

The price of 64K RAW: hat fallen more rapidly than was
expected. an malten have not been able to pin the proﬁle
they had hoped for. A top manager in the ﬁeld aye that the
cxoected profit of about V5 billion did not materialize. Deaplte
the previotu bridit outlook. extremely hard oornpetition in
the VLSI field has put companies in a very revere eituation.

It area generally believed that the market for 64K W's
would continue for three more years, but competitive nlee
haveiuat bemnandeverymaltariatryingtoexpandproduc—

E

1

Tour m at bite W (e Dita/you)
.
‘1

 

.-
0
ea

we'n'rerra-eo'at'aa'aa'ea
Pig. Number of Site lntavated oi Dynamic RAWelW/Wl

tionrapldly. NBC. l-litaehiandl'ujltntareaimheatreaehn
aproduetioneeeleotonenillionualtaparmonthbythh
:prbteﬂaandOldhaaannouncedthat productionofm
thouamdunitaiioecemberlaatyearwillbehcreaaedtodoo
thouaandinMarch. Mimblddﬂlectrlclaplanniutoproduc
tionSOOthouaandunltatldtaptine. Toddbareportedlytvll
expand production equipmenttoraiaetbepreunt monthly
productionol’lOOthoutandunltatolmllionunitabythe
endottldeyear.8hrpvlllbeehproduetionof300thmnnd

107

MWWONLY
l-OIi OFFICIAL use ONLY

Table. IC Selea. Rio Expanaeeand Equipment lnveetmerrt

  

'3. ”CM.

 
 

loner reea Ital.“ My Val-‘0‘

units per month from April. ' "‘ — '

Thisexpenaioncfproductionhyiapeneaemelreraiatohe
attained by investing 41% of theh ales. Shown in Table l are
the trend; of if: aalee. reaeerch and development. and inveat-
ment in equipment. in 1982, reaearch and detelopment
expenaea and equipment inveatment are expected to amount
to l3.6% and 26.2%. reapectively. of aaiee - a total inveetment
of 29.8%. This fact ahowa that the K: industry it really
investment-oriented. it is feared that there active inveatanenta
might rearlt in entertained competition and exceerive equipment.

Withdemand {cruxm’aattheendofthie
expected to exceed supply. the market is still eat
Janeneae malterahaveenjcyed develoenrentheneﬂtalnthenew
64K RAM market. Solonaaethe l6KRANmarhetintheUS.
harnotdirrrinialred.iapaneaernakertarenot infrlm on
the acquired market.

It may be raid thatJapaneaemelterehaveeatabllmeda
hair for existence byohtainhuagreatermareol‘theexpend
in; market. Here it the eaaence of the friction in the Japen~
US. aemiconductor war.

When the market atopa upandlrra.aornerrnireramay not
heahletoafford archahlahrateoflnveatrnent. Thlaia
reﬂected in the small number of enterprtaea. which luve gone
into production of 65K RAM'a, comd with 16K RAM
maker: the worldover.

Under there circumstancea. the industry war mocked when
Hitachi announced on December. 17 of Ian year that it would
begin mproductien of 256K W's from the autumn of
I982. Now both Japaneae and American makers will have to
so all out in investing in production of 256K RAM': despite
the fact they have not recovered their 64K RAM irrveatment.

While the appearance of 256K W’rwili intensify the
friction between Japaneae and US. aunieonductor mitera.
hutuaertwillbenet'itbytheaceeientionoftedmoloucai
developments in the electrcnlca field.

mat Marketing haeardi Co., Ltd.

108

MOWMONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE MID rmowct

ARDUOUS mom HAD! TO comm CWIORS mum
Tokyo NEON mu: sum in Japanese 15 list 82 p 9
[rest] Waiting for ”Voice of God?"

In connection with the work of drawing up the draft of a Public
Tele-Commmications Law revision bill for the puzpoee of liberalizing
data commmications, the Postal Services Ministry and MIT! are continuing
efforts to search for a cowromise plan. With regard to the Postal
Services Ministry's original schedule for submitting the draft to the
Cabinet meeting on the 12th, time was earned to the extent of about
one week, due to the request for the postponement of the submitting thereof
to the Cabinet Secretariat. however, there is also no possibility that the
talks between the administrative officials concerned of the two Ministries
will develop beyond this, on a large scale. marefore, it seems that
the two Ministries will come to make final settlement efforts. while
waiting for the "voice of God" from the ”1?. Private users are watching
the situation, from the stand that if the situation is not settled.
it may result in injuring the LDP, too.

The administrative officials concerned of the Postal Services
Ministry and NIT! seem to have half given up their respective hopes, but
they have been continuing a series of talks. in order to seize an
opportunity to settle the situation, somehow or other. The reason for
this is probably that if the proposed revision itself of the Public
Tale-Communications Law is upset coapletely, and if the main cause is
regarded as resting with the two ministries, then they will become
targets of public iweachment.

NIT! has so far been upholding the stand that it cannot accept the
Public Tele-Comunications Law revision bill general outline, submitted
by the Postal Services hinistry to the LDP Communications Department
on Feb. 2%. As for the reasons, "111 has listed the following points:
(1) The Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council's reconnendation
should be respected; and (2) in order to relieve medium and small
enterprises and other enterprises, which cannot afford to have their own
computers, and which will be placed in a disadvantageous position, when
compared with the icint use of circuits by big enterprises, the liberalization

109

roe omcuu. us: only
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the use of circuits by the persons concerned or the joint use

thereof , including message exchange. should be carried out. MITI also says
that concerning these requests, the Public Tele-Comunications Lao need
not BuccSSdl‘ily be revised, and that there will be no objection to the
realizing thereof on the basis of a Ministry ordinance or regulations.

Kev Is Preservation of Secrets

On the other hand, the Postal Services Ministry maintains that it
cannot regard message exchange. which is telegraph- or telephone-like
service. as information-processing [service]. set forth in the expanded
interpretation by MITI. Furthermore, it has nde no concessions. from the
stand that in regard to telepsph- or telephone-like services. the
preservation of oomications secrets is absolutely necessary. and that
a set-up should be established under which the Postal Services Minister
can check them, in some form or other.

It is LDP Comications Department Chief MORI's tentative plan
which appeared under such circumstances. The main contents thereof
Jucm to be as follows: (1) A new bill for the purpose of a high-level
comunications services system, the submitting of which bill to the
current Diet session has already been given up by the Postal Services
Ministry, will be submitted to the next regular Diet session after the
necessary preconditions. including the preservation of commieat ions
secrets. are improved; (7) MITI will co-operate in the submitting of the
new bill; and (3) it will not be good if medium and small enterprises
-Ir-- Named in a disadvantaguoun position. comet-ed with big enterprises;
therefore. as "stop-gap" steps to be taken until the Diet passage of the

new bill, measures will be taken to preserve comunications secrets, while
on the other hand, permission will be granted for message exchange

under the use-by-others system, within a certain fixed scope (wider under
the present draft), through confirmation by the Postal Services hinister.
The Postal Services Ministry is said to have decided to "concede on"
(accept) the MORI tentative plan. However, MITI has still not accepted
the proposed [system for] "confirmation by the Postal Services Minister."
The talks between the administrative officials concerned are deadlocked.

Under this situation. however, the LDP. which has mediated between
the two Ministries, will eventually have its ability to govem as the
responsible party questioned. That is why Policy Board Oxairman TAMARA
presented a request. asking, "Is it impossible to have the MORI tentative
plan contain contents which are slid'utly more acceptable to MITI?" So far.
it is not known what is meant by the plan which MIT! can accept. However.
the Postal Services Ministry is determined to uphold the proposed
[system for] "confirmation by the Minister." to the last. The problematical
points can be said to have become clear, between the Ministry and MITI
which is planning to prevent the arising of such a situation.

110

”MUSEONLY
Even if the two Ministries reachaconpronise. the incorporation thereof
in the Public hie-Communications Law revision bill will not be realized
in time for the submitting of the bill to the Cabinet meeting. slated
for the 19th. because it is necessary for each Hinietry to conduct checks,
once again. Therefore, it will come about that the remaining point
of compromise will be to revise the Ministry Ordinance or Regulations.
In regard to the problem of whether it will be possible for the two
Ministries to reach a compromise, within the next two or three days.
the proposed liberalization of data communication has entered the stage
where it will be settled at the lat moment.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keiui Shinbunehe 1982

cso: 6106/91.

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run vrs-syuu. was. 01‘»!

scmacz m 111mm

REVISION 0? POSTAL SERVICES mm W

Circuit Use for 'Others' Approved

The Postal Services Ministry and Ml‘l‘I on the 15th reached agreement
on a Public Tele-Comunications Law revision bill calling for the
liberal izat ion of data communications circuits, [the work of drawing
up the draft of which bill] had been having hard sailing. The two Ministries
accepted the "judgment," formed by Li)? Policy Board mailman TANAKA
who has been making co~ordination efforts. In regard to high-level
communications services, which were regarded as a focal point, the
contents of the judgment are as follows: (1) Under certain conditions,
"others' use" of circuits, which use will be accoQanied by the use of telephone-
like services, will be approved only as to medium and sail enterprises which
have close business connections; (2) this will be a provisional tentative
step to be taken until a decision is reached on the way of the use of
circuits as a whole; and (3) as regards the overall liberalization of
high-level communications services, the Government will formulate a
conclusion quickly. As a result, the amending of the revision bill, as
called for by MITI, will be given up. but in line with the purport of the
judgment, the Postal Services Ministry will revise its Ordinance, so as to
pave the way toward use by medium and small enterprises. However, in
regard to the contents of the "certain conditions" which are all-important,
[the judgment] calls for postponing the reaching of a conclusion. me
problem has thus come to an "iridescent end." Due to the agreement
reached between the two Ministries, the revision bill will be incorporated
in the administrative business siqalification and rationalization bill
(package bill calling for readjustment of item which require approval or

The Cabinet, at a meeting, slated for the 19th, is scheduled to decide
to subnit [the revision bill] to the current Diet session.

In regard to data communications. information will be processed
through the direct connection of conputere and oommications functions,
as in the case of the National Railways' Green (TN: First Class Ticket)
”windows and the banks' on-line systems. They are said to be the third
communications, after telegraph and the telephone. Under the Public
Tele—Comunicat ions Law now in force, a net of various restrictions is

put up over the use of such data comications services by private circles.
Therefore, the removal of these restrictions or revision of the Law has
been sought since several years ago.

Hith regard to the densnd for liberalisation, centering on industrial
circles, the Postal Services hinistry had originally planned to cope with
it through revision of the existing Law and also through the enactment
of a new law (data commieations law) which will pernit private circles
also to offer high-level commications services in which network
communications services will be extended, with the values of information
enhanced through the processing thereof with the use of oosputers. But
the new bill contained such contents as to call for the establishment of
a new approval or permission system. Therefore, HI‘l‘I, which has demanded
overall liberalization, showed repulsion. The enacting of a new law

was thus given up, and negotiations were continued on the revising of the
remaining Law now in force.

however, in regard to the revising of the Law, HITI, which sought
the- liberalization of high-level comications services, called for
approving “others' use" of data circuits, which are now placed under strict
rt..u-iction.., 4:. in the case of the use of telephone services, a: a
measure toward medium and small enterprises which cannot have their own
computers. Thus, it took the stand of securing the virtual liberalization
of high-level comunications services. On the other hand, the Postal
Services Ministry emphasized that partly from the standpoint of
comnunicat ions secrets, it cannot approve the large-scale liberalization
of "use by others" only through revision of the Law now in force. [The
problem] thus had hard sailing. In the end, it was decided that the
revision bill will not include that part, due to the TANAKA judgment.
it was also decided that the form of approving it as an exception
will be taken, in accordance with a Ministry ordinance.

Under the revision bill, moreover, the ”joint use" of con-unications
circuits by two or more coupanies will be liberalized in principle,
if they are to be used between enterprises which have bminsse connections
with each other. Hessage exchange, in which telephone-like services will
be used, will also be approved if it is to be carried out between
enterprises which have close business connections with each other.
It will thus become possible to establish new cot-unications systems, for example,
between manufacturing industrialists and retailers, between tourism
enterprisers and hotel-keepers, and between transportation enterprisers
and warehousing enterprisers.

Moreover, concerning the connection of public oomnications circuits,
specific commications circuits, and public communications circuits
(n-ublic-specific-public connection) which will become indispensable

1.13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for private information and communications enterprisers to offer informat ion-
rrocess ing networks, it will become an object for the applica; ion of an
individual approval system, on the grounds that there is fear of its

coming the utilization of services similar to telegraph and telephone
services which are the regular services of the Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Public Corporation (NTT). It was also decided that the connection
of public communications circuits with specific communications circuits
(public-specific connection) will not be approved, either, in the case

of carrying out message exdtange.

As regards the liberalization of data commications. the Second
Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council (Chairman: Toshio DOKO),
in its recomendation concerning the readjustment or rationalization of
tasks which require approval or permission. also says as follows: "State re-
strictions should be eliminated. as far as possible. and efforts should
be made to use the originality and ingenuity of private circles to the
maximum. " Horeover, the noomendation says as follows: (1) Liberalization
should be carried out. with the exception of the system for carrying out
message exchange (use of telephone-like services). with an unspecified
large nusber of persons as the objects; (2) in order to clarify the
minimum necessary scope of restrictions, a negative-list formula should
be adopted; and (3) in regard to mutual connection using computer circuits,
the standards for granting separate approval should be clarified in case
the granting of such approval is necessary.

Under the revision bill, however, high-level cornunications services
will be approved only toward medium and small enterprises alone. horeover.
the bill will be submitted to the Diet. with the conditions also left
unclarified. me "1mm judgunt" calls for the quick reaching of a
conclusion on the overall liberalisation of high-level oomunications
services. It can also be said, however. that the problem has been settled
in the form of retreating to a considerable extent from the purport of
the Research Council's interim recommendation.

Gist of Policv Board Chairman TANAKA's Judgment

1. Measures should be taken to approve the transmission of
comunications by others under certain fixed conditions. limiting it only

to comunicat ions to be used for medium and small enterprisers who
have close business connections.

(1) Procedures should be established on the basis of the spirit of
adminiwtrative reform.

(2) The scope of commications should be studied through co-ordination
with m.

114

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
(3) This step should be regarded as a provisional. tentative step
to be taken until a conclusion is reached on the new way of the whole
utilization of circuits for use by others.

2. In order to materialize the above-mentioned measures. co-operation
should be obtained among the Administrative Management Agency, the Postal
Services Ministry, and MITI.

3. In connection with the way of the overall liberalisation of the
utilization of circuits for use by others. I want the Government to
make efforts to reach a conclusion quickly. In that case, MITI should
make a response with sincerity, when the Postal Services Ministry takes
necessary and rational legal measures.

The Postal Services Ministry and MI‘l'I have agreed on the liberalization
of data communications. This has made it possible for medium and small
enterprisers alone to use high-level oomunications services. though
with conditions attached to it. In this connection. however. it is
insufficient for the medium and small enterprisers to have mere business
connections with each other. For example, [the establishment of]
certain fixed capital relations between the two sides will become necessary.

In concrete terms, it will become possible for medium and small
enterprises. which have such close connections with each other, for example,
to transmit immediately to the other medium and small enterprises
information as to inventory control, the issuance of orders, and the
transportation of manufactured products through the use of networks
established by private information and comications enterprisers.
However, with regard to the concrete contents of such operation and the
scope of comunications, the "TAMARA judgment" also says that "studies
should be conducted through co-ordination with m." Thus, the problem
seems to have been left to future negotiations for revision of the
Postal Services Ministry and MITI ordinances. ,

However. in regard to the agreement between the two Ministries
this time, medium and small enterprises, which do not have capital
relations with each other. will virtually not be permitted to use
high-level comnications services. It has been decided that it will
be left to the work of revising the Law next year or after. In that
meaning. the use of data comications circuits may be said to have
been placed under a "limited liberalization" [system], in"regard to
the revising..of the Law this time.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shilbunsha 1982

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Liberalised Date Oo-nications
Tokyo MIME mo serum in Japanese 19 liar 1982 p 11
[Text]

Three Government offices, that is, the Postal Services Ministry.
HITI, and the Administrative hanagenent Agency conducted consultations
with 1.0? Administrative and Financial Affairs Research Council Chairman
Ryutaro HASHIHO‘I‘O on the 18th, in order to decide on detailed points
as to the liberalization of data cosmications. M a result, agreement
was reached to decide on the general outline of the contents of a
revision of the Postal Services Ministry Ordinance for the purpose of
carrying out the proposed liberalization, by the 19th when a Public
Tele-Comunications Law revision bill is expected to be decided at a
Cabinet nesting. Moreover, agreement was reached on the following points
in the form of Quairnn HASHIHOTO's arbitration award: (I) In deciding
on the detailed points, the Postal Services Ministry should sufficiently
accept the views of HITI and the Administrative Management Agencv and
decide on the concrete contents quickly; and (2) a new law concerning the
use of oomnications circuits by others should be studied at the new
Tele-Connunications Deliberation Council to be set up within the
Postal Services Ministry.

As regards the framwork of the Public Tele-Oonnmications Law
revision bill, Policy Board chain-an TANAKA submitted his judgment, and
generally put an end to the Postal Services Ministry-H111 confrontation.
But the phraseology was not clear; therefore, it was hoped that
co-ordination would be carried out between the two Ministries, in
connect ion with the contents of the revision of the Postal Services
Ministry Ordinance, accompanying the revising of the Law. On the same
day, moreover, HITI revealed that [the problem of] measures for the
prevention of computer crimes will be left to deliberations at the
Indusrrial Structure Deliberation Council Information Industry Department.

1119 gist of the HASHIHO‘I'O arbitration award is as follows:

1. In regard to others' use of [data circuits] for use by medium
and small enterprisers who have close business connections,

(1) Co-ordinat ion with the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public
Corporation (NT‘I‘) on the scope of coununications should be hastened.
and a conclusion should be obtained by the time Diet deliberations start,

(2) In order to approve the transmission of comnications by
others. the minimum necessary procedures should be established, while
consideration should be given to maintaining communications order
on the basis of the spirit of the proposed administrative reform this time,

(3) Omitted (TN: Omitted by the newspaper, not by the translator),

116

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(H) Concerning the overall way of circuits for use by others.
ex nut-t1. should be made to reach a conclusion. as early as possible. and
the wove-mentioned provisional measures should be re-viewed completely at the
stage where a conclusion will be reached.

2. In connection with the form of joint use and use by others
in the Public Tele-Oosaunications Lav revision [bill],

(1) with regard to the form of joint use and use by others and
tho forms of the connection between comuters and of the connection of
public circuits and specific circuits. efforts should be made, so that the
free use of circuits can be secured if it is for data-processing purposes,
as in the case of aessage exchange through the use of half-way conputers
or terminal comunications which will be accompanied by data processing.

(2) The public-specific-public connection should be approved under
an individual approval system. if it is for data-processing purposes.

and as to the forms to be approved. efforts should be made to make then
known through the adoption of contents and formulas, which are as easy
to understand as possible.

(3) As regards the above-mentioned detailed points, the Postal
Services Ministry should continue sufficient discussions and co-ordination
with the Administrative Management Agency and H111.

common: “than K0370 Shinbunlha Tokyo Honda 1982

(:80: (0106/96

117-

FOIOH'ICIALUSEONLY
DUI WON” use. Uﬂbl

SCIENCE AND mom

BACKGROUND OF MICATIOIIS W
New Uses of Circuits
Tokyo NIKON IBIZA! sum in Japanese 17 list 82 p 3

[Text]

It has been decided that the Public Tele-commications Law revision
bill calling for the liberalization of data oomications will be finally
submitted to the Diet after being decided at a Cabinet mating, slated
for the 19th. when compared with the Law now in force, the revision
bill approves large-scale liberalization as to the "joint use" of data
circuits by enterprise groups. however, in regard to ”use by others"
which will open the way for the use of high-level commieations services

by private circles, it does not call for the overall removal of the
strict mstriction framework. It seems that discmsions on the
liberalization of circuits, which discussions have been left out, will
become a focal point also during Diet deliberations. This paper probed
into the tasks left behind toward the use of circuits, the way for which
use will be opened through revision of the Law, for the first time.

and also toward the couplete liberalization thereof.

"Group" Restrictions Based

Restrictions on the joint use of specific comications circuits
by enterprise groups will be removed on a large scale, due to the
revision bill this time. Under the Law now in force, enterprise relations,
in which joint use will be permitted, will be limited to the “considerable
business connections," prescribed by the Postal Services Ministry Ordinance,
including connections, for exalple. (1) between manufacturing industrialists
and sales companies. (2) between manufacturing industrialists which
have close transaction connections with each other; (3) between banks,
and (lo) between aviation companies and tourism companies. In other
cases, [such joint use] will not be approved, even if there are close
connections, from the standpoint of capital alignment or physical
distribution. It is necessary to wait for the Postal Services Minister
in grunt individual approval.

Also, in regard to the standards provided for in the Ministry Ordinance,
approval will be granted in the case of [joint use] between manufacturing

118

MWWMY
industrialists and sales cospanies', and approval will not be granted
in the case of [joint use] between manufacturing industrialists and
warehouse companies, which keep their products in custody, or between
those industrialists and transportation cospanies, which transport their
products, no matter what close transaction connections the manufacturing

industrialists and the cospanies may have with each other. Such an
imbalance was pointed out.

Under the revision bill, these points will be corrected, and [joint
use] by enterprises, which have been continuing transactions with each other,
will be liberalized in the case of its being accowied by data processing.
irrespective of the type of enterprise. For examle, Automobile Sales
Company A is showing good bminess results, and stockpiles at its branch
offices become insufficient. Under the present system. in that case,
Company A knows about the fact through the use of specific circuits
between its Head Office and the branch offices, and asks Transportation
Company 8 for transportation from its plant, and not through the use
of such circuits. However, under the revision [bill] this time,

Company A can have specific circuits for joint use also with Company B,
and an accurate transportation control system will come to be carried out.

In that case, moreover. message exdaenge, in which the circuits
will be used in the same way as in the case of telegraph or the telephone,
will be approved, if the two sides have "close business connections"
with each other, as can be seen, for exasple, in the following points:
(1) One of them holds more than 10‘ of the other party's capital, (2)
the amount of transactions is equal to over 20$ of the total amount,
and (3) they have business tie-up relations with each other. warehouse
Company 3 (TN: sic) can transmit order slips to the branch officies.

This means the granting of approval for message exchange which "is banned
in principle."

Doubts About Effects of Establishment of Special kceptione

It is "use by others" which means that specific circuits, leased
by information-processing companies, etc., from the Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Public Corporation (an) or the Kokusai-Denshin Denwa (Telegraph
and Telephone) Company (KDD), will be offered for data communications
between or among a plural nunber of customers. Under the Law now in force,
a production, sales, and inventory control system can be established
only with regard to manufacturing companies and sales coIpanies and other
customers who have business connections. Under the revision bill, however.
other companies, which have transaction connections, can be incorporated
in such a system. With this, it will become possible to establish a
physical distribution cycle of manufacturing, warehoming, transportation,
wholesale, and retail, with an information-processing company (computer
center), which has its own cosputers, as the nucleus, as far as use by others
is concerned.

In the case of use by others, however, message exchange will be banned
in principle. The judgment, given by LOP Policy Board Oxairman TANAKA

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the 15th, also only approves the establishment of an exception,

saying as follows: "Under certain fixed conditions, approval should

be granted, limiting it to medium and small enterprises which have close
business connections." This step has been incorporated as a measure

to relieve medium and small enterprises which cannot secure the separate

or joint use of data circuits. however, doubts are already being expressed
about the actual effects of the establishment of such special exceptions.

"If as 'close connections' as in the case of big enterprises er: to
be sought of medium and small enterprises, it will rather bind the special
nature of the medium and small enterprises which tend to exercise their
originality and ingenuity. This will become a problem, from the standpoint
of forming a flexible industrial organization" (Policy Concept Forum Standing
Sponsor Hajime HIROTA). From the standpoint of users, the following view
was expressed: 'ﬁhe scope of medium and small enterprises is not clear.
Communications are not connected with the problem of whether the amount of
capital is large or small. Both joint use and use by others are a
transformation of separate use. No differentiation should be made inregard t0

liberalization" (Tele-Comunications Users Consultative Council Chief of
Secretariat hikito KDNO).

In this connection, the Postal Services Hinistryrebuttedas f011°W$= "In
regard to the revising of the Law, it is impossible to remove restrictions
beyond this, in order to preserve communications secrets." It also
explained that due to the establishment of such a special exception,
the extending of mail-box service, one of the high-level communications
nervices, will become possible, thus opening a way fbr the future.

This is mail-like service in which periodic business-letters will be

sent simultaneously to various customers. However, if strict conditions

are imposed, then rather big gaps will probably arise between the possibility of
"should be possible" and its becoming connected with implementation.

Establishment of Public Circuits Network Hill Become Possible

Moreover, in regard to the mutual connection of public communications
circuits and specific circuits, which connection was strongly requested
by big companies which have branch offices and operation offices on a
nation-wide scale, the "public-specific" connection will be liberalized under
certain fixed standards, though it is now under a separate approval system.
The "public-specific-public" connection will be shifted to the separate
approval systeunthough it is banned. Consequently, in the case of big
rwmpanies which have their own respective computers installed at their
mead offiCes in Tokyo and also at their branch offices in Osaka, it will
become possible to connect specific circuits, which will become "arteries,"
betwuvn the computers in Tokyo and Osaka and to establish public circuits
networks, which are equivalent to "capillaries," between each computer and
the operation or branch offices. Also, in that case, however, overall
liberalization will not be carried out, and the “public-specific-publir"

connection will be placed under the Postal Services hinistry's survuillance.
M-.“qgo exchange will also be left banned.

120

IKIICHﬂﬁCJAI.USEGDNLN
.Eoun a A~>oa..m
ouonuaom a have: vacuum on. «Hos»
cauuooncoo Omansanuuuwooamuumansm

.noguvcouo
voxmu :wauhoo have: vo>oaama on
Hausa :Ouuooccoo umuuooaauouansm

. A.uc0muuvcou
vegan awouhoo have: caucus» on
Hausa Hd>oaann .uonqhahouco Hausa
can agave! «no» mo onao 0:9 nay
oanuononlu an wucogoxo ouuouo:

.aanwanoa
«a msousnnoo o» acupuonnoo

.oanuuuoa um .ununoooonn nude an
vaucoABoooo on Add: acolnumanuuno
sums: .ohoEOumau coosuon accuuQOM:
nalloo annuahou mo unoisnmandvnu

.vusuwHOAa
on Hausa n:0muomhuuon noocunan

.02& 0A OQHQ Add...” ”smug—us

Haywaoo voxum cauuhoo ¢>v£ gums:
nonwhanouco cooauon ouconoxo ouuaaoz

.ovnw on

dunno .mco«uuoc:oo acomuommcmsu
naoaauvcoo o>on noun: .oOnuhahouao
3 78 $on 9:. 62832..

on auozm mnemaomhuuun mmucmnaa

.voccnn on Human
com woo—Eco 0.“ 3:96am moamuomanam

.Eouuam
Ad>0hanm ouununon a have: vounaa
on dunno camuooacoo ouMuooann0mun2m

.o~n«mooaiw aw oucoguxo ouowuo:

.oanunnon mu
onousoaoo .mnoaounzo ou.nomcunaoo
unmanooona-:0wun3howcw uo somuuoccoo

.mwucaalou
u:«ooooo&a-co«umahoucw vco mLoIOUnao
coozvon unwaaOOOha ouav ham haze

.huoonooo: ohm

. 80990 £00302 EOmuUOF—BOO “no-Ewan

62.93am
on no: Hausa oucunoxo «wanna:

.uc0muooncoo unocmmsa o>un
053 whoamha&09co hozuo van .20.?»
coaon: .aunwauwnunsvcu maunauoomacvs
on >Hco vowcoau on Hanna aa>9uaa<

coma
I0 0:600

Adﬂuﬂt

 

damn coumm>u¢ on» can sag ocowpnowcsseoo-oaoh awansm acumwsm och

121

FOIIOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
I'UI Vfl'lblﬂh 09$ UIVLI

It is certain that this marks one step forward, when conpared with
the Law now in force. However, in regard to the way toward high-level
communications services which are all-ilportant, "limited" liberalization
will be carried out. Therefore, the possibility is strong that its
effects on informat ionized society will only be "limited," too.

common: Nihon Keisai Shinbunsha 1982

Test for Efficiency
Tokyo NIKON [BIZAI sum in Japanese 18 Mar 82 p 3
[Text]

There is no other example which was more difficult to understand
than the contents of the Postal Services Ministry-HIT! confrontation this
time as to a public Tole-Communications Law revision bill. That is because
technical terms, which are unfamiliar to the general public, were used,
and also because intangible "things," such as computers , comications,
or information, were dealt with. But it is too hasty to try to settle
the confmntat ion between the two Hinistries, regarding it as a mere
struggle over jurisdiction, between Government offices. when tracing
back to the original starting point of the confrontation, we will come
into collision with two options as to whether infomation-processing
services, which will appear, one after another, due to the progress
of technology, "should be developed, being left to the free originality
and ingenuity of private circles," or whether they "should be restricted,
with importance attached to their public utility."

Charter Flights for Information

In order to make the problem easy to understand, let us replace
communications circuits by roads. It was the Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Public Corporation (m) which had so far constructed roads
called public circuits (telephone lines) or specific circuits, while
rul filling the role of a transportation enterprise for transporting
freight called information. It is the Public Tele-Comunications Law
and the Postal Services Ministry which exercise control over the contents
of such roads and transportation.

However, computers and other types of low-priced electronic equipment
and apparatuses appeared. It is good to consider this equipment and
apparatuses to be machinery and appliances for processing, treating
in advance, and packing freight (information) to be transported along
roads called circuits, so that it can be used as soon as it arrives.
That is why data comunications, which connect computers and circuits,
are called "added-value comunications services," though the telephone
and telegraph transmit information as is, without processing the contents
thereof.

12?.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Therefore, enterprises and information-processing services
cntcrprisers, who have cosputers, that is, machines for packing and
processing information, came to lease circuits from NTT, in order to
promote the efficiency of their transportation services. This is a so-called
charter flight for the transmission of information.

In this connection, the "joint use," which has become a problem
in regard to the revision bill this time, means a charter flight or an
exclusive road to be used jointly by a plural nuiser of enterprises,
such as food companies and refrigerator cowanies. The revision [bill]
this time calls for carrying out liberalisation to such a considerable

extent that various kinds of information can be transmitted through the
use of the circuits.

0n the other hand, "use by others" refers to the form of the use of
circuits, centering on the information-processing services enterprises,
and it can be likened to local transportation business. It is business
in which information as to an unspecified large number of persons will
be transmitted through the use of circuits leased from NTT. When conpared
with the joint-use [formula]. strict restrictions are still imposed on
the method of packing the freight to be transported and the destinations
theruof. '

Procedures for the Future Irisdescent

MITI, which wants to promote the development of the information
industry, centering on computers and software, would like to develop
new services and demand through liberalization of the use of circuits.
0n the other hand, the Postal Services Ministry is taking the stand that
communications services are strongly of a public-utility nature, and
that even in order to preserve communications secrets. it is impossible

to case restrictions. This was the basic point of the Postal Services
Ninistry-Hi‘l‘l confrontation this time.

In the end. with regard to LDP Policy Board Chairman rmm'a judgment
this time, the Postal Services Ministry only approved liberalization
to the minimum extent which is conceivable. As to through what procedures
the remaining liberalization problem should be settled from now, it was only
decided that "the Postal Services Ministry, hiTI, and the Administrative
Management Agency will co-operate with one another." Thus, an "iridescent
settlement" was reached, without showing any concrete direction.

What is the liberalization of what remains? It means a field
which is called high-level commmications services. The focal po'..:t is
whether exchange between the data connunications systems of different

enterprises will become possible through the establishment of networks
which will connect a plural nutter of computers to the comications
circuits of NTT. As for computers, the words to be used will differ,

according to the manufacturer or the age when they are produced. In order
to connect them, it is necessary to go through a computer which is

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VR watt-gene. Udl. slut!

equivalent to an "interpreter." If higholevel connmmications services
are liberalized completely. it will pave the way toward establishing new
information-processing services business which will regard it as its task
to act as such interpreters. The reason for this is that as a result of
the free use of the charter flight of circuits, it will become possible
to establish a new line of business in which information of Company A
will be interpreted and transmitted to Company B. In that case, it will
become unnecessary for various enterprises to have overlapped data.

This will also have many points of advantage, from the standpoint of the
national economy.

No Conclusion Hill Be Reached until after One Year?

In the US, such restrictions have already been eased. Also, in Japan,
the Pnovisional Administrative Affairs Research Council has clarified its
direction. to the effect that liberalization should be carried out.
as far as possible. In Japan. however, the problem of liberalizing such a
field has been left to future co-ordination between the Postal Services
Ministry and hITI which are still in a deeply-rooted confrontation.

So far, a direction has not been decided as to whether high-level
communications services should be restricted through the enactment of a
new law (plan of the Postal Services Ministry), or whether such services
should be liberalized in principle through a further revision of the
Public Tale-Communications Law (plan of H171). It is said that "a conclusion
will reached at least one year hence" (MIT! leader). ‘

Whether it will really become possible to use computers efficiently.
depends on how such co-ordination will be carried out. Therefore. in order
to prevent the Postal Services hinistry-MITI confrontation from ending up
in a merestruggleover jurisdiction between Government offices. "it is
necessary to consider what meaning the liberalization of high-level
communications services will contain. from the viewpoint of the national
economy" (big infonmation-processing services company leader).

The form of treating or processing information is quickly spreading,
accompanying the rapid progress of electronic technology. In order to
guide the industrial structure in the direction of concentrating knowledge,
it is wiser to recognize the free originality and ingenuity of private
circles and to maintain the way toward securing the appearance of low-priced
services through the market mechanism concerning competition. The time has

come for considering the information-processing problem calmly. with the
general settlement of the Postal Services Hinistry-HITI confrontation as a
turning point.

COPYRIGUT: Nihon Keisai Shinbunshe 1982

C50: 0106/94

12b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LIBERALIZATION OF DATA CWCATIOIS WATTSPACTQY
Tokyo rmo sum inJepenese 18 Her 82 p 5

[Text]

-- It is good that éo-oxdination'wi'tb'iﬁ—thT'Gve—miht his"
been generally completed, in regard to the liberalization
of data coununications. But the liberalization is limited,
and the contents are insufficient. The Government should
Make further efforts to carry out overall liberalization
along the line of the Provisional Administrative Affairs
Research Council's recommendation --

The problem of liberalizing data communications, concerning which
problem the co-ordination of views between the Postal Services Ministry
and HITI has been having hard sailing. has generally come to an end,
in the fonn of a "judgment" by LOP Policy Board Quairman TANAKA.

On this basis, a Public Tele-Oomunications Law revision bill is
expected to be submitted to the Diet after it is decided at a Cabinet
meeting, slated for the 19th.

The gist [of the revision bill] is as follows: (1) Under certain
fixed conditions, the transmission of oo-unications by others shall
kc l-ormitted, limiting it only to [commications] for use by medium
and small enterprisers who have close business connections; and (2)
hownvor. this shall be a provisional. tentative step, and the Government
shall make efforts to reach a conclusion quickly, in regard to the
nvnmll liberalization of use by others. In other words, the focal
point is that approval will be granted, though conditionally, for
primate entnl‘prim‘s' participation in the field of "high-level
communications services," which have not been permitted so far, and in
whi-‘lu ~~umnmirat ions by others will be transmitted through the use of

circuits leased from the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation
(NTI‘).

 

 

Anyway, this may be said“ to be a mes-sure which has advanced by one

stu-p. only from the viewpoint that a new way has been opened as to
high-level commieations service.

As for the contents, however, it is limited to mediln and small
enterprises, and moreover, vague restrictions are iqosed, such as
"close business connections" and "certain fixed conditions."

125
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
I'UK UN'ILIAL use ONLY

That is probably because a political compromise was pressed to be
reached in the form of a judgnent by the LDP, with regard to the
Postal Services Ministry-14171 confrontation. However, this is really a
limited liberalization. Even when viewed from the standpoint of the
Second Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council's interim

recomendation, the contents cannot but be said to be extremely
insufficient.

Under the draft Public Tele-Ootmsunications Law revision bill.
drawn up by the Postal Services Ministry. the "joint use" of commications
circuits by two or more companies will be liberalized in principle.
if they are to be tsed by enterprises which have business connections.
the problem is that strict restrictions will still be maintained
as to "use by others," in which private information-processing service

companies will let their customers use cornunications circuits which they
lease from m.

This will prove markedly disadvantageous for medium and small
enterprises which cannot have their own colputers. when compared with
big enterprises which will enjoy benefits. due to the liberalization of
joint use. and which cannot help sub-leasing the communications circuits
leased by infornation-processing enterprisers. That is why HIT!
demanded the large-scale liberalisation of "use by others," as a
measure toward medium and small enterprises. It was thus in confrontation
with the Postal Services Ministry.

The urgent problem of revising the Mlic Tele-Coummications Law
has been settled, due to Policy Board Chairman TANAKA's judgnent.
However, the reaching of a conclusion only has been postponed.
with regard to the problem of how to carry out the liberalization

of high-level comunications services, which problem was regarded as a
very big focal point.

In regard to the overall liberalization of data communications.
it will probably be necessary to impose restrictions on the private
cir-cles' extending services similar to telephone service or to take
Int asures to preserve communications secrets. However, there are
doubts as to the Postal Services Hinistry's way of thinking. to the
etfect that liberalization cannot be carried out any further unless

the State holds the power to grant approval or permission through
the enactment of a new law.

On that point, the LDP's written judgment says, "HI‘I‘I should
makt- a response with sincerity. when the Postal Services Ministry
takes necessary and rational legal measures." However, new legal
measures should be studied carefully.

we want the Government to carry out oo-ordination from now,
in line with the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council's
rucx-mmcndation calling for the adoption of a negative-list formula

(for carrying out liberalization in principle and also for clarifying
the minimum necessary scope of restrictions).

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Cbu-Nichi Shimbun Tokyo Eonshs
126

c”: “06’9" roe omcm. use ONLY
mm DATA MIWIOUS 3m
Tokyo SAM]: sanmm in Japanese 18 Mar 82 p 10
[Text]

The fact may be appreciated that—"Elie 'p'endl'n-g' problem 6? liberalising ‘
data commieations has generally cone to an end. and that it has been
decided that the situation will advance toward liberalization, though
with conditions attached. However. high-level couunications
services in question have only been lilitedly liberalized. In order to
make data connunicatians lore fruitful in the future. it is necessary
to make efforts in the direction of carrying out further liberalization.

In regard to the liberalization of data comications, the Postal
Services Ministry and HITI were in confrontation over the problen of
to what extent the scope, in which private circules can freely use
circuits for data communications. should be expanded. Thus. it has been
having hard sailing. While clarifying the direction of approving the
proposed liberalization, as a general principle, the Postal Services
Ministry had been taking the stand that it would be necessary to carry
out restrictions. mat is why it see. to have cone into confrontation
with Hl‘i‘l which was trying to avoid the iqosition of restrictions,
as far as possible.

Therefore. it was ispcssible to take necessary legal measures. and
it was feared that a situation niat occur whereby the liberalization
of data comnications would be delayed on a large scale. With regard
to such a confrontation between the Postal Services Hinistry and NIH.
1.0? Policy Board Chairman 1mm started mediation efforts. and put an
end to the problen in the fora of a judgment. This nay be said to have
been timely, particularly because the deadline for the abutting of a
bill is close at hand.

According to the "TANAKA judgment ," (so-called use by others).
in which data communications circuits in the field of high-level
comunications services will be leased from private information
enterprisers under certain fixed conditions. and in which they will be
used. will be approved only as to medium and small enterprises which

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR UI'CILIAL USE. URL.

have close bminess connections'."3'é§ides'the aoVe—fi't cal—ls for '

mking efforts to reach a conclusion quickly, with regard to overall
liberalization. This is the gist [of the judgment]. At the present time,

this is a realistic option. In that meaning, it can be said to have marked one
step forward. However, it probably cannot be denied that it is far

from liberalization in the true sense of the word.

It is true that it is very distant from the liberalization of data
connunications, set forth in the Second Provisional Administrative Affairs
Research Council's recommendation, which calls for the liberalization of
data communications circuits, with the exception of message exchange
(use of services similar to telephone services) in which an unspecified
large nunber of persons will be regarded as the objects. and the
curbing of restrictions to the minimum necessary extent if they are
to be carried out. The reconsendation also calls for the adoption of a
negative-list formula and the clarification of the standards for granting
individual approval for mutual connection.

In that meaning, it will probably be necessary to develop the
liberalization of data communications further. from now. The position of
the step this time should be defined as a process leading to such
large-scale liberalization. Hith this. a period must not be put to the
problem of liberalizing data co-unications.

Under a situation whereby the unification of information and
c.m.-aunic.-tinn;. is being promoted further, the liberalization of data
comunicat ions is indispensable for establishing a high-level informationized
society. It is inpossible to hope for the development of the economy and
society. from now, without securing the development of informationization.
From this standpoint, it is hoped that in order to walk the road leading to
"freer data communications." the Ministries and Agencies concerned will
strengthen co-operative relations among theuelves. from a broader viewpoint,
without sticking unnecessarily to their own respective positions.

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keisai Shilbun Tokyo lonsha 1982

680: 5106/96

128

“MUSEONLY
PLANS FOR umwu mm PROTOTYPE PLANT um UP
Division of kpenses
Tokyo DWI sum in Japanese 3 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] The division between govern-eat and the private sector has generally
been settled for construction expenses of about 65.6 billion yen on the urani-
l.- enrichnent prototype plant (production on the order of 200 tons SW annually)
which has been under study by the Science and Technology Agency end th: elec-
tric power industry. Regarding the construction cost, in substance: 1) the
Power Reactor and Nuclear DevelopIant Corporation. principally responsible

for construction. will borrow 25 percent (about 16.5 billion yen) in the pri-
vate aarket, with the government and the private participants jointly guaran-
teeing the debt; and 2) of the remaining 75 percent, the private sector will
provide capital of about 25 billion yen, slightly more than half. The private
power companies have not yet fornally made a decision. and since the Science
and Technology Agency is still considering general questions including the
problen of location, it will be some tins before a final settlenent is reached.
but the hurdle of the division of governnsnt and private burdens has been
crossed. .

Details Still To Be Worked Out Regarding Power Cowanies, Manufacturers

The uraniu enrich-ent prototype plant is a facility to follow the Okayalaa
Prefecture Ningyotoge pilot plant and is ained at inproving the technology of
use production by centrifugal separators, confining its economic viability,
and noving toward making it co-crciel. It is expected to produce about 200
tons SW per year of enriched uranium using 20.000 centrifugal separators.

The construction budget has been estimated at 65.6 billion yen. and the divi-
sion of the cost of construction between the government and the private sector
has been a problel.

The Atonic Energy Omission and the Science and Technology Agency have
considered even this prototype plant as being eventually included anong
co-ercial plants for which private power conpaniee will be prinarily respon-
sible, and have argued that. in the light of budgetary problem, the private
sector share of the construction expense should be lore than half. In con-
treat, the private power conpanies have been inclined to resist takiu nore
than half of the burden, since the Power Reactor and Nuclear Developnent

129

FOR Oil-1C1“. USE ONLY
run urn-luau. use. URL!

Corporation will be responsible for developing the prototype plant and its
development will be under government direction, and have held to the view that
the 10 power companies. including the Japan Atomic Power Company, should, as
an appropriate degree of cooperation, assume a burden of 25 percent.

In the budget for 1982 the Ministry of Finance has allotted 960 million yen
for development of the prototype plant, and has thus by means of the budget
established preconditions for determining the ratio of government to private
support. however. since the difference between the government and private
proposals was large, it was expected that it would take a long time to settle
the matter.

To deal with this, the idea recently emerged that the Power Reactor and Nuclear
Development Corporation should borrow a portion of the construction expense in
the private market and repay it from the proceeds of the sale of enriched
uranium. It is considered that it would be possible to borrow 25 percent of

the construction expense, some 16 billion yen, and that this could be guaranteed
by the government and the private companies.

Thus the issue became the division between the government and the private
companies of the remaining 75 percent, about 59 billion yen, and the views of
the government were accepted, with the private sector taking a burden of about
25 billion yen, some 1 billion yen more, and the government assuming 26 billion
yen.

Provisionally setting the private portion at 25 billion yen, the private
proportion of the 65.h billion yen construction expense amounts to about 38
percent, about 9 billion yen lore than the 25 percent proposed by the power
companies. Since the manufacturers of the centrifugal separators will also
assume part of this, such a percentage does not seem to be something that the
private companies cannot accept.

0n the other hand, since in this division of burdens the private sector is
taking more than half, by however, small a margin, once the portion to be
borrowed by the Power Reactor and Nuclear Development Corporation is put
aside, while direction will continue in the hands of the government. this
agreement on the division of burdens is of such a nature as to make it easy
to persuade the Ministry of Finance.

It is necessary to work out the details of the method of guaranteeing the
loan of the Power Reactor and ﬂuclear Development Corporation, as well as the
division of the private capital among the power companies and manufacturers,
and a final decision has yet to be reached, but in general the proposal has
becoee solid.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1982

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'ormu sumo}! Editorial
Tokyo DENKI SNIHBUN in Japanese 5 l'eb 82 p 3
[Editorial: Waking Uranit- Enrich-eat Japanese"]

[Text] Ningyotoge on the border between (keys-a and Tottori Prefectures is
already piled with snow. A white building to be seen only about 300 neters
from the tea house (rest house) at the pass is the uranium enrichnent pilot
plant of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Development Corporation.

Within the pilot plant several thousand centrifugal separators quietly revolve,
leaking enriched uranium fro. natural uraniul. This plant, which has been in
partial operation since 1979, was coepleted and all centrifugal separators
installed last autm.

The enrich-ant of uraniun requires very high technology, and since the gas
diffusion process used heretofore requires great counts of electricity, so
euch that it has been said that "enriched uraniu is canned electricity,"
Japan and many other countries have relied on the United States.

In Europe, Britain and France carried out enrichment by the gas diffusion
nethod, and later, Britain, Ger-any, and the Netherlands developed centrifugal
separators through a cooperative entity called Urenco and have progressed
through a pilot plant to the construction of a proper plant and comercial
operation. The requirement for electric power in the centrifugal separation
method as conpared to the gas diffusion nethod is about one-tenth as high and
it is, moreover, superior in the nutter of expansion in accordance with demand.

In Japan, too, in 1972 the Ate-1c Energy emission designated as a national
project the experinental development of uranium enrichnent by the centrifugal
separation nerhod to the extent of building and operating a pilot plant, and
took the first step along the path of an autononous nuclear fuel cycle through
domestic uraniun enrichnent.

Enrichnent technology comes under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and
control of infornation is strict for all countries, which has encouraged
development of autonomous national technologies.

A subconittee on Japanese ureniun enrich-ant of the Atonic Energy Omission
deliberated frm the end of 1980 through August of last year and presented a
report to the Atoeic Energy Co-ission concerning leans of proeoting doeeatic
uranim enrichunt in this country after the pilot plant. The subco-aittee
chaimn was the late Inoue Goro. deputy chairman of the Atomic Energy
Cot-lesion. whose nenorial service was jointly conducted by the Chubu Electric
Power Coepany and the Power Reactor and Nuclear Develop-ant Corporation on

15 December last year, and its nembership consisted of authorities free the
governaent. academia, and industry.

According to the conclusions of the subcmittee, the objective is to begin
operation of a co-ercial plant between 1985 and 1990, end the uraniu enrich-
nent industry should be run by private enterprise. To prepare for a commercial

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-oll UPI-luau. use ONLY

plant it is necessary to have a prototype plant. It is appropriate that the
state lead the drive to plan the prototype plant, with the direct cooperation
of private enterprise.

As a love toward the establishment of private cornercial uraniu enrichment,
in the spring of last year a Uraniun Enrichment Preparations Office was set up
within the Federation of Electric Power Co-psniea. The Power Reactor and
Nuclear Development Corporation and three centrifugal separator manufacturers
are presently working on plans preparatory to construction of the prototype
plant.

however, it is said that it is inpossible to set a date for the co-encenent
of construction of the prototype plant due to difficulty in resolving financial
questions such as the allocation of construction costs.

The cost of construction of the prototype plant is set at about 65 billion
yen, and in the interest of early comencanent it is at present considered
realistic that the Power Reactor and Nuclear Develop-ant Corporation should
be responsible for construction and operation, while the private sector, which
will have charge of conercial plants, will cooperate closel;.

Should the negotiations between the govern-ant and the private sector not be
resolved and the construction of the prototype plant delayed or suspended,

what will happen? The develop-ant of centrifugal separators and the technology
of their mass production will continue, as before, centered on the Power
Reactor and Nuclear Developeent Corporation.

However, .the nenufscturers of centrifugal separators have already had a great
decline in work related to uraniun enrichment with the conpletion of production
of the centrifuges used in the pilot plant; their factories and equipnent are
idle and their technicians are awaiting the start of the prototype plant,
feeling that one day is like a thousand years.

The three manufacturers, in order to gain the advantages of mass production of
centrifugal separators and to achieve the capacity to conpete internationally,
have prepared for concentrated production for the prototype plant through
establishment of a jointly owned subsidiary colpany, and are prepared to shift
ssoothly to the construction of co-aercial plants afterward, but if the
interruption in work continues, there is the danger that these plans will be
frustrated, and that the technology and hulan resources amassed over a long
time and at considerable expense will be dispersed.

Concerning the supply and denand aspect of enrich-ant, there is the view that
because of substantial delays in worldwide plans for the generation of electri-
city using atonic energy, at present supply is greater than demand, and for at
least 10 years ahead world supply will meet densnd completely, so there is no
need for urgency.

Japan at present, with not only a long-tern contract for enrichnent services
with the United States but the recent conclusion of a contract with France for
an adequate anount, feels secure with guarantees, through long-tern contracts,
for at least the next 10 years. so there is the aspect that it is difficult to
feel any urgency about domestic enricInent.

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
If. however, both for domestic and foreign consumption. we do not show sons
actual results in domestic uraniu enrich-ant. including showing prospects of
asking it econonically viable. through construction now of something on the
scale of the prototype plant, then several years hence when we may wish to
construct co-ercial plants this nay be difficult to realize.

During such a period the majority of technicians presently connected with
enrichment would change to other fields, large enrichment plants in countries
with natural uranim resources would he couitted to joint operations with
Urenco and the Americans, and also the level of enrichment technology. once
seen as able to place us alongside the nost advanced countries in a space of
10 years through the national project, would have again fallen greatly behind,
and Japan's plans for the production of enriched uranium would come to naught,
isn't that true?

Furthermore, if we fail to skillfully take success in developnent following
the Atomic Energy National Project to the final stage of creating an industry,
then the methods of pronoting the developnent of atonic energy and the very
structure of industry will be subject to severe reflection and investigation.

Attending the nemorial service for Inoue Goro, chairman of the Japanese Uranium
Enrichment Subco-aittee, who had strongly urged the necessity of the early
construction of the prototype plant through close cooperation between govern-
ment and private industry. and while praying for his happiness in the next
world, I made earnest petition that the day would soon cone for the establish-
ment of a new form of motive energy and the nuclear fuel cycle, which was the
dying wish of this man who worked for the development of autononous technology
and the elevation of Japanese industrial capacities.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1982

9898
C80: (0106/ 73

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I U“ V. IIVIR- 5a- Vl‘hl

SCIBNG AND “MY

TOYOTA STRENGTHENS POSITION THROUGH STRATEGIC MERGER

Myo wsrtnrss JAPAN in English tint: 62 pp 21-23

[Artie]; by shone Rocha, materiel-duet. mitten JAPAN]

['rexcl

OYOTA Motor Co. (THC).
headed by Eiji Toyoda. the
world's second largest auto maker. and
Toyota Motor Sales Co. (TMSCi. the
main dealer for Toyota Motor headed
by Shorchiro Toyoda. recently
announced at a joist press conference
in Nagoya that they have tiyted a
memorandum for merger. The corn-
pontes will be med on a fifty-fifty
basis on July I. The name of the new
company will be the same as the
current manufacturer. Toyota Motor
(0.. Ltd., and its annual'sales are
expected to reach more than *4 trilo
Iron. TMSC was established in l950 as
the main dealer for TMC after having
heen separated from the latter in order
to allevrate a managerial crisis at a tine
when Japan's auto industry was not
yet fully developed. While maintahln;
close connections. the two companies
have been beneﬂttin. from the advan-
tages of the ration as the demand
for motor ve 'cles 'mcreaaed world-
wide. However. conditions affecting
Japan's auto industry have changed as
auto ntanufactu has reached a
stage of maturity. unhermore. com-
petition a auto makers through-
outtheworld or the small-car market.
particularly between Japanese auto
malters and their US. counterparts
itcludins General Motors (GM). have
intensiﬁed. The proposed merger is
intended to cope more readily with
the intensified competition and to
strengthen the company‘s position in
the world car market as the second
largest maker.
The memorandum for the merger

ﬂeo stems that though both companies
willbemerpdon anequalbasisﬂor
buLprocedures. THC wil absorb
TNSC and take over the latter's
personnel. The rates of 'taliaation
in the new company and location of
posts for dﬁ‘ctors wil be decided
through discussions between the two
companies. Both will holdjrneral
shareholders meetings It the middle of
this May for shareholder approval of
the merger. it is most likely that the
president of the new company will be
Shoichiro Toyoda and the chairman
B§i Toyoda.

Detailed procedures for the merger
have been examined and discussed h)-
a committee established immediateh
after the announcement of the metpet.
The formal doth; of the cement
wastobernadeatthee ofthir
March.

As there are gaps in stoclt prices
and assets between the companies. the

ratioe__oi caplgliaatim 'm the new
'cotnpany are capected to amount to

one for TMC against 0.8 for TMSC.
However. if both companies hold to
the principle of equality. the ratios
will possibly become ﬁfty-ﬁfty. In
that case. TMC shareholders may be
granted gratis shares. The new THC
will also take over TMSC's current
borrowings totaling as much a ¥|20
billion as well a such unproﬁtable
divisions as housing. according to the
leaders of both companies itclud’at;
President Eiji Toyoda of THC. They
havethus brought loahalt speculation
concernitu the establishment of a
separate sales ﬁnancing company. and

134

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
separating the unproﬁtable divisions of
TMSC as subsidiaries.

TMSC was separated from THC and
establiﬂied as a sister company in
I950. as mentioned above. border to
receive joint ﬁnanchg frotn several
banks to overcome the managerial
difficulties of THC. They have been
closely cooperating with each other
and succeeded in mitts; THC the
second largest auto maker in the world
after CM. However. Shotaro Kantiya.
honorary chairmm of TMSC who was
the first president of the company
died in Dep'cember I980. Then Shoi-
chiro Toyoda. who was vice president
of THC. became president of TMSC
last June. At that point. many people
involved in the attto industry began
predicting that the companies would
merge after Shoichiro Toyoda had
served for a while as TMSC‘ president.

The merger was expected to materr
alrze some time in I983. However.
since the Japanese auto ittdustry has
undergone drastic changes in recent
months due to trade friction with
advanced industrial countries and
other international factors. and effec-
tive measures to cope with these
serious problems were required, the
proposed merger of the two companies
materialized much earlier thm ex-
pected.

Established in August I937. four
years before the outbreak of the
Pacific War and a month after Japan
invaded China. Toyota Motor (‘0.
produced 9.300 cars in its first year of
operation. During more than a decade
after the establishment - including
almost four years of Japan's hostilities
with the Allied Powers - the company
produced mostly trucks for military
use along with some passenger cars.
Although World War II termrnated in
August [945. the company was not
able to start regular operations irn-
mediatel} The world's car market was
dominated by US.-made cars. There
was no way for any Japanese car
maker to wedge itself into the world
car market at that time. One reason
was obvious: technical levels of
Japanese auto makers were not high
enough to compete with US. car

makers

The opportunity for moving into
the world market came when Japanese
manufacturers succeeded in producing
small cars with high fuel efficiency.

particularly after the first oil crisis at

135

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9

I973. Even before
number of Japant
were exported to n
world. However. .

mom 3.2mm
sales totaling ¥3,Si
or June l98i. itt

mgr uriounted to
“60)" ‘09 P0
and profit arnong

enterprises tn Japan
free of borrowings.

million at the and 0

As for Toyota I
was establidied 'at A
h Nagoya. its ct
¥23.7l7 million at
$.l6l as of the end
TMSC's sales rea
million with a rt
#57300 million a
The expected sales
will arnoont to sot
cause current sales
parts be‘uig sold It
parties will be we
mentioned NSC st
of TMSC amount
million as of last Set

In I969. 1'th
cars and anomed
world auto makers.

any 's out texce
eetrel. In one I9

exports since its ﬁr
in A I957 ea
units. ‘s a
exceeded the
December I980.
place only after ON

The proposed In
the judgment of hr
the current separate
enough to cope
for the world a
General Motors is
much as :60 billio
cars. GM's t-rget it
for a 25% share in
including the marl
For this elfort. G!
the strength and f:

FOROMOAIJSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9
I'Uﬂ VI’I'O‘JI‘A. was. \II‘LI

Table 1. Comparison of Leading Auto Makers

  
 
 
 
    
 
  
  
   

    
  

    
 

Output (units)

I Sale$(¥l hi1.) 3,506.4

' Recurring prom? 227.5
(or bil.) -

Employees 3 49.000

3.220.000

   
 

171.6
($730 mil.)

12594.0
(357.? bil.)

467.2
(-5760 mil.)

746.000
2.584.000 4.7 $0,000

  
    
   
  

(Note) As oflunel981for THC, as ofMarch 1981 for TMSC and
Nissan. as of December for GM.

sidiaries and related companies scat~
tered throttdiout the world. if GM's
strategy is successfully developed. even
1%? will have to face extremely
dl tilt problems.

Toyota's Ion rm strategy is
called “Global l reﬂec its goal
to secure a l0$ mare of world
market, enough to ntalte itsbaae in the
world at marlret firm enough to
survive dinette Gli’a powerful chal-
ienp. TMC ha already established a
mare of more than 8501' the world‘s
car output. Toyota has so far been
successful throudi establishhg a
unique rationalized production aetnp
concentrated it only one area (Alchi
Prefecture) and exportbtg inexpensive
but him-quality cars to almost every
country in the world.

In the l980s, homer. “the small
carwar"wlllbewgedonaworldwide
scale and protectionism 'at the auto
industry is likely to develop into a
serious problem. In fact, Japan's car
industry has been forced to restrict its
exports to such industrially advanced
regions as the United States. West
Germany. Britain and other European
countries. Even developing countries
are striving to establidi an auto or-
dustry as a key industry {or their
industraillzation. They are already
urging that more parts produced at
their own countries be used in
anneaa-madecarbodies .

The current separate settp of THC
and “(SC is utisfactory for the
production and overseas sales of
finished automobiles. With a view to
advancing into the world market from

136

a strategies! view point. however. thlr
setup is no longer either effective or
efficient. While TMSC has been active
in promoting its international strategy
TMC has not been necessarily tn
agreement with all of ThiSC‘s pro
grams. For example. TNC has been
somewhat cautions in promoting it:
hitemational stratey, such as estab
lishing ioal factories in mm: mar
Itets.

in fact. Toyota has been ap
proached by foreign car markets or
several occstions for tieup deals. bu
no deals have ever been successfully
concluded because of this caution:
attitude projected by Toyota. Thi
propose merger. however. i
definitely intended to unify botl
companies it international strateglca
operation.

On the domestic front. except fo
sub-compacts. Toyota stmeeded ll
increasing its domestic market than
by l point to 38.3% last year. Mean
time. Nissan's share levelled off ant
remained at 29.l%. Toyota has as it
target the sales of more lhll 2 milliot
cars domestically by l985. Toyoti
believes that if this share is achieved.i
can hold firmly to the leadership it
the domestic market. With the curren
separate setup. however. it is felt tht
goal wil be hard fo reach.

But their views have not alway
been in agreement. When Nissan suc
cessfully created a boom for turbo car
and Toyo Kogyo succeeded in eelli :

at number of its highly ”fa

amiliar model; THC criticized S(
for its lack of effective market re

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9

search efforts. and TMSC cornpla'ated
that THC was concentrated only in
produdrt'ghzara unapenainly lid over-
looking need to develop new can
to meat market monuments. it it true
that the aeparate aetup put a barrier to
the flow of information between the

two oompanlee.

The Iropoeed merger is deﬁnitely
intende to overcome euch e
and to eetablith a firm baee or future
operatione both at home and abroad.

The table provides a compariaon of
the world's three major auto makers -
Toyota and Niaaan in Japan and GM in
the U.S.:

Al the time oftlriswrttinpone
leading newspaper in Japan reported
that Toyota Motor Co. has decided to
huild a passenger car assembly plant in
the us The location of the plant will
be somewhere in the midweat and the
plant's yearly output will be 2001!!)
to 250,000 units. It will be completed
it I985 or 1986. The reason Toyota
has made this decielon is that it feel:
trade friction will never be mitigated.
and restrictions placed on Japan's car
export: will be further strengthened
without hope of their being lifted.
With the merger of THC and TMSC
nearing. Toyota aeema to have tried to
impreee the world with a strong tone
of the new-born ms

Ar for other Japaneae auto malten.
Honda Motor is now buildh; an
anembly plant for paeeenaer can in
Ohio for completion at the end of this
year and Nice-t Motor is worth. to
complete a new factory for trucks in
Colorado. According to President Eijl
Toyoda of THC, it intends to expand
itaealeelntheus.byhavinaa
production base in that country. Major
parts 'aicludina entire: will be trans.
ported from Japan for the time being,
but THC wﬂl try to raise the rate ef
parts to be procured in the us In the
future. TMC will make the plant a

midweat. many
expected lobe'
of car quality .
of production.

Alon; with
Japaneae auto l
auto parts malt-
move into tht
ductlon.

The locatloe
tory tn the U
where the labor
matron. ther

W, Ito :
part of the US.
maker: are cot
be along the M
auto parts wl
ported frorn la;
the operation.

Accord t-
settlement or
the current I
lune. its talea h
to “370.588
With Its m:
this account at

aiory for M
acooenrt aettier

TMC at a air
recurrhra profit
million. up 3t
hidteet in its hit
an increase oi
million. the ti
corded. For thi
expected to re
retaining
proﬂt¥l 2.70:
During the I
tioned above,
m“ "to
totdledugwﬁ‘r.
'ue combined.
amounted to i
It: output also
l.$40.968 units
'at output and t
cessful in incre:

completely integrated factory which -
will alto produce casinos. 33:35:15;
THC has been unreaponelve to Thenew‘foy
frequent approaches from UAW (The accommodated
United Auto Workers Union) “I" currently under
aroups related to the US. Congreaa for Koralruen my
Clllblbhln‘ ”In“ 0" "R US. '0 d' The MC“
dlllOl'l. though TMC was continuiﬂd February 198m
negotiations with Ford Motor Co. for ’00." meter: .
,mm production in the U5.. no 313 billion 11
fruitful results have been seen. The basement "3°"
negotiations have been froren since ground will ,0
last year. nerve as the neu
In the new plant to he built in the merged compan]
COPYRXGll'l‘a ‘l'ho "than Kogyo Shibun 1982
137
C80: 4120/216
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9
DUI UIWILIAI. U» URL!

8(3an AND W

mum 2mm SUCCZBDS m “CYCLES mm RESEARCH

Tokyo wsmss JAPAN in branch lie: 82 pp 89-93

[Article by ‘raltehilto Shana-a, heretical. Official. Agency of. Inductee]. Science

a Technology)

[hate]

SOME 60% of Japan's energy ooh:
'on is accounted for by'mo
dustries However. about 50% of the
'mdustrhl energy is simply dumwd
'atto the environment it the form of
exhaust pet or warm waste water
without hem; fully utilized. In Japan.
it issncssentrsl taskiromthestaad-
poem of etonorrrizlng energy oonsump
tion to reuwer this tremendous quart
tity of waste heet end to recycle it in
an effective way.
Development of entirely new tech-
ie required for the efficient
utilization of waste heat. since eats
tecltnoloﬂes are nnt capable of recy
he such waste heat in an economically
teedble iadtion.
Massed on this concept. march and
deveiifrnent oi new technical systems
to or ue waste heat was started in
fiscal I976 as at: wqwhr’escﬂe proj-
ect for thr developing
technoloett-s to recover and utiliu
waste heat from factories and plants
including steel mills. Along with the
initietr-‘n in fiscal I978 of the “Moon-
light Project“ which is intended to
develnp new technologies to cut eater.
3y consumption in general. the former
prt-yeet was absorbed hto the pro-

gram.

We would like to introduce Ill this
article some technical aspects of some
new heat pump systems which have
been developed as a part of the re»
search and dev nt of new techni-
ealsyatentstout iaewaste heat

Steel mills discharge ltupe quantities
of warm waste water of comparatively
low temperature. If we aucoeedin

raising the temperature or heat energy
dinsudrwarmwaste waterto
- tso‘C. upended

wil be nude podbleh

reason-t
anahaorp type tpurrtpsystem.
The compression-type heat pump
' d to recover heat
warm waste water
W m‘ °f from; $0?
quart roan
factories and plants and to obtain hot
water with a temperature of too -
teo°c m a met more for
retionalm utlintlon it the community.
heat pump
tent. on the hand. is mainly
intended for radon] air conditioning.
These two puns systems will be de-
serthedinaome anbelow

nype Heat Pump System
Tb objective is to develop a com»

preeslon- heat pump system to
pursue“ water or steam with a

temperature from l00' to l60‘t‘ uti-
lizing heat from warm waste water
witha atampsrature ot‘30- 60°C with
e cepeelty olat least t.000 rn’lh
Thermd elation? as exp renedby

ooelllcient ol‘ orrnance lit)? the
ratio of ted heat to drive en 'r
u) come to over three in lll‘

mpsyttemand

138

FOR omen. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9

Diepnm l. Consptession-sype heet sump system 01
Seen conpteoot

    
  
 

See type \sposhes
[\hsust heat scene

"we taste inter
()0 - 60'0

"U llot “It!
mum” ttoo - too"

gcgmosgdemmg cfndition. name 1M has led to th
: pt nation 0 steam with s setew
tempetstuse of 160°C. Me

In otdet to teslue s high~petfonno ssalh; end lubti
snoe hest pump system conlotmin; to fteoo.
the shove-mentioned speciﬁcations. I New type VIM
system has been sdopted to raise elem mete vale
tempetstute with s oomptessot on the polluted end com
low-tempmtute side and through the system envisions
ptinciple of exothesmie shsotption of equipment sdopti
the solution of lithium bromide (Lilt) ﬂesh vspotiution
on the hidetempenture side ol‘ die valet conducted
system (Diagram 1). chemhet. The l

Resesteh end deveio t vote ptoduoed in this .
stated in liseel I976. develop side snd vspotizel
mentol’sllcomponentsmslhbhed mthevettioslpip
by I979. snd s pﬂot plsnt delven with is tnnsl‘emd l’son
s engine Ives sssemhied from medium.
these components '0 I980. Runn I” W
tests of the pilot plant «me can heat ptls'i‘lp system
in I981. The feesiblity of the worm Nth Wm
weste wstet dtive system end the W! W
encode ens studied I W010 «the s
systemsmeet thedive ol’veste WGGMMO
heel sauteed. ssict see MMNRWF
bneny outlined below." a petting ml
Sesewoomptessot — oduction s so-eell
lempentuse of 55°C wessuﬂieiset lot is applied in the
the previous heel pump system fot sh demotion process
conditioning. Tempentute imide the tempentutemsin
comptessot chamber stsyed st60o Omen-Am
70°C. ﬂowevet. the present system system tube
tequites the penemion of s tempess- soutoe s and
me of shoot 1 IO'C at the eompteesoe um schema: fut
outlet. so that the tempetetuse ﬂuids 0"“ P050000
theoom mumutmwno. MWN
l20°C. an“. lteon (mediumhnd oil it! 0‘ Wlﬂ‘
ere expected to decompose throudt “’0' conditions.
hest snd mutusl motion in s conven» ptessootype heet
tionslomnptessotoftheoil-seeltype. systemhssheen

139
FOR OFFICIAL [3! ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9
I‘UK UI'I‘I‘LMI. UM UNI-I

endsiiqnid onthrhidttanpere-
tureride.
Norm
A lot [dent all the
sweater: toesteh-
lish the technoloﬂeeofs heel
mm for tent ntre
waterfront tot Cfronttnste
yeterwithetemsmreoﬂO-GO'C.
The totd energy-min; pdot
to! $0.000

cm" (with en outptt
eel/h) ts onotwentieth i he es
comet! with en ectusl and is

driven by s diesel o I). A:
s remit. e 1” runs!

(the alto of devel heat to heat
input of the ' engine). corre~

sponding to CO I I. has been obtain-
ed for tempersture miter: of
I60‘C.(COP-3fortheexhldrive

r of the eontpreseor) The per-
orrnsnee basically (Is to the
origins] terpet value. It hes been con
firmed further that thermd emciency
metres lm for IIO‘C temperature

reunion.

m mm
to
shedforhtheprojeetJneddltiou.
eornponentsuch srtheconpreeser.

my. tent ture generator-adden-
”mam...“ easiest
mpsysthontesre being
operatin‘nthiemy.

.—--._‘_.—

Diagram 2. Absorption-type hut pump system

Iemperstere meth-
i old uedb condensation)

 

considerable. A COl’ol'OJeIsse'lne

single retina. 0.25 fr
double stage $3. end 0.75 fr

W#,with e target ten

The dab of the WM; eye
h; we» celled for the productio
of tee with its large latent best it
uterus or en ehsorption heat pom
cycle. Tenet tent more of mitt
gamma]? sndCOJdofow

vereenvhpdaespec ' ).
Fiat-type nheaptiee hat pup syn
ee- - m but grep system (Di
m 2) follows concept of tit
ementiunsl shsorptiorvtype hot en
cold vster dispenser. However, thee
were muons problems to he solve
including the corrosion iithhtr
W an: over“ thermal I
v hirer operating ternpert
ture. The reeeereh consisted of repeat
ed construction and c

trial equipment with en output c

manner-Mum
-
Mud-C»

POIOFIICIALIBEONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007i02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050048-9

COPYRIG‘I‘I‘t

60:

4120/21!)

30M» 350.000 “:meth ”MW
mtioucd new la m can- mm
pieteiy attained mwm Ind 0(stme
development an {halted in 1979. W W
Thisyumiutuallyopcnmu Wm
mttndyehgutdothetplutu f“.w“‘
”m” . M “$11“?ng
Second-type “I”. M W
m - Ranch and Wt brine of the m
stated with the selection ol’ III Idnl Vuiotnoolthintio
coutbtnntionotcoldmcdhmudab "ﬂwl
with liquid. Vuiotts animal Md In
eqmputent whit mdmnoddcdh -|4‘C with u
the count of match. Water was
'umbtomideuoititiottuthubtolptiott m we 00.!
liquid. Hammad {emulated- m of . o
wiuetkﬂndwnmnw mvhtlu
on um tempentum m no: «use:
wanentuoodthcooldmeditmvpn med on .
wutlwd out. After 0 Weird“ . my 10.:
narycx‘ maptlotplnom- thithchttctuytt
IWCMR of actual in W Ml '0 m. 1"“ u d
csubiidi a data M {a the that M
actual plant. the aviation of but obt {tout w
conducting Mammalian“- 60'C and that ‘-
yds of operating mm Tin LWWPG'V“
mull: showed thatthcocﬂmnyh- Arum-type ml
tended petfotmmbem W with . a
Hotmtcrofw'Cwmdttﬂy mam“
obtmdftomvnnnmmd mud-nut!“
60°C Mid coolin‘mtet otts‘c. mm“???
tan tttu Iym W not mm
sis: mmtcd om! to chub mmof35'C.
Wampum": water. Hot mm of Thu: l he bin
90C wu Molly ptgdtiad I’m 0“."qu
wannwmewatuofsoCJIudi- the“)! um
timeouttot mundstomow cyoﬂndumsq
sting safety utd amt“ A: cautioned a:
st wenstndied. luv: dmdy m:
mama! mm “3’“th
obtmhotmtetofoml Cut-ell nematod-
un Mapabkofptodttdn autumn,“
uumf’ll‘tinl equipmat wounded in w.
The union Mayo Quinta 1982
EN!)
161
l-‘OIOIIICIALIBEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500050048-9