FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10222
30 December 1981

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 20/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation Has summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING CHEERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
ma OFFICIAL “SF 0‘! \‘

JPRS mm
30 Decemb

HORLDHIIE REPORT
Teucommxunous Poucv, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(9000 20/81)

Cameras

SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA
Dim-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Kuwait, Tunisia Sign Loan Agreement for Telecomlunications Project
(HARM TROPICAUI ET HBDITERRANEEIIS, 6 Nov 81)............

0838.

Methods for Locating Breaks in Optical Cables
(8. H. Vernik, A. H. Kuznetsov; mm, Sep 81).....

Climatic, Mechanical Tests of 'Iztok' Comunication System
(Ya. Ya. 511111.811; mmmu', &p 81) 0000050050000. 000

Development of Comunications in Belorussia
(I. "0 Gritsuk; mm‘z" sep 81) OOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOCUO

Rural Hire Broadcasting Discussed
(mm‘z', sep 81) OOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOQCOO00.00.00...

Haws of Developing Rural Telephone Communication, Hire
Broadcasting

. (Go Honing; W', M 81) clotooooooolooooooloeeoo
Automatic Telephone Exchange 'Kvant' for Agencies, Industry

Discussed
(0. "Stalin; WM', 39!) 81) ooeoeooooooeooooooeaoooo

-a- [III-W-l‘OPO

l-‘OROl-TICIALUSEONLY
Paris HARCHES ThOPICADX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2312

[Text] Tunisian-Kuwaiti cooperation, details of which we have reported several times,
has materialized again. In a ceremony held on 31 October, at the headquarters of

the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (TADBS) in Kuwait. the Tunisian
ambassador to Kuwait, Mohamed Hegdiche. and the president of the fund, Mohamed Imady.
signed a loan agreement for a total of 3.7 million Kuwaite diners or about 6.675
million Tunisian diners.

The loan-at a 6 percent interest rate and repayable in 15 years, with a 6-year grace
period-will be applied to finance the outlay of foreign exchange required to build
the Tunisian section of the fourth inter-Arab telecommunications project (Algeria-
Tunisia) with an estimated cost of 6.4 million Kuwaiti diners.

The project envisages expanding and improving the telecoalunications network between
the Magreb countries with the installation of coaxial cables and multiple: circuits
for national and international communications.

One should remember that the FADES has already granted several loans to Tunisia and
these loans total 27.2 million Kuwaiti diners.

It should also be pointed out that, last week, the deputy director general of the
Kuwaiti Fund, Badr Bl Hamaidi, was in Tunis where he conducted talks with Tunisian
officials, mainly with Minister of Plan and Finance Hanaour Moalla, on the subject

of cooperation between Tunisia and the Fund, and on ways to increase this cooperation.
Badr £1 Hamaidi also studied with the minister of transports and communications.
Sadoh Ben Jones, a project to modernize the basic infrastructure of the railroad line
between Tunis and Bordj Cedria and he mentioned that four other projects will be
undertaken in 1982. These projects are: the development of the Oued Siliana region,
the drainage of the Mateur region. the utilization of waste water for agriculture

in Tunisia and, finally, the building of an asphalt road in Beja. The Kuwaiti Fund
is reported to be also prepared to finance a project to build a 70-kilometer rail-
road line between Gabes and Hedenine. This railroad line. where construction work

is scheduled to start next year, will cost in the region of 20 million Tunisian diners.

It was announced in Tunis that the crown prince of Kuwait, who is also the president
of the Council of Ministers, will pay an official visit to Tunisia this coming

December.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796 1
680: 5500/5003 roe omcm us: ONLY
METHODS FOR LOCATING BREAKS IN OPTICAL CABLES
Moscow ELEEIROSVYAZ' in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 25-28
[Article by S. H. Vernik and A. H. Kuznetsov, submitted 6 Aug 80]

[Text] Successful operation of communication lines is determined to a
considerable degree by the possibility of locating the exact
point of their break. The solution of this problem is usually
connected with great difficulties both in developing measurement
methods, and in developing measuring instruments. Por optical
cable communication lines (OILS), particularly for long lines
with an attenuation of the order of 30-60 dB, the solution of
this problem is connected with additional difficulties caused by
the complexity of the processes of propagation and reflection of
light signals in optical fibers (0V).

Let us examine the possible methods of locating the break points
of 0V and 0x [optical cables] as a whole and particularly the
methods suitable for using on long lines.

As is known, not any actual breakdown of an optical fiber (0V) totally stops the pro-
pagation of a signal. For example, a break of 0v with a vertical shear and separa-
tion of 0V in the cable by 2-5 pm leads only to an insignificant increase in the at-
tenuation of the signal. Therefore, a break of 0V will be considered a damage at
which the propagation of light energy stops completely. There exist three methods
for locating the breaking point in 0V.

The method of measuring light energy radiated into the surrounding medium is used
for quality control of initial semifinished products -- "moldings" from which 0V are
stretched, as well as for locating 0V breaks and great (of the order of 2-31) non-
uniformities. Quality control of moldings is accomplished by probing them with ra-
diation of a gas laser of the visible spectrum (‘1.- 0.62 pm). Luminescence is ob-
served at the points of 0V nonuniformity. The quality of the molding can be judged
by the intensity and the number of the luminescent points. By statistical process-
ing of the results of visual observations, it is Possible to establish the correla-
tional connection between the quality of the molding and the 0V nonuniformity.

At the points of great 0V nonuniformities, some of the energy of light signals is
radiated into the surrounding space. In this case, the measuring signal introduced

FOI'OFFﬂial.USE(HﬂLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

into the 0V consists of powerful light pulses (of tL: order of 1-3 H) repeated with
frequency of 1-5 kna. The light signals radiated into the surrounding space are
picked up by the photodetector of the receiving device and are transformed into

pulses of current (voltage) which are then amplified in the narrow-band amplifier
which is characterized by a great gain factor and is tuned to the frequency of the
repetition of the light pulses.

In the process of measurements, 0V moves in relation to the photoreceiver, and the
intensity of the radiation in it becomes fixed. The function of the distribution of
the power of the radiated signals along the length of the 0V characterizes the dis-
tribution of nonuniformities. The CV break point usually corresponds to the high
amplitude of the emitted signal. As is shown by preliminary results, this method
can be realized if the dynamic range of the receiving device is 110-160 dB.

The method of measuring intensity of the Rayleigh backseattering is used widely in
measuring the distribution functions of nonuniformities along OKLS and the attenua-

tion equivalent of 0V and 0K.

L1.- ~21

Figure 1.

The functional diagram of the measuring device used in this method is shown in Fig-
ure 1. The OKLS S is probed by short (2-5 ns) high-power light pulses (1-2 H) which
are introduced into the 0! through the differential device 6. The reflected back-
scattering flux is received on the receiving device 6; the screen of the BET [elec-
tron-ray tube] 7 (or some other indicator) shows the dependence of the intensity of
the backscattering flux on the length of the line (or the time of signal propagation),
as well as the point of 0V nonuniformities. The point of 0v break is characterised

by a sharp drop of the scattering power.

The main drawback of this method is the low level of the backseattering flux, which
makes it impossible to use this method for locating breaks in long OILS due to insuf-
ficient sensitivity of the receiving device. Moreover, in the presence of relative-
ly great nonuniformities (which is the case at the existing level of the manufactur-
ing technology of 0V and 0K), tLB power of the counter flux of light pulses could be
considerably higher than the power of the Rayleigh scattering flux. This distorts
the results of measurements.

The location method of determining breaking points of 0V is identical to the pulse
method of measuring the distribution functions of nonuniformities which is widely
used on cable communication lines.

FINICHHHC£A1.USEIJNLY
Figure 2.
Key: 1. Break

The functional diagram of the measuring device used in the location method is anal-
ogous to the one shown in Figure l. The generator of sounding light pulses l of
5-10 ns is triggered by the electronic driving oscillator 2 which, simultaneously or
with some delay (‘75 ), triggers the scanning generator of the BLT 3. The sounding
pulse passes through the differential system A to the 0V 5 being measured. Part of
the energy reflected from the 0V nonuniformities creates a reverse light flux which
arrives at the photodetector 6 and transforms into voltage pulses. having been am-
plified in the amplifier 7. they are delivered to the vertical plates of the BET,
causing the deflection of the electron beam upward or downward along the axis y from
the middle line. The arrival time of the reflected pulses is registered in the
scale of the scanning time s(t) which can easily be converted into the distance, km,
to the place of reflection (Figure 2):

1-0.58 (1)0. (1)

where v is the light energy propagation speed.

The breaking point is determined by the distance x beyond which the reflected pulses
do not arrive to the receiving device.

The main difference of the parameters of the circuit of Figure l which is used for
measuring breaking points and distribution functions of nonuniformities by the loca-
tion method from the parameters of analogous circuits intended for measuring the in-
tensity of the backscattering flux is that the receiving device used in the location
method has a narrower operating frequency range. This makes it possible to have an
amplifier of the receiving device with a dynamic range of 50-60 dB. Moreover, as
was mentioned before. the signals reflected from the nonuniformities and breaking
points usually are by several orders higher than the intensity of backscattering
fluxes. Thus, this method makes it possible to conduct measurements on long OILS.

It can be seen from examining the functional circuit of Figure l and the description
of its operation that it is analogous to the widely known circuits used in devices
of the PS-type or UIP-type [3] which are intended for studying distribution functions
of nonuniformities and for locating breaking points of cable conductors as one of the
great nonuniformities in which the reflection coefficient is equal or close to one.
his fact is quite important, because it makes it rather simple to design a device
for locating 0V breaks in the form of an attachment to the series-produced PS-type
instruments. However, when measuring OK, it is necessary to consider the special
characteristics of the propagation of optical signals and reflections of optical
fluxes in CV which lead to the appearance of additional errors.

1;
FOI:OI1W(JA1.USEIMNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USFIONLY

Location Method Errors. Optical signals attenuate when they are transmitted through
0V due to losses in CV, which leads to a decrease in the energy of the sounding light
pulse H0 at the end of an OK with length L to the value

r:- = r. e«3.21m L . (2)
where UL is the attenuation factor of 0V, dB.

The energy of the pulse reflected from the and of the line, when it is fully reflect-
ed. measured at the beginning of the line is

“3;" _ I’. e—( .u-o L (3)

Knowing the attenuation value of the regeneration section of the OKLS or , it

is possible to determine the minimum dynamic range of the measuring de ce a In I
2 a pep . In order to determine the dynamic range of the measuring device, it i:
necessary to increase a man by the attenuation, a1 or which characterizes energy
losses during reflection at a point situated at the diEtance L1 from the beginning
of the OILS. These losses are stochastic in nature and are a function 1P1 of a set
of stochastic values: modulus of the reflection coefficient at the i-th point P1;
distribution function of angles at which light waves of various modes reflect from

the surface of the av break (91 p, where p is the number of the mode of the light
wave. Moreover, a1 1 depends on the aperture angle of the 0V 0 and the conditions
of the propagation é} thividual modes in the 0V. Thus,

Gum-t (Pl- 1: u' 6) (a)

and is stochastic in nature.

 

Figure 3.
Key: 1. Breaking point

5
son omcw. use ONLY
Figure 3 shows possible profiles of 0V breaks and oscillograms of the reflected sig-
nals corresponding to them. The smallest losses occur if the break surface is

perpendicular to the 0V axis (Figure 3a), and the largest losses occur if the angle
of the break plane with the 0V axis is equal to 45 degrees (Figure 3b); in the case
of a complex surface of the break (Figure 3c), the value of the losses is stochastic

in nature. Besides the losses as a result of reflection, it is necessary to consider
also the losses in the differential assembly of the measuring device a nn¢ . Conse-
quently,

an} I- 26," — 3:17 -.- 8;... (5)

If we limit ourselves to measuring the point of 0V break from two sides of the regen-
eration section, then

‘.: yrs "" 9m "' ‘r'r " 53‘6- (6)

The maximum value of any achieved in practice is 80-90 db for the power of the
sounding pulse of the order of 1-2 H. Losses in the differential device are usually
equal to 8-10 dB [1], and the attenuation of the regeneration section is 30-35 dB.
It follows from this that a o , if measured on one side of the regeneration sec-
tion, can be not more than 0-fg>dB; when measuring on both sides -- 25-35 dB, which
makes it possible to locate the breaking point of the 0V with a high degree of ac-

curacy.

The length of the sounding signal can also affect the error in the determination of
the 0V breaking point [2]. When determining this error, it is necessary to consider
the widening of the pulses in the line. when a light pulse with a duration of to
propagates along the 0V, it widens at the beginning of the fiber due to dispersion
of the 0V material, due to the dependence of the group delay time on the number of
the mode of the light waves, and due to the stochastic spread of values of the group
delay time in the 0V.

These distortions result in the widening of the sounding pulses as they get farther
away from the light source. As a result of this, the resolving power of this method
is not the same: it has the highest value at the beginning of the line, and the low-
est value at the end of it. The value of the widening of the pulse depends on the
type of the fiber and the characteristics of the radiation source.

For example, when an incoherent light pulse with a duration of to is transmitted in
a multimode fiber. it widens toward the end of the regeneration section with the
length L to the value [1]

.‘;-I.'.: -\t:‘_---lr'-:'.'!'. (7)

where (kt -- spread of the group delay time per length unit in a multimode fiber
due to the presence of various nodes; 111.: -- widening of the pulse per length
unit due to dispersion in the material and dispersion of the natural waves.

When the natural modes are mixed on the irregularities of the fiber, the pulse at
the end of the fiber widens to the value[l]

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.','-1 (:E—JlizL:~.\I: LL ' (8)

where Lc is the average length of the W on which the total exchange of energy be-
tween the nodes takes place.

In practice, I. ) 1.5 4': y A Ta, and the value of the pulse widening A t
is proportional to “W1?“ example, at An/n . 0.01, the spread of the group
delay time At is 48.1. ns/km, and at a coherent light source, 26.2 ns/km. For a
gradient fiber. we have, respectively, 6.86 ns/km and 2.62 ns/kn. thus, with a
sounding pulse of to - 10 ns and a coherent light source, the pulse widens to 34.2
us at the end of the first kilometer of the line. These data indicate that there is
no point in decreasing the length of the sounding pulses below 5-10 ns.

5.’ a)

 

 

Figure lo.
Key: 1. Uniform

The maximum value of the error in locating a break corresponds to the maximum value
of a ‘rp , when the reflected pulse is not observed at the breaking point of the 07
on :3. screen of the measuring device (Figure 3b). In this c‘eaee. the operator usual-
ly assumes that the location of the break is the point of the closest 0V nonunifor-
mity on the side of the sounding generator (Figure la) which, after the break, has
the form shown in Figure lob. In this case, the measurement error will be determined

by the section of a high uniformity loan of the 0V. where no reflected pulses are
observed.

with the improvement of the 0V quality, do”, will be increasing to the values of
the 0K factory lengths, because, as a rule, joint reflections occur at the points of
OK joints which are registered by pulsed instruments.

By using these reflections. with the aid of the location method, it is possible
to determine the factory length of the or where the break took place.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Conclusions. The analysis of the location method of the determination of the break-
ing point of 0V showed that the possibilities of errors in measurements depend sub-
stantially on a number of random factors which can lead to impermissibly greet
errors. In order to liait then in the process of the construction of OKLS, it ap-
pears to be appropriate to measure the nonuniformity distribution functions along
the length of the line and to include these characteristics in the operation manual
_of the OILS. These characteristics measured on both sides of the regeneration sec-
tion supplemented by actual data about the length of the construction sections of OK,
distribution of nonuniformities, values of reflections at the joints of the factory
lengths, and actual attenuation of OK make it possible by their changes to judge
about the constancy of 0! parameters by periodic measurements of the nonuniformity
'distribution functions and a more accurate determination of the 0V failures. In
this case, the characteristic of the distribution functions of nonuniformities ob-
tained in the course of the latest measurements can be used as a reference scale
for the determination of the 07 failure. Measurements of the nonuniformity distri-
bution functions on both ends of the regeneration section to the break point and
after it will contribute to a more accurate determination of the failure point of
'the fiber.

3 IBLIOGRAPHY

1. Unger, O. c. "Opticheskaya svyaz'" [Optical Communications], Moscow, Svysz',
1979.

2. Grodnyev, I. I., at sl. "Koaksial’nyye kabeli svyasi" [Coaxial Communication
Cables], Moscov, Svyaz', 1970.

3. Kuchikyan, L. I. "Fiaicheskaya optika volokonnykh svetovodov" [Physical Optics
of Fiber Light Guides], Moscow, Energiya, 1979.

a. Muradyan, A. G. and Ginsburg, S. A. "Sisteny peredachi informatsii po optiches-
komu kabelyu" [Optical Cable Data Transmission Systems], Moscow, Svyas', 1980.

5. Teumin, I. I. ‘Volnovody opticheskoy avyasi" [Optical Communication waveguides],
Moscow Svyaz', 1978.

6. Makhlin, R. Ye. and Titov, I. V. "Measurement of Reduced Factor of Reflection
from the End of the Fiber when There is a Break in an Optical Fiber Communica-
tion Line," PIS'MA V ZHTF [Letters to the Journal of Technical Physics), Vol I,
No ll, 1975.

7. Makhlin,R. Kh.; Ku7netsov, A. A.: and Titov, I. V. "Observation of Optical
Pulses Reflected from the Far End of the Fiber," RADIOTEKHNIKA I BLEKTRONIKA,
Vol XX, No 6, 1975.

8. Cuttman, J. and Krumpholz, 0. "Location of Imperfections in Optical Glass Fiber
Haveguides," ELECTRONICS LETTERS, Vol 11, No 10, 1975.

9. Veno, Y. and Motoh Shimlzu. "Optical Fiber Fault Location Method," APPLIED OP-
TICS, Vol 15, No 6, 1976.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Personik, C. D. "Photon Problem -- an Optical Fiber Time Domain Reflectmter,‘
PS‘I‘J, Vol 56, No 3, 1977.

[1. "Detection and Location of Fiber Breaks in Optical Cmunication Lines," m,
Vol 90, No 11, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATBL'STVO "RADIO I SVYAZ'", 'nmnosmz'", 1981

10233
C80: 5500/1005

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CLIMATIC, MECHANICAL TESTS OF 'IZTOK' MUNICATION SYSTEM

Moscow ELBICI'ROSVYAZ' in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 12-15
[Article by Ya. Ya. Silin'sh, submitted 15 Nov 78]

[Text] Series production of the integrated analog-digital communication system
as ATs "Istok" has been started [1]. In the process of the preparation of the
documentation for series production, a complex system of production quality con-
trol (ISM) of YeSS ATs was developed, guaranteeing a high quality of the station

equipment [2] .

The KSUKP YeSS Al's includes a complex of organizational, scientific, and technical
problems which are solved at all stages of production and operation of the ass
Al's equipment. This complex includes four groups of problems: general system pro-
blems, problems of the stages of designing, manufacturing, and operation.

The general system problems prwide for continuous control of the plans of measures
for the purpose of quantitative evaluation of the quality of work and the provision
of unified metrological and patent-information means for the entire development of
the system.

The problems of the designing stage include: the order of the quality control of
the design and technical documentation and verification of this documentation by
the reliability, metrology, and standardization services; safety program; methods
of climatic and mechanical tests, etc.

At the manufacturing stage, the quality of the equipment of YeSS Al's is ensured by
the analysis of causes of defects and failures; organisation of the optimal input
control of materials, semifinished products and components; certification of the
equipment and technological processes by quality levels; conducting Quality Days,
etc.

The problems of the state of operation include the collection, processing, and sub-
mission of information to the designer and the plant about failures of the equip-
ment during the operation in the experimental zone, conducting controlled operation
of series stations, establishing the exact amount of spare parts, etc.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The quality and reliability of the Yess his equipment are greatly affected by ex-
ternal climatic and mechanical influences. Moreover, in the process of the manufac-
turing of equipment, there unavoidably occur hidden defects which are revealed
only in the running-in process of the equipment. The developed methods of climatic
and mechanical tests included in the KSUKP YeSS ATs made it possible to check ra-
pidly the operating ability of the equipment under various conditions and to reveal
the causes of its failures and hidden defects.

Climatic Tests. The reliability of the functioning of Yess AIs is affected the
most by temperature, since most of its electroradio elements (ERR) are sensitive
to its changes.

According to specifications for the equipment of this class, it should operate at
a higher temperature of +b000. However, local overheating occurs in some electronic
assemblies of the equipment due to the special characteristics of their design.

GDR specialists studied the dependence of the overheating temperature toverheat
within the bay of Yess ATs on the released thermal power P: of individual assemblies
located in a given bay [3]. The results of these studies for the middle (curve 1)
and end (curve 2) bays of the set are shown in Figure 1.

As can be seen from the curves, at the maximum power release within the bay equal
to 500 H, local overheating of the bay located in the middle of the bay set will
be 'v 15°C. For this reason, tests of the 1:33 Are components, such as sections,
cells, transformers and other BRB, must be conducted at a temperature of +55°C,
and not at 440°C.

3.

 

Figure 1.

Key: 1. t

overheat

In temperature tests, in order to correctly reflect real operational conditions and
to select correctly the conditions of the tests, it is necessary to consider ther-
mal balance of the objects being tested. It has been established that a specimen
has to be kept in the testing chamber at the higher operating temperature of +55°c
for four hours. But the casing, for example, of the multiple integrated connector
(HIS) used in the YeSS ATs reaches this temperature only after four hours, i.e.,
the time origin of HTS tests must be moved to that time. heat-releasing objects
(powerful transistors, resistors, etc) reach a higher operating temperature

11
FOI‘OIFKJAI.US£GNVLY
considerably earlier, and the stable temperature value of their casings even ex-
ceeds the operating temperature in the chamber. All this is shown clearly in Fig-
ure 2 which gives the dependence of the air temperature in the testing chamber
(curve 1), temperature of the specimen surface (curve 2) and the surfaces of power-
ful transistors (curve 3) on the testing time.

 

F'_?"'- r‘ 6 1.: (2)

Figure 2
Key: 1. Ttest - 4 hours
2. Hours

Tests of equipment at lower operating temperatures are conducted in the same way.

Moisture resistance tests of the equipment are also done in a special chamber, where
real operating conditions are simulated. It is taken into consideration that under
real conditions, the object is under an electrical load which affects the formation
of dew on the casing of the object and lowers by one order or more the resistance

of the insulation of the printed circuit plates, transformers, etc.

The next test of the equipment for various transportation conditions is done in a
cyclic mode, with variable ambient temperature and humidity. Aftei these tests,

the equipment must be acclimatized under normal conditions at an ambient temperature
of +251100c and humidity of 65:15% in the course of 6-24 hours. This is necessary,
because all electrical parameters of the equipment must return to the initial nor-
mal state.

It is considered that the equipment has successfully passed the tests, if its cer-
tain electrical parameters did not exceed the established limits during these tests.

Mechanical Tests. In order to check the equipment completely under various modes
of transportation and operation, it is tested for mechanical, vibration, and shock
effects. The sample is placed on a special platform which is set into vibration
with variable acceleration and frequency.

YeSS ATs equipment can be transported by motor vehicles, railroad, sea and air.
Therefore, it is necessary to examine the conditions corresponding to these types
of transportation. Figure 3 shows the dependence of acceleration g on frequency f
for various types of transportation obtained in [4-6]: curve 1 -- plane, 2 -- ship,
3 -- motor vehicle, A -- container carrier. The same figure gives the dependence
of g on f for shock (curve 5 -- for packaged equipment, curve 6 -- for unpackaged

12
FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equipment) and vibration (curve 7) effects. Curve 8 corresponds to the existing
conditions of testing for vibration effects. The frequency range (10-500 Hz) was
determined by the passband of the measuring instruments used.

 

 

" .5: 2: 5:- tr 232' 577
Figure 3.
Key: 1. B:

 

As can be seen from Figure 3, the greatest accelerations in the equipment occur
during transportation by plane, and all types of transportation are characterised
by an increase in acceleration from the frequency of 10 Hz.

Tests of samples for sinusoidal vibration were conducted on a special stand. For
such tests, it is necessary to use only an electrodynsmic stand (for example, VEDS
400) which makes it possible to obtain a sliding sinusoidal signal with a speed of
one octave per minute with automatic adjustment of the amplitude of movement and
acceleration. Vibration stability tests were conducted with voltage turned on, i.
e., under load, and those for vibration strength -- under no-load conditions with
visual and electrical checking of the sample after the tests. In the process of
developing a sample, it is recoumendedmuse stifﬁr tests (by 30-50%) than the ex-
isting ones for ensuring the margin of safety of the structure during periodic
plant tests.

13
lill¢lﬂﬂC1Al.USElMVLY
GDR specialists proposed to simulate transportation conditions by means of 1000

pulse shocks of 6 no at an acceleration of 100 g, unloading jobs -- by throwing

the equipment from a height of up to 85 cm or by six shocks with an acceleration
of up to 600 3.

Figure 6 shows the dependence of g and f occurring in the toss AIs obtained in
mechanical tests of a sample for its stability to external effects: curve 1 -- dur-
ing the switching of tumblers; 2 -- during the replacement of cells; 3 -- during
accidental shocks during the operation of the equipment. Curve 6 shows the exist-
ing conditions of testing for the detection of resonance frequency in the equipment;
curves 5 and 6 -- testing conditions accepted for YeSS AIs for shock and vibration
stability. As can be seen from Figure 3 (curve 8) and Figure 4 (curve 4), the ex-
isting testing conditions used at plants manufacturing AIS [automatic telephone ex-
changes] cannot ensure qualitative checking of the YeSS A18.

Difficulties are caused also by discrepancies in the normative technical documents-
tion for ERR [8], where 20 degrees of rigidity are given for vibration effects which
do not correspond to the effects occurring during operation. For example, rigidity
degrees I, II and V for the frequency ranges, respectively, of 10-35, 10-60, and
10-100 Hs have the same acceleration of lg, which is not substantiated scientifi-
cally at all.

As was shown by the studies (Figure 4), tests for the vibration stability of cells
and sections 0f the equipment of YeSS ATs should be conducted in the frequency

range of 10-500 Hz with an acceleration of up to 0.5 g. Shock stability test must
be conducted at an acceleration of 2.5 g and the length of the shock pulse of 6 as.

In order to ensure a high quality of standard replacement elements (TEZ) of the
YeSS Ara equipment, they are subjected to accelerated reliability tests in the pro-
cess of manufacturing. A method was developed according to which, after mechanical
effects on T32, they are tested for nonfailure operation under a maximum electri-
cal load in a special compact chamber at a temperature of +SS°C in the course of
1000 hours. These tests showed the possibility of revealing design and technologi-
cal failures of 122.

In the manufacturing process of the equipment, there unavoidably occur hidden de-
fects which lead to running-in failures. Short-term forced climatic and mechani-
cal effects make it possible to reveal these defects and reduce the running-in

failures [9, 10], which is confirmed by the tests of the experimental specimens of
the YeSS ATs "Istok".

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Adzhemov, S. A.; Hisulovin, L. Ya.; and Parilov, V. P. "General Principles of
Constructing an Integrated Quasi-Electronic Analog-Digital Conmmnication Sys-

tem,” ELEXTROSVYAZ', No 10, 1975.
2. Kerr, W. A. "Nine Axioms for Quality Control," QUALITY PROGRESS, No 3, 1974.

3. Harkert, C. "Brwarmenysprobleme in elektronischen Geraten," Dissertation TU
Dresden, Pakultat fur Blektrotechnik, 1967.

lb
INJIIOIIWCJAI.IEIE(MULY
10.

FOR (WI-1C1“. "SF. ONLY

Reissnann, E. ”Bin Beitreg zur Hessung mechanischer Umvelteinflusse und vir-
kungsequivelenten PruEfung von Gereten," Dissertation TU Dresden, 1972.

Reissnann, E. "Zusemnenhnng zwischen Teldbedingungen und Ptufbedingungen."
Anlege 2 sum Abschlussbericht TU Dresden, Sektion informationotedenik, 1973.

Lipnann, R., and Heinrich, Ch. "Schwingungsbeenspruchung von Peckungen,"
DIE VERPACKUNG, No l, 1977.

TGL 2000-0057, "Stossfolge und Schwingungsprufung," 1971.

COST 16962-72. "Electronic and Electrical Engineering Products. Mechanical
and Climatic Effects. Requirements and Testing Methods."

Silinbh, Ya. Ya., and Yedchenko, K. I. "Accelerated Technological Run of Seni-
conductor Equipment." NADBZHNOST' I KONTROL' RACHBSTVA, No 6, 1972.

Silin'ah, Ye. Yn.. and Yedchenko, K. I. Patent No 659745 (USSR). "Radio Equip-
ment Aging Methods"

COPYRIGHT: IZDATBL'STVO "RADIO I SVYAZ'", "ELEXTROSVYAZ'", 1981

10233

CSO:

5500/1005 .

15
non omcm. use ONLY
DEVELOPMENT 0? COMMUNICATIONS IN BELORUSSIA
Moscow BLEKTROSVYAZ' in Russian 30 9, Sep 81 pp 1-3

[Article by I. H. Gritsuk, minister of communications of the Belorussian 883: ”Re-
sults and Directions of the Development of Communications in Belorussia"]

[Text] Communications workers of Belorussia, just as all Soviet people, have started
working on the fulfillment of the tasks of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan. Workers,
engineers, technicians, and the entire personnel of the commmnicstions industry of
the republic are concentrating their efforts on complete fulfillment of the resolu-
tions of the 26th CPSU Congress and instructions of the USSR Ministry of Communica-
tions, realizing that faultless operation of the means of communication is an essen-
tial condition for the intensive development of the entire national economic complex.

This industry commenced the current five-year plan with fairly good technical equip-
ment which makes it possible to conduct effective work on the improvement of the
services to the population and the national economy of the republic with all types
of communications, increasing labor productivity and reliability of the means of com-
munication.

The preceding Tenth Five-Year Plan was the years of further strengthening of the
material and technical base of communications. It will suffice to say that the five-
year target for the introduction of the fixed capital was fulfilled in Belorussia in
6 years, and the value of the capital increased almost by 462.

Year after year, the allotted capital investments were used systematically, and
their volume increased by 361 in five years. This made it possible to increase the
length of intercity telephone channels almost l.7-fold and introduce new capacities
of automatic intercity telephone stations. The industry was modernized on a new
technical basis. Main lines were equipped with transmission systems R-3600, K-l920,
KPIOZO, BK-960, and the intraoblast networks were equipped with system X-300, [-60-
P which replaced KV-Za, KV-lz, V-12-2, and HB-B systems.

A large volume of work was done on the equipping telephone channels with semiautoma-
tic and automatic equipment; the level of automation reached 921. On the whole, this
made it possible to automate tandem operation by 96%, and to handle outgoing calls,
whose number increased by 651, without increasing the number of operators.

16
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(I§LY
I‘MICMNNCJAL.USEGDNLV

The number of intercity coin telephones (HTA) increased by 40% during the five-year
plan, which provided additional convenience for the population and guests of the
republic's capital, the heroic city of Minsk, and other cities and produced a defi-
nite economic effect. The 260 HTA of Minsk (including automated intercity public
call stations operating twenty-four hours a day) are attended by 23 people. These
MBA handle about 17,500 outgoing calls a day. The handling of such a number of
calls through operators via Minsk HTS [intercity telephone exchange] would require
a staff of about 300 telephone operators.

Telegraph communications were also developed. The capacity of the network of sub-
scribers' telegraph exchanges increased by more than 401 during the five-year plan;
the first section of the data transmission network which was completed covers all
rayon communication centers. Telegraph networks were equipped with DUHKA, "Inter-
val", KANT, and TART equipment and with automatic switching crossbar exchanges AT-
Ps-PD, ATK-PD, and ATK-ZO U.

The republic searched for ways of improving the organisation of telegram deliveries
and lowering the costs of the delivery service. The experience of the Minsk post
office in creating a reference telephone card file deserves attention. It makes it
possible to transmit telegraph messages to the addressee by phone (including business
phones).

In the republic, telephones were installed in about 75% of the apartments of the
heads of rural communication departments (06), which made it possible in 1980 to da-
liver to rural residents and receive from them about 60.000 telegrams in the even-
ings after the business hours of OS and during holidays.

The city and rural telephone communications were developing at an accelerated pace.
For example, the capacity of GTS [cit telephone networks] increased 1.67-fold and
that of STS [rural telephone networks increased l.S7-fold. Work was done on speed-
ing up the operation of installed capacities. Their utilisation factor as of 1 Jan
1981 was 94% for GTS and 80% for STS.

The introduction of centralized repair services at the GT3 of Minsk and other oblsst
centers made it possible to perform up to 96.71 of repairs within the established
time limits, to increase labor productivity and create additional convenience for
the population by concentrating transportation facilities and human resources. The
number of coin telephones at GT8 increased by almost 301; the republic occupies the
fourth place in the country with respect to their number per capita.

The automated rural telephone network is based only on crossbar exchanges. At more
than 900 kolkhores and sovkhores, telephone intercommunication facilities (VPTS)
were reconstructed. At one half of these farms, these jobs were combined with the
organization of the dispatcher's telephone communication service, and the volume of
capital investments used just for these purposes was on the order of 30.5 million
rubles. The dispatcher's communication service organised between rayon centers and
kolkhoses in 33 rayons of the republic proved to be highly effective for the national
economy.

17
FOI‘OIFKJAI.USB(NVLY
The rural communication network uses many thousands of kilometers of KSPP-type cables
with which a considerable number of connecting lines were organized with the aid of
analog and digital channel-forming equipment during the years of the Tenth Five-Year
Plan. However, under the conditions existing in Belorussia, it would be wrong to
disregard the possibility of increasing the number of connecting lines by suspending
additional aerial cables with their subsequent multiplexing.

The television network of Belorussia is based on the transmitting television stations
of the metric-wave band of the types "Len“, "Uragan", "Yakor'", and "Zena". During
the past five-year plan, three powerful relay stations were built, which made it pos-
sible to improve the reception of the first television program for 901 of the repub-

lic's populatiOn, of the second (republic) program -- for 702 and of the third pro-
gram -- for 161.

The wire-broadcasting rediffusion network has 3.6 million loudspeakers. More than
700,000 loudspeakers were installed during the five-year plan, and their density in-
creased to 37.6 per one hundred people, including 30.2 paid loudspeakers.

In order to provide better postal services to the population, more than 250 new post
offices were opened; 1500 out of 6400 post offices meet the requirements of "enter-
prises of high standards". Twenty-eight new buildings of rayon post offices were
built, six central enterprises, 210 shops and sections were fully mechanized, and
#50 primary electronic machines were introduced for mechanizing postal money-handling
operations. Rural mailmen deliver more than three million pieces of mail a year to
homes of the population, which contributes to the raising of the effectiveness of
the utilization of rural labor resources.

The introduction of a complex of organizational and technical measures made it pos-
sibLe to increase labor productivity of the communications workers in the republic

by 241, save 5.7 million rubles against the goal of 6.5 million rubles and to relieve
more than 5500 employees.

The steps of the economic growth in the Eleventh Five-Year Plan are steep, and we
must take bigger strides than in the last five-year plan. In 1981 and during the
five-year plan as a whole, communications workers of Belorussia are faced with ex-
tensive tasks of technical improvement of networks, raising the effectiveness of the
utilization of the fixed capital, and improvement of the operation of all types of
communication.

It is planned to increase considerably the length of intercity telephone channels,
to build new ANTS [automatic long-distance telephone exchangesJin Brest (in 1981),
Minsk, Comel', Hogilev, to expand the ANTS macrodno and to complete the automation
of the zonal communications in the republic.

The number of outgoing long-distance calls must be increased l.6-fold with a stable

number of employecs; the number of automated channels will increase more than 2.3-
fold.

The telegraph network will be developed further. New AT-PS-PD stations will be built
in Hogilev and Brest, the subscribers' telegraph network will increase by almost 25%,
and the completion of the construction of a low-speed data transmission network will

18
FOB OFFICJAI.USE(NVLY
FINI(NNWCJAI.USE<0N1N

make it possible to cover the entire agricultural and industrial complex of the re-
public. Provisions are made for considerable capital investments for equipping this
subbranch with new electronic devices.

As the number of families having home phones increases, the method of transmitting
telegrams by phone will be introduced more and more actively. In 1983, it is planned
to complete the installation of telephones in the apartments of heads of rural com-
munication departments, which make it possible to create favorable conditions every-
where for delivering telegrams to rural residents after the business hours of OS and

on holidays.

The capacity of urban and rural telephone networks will increase 1.3-fold; in 1984,

there will be more than one million telephOnes. VPTS in more than 620 kolkhozes and

sovkhozes will be expanded in combination with the organisation of dispatchers' com-
munication at the rayon center -- kolkhos level. The number of connecting lines in

rural telephone networks will increase by 351.

In the Eleventh Pive-Year Plan, as a result of the introduction of progressive tech-
nology, mechanization and automation of production processes, scientific organization
of labor, reconstruction and reequipment of enterprises, labor productivity in the
industry will increase by 18.8-191, and not less than 81% of the increment of the
production volume will be accomplished due to the growth of labor productivity. 0n
the whole, it is planned to achieve conditional release of 11,700 people of the pro-
duction staff. Re are continuing to search for methods of saving and effective use
of material resources, energy, and fuel.

The experiment on wiring of all city ATS [automatic telephone exchanges] by the me-
thod of "free spread of station cables" yielded a saving of over 20% and will be the
main method in the Eleventh Five-Year Plan.

In 1981, it is planned to complete the reconstruction of the Vitebsk Radio Television
Station, to reconstruct the Grodno station in 1982, and build two new television sta-
tions during the five-year plan. As a result of these measures, it is envisaged to
cover 97% of the republic's territory by one television program, up to 851 -- by two
programs, and up to 352 by three programs.

The annual program of the "Belsvyss'stroy" Trust, which they are fulfilling by their
own efforts, will be ata level of 25-27 million rubles, and that of the "Belremstroy-
svyaz'" will increase by 602, reaching lk-lS million rubles. It is planned to
strengthen substantially the material base of the construction industry. In order
to satisfy the needs in special furniture for public buildings, a furniture shop was
built with a design output capacity of 650,000 ruble-worth of products. An automated
mortar plant with a capacity of 30,000 cubic meters of mortar is in operation, and
its second section is under construction. The reinforced-concrete shop with a cape-
city of 25,000 cubic meters will make it possible in 1984 to produce about 05,000
reinforced-concrete supports and satisfy the needs in hollow decking and high-qual-
ity reinforced-concrete products. The production base of the "Belsvyas'stroy" Trust
will be expanded, which will make it possible to produce more than one hundred kinds
of nonstandard parts and articles.

19
IKIICINNCIAI.USE(N‘LY
Measures are being taken for a more effective utilization of the capital investments
allotted for the Eleventh Five-Year Plan; however, in order to solve all problems of
the five-year plan in the development and strengthening of the material and technical
bese of the cmmmunication network of the republic, it will be necessary to use also
some above~plan credits of the Gosbank and Stroybank of the USSR.

The equipping of the communication network with new equipment, raising of the level
of operation of the technical base, increasing labor productivity, expanding social-
ist competitions at communication enterprises, and spreading advanced experience
will make it possible to impr0ve the services of all types of communication to the
population and national economy of the republic in Eleventh Five-Year Plan and to
realize the main directions of the economic and social development of Belorussis
established by the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "RADIO I SVYAZ'", "ELEKTROSVYAZ'", 1981

10233
080: 5500/1005

20
F08‘0FFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

RURAL WIRE BROADCASTIK: DISCUSSED

Moscow ELBKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 9, Sep 81 p 47

[Report on the meeting of the Scientific and Technical Council of the USSR Ministry
of Consnunications]

[Text] In December 1980, a meeting was held at the Scientific and Technical Council
of the USSR Ministry of Comnications on the subject: "Problems of Delivering Pro-
grams and Automation of Hire Broadcasting Facilities in Rural Areas."

The discussion of this problem was brought about by the necessity of improving the
quality indexes of the wire broadcasting networks and increasing the hours of daily

operation of rediffusion stations.

Research, design, and planning organisations and operating enterprises of the USSR
Ministry of Conunications have done work on the improvement of the technical and
economic indexes of wire broadcasting in rural areas by automating the equipment of
radio wire broadcasting centers (RTD'). Modern equipment has been developed for auto-
matic control systems of RTU located in the zone of confident reception of ultra-
short-wave frequency-modulated radio stations: remote control units (m0) installed
on ultrashort-wave transmitters; a device for autouting tube amplifiers with a power
of 1 kW ("Duet-2"); low-power radio wire broadcasting centers TOW-0.25X2. TOW-05
x2 and THIN-0.1; equipment for transmitting broadcasting program over the rural tele-
phone comunication networks (AVSP), and station-wide automation system (08A); a unit
for transmitting broadcasting programs in systems with IR! [pulse-code modulation].

As a result of systematic introduction of new equipment, about 6000 rediffusion sta-
tions were changed to distant control and were fully automated in the last 10 years.
Due to this, the quality indexes of rural wire broadcasting improved, the length of
daily broadcasting increased, and the number of the attending personnel was reduced.

The Scientific and Technical Council resolved: that the projects directed toward in-
tegration of rural stations and external plants of wire broadcasting and telephone
covmnunications, as well as measures for centralising maintenance of rural wire broad-
casting and telephone cosqunication facilities are promising; to transmit rayon
broadcasting programs to rural radio wire broadcasting centers located in the sones
of confident reception of ultrashort-wave frequency-modulated broadcasting stations
through standard audio frequency channels; to conclude the development of proposals
for reducing external plants of wire broadcasting in rural areas; to define specifi-

cations for main design projects necessary for ensuring the integration of equipment

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and centralization of maintenance of wire broadcasting facilities and telephone com-
munications in rural areas; to give priority to the development of proposals for the
operation of automated RTU and for devices for switching standard audio frequency
channels for circular messages from rayon centers to automated RTU located in the
ione of confident reception of ultrashort-uave frequency-modulated radio stations;
to develop proposals for improving the program transmission method and ensuring the
automation of RTU in sparsely populated regions located outside the zone of con-
fident reception of ultrashort-vave radio stations; to develop standards for terms
and their definitions in application to the systems, structures and devices of radio
wire broadcasting centers; to develop standard designs for stations of rural radio
wire broadcasting centers with consideration for the installation of new automatic
equipment.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "RADIO I SVYAZ'", "ELBKTROSVYAZ'", 1981

10233
CSO: 5500/1005

22
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ONI.Y

USSR

HAYS OP DBVEIDPIK} RURAL TBIEFHONE CWCATION. WIRE BBOANASTINO

Moscow BLBKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 9, Sep 81, pp 61-62
[Article by G. Honina, from the materials of an industrial and technical seminar]

[Text] In March 1981, an industrial and technical seminar was held in Chelyabinsk
on the subject "Ways of Increasing the Effectiveness and Quality of Rural Telephone
Communication and wire Broadcasting". It was organized by the Main Administration
of Rural Telephone Communication and Main Radio Administration of the RSPSR Ministry
of Communicathnl,0ral Center of Scientific and Technical Propaganda of the RSPSR
Society "Znaniye",Chelyabinskaya Oblast Production and Technical Administration of
Communication and Chelyabinekaya Oblast Administration board of NTORBS [Scientific
and Technical Society of Radio Engineering, Electronics and Communication] imeni A.
S. Popov. About 200 specialists, members of the PTUS [Industrial and Technical Com-
munication Administration] of the republic and representatives of scientific research
and educational institutes participating in the seminar.

A considerable role in the achievements of communication workers in the Tenth Five-
Year Plan belongs to the communication workers of the Russian Federation, who did
much for the implementation of the program for improving the effectiveness and qual-
ity of production mapped out by the 25th CPSU Congress.

Having opened the seminar, G. s. Voloboy, director of COSTS [Main Administration of
Rural Telephone Communications] of the RSPSR Ministry of Communications, summarised
the results of the fulfillment of the tasks of the five-year plan in the republic. Pro-
gress has been made in its facilities of electrical and postal communications, tele-
vision, broadcasting, and Soyuspechat' [Main Adminstration for the Distribution of
Publications]. For example, the length of telephone channels on the oblast communi-
cation lines of the Russian Federation increased during the Tenth Pive-Year Plan by
a factor of 1.6 against 1.3 of the plan. The capacity of city and rural telephone
stations in the republic increased almost by three million numbers. The task of in-
creasing the number of receiving points of newpaper pages by the phototelegtaphic ma-
thod was fulfilled ahead of schedule, in 1979. The five-year plan of the introduc-
tion of powerful television stations was fulfilled one year ahead of schedule.

The five-year plan for increasing the capacities of telephone stations in rural areas
was overfulfilled by 6.61. The task of the construction of telephone facilities in
rural areas of the Nonchernozem Zone was fulfilled in 6 years and 9 months.

The task for the construction of telephone intercmmmnucation facilities (VPTS) in
kolkhoass and sovhoses was overfulfilled.

23
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
telephone cocanunicstion (STS) facilities on the basis of new progressive methods
(see "ELEKTROSVYAZ'", 1979, No 9). As a result: of this conference, "Basic Principles
of Centralized Operation of Rural Telephone Communication Facilities" was prepared
for publicati-on. The development of a complex of equipment for technical control of
STS facilities, the introduction of new equipment and improvement of the existing

of rural telephone network. During the years of the last five-year plan, experinen-
tal operation of an "Istok"-type ATS [automatic telephone exchange] was completed
and the introduction of the following equipment was started: IKH-SVCh [pulse-code
modulated-microwave] radio relay equipment of the "Radan" and "Oktaedr" types, trans-
mission systems for cable lines 1101-15 and "Zone" and for aerial networks -- VO-12-
Ye2. Experimental operation of cables KSPPZTs with signal conductors and TSPZPB
5X2X0.9 with aluminum-copper conductors was conducted. In 1981, the republic's net-
works received the first few hundreds of kilometers of this cable.

The reliability of STS networks depends greatly on the condition of external plants,
on their timely overhaul and maintenance. Unfortunately, not everything is satis-
factory in this area: not all PTUS of the republic fulfilled the plan for line re-
pairs. There is insufficient control on the part of BTUS (RUS) [operational and
technical conmunication centers (rayon communication centers)] over the correctness

these problems require serious attention of the specialists in rural telephone con-
municat ions .

In 1981-1985, it is planned to build rural tele hone networks for general use cover-
ing rayon centers located in villages and VHS {telephone intercomunication] net-
works in sovkhozes and kolkhozes with a total capacity of about 800,000 numbers, in-
cluding about 300,000 numbers in the Nonchernosem Zone of the RSPSR. It is planned

to put into operation ATS for general use in rural areas, including quasi-electron-

Tenth Pive~Year Plan for the development and inorovement of wire broadcasting (W)
in the Russian Federation have been completed successfully. The plan for increasing
the number of wire-broadcast loudspeakers was overfulfilled. They were installed
in 1670 settlements. Multiprogram wire broadcasting was developed further and can
be enjoyed by the population of more than 31.0 cities and city-type settlements of

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR!0FFKJAI.USE10N1Y

the republic. More than 3000 rural radio wire broadcasting centers (RTU) were auto-
mated and changed to remote control, which made it possible to relieve about 3500

units of attending personnel. Great successes were achieved in the complex solution
of problems of automating rural radio centers by the radio specialists of Tul'skaya,

Gor'kovskaya and Kuybyshevskaya oblasts.

However, there are some shortcomings in the organization of the operation of wire
broadcasting facilities. The problems of automating rural rediffusion stations are
not solved in an integrated manner everywhere, which lowers the effect of the imple-
mented measures. There are no clear recommendations for the optimization of the for-
mation of centers of wire broadcasting networks in the rayons for the purpose of re-
ducing the length of the lines. There are long interruptions in the operation of
wire broadcasting loudspeakers due to the demolition of PV lines during the recon-
struction of electric power networks and other construction jobs. Subscribers' loud-
speakers are not produced by the industry in sufficient quantities.

In the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, wire broadcasting. including multiprogram broadcast-
ing, will be developed further. It is planned to change all rural radio centers to
remote control and complete automation. Long-range plans will be developed for pro-
viding radio broadcasting services to the rayons with consideration for the optimisa-
tion of the formation of centers in the networks, reducing the length of wire broad-
casting lines, and organisation of the delivery of programs of rayon broadcasting to
the radio centers of the rayon. A wide dissemination of production experience will
make it possible to increase the effectiveness and quality of operation of Pv facili-

ties.

The problems touched upon in the main reports were developed further by the partici-
pants of the seminar. The following problems were discussed: improvement of the ef-

fectiveness and quality of STS and PV operation in application to the conditions of
various oblasts of the RSFSR; special characteristics of the sets of equipment of
the system of centralized technical control of STS networks and the introduction of

control systems; ways of introducing a complex quality control system for STS oper-
ations; experience in the operation of transmission systems with pulse-code modula-

tion for rural telephone networks; modern methods of cabling local telephone net-

works; problems of the organization of rayon broadcasting at automated rural radio
centers controlled through an ultrashort-wave channels; possibilities of reducing

the volume of external plants for wire broadcasting in rural areas. '

There was a helpful exchange of opinions among the specialists in rural telephone
communications and wire broadcasting, and recommendations were developed for solving
urgent problems, such as the improvement of the quality of STS and PV and the growth
of labor productivity of each enterprise.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "RADIO I SVYAZ'", "ELEKTROSVYAZ'", 1981

10233
CSO: 5500/1005

25
roe omcm. use ONLY
AUTOMATIC TElEPﬂONE EXCHANGE ‘KVANT' FOR AGENCIES, INDUSTRY DISCUSSED
Moscow ELEKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 62-63

Article by C. Hatlin: "Scientific and Technical Seminar on the Administrative and
ndustrial Automatic Telephone Exchange 'Kvant' of a Quasi-Electronic System"]

[Text] The section of industrial communications of the Central Administration Board
of NTORES [Scientific and Technical Society of Radio Engineering, Electronics and
Communications] imeni A. S. Popov held a scientific and technical seminar in Riga in
April 1981 on the "Kvant"-type automatic telephone exchange of a quasi-electronic
System developed and produced by the Riga Order of Lenin Production Association VET

[Electrical Engineering Plant] imeni V. I. Lenin to be used in agencies and industry
in various sectors of the national economy.

The seminar was attended by more than 150 specialists representing 14 union and re-
public ministries, 35 largest industrial enterprises (Hagnitogorsk and Noril'ak me-
tallurgical combines, Automobile Plant imeni Likhachev, and others), 30 research,
design, and educational institutes, and other organisations. Opening addresses were
given by P. 0. Vidoniks, deputy general director of the VB? Association, and V. N.
Roginskiy, member of the board of RTORES imeni A. S. Popov.

Specialists of the design bureau of the VB? Association reported on the special char-
acteristics of the RE ATS [quasi-electronic automatic telephone exchange] "Kvant"
for agencies and industrial enterprises, the composition of its equipment, its pro-
grams, organisation of additional services, procedures of its designing, installa-
tion, and its start-up and adjustment work.

The participants of the seminar familiarised themselves with the state of series
production of the "Kvant" equipment. It was mentioned that its development and in-
troduction signify a new qualitative stage in the development of the techniques of
industrial communications which opens up fundamentally new possibilities in the ap-
plication and operation of telephone exchanges at industrial enterprises. in trans-
portation, and in construction. KE ATS "Kvant" is based on modern elements and con-
trols the process of establishing a connection with the aid of specialised computers
on the basis of appropriate programs; its users are provided with a set of addition-
al services most of which are accomplished by means of programs; the complex of pro-

grams makes it possible to determine failures without the participation of operating
personnel.

26
FORIOFFNJAI.USEioNLY
FOR‘0F11CIAI.USE1MVLY

At the same time, it was established that the introduction of "Kvant" at industrial
enterprises causes some definite difficulties some of which must be eliminated by
modifying its design, and others by implementing organizational measures. "Kvant"
exchanges require the presence of storage batteries i.e., a buffer mode of elec-
tric power supply, because the executive program and the stored information are lost
if the power supply stops even for a short time. The restoration of the executive
program requires some time in the course of which the exchange cannot operate. The
existing programs of the exchange do not provide for the automation of the process
of clearing the memory devices of erroneous, excessive, and other unnecessary infor-
mation which accumulates constantly in the process of establishing the connections.
Among other things, this necessitates the presence of operators, which lowers sharp-
ly the economic indexes of the exchange.

The high initial cost of the equipment and the previOusly unforeseen expensesonsnin-
taining operators lower the economic indexes of the exchange and complicate the pro-
cess of its introduction. The situation is particularly grave for the customers who
were counting on the installation of a low-capacity ATS (64, 128, 256 numbers).

Most likely, the delivery of an ATS of a new generation, to which "Kvant" belongs,
cannot be approached from the same position as the delivery of This-69 [universal
automatic telephone exchange-49]or ATSK-lOO/ZOOO [crossbar automatic telephone ex-
change-lOO/ZOOO]. The exchange cannot operate without a complete set of equipment
including a special device for information input (output) to specialised.computers.
Therefore. many specialists rightfully insisted that KB ATS "Kvant" should be deliv-
ered with a complete set of its entire equipment regardless of the manufacturers of
its individual types, and this was reflected in the recommendations passed at the
seminar.

It was also noted that no optimal solution has been yet achieved on the problems of
the organisation of centralized operation of the exchange in the case of its mass
introduction, there is no sufficient information on the designing, installation and
operation of the "Kvant", and there are no necessary materials for the buyers of the
exchange.

The seminar recommended, among other things, to introduce a course on quasi-electron-

ic automatic telephone exchanges in electrical engineering institutes and communica-
tions tekhnikums.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "RADIO I SVYAZ'", "ELEKIROSVYAZ'", 1981

10,233
C50: 5500/1005 END

27
FOR 0FI1CLA1.USE(NNLY