FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10488

3 May 1982

Translation

HANDBOOK ON MARINE RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
AND RADIONAVIGATION EQUIPMENT. VOL. 2.

RADIONAVIGATION EQUIPMENT

By

A.M. Bayrashevskiy et. al.

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

mas publications contain informtion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and mterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or (following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 0P
MTBRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HANDBOOK 0N MARINE RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
AND RADIONAVIGATION EQUIPMENT. VOL. 2.

RADIONAVIGATION EQUIPMENT

Leningrad SPRAVOCHNIK PO SUDOVGIU OBORUDOVANIYU RADIOSVYAZI I RADIO-
NAVIGATSII 2. OBORUDOVANm RADIONAVIGATSII in Russian 1979 (signed
to press 13 Nov 79) pp 2-229

[Book by Aleksandr nustafovich Bayrashevskiy, Yuriy Yeliseyevich
Gornostayev, Aleksandr-Vasil'yevich Zherlakov, Aleksandr Anatol'yevich
Il'in, Oleg Vasil'yevich Kononov and Nikolay Timofeyevich Nichiporenko.
edited by Doctor of Technical Sciences, Professor A.V. Zherlakov;
reviewers: engineers N.P. Malyshev and v.1. Shchepotin, Izdatel'stvo
"Sudostroyeniye', 1979, 231 pages, 12, 000 copies]

Foreword...... ....... ........................

oooooooosooosoosaooooooavooooo-e 1

Part (he: Marine Radionavigadon 8ystsm................ ...... .............. 3
Chapter 1. Goniometric lurine Mdionavigation System....................... 7
1.1. Marine Radio Direction Finders and ‘meir massification............ 7
1.2. The "Rybka" lhrine Aural Indicating Radio Direction Pinder......... 8

1.3. me "Barkas" Portable Marine Aurally Indicating Radio
Direction Finder ..... .............................................. 15

1.4. The "Rush" M1 Channel Marine Visml hdio Direction Finder....... 20

1.5. Pequiremnts Placed on the Insna11ation, Aligunent and

Operation of brine Radio Direction Finders .......... ..... . 35
Chapter 2. Phase Radionavigation System........................... ......... 39
2.1. 'nne Classification and Specific Features of Marine Phase
Radionavigation Systems ...... ............... ....... .......... ...... 39
2.2. 'Ihe "Pits-10" Marine Indicating Receiver ......... .................. 47
-'a- [I-USS—R- FPOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPPILIAL UDI‘. UNLI

2.3. Ihe "Pirs-IM" Marine Indicating Receiver.........................

2.4. Requirements Placed on the Installatim, Alignment and
Operation of Indicating Receivers lhder brine Conditions....

Chapter 3. Pulse and Pulse-Phase Radionaviation Systems..................

3.1. me Classification and Specific Features of urine Pulse
and Pulse-Phase Radionavigation Systems..........................

3.2. me KPI-SF Indicating Receiver.......................... .....

3.3. Recommendations for the Installation of the Indicating
Receiver ona Ship...............................................

3.4. Main Operating Rules for the KPI-SP Indicating Receiver..........
Part No: Marine Navigation Radars........................................
Chapter 4. Marine Pulsed Navigation Radars.

4.1. The Specific Features of Pulsed Radars and Their Technical
and Operational (haracteristics..................................

4.2. ‘Ihe "Iotaiya" Purine Navigation Radar............................
4.3. The "Mius" Marine Navigation Radar...............................
4.4. ‘Ihe "Nayada" Series of Purine Navigation Radars..................

4.5. Requirements Placed on the Installation, ‘I'ming and
Operation of Marine Navigation Radars

Chapter 5. Automated Marine Navigation Radars........................ .....
5.1. he "mean" Marine Navigation Radar
5.2. 'me "Okean-M" Marine Navigation Radar

5.3. Specific Features of Marine Radionavigation and Radar

Complexes........................................................
Chapter 6. Doppler Navigation Radars......................................
6.1. Specific Features of Doppler Navigation Radar Operation..........

6.2. The "Istra" Radar for Measuring the Ibcking Speed of Ships.......

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

62

71

75

75

81

98
99
110

112

112
122
138
157

184
202
202

234

280
286
286
289
Chapter 7. Marine Infrared and Television Equipment........................ 295

7.1. The "Hgla" Infrared Night Vision Bquipnent........................ 295
7.2. “the "Goriaont" brine ‘Delevision Installation..................... 299

Bibliography................................................................ 305

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Text] Basic information on modern radionavigstion and radar equipment for maritime
vessels is contained in this second volume of the handbook; the classification and
characteristics are given for the instruments, as well as the complement and compo-
sition of the equipment and functional schematics of the units. The major require-

ments for the installation and operation of equipment under shipboard conditions
are set forth.

The handbook is intended for a wide circle of engineering and technical workers in
design and planning organizations, as well as cpecialists engaged in the operation

of the equipment on seagoing and river fleet vessels and those of the Ministry of
the Fishing Industry.

The handbook can also be useful to students in the higher educational institutes
and technical schools, and students taking courses in marine training institutions
for their course and diploma design work.

Foreword

Because of the rise in the tonnage and the increase in the speeds, sizes and inertia
of modern vessels, the requirements place on marine navigation have increased sub-
stantially. The radionavigation instruments used on the ships of the merchant mar-
ine and fishing industry fleets are becoming extremely important, where these ins-
truments make it possible to reduce the number of accidents which incur large mater-
ial losses, and in some cases, create a real threat to safeguarding the environment.

Volume 2 of the handbook on marine equipmentforradio communications and radio
navigation is devoted to modern domestic radio navigation instruments used on

_ 1 -

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE(MVLY
ships of the merchant marine and fishing industry fleets. Functional and structural
configurations are treated here, as well as the operational and technical character-
istics and rules for technical operation of radio navigation instruments.

The shipboard oral indicating "Rybka" and "Barkas" radio direction finder as well
as the visual dual channel "Rumb" radio direction finder are treated in Chapter 1.

Chapter 2 contains a description of the marine "Firs-lb" and "Firs-1H" display

receivers which are used to determine the location of a vessel by means of signals
transmitted by the shore stations of the "Decca" phase radio navigation system.

The marine KPI-SP display receiver used to determine the location of a ship based
on signals from shore stations using the "Loran C" pulse-phase radio navigation
system is treated in Chapter 3.

Descriptions of the marine "Lotsis", "Mina" and "Nayada" navigation radars and the
"Okian" and "Okian-H" automated navigation radars are given in Chapters 4 and 5.

Specific features of the operation of “Istra” doppler navigation radars for
measuring the berthing speed are treated in Chapter 6.

Chapter 7 is devoted to the marine "Hgla" infrared night vision scope and the
"Corizont" television system.

Each chapter of the handbook concludes with recommendations for the insulation,
mounting and operation in a ship of the radio navigation instrument being discussed.

The development of ship navigation hardware in the last decade is characterised
by the widescale introduction of digital computer equipment and the use of new
principals for putting together complete sets of equipment which increase the
operational capabilities of the instruments. The realization of digital proces-
sing circuitry for radio navigation data makes it possible to employ optimal pro-
cessing techniques and represent the navigation information in a form convenient
for the ship navigator.

Developmental work was completed and trial operation was started with the

"Yenisey" radar set at the moment work was finished on this handbook. The develop-
ment of situation displays using the "Brit-Ye" and "Kron" computers is drawing to
a close; the production of these computers will start in 1981. Developmental work
is underway at the present time on a more sophisticated "Biryus" navigation set.

Unfortunately, not all of these navigation sets have been included in this edition
of the handbook. However, the authors have taken into account the trends noted in

the development of ship navigation hardware and have attempted to give a more
detailed treatment of those questions which will assist the reader in overcoming
difficulties in studying radar-computer systems not included in this handbook.

The work was done by a collective of authors. Chapter 1 was written by O.V.
Kononov, Chpater 2 by A.V. Zherlakov, Chpater 3 by Yu.Ye. Gornostayev, Chapters

4 and 6 by A.H. Bayrashevskiy, Chapters 5 and 7 by N.T. Nichiporenko and Sh.2
by A.A. Il'in.

Send all comments to Izdstel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", Ulitsa Gogolya 8, Leningrad
191065.

- 2 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Harine radionavigation systems (HRS) are shipboard measurement equipment which
serves to receive, process and display navigation information contained in electro-
magnetic field signals received either from radiation sources external to the ship
or produced by shipboard radiation sources and reflected from external objects.

Radio navigation systems are used for the navigation of maritime transport and
fishing industry ships, where these systems operate in the radio frequency bands

shown in Figure 3.1 (the boundaries of the frequency bands can be changed on the
basis of international agreements).

The major tasks of navigation are solved by means of radionavigation systems: ship
navigation from one region to another by the shortest, safest and most economically
advantageous route. Of great importance in this case are problems of determining
ship position-at sea and the safe divergence from oncoming vessels. Radionaviga-
tion systems are also used when sailing in confined uster (channels, narrow places,
etc.), when docking large tonnage ships in ports, during oceanological, hydro-
graphical and geodesic research at sea, uhenpilotingships through channels, sail-
ing in ice, etc.

Radionavigation systems are recommended for maritime transport vessels, where
these systems assure the determination of position with an accurracy, the values
of which are given below:

Precision in Determining

Navigation Region Ship Position
Confined water 0.1-0.5 cable lengths
Coastal waters 0.1-0.25 miles'

Open sea 1.0-2.0 miles

 

deionavigation systems are classified according to several criteria. Depending
on the service region and the operating range (0) they are subdivided as follows:

a) Close range navigation systems (D g 100 miles), coastal sailing, piloting a
ship, docking, etc .

b) Intermediate operational radius systems (D :_400 miles);
c) Long range navigation systems (0 . 1,500 to 2,500 miles);

d) Global systems (ranges encompassing all ship navigation regions of the world).

- 3 -
FOR,0FFKJA1.USE13NLY
m -o- no ee»...~ we» ve‘ue

Marine radionavigation systems, in being radio instrumentation equipment, are
intended for determining the following mJor navigation pamters:

a) Directions (bearings, course angles, etc.);

b) Distances;

c) A linear combination of distances (difference or sum);
d) Speed;

e) Precise time.

The subsequent processing of these parameters determines the line of position of
a ship at sea or its orientation relative to other ships or objects on shore.

A classification of marine radionavigation systems is given in TableB. las a func-
tion of the primary measurement and processing of the radio signals which contain
information on the navigation parameters indicated above.

The navigation parameters measured by marine radionavigation systems are incorpor-
ated in radio signals which are mathematically described by the following expres—
sions [l]:

e-V(r.o,s)£,,(l—%)sln[.,(l_%)-“]. (3.1)

where e is the electromagnetic field intensity at the installation point of the
shipboard antenna;

H(r,a,t) is the attenuation function for the intensity e due to the travel of
signals over the path;

r is the distance between the shore station and the ship;

0.: is the effective conductivity and dielectric permittivity along the
path respectively;

v is the radio wave propagation velocity;
EE is the amplitude value of the field intensity;

we, *0 are the frequency and phase of the radio signals respectively.

-4-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Radionavi ation
" KHz ' M S stems 8

m - —u?‘_——: ~m' "omega"

5“

 

§= “at. W.M‘ (3)

— 70
m— _””,:g " "Loren C"
LP V' ..._ m 1x _ 4““ "Decca" ' (1)
— m
m mmmgm' .
Ian-_“E-

Th ‘5 a....u53-(5)
. v. — .M -4" ' "
NF 9 ___ T} " 'l.oran A .
" NH:
HF ‘ nr
/
.1 "Transit"
m ”(I ,._ ”3.12.“ WIMNJW'7 Navigation
1 "I Satellite
2 J m gnaw u- u ”cu-um) 10 ca Radar
a gigs-gen) 3.2 cm Radar
transponder
J0 m; A— 1m [x-sun)
8 an Radar beacons
m ff“ 6“!

Figure 31. Band of frequencies used for radiona‘vigation systems.

Key: 1. Directional radio beacons;
2. Omnidirectional radio beacons;
3. Corrections for the "Omega" differential radio
navigation system;
4. Radio buoys;
5. Radio beacons for takin bearings.

Radionavigation systems are broken down into pulsed (the signals are transmitted
at intervals separated in time, as pulses) and CH radionavisgtion systems,
according to the nature of the transmitted and received signals (8.1).

- 5 .-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Name of the Shipboard Equipment

The "Rybka" and "Rub" (visual
dual channel) radio direction
finders; the "Okean-H",
'Taotsiya", "Don", "Hius", etc.
radars.

The "Omega" (range finding mode)
radionsvigation system display
receivers, radars (see above) and
"Al'fa", "Yenisey" and "Brit"
collision warning systems

"Pirs-lﬂ", Firs-lb", KPI-lo,
KPI-SF, "Omega" radionavigation
display receivers and display
receivers of satellite navigation
systems.

Navigation satellite display
receivers (differential method),
"lstra" rad'ar (docking) and other
radars (see above).

"Omega", "Loran-c" and naviga-
tion satellite radionavigation
system display receivers (in the
precise time measurement mode).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER l GONIOHETRIC MARINE RADIONAVIGATION SYSTEMS
1.1. Harine Radio Direction Finders and Their Classification

Radio direction finder is the term for a radio receiving device which makes it
possible to determine the direction of arrival of radio waves. The angle
between the center line of a ship and the direction to a radio beacon, called
the relative radio bearing (RKU), and the angle between true north and the
direction to a radio beacon, called the observed radio bearing (RP) are deter-
mined using a radio direction finder.

Because of the simplicity of the device, the high reliability and the compara-
tively low cost, radio direction finders find wide applications in vessels of
the maritime and fishing fleets.

Radio direction finders make it possible to solve the following navigational
problems:

a) Determine the radio hearings to radio navigation beacons, omnidirectional
radio stations and commercial fishing sonobuoys;

b) Pilot a ship using equal signal zones produced by directional radio beacons; I
c) Take 0? readings on ships transmitting distress signals.

Radio direction finders must be installed on all ships in accordance with inter-
national regulations to assure seafaring safety and protect human lives at sea.

Proper operation of a radio direction finder is possible when such factors as
the following are taken into account, which degrade the accuracy of radio
direction finding:

--The subjectivity in determining the uudibility minimum of a signal;

-The necessity of carefully cancelling out the out-of-phase signal components
("an indistinct minimum");

--The influence of space radio waves at night ("the nighttime effect");
--The necessity of carefully determining and compensating for the radio deviation;

--Thc change in the position of the signal audibility minimum during maneuvering
and rocking of the vessel.

Marine radio direction finders are broken down into aural and visual types
according to the method of indicating the bearing.

In aural radio direction finders, a bearing is taken on radio beacons and radio
stations aurally based on the minimum of the signal audibility. These types of
instruments include radio direction finders with a rotating loop and gonioaetric
radio direction finders.

The further development of radio direction finding equipment has led to the
design of various types of radio direction finders with visual display of a

-7 -

lN)R!0!1ﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(NVLY
I V- V. l O‘oll‘h Hull. \ln‘l.‘

hearing, of which the following find application at the present time:

—-Automatic radio direction finders with a tracking goniometer search coil (ARE);
--Viaua1 radio direction finders with cathode ray tube displays (VRP).

In automatic radio direction finders with a tracking system, it is necessary
only to tune the receiver to the frequency of the radio beacon or radio station
for which the DF bearing is being taken, after which the bearing is determined
automatically. Radio direction finders of this type have substantial drawbacks

which limit their application in ships of the maritime fleet. These include the
following:

--The appearance of false bearing readouts in the presence of interference from
radio stations on adjacent frequencies;

--The considerable inertia of the tracking system, which leads to direction find-
ing errors when a vessel is rocking;

--The poor interference immunity, which causes arbitrary fluctuations of the
meter in the pauses between radio beacon signals.

Visual radio direction finders with CRT displays are broken down into two types:
1) Dual channel visual radio direction finders with a CRT (DVRP);

2) Radio direction finders which sketch the directional pattern on the screen of
the CRT (VRP).

At the present time, dual channel visual radio direction finders have become the
most widespread on ships of the merchant marine, where these finders have the
following distinctive features:

--The channels of the radio direction finder can be manually balanced using
signals from the radio beacon on which the bearing is being taken;

--The capability of estimating direction finding quality;
--The existence of a narrow bandwidth in the receiver (300 to 600 Hz).

Single channel radio direction finders using CRT's with the directional pattern
outlined on the screen have proven themselves quite well in operation, where
these finders are distinguished by the following:

--Simplicity in taking a radio bearing;
--Low inertia of the bearing indication;
--The capability of estimating the direction finding quality.

1.2. The "Rybka" Marine Aural Indicating Radio Direction Finder
Function and Operational and Technical Characteristics

The "Rybka" aural radio direction finder is used on ships of the commercial
fishing and merchant marine fleets, and makes it possible to do the following:

FOR 051WC]A1.USE(MNLY
--Determine radio bearings to navigation radio beacons, omnidirectional radio
stations and fishing industry sonobuoys;

--Pilot a ship using equal signal zones produced by directional radio beacons;
--Take RDF bearings on ships transmitting distress signals.

The following are included in the basic equipment set of a radio direction
finder: loop antenna. antenna mast, "inclined beam" or "whip" type omnidirec-

tional antenna, goniometric receiver, radio operator signal panel and junction
box. '

The equipment complement of a radio direction finder depends on the structural

design of the goniometric receiver unit, the diameter of the loop antenna, the

type of selsyns used to track with the gyzocompass and the voltage of the ship-
board power mains.

A type RA loop antenna is made from two mutually perpendicular shielded loops.
The RA-l.2-4 loop has four turns with a diameter of 1.2 m while the RA-0.6-6
loop has six turns with a diameter of 0.6 m. The turns of the loop winding are
housed inside shielding duraluminum tubes with a diameter of 30 mm. The upper

loop assembly is made of an insulating material. The center taps of the winding
are connected through capacitors to the chassis, something which makes it
possible to check the insulation resistance of the loop circuit with respect

to the loop housing without disconnecting the center tap of the loop winding.

The antenna mast is fabricated from duraluminum pipe with a diameter of 84/76 mm
and a height of 1.6 m. The mast has an upper flange and guys with turnbuckles
for fastening to a deck. The loop antenna is secured to the upper flange of the
mast with bolts.

The "inclined beam" type omnidirectional antenna is made from copper antenna
cable 6 to 8 m long.

The junction box is intended for connecting all of the cables to the goniometric
receiver unit. To provide for spray protection, all of the cables are brought
into the junction box through packing glands.

The goniometric receiving unit contains the receiver, the goniometric unit, the
compensating device and the power supply. -

The OP-lZOF converter converts the shipboard power mains direct current to single
phase alternating current at a voltage of 127 V at a frequency of 50 Hz.

The signaling panel is intended for signaling the position of the ship antennas.

The overall dimensions of the components of the equipment set and their weight
are given below:

FOR'0FFK]A1.USE(MVLY
I'UR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

 

Overall Dimensions, Height,
mm kg
The goniometric receiver 670 x 253 x 360 30
Loop antenna:
600 mm diameter 680 x 680 x 900 14.5
1,200 m diameter 1,280 x 1,280 x 1,592 21.5
Auxiliary antenna 6000 3
Signal panel 242 x 129 x 100 3.5
Antenna mast 1600 9
Storage battery 681 x 257 x 165 35
OP-120F inverter 314 x 178 x 234 12
Connecting cable - 16

a "Rybka" radio direction finder has the following specific features:
It provides for radio direction finding at medium and intermediate wavelengths;
It is produced in a desk top and console design;
It is made with transistors, nuvistors and micronodules;
Provides for sensing by means of a meter with a pointer.
a major operational and technical specifications of the radio direction finder
e given below:

Frequency bands which can be received:

Medium wave, KHz 255 - 535
Intermediate wavelengths, MHz 1.60 - 3.35
Signal modes which can be received Al, A2, A3

Mean arithmetic radio direction finding error, degrees,
in the following frequency bands:

255 - 535 KB: 1
106 " 3035 “HZ 3
Readout accuracy of a bearing on the scale, degrees 0.5

Sensitivity, microvolts:
In the A2 and A3 modes for a signal/noise ratio of
3:1, in the following frequency bands:
255 - 535 KB: 2
1.6 - 3.35 MHz 1
In the Alnarrow mode for a signal/noise ratio of
15:1 in the following frequency bands:
255 — 535 KB: 0.5
1.6 - 3.35 MHz 1
channel selectivity, dB:
Adjacent channel rejection for frequency offset
of i 10 KB: 50
,10 _

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB(H‘LY
Image frequency rejection 60

Intermediate frequency rejection 60
Intermediate frequency bandwidth, Hz: 5500

Hide

Narrow 300
Graduation error in the tuning scale, I 0.5
Manual gain control, dB 70
Electrical compensation for the radio deviation
coefficient D* in the 255 - 535 K32 frequency band,
degrees 1(2—20)
Length of the connecting feeders for the antenna, m:

The D-1200 loop 15

Auxiliary 7
Antenna insulation resistance, MOhm -- 10
Power consumption:

From the 127/220 VAC mains at a frequency of 50 Hz,

VA 35

From the 24, 110 or 220 volt'DC mains, watts 200

From the 26 volt emergency storage batteries, watts 30
Duration of continuous operation from the emergency
storage batteries, hours 10
Rated operating life, hours 8,060
Height of the complete radio direction finding set, kg 158

A block diagram of the "Rybka" rauio direction finder is shown in Figure 1.1.

With the action of an electromagnetic field from a transmitting radio station,
currents are induced in the loop and omnidirectional antennas of the radio
direction finder which flow through the field coils of the goniometer and pro-
duce magnetic fields in them. An antiradar filter, a PLF, is used to eliminate
interference from shipboard radars. A search coil rotates inside the field
coils, where an e.n.f. is induced in the search coil which depends on the angle
between the plane of the search coil and the resulting magnetic field of the
goniometer. The voltage is fed from the main search coil to the input resonant
circuit of the radio frequency amplifier, the UVCh, which consists of an ampli-
fication stage with a bandpass filter in the load and an aperiodic amplifier
stage.

The voltage from the RF amplifier output and from the first local oscillator,
c, is fed through a buffer aperiodic amplifier to the first ring mixer. The
first intermediate frequency (IF - 1,198 KHz) is fed to the single stage ampli-
fier for the first IF having a bandpass filter in the load, and then to a

*D is the quaternary ratio deviation coefficient.

- ll -

FOR OFIHCJA1.USEIDNLN
I'UK OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

second frequency converter consisting of a crystal controlled second local
oscillator (1,613 KHz). an aperiodic buffer amplifier and a second ring mixer.

lam

      
 

Figure 1.1. Block liagram of the "Rybka" radio direction finder.

Key: 1. Compensating unit;

2. Antiradar filter;

3. Deviation compensator;

a. Goniometer;

5. Radio frequency amplifier;
6. Intermediate frequency amplifier;
7. Lumped selectivity filter;
8. Power supply;

9. Regulator;

10. Ship power mains;

11. Audio amplifier;
12. Dynamic loudspeaker;
13. Oscillator;
14. AH detector;
15. Telephone headsets.

The second intermediate frequency of 215 KB: is fed from the output of the
second ring mixer to a three stage second IF amplifier: the first stage has a
lumped selectivity filter, a PSI; the second stage has a crystal filter (when

a narrow bandwidth is used) or has a bandpass filter (when a broad bandwidth is
used); and a third stage with a single tuned circuit in the load.

The second IF voltage is fed from the output of the third stage to the AM detector
AD.

"hen receiving nondecaying A1 signals, the voltage from a third oscillator is
additionally fed to the detector through an aperiodic buffer amplifier where

the frequency of this oscillator varies in a range of 216 to 218 KHz. The audio-
frequency output signal in this case is obtained as a result of the beat fre-
quency resulting from the second intermediate frequency and the third oscillator
frequency.

12

Ilﬂl(lﬂﬂC1A1.USE(ﬂVLY
The audiofrequency signal from the detector output is fed to a three stage
audiofrequency amplifier, the UNCh, the first two stages of which are designed
in an aperiodic circuit configuration, while the output stage uses a push-pull
transformer circuit. The amplified audiofrequency signal is fed to a dynamic
loudspeaker, DGr, and two pairs of TA-S6H type low impedance telephone sets.

The power supply DP provides for the operation of the radio direction finder
from the 127, 220 or 24 volt Ac mains, from 110, 220 or 26 volt DC mains as
well as from the emergency 26 volt storage batteries.

The voltage of the shipboard power mains is fed through the mains filter and the
SHIP POWER switch to the power transformer of the rectifier, which is designed
in a bridge configuration with parametric voltage regulation.

The +16 and -16 V voltages for powering the relays and lighting circuits are
taken directly-from the rectifier, while the regulated +10 and -10 V voltages
for powering the entire radio receiver circuit are taken from the parametric
regulator.

Controlling the "Rybka" Radio Direction Finder

The operational controls and indicating dials used by the navigator when working
directly with the radio direction finder are located on the front panel of the
goniometric receiver (Figure 1.2).

 

Figure 1.2. The front panel of the "Rybka" radio direction finder.
Key: A. Input fine tuning; P. Storage battery;

Reception pattern; G. Set minimum;
B. Tuning; H. Take bearing;
C. Off; 1. Beat frequency oscillator;
D. Power check; J. Operating mode: A ;
B. Telephone headsets; A1 wide; A2, A3; 1 narrow
_- 12a-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [co:t.]: K. Volume;
L. Gain reserve [spline key operated RF gain control].

The DP BEARING signal light serves for monitoring the position of the shipboard
antennas and comes on after they are isolated.

The SET HINIHUH control 1 is intended for rotating the sighting pointer to the
position of the minimum of the radio beacon signal audibility.

The scale for the relative radio bearings, 2 (the stationary scale), with divi-
sions of 1°, serves for reading out the relative radio bearing.

The scale for the observed radio bearings, 3 (the moving scale), with scale
divisions of 1°, serves for reading out the observed bearings.

Control 4, INPUT PINE TUNING, is intended for fine tuning the radio direction
finder to the radio beacon frequency based on the maximum loudness of the
radio beacon call signs.

Switch 5, RECEPTION PATTERN, has four fixed positions and serves to switch the
radio direction finder to the following modes: “watch duty reception". "direc-
tion finding", "sensing".

Frequency tuning scale 6 has numerical scale graduations for the nedium wave band
(outside scale) with intervals of 2 K32, and intervals of 20 KHz for the inter-
mediate frequency band (inside scale).

Meter 7 makes it possible to monitor the power supply voltage and visually
observe the minimum of the radio beacon signal audibility.

The POHER SUPPLY CHECK switch has six fixed positions and serves to turn on the
radio direction finder and check the supply voltages.

TUNING control 8 is intended for precise tuning to the radio beacon frequency
using the frequency tuning scale or based on maximum audible loudness of the
radio beacon call signs.

TUNING control 9 serves for coarse tuning to the radio beacon frequency using the
frequency tuning scale.

Bandswitch 10 has two fixed positions:

Band I (medium wave): 255--535 KHz
Band II (intermediate wavelengths): 1.6—-3.S MHz.

Telephone jacks ll serve for connecting two pairs of headsets.

The GAIN RESERVE control (spline key) is intended for changing the sensitivity of
the radio direction finder.

The VOLUME control serves for continuous control of the volume of the radio
beacon signal being received.

- 13

FIHICIHHCIA1.USE(MNLY
The OPERATING MODE switch has three positions. In the first two switch positions

("A1 narrow" and "A1 wide"), the telegraph signals of radio beacons and radio
stations operating in the Al node are received, while in the third position, the

signals of radio beacons and radio stations operating in A2 and A3 nodes are
received with a wide bandwidth.

Loudspeaker 12 serves for hearing the radio beacon signal.

The EEG control serves to obtain a desirable tone for the beat frequency in the
headsets when receiving the signals of radio beacons operating in the A1 node.

Controls which are not normally used during operation are placed under a cap on
the front panel of the gonionetric receiver, where these controls are used when
preparing the radio direction finder for operation.

The SHIP POWER switch is used for selecting the power supply voltage.

The DEVIATION COMPENSATION switch makes it possible to conpensate for the radio
_ deviation coefficient D in a range of from -2° to 20°.

The ZERO SET control serves to match the scales of the radio direction finders
to the gyrocompass repeater.

The GONIOHETER AXIS LOCK nakes it possible to stop the gonioneter rotor when
zero setting the goniometer indicator.

Technical Operation Regulations

The following are to be done during watch duty reception:
--The Power check switch is set in the "RECEIVE" position;
--Switch 5. RECEPTION PATTERN, is set in the "0" position;

--The OPERATING MODE switch is set in the "A1 wide" position when receiving the
signals of radio beacons operating in the Al node, or in position "A2A3" when
receiving the signals of radio beacons operating in the A2 or A3 nodes;

--The bandsuitch is set to the requisite position;

--The VOLUME control is set to the position in which noise is heard in the head-
sets;

-Using the coarse and fine tuning controls. one tunes to the frequency of a
radio beacon for the maximum radio beacon signal loudness;

--Using the BEAT FREQUENCY OSCILLATOR control, the desirable beat frequency tone
is obtained in the headsets;

--Maximun volume of the radio beacon signal is obtained by using control 4,
INPUT PINE TUNING.

In the case of direction finding and sensing, the following are to be done:
- l4 -

Ft”!(”ﬂﬂ(1Al.U§E(HVLY
I'UK “I'll—ML use ONLY

--Switch 5, RECEPTION PATTERN, is set to the "0" position;
--Using control 4, INPUT PINE TUNING, maximum volume is obtained;

--The pointer is set to the position of minimal radio beacon signal audibility
with control 1, SET MINIMMM:

--The RECEPTION PATTERN switch 5 is set sequentially to the positions of the
green and red cardiod patterns; if the least audibility is obtained in the
red cardiod position, then the pointer must be rotated through 180°;

--Check the correctness of the sensing determination using the indicating meter
when the POWER CHECK switch is set in the "receive" position. The green
cardiod position of RECEPTION PATTERN switch 5 should correspond to the least
deflection of the meter needle;

-Switch RECEPTION PATTERN switch 5 to the "~" position and by alternately
rotating the SET MINIMUM control and the RECEPTION PATTERN switch, obtain the
lowest minimum of the audibility (the sharpest silence angle) and the minimal
deflection of the meter needle in the "receive" position of the POWER CHECK
switch;

--Determine the bearing (or the relative radio bearing) as the average arithmetic-
al value of two readings made at the boundaries of the silence angle. For
example: the silence angle is bounded by readings of 61 and 67°; the true
reading will be (61° + 67°)l2 - 65°;

-After taking the readings, check the radio deviation correction using the
residual radio deviation curve.

1.3. The "Barkas" Portable Marine Aurally Indicating Radio Direction Pinder
Function and Composition of the Equipment Package

The "Barkas" portable radio direction finder is intended for small fishing
vessels and makes it possible to do the following:

--Determine the radio bearings to navigation radio beacons and omnidirectional
radio stations as well as fishing sonobuoys;

--Take radio bearings on ships transmitting distress signals.

The operational and technical characteristics of the radio direction finder are
given below:

Received frequency bands:

Medium wave, KB: 250 - 550
Intermediate wavelengths, MHz 1.6 - 3.35
Types of signals which can be received Al, A2, A3, AJA,
ABE
The precision in setting the tuning frequency, 1 1

Mean arithmetic radio direction finding error,
in degrees, in the following frequency bands:
250 - 550 KB: 1

- $5 -

FOIIOFINCIAI.lEﬂE(HNLY
1.6 - 3.35 MHz 7

Sensitivity for reception with an omnidirectional

antenna and a signal/noise ratio of 20 dB, in

uV/m, in the following frequency bands;
250 - 550 KB: 500
1.6 - 3.35 MHz 700

Channel selectivity in dB:
Adjacent channel reduction for a frequency

difference of ﬁlo KB: 40
Image frequency rejection 40
The intermediate frequency bandwidth in Hz 3000

Power consumption in watts 3
Continuous operational time from an 8KNG-Ts

storage battery, hours 6
Mean time between failures, hours 1500
Height of the radio direction finder, kg 7

The following are included in the delivered equipment set of the radio direction
finder: the receiver and indicator unit, type TA-S6H headsets, type SKNGTs-lD
storage batteries, a cable with a filter, a base and a charger and discharger
unit.

A block diagram of the radio direction finder is shown in Figure 1.3.

The radio direction finder consists of the antenna rotating unit, the antenna
amplifier, the radio receiver, the headsets TP and the KNGTs-lD type batteries
or "Rubin-l" drycell.

The antenna rotating unit has two antennas: a directional antenna which takes
the form of two mutually perpendicular ferrite rods with antenna coils wound
on them, and an omnidirectional antenna in the form of a shortened whip with a
capacitive load.

The antenna amplifier is designed in a resistance coupled amplifier configuration
using a field effect transistor with a high input impedance, which provides for
matching to the omnidirectional antenna. The amplifier load is the input
resonant circuit consisting of an inductance coil and a variable capacitor. The
signal from the input circuit is fed to the radio frequency amplifier input,
where this amplifier is designed around a K20824l integrated circuit with a
bandpass filter as the load in the collector circuit.

The frequency converter and first local oscillator are designed around a single
K22hA242 integrated circuit. The first local oscillator uses a capacitive
feedback circuit. The voltage from the frequency converter is amplified by a
four stage I? amplifier (the IF section), made using four identical R208242
integrated circuits. The load of the first stage is an electromechanical filter

_16-

IN)R|0FIWCIA1.II§EZCH§LY
FOR10FF1C1A1.lEHE(NNLY

F'_—_’-——' —‘1l"‘([;_oTav"——"I
ale—una- Ila] VA‘ .(7)|
. .le :
h ———————— —.__._ —— .—
i' __6MTIW(37_—l ;l" ﬁ‘ﬁﬁT———‘1
v 31‘ l -
[ﬁﬂ‘ﬁai’ I I
l__ -414--- - ________ _J
_.__ _ Miml‘J9_)__ -
[— mini-(1'6)— 1| rinuenlllan)(12)1l~ 4,
I’m-
IM lStorage
L11) 13
——————— Batte ‘—---] Mtteries

Figure 1.3. Block diagram of the "Barkas" radio direction finder.

Key: 1. Antenna steering unit;

2. Radio frequency section;
3. Intermediate frequency section;
4. Electromechanical filter;
5. Low frequency section;

6. Regulator;

7. Oscillator;

8. AH detector;

9. Receiver;
10. Panel I;
ll. Resistor bridge;

12. Panel II (power supply);
13. Regulator

which governs the bandwidth and selectivity of the IF amplifier. The remaining
three IF stages provide for the requisite gain in the channel.

The voltage from the output of the last I? amplifier stage is fed to an audio-
frequency amplifier unit (the audiofrequency section). The following are
assembled on the board for the audiofrequency section: a voltage regulator,

the second local oscillator, the AH detector and an audiofrequency amplifier.

The voltage regulator, which is designed around a K2PP241 integrated circuit,

is intended for stabilizing the operating points of the radio frequency ampli-
fier, converter and first local oscillator stages. The second local oscillator
is intended for receiving Al signals and restoring the carrier when receiving
A3A and A38 signals. The oscillator is turned on when the radio direction finder
operates in a telegraph node and is designed around a KZZhAZhZ integrated circuit
using a crystal controlled oscillator.

FKNRIDFIICIAI.lEII(MULY
Ftﬂl13FFICLAL USE:(NULY

 

Figure 1.4. The front panel of the "Barkas" radio direction finder.
Key: A. CAUTION! INPUT NOT PROTECTED!

B. Signal mode switch; G. Monitor switch;

C. Tuning; H. Azimuth scale light;
D. Tuning light; I. Antenna rotate;

E. Gain control; K. Operating mode switch.

F. Tuning scale, KHz;

The detector stage combines the functions of an AM detector and a converter.

In a telephone mode, it is used to segregate the envelope of amplitude modulated
signals, while in a telegraph mode, it serves to obtain the beat frequency
between the intermediate frequency and the second local oscillator. The detec-
tor is designed around a K22hA242 integrated circuit in a common emitter con-
figuration. The detector load is the input impedance of the audio preamplifier.
The audio amplifier consists of a preamplification stage. designed around
transistors in a cascade circuit configuration, and a final stage using KT-312V
transistors in a push-pull circuit. The audio amplifier is loaded into one
pair of low impedance TA-S6M headsets. A 200 uA microammeter is used to monitor
the output voltage of the radio direction finder, where the audio frequency
voltage detected oy a diode and smoothed by a filter. which is located on panel
I in the resistor bridge. is fed to the microanmnter.

The power supply voltage is monitored by the microammeter, which is connected
through an electrical scale extension circuit for the instrument, located on

panel 11.

The cover compartment of the radio direction finder is broken down into two
parts. The voltage regulator which provides for operation of the radio direction

- 13 -

INDR ("ﬂﬂ{1A|.lﬂﬂE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

finder from the ship batteries is housed in one portion while the back-up power
source (a "Rubin-l" battery) is housed in the other section.

The front panel of the radio direction finder is shown in Figure 1.4. The
operational controls, monitor and indicating instruments used by the operator
when working directly with the radio direction finder are located on the face
and side walls of the housing: the TUNING control, SIGNAL MODE switch, band-
switch, AZIMUTH LIGHT button, ANTENNA ROTATE control, OPERATING MODE switch,
the indicating meter 3, the MONITOR button, telephone jacks 6, the TUNING SCALE
in KHz. the TUNING LIGHT button and the GAIN control. A 24 volt plug is placed
on the back panel to connect the cable when getting power from shipboard storage
batteries as well as two toggle switches: ON-OPP when powered from the ship-
board storage batteries and INTERNAL-EXTERNAL when powered from the external
source (shipboard storage batteries) or the internal source (two "Rubin-l"
batteries).

Operating Modes

watch Duty Reception. In this mode, the OPERATING MODE switch is in the "0"
position. Only the signal from the omnidirectional antenna is used which is

fed to the antenna amplifier and then through the switch to the input tuned
circuit of the RF amplifier. The directional pattern of the antenna has the
shape of a circle. In this mode, one tunes to the frequency of the transmitting
radio station and listens to it.

Direction Finding Mode. In this case, the OPERATING MODE switch is in the "a"
position. The main directional antenna is used for reception. The signal from
this antenna is fed through the switch to a balancing transformer and then to
the input circuit of the RF amplifier. The antenna directional pattern has the
shape of a figure eight. In this mode, one takes DF bearings on radio beacons
and radio stations at the moment of the signal audibility minimum when rotating
the ANTENNA ROTATE control.

Sensing. In this case, the OPERATING MODE switch is alternately set in positions
1 (red dot) and 2 (green dot). The signal from the auxiliary directional

antenna is fed through the switch to the balancing transformer and then to

the input circuit of the RE amplifier, while the signal from the nondirectional
antenna is fed to the same input circuit directly through the switch. The signals
from the auxiliary directional and omnidirectional antennas are added together.
The resulting directional pattern has the shape of a cardiod, the minimum of
which is shifted in space through 180°. The unambiguous direction to the radio
station or radio beacon is indicated by the pointer of the colored marker which
matches the color of the marker on the OPERATING MODE switch for which the

output voltage and the audibility are a minimum.

Technical Operation Regulations.

During watch duty reception, the following is to be done:
--Set the OPERATING MODE switch to the "0" position;

-19..

FOR OFFHJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Sct the SIGNAL MODE switch to the "Tg" ["telegraph"] position;
--Sct the requisite band by means of switch 4;
--Set the GAIN control to the position for which noise is heard in the headphones;

--Tune to the frequency of the beacon on which a bearing is being taken using
the TUNING control for the maximum signal loudness and maximum deflection of the
meter needle.

When taking a bearing and making the sense determination, the following is to
be done:

-Set the OPERATING MODE switch to the "a" position;

-Using the ANTENNA ROTAIE control, set the pointer to the position for minimal
signal audibility from the radio beacon;

--Sequentia11y set the OPERATING MODE switch in the 1 (red dot) and 2 (green
dot) positions;

--15 the least audibility is obtained in position 1, then the pointer must be
rotated through 180°;

-Determine the direction to the radio beacon using the color marker on the
pointer, which matches the color of the marker on the OPERATING MODE switch
for which the signal audibility is minimal;

--Throw the OPERATING MODE switch to the "a” position and determine the boundaries
of the silence angle:

--Using the azimuth scale, determine the relative radio bearing as the average
arithmetic value of the two readings made at the boundaries of the silence
angle;

--After taking the readings. take into account the radio deviation correction
using the residual radio deviation curve.

1.4. The "Rumb" Dual Channel Marine Visual Radio Direction Finder

Function and Complement of the Complete Equipment Package

The visually indicating "Rumb" RDF is intended for merchant marine vessels and

makes it possible to do the following:

-—Determine radio hearings to navigation radio beacons and omnidirectional
radio stations;

-—Pilot ships using the radio signal zones produced by directional radio beacons;
--Take radio bearings on ships transmitting distress signals.

The composition of the equipment package of the radio direction finder depends
on the variant of the receiver and indicator unit, the dimensions and type of

the loop antenna as well as the presence of an antenna mast and the shipboard
power mains voltage.

v 20 -

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic radio direction finder package contains the following units: a loop
antenna, an antenna mast. an "inclined beam" omnidirectional antenna, an antenna
amplifier (AU), a receiver and indicator unit as well as a power supply and
radio operator signal panel.

The "Rumb" radio direction finder has the following specific features:

1) It possesses "visual selectivity", which makes it possible to take bearings
on the signals of two to three radio stations which simultaneously fall withinthe
passband of the radio direction finder;

2) It makes it possible to continuously monitor the balance of the channels during
direction finding;

3) Provides for nonsearch detection of radio beacon signals because of the use
of a crystal controlled digital tuning display.

The major operational and technical characteristics of the radio direction finder
are given below:

The frequency bands which can be received are:

Medium wave, KB: 250 - 545
Intermediate wavelengths, MHz 1.6 - 2.85
Types of signals which can be received A1, A2, A3

Precision in setting the frequency from the
digital display, KHz 0.5

Mean square direction finding error, degrees, in
the following frequency bands:

250 - 545 KHz 1
1.6 - 2.85 MHz 3
Sensitivity when receiving with the 1,200 mm
diameter loop, a feedline with a length of L I
30 m and a signal/noise ratio of 10:1, in uV/m,
in the following frequency bands:
250 - 565 KB: 25
1.60 — 2.85 MM: 25
Channel selectivity, in 63:
Image frequency rejection 60
Intermediate frequency rejection 80
Intermediate frequency bandwidth, “2:
Hide band for the audio channel 3,000
Narrow band for the visual channel 500
Radio deviation compensation, in degrees, for the
following coefficients:
A ' :5
D from -8 to +20

The length of connecting feedlines, in m, for the
following antennas:

- 2; -

FOR‘OF1NCLA1.lEﬂE(NVLY
Loop antenna 30 - 70

Auxiliary antenna 10
Antenna insulation resistance, HOhms 10
Power consumption from the 127/220 volt, 50 Hz
mains, in VA 120
Weight of the complete radio direction finder set.
in kg 96

A block diagram of the "Rumb" radio direction finder is shown in Figure 1.5.

The voltages from the longitudinal and transverse loop antennas are fed to the
input unit of the display receiver. The input unit matches the antenna and
feedline to the input amplifier of the radio frequency section, the BVCh,
accomplishes the cross switching of the loop antennas between the I and II
receiver-amplifier channels and amplifies the omnidirectional antenna signals.

A block diagram of the input section is shown in Figure 1.6. In the "bearing"
operating mode, contacts two and three of relay R1 on board 01 open the omni-
directional antenna circuit. In this mode, the signals are fed from the loop
antennas to the diode switchers DKl of board Ul, which in the case of operation
in the first band. are fed through the closed contacts 5 and a, and 6 and 7 of
relay R2 of board 02 and relay R2 of board U3 to the primary windings of trans-
formers TrZ and Trh.

 

Figure 1.5. Block diagram of the "Runb" radio direction finder.

Key: 1. AU = antenna amplifier;
2. BT81 - digital display;
3. BSK - audio channel section;
4. Receiver-indicator unit;
5. UVCh = radio frequency amplifier;
6. UPChl - intermediate frequency amplifier 1;
7. UPChZ - intermediate frequency amplifier 2;
8. VU - output amplifiers;
9. Output switcher;

_ 22 -

FOR¢HﬂﬂK1Al.USE(NWLY
FOR OI-T-TUAL UM; ONLY

Key [cont.]: 10. ELT - cathode ray tube; 16. BNCh - low frequency sec-
11. PL? - antiradar filter; tion;
12. Input switcher; 17. BI? - bearing indicating
13. Input section; block;
16. Radio frequency amplifier; 18. 61, 62 - local oscillators
15. BVCh - radio frequency 1 and 2;

section; 19. PRU - switcher circuit
board;

20. Intermediate frequency 2.

In the second band, diode switchers DKl of board 01 are connected through the
closed contacts 5 and A, and 6 and 7 of relay R1 of board 02 and relay Rl of
board U3 to the windings of the matching transformers Trl and Tr3. The signal
is fed from the Output windings of transformers Tr2 and Tra when operating in
the first frequency band and from the output windings of transformers Trl and
Tr3 when operating in the second band through emitter followers 8P3 and EPA of
board Uh, and EP3 and 3P6 of board US in the first case, and through emitter
followers EPl and EPZ of board Uh and EPl and BPZ of board US in the second
case to the corresponding selection and amplification channels of the high fre-
quency section (see Figure 1.5). The diode switchers DKl - DKZ of board 01 are
switched by a square wave pulsed voltage at a frequency of 15 Hz, as a result
of which the output windings of the transformers Trl and Tr3 are cross switched
between inputs I and II of the amplifier channels.

In_the "watch duty" and "check" operating modes, the signal is fed from the
omnidirectional antenna through contacts 2 and 3 of relay R1 of board 01 to the
input of the broadband amplifier, which consists of three stages and has as a
load the primary windings of Trl and TrZ of board 01.

The secondary windings of these transformers are connected to diode switcher
0K2, and the subsequent signal path is analogous to the "bearing" mode.

The signals from the input section (see Figure 1.5) are fed to the radio fre-
quency section, BVCh, which contains two identical amplifier stages for the
signals from the longitudinal and transverse loop antennas. The radio frequency
amplifier UVCh, which is incorporated in the radio frequency section. performs

the following functions:

a) Provides for signal selection and amplification at the frequency which is
tuned in;

b) Provides for image frequency and 750 KB: intermediate frequency rejection;

c) Converts the amplified signal £1 to the first intermediate frequency ftp -
750 KHz;

d) Controls the gain in steps.
A block diagram of the RP amplifier is shown in Figure 1.7. The RF amplifiers

of the first and second amplification channels are made with two identical
shielded strips. Two ganged sections of the five section block of variable

FOR‘OIIHCIAI.USE(NVLY
(a) (5)
a-m _n£a_ga_32_ _ _ _ _ gay ya;
(I) rum an ———- ‘r ‘1

5-” venue-ovum,» I ; I
barrow-06 _____ 3m
'- _ J‘ (9) '
' ~ ' '
| I [ran have);

’"2 (u)
m .
2 | l
| 3m. -> I
_ ”7w— _ - _ " '1
I 3.0! I
[ml '
”L, E Inav Irena-2
‘ an; I (12)

 

3 51 ES
2n nmwzmwmnwnm L_ __ _E{___L__ I __ _J _____ _J
iuanannod ”new ,5

U - 2.70

(1)].lfffg ”U

Figure 1.6. Block diagram of the input section.

Key: 1. U - 20 volts. E - 15 Hz, from the bandswitch;
2. From the loop antennas;
3. Diode switcher 1;
4. Board U2;
5. Board U4;
6. From the omnidirectional antenna;

F‘HR()FFIC1AI.IIBEI(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [cont.]: 7. From the OPERATING MODE switch;
8 Emitter follower 1;

9. Emitter follower 2;

10. Board U3;

11. To the high frequency section [RP front end] of
channel I;

12. To the high frequency section of channel II;

13. Relay 32.

 

Figure 1.7. Block diagram of the RP amplifier.

Key: 1. Band I input;
2. Tuned circuit 1;
3. Emitter follower l;
6. Gain control 1;

5. Amplifier 1;
6. Mixer 1;

7. Tuned circuit 3;
8. Band II input;
9. Heterodyne oscillator 1 input.

capacitors are used to tune the RP circuits for bands I and II in both channels.

The radio frequency signal is fed from the input section to the input resonant
circuit Kl when band I is switched on (to tuned circuit K2 when band II is
switched on). The signal at a frequency of f1 which is segregated by tuned
circuit K1 is fed to emitter follower 3P1. then to the 1:10 step gain control
RUl and thereafter to amplifier U1, which is loaded into tuned circuit K3.

The signal from amplifier U1 and the signal from the first local oscillator 61
are fed simultaneously to the input of balanced mixer Sml.

The converted signal at a frequency of fIPl - 750 K8: is isolated in tuned cir-
cuit K3 and fed to the input of the first intermediate frequency amplifier
board.

The first intermediate frequency amplifier UPChl (see Figure 1.5) performs the
following functions:

- 25 -

FOR‘0FFK]AI.USE(MVLY
a) Amplifies the 1P1 signal;

b) Converts the amplified 1P1 signal at fIFl - 750 KB: to the IF2 signal:
EIFZ - 33.3 KHz;

c) Provides for continuous gain control of the IFl signal.

A block diagram of intermediate frequency amplifier 1 is shown in Figure 1.8.

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

 

Figure 1.8. Block diagram of intermediate frequency amplifier 1.

Key: 1. Amplifier l; 9. Intermediate frequency 1 input;
2. Emitter follower 1; 10. Monitor;
3. Gain control 1; 11. Intermediate frequency ampli-
6. Amplifier 2; fier 2 input;
5. Amplifier 3; 12. Mixer 1;
6. Emitter follower; 13. Amplifir’ 4:
7. Gain control; 14. Gain control 2.
8. Local oscillator 2 -
783.3 Kﬂz;

In the "bearing" operating mode, the IFl signal is fed from the output of mixer
Sml to the amplifier stage 01, which is loaded into a resonant circuit, and

then to emitter follower EPl. which matches the output impedance of the resonant
circuit and the input impedance of gain control circuit R01. Following the

R01 circuit. the signal is amplified by resistance coupled amplifiers 02 and U3
and thereafter fed to gain control circuit 2.

The signal level is continuously adjusted by a factor of 25 times in gain control
circuits 1 and 2, RUl and R02.

The signal is fed from the output of circuit RU2 to tuned amplifier U4, which
is loaded into a resonant circuit, and then to the mixer stage Sml, to which

the local oscillator signal of G2 is fed simultaneously. The signal is fed from
the output of mixer stage Sml to the input of intermediate frequency amplifier 2.

- 26 -

FOR‘OFTWCJAI.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the "monitor" mode, relay R1 of the board for intermediate frequency ampli-
fier l connects the inputs of the first intermediate frequency amplifiers of
both amplifier channels in parallel.

The low frequency section (see Figure 1.5) performs the following functions:

a) Amplifies the IF 2 signals within a passband of 500 B: (narrow band) and
3 KB: (broadband);

b) Generates the voltages which control the input and output switcher circuits,
blank the trace and compensate for the D radio deviation coefficient;

c) Compensates for the D radio deviation coefficient.

    

(7 ) ﬂamo‘ocuui

   

(3)" (6) "

  
 
      
    

( 10‘2"“:
( 1 1) and” um “mm"

_ (12)”

Monitor
me

(lawggomxmd PIC. L9. Qyuummasasu

16) new "1'12.

Figure 1.9. Block diagram of intermediate frequency amplifier 2.

Key: 1. D compensation; 10. Amplitude balance;
2. Emitter follower 1; 11. Input bias;
3. Amplifier l; 12. Intermediate frequency 2;
4. Amplifier 2; 13. Wide band output;
5. Amplifier 3; 14. Tuned circuit 1;
6. Amplifier 4; 15. Emitter follower 2;
7. Narrow band output; 16. Amplifier 6;
8. Amplifier S; 17. Amplitude balance circuitry.

9. Intermediate frequency
amplifier 2 output;

The functional circuitry of the low frequency section consists of two boards
for the intermediate frequency amplifiers (of the first and second channels),
the switcher board, the PRU as well as the boards for the compensation of the
D radio deviation coefficient (gain imbalancing of the channels).

A block diagram of the second intermediate frequency amplifier is shown in
Figure 1.9. The IF2 signal is fed to tuned circuit K1 of the IF amplifier 2

- 27 -

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
board, which is the load for mixer Sm2 of the IF amplifier 1 board of the high
frequency section.

The signal from tuned circuit K1 is fed through emitter follower EPZ simultan-
eously to amplifier U6 and to amplitude balancing circuit BA, which serves to
equalize the gain in both channels.

Following amplifier 06, the signal is fed through a filter to the broadband
output of the audio channel.

The signal is fed from the amplitude balancing circuit to the input of emitter
follower EPl, and thereafter to the compensation circuitry for the radio
deviation coefficient D and simultaneously to tuned amplifiers U1 - 03. with
which the requisite passband is shaped and the requisite signal gain is obtained.
The signal is fed from the output of resistance coupled amplifier U3 to resis-
tance coupled amplifier U5 and then through relay R2 to the input of the tuned
amplifier U5. Relay R2 is actuated in the mode when checking the operability of
the indicator-receiver unit.

The signal is fed from amplifier US to the input of the bearing indication unit,
BIP (see Figure 1.5), and to the narrow band output of the audio channel section,
the BSK, which is intended for listening to the call signs of the radio beacons
and radio stations operating in Al, A2 and A3 modes for which the bearings are
being taken.

A block diagram of the audio channel section is shown in Figure 1.10. The
signal is fed to the audio channel section via the two inputs for channels I
and II when operating with a broadband response in the A2 and A3 nodes, and
via the single input when operating with a narrow bandwidth in the Al mode.

Narrow Band

    

 

  

Raﬁ
11
I r (12)
I i th '53
[lumen ﬁna)

 

(7)

 

(8) (9) (10)

Figure 1.10. Block diagram of the audio channel section.

Key: 1. Channel 1 input; 8. Amplifier 3;
2. Emitter follower l; 9. AH detector;
3. Emitter follower 3; 10. Amplifier A;
6. Channel II input; 11. Loudspeaker;
S. Amplifier l; 12. KI-SS;
6. Amplifier 2; l3. headsets.
7. Emitter follower a;

_28—

FOR1OFFNJAI.UBE(MVLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE¢)NLX

In the case of A2 and A3 operation, the signals from both channels of IF ampli-
fier 2 are fed separately to the inputs of emitter followers 8P1 and 8P2. The
phases of the voltages fed via the two inputs, are shifted by 90° by a phase
shifting R and C network prior to combining them, because of which, the intens-
ity of the sum signal changes insignificantly for any course angle to the radio
beacon on which a bearing is taken.

The sum voltage is fed from the phase shifting network to amplifier stages U1
and U2 with resonant circuits in the load, which together with the output tuned
circuit of IF amplifier 2 provide for the specified passband.

The voltage is then fed to emitter follower EPA, and then to the untuned ampli-
fier stage U3. The amplified voltage is detected by amplitude detector AD and

fed to the audio amplifier U6. having outputs to a dynamic loudspeaker Gr head-
sets If and a KI-SS instrument.

 
 
 
      
 
 

Indicator
”Mammy:

WWI/Imam
(’0).

Figure 1.11. Block diagram of the bearing indicator unit.

Key: 1. Channel I output amplifier input;
2. Channel I output amplifier board;

3. Output switcher board;
a. Channel II output amplifier input;
5. Channel II output amplifier board.

When operating in the A1 mode, the voltages are summed beforehand in the IF
amplifier 2 stages, and then the total voltage is fed to the input of emitter
follower 5P3. The voltage is amplified in stages 01 - U3 and fed to the AH
detector AD. The voltage from the third local oscillator c is simultaneously
fed to the detector through emitter follower 8P5. A difference frequency signal
is obtained as a result of the mixing of these voltages.

Following detection. the difference frequency voltage is fed to U6, with outputs
for loudspeaker. headsets and the KI-SS instrument.

The bearing indication unit, 31? (see Figure 1.5), is intended for the power
amplification of the IF 2 signals, the cross switching of the channels, the
display of the bearing on the screen of the CRT and sense determination. A block
diagram of the bearing indication unit is shown in Figure 1.11. The second
intermediate frequency signal is fed from the low frequency section to the inputs
of the output amplifier boards of the first and second channels.

-29-

FOR OIIICJAI.USEICNVLY
The output amplifier consists of a preamplifier stage. a phase inverter stage
designed in a push-pull configuration, and a final stage, also using a push-
pull circuit.

The signals are fed from the output transformers of the output amplifier boards
to the output switcher board (VK), which switches the output circuits of both
amplifier channels synchronously with the corresponding switching at the input,
which makes it possible to continuously monitor the balancing of the channels.

After passing through the diode switcher, the signals are fed from the output
transformers to the deflecting plates, and from the sense determination trans-
formers to the modulator for the CRT (see Figure 1.5).

An antiradar filter, PLP, is inserted in the circuit of the omnidirectional
antenna to protect the receiver input against radar signals. A digital display
unit, BTsI, is used to visually observe the tuning frequency.

Operating Nodes

Hatch Duty Reception. Operating mode switch 18 is in the "watch duty" position
(Figure 1.12) [second position going clockwise]. Only the omnidirectional
antenna is used for radio reception. One tunes to the radio beacon frequency.

DP Bearing Mode. Operating mode switch 18 is set in the "bearing" position
[third position going clockwise]. The loop antenna is used for radio reception.

'After fine-tuning the receiver and setting the gain, the channels are balanced
by the two BALANCE controls, 7 and 8. Bearings are taken on radio stations and
beacons in this mode.

Sense Determination. Operating mode switch 18 is set to the "bearing" position
and the SENSE button is pushed on the BEARING POINTER control. The loop and
omnidirectional antennas are used for radio reception. The quadrant correspond-
ing to the direction to the radio beacon is traced on the screen of the CRT in
this mode. The bearing ambiguity is resolved in this mode.

The Monitor Mode. Operational mode switch 18 is set in the "monitor" position
[extreme clockwise position]. In this position, the operation of the set

is checked periodically by means of the OPERATING CHECK and VOLTAGE CHECK
switches and the meter 22.

Operating the “Rumb” Radio Direction Finder
The operational controls and readouts used by the navigator when working directly
with the radio direction finder (see Figure 1.12) are located on the front panel

of the receiver-indicator unit.

The SWITCHER OFF push button [28] serves for hearing the call-signs of the radio
beacons more clearly.

- 30 _

FOR omcut USE ONLY
INHRCMWNCJAI.\EH§(H‘LY

 

Figure 1.12. Front panel of the " umb" radio direction finder.
[See text for key]

The BEARING POINTER control [27] serves for reading the relative radio bearing

and the observed bearing.

Moving pointer 1 has five parallel lines for the correct alignment with the
image on the CRT screen. The readout is accomplished using the center line of

the pointer.

Control 4 for the D radio deviation coefficient compensation makes it possible
to compensate in a range of iron -8° to +20°.

The scale for the radio bearing angles (stationary scale 2) with scale divisions
of 1° serves for reading the relative radio bearings.

The observed radio bearing scale (moving scale 3) with scale divisions of 1°
serves for reading the observed bearings.

The monitor signal light for the position of the shipboard antennas, ANTENNAS

ISOLATlD, comes on after the isolation of the ship's antennas and the switch
on the signal panel of the radio operator is set tothe "take bearing" position.

Digital display 6 for the tuning shows the tuned frequency of the radio direction
finder with a precision of 0.5 KHz.

The phase balance control 8, BALANCE, serves to equalize the phase shifts in
both channels.

-31-

F‘“l(lﬂﬂ(lhl.lﬁli(ﬂ‘LY
The gain balance control 7, BALANCE, is intended for equalizing the gains of
both channels.

Loudspeaker 9 server for listening to the radio beacons on which the bearing is
being taken.

The switch Al-Az-A (10) has four positions. In the first three switch positions,
narrow band reception is used for the telegraph signals of radio beacons and
radio stations operating in the Al mode. In the fourth switch position, the
signals of radio stations and radio beacons operating in the A2 and A3 modes

are received with a wide bandwidth.

The VOLUME control 11 serves for the continuous adjustment of the volume of
the signal being received.

The coarse tuning scale 12 has scale graduations for the medium wavelength band
(the outside scale) at intervals of SO Khz, and for the intermediate wavelength
band at intervals of 0.2 MHz (inside scale).

The coarse tuning knob 13 serves for the rough tuning to the radio beacon fre-
quency and has a pointer for presetting to the approximate frequency on the
scale. The fine tuning knob 14 which is colocated with the coarse tuning control
serves for the fine tuning to the radio beacon frequency either using the

digital display or for a maximum of the ellipse or line image on the CRT screen,
or based on the maximum loudness of the radio beacon call-signs.

Bandswitch 15 has two fixed positions:
"250 - 545 K31" is band I (medium wave);
"1.6 - 2.8 MHz" is band II (intermediate wavelengths).

Operating mode switch 18 has four fixed positions and serves for switching the
radio direction finder to the "watch duty reception", "DP bearing" and "check"
modes.

The LINE LENGTH control 16 serves for continuous adjustment of the gain and
obtaining the image of a line trace or ellipse with a length of 4 to 6 cm on
the screen of the CRT.

The coarse gain attenuator 17 has two positions: "1:1" and "1:10". when the
attenuator is switched from the "1:1" position to the "1:10" position, the
signal gain is reduced by a factor of about 7 to 15 times.

Telephone jacks 20 are intended for connecting headphones.

The monitor and indicating controls not used during normal operation and which
are used for monitoring the supply voltages, conditions in individual stages

and detecting defects in both channels of the radio direction finder are located
under a cover on the rear panel of the receiver-indicator unit (see Figure 1.12).

The OPP switch (deviation turned off) serves for disconnecting the elements
which compensate for the radio bearing deviation coefficient D (present cnly in

- 32 -

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the radio direction finder variant having a loop antenna, arranged at an angle
of 45° to the DP [middle-line planel).

Puahbutton 21 for monitoring voltages makes it possible to monitor an additional
six supply voltages and operating conditions of the stages.

The VOLTAGE CHECK switch serves for selecting the supply voltage or condition
of the individual stages being monitored.

Meter 22 makes it possible to monitor the supply voltages and operational condi-
tions of the stages. The normal mode corresponds to s deflection of the meter
needle in a range of 60 to 80 scale divisions.

. The OPERATION MONITOR switch serves to check the correctness of operation and
detect defects in both channels of the radio direction finder.

Selsyn cutoff pushbutton 23 is used when matching to the gyrocompass repeater.

Control 2b for compensating for the A radio bearing deviation coefficient makes
it possible to rotate the CRT in a range of 15° (it is first necessary to loosen
the lock, and then make the adjustment).

The COURSE control 25 (setting the course) is intended for matching the radio
bearing scale to the gyrocompass repeater.

The FOCUS. BRIGHTNESS and BEAM CBNTBRING controls serve to change the focusing,
brightness and beam centering of the CRT respectively.

The SPKR OPP switch is_intended for disconnecting the.loudspeaker from the audio
channel. -

Screws l9 and 26 serve to fasten the housing to the shock absorbers.
The small lights 5 are intended for lighting the scales.
Technical Operating Rules

The following are to be done during watch duty reception:
--The operating mode switch is set in the "watch duty" position;
-The bandswitch is set to the requisite band;

--The A -A2-A3 switch is set in the position "A2A3" when receiving A2 and A3
signs s, or in one of the three "A1" positions when receiving Al signals;

--The requisite loudness is set using the VOLUME and LINE TRACE LENGTH controls;

--0ne tunes to the frequency of the target radio beacon based on the maximum
signal volume using the tuning controls;

-The desirable BFO tone is obtained in one of the three "A1" positions using
the Al-Az-A3 switch.

- 33 -

Itﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following are to be done when balancing the channels:
--Set the operating mode switch in the "bearing" position;

—-A S to 6 cm image is obtained on the CRT screen using the TRACE LENGTH control
and attenuator 17 (1:10);

--The two images on the CRT screen are combined using the combined BALANCE con-
trols (7 for the gain and 8 for the phase shifts):

a) One line is obtained on the CRT screen as a result of the combining when
receiving one signal:

b) When receiving out-of-phase signals, because of the influence of back-
scatter or multipath propagation, an ellipse is produced on the CRT screen
as a result of the combining;

c) when receiving two signals which are close in frequency, one parallelogram
is produced on the CRT screen as a result of the combining.

The following are to be done when taking a DP bearing and determining the sense:
-—Thc operating mode switch 18 is set in the "bearing" position;

--0ne tunes to the frequency of the target radio beacon based on the maximum
image on the CRT using the tuning controls;

--It is recommended that the position of attenuator 17 (1:10) be left unchanged
when taking bearings on a group of radio beacons so as not to balance the
channels anew;

--Sct the POINTER control so that the line on the azimuth pointer dial is
strictly parallel to the electronic trace or the major axis of the ellipse
on the CRT screen;

--Press the SENSE button and determine the quadrant on the CRT screen within
which the target radio beacon or radio station is located;

--Determine the bearing or relative radio bearing using that portion of the
scale which is located within the quadrant obtained from the sense determin-
ation;

--After taking the readings, one must take into account the correction for the
radio bearing deviation using the residual radio deviation curve.

The following are to be done in the monitor mode:

--Sct the operating mode switch to the "monitor" position;

--Check the major voltages and currents using the monitor meter by means of the
VOLTAGE CHECK switch;

--Check the major units of the indicator and compensate for the radio bearing
deviation coefficients using the CRT screen and the OPERATING CHECK switch.

- 34 -

FOR OFTWCIAI.USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.5. Requirements Placed on the Installation, Alignment and Operation of Marine
Radio Direction Finders

A position is to be selected for the mounting of the antenna of a marine radio
direction finder which is the most remote location from the metal parts of the
vessel. Antennas for marine radio direction finders must be mounted as high

as possible above the hull of the ship and as far as possible from pipes, masts,
antennas and metal superstructures.

At medium wavelengths, the hull of the ship usually exerts the greatest influence
on the amount of radio bearing deviation, while at short wavelengths, the masts,
pipes and other antenna-like objects having a length of one-quarter or three—

quarter wavelengths of the target radio station or radio beacon have the greatest
influence.

Metal rigging within a radius of 9 m from the loop antenna is broken up into
unequal sections with lengths of from 2 to 6 m using insulators. In the case
where such segmentation is impossible, the rigging should be reliably grounded.

Having chosen several possible sites for the installation of the antenna system,
it is expedient to use a portable radio direction finder to study them and
select the position for which the radio deviation in the working frequency band
is the least.

At short wavelengths, clear-cut silence angles should be obtained for bearing
directions in all azimuths from 0° to 360° in an aural radio direction finder,
narrow image ellipses should be obtained in the visual dual channel radio
direction finder and clear-cut bearing readings should be obtained in other
radio direction finding systems.

The longitudinal frame of the direction finder is positioned in the midline
plane so that the engraving of the NOS [not further defined] is directed towards
the bow of the ship. The height of the whip or the vertical projection of the
slant antenna should run from a to 6 m. The distance between projections onto
the horizontal plane of the loop antenna and the omnidirectional antenna should
not exceed 6 m, otherwise the quality of direction sensing is degraded in the
intermediate wavelength band. A spacing of the antennas is permitted in the
vertical plane within the limits of the difference of the feedline lengths from
the omnidirectional and loop antennas to the indicating receiver of no more

than 4 m.

An antenna amplifier is used where the length of the cable to the indicating
receiver unit is more than 8 m, regardless of the type of omnidirectional
antenna. An antenna box is used only in the case where an inclined beam antenna
is used with a feedline length of up to 8 m.

It is recommended that a receiver—indicator unit in a desk top design be set up
on a desk, while the console design is to be mounted in a navigator's console.

- 35 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The ground terminal must be connected to the hull of the vessel and the ground
buses of the shock absorbers. The power supply is installed in a vertical
position no further than 20 m from the receiver—indicator unit and is fastened
without shock absorbers. The signaling panel is to be placed in the radio room
in a vertical position, in a place convenient for actuation and observation.

After installing the radio direction finder, the insulation resistance of the
antenna and feedline system is to be checked, the radio deviation is to be
determined and compensated and the correctness of the connection of the power
supply is to be checked and the unit is to be matched to the gyrocompass repeater.
The insulation resistance of the antenna and feedline system is checked with

a megnhmmeter with a test voltage of 500 volts. The loop RP feeders are dis-
connected from the receiver-indicator unit and the megohnneter measures the
resistance between the center lead of the feedline and the chassis, which should
be no less than 20 MOhms. A drop in the insulation resistance down to 10 MOhms
is permitted at a temperature oi 40° c and a humidity of 982.

The correctness of the zero setting of the goniometer indicator is checked as
follows. The ends of the loops are disconnected or shorted in the junction box
and a bearing is taken on any radio station. "hen the relative radio bearing
is other than 0° or 180°, the goniometer axis is locked with the GONIOMETER
AXIS LOCK control, which is located under the cover on the cabinet of the
goniometric receiver unit. The screw inserts are unscrewed with a special
wrench, the MINIMUM SET control and the top cover are removed. The fastening
screw is unscrewed and the azimuth pointer is set to 0° or 180°. After this,
the loops are reconnected.

The determination of the radio bearing deviation can be accomplished several
ways.

1. Using the radio transmitter of an auxiliary ship which makes a circle around
the RDF ship. In this case, the ship for which the radio deviation is being
determined remains in place. An auxiliary ship which continuously transmits
radio signals at the working frequency of a radio beacon makes a circle around
it at a range of 1.5 to 2 miles. At different relative bearings read out from
0° to 360° going clockwise, the relative radio bearing angles (RKU) from the
RDF and the relative bearings (K0) from the azimuth circle of the compass are
read out simultaneously at intervals of 10 to 15°. Then the value of the radio
deviation is calculated for all relative bearing angles using the following
formula:

f - KU - nxu ”KY-"KM (1.1)

the curve is plotted, and a radio deviation table is drawn up for the relative
radio bearings at intervals of 10 to 15°.

2. Using a shore radio transmitter or radio beacon.

In this case, the ship for which the radio deviation is being determined
approaches a shore radio transmitter (radio beacon) at a range of 1.5 to 2 miles

-36..

FOR'0FFKJAL.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and positions itself so that the radio wave intersects the shoreline at an

angle close to 90°. Then the ship makes a circle and does the same things as

in the first method. The radio deviation is s periodic function of the relative
radio bearing, and for this reason can be represented by a Faurier series:

/=- A -| BsinU’KV) + Ccoqpxynosmmxy) +
+Ecos2(PK¥)-I- (1.2)

[PKY - relative radio bearing (RKD)].

The coefficient A is called the circular coefficient, the coefficients 3 and c
are the semicircular coefficients and D and E are the quadrantal coefficients
[quadrantal DF error]. The values of the radio deviation coefficients depend

on the type of secondary radiatcrs and their position relative to the loops of
the RDP. Metal structures, the vertical dimensions of which are considerably
greater than the horizontal ones (masts, pipes, ship antennas) are called
antenna-like secondary radiators. Metal structures which take the form of a
closed resonant circuit for the induced current are called resonant circuit type
secondary radiators. Such resonant circuits can be produced by the parts of

metal rigging. The largest resonant circuit type radiator is the metal hull of
a ship.

The A coefficient appears when the bearing readout pointer is set incorrectly
and where resonant circuits are present, the planes of which do not coincide
with the axis of the RDF loop.

The B coefficient is due to antenna-like secondary radiators located at the bow
of a ship (+3) or at the stern (-B).

The c coefficient is caused by antenna-like secondary radiators, located either
on the portside (+C) or to starboard (-C).

The D coefficient is caused by the ship's hull or by longitudinal and transverse
resonant circuit type secondary radiators.

The E coefficient is caused by resonant circuit type secondary radiators arranged
at an angle of 65° or 135° to the longitudinal axis.

Insulators are inserted to reduce the influence of secondary radiators in metal
rigging, or, on the other hand, a reliable contact is made between the metal
structures so as to eliminate the dependence of the level of the secondary
field on climatic conditions.

The quadrant radio deviation coefficients have the greatest values.

The quadrantal radio deviation coefficient D is compensated in the “Rybka” aural
radio direction finder in the first band in the following manner:

a) The value and sign of the radio deviation coefficient are determined;

- 37 -

F(”l(lﬂﬂ(1Al.US£10NLY
b) The cover on the cabinet is removed from the goniometric receiver;

c) The DEVIATION COMPENSATION switch 19 set to the "+D2-8°", "+D8-20°", "-02-8°"
or "-08-20°" position depending on the sign and magnitude of the D coefficient
being compensated;

d) The locking screw is released and the adjusting screw of the variometer is
rotated until the azimuth pointer line is set opposite the division corresponding
to the value of the D coefficient being compensated;

e) The locking screw is clamped down and the cover of the case is closed.

The quadrantal radio deviation coefficient D is compensated in the "Rumb" visual
radio direction finder in the medium wavelength band as follows:

a) The value and sign of the radio deviation coefficient are determined;

b) The image on the CRT screen is made equal to 5 :o 6 on using the TRACE LINE
LENGTH control;

c) The double image is reduced to a line or an ellipse with a minor axis of
minimal length by means of the the BALANCE control;

d) The operating mode switch is set to the "check" position;
e) The OPERATION CHECK switch is set to position "2";

f) The D coefficient compensation control is rotated so that the line or the

major axis of the ellipse on the screen of the CRT is set at a relative radio
bearing angle of 45° 1 D.

After compensating for the quadrantal radio deviation coefficient D, the residual
radio deviation is determined by the method treated earlier. The curve for the
residual radio deviation is drawn on a special company blank form and is used

for corrections during direction finding.

The power supply is turned on after checking the setting of the 220/127 volt
plug in accordance with the mains voltage. In the case where a direct current
main is used, the conformity of the type of voltage converter to the ship's
power mains is also checked. The plug on the power supply should be set for
127 volts. Prior to turning the direction finder on, the input voltage switch
on the power supply is set to the extreme left position, and after turning it
on. the nominal voltage is selected.

To match to the gyrocompass repeater, it is necessary to open the cover of the
controls which are not used during normal operation, to cut off the power to the
selsyn by pressing the button and set the radio direction finder scale in
accordance with the gyrocompass readings by means of the existing control. With
an increase in the gyrocompass bearing angle, the scale of the radio direction
finders should rotate counter-clockwise.

Opposite rotation of the scale occurs because of the incorrect connection of
the two wires to the selsyn rotor winding. With correct matching, the error
in relative bearing angles from the radio bearing scale should not exceed : 0.S°.

- 38 _

FOR(MﬂﬁCLhLiﬂﬂEONLY
F(Hl(ﬂﬂﬁ(JAl.Ub£(JNLY

CHAPTER 2' PHASE RADIONAVIGATION SYSTEMS

2.1. The Classification and Specific Features of Marine Phase Radionavigation
Systems

Marine phase radionavigation systems are intended for determining a ship's
positron at sea. The phase radionavigation systems used in the merchant marine
are difference range finding systems which measure the phase difference (the
difference in the ranges) of the signals from shore transmitting stations
operating in a CH mode. Phase radionavigation systems are broken down into
frequency gating ("Firs-l". "Decca") navigation systems and time gating ("Omega")
radionavigation systems according to the manner of segregating the radio signals
in the received channels of the shipboard indicator.

The "Decca” Phase Radionavigation System. The "Decca“ radionavigation system

is intended for determining a ship's position (lines of position) by means of
measuring the difference in the ranges to shore transmitting stations operating
in a CH mode using coherent electromagnetic oscillations (which are interrelated
by an integer ratio). The operation of the system ("Decca" is a frequency
gating navigation system) is based on the principle of measuring the phase
relationships of the radio signals received by the marine indicating receivers
in the long wave band of 85 to 135 KHz.

The shore stations (Figure 2.1) operate in a coordinated program, forming networks

in which four stations are usually incorporated: the master, VShCh, and three
slaved stations: VH1, VH2 and VH3.

)

 

Figure 2.1. On the determination of the lines of position of a ship
in the "Decca" radionavigation system.

Key: 1. Slaved station 3 (violet), 5f;
2. Line of position 2;
3. Line of position 1;

- 39 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key [cont.]: 4. Slaved station 1 (red), 8f;
5. Slaved station 2 (green), 9f;
6. Master station, 6f.

The shore stations, using C" operation (without call-signs), transmit radio
signals at frequencies which are multiples of the base frequency of the network
a - an: 6f (master), 8f (slave 1). 9f (slave 2) and 5f (slave 3). For
convenience in identification, colors are assigned to the slaved stations (red,
greed, violet).

All of the networks of the "Decca" radionavigatipn system (there are 49 networks
in service at the present time) have alphanumeric designations from zero to ten
and contain ten letters of the Latin alphabet in various combinations (for
example, 38, 6C, 10C, etc.).

If V is the propagation velocity of the electromagnetic oscillations (for the
"Decca" radionavigation system. the computational velocity is equal to v I
299. 570 km ' sec'l), then the distances r and rn from the master station and
slaved stations 1-3 to the ship c are determined by the time delays 1 - r/v
and 11 - ri/v (i - l, 2, 3) of the received radio signals:

1’mastnr ' Unm - U..cos69(t —1);

. Unm- manna—1,), (2'1)

Uslave

where Um and Un are the amplitudes of the radio signals received from the
master and slaved stations; n is a coefficient which applies to the slaved
stations and takes on values of 8. 9 and 5.

The transmission of the radio signals by the slaved stations is matched to the
transmission of the radio signals by the master station. For simplicity in
the discussions, we shall not consider the time delay in the transmission of
the slaved station (baseline delay) with respect to the master station which
occurs in this case, since the latter is taken into account in the design of

the grid of isolines of the "Decca" radionavigation system which are plotted
on the charts.

The received signals (2.1) in the shipboard indicating receiver are amplified
and reduced to a single comparison frequency an by means of multiplication by
the coefficients H/6 and Min, where the quantity H is the least dividend for

6 and n. Since n takes on values of 8, 9 and S for the slaved stations, then
we have M equal to 24. 18 and 30 for the three pairs of stations (master and

slave station 1, master and slave station 2, master and slave station 3).

Consequently, the signals (2.1), which are equated in amplitude and reduced to
a single comparison frequency, assume the form:

-lhm‘U“MMQQN%y

Umaster (2.2)

’l
I U .-U cosMul—— .
Uslave an ' ' ( o)

- 40 -

l1)Rl0l1ﬂ(1Al.ll§EZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL US}. ONLY

where M sequentially takes on the values indicated above for the selected pairs
of master and slaved stations.

The phase difference 0 of the received radio signals (2.2) is measured in the
phase detectors (PD) in a marine indicating receiver:

r—n
v .

 

. . n '
9-mo(c—7)—Mn(¢—7)-Mu (2.3)
Thus, the differences in the ranges r - r1 between the ship C and the master

and slaved stations or the lines of position, LP's, which are hyperbolas, at
the intersection of which the ship is positioned, are determined in this case.

The phase measurement process for w is ambiguous, since only the fractional
portion of the total cycle of change in the voltages (2.2) is determined in

this case. For this reason, one must use the following instead of equation
(2.3): '

2n
- 2nN+—(r—r‘),
1’ 1M (2.10)

where N is an unknown number of total cycles of change in the voltages (2.2),

determined in the process of eliminating the ambiguity (UK); A“ is the compari-
son wavelength defined by the equality XH . VT“.

Uhat has been said can be illustrated by means of Figure 2.2. For the ships
Cl and C2, which are located on line of position LPl (a hyperbole), the measured
phase difference is O I 2n. For the ship C3 (LP 0), the phase difference is
p - 0. For ship Cb, the phase meter readings yield the fractional portion of
the period 2!, to which one must add one complete cycle of the frequency (N - l).

The shortest distance d between adjacent hyperbolas with phase meter readings
which differ by a complete period 2n is called the phase track width, while
the shortest distance b between the master and slaved stations is called the
baseline. The track width d is defined by the expression:

Ru

4 - .
23in l-
2

 

(2.5)

where Y is the angle between the directions from the ship to the master and
slaved stations. The least value of the track width occurs for a baseline of
(do “ XH/Z).

Eliminating the multiple value ambiguity (UH) of the phase measurements of 0
consists in determining the number of tracks (the number of complete cycles N).

The lines of position (position of the ship) are determined by adding the number
of complete cycles to the readings of the phase meters [see (2.6)].

The "Omega" Phase Radionavigation System. The "Omega" radionavigation system

is intended for determining a ship's position (lines of position) by means of

measuring the phase difference (range differences) to eight shore transmitting
stations operating in an established CH mode.

—4]‘n

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0810HHK1AL.USEZONLY

      

(3) (a)

Figure 2.2. On the determination of the
values of the phase differ-

ence o as a function of a
ship's position.

Key: 1. Master station;
2. Slave station;
3. Line of position 0;

A. Line of position 1.

The "Omega“ radionavigation system
belongs to phase systems using time
gating of the radio signals and is
designed for determining the position
of a ship in practically all of the
navigating regions of the world. The
position of the shore transmitting
stations and the Latin indexes assigned
to each station are shown in Table 2.1.

The operational principle of the "Omega"
radionavigation system consists in
determining the lines of position of

a ship by means of measuring the phase
difference 9 (the range difference r2 -
r1) of the radio signals from two shore
stations by means of the shipboard
indicating receiver, and this regard,

is similar to the operation of the

"Decca" radionavigation system [see
(2.4)], where:

p.21.” 1 2:: -"-T-’—'..

AM
To eliminate the ambiguity of the read-

out, it is necessary to determine the integer number of tracks N, for which a

special system operating mode is used.
TABLE 2.1.

 

 

gtation
Cn- nan

  

Latitude
Ill-ma 9

mi

1.0%: tuda

“"PM‘AI‘KH“ A 66° 25' I5’.0N I3" 09' 10100:!
Mmlpmmu Half-2mm) (2) B 6° [8' W.0N |0° 40' oo'.ow
“Inf-u ( c 21° 24' I6'.9N ”37° 49' 52'.7w
(l-npual 33mm!“ (4) D ‘6' 2V 57',2N 98: 20’ (3:11“!
(I. I‘Mmbou s F 20° 58' 26'.5$ 55. 17' 24 ,‘IOsl
Al‘lt‘lﬁulltnau(6) I- 43‘ oo' l2'..'6 650 II: 27'.7W
hum-mu) (i ' I0" 42' 06'.2N m M 202w
"mu-rm“) ll tn" :w 5. am I29“ 27' warns:
l . “Mm" a “VI" Ian-run... muse! I Tuna one-ac.

 

*Stntion G will be replaced with a station in the Pacific Ocean.

Key: 1. Norway;
2. Monrovia (Liberia);
3. Hawaii;

4. North Dakota;

—42-

5. Reunion Island;
6. Argentina;

7. Trinidad;

8. Japan.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 2.2.

 

_. ._-_.._.-_ _-.____._._(ll.._ . -_.-.-- (3....-.

Nam-nu m an:

Cums-a I. am" I- u all "ma-answer's

 

Station ' “m ”m '° ‘ "mm' c

33:22.“) “2““ ‘:-':~2'? ?-3

[ma ' ' . . .
.; um... Maggy .2... 3.. ...
I) «new» )lnamn) North Da .) 3.6 4,» L2
P:x-|¥Imu:0(keunion }'°) ﬁQ-gi 5%
'_ pmmma A! entim _-.. .'. .-
“(TPM""M°€1rEnidad) k; g? ?g

I! (Human) (Japan)

Key: 1. Transmission interval at the frequency f - 10.2 K3: in 1 cycle of
10 seconds;
2. Duration of the transmission in seconds.

The radio signals are transmitted by the shore stations at frequencies of 10.2
KB: (9f), 11.33 KB: (10f) and 13.6 KHz (12f), which are multiples of the base
frequency 1f - 1.133 KHz, i.e., in the infra-low frequency band (ILP).

The identification of the received signals in the shipboard indicating receiver
is accomplished through the permanently established time pattern for their
transmission by the shore stations, depicted in Figure 2.3. As can be seen
from this figure, the time intervals for the transmissions of the stations
(Table 2.2) have a strictly defined duration and set sequence, which makes it
possible to establish precisely from which station the signals are incoming

at the given point in time to the input of the shipboard indicating receiver.

The phase difference measurements are made at the single frequency of 10.2 KB:
(the "navigation" mode), while the 11.33 and 13.6 KB: frequencies serve to
eliminate the ambiguity (the UH mode).

The synchronization of the operation of the shore transmitting stations of the
"Omega" radionavigation system with the standard precision universal time
(Greenwich time) is accomplished through the use of high precision atomic
oscillators with a relative frequency instability of 10'1 . For this reason.
high stability crystal oscillators (the relative daily instability is 10'8),
which are used in marine indicating receivers, are synchronized with the precise
time signals of the shore stations of the "Omega" radionavigation system,

which increases the reliability of the phase measurements and makes it possible
to obtain precise resdouts of Greenwich time (the precision time measurement
mode).

To transmit the special measurement signals, the shore stations transmit addi-
tional frequencies in intervals free of the major frequency transmissions (see
the hatch-marked portions of the diagram in Figure 2.3), which can be used in
the range finding mode to determine a ship's position (the operational mode
called "po-po").

INFR‘0F1NCIAI.IISI1(N!LY
Key:

   
    
    
 
   

my."- dt on:
(1) "”"r'

poem-«(dun
(2) "" 'mm'mm"

r4 (am) (red 24] (am -- BM.)
.llruxi- ‘RI (BM. — woman; I] ~ *4 2 xl'n 1'13 (gm g”)
"Decca" 352%; am" green lo. 2 KB ( _ ’)

 

 

 

mm ) an ' master
(purp e) station
9] - l0.2 xl‘u
«um. IO] ".33 I‘ll! II - LII“ II'II I01 ul'll
"Omega" l2] - lllﬁnln 1_133 Kilt an .. slaved

"' station
' nan upmrmmunmummrm cll-pt-ls.

- ..!£or..thr_1'rira-_l" .nisnlaueceim

 

-... . __—__—-—_—_..-_—.

(5) I‘c-m- am °

 

 

map-Ia d maul

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mun-n as due.
‘4) “l. ‘6, ”In! "’00-.- | ‘7) IWPDI C'Yﬂcllh
d. 0.216 (‘37 u) d, 0.713 mum nil 5
(L32 In!)
-0, am (58.» u) d, 0.62" mun .il 3 d 5 .07 mun mil .
(I,|7-I nu) (I0!) Hm)
Al, ‘ (UK!) (:50 u) d, I." mum
(2.l|2 In)
:1 '-" 24 Inna d u 72 mun
8.0 (m .1] - 3,4 urn) (m II mum mo
(for 3f I 3.4 RH: (for IE- 1.133 K

 

 

 

Transmissions of the shore stations;
Computational (base) frequency;

Frequency determining the grid of precise isophases (precision tracks):

Width d of a precision track on the baseline. miles;
Ambiguity elimination mode*;

First stage;

Second stage.

Eliminating Multivalue Ambiguity in Phase Radionavigation Systems.

indicators.

of a ship.

-44.-

FOR!0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

Phase radio-
navigation systems using frequency or time gating (the "Decca" and "Omega"
radionavigation systems) have readout ambiguity in the readings of the phase

The UH mode - ambiguity elimination in the operation of marine
indicating receivers - is used to eliminate this.
measurements of the radio signals of the shore stations are made at lower fre-
quencies than the major frequencies used for determining the lines of position

In this mode, the phase
D
l—_¥=}_-:— _ — —

r wmmrwwmmmﬁ
_—I-_

     
   

  

I:-
ﬂmlwmmm "m m m
— _l—I —

 
   
 

"ﬁg smmwmmu_ m

l—l-I_l
__._.. ._ “.129... .19 .1899...

   
 

 

Figure 2.3. Time diagram of the radio signal transmission cycle

by the shore stations of the "Omega" radionavigation
system.

In the "Omega" radionavigation system, the shore stations transmit additional
frequencies of 11.33 and 13.6 RH: for the ambiguity elimination mode besides
the main frequency of 10.2 KHz. Phase measurements are made in this mode in
a marine indicating receiver either at the difference frequency of 3.4 KB:
(the first ambiguity elimination stage), formed by the difference between

the 13.6 and 10.2 KB: frequency, or at a frequency of 1.133 RE: (the second

ambiguity elimination mode), formed by the difference between the 11.3 KB:
frequency and the main 10.2 KHz frequency.

difference ‘8 (the difference in the ranges to the shore stations). just as

for the main navigation frequency of 10.2 KB: (see Figure 2.2). The difference
consists in the fact that during phase measurements at lower frequencies (3.5
or 1.13 KHz), the width of the tracks d ("coarse" tracks) is several times
greater than the width of the precision tracks formed during measurements at
the main frequency of 10.2 KHz. Values of the track widths of phase radio-
navigation systems are given in Table 2.3 for measurements at different fre-

quencies. The fact is that during phase measurements in the ambiguity elimina-
tion mode at the 3.4 KHz frequency, the width of the coarse track at the base

is equal to 26 miles, i.e., is three times greater than the width of the pre-
cision track of d - 8 miles.

To eliminate the ambiguity (determine the number N of the precision track when
using charts with the isophase grid drawn on them), one works from the pre-
supposition that the ship's location is known from other navigational determin-
Consequently. in the case of phase measurements using the "Omega" radionavigation
system indicating receiver at a frequency of 3.b KHz, the fractional part of

the coarse track width is determined which is applied to the chart taking

into account the requisite corrections, laying off the distance from the known
isophase line of the coarse track. In this way the number of the precision
track is determined which corresponds to measurements at the main frequency

of 10.2 KB: and the ambiguity is eliminated.

Ambiguity elimination can also be accomplished by a closure technique where
the ship's position is known sufficiently precisely from navigational determin-
ations or the coordinates of the location when leaving port are known, etc.

The ambiguity is eliminated in basically the same way in the "Decca" radio-
navigation system indicating receivers where the phase measurements are performed
at a frequency of 1f 3 14.2 KH-.

2.2. The "Firs-ID" Marine Indicating Receiver

The "Firs-ID" marine indicating receiver is intended for determining a ship's
position at sea using the radio signals of the "Decca" phase radionavigation
system.

The major technical specification for the indicating receiver are given below:

Supply voltage, volts 127 or 220 volts AC
Power mains frequency, Hz 50

Power consumption, V ° A 400

Maximum temperature range, °c from -10 to +50
Humidity range, 2 9S - 98

Type of antenna Vertical
Antenna height, m L A

Number of working frequencies 63

Diurnal stability of the crystal oscillator (2--3) . 10‘7
Number of received channels 5

Band of frequencies which can be received, KHz 70-130

Overall weight, kg 80.5

Operational Principle of the “Pits-1D" Indicating Receiver. The "Pits-lb"
marine indicating receiver has increased interference immunity and operational
reliability thanks to the use of a highly stable crystal master oscillator,

06, in the instrument as well as narrow band crystal filters in the measurement
channels.

Electromechanical compensation-tracking systems are used in the indicating
receiver, the elevated inertia of which as compared to the interference which

changes rapidly with time which accompanies the signals received from the
master and slave stations, assures low frequency filtering of possible errors

in the phase measurements.

- 4y -

FOR1OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

A measurement principle which is different from that of the foreign "Decca"
radionavigation system indicating receivers is used in the "Pits-ID“ instrument,
where this principle consists in reducing the radio signals from the master
station at a frequency of ﬁt to frequencies of 8f, 9f and 5f of the slave
stations and then measuring the phase difference w due to this at the nf
frequencies of the slave stations.

A block diagram of the "Firs-1D" indicating receiver is depicted in Figure 2.h.

The Synchronization Channel. The master oscillator, 06, which is installed in
a thermostatically controlled chamber, generates a highly stable reference
voltage at 6Fo, which is fed in the synchronization channel to the FAPCh

[phase locked loop, PLL] - a system for automatically fine tuning the phase

and frequency of the reference voltage 6Fo to the phase and frequency of the
radio signals from the master station. 0n the other hand, the radio signals

of the master station at 6f received by the ship's antenna A are fed following
preamplification in the RF amplifier to the mixer Sm, where the intermediate
frequency 6? is segregated out. The synchronization channel and measurement
channels of the indicating receiver are tuned to constant intermediate fre-
quencies of 100, 133.3, 150 and 83.3 KHz. This is achieved through the use

of a heterodyne frequency oscillator G, which generates a highly stable voltage
at one of 63 frequencies (6A), which are linearly related to the transmission
frequency of the master station of the selected network of the "Decca" radio-
navigation system. The noise immunity during reception is also boosted through

the use of narrow band crystal filters which are tuned to the intermediate
frequency.

The following voltage is fed to the input of the phase locked loop system
following the mixer, crystal filter and intermediate frequency amplifier, the
UPCh:
U”.- U.tos (Gobi-60 1;).
(2.6)

where 60 corresponds to the intermediate frequency of 6? while 69 (r/v) is
the phase shifts produced as a result of the time delay 1 during the trans-
mission of the radio signals from the master station to the ship [see (2.1)].

The master station signals 6f received on the ship can be considerably influenced
by interference of various kinds (for example, atmospherics, etc.), which are

of a random nature. A certain portion of this interference can pass through

the 6? crystal filter. For this reason, the continuous fine tuning of the fre-
quency and phase of the reference voltage at 6P0 from the highly stable master
oscillator 00 to the phase and frequency of the 6P voltage from the master
station has the advantage that by virtue of the considerable inertia in the
elements of the PLL tuning system, the latter practically does not respond to
rapid random changes (as a result of the action of interference) in the received
signals. Along with this, the reference voltage 6Fo, which is tuned to the
phase and frequency of the 6P signals from the master station will not contain
this random interference and is subsequently used for the phase measurements.

-48—

FOR‘OIF1C1Al.lEﬂ!(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ma

é:

 

a:
O

 

BS. i:§.e

bx»

a
. 004 238

kb

- at 3.:

_ at»?

kw

. . 5538 as
e ooEb§§>ezguatt

"5— co
3 x as
no

eks

.uuum OHS.-
.. «if 53::

 

: Sheena :
:3auoao:

3:36 "—5— n6.”

3.59

3.62

«v
I

.95 mm

A395; szczEu§=B~ Sinks

      

Q0.

-49..

:UUm OHUN:
a 55.! dﬁes:

gutsy

 

<95: “Stnaqu : 9.3.33 :

mo .13; 35:25 in: :uunuoao:

 

 

mo in; .95. .E

3.
be IE: .3 L C <

gonna—.0 . can tartaszeﬁﬁzé c czek

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [cont.]: 5. Master oscillator;
6. Oscillator;
7. PvK [?channel phase shifter?];
8. FDG [7oscillator phase detector?];
9. Phase detector 6;
10. Phase detector 8;
11. Motor;
12. SmG [?local oscillator mixer?];
13. Reduction gearing;
14. SFPS [not further defined];
15. FVPS [not further defined].

The 6Fo voltage from the PLL passes through the divider D:6, where the ambiguity
which occurs in the value of the phase during division is eliminated by a
special discrete phase shifter, DP.

The Mair Channel. The main channel of the indicating receiver is intended for
fine rising the phase of the reference frequency 1P0 to the phase of the master
station signal 6f. The operation of this channel increases the reliability of
all of the phase measurements, since the reference voltage at lFo which is fed
from the PLL circuitry thrOugh the master phase shifter unit, the BVF, the
divider D: 6 and the DF discrete phase shifter is then used in all operating
modes of the instrument both as the original master voltage which "remembers"
the phase of the master station, the VShCh.

The main channel unit is similar to the synchronization channel unit. At the
output of this channel, the intermediate frequency 6? is fed to the phase
detector F06, to which the master voltage 6P0 is also fed which is obtained
by multiplying the reference voltage lFo by six. "here there is a phase

difference 00 between the voltages cited here, the compensation-tracking sys-
tem fine tunes the phase of the 6Fo voltage (and consequently also the phase
of the lFo voltage) to the phase of the 6P voltage of the master station.

The reference voltage lFo, which is tuned in the main channel to the master
station phase, has the form:
Ulfg-U.M(OI+Q%). (2.7)

The Phase Difference Measurement Channels. The "Pirs- 10" indicating receiver
is designed to determine a ship's position (lines of position) by means of
finding the phase differences 01, $2 and $3 for the master and slaved station
signals in all three measurement channels (red, green and violet). The pro-
cesses which take place in this case are similar. For this reason, we shall
consider only the operation of channel I: the red channel.

The radio signals received by antenna A from slave station 1 [see (2.1)] are:

Un- U.eos89(l _.’.I.)
U

-50.-

FOR OIIHCJA1.lHiE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and following preamplification in the RP amplifier are fed to the mixer, where
' they are mixed with the frequency 8A of the local oscillator. The 8? intermediate

frequency is fed to phase detector F08 after passing through the crystal filter
and the IF amplifier, the UPCh:

u,,=u.m(su+an-';l). (2.8)

On the other hand, the voltage lFo [see (2.7)], which is fine tuned to the
phase of the master station. is fed to the Yx8 multiplier:

u,,.-u.m(au+su—;-). (2.9)

Reference voltage (2.9) is also fed to the red channel phase detector PBS. The
compensation-tracking system measures the phase difference 01. In accordance
with equations (2.8) and (2.9), this phase difference is equal to:

15-39:}. (2.10)
which makes it possible to find one line of position for a ship.

The measurements of the phase differences $2 and W3 in the green and violet
channels are made just as was explained above for the red channel.

The Measurement of the Phase Difference w by the Compensation-Tracking System.
Measurements of the phase differences w between the master and the slave stations
are made in the measurement channels of the "Pirs-lD" indicating receiver.
Compensation-tracking systems are used for this purpose (Figure 2.5), which
consist of phase shifters, phase detectors, motors and precise indicators

(phase meters). The tracking systems in the measurement channels are distin-
guished only by the use of reducers with different transmission ratios, and

for this reason. it is sufficient to treat the operation of such a system for
only 1 (the red) channel.

The reference voltage lFo is fed to the times eight multiplier, Yx8, and then
the 8P0 voltage is fed through the phase shifter Fv8 to phase detector FDB. The
mismatch voltage which is proportional to the phase difference $1 between the
8Fo voltage (tuned to the phase of the master station) and the 8P voltage
(having the phase of the signals from slaved station 1) is produced in this
detector. This mismatch voltage is fed from phase detector FD8 to the motor

M. which turns phase shifter Fv8 through the reducers as well as the pointers
(large and small) of the precise red indicator, the TIK.

The phase shifter ?v8 changes the phase of the 8P0 voltage until the mismatch
in phase detector FD8 is compensated. The readout is made from the TIK precise
Indicator, where the large pointer indicates the fractional portion while the
small pointer indicates the whole number of periods (tracks) of the measured
phase difference #1 [see (2.10)].

-51‘-

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(N§LY
FOR.0ITWCJAI.USE‘ONLN

 

Figure 2.5. The compensation-tracking system for phase measurements
("Pits-ID").

Key: 1. Phase detectcr 8;
2. Phase shifter 8;
3. Motor;
4. Reducer;
5. Step-up gearing (x3);
6. x8 multiplier.

Thus, to determine a ship's position (lines of position), measurements of the
phase differences 01, t2 and 03 are made in the three measurement channels.
These measurements are made at frequencies of 89, 99 and 59 [see (2.10)). In
order to have the capability of utilizing navigation charts with the "Decca"
radionavigation system hyperbole grids drawn on them, it is necessary to convert
the readouts of #1, W2 and #3 to the readings of the "Decca" radionavigation
system indicating receivers which measure the phase differences at the compari—
son frequencies of M9 - 260, 180 and 309 [see (2.2)]. For this purpose. the
readouts of the phase differences W‘, 02 and $3 in the "Pits-1D" are transmitted
to the large pointers through the step-up gearing (by factors of 3, 2 and 6
times in channels I, II and III respectively) (89 - 3, 9a ' 2 and 59 ' 6),

while they are transmitted to the small pointers, which calculate the whole

number of periods N (tracks) through step-down reducers (by factors of 8, 9
and 5 times).

Consequently, the rotation angles of the small pointers of the TIK [precision
rcd indicator]. TIZ [precision green indicator] and TIF [precision violet
indicator] are H times less (24, 18, 30) than the rotation angles of the
large pointers and one revolution of the small pointers corresponds to H
revolutions of the large pointers, i.e., contains 24, 18 or 30 tracks (one

revolution of the large pointer corresponds to a phase difference change of
Zn: by one track).

The track zone in the "Decca" radionavigation system is the term for the
number of tracks in one revolution of the small pointer. Thus, for the TIK

-52-

FOIiofFﬂJAl.USE1MVLY
precise red channel indicator, 24 tracks are contained in the track zone, etc.
An additional internal scale with 10 Latin letters A, B. C, D, E, F, G, H, I
and J is used to identify the zones (see Figure 2.5), to which the small

pointer of the precision red indicator is coupled through a step-down 1:10
reducer.

- 12 volts
-’Zb

    

+12 volts

            

aLammJ (ll)

maronemnu "can:
com

(6) (7) (8) (9)

       
 

SUMM Hornet

(11 £513. (13”!4‘”:

    
 

V.

Figure 2.6. Basic electrical schematic of the phase difference p
measurement circuitry in the "Pirs-lD" indicating

 

receiver.
Key: 1. RF amplifier 3; 11. Tachometric feedback;
2. RF amplifier 2; 12. Low frequency amplifier;
3. Phase shifter 8; 13. Output low frequency
a. Emitter follower 2; amplifier;
5. RF amplifier 1; 14. Tachogenerator;
6. Discrete phase shifter; 15- DC 0-5 electric NOCOY;

7. Divide by 6; 16. Reducer.
8. Divide by 40;

9. Modulator;

10. Emitter follower 3;

- 53 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Ult UH‘IL‘IAL bah ONLY

For convenience in identifying the readings taken from the precise indicators,
the scale divisions for the small pointers of the red channel are graduated
from 1 to 23 (24 divisions, including the 0 graduation); the green channel

is graduated from 30 to £7 (18 divisions, including the 30 graduation); and
the violet channel is graduated from 50 to 79 (30 divisions. including the

50 graduation). The stable positions of the phase shifters to which the small
pointers must be set in the "zero set" mode are indicated by large numbers on
these scales (for example, the numbers 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18 and 21 in Figure
2.5).

A basic electrical schematic of the phase difference 0 measurement circuitry of
the "Pits-10" indicating receiver is shown in Figure 2.6. The reference voltage
8F0, which is obtained by multiplying 1Fo by 8, is fed to the stator windings

of the phase shifter Fv8 (a BIF 0.19 type). Voltages are induced in the

rotor windings of FVB which are proportional to the sine and cosine of the

rotor rotation angle. After summing in a quadrature circuit consisting of
resistors Rl-R3 and capacitor Cl, the voltage 8F0 is phase shifted through an
angle which depends on the rotor rotation angle. The 8F0 voltage then passes
from phase shifter Fv8 through the emitter followers EPl, 8P2, RF amplifiers

] and 2 and is fed to phase detector F08.

On the other hand, the 8P voltage from the slave station 1, VH1, is fed to

this same phase shifter following amplification in RF amplifier 3. Phase
detector F08 is a summing bridge configuration, and for this reason, taking
into account the action of diodes DI and 02, we obtain a DC mismatch voltage
across capacitor CZ which is proportional to the phase difference *1 between
the voltages 8F and 8Fo. The mismatch voltage is fed from capacitor C2 through
protective relay RV-0.7 to the modulator HOD, where it is modulated with a
frequency of 416 Hz, obtained by dividing the reference 1F“ voltage by 40.

The mismatch voltage is fed from the low frequency output amplifier, UNChvykh'
to the control winding 1-2 of motor BC 0.5 after passing through emitter
follower EP3 and several low frequency amplifiers, UNCh's. This motor rotates
phase shifter Fv8 through the reducer R until the mismatch voltage is cancelled.
At the same time, the motor rotates the rotor of the tachogenerator Tth,

which generates a negative feedback voltage which is applied to the low fre-
quency amplifier to stabilize the operation of the DG 0.5 motor. He will note
that relay RY-0.7 actuates in the ambiguity elimination mode (UN) and discon-
nects the modulator, HOD, from the circuit of phase detector F08, so as not

to introduce errors into the readings of the precise indicators.

Eliminating Ambiguity in the “Pirs-lD" Indicating Receivers. The phase measure-
ments of 0 [see (2.4)] have an ambiguity of Zn“, where N is the number of
complete periods (tracks) determined in the ambiguity elimination mode. The
identification of the track number N consists in finding the correct readout
using the small pointers of the precise indicators. An additional indicator
(phase meter) CI is used for this in the "Pirs-lD" indicating receiver (see
Figure 2.h), where this meter is also called the "coarse" track indicator,

which makes phase measurements only at the frequency 1F (or If).

- 54 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The master and slaved shore stations of the "Decca" radionavigation system
transmit radio signals in accordance with the special MP [multipulse] or H? + V
time diagram for the ambiguity elimination mode.

The time pattern for the H? + V transmissions of "Decca" radionavigation system
shore stations (the mixed transmission cycle) is shown in Figure 2.7. The
transmission cycle begins at the outset of each minute with a short interruption
in the transmission of the master station (depicted in the figure with a thick
line), after which. the master station transmits signals simultaneously on
frequencies of SE and 6f for 0.45 see (from 0.15 to 0.6 sec), while the first
slave station 1 (red) transmits on frequencies of 8f and 9f. Then the second
pause in the transmission of the master station follows in the 10th second,
after which this station transmits signals on four frequencies (5f, 6f, 8f and
9f) for 0.65 see (from 10.15 to 10.6 sec).

Then follows the third brief interruption in the transmission of the master
station, and the first slave station 1 (red) transmits signals at frequencies

of 5f, 6f, 8f. and 9f for 0.45 see (from 12.65 to 13.1 sec). The master station
does not operate during this time interval. Then, as can be seen from the

time pattern for master station transmissions, depicted in the figure with

the thick line, there follows a fourth pause in the operation of the master
station. and the second slave station 2 (green) transmits at four frequencies
(Sf, 6f, 8i, and 9f)between 15.15 and 15.6 sec (for 0.45 sec), while the master
station does not operate during this period.

The fifth interruption in master station transmissions occurs prior to the
transmission of the 5f, 6f. BE and 9f ambiguity resolution signals by the
third slaved station 3 (violet), which follow from 17.65 to 18.1 sec (for 0.45
sec). In this time interval, the master station also does not operate.

After 20 seconds have elapsed following the short term interruption in trans-
missions, the master station transmits frequencies of Sf and 6f in the time
interval from 20.15 to 20.6 sec (for 0.5 sec) and simultaneously with it, the
second slaved station 2 (green) transmits frequencies of SE and 9f.

A similar phenomenon occurs after 40 seconds have elapsed, with the only differ-
ence that simultaneously with the master station which transmits signals at
frequencies of SE and 6f, no longer the second slave station transmits the
signals at frequencies of 8f and 9f. but rather the third slave station 3
(violet).

It is important to note that the transmission cycles for the ambiguity
resolution signals by the shore stations of the "Decca" radionavigation system
are of a symmetrical uniform nature and take place both with a repetition
period of one minute (this cycle is conventionally designated with the letter
V) and with a repetition period of 20 seconds (the multipulse, HP, transmission
cycle). The essence of the more reliable technique of ambiguity resolution,
UM. by means of using the multipulse mode consists in the fact that in marine

indicating receivers using this mode (the "Firs-1M", etc.), the 1f signals

- 55 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

qu .mﬁ www.

.26... coaumsasaam
3.233.: 05 5 3323 coauwwwiwcoﬁku :339: 9.3 no
acowuwum ouosw 93 mo coamauaucuuu >1": 9: «0 29536 as; .5 N 9.53..—
03 .mqr um 1;. L3. .. con 236 p.35

 

3m 3m 2.: Hall 2.2 .5 2% 3: 2.2. a? '33 u...

Islamalalgﬂ
Ialulalalmi
lululala 5.!

3.. Kg 34' 85. «a as“ .888 Q8 §~ 9.»
.25

 

  

       

      

  
   

 

.1 w “.9 2.: .2. 9.... .5 an. as. as. a...“ 93 § u.“

.oon .u

-56.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are segregated from the sum of all four freQuencies (5f. 6f. 8f and 9f) trans-
mitted simultaneously for 0.65 sec by each station in the network. The V and
MP cycles are easily distinguished in Figure 2.7, since the time intervals of
station operation in the V mode are depicted in the left half of the figure.
while the multipulse mode is shown in the right half.

The V transmission cycle is used in old models of indicating receivers and
makes it possible to resolve the ambiguity once per minute. When the HP trans-

mission cycle is employed, the ambiguity is resolved for each pair of stations
three times per minute.

The ambiguity resolution process consists of two stages (see Figure 2.4).

The first ambiguity resolution step consists in accounting for the additional
phase shift introduced into the IPO reference voltage when the master oscillator
DC voltage at 6P0 is divided by 6, where this oscillator is designed in a

phased lock loop configuration in each synchronization channel to fine tune

to the phase and frequency of the master station. This additional phase shift
will be a multiple of 60° and is determined by the quantity 2(2l/6). where

z is an unknown integer, which can assume values from zero to five (2 - 0, 1,

2, 3, 4, 5). To eliminate the ambiguity in the division and reduce the number

2 to zero, the master station signals at frequencies of 5f and 6f are used

in the transmission cycle for the ambiguity resolution signals (see Figure 2.7).

These signals which are received by the antenna of the ship's indicating
receiver (see Figure 2.4), following conversions in the main and violet channels,
are fed to the mixer Smc following the intermediate frequency amplifier; the

1? difference frequency voltage is generated in the mixer. The IF voltage is
then fed to the phase detector FDG of the compensation-tracking system, to

which the reference voltage IE is also fed, which contains, as was indicated
above, the phase shift of 2(2196) from the multivalued ambiguity of the divi-
sion of the phase of the reference voltage 6Fo by 6.

The phase metering device wrl measures the phase shift 2(21/6) or the difference
voltages 1F and Ira, and the readout on the white scale of the GI [coarse track
indicator] will not be equal to zero. This scale is graduated in numbers 2

from zero to five. By rotating the DIVISION AHBIGUITY control clockwise, which
has six positions, and the discrete phase shifter DP coupled to it, the phase

of the reference voltage lFo is changed in portions which are multiples of

60° until the complete compensation for the phase shift 2(21/6). The reading

of the white scale division of the coarse track indicator in this case will

be equal to zero. and the first stage in the resolution of the ambiguity is
completed.

The second stage of ambiguity resolutions [see (2.6)] consists in determining
the track number from the precise indicators, i.e., the number 21“ of the

total cycles of measuring the phase difference v. The 8f and 9f signals trans-
mitted simultaneously for 0.65 sec by each slave station are used for this (see
Figures 2.4 and 2.7).

- 57 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the 8f and 9f signals of slave station 1 are used when resolving the
ambigeity for the red indicator, the TIK [precise red indicator]. These signals
will be picked up by the antenna, and after undergoing conversion in the red
and green channels by means of frequency gating, they are fed to mixer Smc. The
difference frequency 1? is segregated in the mixer Smc, where this frequency
has a phase shift corresponding to the time delay r1/v with the passage of the
radio signals over the distance r1 from slave station 1 to the ship. The voltage
1? is fed to the phase detector PDG. 0n the other hand, the reference voltage
1? , which is tuned to the phase and frequency of the master station, is also
fes to phase detector FDG. The compensation-tracking system, the action of
which is similar to that which was described above. measures the phase difference
orz in the voltages 1F and lFo. and a readout appears on the red scale of the
coarse track indicator, the GI, which corresponds to this phase difference. It
is important to note that the measurement of the phase difference at is
accomplished at the base frequency 1? (lf), and therefore [see (2.4)[:

I|—I

¢r3u2nN'-}-2&- A -. (2.11)

 

where l is the wavelength correponding to the base frequency if = 14.2 KHz;

N; is the unknown number of complete cycles of change in the phase difference
vrz. The measured phase difference or likewise has an ambiguity of Znﬂl. The
hyperbolic grid of isolines plotted using formula (2.11) forms the so-callcd
"coarse" tracks. the width of which is several times greater than the width

of the precision tracks (see Table 2.3). Given the condition that the ship's
position at sea is known with an error of no more than three miles, i.e. with
a greater precision than half of the width of a coarse track, for which the
reckoning or determination of the position by other navigation instruments is
used. the number N1 of the coarse track will be known beforehand. For this
reason. the reading taken from the red scale of the coarse track indicator
makes it possible to find the number N of the precision track. For this. the
small pointer of the TIK precision indicator (red channel indicator) is set

in accordance with the reading of the red scale of the GI [coarse track indi-
cator] and the ambiguity in the phase measurements of $1 is thereby eliminated.

Similar operations must also be carried out to eliminate the ambiguity in the
readings of the precise indicators for the green and violet channels. For

this, the green and violet scale readings of the coarse track indicator are

set on the T12 and TIP [green and violet precision indicators] (in the green

and violet channels), by turning the small pointers of these indicators manually
to the corresponding divisions. After setting the small pointers of the pre-
cision indicators, the ambiguity resolution is considered completed.

Eliminating the Phase Shifts Produced in the Measurement Circuits of the "Pirs-
ID“ Indicating Receiver (Zero Setting). In the "zero set" mode, possible
undesirable phase shifts in the signals of the master and slave stations are
eliminated in the measurement channels of the indicating receiver. A special
SFPS circuit (see Figure 2.b) generates test signals (called pilot signals)

in the form of a train of short pulses with a repetition rate of if, which
are fed to the measurement channels in the "Pirs-lD" receiver. If during the

- 53 -

FOR,OF1ﬂ(JAI.USEIDNLY
passage of the if signals voltages appear by virtue of the properties and
engineering features of the electronic circuits used in the instrument, where
these voltage give evidence of the appearance of phase differences, then the
readings of the precision and coarse indicators are corrected.

The processes which take place in the indicating receiver in the "zero set" mode
are conveniently broken down into three steps.

The first step in the process consists in tuning the phase of the pilot signals
to the phase of the master station signals at the output of the main channel.
As can be seen from Figure 2.6, in the "zero set" position of the operating
mode switch, the pilot signals at If from the SFPS [pilot signal generating]
circuitry are fed through the RP amplifier to the circuitry of the main channel.
Because of the presence of narrow band filters in this channel, the 6f frequen-
cies are segregated from the 1f frequencies, where the former have the appro-
priate phase. The 6f signals are fed tothe mixer Sm, where they are mixed with
the 6A frequency of the local oscillator and are then fed through the crystal
filter and the intermediate frequency amplifier to the main channel phase
detector FD6.

0n the other hand, because of the action of the synchronization channel and the
FAPCh system [phase locked loop frequency and phase control system], the 6P0
(lFo) reference voltage is fed to this phase detector P06, where this voltage
is tuned to the phase and frequency of the master station. The mismatch vol-
tage corresponding to the phase difference between 6F (If) and 6P0 (1P0) '
is fed from phase detector FD6 to motor M of the compensation-tracking system,
which rotates the pilot signal phase shifter FvPS until this phase difference
is equal to zero. The tuning of the 1f pilot signal phase to the phase of

the master station signals (the phase of the lFo reference voltage signals)

is accomplished in this way.

The second stage of the process in the "Pirs-lD" indicating receiver in the
"zero set" mode consists in taking into account possible additional phase
shifts in the measurement channels and eliminating possible errors in the
readings of the precision track indicators. In this case, the 1f signals,
which are tuned to the phase of the reference voltage 1P0 signals, are fed
from the pilot signal generator through the RP amplifier to the measurement
channels (red, green, violet). Because of the presence of narrow band filters
in these channels. the 8f, 9f and 5f harmonics are segregated from the 1f
signals, where the former have the same phase as the 1f signals. The segre-
gated signals then pass through the mixers Sm, the crystal filters, the inter-
mediate frequency amplifiers and are fed to the appropriate phase detectors.
0n the other hand, the reference voltage 1P0 signals are fed to these same
phase detectors where these signals are tuned to the phase and frequency of
the master station. It is easy to see that the differences in the mismatch
voltages produced in the phase detectors correspond to possible phase shifts
in the 1f pilot signals because of their passage through the components of

the measurement channel circuits, and consequently, will be a source of errors
in the precise phase measurements. To take these errors into account, the

- 59 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFT-10A]. USE ONLY

.uouuuamau usmuao zocosvouu 30A
"mausnu uauucmwsouuoonm
a

ho .MOuaHnuuao uuuaoz

acuucou hucosvoum van manna ouquOuaa osu mo uauwaoSQo oaann .w.~ unauum

AC

 

 

uuuuuuzu oow£m
“Nu hwaux

.ma
.NA
.HH
.oH
.a

“nu“uuanEo zoaoaaouu non
«MunoHHOM uuuuuam
muouwaavo:

“unloHHOM nouuuam

2:— >33—

ququuuv uuwnm
mucuoouov maocousuchw
“Hocawso coauwsuaounuchm

.w
.h
.o
.n
.c
.n
.N
.H

.u0>«ouou unauauuvcu :nalmu«m= USu mo huuuauudo

      

away

an ode
o<> am

"an:

- 6O -

FOR<HWﬂJALIﬁﬂEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

large pointers of the precision track indicators are set on the zero gradua-
tions, while the small pointers are set to any large division on the inside
scale.

The third step in the "zero set" process consists in taking into account possi-
ble errors due to supplemental phase shifts when the radio signals pass through
the measurement channels of the indicating receiver during phase measurements
with the "coarse" indicator, the 61. At first, the additional phase shift with
the passage of the pilot signals through the main and the violet channels is
taken into account. In this case, by pressing the ZERO I control, the 6F and
5? (6f and Sf) are fed to the mixer Smc [coarse track indicator mixer] from

the main and violet channels, which produce the difference frequency 1F (If).
The latter is fed to the FDG phase detector [coarse track phase detector], to
which the reference voltage 1P0 is also fed. With the appearance of an addi-
tional phase difference between the IF and lFo voltages, the reading on the
white scale of the coarse indicator will differ from zero. A zero reading is
to be set on this scale using the ZERO I control.

Then the additional phase difference with passage of the 9F and 8? (9f and 8f)
pilot signals through the green and red measurement channels is taken into
account. By pressing the ZERO II control, the indicated frequencies are fed
to the Smc mixer, while their 1? difference frequency is fed to the PDG [coarse
track phase detector]. 0n the other hand, the lFo reference voltage is fed

to this same phase detector, the F06, through an additional phase corrector,
the FvK, which is inserted when the ZERO 11 control is pressed. With the
appearance of the phase difference between 1? and lFo, a mismatch voltage is
produced in the coarse track phase detector and the white scale reading will
not be equal to zero. This phase difference is taken into account by means of
the FvK phase shifter using the ZERO II control until the zero reading appears
on the white scale.

The FAPCh [Phase Locked Loop] System for Tuning the Phase and Frequency of the
6F0 Reference Voltage to the Phase and Frequency of the 6? Voltage of the
Master Station, the VShCh. A two stage (primary and secondary) frequency
control system using a compensation-tracking system is employed in the "Pirs-
10" indicating receiver in the FAPCh system, which consists of a master crystal
oscillator 06 (Figure 2.8), a phase shifter PAP, a motor H (a Dc-OSTA type)

and a variable capacitor C. After the instrument is turned on, a voltage of
-27 V is fed through contacts 3 and 4 of relay R2 to electromagnetic clutch

EM, which actuates, disconnecting the step-down 1/12 reducer from the motor

M, and the latter operates through the 1/100 step-down reducer (the broad
operating bandwidth of the PAPCh [PLL frequency and phase controll). Simultan-
eously, a voltage of 26 VAC at a frequency of 416 Hz is fed through contacts
2/5 and 8 and 9 of relay R1 to motor M. The latter starts to rotate and turns
the phase shifter PAP through the reducer, and couples the rotation through

the additional 40/1 step-down reducer to cams A and B of variable capacitor

C. returning it to the initial position. It is important to note that relay

R1 actuates only with the simultaneous closure of contacts 3 and 4, and l

and 2, which contact can B with a broad projecting lug and can A with a

narrow tooth—like projection respectively, the position of which corresponds

- 61 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAL UDI'. UNL!

to the initial position of the capacitor C. With the actuation of relay R1,
capacitor c will be in the initial position, which also corresponds to the
first stage in the automatic frequency control of the phase locked loop system.

The actuation of relay R1 connects the windings of the motor K through contacts
1, 2, S, and a, and 7 and 8 to the output of the output amplifier. In this
case, the mismatch voltage between the reference 6P0 voltage fed from the
thermostatically controlled master oscillator 06 through phase shifter PAP and
the emitter follower KP to the phase detector PD, and the 6P voltage of the
master station, which is also fed to the phase detector through the synchron-
ization channel, is fed from the low frequency output amplifier to the control
windings of the motor H. In the process of subsequent automatic frequency
control (the second stage), when the mismatch voltage appears in phase detector
FD, the motor M rotates the phase shifter PAP and the variable capacitor C
until the phase and frequency of the 6P0 voltage is completely synchronized
with the 6P voltage from the master station.

The second synchronization stage takes place within the range of rotation

of the capacitor C limited by the rotation of the cam with the broad lug.

Hhen outside of this range, contacts 3 and 4 of relay R1 are open, relay R1

is de-energized and the automatic frequency control process starts anew by
means of rotating capacitor C to the initial position, as was described above.
With the completion of the automatic frequency control and synchronization
process for the 6Fo and 6? voltages (the mismatch voltage from the phase
detector will be equal to zero in this case), the maximum voltage will be
picked off of the synchronous detector SD. This voltage is fed through the
breaking contacts 10 and 12 of relay R4 and the controller (modulator, emitter
follower, low frequency amplifier) to relay R2, which actuates, opening con-
tacts 3 and 4 in the power supply line for the electromagnetic clutch EH. The
motor H turns on to rotate the phase shifter FAP through the step-down 1/100
and 1/12 reducers with an overall transfer ratio of 1:1,200 (the narrow operat-
ing bandwidth of the PLL frequency and phase control). The PLL system shifts
from the search mode to the mode of tracking the phase and frequency of the
master station signals. In this case, the completion of the automatic fre-
quency and phase control synchronization process will be clearly seen from
the blinking light on the scales of the precision track indicators.

2.3. The "Firs-1H" Marine Indicating Receiver

The modernized "Pits-1H" marine indicating receiver differs in its structural
design from the "Firs-1D" in the use of the MP [multipulse] mode in ambiguity
resolution (UN). The reliability of ambiguity resolution is increased in this
way, especially with an increase in the distance of the ship from the trans-
mitting stations of the selected network of the "Decca" radionavigation system.
A block diagram of the instrument is shown in Figure 2.9. In the multipulse
ambiguity elimination mode. each station in a network of the "Decca" radio-
nnvigation system transmits signals at frequencies of 6f, 8f, 9f, and 5f
simultaneously at intervals of 20 seconds (see Figure 2.7). By summing them,
one can segregate the fundamental frequency 1f from which the number of

tracks N is identified.

- 52 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2.9. Block diagram of the "Firs-1H"

Key: 1.

Synchronous detector 1;
Relay RV—0.7;

Motor M;

Phase shifter;

Master oscillator, 6Fo;
"Zero sct";

FVPS - pilot signal phase
shifter;

Phase detector;
Ambiguity division;

TIK - red channel pre-
cise track indicator;

. Varicap multipulse

phase shifter;

- 63 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indicating receiver.

12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

Multipulse zero set;
Phase shifter 8;

Phase shifter 9;

GI - coarse track indi-
cator;

Emitter follower;

PD - peak detector;
Multipulse control;
Network number;
Hultipulse balance;

FDG B coarse track phase
detector;

TIZ - green channel pre-
cise track indicator;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [cont.]: 23. TI? - violet channel precise
track indicator.

The signals cited here are picked off from the secondary windings of transformers
Trl--Tr4 inserted in the circuits of all of the measurement channels in the
"Firs-1H" indicating receiver. The voltage obtained is fed through the emitter
follower E? to the peak detector PD, which limits the voltage on the down side,
where the short width pulses with a repetition rate of 1? are also segregated
out. These pulses are then converted to sine waves at the same frequency and
fed to the phase detector PDG [coarse track phase detector]. 0n the other
hand, the reference voltage lFo is fed to the phase detector from phase shifter
pr. Using the phase measurements made by means of the compensation tracking
system, which consists of the FDG phase detector, the phase shifter yr and the
motor M, the ambiguity is resolved as was explained above using the readings

of the GI [coarse track indicator] scales.

A provision is made in the "Pirs-lH" indicating receiver for the adjustment

of the mutual phase relationships between the received 6f, 8f, 9f and 5f
signals, since it is possible to segregate the synthesized lF voltage from the
sum of the four frequencies cited above given the condition that the latter

do not undergo any additional phase shifts when passing through the correspond-
ing measurement channels.

The phase relationships are adjusted in the "zero set" mode by means of changing
the phase of the local oscillator frequencies at 8A, 9A and 5A, for which

rhree varicaps FVHP [multipulse phase shifter] are used, the supply voltage

to which is delivered through the HULTIPULSE ZERO potentiometers.

The maximum deflection of the HULTIPULSE BALANCE meter needle corresponds to
the isolation of the synthesized IF frequency, and consequently, the subsequent
reliable elimination of the ambiguity in the phase measurements.

The "Firs-1M" indicating receiver set contains four units with the following

overall dimensions and weight (without the matching parts of the connectors):
--The receiver (P): 425 x 682 x 225 mm, 32 kg;

--The block of indicators (31): 640 x 403 x #06 mm, 22 kg;

--The power supply (BP): 477 x 379 x 231 mm, 25 kg:

--The antiradar filter (PLP): 76 x 48 x 335 mm, 1.4 kg.

The following are included with the equipment set of the "Firs-1H" indicating
receiver (Figure 2.10):

-—Fau1t detecting instrument (PON);

—-Kit of spare parts, tools and accessories (19 modules);

--Technica1 description;

--Connecting rubles.

FOI.OFFKJAL.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A general view of the block of indicators of the "Pirs—lM" instrument is shown
in Figure 2.11. The following are arranged on the front panel of the block of
indicators: the scales of the precise indicators. the TI (5 is for the red, A
is for the green and C is for the violet); WHITE, RED, VIOLET and GREEN scales
of the CI [coarse track indicator]; the ZERO and TRACK setting controls for
the pointers of the precision track indicators; the ZERO set control for the
WHITE Scale of the coarse track indicator; the NETWORK NUMBER switch for select—
ing the network number; the OPERATING MODE switch; the HEAT signal light for
the thermostat heating system; the DIVISION AHBIGUITY switch; the ILLUMINATION
control for adjusting the filament current of the scale lighting lamps; the
D—PRESS button for operation in the combined variant; the meter indicator for
the multipulse phase balance; the controls for correcting the phase of the
local oscillator frequencies of the individual channels (K is for the red, 2
is for the green and F is for the violet); the light indicating switch for the
coarse track indicator.

 

Figure 2.10. The complete equipment complement of the "Firs-1M"
indicating receiver with the fault detection instrument.

For convenience in operating the instrument on board ship, a fault detection
instrument (PON) is used in the "Firs—1M” indicating receiver. The amplitude
and freQuency, as well as the pulse width of the signals being checked, which
are picked off from the corresponding monitor plug connectors of the "Pits—1M"
indicating receiver are monitored by means of the fault detection instrument
(Figure 2.12).

The main technical specifications for the fault detection instrument are given
below:

Maximum measurable signal voltages Up :0 10 volts
Range of measurable frequencies 25 Hz--25 KHz
_ 55 _

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Signal pulse widths which can be measured at

levels of 0.7 to 1.5 volts 800 us--800 ms

Deviation of signal amplitudes from the

nominal values i(20-25)Z

Duration of continuous operation 6 hours

Supply voltage 127 VAC. 220 VAC,
+52

Power mains frequency 40 Hz, 400 Hz, 1;!

Power consumption 40 VA

Height of the instrument 7 kg

Overall dimensions 346 x 223 x 212 mm

The following components are placed on the front panel of the fault detection
unit (see Figure 2.12): toggle switch 81, ON-OPF, for turning the instrument
on and off; the 127 volt - 220 volt - control for setting the supply voltage;
the POHER male connector for the supply voltage input; switches 82, B3 and 34
for setting the test programs; the MEASUREMENT - RESET counter toggle switch;
the FREQUENCY CHECK two place counter (the lamps L1 and L2 are dekatrons); the
AMPLITUDE CKECK meter; the CALIBRATE control for the meter; the TEST monitor
socket for the fault detection instrument; and a 0.5 amp fuse.

._......—._..—. ..—-——._—.—.

%
Track Zero

 

Figure 2.11. The indicator block of the "Pits-1H" instrument.

Key: 1. Operating mode;
2. Heat;

3. Network number; zero set; master station coarse
track sync;

-66-
INJR‘OFTHCIAI.I£SE‘0BﬂLY
FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE10NLY

Key [cont.]: 4. Operate;
5. Heat [indicating light];
6. Phase correction;

7. Coarse track indicator scale lighting: on - off;
8. Division ambiguity;

9. Scale lighting;
10. D-press.

IIIIDOI. Iltlilu Ihl‘uul.
Frequency Check Amplitude
on“ .3 Check

I
ﬂ 1- “3“, u )0 u

.. 1' " " 0" TEST

It".

"I." I”"‘"_" __...
Progrm :II..I:(."‘
__ Inf. (1_

 

Figure 2.12. Exterior view of the fault detection instrument.

Key: 1. Type "Pirsl-lﬂ". No. 709. P0" [fault detection
instrument].

A block diagram showing the amplitude testing of signals is depicted in

Figure 2.13. The signal being checked is fed through switch 32 to the modulator
MOD, where it is modulated with an Ac voltage at a frequency of 400 Hz, which

is fed through the matching emitter follower E? from a push-pull multivibrator.
Then. the signal being checked passes through an amplifier circuit and limiter
0. and is fed to the meter I. Based on the deflection of the meter needle.

one can judge whether the signal amplitude falls in the specified range. A
signal with a deviation of 1(20 - 25)! of the nominal value is considered
normal, 1. e., within the range of the first - sixth scale divisions. Signals
being monitored with voltages of up to 10 volts are checked with limiting with

respect to the maximum. For this, a voltage of -12. 6 volts is fed to the
limiter through switch 84 in the "A" position.

A provision is made in the instrument for calibrating the meter I in a calibra-
tor K. The calibrating voltage of 0.6 volts is fed through switch 32. With
the deflection of the meter needle I from the fourth scale division, the needle
is returned to this position with the CALIBRATE control, for which a voltage

of -12.6 volts is fed through the potentiometer. When calibrating the meter,
program 413 is set with controls 82, 33 and 84 (see Figure 2.12).

- a] _

FOR10FFKJALIEEIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4?,” -12.6 v. 4?.”

 

Figure 2.13. Block diagram of the circuitry for signal amplitude

testing.

Key: 1. Calibrator; S. Emitter follower;
2. Signal being checked; 6. Pulse generator;
3. Modulator; 7. Limiter.

a. Emitter follower;

The frequency or width of the signal pulses is checked in accordance with the
block diagram shown in Figure 2.16 and consisting of the channel for the fre-
quency being measured, a reference frequency channel, a counter, reset and
triggering devices as well as a controller.

The basic function of the circuitry consists in generating a time interval
equal to the duration of one period of the frequency being studied or width

of the pulse being checked, and turning on an electronic switch, Kl, for this
amount of time in the reference frequency channel. The measurement process
consists in modulating (quantizing) the generated time intervals with the
reference frequency pulses and calculating the number of these pulses with a
two place decimal counter, which registers the value of the measured frequency
or the width of the signal pulse being studied.

Frequency Measurement. The frequency being measured (at a level of 0.7 volts)
is fed through switch V2a to the input of the channel for the frequency being
measured. It is then routed through the matching emitter follower 8P7, ampli-
fier U7, and emitter follower BP8 to Schmidt trigger Tg6, where it is con-
verted to pulses. the width of which is equal to the period of the frequency
being measured. It is then fed through the 0:8 divider and emitter follower

9 to the wafers V2g and V2v of switch V2. When measuring a frequency, switch
V2 is set in the "6" or "7" position.

The electronic switch K1 in the reference frequency channel is controlled
through emitter follower 8P6 by Schmidt triggers Tgb and Tg5 of the controller.

.-68-

FOB OFFICIAL USE ONLY
u~ couumsun .on uo~> .:umoa: .oa

“waning; 3» “0339.2 .3 “n 330:8 nouuuam .a

3 330:8 h332.5. .2 “N nowwuuu noun—sum .m

"n nonmuuu unwasum .oH “N uoaodmou nouuwam .n

3 hogaaow nauuuam .nn "5....qu 323.50on .0

.uwca unduﬂw «A :Ohuwxon .3” "H MU3OHH0u hwuuaﬁm .m

umau» can uoaux .- memmnﬂmm .n pudwaﬂna< .ma "H Hannah“ geaasom .c

we “guacaoo .NH "N uoauuaaa< .n

uoaoaaou nouuwsu .nN “Hocaaso “H “mauudaa< .~
mun—3m .ou aocoavouu 00:833— .: «..hu:o:vouu mucououmm: 2— ”aux

.9533 533
0339 vca hocoavouu Amanda new iuuaouuu 23 mo £93va x03;— .:.~ 2598

.MOuwunmﬁugs 05 so».— vneEuéuwg? Em ‘1 3%

:aouug no aux—0:90.; vouauaoz: :3u.§§= :5. «£25? 35328::

                 
                 

  

l‘lll'l'llllll'llll

3:832. 3:835: E55

   

33:2 3 83.3.
8.835% _

RwPIIIQCL

  

.v |~..

£5395: 33WKnual... L nowv

0.— aouucoo .

 

   

33

IIIIQUﬂﬂEJﬂ§A§ﬂIII14ﬁﬁéz

  

-59-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When switch V1 is set in the "reset" position, the dekatrons L1 and L2 of the
counter are switched to the initial position, and the flip-flops of Tg2 [Schmidt
trigger 2] -the divider in the reference frequency channel, are set to the
position for half of a readout unit, which makes it possible to avoid the
readout error of :1 in the case of a multiple ratio of the reference frequency
and the frequency being measured.

When switch V1 is set to the "Measure" position, a triggering signal is fed
from biased multivibrator G to flip-flop Tga, the flip-flop reverses its state,
also shifting flip-flop TgS which is coupled to it to the new state. The pulse
of the frequency being measured then incoming from emitter follower 9 shifts
flip-flops Tgb and TgS to the state where the feed of the blocking voltage
through emitter follower 6 to the electronic switch is terminated. The switch
turns on and passes the reference frequency pulses, which pass through switch
V2d, amplifiers U1 and 02, Schmidt trigger Tgl, emitter follower 1, the elec-
tronic switch K1, emitter follower 2. the flip-flop divide by 8 divider Tg2

and emitter follower 3. The two place decimal counter (dekatrons L1 and L2)
count the number of reference frequency pulses. The next regular pulse then
coming from emitter follower 9 of the channel for the frequency being measured
shifts the flip-flops Tgb and TgS of the controller to the opposite state,

the switch is cut off and the pulse counting is terminated. with the arrival
of the next triggering pulse, the measurement process is repeated.

Measuring Signal Pulse Width. Measurements of signal pulse widths are made
by feeding the pulses to be tested (at a level of no less than 2.5 volts)
through switch V2a to emitter follower 7 and then to amplifier U5. Simultan-
eously with this, the pulses are fed through amplifier U7, where they are
inverted, and emitter follower 8 to amplifier U6. Positive pulses are taken
from amplifiers U5 and U6, where the pulse from the negative leading edge

of the input pulse is taken from US and the pulse from the positive leading
edge of this pulse is taken from the output of U6. To measure the width of
a positive pulse. switch V2 is set in the "8" position, and when measuring

a negative pulse, it is set in the "9" position. The pulses being measured
are then fed to flip-flops Tga and TgS, and the measurement process takes
place just as in the case of frequency measurement.

In the autocheck mode, the program number is set at 618 and a 400 Hz voltage

is fed through switch V2a into the channel for the frequency being measured,
where this voltage following conversion is fed from the output of emitter
follower 9 to switch V2d for the input of the reference frequency channel. The
counter readings should change continuously in this case. when the program is
set at SIB, the counter readout should not change.

The set of test programs and the readings of the AMPLITUDE CHECK indicator and
the FREQUENCY CHECK counter are given in the operating instructions for the
"Firs-1M" indicating receiver.

- 7o -

FOR‘OFHKJAI.USEfﬂVLY
2.4. Requirements Placed on the Installation, Alignment and Operation of
Indicating Receivers Under Marine Conditions

The "Pirs-lM (or D)" indicating receiver is installed in a heated room in a
location convenient for servicing and use, while the indicator block, the BI,
is installed close to the operating position of the navigator (in a bulkhead

or on a navigator's table), and the receiver P and power supply 8? are installed
in an insulated room at a distance of no more than 40 m (Figure 2.15) from the
indicator block. Moreover, when laying out the individual instruments included
in the complete indicating receiver package, one takes into account the
maximum permissible distances which depend on the design characteristics of

the connecting cables. The positions of the connectors (up or down) in the
installation of the instrument are shown in Figure 2.15. It is permissible

to replace the KNRE and KNRETE type cables with cables having the same number
of cores, the same cross-sections and similar shielding. If the units of

the "Pits-1H" indicating receiver are located at distances of no more than

2.5 m from each other, then it is possible to use cables supplied by the manu-
facturing plant as part of the complete equipment package.

   

 

—'—-—' "(J-CH" _ ‘ " " Mummrnnm‘

Rece}ver ' 'G""F"“'*

 
  
  
 

Indicating
Unit

I 1N1"

To the antenna

 

Figure 2.15. Schematic showing the electrical connections for the
"Firs-1M".

Key: A. To the map tracer;
8. Antiradar filter;
C. To the ship power mains, 220 VAC (or 127 VAC), 50 Hz.

A vertical marine omnidirectional antenna with a length of from 4 m to 6 m is
used to receive radio signals from the stations of the selected network of

the "Decca" radionavigation system. If the antenna has a length of more than

6 m. then it is permissible to incline it to the horizontal by no less than

80°. The capacitance of the antenna feedline should not exceed 2,350 picofarads.

- 71 ‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The antenna is to be located far away from the antennas of the ship's radio
transmitting equipment and fastened sufficiently tightly. since its rocking
can introduce additional errors into phase measurements.

_——.———_——————__——

. Map-a a true-av- Jun-u. ur than
hLer. "Wm-Eb- r-M-mﬂ- n:

TENN-In? (HOMO!
£1337'iluw' "IDWI
TSleuu' 9440)“)!
I'llonxluu' I

1." (9mm '-
.-1~I1(l’K-lm (5 I “N-
1331le 2.5-.
mun-u 2.5a
7337A'd 2.530
.T3llh'llu' 2.5a
Tsﬂxlﬂ --
.3x3.6lnl' lo:

 

The checking of the operational status of the "Pits-l" indicating receiver

is accomplished under marine conditions when using the instrument for naviga-
tion, as well as for preventive purposes every 200 hours of operation, but

no less often than once every three months.

The fault detection instrument is used in the "Firs-1M" indicating receiver

to check the power supply circuits (test the power supply voltages of the
instrument), the indicator block (check the reference frequencies) and the
receiver (check the reference frequency, intermediate frequency voltages, etc.).
The set of test programs and permissible values of the deviations in the
voltages being checked are given in the operating instructions for the instru-
ment.

In the case where defects are found which cannot be successfully eliminated
under shipboard conditions, the instrument is to be repaired and aligned by
specialists of the electronics radionavigation service for shipping.

The readiness of the "Firs—1H" indicating receiver for use is established during
the start-up of the instrument and the subsequent performance of the following
operations (see Figure 2.11):

1. One hour before the start of operation of the instrument, throw the
OPERATING MODE switch to the "heat" position.

The thermostat of the crystal oscillator unit is heated, which is attested by
the fact that the green monitor lamp HEATING is on. When the requisite temper-
ature is reached (after 20 to 30 minutes), the light goes off. It is possible
[or the light to come on repeated for short periods of time (1 to 5 minutes)
during the process of the subsequent adjusting of the thermostat temperature.

2. The twin NETHORK NUMBER switch is set to the number (outside scale) and
letter (inside scale) chosen from the network chart for the "Decca" radio-
navigation system.

-72-

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂEiDNlY
3. The OPERATING MODE switch is set in the "Zero Set" position. After 1 to
3 minutes, the scale lighting for the E, A and C precision track indicators
should begin to blink and there should be continuous illumination of the
WHITE scale for the coarse indicator, where these are evidence of the comple-
tion of the process of fine tuning the master oscillator to the phase and
frequency of the master station of the network.

a. The greatest deflection of the phase balance meter needle is achieved by
rotating the PHASE CORRECTION after pressing the K, 2 and P [red, green and
violet] controls.

5. Using the ZERO and TRACK controls, the large pointers are set to zero on
the outer scale while the small pointers are set to any of the large numbers
on the inner scales of the precise E, A and C indicators after these controls
are pressed. The zero graduation on the WHITE scale of the coarse indicator
is set using the ZERO control.

6. Having set the control to the ON position, turn on the light display for the
scales of the coarse indicator. the GI [coarse track indicator].

7. The OPERATING MODE switch is set in the "Sinkh VShChG" ["coarse track master
station synchronization"] position. The RHITE scale of the coarse indica-
tor, which has divisions of 0, l. 2, 3, 4 and 5 will be illuminated for
2.5 seconds every 20 seconds. It is necessary to take the reading of the
WHITE scale which should be set equal to zero.

8. Rotate the DIVISION AHBIGUITY switch clockwise by the number of divisions
corresponding to the noted reading of the WHITE scale, making the reading
of this scale equal to zero.

9. The OPERATING MODE switch is set in the "operate" position.

The small and large pointers of the E, A and C precise track indicators, in
rotating, will come to stable positions which make it possible to record the
corresponding readings, since the scales of these indicators are continuously
illuminated. The RED, GREEN and VIOLET scales of the coarse indicator are
illuminated for 2.5 seconds each during a single cycle of 20 seconds in step
with the time pattern for the ambiguity elimination in the following sequence:
red. green and violet. The readings of the small pointers of the E, A and C
precise indicators are matched to the readings of these scales of the coarse
indicator at the moment they are lighted up. For this, for example, the small
pointer is set to the reading of the division of the inside scale equal to

the readings of the RED scale in accordance with the reading recorded from the
RED scale of the coarse indicator using the TRACK control of the E precise
track indicator. Similar operations in determining the number of the precise
track (the setting of the small pointers) are also carried out for the A and

C precise indicators. In the "operate" mode, the WHITE scale is not lighted.

The track zone is set by means of the TRACK control by rotating the small
pointer through that whole number of revolutions for which the letter designating

-73-

FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the given zone appears in the cutout in the dial plate of the precise track
indicator. In this case, the numerical index of the zone is determined from
the "Decca" radionavigation system chart on which the dead reckoning position
of the ship is drawn.

10. The pointer readings are taken from the precise indicators and the corres-
ponding lines of position are drawn on the navigation chart with the "Decca"
radionavigation system hyperbola grid drawn on it.

During the first hour of operation, it is necessary to take care that the
readings of the small pointers of the precise track indicators do not differ
from the readings of the corresponding scales (RED, VIOLET, GREEN) of the
coarse indicator. where necessary, the readings of the small pointers are
to be corrected every 30 minutes with a subsequent increase in this interval
up to 2 to 3 hours.

With a change in the number of the "Decca" radionavigation system network,
the operations presented above are repeated, starting with paragraph 2.

_ 74 -

INJR‘OFIWCJAI.USE(HVLY
CIA"! mn_. mu AID rum-run “MUM“ mm

 

Ll. ha claaailiaauau ll Ind“; hat-r" at Marina Pal-a .4 Vain-nan
Indium“. lyn-

llarLaa pal-a II yulaa-phaaa raaimiutiu ayn-a (WI) an a aa-a of log
rum rall- ninth- and an lat-4d (or «uni-h; a auy'a with: at part
IIII‘GII Ira aura with a proclai- uhicn aaluru "Hanna! aalaty Ita- rail-
in m In aha "an 00a. n- 'lacaad' ”In radian-visa“- not. .1 'laraa-C"
"lac-yum an“. an tho can an" ﬂair and lar :3- ma 0! Irrha mi-
n“. [5. 6:. hu- oyan-a an it poaaihla ta name the “(hr-a“ Ia Eh
din-cu Ir- a IN. to an stationary poi-u: a pair Katina um synchronously
I sit radio ulnar. For a bun radio Ina mun nloclcy. v. a doll-
:::a rim till-rm. a: hum- Iha hat-ll o! arrival a! aha radio aipala Ir-
Ih aim-a autism corn-pal- to a particular 1mm in th- liar-cu Ar.
hi0 ri- liﬂarnu in «nu II. radio lulu“- ur-zar .4 u Ian-rad by
alaaa at a “Maud i-lkatia. raraivar. 1h aa—crlc lot-a cl Man a! canal
“Maroon in th- “at-cu Ir. a clip to M acacia-a hr- n lull- h :50
lor- al a Iyurbola an it. “run a! “a car“. nu. Klara raﬂaaaviurin
ayalau bah-3 non. “Hanan-raging. or bynrhali: ant-a arming u the
line o: gee-m: nullity Nina nan-rad.

 

My with. Ia “uni-ad by Ila inuraaerlal o! Iba m Incision. act-roan“-
iaa w “a dill-rang" ll rh “ac-«- to the «- paira a! m antic-a. ma
pair at station «ad-u a! a tartar (van) .3; a ulna (m) union. aaparaul
by a liOI-Gl which la calla! Ila Malina 5. ha Iaarar Julia. start a.
lru-iauin cl ch radio plan viru - rancid. ”rid (mania. u) 1' a: a
cam r ("my 9! I. utila lb- alavaa lullua main Ilaaa pal-u ad aya-
clrmaly "Ir-nit Ib- will a canal- Ii- dahy :4.

m 'mao-n' rdlnrvlutha mn- ia a Inc. «a may-chunk“ (blond-c)
Malian. no“ can air 0! antic-a :r-nila radio yulua with a manila
parlad T a“ a :ar-riar lraquory I. did mm (ru- Iha pala- ra'arklu
period and earriar (IM’ or Ila arhcr aair.

M or more pain 0! nation «I M «III-a4 in a aamrt. .4 In IM- can.

their carrier lraaunclaa an chut- In I-. I- this can. aha nun- ar alm
Maxim an an no a: aua ”in. vb“. In alt-or taut. a» nun Italian 0! at
pair in colonial with the alava nation a! nectar pair. an. no Malia 1-.“
lot the najurily a! nation pain ma :0 m u ”0 an".

M IM- anon: :iu. thra- earrhr iraquaey eta-la If. not hr ayam unra-
Iin la IM lulu-ma ball: I. 1.050“; 2. LISO m d ). moo III. II.
repetition urine: ("purl-n ra a.) a! in- radio laaa an “In“ In rim
grow». lulu-am by no lauara I (Ma). I. (luv and I (amid). lath
new cal-iat- al aw: materially heraaaiu ("urn-r) "parish: pariah
duipanl by ordinala I-rala I 9r- 0 u 1. m and“ valu- a! any 0!

m u "patina: pariah 1. annual in .kroaaunla. ia unusual by aha
Iona-Mn; Ilpnaaina:

-79-
mmmmv
packets (trains) of slave station pulses consist of eight pulses with a period of
1,000 microseconds. Besides the eight main pulses with a period of 1,000 micro-
seconds, there is also a ninth pulse present in the pulse train of the master
station, where this pulse is set off from the preseding pulse by 2,000 microseconds.
This pulse, which is called the marker pulse, serves for the identification of the
master station signals as well as for the transmission of service information to
the slaved stations.

Phase coding of the pulses is introduced in order to elhninate the influence of
the space waves of the multiple reflection of each preceding pulse in a train on
the subsequent surface pulse which occurs in the pulse train mode. The essence of
phase coding consists in the fact that the initial phase of the radio pulses in a
train is shifted through 180° in accordance with a law which is different for the
odd and even trains. As a result of the alternate period storage of the pulse
trains, the sum of the components in the output voltage, which are due to the
space waves noted above, becomes equal to zero. The phase coding of the pulses

in a train also facilitate the automatic identification of the signals of a master
station and the tracking of it in the case of noise levels elevated above the
signals.

All of the "Loran-C" radionavigstion system networks operate on one carrier fre-
quency in the longwave band: 100 KHz. The signals of the various networks are
identified based on the repetition period T of the radio pulses. The repetition
periods are combined in groups designated as S, SH, SL and $8, each of which
consists of eight recurrent periods with ordinal numbers of 0 to 7. The precise
values of the repetition periods are defined by the relationships:

TSL1(.!"' -N) ll)" “KC: 7'“. ‘ (Nll- N) Ill) mu'l
13". (an) N)lml\mt; 1;, ("In N)lmlnun

[HKC - microseconds]

The signals of the slaved stations in one network are identified based on their
time position relative to the master station signals. The arrangement sequence
(in the general case) is as follows: W, X, Y, Z. The valueu of the code delays,
tk. introduced at the master stations, are chosen so that th- pulse trains of each
slave station can appear only in a definite time interval segment relative to the
pulse train from the master station. For this reason, the readouts of the navi-
gation parameter for each pair will fall in their own specified range.

The gruups of repetition rages and the number of the recurrent frequency are
included in the designation of a network. For example, SL-7 defines the
"Loren-C" radionavigstion system network operating with a pulse repetition
period of 79,300 microseconds from the group of SL repetition periods. The
conventional designation of a network is supplemented with the corresponding
letter to designate one of the stations in a network (M for the master and H,
X, Y or Z for the slaved stations).

- 77 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The "Loran-c" radionavigation signals are not only used for solving navigation
problems, but also for transmitting precise time signals.

Marine receiver-indicators are intended for the measurement of a radionavigation
parameter: the time difference At between the momcnts of arrival of radio pulses

from the master and slave stations.

In the "Loran-A" pulse radionavigation system receiver-indicators, the quantity

At is measured by a pulse technique: by means of matching the envelopes of the
edges of the radio pulses. In the case of a signal to noise ratio of five, the
mean square measurement error a does not exceed :l usec. The pulse measurement
technique is sometimes limited when working with "Loran-C" radionavigation signals.
Such a measurement technique is realized in the first type of indicating receivers
[S], which include the KPI-h equipment.

The capabilities of pulse-phase radio navigation systems can be more fully realized
only in indicating receivers which utilize additional information on the phase of
the radio signal. Such devices include the second type of indicating receivers
with visual matching of the edges using the high frequency pulse modulating fre-
quency (ML-100), with automatic phase tracking and visual matching of the envelopes
of the leading edges (KPi-SP), as well as the third type of indicating receivers
with automatic measurement of the phase difference of the carriers at a "singular"
point in the radio pulses and using automatic signal search where the noise level
exceeds the signal level (TDL-601). The third type of indicating receivers
realizes the major advantages of pulse-phase radionavigation systems: they have
high measurement precision and unambiguous readouts: they execute a signal search
in the presence of noise. Marine indicating receivers, as a rule, are designed

for operation in both long range radionavigation systems.

I" JIHHJ .

 

Figure 3.1. On the determination of the operational mode for the
transmission of pulse-phase radionavigation system
signals.

The sequential resolution of the following major problems precedes the obtaining
of a readout of the radionavigation parameter from a pair of pulse or pulse-phase
radionavigation stations:

- 78 -

INJR‘OFFICLAI.I£SEI(NVLY
l. The tuning of the indicating receiver to work with the signals of the
selected pair of radionavigation stations.

2. The detection of the signals from the selected pair and the identification of
the radio pulses from the master and the slaved stations.

3. The identification of the type of signals received from each shore station.

4. Measuring the rsdionavigation parameter using the most suitable portions of
the edges of the radio pulses.

5. Recording the readout, and if necessary, correcting the values of the time
difference with a correction for the radio wave propagation conditions.

simplified variants of indicating receivers have become extremely widespread in
the merchant marine: equipment of the first and second types. In such equipment,
the problems enumerated above are solved by the operator and the measurement
results depend to a considerable extent on the level of his training and acquired
practical operating skills.

To tune the indicating receiver, the operator switches to the requisite frequency
band and sets in the designations for the selected pair of stations with the
corresponding switches located on the front panel of the indicator.

The signals from the pair of stations are detected and identified visually on the
screen of the CRT. with correct setting of the switches, signals from a pair of
"Loran-A" rsdionavigation station and a network of "Loran-c" rsdionavigation
stations stand still on the horizontal sweep line, while the signals of the other
pairs of "Loran-A" stations or "Loren-C" networks move at different rates to the
right or to the left along the sweep lines.

The signals from the master and slave stations of the “Loran-A" rsdionavigation
systems are recognized using the following rule: the signals are to be placed on
different sweep lines so that the top pulse is to the left of the bottom pulse.
Then the top pulne will be the signal from the master station and the lower one
the signal from the slave station.

In "Loran-C" rsdionavigation systems, the master station pulse train is recognized
from the presence in the train of the ninth marker pulse, while the pulse packets
of the slave stations are recognized based on their timewise position on the
sweep lines relative to the master station pulse train. To facilitate the ident-
ification operation, it is recounnnded that a reading be set beforehand in the
readout unit which corresponds to the calculated line of position. Then, if

the master station signal is set on the stationary pedestal at the start of the
upper sweep line, the moving pedestal appears at the point where the signal of

the corresponding slave station is located.

The identification of the type of received signal (surface, space, combination) is
one of the most important operations, which has a significant influence on the
measurement results. It should be carried out taking into account the specific

-79-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
features of radio wave propagation in the working band of the radionavigation
system based on data on the range to the shore station, the propagation path, the
season of the year and time of day, as well as information on the mutual position
of the pulses on the CRT screen, their shape and time stability.

when space wave signals are used for the measurements, the resulting readout is
to be corrected with the appropriate correction for propagation conditions, taken
from the radionavigation chart.

In the "Loran-A" radionavigation system, surface waves are received during the day
[6] with propagation over the sea at ranges of up to 600-700 miles from shore
stations with powers of 100 to 160 K" and at distances of up to 800 to 900 miles
in the case of l M" stations. At night, because of the increase in the level of
atmospheric noise, the reception range is reduced to approximately 500 miles. The
reception range is sharply reduced in the case where land areas are encountered
over the propagation path.

Space waves usually appear one to two hours before sunset, and are observed
during the entire night and one to two hours after sunrise. In the winter, iono-
spheric signals are observed around the clock at middle and high latitudes, with
the exception of two to three hours near noon.

0f the different kinds of ionospheric signals (81, £2, 0, F1 and F2), the more
stable £1 waves received at distances of up to 1,400 to 1,500 miles from land

stations are used for position determinations. As compared to a surface wave,
the amplitude of an ionospheric wave increases, while the time delay decreases
with increasing range to the shore station.

At distances starting at 300 to 500 miles, a composite signal is received which is
formed by the interference of the surface and ionospheric waves. As a rule, the
envelope of this signal has a "double peak" shape. Measurements using the composite
signal require the greatest care, since in the case of small surface wave ampli-
tudes, as well as with the influence of "splitting" phenomena of the leading edge
and fading of the space wave, the "double peak nature" of the resulting pulse can

be poorly pronounced, something which makes it difficult to ascertain the portion

of the edge corresponding to the surface wave.

In the "Loren-C" radionavigation system, the reception range for surface waves in
the case of propagation over the sea depends primarily on the transmitted radio
pulse power, the level of atmospheric noise and the degree of influence of ion-
ospheric waves at the reception point [5].

Space waves at a frequency of 100 K32 exist at all tunes of the day. An excep-
tion is only the low latitudes (0 < 30°), where daytime reflections are absent
during the summer. The amplitude of the £1 ionospheric wave rises up to the
amplitude of the surface wave at distances of approximately 500 miles during the
day and 600 miles at night with time delays equal to about 50 and 70 microseconds
respectively. with a further increase in the range to the shore station, the
amplitude of El radio pulses begins to exceed the amplitude of surfaces waves,
while the delay in the arrival time of the reflected pulses, in falling off, tends

- 30 _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
towards constant values of 54.1 microseconds at night and 38.1 microseconds
during the day. Doubly reflected radio signals conventionally designated as
E2 appear at the same time.

It can be seen from an analysis of long wave band radio wave propagation condi-
tions that regardless of the time of day, starting at distances of 300 to 400
miles, one must anticipate the reception of a composite signal caused by the inter-
ference of surface and space wave radio pulses. The waveform of the envelope of
the resulting radio pulse is governed in the general case by the ratio of the
amplitudes and high frequency modulation phase difference. Horking with the compo-
site signal entails considerable difficulties, as a rule, due to the complexities
of the visual recognition of the portion of the pulse edge which is due to the
surface wave.

Starting at ranges of 900 miles, the 31 component will predominate in the envelope
of the resulting pulse, and with a certain amount of care, measurements can be
made just as in the case of purely reflected signal.

3.2. The KPl-SF Indicating Receiver

1he KPl-SF indicating receiver is intended for the determination of a ship's
position using "Loran-A" and "Loran-C" radionavigation system signals, as well as
domestic pulse-phase radionavigation systems by means of using charts with a
hyperbolic grid or special tables.

Three units are incorporated in the indicating receiver set: the radio receiver,
the indicator unit and a synchronous filter. Additionally , the product complement
includes sets of interchangeable and spare parts, tools and accessories.

The major operational and technical characteristics of the indicating rec:iver
are given below:

Semi-Automatic,
with Visual
Search and Match-
ing of the
Signals on the
CRT Screen

Type of Indicating Receiver

 

The number of station pairs which can be processed

simultaneously 1
The mean square instrument error in the measurements of

the navigation parameter for a signal/interference

ratio of 3, in microseconds:

At medium wavelengths 0.7
At long wavelengths 0.3
Receiver sensitivity for a signal/internal noise ratio of
unity, with respect to the peak values within the
receiver passband, microvolts:
In the long wave channel 7 and 14
In the medium wave channel 5 and 10
(For feedline lengths of 5 m and 10 m respectively)
_ 81 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“as; a.“ uu- --_-—--_..°

Type of Indicating Receiver of the Signals on
the CRT Screen

—__—_____—————_——-———

Receiver bandwidth at the 0.5 KB: level:

At long wavelengths 20 i 3
At medium wavelengths 17 1 S
Cain control range, in dB, no less than:
Manual 100
Balance 60
Probability of correct elimination of the ambiguity in
the phase measurements for a signal/interference ratio
of three, no less than 0.95
Time for measuring the navigation parameter based on the signals
from one pair of stations, in minutes, no more than 1.5

__________________—__————————

A simplified block diagram of the KPI-SP indicating receiver is shown in
Figure 3.2.

In terms of the principle for the realization of the navigational data, the
indicating receiver belongs among single channel devices with visual signal
search and superposition of their edges on a CRT screen [5].

The measurement of the navigational parameter, the time difference between the
moments of arrival of the master and slave station signals, is accomplished by
the compensation technique which consists in replacing (compensating for) the
time interval being measured with an artificially introduced time delay which is
equal to it. This delay is inserted by means of a variable delay circuit and is
read out from the display. The equality of the time interval being measured and
the delay being generated is determined based on the coincidence of the leading
edges of the pulses on the CRT screen. To improve the measurement precision, a
provision is made in the indicating receiver for an automatic tracking system.
Tracking is accomplished in the operation of the "Loran-A" radionavigation
system using the doubly differentiatedenvelopesof the signals. In the "Loran-C"
radionavigation system, the tracking uses the zero crossing points (with respect
to the phase) of the pulse RF modulating frequency. By means of matching the
edges of the envelopes and the CRT screen, uniqueness in the phase readout is
achieved with a precision of half of the RF pulse modulating period.

A self-monitoring mode is provided in the indicating receiver for checking the
operability of the equipment. The operability is monitored on the CRT screen,
as well as on the inidicsting display.

The radio receiver (RPU) is intended for the selective reception of the radio-
navigation system signals from the background of interference and for amplifying

-82-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.fm. Power Sapply

Circuit

Figure 3.2. simplified block diagram of the KPI-SP indicating
receiver.

Key: 1. RPU I receiver;

. D I divider;

. Cathode ray tube;

. Self-test signals;

. UP I Preamplifier;

. DS I RF signal decoder;

. AD I AM detector;

. DTs - double differentiating network;
. $11 I selector 1;

. $12 I selector 2;

11. U I output amplifier;

12. DO I amplifier-limiter;

13. Sm I limitier;

14. SF I synchronous filter;

15. 06 I master oscillator;

16. From the SHIFT buttons;

17. ODCh I master frequency divider;
18. FPI I pulse train driver;

19. Self-test;

20. PPM I strobe and trucking marker driver;

[-0
OVDQQOUI§WN

-83—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m a... u......... ...._ .o.-~a

[Key to Figure 3.2, continued]:

21. CTN - sawtooth voltage generator;
22. UPK - channel shift control circuit;
23. SK - code comparator;

24. RSch I bidirectional counter;

25. Dsh - decoder;

26. Tg - flip-flop;

27. ILI I OR gate;

28. “V - biased flip-flop;

29. PU 8 threshold gate;

30. UPN I push-pull sawtooth voltage amplifier;
31. IA I A integrator;

32. In I B integrator;

33. Visual display unit;

34. Synchronizer;

35. Digital display;

36. Tracking system;

37. VD - time discriminator.

them up to the levels needed for normal operation of the indicator. A block dia-
gram of the receiver is shown in Figure 3.3.

The unit has two operating bands: long wave and medium wave, as well as fixed
tuning to the frequency of the operating channels. The radio receiver is remote
controlled.

The long wave channel of the receiver uses a direct amplification circuit config-
uration for a frequency of 100 KHz. The 0.5 level bandwidth is 20 s 3 K32. A
provision is made for the capability of operationally tuning the selective
circuits + 9 RH: off of the center frequency, something which improves the condi-
tions for recognizing the type of radio pulse being received (surface, ionospheric,
composite).

The medium wave channel cf the receiver is a superheterodyne circuit. The
intermediate frequency is 465 K32. The bandwidth at the 0.5 level amounts to
17 + S KHz.

In the long wave channel, as well as in the IF channel for the medium wave band,
amplitude-phase and phase equalization respectively are used for the frequency
characteristics. This made it possible, along with retaining the high select-
ivity rejecting signals of radio services on adjacent frequencies, to increase
the rise time of the radionavigstion system pulses at the receiver output. and as
a consequence, to increase the resolution of the indicating receiver with
respect to ionospheric signals.

-34-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
an .3533. I 9— .3 393:8 nauumeo I mm .m
"Euuuuxluzﬁ .2 3 I33: 26:. I So g

Souuaoo amen 9.28.5030 I ma .3 303mm use: I 55..— .o
328:3 .3318 I mu .2 30:53 I o .n

x 3:: 32.2.3 I r: .2 x 35:... I s. 3
303033 hound—8 I an .3 3.32. 35950 9:55 I ma .n
393:3 cmuu 3:959»? I ma .2 Iona: mu o>uaouoms I zu>um .«
“Sigizué .5588 .o x 3328:. n E A

35332 Oman of no Hana: goo: .n.m 0.5»:

“.II Wm.“ I I am «hangJMsm “EI “Isl mm I Iva I I may... .39.
_ u E a a HIE—HIE?“ 333.56
_

  

3
3
3
q:
A.
Q
N
___~.¢__.

2x 52%
mecca—.0 253 9—3

E :VEESV _ ACE

u. -5 a 8
_ IIIIIII I nsu Im. 3””qu IIIIII I I IL

t§3€EEn 53:956..
:uOuwncg u< uhowcuz

- 85 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The signal from the antenna and feedline assembly is fed to the receiver through
an RF connector. To protect the front end stages against the effect of high
power interference from shipboard radio transmitters, radars, etc. , the circuitry
contains a discharger an, a microwave filter Even, a diode thyristor limiter 0
and two diode limiters (001 and cm). The actuation threshold of the thyristor
circuit is about 20 volts, while the threshold for the bilateral diode limiters is
2 volts each.

when operating in the longwave band, the signal is fed to the input filter, Pig,
in the form of a tuned circuit formed by the inductance of a coil, the capacitance
of the antenna, the distributed capacitances of the feedline and wiring, as well
as the capacitances of the tuning circuit board PP and the semiconductor control
capacitors, the varicaps. The varicsps provide for the capability of continuous
tuning of the resonant circuit by +9 KHz from the carrier frequency of the pulse-
phase rad-ionavigation system signals. The control voltage is fed to the vsricaps
by means of a potentioaeter which is coupled to the RECEIVERHTUNE control, which
is located on the front panel of the indicating receiver. An input signal attenu-
ator is located on the input filter circuit board, where this attenuator is made
in the form of a capacitive voltage divider with an attenuation coefficient of
five.

The RF signal is fed through the emitter follower B? from the output of the
filter to the electronic gain control RB. Gain control is accomplished by chang-
ing the internal resistance of the field effect transistor channels with the
action of the regulating picked off of the potentiometers of the OVERALL--GAIN—
«BALANCE INDICATOR. The electronic gain control is matched by the emitter fol-
lower to the bandpass filter FPl, formed by a pair of overcoupled resonant
circuits. The signal is fed through the emitter follower from the output of the
filter to the electronic gain control circuitry (RE) and then through the emitter
follower to rejection filters ark-lurk, which suppress the four sinusoidal

-86..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
interference components with frequencies in a band of from 85 to 135 K82. Contin-
uous tuning of the rejection filters is accomplished by means of feeding voltage

to the varicaps which are picked off of the TUNE sri-nra potentiomters, which are
located on the front panel of the indicator. These same voltages are simultane-
ously fed to the switcher circuit K4, which serves to maintain the Q of the
resonant circuits of the rejection filters constant within the working band of
frequencies. In the "RF" position of the CHANNELS switch, the "Search" instruc-
tion is fed to switcher K3, based on which RFl is switched over to the noise gating
mode. The remaining rejection filters can operate only in a suppression mode.

Then the signal is fed through the emitter follower to the second bandpass filter
F92, which is similar to bandpass filter FPI. The RF signal is fed from the filter
output through the emitter follower to the amplitude-phase equalization circuit,
the KTs, and then through electronic switch ES to the common amplification channel
for the long wave and medium wave bands. Bandpass filters PPl and FP2 are tuned by
means of varicaps, which play the part of tuned circuit capacitors, and are ganged
with respect to frequency for tuning the input resonant circuit.

When Operating in the medium wave band, the signal from the output of the tuning
circuit board PP is fed to the broadband dual tuned circuit bandpass filter, Fsv
[Pmedium wave]. which attenuates the signals of radio services on adjacent fre-
quencies. When the ATTENUATOR toggle switch is switched on on the indicator, the
input resonant circuit in the bandpass filter is shunted by means of electronic
switch K2, which provides for the attenuation of radionavigation system signals by
approximately 20 dB. The signals are then fed to the input filter Pin in the form
of a single resonant circuit, and then through the emitter follower to the elec-
tronic gain control RE. The RF signal is fed from the output of the gain control
circuit through the emitter follower to the bandpass filter FPsv [medium wave
bandpass filter], which takes the form of a three section resonant circuit filter
with external capacitive coupling. The frequency tuning of the filter is accom-
plished by means of feeding fixed voltages to the varicaps on instructions from
the CHANNELS switch in the "RF" [rejection filter], "UV” [long wave], and
"SV-l,2,3" [medium wave bands 1, 2, 3]. After passing through the emitter follower
and the electronic gain control RE, the signal is then fed through an emitter
follower to the frequency converter P to convert the received signal to the 465
KB: intermediate frequency signal. The converter is designed in a combined mixer
and local oscillator configuration. The frequency produced by the local oscilla-
tor is crystal controlled. The switching of the local oscillator frequencies is
accomplished by means of switching in the appropriate crystal by means of the
electronic switchers. The load on the frequency converter is the intermediate
frequency filter Fly, which is formed by a pair of coupled tuned circuits with
external capacitive coupling. The filter is tuned to a frequency of ‘65 K82, and
the signal is fed from its output through the emitter follower EP and the elec-
tronic gain control to the phase correction circuitry, and then on to two identi-
cal intermediate frequency filters, whieh are isolated from each other by means
of emitter followers. The filters are designed in a TM section bandpass filter
configuration. The signal is then fed through the electronic switcher K5, which
is controlled by instructions from the CHANNELS switch to the common broadband
amplification channel for the medium wave and long wave bands. This amplifier
chain contains two amplifiers U and an electronic gain control RE. These
stages are notched to each other by means of emitter followers 2?.

- 87 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The signal is then fed to the output emitter follower which matches the output
of the receiver to the RP cable through which the RF pulses are fed to the indica-
tor unit.

The subsequent processing of the radio signals received from the shore radio sta-i
tions is accomplished in the indicator unit for the purpose of measuring the radio-
navigation parameter.

The complement of the indicator (see Figure 3.2) includes the master oscillator 06,
synchroniser, visual display, tracking system and power supply circuitry.

The series produced "Giatsint" master oscillator (162.210.100) is used as the
master oscillator in the KPI-SP, the 5 HR: frequency of which is established with
a precision of :l ' 10'7 after 15 minutes and :l.5 - 10‘8 after two hours.

The operational time diagram for the indicator which is governed by the synchro-
nizer is intended for the solution of the following problems:

1. Synchronize the repetition rate of the CRT sweep with the repetition rate of
the signals from the shore stations.

2. Generate a pulse train for the measurement and readouts of the navigation
parameter.

3. Generate auxiliary sequences of individual pulses and trains needed for the
Operation of the indicating receiver.

Included in the complement of the synchronizer (see Figure 3.2) is a master
frequency divider ODCh, a code comparison gate SK, a bidirectional counter RCch,
a decoder Dsh, a channel shift control circuit UPK and a pulse train driver FPI.

The master frequency divider generates the sequence of channel A pulses (the
master station channel) from the sinusoidal voltage from the master oscillator
where this pulse train has a repetition period T equal to the repetition period
of the individual packets of radio pulses received from the shore stations, as
well as a series of reference pulse trains for channel A which are needed for
the operation of the indicating receiver.

To measure the thne delay of the slave station signal relative to the signals
from the master stations, the synchronizer generates a sequence of channel B
pulses (slave station), the time position of which can be shifted relative to the
channel A pulses by an interval fixed with a precision of 0.1 microseconds in
a range of10,000 to 70,000 microseconds. This problem is solved by a digital
variable delay circuit by means of comparing the number codes of the frequency
divider and the bidirectional counter, and generating the output signals at the
points in time when the codes match [5]. In the initial state, the code of some
number is stored in the bidirectional counter. The number code in the decades of
the master frequency divider are periodically changed during the process of
dividing the voltage incoming from the master osicllator. At the points in time
when the number code written in the master frequency divider coincides with the

988-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
number code written in the bidirectional counter, reference sequences of channel
3 pulses are generated at the output of the code comparison circuit.

The channel shift control circuitry provides for the capability of moving the
channel A and 3 pulse sequences in time at different rates relative to the
shore station signals. as well as moving the channel 3 pulse train relative to
the channel A pulse train by means of changing the division coefficients in the
master frequency divider and the state of the bidirectional counter.

The pulse sequence driver generates the sequences of pulses needed for the oper-
ation of the receiver, the visual display and the tracking system from the refer-
ence A and 8 channel sequences.

The decoder Dsh is intended for representing the number stored in the bidirectional
counter in a decimal code for display.

A block diagram of the synchronizer is shown in Figure 3.4. The master frequency
divider ODCh consists of the limiter-amplifier U0, seven frequency dividers (DChl-
DCh7) and four drivers (Fr9-Pr-12).

The luniter-amplifier provides for negative and positive peak limiting of the
5 MN: sinusoidal voltage and reduces it to a level which assures normal operation
of the first frequency divider.

The first frequency divider (DChl) is designed as a digital phase shifter. It
divides the master oscillator frequency by five and makes it possible to phase
shift the output pulses in any direction in a discrete step of 0.1 microsecond
upon instructions from the channel shift control circuit. The five subsequent
frequency dividers (DCh2-DCh6) are designed with identical circuits having divi-
sion factors of 10 and are intended for dividing the frequency down to a level
equal to the repetition rate of the shore station RF pulses. For the selected
values of the division factors, the pulse repetition period at the output of DCh6
[frequency divider 6] is 100,000 microseconds, i.e., corresponds to the repetition
period of the group SS "Loran-c" radionavigation system signals.

The repetition rates corresponding to the five groups of frequencies other than
the lowest frequency group SS (the H, L, 5, SH and 5L), are generated by means of
master frequency driver circuits (Pr12) by means of reducing the division coef-
ficient of the sixth frequency divider. The values of the recurrent repetition
rates are generated by means of the supplemental frequenCy driver circuit PrlO

by changing the division factor of the fourth frequency divider in the "Loran-c"
mode and the third and fourth frequency dividers in the "Loran-A" mode.

Frequency divider DCh7 having a division coefficient of eight generates the
signals needed to assure the specified shift rates for the reference pulse trains
of both channels.

Driver Fr9 generates the channel A pulse train with a repetition period of 10

microseconds, having the capability of being shifted in time in discrete steps of
0.1 microseconds.

- 89 -

INDR 0FFKJA1.USE|JNLY
I'UK Ul'fltlhl. 03b \l.\IJ

Driver Prll generates signals with repetition periods of P/Z and T, needed
for the operation of pulse train driver and channel shift control circuits,
as well as for the generation of the recurrent frequencies.

The bidirectional counter RSch consists of six identical bidirectional count~-
ers having a scaling factor of ten each (six decades). The number stored in
each of the first five decades is changed by means of the channel 3 shift
circuit (PP-B), while the numbers stored in the sixth decade is changed with
the action of the signal from the channel 3 set circuit (Ust-B). The codes
of the numbers written in bidirectional counters RSchZ-RSch6, are compared
with the nuuber codes written in the corresponding decades of the master
frequency divider (DCh2-DCh6) by means of five ARD gates of equal capacity
included in the code comparison circuit SK.

The signals from the bidirectional counter flip-flops and the series of pulse
trains from the digital phase shifter are fed to the input of drivers Fr7 and
Fr8. These devices are included in the complement of the code comparison
circuitry and generate the channel 8 pulse trains with periods of l and 10
microseconds, the time position of which can be set relative to the corres-
ponding channel A pulse sequences in discrete steps of 0.1 microseconds.
The pulse train from the outputs of the equal value gates and drivers Fr7 and
Pr8 are fed to pulse train driver as the channel B reference sequences.

The decoder Dsh consists of six identical decoding circuits, each of which
makes it possible to display a decimal number on the seven segment display
corresponding to the code of the number stored in the bidirectional counter
decade coupled to it.

The channel shift control circuit UPK consists of the channel A and 8

shift drivers (PP-A and FP-B), which provide for the dropout of the master
frequency divider and the bidirectional counter with different repetition
periods which depend on the positions of the MASTER FREQUENCIES, SUPPLEMENTAL
FREQUENCIES, and SWEEP switches. Reducing the repetition period of the drop-
out pulses leads to an increase in the shift speed of the reference sequences
of channels A and B. The dropout connunds can arrive at the UPK [channel
shift control circuit] from the SHIFT pushbutton switches or from the tracking
system 88.

The channel shift control circuitry also includes the channel 3 set

circuit (Ust-B), which provides for the elimination of possible intrusions

of channel B time sequences in certain states of the bidirectional counter,
and additionally sets the initial value of the requisite delay of the channel
8 sequences taking into account the specific operational features of the
"Loran-A" and “Loren-C" radionavigation systems.

The pulse train drive FPI consists of three registers (Rgl-RgJ), three time
gates ($11-$13), setting pulse drivers for the first and second registers
(Frl and FrZ), driver Fr6 for the ZONE A and ZONE B pulses, pedestal generat—
ing circuits (Fr3) and pulse decoders (FrS), as well as a pulse driver Frh
for the tracking system 58, the visual display unit VU, the receiver RPU and

the synchronous filter SF. All of the output signals of the pulse train
driver are produced from the pulse trains generated by the registers.

-90..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
pnwv iz—w

Ana I
3~ rwnuuui

anuu2¥11£l

2.5L 9L. -.
db 4

(I. .III'!

_ mic-

 

.uou_:ousosac as. no Inn-nus sue—n .a.n Quanmb

_____muu .

1:333
Aonu 'ns\<apt : tab“. :6

 

 

lian—v I.:.:’ 13— a: a

sailing". . I

 

. .9...

{

III.| . . 2:22; ‘96:.332

{til-{kl !‘

   

A_.v

  

-91-

MOWMONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060001-9

0"!" V." |\ In.» t .on. ~4|Il.l

Key to Figure 3.4.:

. Dsh I decoder;

. RSch = bidirectional counter;

. Fr7 I driver 7;

. Fr8 I driver 8;

. SK I code comparator;

. UO I limiting amplifier;

. DChl I frequency divider 1;

. From the master oscillator;

. ODCh I master frequency divider;

10. Fr9 I driver 9;

11. From the SUPPLEMENTAL FREQUENCIES switch;
12. UPK = channel shift control circuit;
13. Ust-B I channel 3 set circuit;

14. FP-A = channel A shift driver;

15. FP-B I channel B shift driver;

16. From the main frequencies switch;

\OQNO‘V'J-‘WNF‘

- 17. $11 I selector 1;
' 18. Prl = pulse driver for register 1;
l9. Rgl I register 1;
20. FPI I pulse train driver;
21. Rg3 = register 3;
22. $13 I selector 3;

23. From the SHEEP switch;

24. From the SF [synchronous filter];

25. To the synchronous filter;

26. To the RPU [receiver];

27. To the VU [visual display unit];

28. To the SS [tracking systeml;

29. From the CHANNELS switch;

30. From the SHIFT pushbuttons and toggle switch;
31. I I integrators;

32. To the digital display.

The visual display unit (VU) (see Figure 3.2) is intended
problems of radionavigation system signal detection and r
toring the execution of the measurements of the navigatio
the setting for the automatic tracking radio pulses. The
unit is additionally used in a "self testing mode". Incl
display unit besides the CRT and its power supply circuit
generating the signals for the CRT, a synchronous filter
system, as well as sweep generating circuitry.

The sweep generating circuit consists of a biased flip-fl
flop Ts, an OR gate. a sawtooth voltage generator GP“, a

-92-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060001-9
voltage amplifier UPN, a threshold gate PU, as well as a strobe and tracking
marker driver PPM.

In the "operate" mode, the repetition rate of the sweep and its duration are
governed by the sync pulses which are supplied from the pulse train driver of
the synchrnoizer and fed through the OR gate, where these trigger the sawtooth
voltage generator. The generated pulses are amplified in the sawtooth voltage
amplifier and fed to the horizontal deflection plates of the CRT.

In the "Self testing" mode, the sawtooth voltage generator is triggered by a
flop-flop, which in turn is actuated by pulses from the test points in the
indicating receiver. The duration of the sweep in this case is governed by

a threshold gate to which sawtooth pulses are fed from the push-pull sawtooth
voltage amplifier. when they reach the threshold value, the biased flip-flop
is triggered, which uses its own pulses to return flip-flop T8 to the initial
state.

The strobe and tracking marker driver serves to obtain square-wave positive
polarity pulses, which turn on the CRT during the forward trace of the beam,
and also generate a negative marker, which marks the position of the tracking
pulse on the CRT screen. The strobe and tracking marker pulses are fed to the
modulating grid of the CRT.

The signals fed to the vertical plates of the CRT are produced in the signal
driver for the CRT, which consists of the preamplifier UP, the divider D,
the amplitude detector AD, the decoding circuit US, the double differentiat-
ing network DTs, the limiting amplifier U0, the mixer Sm, the final amplifier
U and two switching circuits (gates) $21 and $12.

The kind of signal at the vertical plates of the CRT depends on the positions
of the SWEEP and TEST switches, which feed instructions to gate 812. Five
sweeps of different lengths at a repetition rate equal to the repetition rate
of the shore station pulses are produced on the screen of the CRT. With the
first and second sweep rates, the radio signals from the receiver output are
fed to the vertical plates through divider D, ate $12 and final amplifier U.

The first sweep (the longest one), the duration of which is equal to the repe-
tition period of the ground station signals, serves to solve the problem of
detecting and identifying the signals and presetting them on the auxiliary
rectangular pulses: the pedestals. By means of the separation pulses, the
sweep line is broken down into two parts with a length of T/2 each, which

are reproduced on the CRT screen in the form of two [horizontal] lines. This
increases the sweep scale with a constant working tube diameter and simul-
taneously provides for the possibility of identifying the master and slave
station signals when working with the "Loran-A" radionavigation system.

The second sweep (of shorter duration) with a duration of 8,790 microseconds
is intended for the more precise placement of the signals on the peaks of
the pedestals and the preliminary amplitude equalization (balancing) of the

-93-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-I-ICIAL UM: UNLV

signals. The auxiliary pedestals and sweep segregation pulses, which are

fed to the vertical plates of the CRT along with the radionavigation system
signals, are generated in the synchronizer SPI [pulse train driver] and are
fed to final amplifier U after they are mixed in the mixer Sm. The divider
D serves to adjust the input signal level of the final amplifier.

For the third sweep rate, the envelopes of the radio signals detected by
amplitude detector AD are fed through gate 822 to the CRT. This sweep is of
even shorter duration, 390 microseconds, because of which a large scale image
of the pulse signals is achieved. with the third rate, the lower and upper
sweep lines are combined, the signal type is identified (surface, ionospheric,
combination), and the pulse amplitudes are balanced more precisely and the
edges of the envelopes of the master and slave signals are combined.

The shift pulses which move the sweep lines down along the vertical for more
complete utilization of the working area of the CRT screen are fed from the
synchronizer through the mixer Sm and the final amplifier U to the vertical
plates.

There are two more sweep rates which are used when working with the "Loran-C"
rsdionavigation system. The fourth sweep with a duration of 50 microseconds
is intended for checking the correctness of the signal decoding. In this
case, the radio pulses are fed from the radio signal decoder DS through gate
522 to the screen of the CRT. The CODE 1 - CODE 2 toggle switch (see

Figure 3.7b) serves to control the decoding circuitry.

with the fifth sweep rate ("Po"), the correctness of the resolution of the
phase readout ambiguity is checked by means of combining the edges of the
radio pulse envelopes segregated from the signal and noise mixture by the
synchronous filter 5? on the screen of the CRT. The duration of the fifth
sweep is equal to the duration of the third.

In the "self testing", the signals being tested are fed from the test points
of the indicating receiver through gate 822 to the CRT screen.

The signals for the tracking system are switched by means of the gate
circuit 811. In the "Loren-C" mode, the decoded radio signal from the de-
coding circuit is fed through gate 821 to limiting amplifier U0. In the
"Loran-A" mode, the twice differentiated envelope of the radio pulse from
the differentiating network DTs is fed to the limiting amplifier.

The tracking system (SS) provides for automatic tracking of master and slave
station signals. The major elements of the tracking system are the time
discriminator and two integrators IA and In. The signals from the limiting
amplifier of the visual display unit are fed to one input of the time
discriminator. The tracking pulses from the synchronizer pulse train driver
are fed to the second input. The time discriminator determines the amount
and sign of the mismatching of the tracking pulses and the signals from the
visual display unit.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3.5. Block diagram of the synchronous filter.

Key: . Clock pulses;

. Strobe pulse generator;

. Channel A store;

. Low pass filter;

. Decoded radio signal;

. Radio signal phase inverting amplifier;
7. Channel 8 store.

OM‘UNI—I

The error signal integrators for channels A and B take the form of
bidirectional counters, which calculate the difference in the samples of the
positive and negative mismatched signs. If the absolute value of the dif-
ference in the samples reaches a number which overflows the bidirectional
counter, then a pulse will be fed from the output of the integrator to the
synchronizer, the action of which causes the tracking pulses of the corres-

ponding channel to shift in the direction of a reduction in the amount of the
mismatch.

When receiving master station pulses, the error signal acts through the chan-
nel shift control circuitry, UPK, on the digital phase shifter of the master
frequency divider, tuning the repetition rate of the tracking pulses from the
synchronizer to the repetition rate of the signals from the shore station,
i.e., automatic frequency control is realised in the tracking circuit using
the master signals.

When receiving slave station signals, the error signal acts through the
channel shift control circuit on the first bidirectional counter of the syn-
chrnoizer and shifts the tracking pulses in time till they matchthe "singular"
points of the slave station signals.

The synchronous filter SP is intended for segregating the leading edges of the

"Lorsn-C“ master and slave station pulses from the mixture of signals and
noise.

A block diagram of the synchronous filter is shown in Figure 3.5, while the
time diagrams which explain its operation are presented in Figure 3.6.

-95-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TU“ Uf'l‘ IAL UBI'. \1I‘l.l

 

Figure 3.6. Time diagrams for the operation of the synchronous
filter: a. The RF signal; b,d. Strobe pulses;
c. Voltage across the store capacitors;
e,f. Voltage at the input and output respectively of the
low pass filter.

-96..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The complement of the synchronous filter includes a phase inverting RF signal
amplifier FUR, a strobe pulse driver PSI, two stores BN for channels A and
B as well as a low pass filter FNCh.

The operational principle of the synchronous filter is based on charging 15
storage capacitors, which are connected by means of switching circuits to

the radio signal source at the points in time corresponding to the maximum

of the positive and negative half-waves of a radio pulse. The envelope of

the radio signal is generated from the voltages stored by the capacitors by
means of tine gating and filtering the sequence of gated-out voltages by means
of a low pass filter.

The inverted and non—inverted radio pulses are fed from the outputs of the
phase inverting amplifier to the signal inputs of the stores for channels A
and B. Simultaneously, the strobe pulses which are formed from the clock
pulse train are fed from the strobe pulse driver circuit to the blocks of
stores, where these strobe pulses determine the moments of connection of the
storage capacitors to the radio signal source. Two groups of capacitors

(eight capacitors in the first and seven in the second) are used for gating
the noninverted and inverted radio signal sequences, and two corresponding
strobing pulse trains are generated, which IDVC with a shift of 5 microseconds,
i.e., by the amount of a half-period of the RP pulse modulation frequency.

The timewise sequential connection of the groups of storage capacitors to the
low pass filter is accomplished by means of these same two strobing pulse
trains. The strobing pulses of the second group are used to connect the first
group of stores, while the strobing pulses of the first group are used to
connect the second group of stores to the low pass filter. Because of this
technique of connecting the storage capacitors to the low pass filter, the
radio signal enveloPe produced by them proves to be delayed in time relative
to the envelope at the output of the phase inverting amplifier by a half-
period of the RP pulse modulation frequency.

The electrical power supply circuit is intended for providing power to the
KPl-SP indicating receiver from the alternating current mains at a frequency
of 50 1 2.5 Hz and a voltage of 127 or 220 volts with fluctuations of 1101.

The power supply circuit complement includes eight power supplies which —
produce 10 DC voltage and 1 AC 6.3 volt square wave to power the CRT filament.
The main technical specifications of the power supplies are given in Table 3.1.

The power supplies are designed in a transformer-—rectifier--filter--regu-
lator circuit configuration and are protected against short circuits in the
load circuitry.

The 1,500 volts and -l,500 volts needed to power the CRT circuits are obtained
by converting the regulated DC voltage at 27 volts to an alternating current
square wave at a frequency of about 10 KHz. The voltage for powering the

CRT filasent, as well as the voltages fed to the two high voltage 1,500--
1,500 volt rectifiers, designed in four-stage multiplier circuit config
urations are picked off of the converter output.

-97-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-UK UI'NLIAL Ubl'. ONLY

 

 

TABLE 3.1
Output Load Ripple, Total
. . Voltage , Current , 1 , Instability ,
Unit Using Power Volts Hilli- No More 2
asperes Than No More Than
Synchronizer, tracking +5 3,000 2.0 5
system and digital
display
Visual display +12.6 80 0.1 -
+100 60 -
-12.6 20 1.0
Radio receiver -12.6 1100 0.05 -
-50 60 -
Master oscillator, +27 400 - -
visual display
and converter
for the high
voltage
rectifier
CRT +1,500 0.15 - 10
-1,500 1.0 - -
6 3 100 - -
Synchronous filter -20 $0 0.1 5

______________________——_————————-——

3.3. Recosnendations for the Installation of the Indicating Receiver on a
Ship

An overall view of the KPI-SF indicating receiver set is shown in Figure 3.7.

The indicating receiver is produced in two colors: set O‘l‘sl.400.120 is gray-
blue, while set O'l'sl.loOO.120 is of an ivory color.

The equipment is powered fro. the AC mains at 127/220 volts, 50 Hz. Where
the requisite power is lacking on a ship, one can use DC mains at 220, 110
or 26 volts with the appropriate converters, the presence of which is
stipulated when ordering the product. The mounting and installation of the
converters is accomplished in accordance with the documentation supplied
with them. We supply uains voltage may be measured with a T0613 sulti-
meter or one of a similar class of precision which is no worse than 2.5.
Deviations in the supply mains voltage and frequency deviations not exceeding
110% and 15% respectively are permitted.

-93-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The overall dimensions and weight of the units of the equipneut set are given
in Table 3.2.

TABLE 3.2
Overall Dimensions, mm
--—--——-—-———-—————-—- Height,
. . Depth Width Height kg,
Same of the Designation No More Than
L“— __—_ _ __ —
Radio receiver 0Ts2.003.025 218 450 165 8
Indicator
(with frame) OTs2.043.004 530 515 235 30
Synchronous
filter OTs2.067.360 257 228 140 3.5

Set of tools,
spare par ts

and accesor-
ies 0Ts4.070.228 504 406 166 8

 

It is necessary to observe the following major requirements when laying out
the equipment set:

1. The radio receiver is to be installed no more than 5 m from the antenna
input in an internal compartment of the ship, assuring free access to the
connector. The unit is mounted horizontally on brackets or on a bulkhead,
providing in this case for the possibility of sliding unit out of the hous-
ing and removing the cover from the chassis block.

2. The indicator unit is placed in the navigator's compartment in the
immediate vicinity of the position where the navigation work is done, assur-
ing free access to the controls whizh are located both on the front panel
and on the side. A provision is to be made in the installation of the
indicator for the possiblity of removing the cover and sliding out the
circuit boards for repair.

3. The synchronous filter is housed in the navigator's compartment at a
distance of no more than 3 m from the indicator on a desk or bulkhead.
When installing the filter, a provision should be nude for the possibility
of removing the covers.

3.4. Main Operating Rules for the KPI-SF Indicating Receiver

The Arrangement and Designation of the Meters and Controls. The major
meters and controls are located on the front panel of the indicator, while

- 99 -

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILIAL USE. UNLY

the controls which are not normally used in operation are located on the
right side wall. The controls and meters are enumerated in Table 3.3 , with
the functions performed by them also indicated.

 

Figure 3.7. General View of the equipment complement of
the KPl-SF indicating receiver.
Key: 3. Radio receiver; b. Indicator unit:
c. Synchronous filter.

- 100 -

FOR 0511C1AI.USE10NLY
Meters and Controls

CRYSTAL - OFF toggle switch
WHITE CRYSTAL light

MAIN POWER - OFF toggle
switch

TUNE - RECEIVER potentiometer

The TUNE RF-l, RF-Z, RP-3,
RP-é [rejection filters
l-A] potentiometers

TEST switch

The CHANNELS switch [bandswitch]
(RF, Dv, SV-l, 2, 3)
[rejection filter, long wave,
medium wave bands 1, 2 and 3]

MAIN FREQUENCIES switch
SUPPLEMENTAL FREQUENCIES switch

SWEEP switch (1, 2, 3, lo, F0)

ATTENUTATOR - OPP toggle switch

GAIN - BALANCE potentiometer

The GAIN - COMMON
potentiometer

The CAIN - F0 potentiometer

CODE 1 - CODE 2 toggle
switch

AFC - OFF toggle switch

Functions which Are Performed

Turning the master oscillator on and off

signaling the heating of the master
oscillator (the light goes out)

Turning the indicating receiver on and off

Tuning the receiver in the long wave band
:9 K“: from the carrier frequency of the
shore station. Identifying surface and
space waves

Suppressing interference from broadcast,
telegraph and special stations in the
long wave band

Checking the operation of the major units
of the indicating receiver

Narrow band interference search in the "RF"
position. Turning on "Loren-A" channels
1, 2 and 3 in the medium wave mode and
"Loran-C" in the long wave mode

Selecting the main repetition rate of the
radio pulses

Selecting one of eight recurrent repetition
rates of the radio pulses

Changing the sweep rate, switching the
synchronous filter to the "F0" position
[ambiguity resolution of the phase
readout]

Reducing the amplitude of the received
signal

Equalizing the amplitudes of a signal pair

Adjusting the amplitudes of the master and
slave station signals

Adjusting the amplitude of a signal pair in
the "F0" position of the SHEEP switch

Decoding pulse-phase radionavigation
system signal packets

Actuating synchronization on the master
station signals and tracking of the
slave station signals

-101-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

 

 

TABLE 3.3

Meters and Controls Functions which are Performed

The SHIFT (To THE LEFT - T0 Shifting the rsdionavigation system
THE RIGHT) pushbuttons and signals and pedestals with respect
the A-B toggle switch to the sweep lines

RBADGJT pushbutton Turning the digital display on when

taking a reading

The FOCUS potentiometer Focusing the image on the CRT screen

The BRIGHTNBSS potentiometer Adjusting the image brightness

Digital display Indicating the reading in microseconds

The cathode ray tube Visual display of the signals

 

Preparing the Indicating Receiver for Operation. Prior to starting operation,
the position of the controls and meters of the indicating receive must be
checked and set to the initial positions:

«The POHER MAINS - OPP toggle switch in the "Off" position;

«The CRYSTAL - OPP toggle switch in the "Off" position;

«The CHANNELS switch [handswitch] in any position;

«The TEST switch in the "0" position;

«The AFC - OPP toggle switch in the "AFC" position;

«The A-B toggle switch in the "A" position;

«The OVERALL CAIN potentiometer is rotated counterclockwise to the stop
(in the extreme left position);

«The equal channel gain mark on the CAIN - BALANCE potentiometer control is
set in the upper vertical position;

«The equal channel gain marker on the CAIN - F0 potentiometer control is
set in the upper vertical position;

«The SHEEP switch is set in position "I";

«The TUNE "-1, 33-2, ”-3 and ”-5 potentiometers are set in one of the
extreme positions;

«The ATTENDTAOR - OFF toggle switch is set in the "Off" position;

-102-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-The 0 mark on the TUNE - RECEIVER potentiometer control is set opposite
the mark on the front panel.

The Procedure for Turning the Indicating Receiver 0n and Off. The indicating
receiver is turned on in the following sequence:

1. Some 15 to 20 minutes prior to starting operation, turn on the heat for
the master oscillator, for which the CRYSTAL - OPP toggle switch is set in
the "Crystal" position. The small flight light comes on, which signals the
heating of the thermostate of the master oscillator. After 10 to 15 minutes
the light goes out and will come on again as necessary to automatically
maintain the specified temperature in the thermostat.

2. The POWER MAINS - OPP toggle switch is set in the "Mains" position after
the master oscillator is heated up. After 1 to 2 minutes, two sweep lines
with two rectangular pedestals should appear on the screen of the CRT (in
position "1" of the SHEEP switch).

The indicating receiver is turned off in the following sequence:
1. The POWER MAINS - OFF toggle switbh is set in the "Off" position;

2. The CRYSTAL - OFF toggle switch is left in the "Crystal" position if the-
indicating receiver is being turned off for less than one hour;

3. The POHER MAINS and CRYSTAL toggle switches are turned off sequentially
when the equipment is shut down for a long time.

Measurements Using "Loran-A" Radio Navigation System Signals. The operations
are performed in the following sequence:

1. The indicating receiver is prepared for operation.

2. The master oscillator thermostat heating is turned on for 15 to 20 minutes
prior to the start of operation.

3. Using radionavigation suppor data for the navigation region and the radio-
navigation chart or special tables, two (or more) pairs of radionavigation
system stations are selected.

Based on preliminary information on the ship's position and the radio wave
propagation conditions, the possible type of signals incoming from each of
the stations of the selected pairs is determined beforehand.

5. Tune the indicating receiver for operation with the first pair, for which:

-Set the CHANNELS switch in the "SV-l" ["medium wave 1"], "SV-Z" or "SV-3"
position, corresponding to the first symbol (number) in the designation of
the selected pair of "Loren-A" radionavigation system stations;

- 103 -

FOR¢0FTWC1AI.USE(NVLY
FOR Ol-HLIAL USE. ONLY

--Set the MAIN FREQUBKIES switch in the "II", "I." or "5" position, corres-
ponding to the second symbol (letter) in the designation of the selected pair
of "Loren-A" radionavigstion syst- stations.

5. Set the POWER MAINS -- 0F? toggle switch in the "Power Mains" position.
After two sweep lines with two rectangular pedestals appear on the CRT screen,

use the BRIGHTNBSS and rocus potentiometer controls to adjust the brightness
and clarity of the image.

6. Solve the problem of detecting the signals of the selected pair of stations,
for which the OVERALL GAIN potentiometer control is used to adjust the gain

of the receiver so that two stationary radio pulses (when receiving surface
waves) or two series of stationary pulses (in the presence of ionospheric
waves) - the signals of the selected pair of stations - are clearly seen
against the noise background in the sweep lines.

To facilitate the problem of detecting stationary pulses of a pair in the
presence of considerable interference, it is recomended that the signals
which are being detected be made to move and stop by briefly pressing one of
the SHIFT buttons.

7. Solve the problem of identifying the master and slaved station signals
from the arrangement of the pulses on the sweep lines. The pulses should be
on different sweep lines, where the pulse on the upper line should be to the
left of the one on the lower. with this arrangement, the upper pulse is the
master station signal while the lower pulse is the slave station signals. If
the signals are incorrectly arranged, one of the SHIFT buttons is to be
pressed. Observing the motion of the signals, release the button at the
moment they are correctly arranged.

8. Arrange the master and slave station pulses at the peaks of the stationery
and moving pedestals respectively, for which:

--Press one of the sum buttons (10 nu: LEFT or to ma near). While observ-
ing the shift in the signals release the button at the moment when a single
pulse (surface wave reception) or the first of a series of pulses (where
space waves are present) of the master station are at the peak of the station-
ary pedestal near its leading edge;

9. Set the A - B toggle switch in the "3" position. Push the TO THE LEFT or
To THE RIGHT button. While the observing the shift in the moving pedestal,
release the button at the moment when the leading edge of the pedestal comes
up and touches fra below the single pulse or the first of the series of
pulses (where ionospheric waves are present) of the slave station.

9. Using the GAIN. - BALANCE potentiometer control, set the atelitudes of
the first of the series of visible pulses approximately equal to the height
of the pedestals.

10. Set the SWEEP switch in position "2". The peaks of the pedestals
stretched out in two horizontal lines with the radio pulses on them will be

-104-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
seen on the screen. Taking into account the data obtained in performing
paragraph 3 of these instructions, set about the visual sdentification of
the type of signals being received (surface wave, ionospheric, composite).

ll. Usiag the TO THE LEFT or TO THE RIGHT control, bring the pulse or series

of pulses of the slave station precisely underneath the master pulse (or
cries of pulses).

ll. Set toggle switch A - B in position "A" and using the TO THE LEFT button,
move the radio pulses to the start of the horizontal lines.

13. Set the SWEEP switch in the "3" position. The sweep lines on the CRT
screen will merge into a single line. The stretched video pulses of the
master and slave stations will be seen. A dark vertical marker in the left

portion of the sweep indicates the position of the tracking pulses of the
tracking system.

16. Taking the specific features of "Loran-A" radionavigation system radio
wave propagation into account, continue the visual identification of the type
of signals received from the master and slave stations. Primary attention

is to be concentrated on the leading edges of the pulses (the leading edges
of the first in the series of pulses where space waves are present). To
ascertain a possible weak surface cosponent in the leading edge of an iono-
spheric £1 signal, the OVERALL - GAIN potentiometer control is to be used

to increase the receiver gain and carefully study the initial portion of the
leading edge for the presence of a break in the envelope.

15. Set the A - B toggle switch in the "3" position, and using the TO THE
LEFT and TO THE RIGHT buttons, match up the initial portions of the leading
edges of the master and slave signals. Using the GAIN - BALANCE potentio-
meter, simultaneously equalize the leading edges of the pulses up to their
peaks (in the case of surface waves or pure space waves) or up to the
breaks in the envelopes (when working with composite signals).

Note: When working with £1 waves, the matching of the leading edges is to be
accomplished at the moment the phenomena of leading edge splitting and pulse
fading are finished.

16. Press the READOUT button and take a reading of the navigation parameter
in microseconds from the digital display.

In the case of measurements using space waves, the reading must be corrected
with a correction for the radio wave propagation conditions, which is taken
from the radionavigation chart or from tables.

17. To obtain the second line of position, similar measurements are to be
performed using the second pair of "Loren-A" system stations.

18. To establish automatic tracking of master and slave surface wave signals,
the A - B toggle switch is to be set in position "A" and the TO THE LEFT or
TO THE RIGHT button is to be used to match the 0.5 level of the leading edge
of the combined pulses with the dark vertical marker.

- 105 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL bbl'.‘ ONLY

Measurements Using "Loran-C" Radionavigation System Signals. The operations
are performed in the following sequence:

1. Prepare the indicating receiver for operation.

2. Turn on the master oscillator thermostat heating 15 to 20 minutes prior to
starting operation.

3. Choose two (or more) pairs of stations from the "Loran-C" radionavigation
system network from a radionavigation chart or special tables, using radio-
navigational data for the navigating region.

Based on the preliminary information, determine the possible types of waves
arriving from each of the stations of the selected pairs beforehand.

4. Tune the indicating receiver to the signals of the selected network for
operation, for which the following is done:

--Set the CHANNELS switch in the "RP" ["rejection filter"] position;

--Set the MAIN FREQUENCIES switch in the "S", "SH", “8L" or "$5" positions,
depending on the designation of the network selected for operation;

--Set the SUPPLEMENTAL FREQUENCIES switch in one of eight fixed positions,

corresponding to the number included in the designation of the network
selected for operation.

5. Set the POHER MAINS - OFF toggle switch in the "Power Mains" position.
After the two sweep lines with the two rectangular pedestals appear on the
CRT screen, adjust the brightness and clarity of the image using the

BRIGHTNESS FOCUS potentiometers.

6. Solve the problem of detecting the signals of the selected network of the
"Loran-C" radionavigstion system, for which the OVERALL - GAIN potentiometer
is used to adjust the receiver gain so that the stationary packets (train) of
radio pulses of the master and slave stations are clearly seen against the
background of interference on the sweep lines. The master station pulse
train:consiats of nine pulses, while the master station trains consist of
eight pulses each. The pulse trains of other networks move to the right or to
the left along the sweep lines at different rates.

7. The interference status is estimated on the CRT screen. When there is
interference from broadcast, telegraph as well as special stations, the

interfering signals are to be suppressed using the rejection filters. The
rejection filters are tuned in the following order:

a) The OVERALL - GAIN potentiometer is used to adjust the gain so that the
band of interference is equal to the pedestal amplitude;

n) The RF-l [rejection filter 1] is tuned to the frequency of the first
interfering signal, for which, the maximum level (thickness) of the

-106-

INDR‘OFFICLAL USE2CNULY
interference trace on the CRT screen is achieved by rotating the TUNE RF-l
potentiometer control;

c) Suppress the first interference signal, for which the TUNE RF-2 potentio-
meter is rotated and the position is found for which the amplitude of the
interference is sharply reduced;

d) By rotating the TUNE RF-l potentiometer control, seek out the second
possible interference signal and suppress it with the RF-3';

e) By rotating the TUNE RF-l potentioueter control, seek out the third
possible interfering signal and suppress it with RF-b;
f) Tune RF-l to the frequency of the fourth possible interfering signal, Set
the CHANNELS switch in the "DV" ["long wave"] position; in this case, the
RF-l is switched from the "search" mode to the "suppress" mode, which is
accompanied by a reduction in the amplitude of the fourth interfering signal;

Note: The process of suppressing interference must be accompanied by visual
monitoring of the level of the useful signal pulse trains; where possible,
one is to avoid tuning the rejection filters to frequencies close to the

carrier frequency of the radio pulses, something which can reduce their
amplitudes and distort waveforms.

8. Position the pulse trains from the master and slave stations at the peaks

of the stationary and moving pedestals respectively, for which the following
are done:

--Using the OVERALL - GAIN potentiometer control, the amplitude of the pulse
train from the master station is set equal to the pedestal height;

--The A - B toggle switch is set in position "A";

--One of the SHIFT buttons is pressed (TO THE LEFT or TO THE RIGHT); Observ-
ing the motion of the signals, release the button at the moment when the
first eight pulses of the naster station pulse train are located at the peak
of the stationary pedestal;

--Set the A - B toggle switch in the "B" position; press one of the SHIFT
buttons (TO THE LEFT or TO THE RIGHT) and move the moving pedestal underneath
the selected pulse train'for the determination of the slave station line of
position so that the eight pulses of the pulse train appear at the peak of

pedestal.
9. Set the SHEEP switch in position "2". Two sweep lines will be seen on the

CRT screen which are determined by the peaks of the pedestals with eight
radio pulses in each horizontal line.

10. By pressing one of the SHIFT buttons (TO THE LEFT or TO THE RIGHT) arrange
the eight radio pulses on the lower sweep line (slave station signals)

- 107 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

precisely underneath the eight pulses on the top sweep line (master station
signals).

11. Set the A - E toggle switch in position "A". By pressing one of the SHIFT
buttons (TO THE LEFT or TO THE RIGHT), set the first radio pulses of the pulse
trains at the origin of the sweep lines.

12, Set the SHEEP switch in position "3”. One sweep line with two signals formed
by the superimposition of the envelopes of the eight pulses from the master and
slave station pulse trains will be seen on the CRT screen.

13. Taking into accOunt the data obtained in the execution of paragraph 3 of these
instructions, set about the visual identification of the type of signals received
from the master and slave stations. Special care should be taken in performing
this task when working in the region of a mixed signal. To facilitate the identi-
fication of the portion of the edge of the resulting pulse corresponding to a
surface wave under conditions of in-phase addition of forward and reflected
signals, one is to begin to slowly rotate the RECEIVER potentiometer control,
accompanying it with the visual monitoring of the shape of the initial portion

of the edge of the radio pulse. The moment of the transition from the surface

to the composite signal should be indicated in this case by the appearance of a
wavy variation ("steps") on the monotonically rising envelope.

14. Press one of the SHIFT (To THE LEFT or TO THE RIGHT) buttons and bring the
center of the signal edge portion selected for the measurements using the master
station signal up to the dark vertical marker of the tracking point.

15. Switch the A - B toggle switch to the "B" position. Using the GAIN - BALANCE
potentiometer, set the slope of the slave station signal edge portion selected
for the measurements parallel to the corresponding portion of the edge of the
master station signal.

16. Press one of the SHIFT buttons (TO THE LEFT or TO THE RIGHT) and match the
master and slave station signal edge portions selected for the measurements.

17. Check the decoding of the radio pulses, for which the SHEEP switch is set in
position "4". One sine wave should be seen on the CRT screen (the signals are
decoded). If two sine waves which are out of phase are seen on the CRT screen
(the signals are not decoded), then the CODE 1 - CODE 2 toggle switch rust be
set in the next position and one must check to see that the radio signals have
been decoded.

[8.Setthe SHEEP switch in the ”F0” position (phase readout). The envelopes of
signals with a triangular waveform from the synchronous filter output will be
observed on the CRT screen.

19. Using the sum buttons (10 the LEFT or no THE RIGHT) and the so cam
potentiometer, match the leading edges and amplitudes of the triangular images.

- 108 -

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
20. Press the READOUT button and take the readings from the digital display. If
the reading was obtained using space waves, it rust be corrected with the
appropriate correction determined frou a chart or by means of special tables.

21. To obtain the second line of position, it is necessary to perform the oper-
ations indicated in paragraphs 8 through 20 of these instructions.

-109-

FOR OFFKJAL.USE13NLY
FOR OFFKJAL USE ONLY

PART II MARINE NAVIGATION RADARS

Marine navigation radars (SNRLS) have taken over the leading position at the
present time in ship navigation and navigation safety equipment. Despite the
fact that the first experiments in detecting ships were performed in the

USSR as early as 1936 [4]. radars began to find wide scale applications in
navigation only at the end of the 1940's and the start of the 1950's.

Marine navigation radars or ship radar* is :he term for the radioelectronic
device intended for the detection and determination of the coordinates and
parameters of motion of various objects on land (shore) and on water by means
of the reflection, reradiation or inherent radiation of the objects (the

targets) of electromagnetic (radio) waves. A radar object (target) is any
phyrical body or group of bodies, the electrical and magnetic properties of

_which differ from the environment in which the radio waves propagate. Under
sea navigation conditions, such objects are ships, navigation markers (buoys

and spar buoys), the shoreline, various water surface obstacles, shore struc-
tures, etc.

Useful information on the radar target is supplied by the radio signals which
arrive from it at the radar set. Depending on the origin of these signals,
radars are broken down into passive and active types. A passive radar system
is used to receive signals produced by thermal radio emission. For this
reason, passive radar is frequently called passive thermal radar.

A passive system radar contains a pencil-beam receiving antenna, a receiver
and a display unit. Passive radars are used in ship navigation to receive
the electromagnetic energy radiated by the sun, the moon and the stars.
Marine radio sextants operate on this principle.

An active radar system can operate with either a passive response (primary
radar) or an active response (secondary radar).

A passive response radar contains a radio transmitter. transmitting and
receiving antennas, a radio receiver and a display. The energy of the
direct or probe signals radiated by the antenna, in propagating in a speci-
fied direction, is reflected from the objects and impinges on the receiver

input. The reflected signals, amplified by the receiver, are fed to the
display where they are converted to a form convenient for obtaining informa—

tion on the received signals.

Active radar with an active response differs from the passive response in that
a transceiver or radar transponder is present in the target or point which is

specified beforehand.

A radar transponder is a device in which, with the arrival of "interrogation"
radar signals, response signals are transmitted in the form of code combinations

*In American and English literature: radar (radio detection and ranging).

- 110 -

FOR10FFNJAI.USE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of sufficient power. The response signals make it possible to not only detect
and determine the coordinates of a poorly reflecting target or point where

the radar transponder is set up, but also to identify the object. Radar trans-
ponders, designed for joint operation with ship navigation radars, have been
given the name of radar transponder beacons (3H0).

Radars are classified not only according to the origin of the radar signals,
but also according to the type or structure of the probe signals (the signals
irradiating the targets). Depending on the type of signals. radars are broken
down.into pulse and CH types. A pulse radar periodically transmits short
microwave (SVCh) pulses. while it receives the pulse signals reflected from
the targets in the gap between the probe pulses. The reflected pulse signal
from each target is delayed with respect to the probe signal by the time t -
2D/c, where D is the distance to the target (the range); c is the radio wave
propagation velocity. The range is determined from this time interval, D =
ct/Z, while the direction to the detected target (the azimuth) is determined
by means of the pencil-beam antenna.

Where several targets are present, the received returns will be shifted in
time and direction depending on the range and azimuth to these objects. The
specific feature of pulsed radar operation noted here makes it possible to
rather simply observe several objects simultaneously which are located within
the operating radius of the radar. Display techniques using cathode ray

tubes (BLT) [CRT's] used in pulsed radars or automatic ranging systems for

one or more targets also facilitate this. The advantages of a pulsed radar
also include the comparative simplicity in the utilization of the same antenna
for both transmission and reception of the radar signals.

Drawbacks to pulsed radars are the necessity of using large peak powers for
the probe pulses, the complexity of determining the rate of motion of objects,
the impossibility of measuring very small ranges and the relatively large
minimum operating range of the radars, which depend on the pulse width, the
minimum value of which is limited by the frequency spectrum width and the
transient process times in the equipment.

Despite the drawbacks noted here, the advantages of the pulse technique make

a 360° scan mode possible for marine navigation radars. The C" system is

used at the present time in navigation equipment for the measurement of the
docking speed of ships. For this purpose, an unmodulated CH system is used
which is known under the name of the Doppler-Belopol'skiy system. The opera-
tional principle of this system consists in the fact that the frequency of
returns in the case of the relative motion of the target and the radar differs
from the frequency of the probe signals by an amount which depends on the
radial velocity of the relative motion of the radar and the target.

.. 1,11.-

FOIlNﬂWCJAl.USE¢MVLY
FOR(Nﬂﬂ(JAL.USE(NHLY

CHAPTER 3 MARINE PULSED NAVIGATION RADARS
4.1. The Specific Features of Pulsed Radars and Their Technical and Operational
Characteristics

Pulse marine navigation radars (ISNRLS) are used in navigation for the detection,
coordinate determination and determination of the parameters of the motion of
various water and shore targets, the shoreline and other obstacles which are
capable of reflecting the energy of the probe signals to the radar. The
resolution of these problems makes it possible to assure navigation safety

when ships are located in narrow straits and other confined waters, the safe
passing of ships in the case of reduced or limited visibility, as well as

the determination of a ship's position based on known shore or floating refer-

ence points and by means of specially set up radar transponders.

Pulse marine navigation radars should possess sufficient resolution. precision
in the measurement of ranges and directions to targets being detected as well

as minimal overall dimensions and weight of the entire installation, assuring
the following in this case:

-Azimutha1 plan position indication, which makes it possible to monitor the
surrounding surface situation within a specified operating radius;

-—The orientation of the image of the returns from the targets on the indicator

screen both relative to the course of the ship (the middle line plane) and
relative to the meridian (true north);

-Reliable detection of both large and small low lying surface objects (buoys,
small boats, various obstaclen) where clutter is present from an agitated
sea surface, or hydrometeors grain, fog, snow, etc.);

--A target detection range independent of the amplitude of the rocking of the
ship;

--The reproduction on the indicator screen of both the relative and true
motion of the targets;

--0perational reliability and servicing simplicity.
A block diagram of a pulsed radar with plan position indication is shown in

Figure 4.1. The circuit complement includes the following major components
or units:

a) A synchronizer, which generates the triggering pulses to control the radar
circuitry (one operational cycle of the radar, the duration of which is called
the repetition period corresponds to each triggering pulse);

b) A pulse modulator which generates modulating pulses of a specified width
'p and amplitude, which control the microwave generator;

c) A microwave generator which produces high power microwave pulses, the width
of which is governed by the width of the modulating pulses;

d) The antenna and feedline, which consists of a pencil-beam antenna and a
waveguide line; the antenna has a beaver-tail directional pattern, i.e., a

- 112 -

F0l:0l1ﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(ﬂULY
narrow pattern in the horizontal plane (0.7 to 0.5°) and a relatively wide
pattern in the vertical plane (18 to 25°). which assures the requisite pre-
cision in the measurement of azimuths and reduces the influence of the ship's
rocking on the radar detection range;

e) An antenna switch with a very fast response, which at the moment the probe
pulse is generated connects the antenna to the transmitter and protects the

receiver input against the high power pulse of the microwave generator, and
after the probe pulse is completed. connects the antenna to the receiver input
until the generation of the next.probe pulse;

f) A receiver which amplifies the received signals and transmits them to the
display in the form of video pulses;

g) A two dimensional plan position indicator (1K0) [PPI], which converts the
received return voltage to a visible image on the CRT screen. Magnetically
controlled CRT‘s with brightness modulation of the electron beam are used

for this purpose in the display. The received signals increase the brightness
of the screen at the point corresponding to the azimuth of the detected target
and its range on the range scale.

 

Figure 5.1. Block diagram of a pulsed radar.

Key: 1. Radar synchronizer;

2. Pulse modulator;

3. Microwave frequency generator;
4. Antenna switch;

5. Plan position indicator;

6. Receiver;

7. Azimuth sweep circuitry;

8. Antenna rotating mechanism.

Mechanical and electronic cursors are used to read the azimuths. The ranges
to targets are read out by means of special electronic range markers, which
are fixed (NMD) or moving (PHD). With the rotation of the radar antenna (by

- 113 -

FIN!(IHHC1A1.USE(MVLY
lN)R'0lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬁSEi(ﬂWLY

means of a special mechanism), these markers create fixed range rings (circles)
(NKD) and a moving range ring (PKD) on the CRT screen.

 

gum Range signal

Figure 6.2. Block diagram of an automatic range tracking system.

Key: 1. Receiver output;
2. Time discriminator;
3. Controller;
4. Strobe pulse generator;
5. Time modulator;
6. Radar synchronizing pulses.

The plan position display is assured through the creation of radio circular
scanning of the electron beam of the CRT. The radial range sweep is produced
by deflecting windings. through which a sawtooth waveform current is passed.
Circular sweep of the CRT beam can be obtained in two ways: by rotating the
deflecting windings about the neck of the CRT synchronously and in phase
with the rotation of the antenna or by creating a rotating magnetic field by
means of two stationary. mutually perpendicular deflecting windings.

The following are used to couple the antenna to the indicator: a selsyn
tracking transmission system (88?); sine-cosine rotating transformers (SKVT);
turning or rotating transformers (VT), etc. The orientation of the signal
image on the PPI screen with respect to north is assured by tracking the
azimuth sweep circuit with the ship course indicator: the gyrocompass.

The signals can be displayed either in a relative motion (on) or true motion
(ID) mode. In the first case, the origin (center) of the circular radial
scan. which marks the position of the ship on the PPI screen. coincides with
the center of the screen and remains constant when the ship moves. Because

of this, the images of stationary objects move on the screen at a speed pro-
portional to the speed of the ship, while images from moving objects move

with the relative speed of the objects and the speed of the ship itself. Such
a display mode complicates the identification of stationary and fixed targets,
makes it difficult to determine the true direction and speed of other ships,
etc.

-114-

FOR10FHKJA1.UBE(N‘LY
To change a display over to a true motion
indicating mode, it is necessary to sub-
tract the vector for the motion of the
ship itself from the relative motion
vector. This is achieved in technical
terms by having the PPI circuitry supple-
mented with a special device: a true
motion display accessory, which converts
the electrical log and gyrocompass data
to the appropriate signals which move

the origin of the circular-radial sweep
on the PPI screen in the direction of the
ship's motion and at a rate proportional
to its speed. Upon reaching the edge

of the screen, the origin of the sweep is
automatically (or manually) and rapidly
returned to the initial position at the
opposite edge of the screen, changing

 

Figure 4.3. Time graphs of automatic
range tracking circuit

operation. the image of the surrounding area. To
Key: 1. t2 - ‘delayi preclude log and gyroconpass errors. a

2. tds - tdiscriminator‘ provision is made for manual correction

3. td. of the ship course and speed data in the

true motion display circuitry.

When the origin of the range sweep is shifted relative to the center of the
screen, the azimuth reading is taken by means of an electronic azimuth cursor
(EVN), which takes the form of a second sweep line which can be rotated manually
in a range of 360°.

A system for automatic range tracking (A80) and automatic azimuth tracking (ASH)
of targets is used in automated navigation radars to solve the problem of
passing and preventing the collision of ships. A block diagram of an automated
range tracking circuit is shown in Figure 4.2, while the time traces of the
change in the voltages in the elements of this system are shown in Figure b.3;
The radar sync pulses (graph a) control the operation of the time modulator
(see Figure 4.2), which generates the delay voltage pulses tz [l] (graph b).
The trailing edge of these pulses triggers the strobe pulse generator (range
Strobes), shifted in time with respect to each other by the amount of their
width (graph c). The strobe pulses and video pulses of the received returns
(graph d) are fed to the time discriminator. The time discriminator compares
the overlap areas of the video pulse and the strobe pulses and generates an
error voltage (graph e), which is proportional to the difference in the areas
being compared. The error signal is fed to a controller which generates a
control signal voltage AU (graph f). The latter, in acting on the time modula-
tor. changes the width of its delay pulse ts so that the timewise mismatch At
which is equal to At - td - tds is reduced and tends to a low value equal to
the tracking error.

- llS —

INJI‘OIWHCIAI.IISEiCHVLY
IIIR()FFIC1Al.lEﬂE(ﬂWLY

 

.0) W aluminum
meanness

Figure 4.5. Phase meter circuit of a time modulator.

Key: 1. Sinusoidal waveforms frol the radar synchronizer;
2. Phase shifter;
3. Limiter;
6. Differentiating network;
5. Negative peak clipper;
6. To the tracking pulse generating circuitry;
7. From the electromechanical integrator.

Electronic and electromechanical integrating circuits are used as the controller.
A block diagram of an electromechanical integrator is shown in Figure 5.4.

The integrating element is an Ac or DC electric motor. The angular speed of

the motor is proportional to the applied voltage, while the shaft rotation

angle Aw is proportional to the integral of the input voltage. A feedback
network. designed around a tachogenerator for the appropriate type of current,
differentiates the output signal. The resulting voltage is compared with the
input, and their difference acts on the electric motor until the output signal
is precisely proportional to the integral of the input signal. while the voltage
difference goes to zero. '

Time modulators (VH) take the form of delay circuits which can be made in the
form of devices which generate variable width voltage pulses (multivibrators,
phantastrons, etc.) or pulses of constant width, which are delayed relative

to the sync pulses by an amount of time governed by the integrator control
signal. An example of the latter type of time nodulator is a phase metering
circuit (Figure b.5) consisting of a phase shifter and the driving stages. The
sinusoidal waveforms from a radar synchronizer are fed through a phase shifter
to a limiter. The rectangular pulses obtained after limiting are differentiated,
and after negative peak clipping, the spiked positive polarity pulses control

- 116 -

IKIICHHNCIAI.USE¢UNIM
the strobe pulse generator, which can be designed in a delayed blocking oscil-
lator circuit configuration. The time delay tz of the peaked pulses is
realized by a phase shifter for which the phase output signal is proportional
to the integrator rotor rotation angle as. The value of the time delay is
defined by the expression:

:2 ' [tdelay] . (0/21)“r

where p is the phase change created by the phase shifter;
T is the period of the sinusoidal oscillations driving the phase shifter.

 

Figure 4.6. Time graphs showing the operation of an automatic
azimuth tracking circuit.

Automatic azimuth tracking with simultaneous scanning of the surrounding

space is accomplished using the same technique as in the case of automatic
range tracking. The basic difference consists first of all in the fact that
the tracking signal is not a single pulse, but rather a pulse packet which is
reflected from the target during the rotation of the antenna in the horizontal
plane; secondly, the arrival period of the pulse packets is determined by the
circular scanning time in azimuth. Graphs of the processes in an automatic
azimuth tracking system are shown in Figure 6.6. When the axis of the antenna
directional pattern coincides with the direction for which there is a special
marker on the azimuth circle of the antenna rotating mechanism, then a special
contact is closed and the azimuth readout pulse generator or hearing strobe
generator is turned on (graph aI). With the action of these pulses, the
strobe pulse generator is actuated (graph b1). when the center of the return
signal packet (graph cl) coincides with the center of the strobe pulses, the
return pulse packet is divided in half (graph d1) and the to‘al voltage at the

- 117 -

IN)R<DFII(1Al.lEII(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

output of the time discriminator is equal to zero (graph eI), because of which
the control voltage at the integrator output does not change (graph fl). If
the target shifts relative to the position of the azimuth marker in the antenna
mechanism, then the center of the strobe pulses will not match the center of
the return signal packet (graph cIl). Then a mismatch voltage will appear at
the output of the time discriminator (graph all), which will increase the
control voltage of the integrator (graph £11), and as a result, the integrating
electric motor will turn the azimuth marker through the mismatch angle.

The operational characteristics of a marine navigation radar are as follows: the
maximum detection range, the minimum detection range, the resolution, the pre—
cision of range and angular coordinate measurements and the operational relia-
bility.

The maximum range depends on the power potential of the radar, the effective
back-scatter cross-section of the target, the energy losses in the atmosphere,
the influence of water surface returns, and is limited in practice by the
radar visibility range for surface targets, which is determined by the propa-
gation properties of ultrashort waves (UKV) [VHF].

The potential detection range (the radar range in free space) is defined by
the formula:
4
o ‘/ spiny
"" P........(4n)"

where P1 is the pulse power of the probe signals;
GA is the directional gain of the antenna;
Seff is the effective radar cross-section of the target;
Prec m n is the receiver pulse sensitivity;
A is t e radar wavelength.

 

When x < 10 cm, the energy of the radar signals is attenuated in oxygen, water
vapor and hydrometeors. For this reason, the radar detection range is reduced

and will be equal to:

. —oau '
Duns: " Dune up..."

(4.1)

where a3 is the attenuation coefficient of the atmosphere, which depends on
the wavelength and the condition of the atmosphere, in dB/km.

when using radar on low lying surface targets, the return from the water
surface sharply reduces the radar range. In this case, the radar detection
range is determined from the formula:

, __ _
. V (3013*; ”may

 

 

Pill! mln 1’

 

where “1 is the height at which the radar antenna is mounted;
hz is the height of the surface target.

-m-

FORIIHNC1A1.USI(HQLY
Besides the return energy. the water or ground surface also exerts an influence
on the radar range because of its curvature. It is known that at ultrashort
wavelengths. especially at centimeter wavelengths and shorter, the capability
of radio waves of bending around the convex surface of the earth is very

poorly pronounced. For this reason, radar detection range of surface targets
is limited by the radar visibility range (in kilometers). which is equal to:

o..-.. man/Z. + V7,)
(where “1 and h2 are expressed in meters).
The minimum radar range is determined by the probe pulse width:
Dmin ' 3001’ 1 ”min - M's
(where 11 is the pulse width is microseconds; Dmin is the minimum range in m),

and depends on the ao—called radar dead zone, which is determined from the
formula:

0|! a- h' .
- hlltanelz ' 1‘0”

 

Ddead zone

where 6 is the width of the antenna directional pattern in the vertical plane.

The range resolution of a radar is characterized by the minimum distance AD
between adjacent targets, located on the same azimuth, for which it is
possible to observe them separately and determine their coordinates. The
spacing AD depends on the pulse width, the electron spot diameter d“ on the
CRT screen and the range scale (the distance being measured) of the indicator
D:

an..?;14.£111

h

where c is the radio wave propagation velocity; 1
sweep line.

p is the length of a range

The directional (azimuth) resolution of a radar is determined by the minimal
angle Au between adjacent targets located at the same range from the radar,
for which it is possible to observe them separately and determine their
coordinates. The angle do depends on the width of the antenna directional
pattern in the horizontal plane oﬁor, the spot diameter and the distance r
from the center of the sweep to the target blip on the CRT screen:

- - d
An =' a,” +51,1—:- .
The coordinate measurement precision is characterized by the size of the errors
when making readings with the radar. They can occur because of waveform dis-
tortions in the pulsed signals, inaccuracy in taking the radio wave propagation
velocity into account as well as the influence of interference, instrument

errors. limited resolution of the observer's organs of vision. etc.

- 119 —
Ftﬂlfﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEH!(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The potential range measurement precision depends on the waveform and width
of the probe pulses as well as the interference level. The mean square
potential error of a range measurement is defined in accordance with the
formula:

63-5 Cl -

V‘WO

 

where qo is the ratio of the signal energy to the interference energy at the
receiver output.

The potential mean square azimuth measurement error is determined by the width
and shape of the antenna directional pattern in the horizontal plane as well
as the ratio of the signal energy to the interference energy at the receiver
input: .
“to

V87. '
Operational reliability characterizes the capability of a radar of performing

the function assigned to it under actual operating conditions. It is usually
expressed as the number of operating hours between two successive failures.

.
on =

The main technical characteristics of a marine navigation radar are: the
wavelength (pulse modulation frequency); the pulse repetition rate; the
transmitter power; the receiver sensitivity and bandwidth; and the width of
the probe pulses. The technical characteristics or the parameters are chosen
based on the requirements placed on the radar operating characteristics.

The wavelength of a marine navigation radar is chosen taking into account the
following tasks: providing for pulsed radar operation with a short pulse
width (0.05-1 usec); obtaining high antenna directivity in the horizontal
plane without excessively increasing the antenna dimensions; assuring the
detection of both large and small lowblying surface targets within the speci-
fied operational radius of the radar; providing for the requisite radar
detection range where energy is absorbed in the troposphere (oxygen, water
vapor) and in hydrometeors (rain, fog, etc.). Working from these conditions,
the 3 centimeter band has become the most widespread for navigation radars

(a wavelength of 3.2 CI). In individual cases, a 10 centimeter radar is
used to reduce energy absorption in the troposphere and reduce clutter from
precipitation and rain clouds.

The choice of the pulse repetition rate is conditioned by the unambiguous
determination of the range and effectiveness of detecting targets in a circular
scanning mode. The following are considered in this case: the duration of

the forward trace for the range sweep; the rotational speed of the antenna

and the width of the antenna directional pattern in the horizontal plane.

The maximum pulse repetition rate is determined from the formula:

t
—.

2.5 D...
where Dmax is the maximum range on the indicator scale.

 

19? max ' F...“-

- 120 -

FOR 0F?1(1A1.U8E(NVLY
INJR 0F1ﬂCJAl.IﬁiEI)NLY

The minimum repetition rate is found from the condition:

 

° -
PP min ' 6n"min/“hot F'”M ' '

where "min is the minimum number of reflected pulses in a packet (it should
be no less than 10 to 15); n is the antenna rotational speed, r.p.m.

The working repetition rate is chosen from the condition:

F < P < P

9 min 9 p max‘ FwnanFn<meb
A distinction is drawn between the pulse power P and the average power Pavg
of the radar transmitter. which are related by the following equation:

PBVE - PPT PPP PC.‘ PI‘IFI-

The receiver sensitivity and bandwidth are some of the most important charac-

teristics, since along with the transmitter power, they determine the radar
detection range and the quality of the pulse signal.

The sensitivity characterizes the ability of the receiver to receive and
detect weak returns with a specified probability under conditions of inter-
ference produced by the internal noise of the receiver. It is expressed

as the minimum received signal power at the input to the receiver, which is
equal to:

Free min - Nnmkabfrec Ply Illa "' ”autobhp.

where Nn is the noise factor of the receiver;

m is the discrimination coefficient (the minimum signal power to noise
power ratio at the receiver output which is necessary to isolate the
useful signal);

k is Boltzman's constant, equal to k - 1.37 ‘ 10'23 J/deg;

T . 300° K;

Agrec is the receiver bandwidth.

Receiver sensitivity is expressed in units of power (fractions of a watt) or
decibels:

Pa:

Pup uln

 

I"rec min ' 1° 1“(Pref/Pr“ min)’ 63’ P.,...-10lg ‘5'

where Pref is the reference power level. usually 1 watt.

Radar receiver bandwidth should not be very narrow so as not to cause pulse
signal distortions. 0n the other hand, too wide a bandwidth increases the
internal noise and thereby reduces the receiver sensitivity. In practice, the
bandwidth of a marine navigation radar receiver is chosen from the condition:

 

urn—MEL” +2“,
- 121 -

F03‘0FFHJAI.USE(MVLY
FINICNHHCJAL.USEZCH€LY

where afs is the residual error in tuning the local oscillator of the automatic
frequency control system of the receiver.

The major parameters of a radar antenna are: the directional pattern width
of the antenna in the horizontal “hor and vertical 6 planes at the half power
points (at the 0.5 level); the directional gain GA and the degree or amount
of sidelobe suppression.

The antenna directional gain is equal to:

G 4 1 0 _ 4s
A ' “hot 0 A “two '

 

If “hor and 6 are expressed in degrees, then:

GA:- ‘lm a

aiw0‘
The degree of sidelobe suppression is expressed in decibels and is characterized
by the ratio y of the maximum sidelobe power Pb to the power of the main lobe P:

 

y - 10 log(Pb/P), dB.

To assure normal operation of a marine navigation radar, the sidelobe level
should be 20 to 30 dB below the level of the main lobe.

4.2. The "Lotsiya" Marine Navigation Radar

The “Lotsiya” marine navigation radar (SNRLS) is intended for installation on
vessels of port services, auxiliary services and technical fleets, on low
tonnage hydrofoils as well as [or a standby radar on large tonnage seagoing
vessels [11].

The "Lotsiya" marine navigation radar contains the following units: the
antenna (Ll). the transceiver (L2), the indicator (L3), the power supply (LA),
the control console (L5), a power inverter. a rectifier and a regulator for
the ship power.

The radar station equipment complement also includes the installation set for
mounting the waveguide channel. the set of waveguide sections, the set of
spare parts, tools and accessories as well as the set of interconnecting
cables.

The unit can be powered from three sources: 2h-27, 110 or 220 volts DC; 115
volts AC at 400 Hz and 220/380 volts three-phase AC at 50 Hz.

The "Lotsiya" marine navigation radar has the following operational and tech-
nical parameters:

- 122 -

FOI10FFKJAI.USEIMVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060001-9

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NHLY

,___———_——_—_—

3503 £033.26: 03.53 .3333: on» no saunas 3003 .53 0.53..—

.3

ta an £33. can? 5.:

 

-123«-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key: 1.
20
3.
6.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
16.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

23.

26.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02I09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080001-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Antenna;

Diode clamping bridge;
Rotating transformer;
Deflecting coils;

Antenna rotation motor;
Rectifier;

Cutoff switch;

ANTENNA ROTAIB. 115 volts,
600 Hz input;

PREPARE FOR OPERATLON;
RANGE;

SHEEP INTENSIPIBR;

AFC 0N;

CURSOR BRIGHTNESS;

MOVING RANGE RING;

TUNE;

Antenna switch;

Magnetron RP generator;
115 volts, 600 Hz;
Rectifier;

Receiver front-end protective
discharger;

Attenuator;

Intermediate frequency ampli-
fier AFC;

Ignition rectifier [for dis-
charger];

Receiver nixer;

AFC mixer;

Discriminator;

Crystal current;

AFC crystal current;
Amplifier;

Maximum detection range*, miles:

A shore 60 m high

30.

31.
32.
33.

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
60.
61.
62.

63.

66.

as.
66.
67.
68.
69.
50.
51.
52.
53.
S6.

Ship with a displacement of 700 tons

Average sea buoy

Minimum detection range, meters
Maximum range determination error, percent of

the maximum value of the indicator scale:

0n the 6. 8 and 17 mile range scales

0n the 0.5, 1 and 2 mile range scales

Intermediate f
fier;

Local oscillau
Peak detector;
POWER 0N;
Azimuth marker
Blocking oacil
Scale choke;
SCALE;

AFC amplifier;
Delay line;
Scale switch;
Fixed range rt
Modulator and
panel;
Rectifier, 115
+150, -150 vol
Rectifier, 115
300 volts, 5 v
out;
BRIGHTNESS;
Azimuth marker
Deflecting coi
Rectifier;
Video amplifie
Sweep circuit;
Automatic time
Brightener;

IF amplifier;
MPV [expansion

Maximum azimuth determination error, degrees

1"For a waveguide length of up to 10 m and an antenna mounting
above sea level.

- 126 -

FIHICIHWCIAI.U§E(HVLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600060001-9
Range resolution, in m, no worse than

Angular resolution on the a mile scale, degrees,

35

no worse than 2
Carrier frequency (3.2 cm wavelength), MHz 9,375 1.45
Probe pulse width, microseconds:

0n the 0.5, l and 2 mile range scales 0.12

On the A, 8 and 16 mile range scales 0.3 i 0.1
Pulse repetition rate. pul/sec:

0n the 0.5, l and 2 mile scales 1.600 :_200

On the h. 8 and 16 mile scales 500
The pulsed transmitter power, xw:

0n the 0.5, 1 and 2 mile scales 2.5

On the 6, 8 and 16 mile scales 4.5
Pulse sensitivity of the receiver, in dB relative
to the l mu level 88
Receiver intermediate frequency, MB: 30
Receiver bandwidth, MB: 13.5
Antenna directional pattern width at the 0.5
level relative to the maximum power, degrees:

In the horizontal plane 1.7

In the vertical plane 18 1'2
Sidelobe attenuation, in dB, no less than 23
Antenna rotational speed, r.p.m. 20 i_k
Diameter of the indicator screen, mm 108*
Antenna gain 700
Indicator range scn1::**, :ilcs - 0.5, l, 2, b

and 16

Interval between fixed range ring markers
on the 0.5 mile scale, miles 0.1
Power consumed from the ship's power mains, watts 500
Continuous operating time. hours 24
The time before the radar is ready after being
turned on, minutes A
Permissible ambient temperature variations, °c:

For the L1 unit [antenna] -40 to +50

For the other units -10 to +50

—_—_——

*The indicator screen diameter with the removable lens is increased.
“Only the moving range ring is used on the l to 16 mile scales.

- 125 -
mortucmbssomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Permissible relative air humidity at +40° c, x 95-98
Permissible ship angle of heel, degrees #5
Permissible variations in the ship power parameters, X:

For the DC and AC voltages ﬁlo

At the 50 Hz frequency 3}

At the 600 Hz frequency 3;
Permissible wind load on the antenna, n/sec 50

A block diagram of the "Lotsiya" marine navigation radar is shown in Figure 4.7.
The synchronization of the radar circuit is accomplished from a blocking
oscillator, which controls the operation of the sweep generator of the indicator
L3 through a delay line and directly controls the magnetic modulator of the
transmitter L2. The mutual relationships between the remaining elements can

be seen from the block diagram itself.

The antenna unit (unit L1) consists of the antenna, the RP section, the SL-369
antenna rotation motor, the motor power rectifier, the 0K bearing (azimuth)
marker contactor group, the 6VTI-1TV type rotating transformer (VT), the DH
diode clamping bridges and the supplemental toggle switch for actuating the
antenna rotation.

A DC voltage is fed to the motor winding from the rectifier, which is designed
around ZDZOZZh type diodes in a bridge configuration. The antenna is rotated
through a reducer with a gear ratio of 1:250. The rotating transformer pro-
vides for the synchronous rotation of the sweep on the plan position indicator
screen (PPI) with the rotation of the antenna. The rotating transformer

rotor is coupled to the rotating shaft of the antenna through a reducer with

a ratio of 1:1. A current is induced in the stator windings of the rotating
transformer which is proportional to the sine and cosine of the antenna
rotational angle.

The high frequency section of unit Ll consists of the radiating system (the
antenna) and the waveguide channel. The slot type antenna contains a rectan-
gular cross-section waveguide of 28.5 x 12.6 mm with inclined slots cut in
the narrow wall, which shape the antenna directional pattern in the horizontal
plane. The slots are separated from each other by metal partitions which
form ultimate waveguide filters to suppress the vertical field component. A
horn reflector shapes the directional pattern in the vertical plane. The
horn is covered with a dielectric fairing to protect against the external
environment. The overall standing wave ratio (KSV) [SHR] of the antenna is
no more than 1.4. The change in the SHR with the rotation of the antenna
does not exceed 0.1. The maximum of the antenna directional pattern is
deflected from a normal to the antenna aperture by an angle of 5°24'.

The rotating junction of the antenna waveguide channel consists of fixed and

moving sections. The stationary section takes the form of a rectangular
waveguide 23 x 10 mm in cross-section with circular flanges. The moving

-126-
mmussomv
section consists of brackets and waveguides which are connected to the
antenna. There is an air gap of 0.2 In between the stationary and rotating
sections. Electrical contact is achieved in the gap by means of a choke
groove. Energy transmission stability is assured between the sections through
the presence of a coupling stub.

The transceiver (unit L2) consists of the following: a magnetic modulator, the
RF generator (magnetron) MI, the antenna switch AP, the intermediate frequency
preamplifier PUPCh, the local oscillator and the automatic frequency control
circuit APCh [AFC].

The thyristor type magnetic modulator has a series charging resonant circuit,
three compressor stages, a shaping line and a pulse transformer. The first
type A compression stage (section) produces voltage pulses with a width of

22 usec, thesecondtype 3 stage produces pulses with a width of 1.7 usec and
the third type A compression stage produces pulses with a width of 0.12 or
0.3 usec. An HI-lSB-l pulsed magnetron is used in the transmitter.

The ferrite antenna switch has a broadband receiver protection discharger R2?
of the RR-83A-l type, equipped with a preheater with a thermal regulator. The
discharger contains a firing electrode which is supplied from a firing recti-
fier at a voltage of 600 to 800 volts.

The local oscillator G takes the form of a reflective K-27 klystron. The
intermediate frequency preamplifier contains two stages using a dual tuned
circuit configuration with 62hlB vacuum tubes. The gain of the IF preampli-
fier is no less than six for a bandwidth of no less than 10 MHz. The signals
are fed to the amplifier input from the balanced mixer of the receiver in
which DQOSV and 04053? microwave (SVCh) diodes are used.

The AFC system operates in a dual channel circuit configuration with a balanced
mixer, similar to the receiver mixer. using 0405A and 0405A? microwave diodes.
The AFC channel includes the following: a two stage I? amplifier using 6ZhlP-
YeV vacuum tubes, 3 discriminator using stagger tuned resonant circuits with

a 6Kh2P-Yev twin diode; a controller which contains a DC amplifier using a

6N2? "triple triode" vacuum tube and a peak detector using 20105 silicon diodes.

In structural terms, the L2 unit takes the form of a hermetically sealed cylin-
der with exterior annular cooling fins. The cap of the cylinder is a facing
panel, which supports all of the structural components through the chassis.

The high voltage elements of the transmitter - the magnetron oscillator MI and
the modulator - are housed in a separate high voltage compartment of the trans-
ceiver. A packet with drying silica gel is included in a special lattice work
cartridge to reduce the humidity in the unit.

The indicator (unit L3) contains the following: the cathode ray tube BLT [CRT],
the high voltage rectifier. the deflection coils OK, the sweep generation

circuitry (sweep assemblies). the main 1? amplifier, the video amplifier.
forward trace sweep intensifier and other components of the display circuitry.

- 127 -

FI“!(HNWC1AI.USE(MVLY
90R OFFICIAL USIZ(NNLY

The amplified signals from the targets are fed from the output of the IF
preamplifier to the input of the intermediate frequency amplifier. The ampli-
fied and detected signals from the IF amplifier output are fed to the video
amplifier input. The fixed range ring, moving range ring (from the L5 unit
[control console]) and the azimuth (bearing) marker voltage pulses are fed
to the input of the second video amplifier channel. The amplified signals
from the targets, the fixed and moving range ring markers as well as the
azimuth marker signals are fed from the output of the video amplifier to the
cathode of the CRT. Also fed to this point is the screen brightness control
voltage. The forward trace sweep intensifier voltage pulses are fed to the
CRT modulator.

The power supply (L4) contains a distribution box, a sweep scale panel, a sweep
and modulator supply panel, a panel of +300, +5 and -9 volt rectifiers, a
panel of +150 and -150 volt rectifiers as well as the synchronizer panel.

The distribution box serves for electrically connecting the radar assemblies
which are located in different units as well as the electrical interconnection
of all of the units to each other. The complement of the box includes the
following: the connecting circuitry with the output plugs, the power switching
circuit, a portion of the azimuth (bearing) marker generating circuit, thermal
time delay relay, filter capacitors for the sweep and modulator power supply
rectifiers as well as a fan for ventilating the unit.

The sweep scale panel is intended for switching the circuits which generate
the sweep scale. The +27 v voltage from the SCALE switch, located in unit L5,
is fed to the windings of one of the relays, which connects the appropriate
sections of the scale choke in the sweep generator circuit.

The BPRM modulator and sweep power supply panel (block) is intended for supplying
a DC voltage of 80 to 150 volts for the indicator sweep as well as the module-
tor. It consists of the sweep supply rectifier, the modulator supply rectifier
and the current protection. The sweep supply rectifier is designed in a

bridge circuit using ZDZOZZh diodes. The modulator supply rectifier is like-
wise designed in a bridge circuit using ZDZOZZh diodes. The current limiting
circuitry protects the components of the sweep and modulator circuits when

the permissible current values of the load are exceeded.

The +150 and -150 volt rectifier panel contains rectifiers designed in a
semiconductor bridge configuration.

The +300, +5 and -9 volt rectifier panel contains a +300 volt rectifier in a
bridge configuration with an electronic regulator using 6Sl9P-V, 6ZhSB-V and
6GSB-V vacuum tubes using a KTsAOZZh rectifier; the +5 volt rectifier is a
full wave rectifier using a KTaAOZI rectifier with regulation provided by a
D815A zener diode. The -9 volt rectifier is likewise designed in a fulldwave
configuration using a KTshOZI rectifier with regulation supplied by a 08156
zener diode.

- 128 -
roe omaAL'use ONLY
The synchronization panel contains a locking oscillator designed around a
6N17B-V vacuum tube operating in a self-oscillating mode. The blocking oscil-
lator synchronizes the operation of the radar units. To compensate for the
delay in the modulator, the indicator sweep circuitry is triggered through a
delay line L2. The AFC gain is controlled by means of a potentiometer which
regulates the grid bias of the IF amplifier tube of the AFC system.

The monitor and control console (unit LS) includes the monitor. control and
fixed and moving range ring marker generator panel. The unit has the follow-
ing controls: radar power on and off switches. antenna rotation switch,
brightness controls for the range marker, PREPARE-OPERATE transmitter on switch
and indicator switch. brightness controls for the illumination of the range
scales. operational control of the AFC (turning on the AFC, manual frequency
control, tuning), range scale switching (scale adjustment), as well as time
delay adjustment of the moving range ring and its measurement.

The power inverter (IS-24/27) is intended for converting the 26 or 27 volt DC
to 115 volts AC at 400 Hz unregulated with a capacity of up to 230 VA; as well
as 115 volts, 400 Hz regulated with a capacity of up to 140 VA. The complement
of the IS-24/27 inverter includes: the power unit, the master oscillator.

the control unit. the AC voltage regulator. the 27 volt rectifier and the
ventilation fan.

The power unit takes the form of a parallel inverter (a DC power to AC power
converter) using controlled PTL-SO-Z thyristor rectifiers with external excita-
tion. The thyristors are controlled (excited) from a 62-400 master oscillator,
which generates square wave pulses with a positive amplitude of 8 volts.

The master oscillator is designed in a push-pull configuration with transformer
coupling (a blocking oscillator) using P215 transistors. To improve the
frequency stability, power is supplied to the oscillator through a compensation
type voltage regulator, the circuit of which employs P213. HPZSB, HPlOb tran-
sistors and silicon D8183 and D8148 zener diodes. '

The BUl control block consists of an electronic time delay relay and a voltage
discriminator. The control unit provides for either local or remote triggering
of the inverter, protects the external voltage source and thyristors against

a short circuit current, and automatically switches the taps of the output
windings of the power transformer in the case of a considerable change in the
supply voltage.

The 27 volt rectifier is designed in a bridge configuration using 20202V silicon
diodes. The presence of a 27 volt rectifier with a general supply mains

voltage of 27 volts is due to the requirement of isolating the output voltages
of the inverter from the supply mains voltage. which increases the operational

reliability of the radar.

The ferroresonant regulator is intended for stabilizing the 115 volt, 500 Hz
output voltage. Normal operation of the regulator is assured with a load current

- 129 -
FORTOFFKJAI.USE(HYLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of up to 1.25 amps. In the case of a greater value of the load current, the
output voltage falls off smoothly.

The fan located inside the inverter promotes the maintenance of a constant
temperature within the inverter housing.

The 15-110 and 18-220 power inverters convert the DC voltage of the ship's

mains at 110 V or 220 V to 115 volts at #00 Hz. The following are generated

at the inverter output: 115 volts, 400 Hz unregulated with a capacity of up

to 230 VA; 115 volts, 600 Hz regulated, with a capacity of up to 140 VA, and

a Dc voltage of 27 volts at a power of up to 80 watts. The following are
included in the inverters: the power section, the caster oscillator, the
control block (802 for the 18-110 inverter and 803 for the 18-220), interference
protection filters, and AC voltage regulator and a 27 volt rectifier.

The ship mains power rectifier (unit V27) is used to power the "Lotaiya" marine
navigation radar from the ship's three-phase AC voltage of 220 V or 380 V at

50 Hz. The unit takes the form of a three-phase rectifier using VKDZS-lB
silicon rectifiers, and an 18-24/27 power inverter with a DC voltage of 24 or
27 volts.

The ship's mains power regulator (the LS unit) is intended for powering the
station from the AC mains voltage at 115 volts, 400 Hz and has the following
output voltages: 115 V, 600 ha unregulated with a capacity of up to 230 VA;
115 V, 500 hr, regulated with a capacity of up to 160 VA and a DC voltage of
27 V at a power of up to 80 watts. The L8 unit contains a power transformer,
ferroresonant regulator, and a duty bridge rectifier using 2D202V silicon
diodes.

The overall dimensions of the radar units and the values of their weight are
given below:

L1 1,481 x 393 x 357 mm; 24 kg
L2 295 x 295 x 397 mm; 12 kg
L3 581 x 352 x 205 m; 12 kg
L4 264 x 320 x 180 mm; 12 kg
L5 276 x 274 x 133 mm; 3.5 kg
IS-24/27 520 x 370 x 190 mm; 30 kg
V27 520 x 370 x 190 mm; 30 kg
LS 340 x 200 x 165 mm; 7 kg
18-110 520 x 370 x 190 mm; 30 kg
18-220 520 x 370 x 190 mm; 30 kg

The "Lotsiya" marine navigation radar is located and installed on a ship taking
into account its operational convenience and the specific features of the
operation of its units. The L1 unit [antenna] is mounted on a special mast

or platform at a height which precludes the possibility of the appearance of
shaded sectors and the irradiation of the ship's crew by the electromagnetic
field on open spaces of the deck and superstructures. The L3 and LS units

- 130 -
son orncm. us: ONLY
[indicator and control console] are housed in the bridge (near the helm) or

in the navigator's compartment. The L3 unit can be fastened to a desk. in a
bulkhead or built into the ship control console. The L5 unit should be installed
in the immediate vicinity of the L3 unit. The L2 and L3 units can be located

in any dry room. The L2 unit should be installed only horizontally. When
installing the LA unit, it is necessary to assure access to the fuses and the
COURSE MARKER ootentiometer, which are located on the facing deck panel. The

15, V27 and LS units are installed in equipment rooms. It is also permissible

to locate these units in the navigator's room and the bridge.

when installing the units, a provision should be made for the capability of
free access to the fuses and controls of the units, as well as for opening

the covers and the ventilation openings. It is not permissible to place the
V27 and Ls units in rooms with a corrosive or dusty environment, or to cover
them during operation with covers or heat insulating objects. The L2, L3 and
L4 units are mounted on type APN shock absorbers while the V27, Ls and IS

units are mounted on AKss-iOH shock absorbers. The chassis of all of the units
should be reliably grounded.

The units are electrically interconnected by means of cables in strict confor-
mity with the marking on the cable plug connectors and the units. The cable
from the ship power mains to the inverter or the LS and V27 units is run
directly in the ship. All the remaining cables and the matching part of the
connector for the inverter and the LS and V27 units are supplied as part of
the radar package. The length of the cable from the L1 unit to the L3 and
from the L3 to the LA should be minimal. Otherwise, there is the danger of
distortion of the sweep on the 0.5 mile range scale.

The waveguide channel is composed of standard waveguide sections. The quantity
and designation of the waveguides are stipulated when ordering. The number

of bends in the waveguide line should be no more than five. The maximum length
of the waveguide channel should not exceed 10 m.

It is recommended that the "Lotsiya" marine navigation radar be controlled
and its operating modes checked in the following order.

The ON-OFF toggle switch on the control console is set in the "On" position.
The green light comes on in this case on the control console. After one minute,
the main supply voltages for the radar are checked with the meter: +115,

+27. -150, +300, and +150 volts, for which the CHECK switch is set in the
appropriate positions. After two to four minutes, the presence of the sweep
and modulator voltages is checked. If these voltages fall in the nominal
range (are within the specified sectors of the meter), then the PREPARE -
OPERATE toggle switch is set in the "Operate" position, while the CHECK

switch is set in the "TM" position. In this case, a red light should come on,
on the control console, while the magnetron current should correspond to the
nominal value.

By continuously rotating the BRIGHTNESS control on the indicator in a clockwise
direction, a clear-cut sweep line is set on the CRT screen. By rotating the

- m -
son omcu'l. use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

MARKER BRIGHTNBSS control on the control console, bright fixed range ring

marker points are made to appear on the sweep line.

By turning the GAIN

control clockwise on the indicator, receiver noise is made to appear on the
sweep line. Having checked for the absence of foreign objects within the
the ANTENNA ROTATE toggle switch on the

radius of rotation of the antenna,
control console is set in the "On" position.

screen should rotate clockwise in this case.

The sweep line on the indicator

The SCALE switch on the control console is set sequentially in the "1", "2",
"A", "8" and "16" (miles) positions. and by turning the control for the range
readout mechanism on the control console, the presence of the moving range
ring marker on each range scale is checked. Having set the moving range ring

marker at the edge of the CRT screen,

of the range meter to the set scale is also checked.

TABLE 4.1.

 

 

Unit in which the

Controls Are Located

L5 [control console]
L5

L5
L5
L5

L5

L5
L5

L5
L5
L3 [indicator]
L3
L3
L3
L3

L3

Designation of the
Controls

m-vnu. [ON-OPP]

PODGOTOVKA-RABOTA
[PREPARE - OPERATE]

MASSHTAB [SCALE]
KONTROL' [CHECK]

VRASECH ANT - VKL
[ANTENNA ROTATE - ON]

APCH - RRCH [AFC -
MANUAL FREQ CONTROL]

NASTROYKA [TUNE]

YARKOST' MBTKI
[MARKER BRIGHTNESS]

DAL'NOST' [RANGE]
PODSVET [BRIGHTENER]
USILENIYE [GAIN]

VARU [TIME ACC]
PODQVET [BRIGHTENBR]
YARKOST' [BRIGRTNESS]

ms arm -m
[Azmcru MARKER - ON]

MPV - VYKL [MPV - OFF]

- 132 -

FOI.0i11CLALIJSl(NNLY

the conformity of the scale readings

W

Center

"Prepare"

"0.5 miles"
"115 vi!
"Rotate"

"Manual freq
control"

Center

Extreme left

Any

Center
Extreme left
Extreme left

Center

Extreme left

"Azimuth marker"
"Off"
Unit in which the Designation of the

 

Controls Are Located Controls Initial Position
L1 [antenna] ANTENNA - VKL "0n"

[ANTENNA - 0N]
LS [regulated ship power PITANIYE — VRL "Power”
supply] [POWER - 0N]
LS HESTNOYE - DISTANTS "Remote"

[LOCAL - REMOTE]

 

Notes: 1. The SCALE switch should be turned only after first pressing it.

2. If when the PREPARE - OPERATE toggle switch is set in the “Operate"
position, there is no magnetron current or beam sweep on the screen
of the CRT, then it is necessary to set the toggle switch in the
"Prepare" position, to press and release the SCALE switch and again
throg the toggle switch to the "Operate" position.

The SCALE switch is set in the "4 miles" position, and by smoothly turning

the VARU [time AGC] control on the L3 unit (the indicator), the presence of
shading of the CRT screen in a radius of no less than 3 miles is checked.

By successively setting the CHECK switch in the "TR-1“ and "TN-2" positions,

and by turning the TUNE control, blips from targets are made to appear on

the indicator screen in any of the range scales and at the noninal value of

the crystal current (within the range of the corresponding sector of the meter).
Optimal tuning is maximum image brightness of the pips on the indicator screen
from the most distant targets.

The APCh - RRCh [AFC - MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL] toggle switch is set in the
"AFC" position. In this case. the brightness of the signals returned from the
targets should not change on the indicator screen and the crystal current
level should not exceed the nominal values when the TUNE control is rotated
90° to the left and to the right of the set value.

To shut the radar down, the PREPARE - OPERATE toggle switch is set in the
"Prepare” position. The ON - OFF toggle switch is depressed on the control
console and it is set in the "Off" position. The POWER - 0N toggle switch on
the LS unit is set in the "Power" position (when the radar is equipped with

a LS unit).

All of the radar controls are set in the initial position in accordance with
Table 4.1 prior to starting the radar up.

Prior to turning on a new radar or following a long term down time, a careful

visual inspection is to be made of the radar. the correctness and reliability

of the unit connections are to be checked as well as the integrity of the
mechanical structures of the housing, the front panels of the units, the

- 133 -

FOI.OFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

presence and conformity of the fuses to the nominal values and the correctness
of the joining of the antenna to the waveguide.

When the equipment is provided as a complete package with the 18-26/27 unit

in conjunction with the V27 unit, the AUTOMATIC-MANUAL toggle switch in the
inverter is set in the "Manual" position. Depending on the ship mains voltage,
as well as the length of the cable between the V27 and 18-24/27, it is permis-
sible to switch the 25 - 27 volt toggle switch to the position for which the
unregulated output voltage of 115 volts will fall in a range of 115 volts i.5 z.

The tuning and adjustment of the "Lotsiya" marine navigation radar are carried
out when parts and assemblies are replaced which have exhausted their service
life, after eliminating defects, etc. The list of checks and adjustments after
the replacement of main units, panels, assemblies and parts of the radar is
given in Table 4.2 of [11].

The procedure for some of the radar adjustments during operation on board ship
is given below.

The antenna is adjusted while the ship is standing at the dock. The following
procedure is recommended for the antenna adjustment work. Using an optical
sight, the center line of the ship is lined up with any clearly visible reflect-
ing target on the radar screen which is located at a distance of 0.7 to 1 mile.
The ANTENNA ROTATE - 0N toggle switch on the control console is set in the
"Antenna rotate" position while the SCALE switch is set in the "1 mile" posi-
tion. By turning the antenna manually, a return from the selected target is
made to appear on the sweep line.

Rotating the POINTER [azimuth pointer] control on the L3 unit, the mechanical
line of sight is matched to the zero graduation on the azimuth scale of the
indicator. The cover on the antenna assembly is opened up, the fastening
screws for the rotating transformer are loosened and the sweep line on the PPI
screen is made to match the mechanical sighting line by means of rotating the
rotating transformer housing. Then the housing of the rotating transformer

is secured with the screws and the drive section is pressed down until it
engages the gear wheel. The AZIHUTH MARKER 0N toggle switch on the L3 unit is
set in the "On" position. The antenna horn is rotated in a small range from
the zero position. and by rotating the shaft on its axis, the electronic
azimuth marker is made to match the mechanical sighting line. One is to make
sure that the target marker appears precisely on the electronic course marker.
The antenna cover is closed and the screws are tightened down. The ANTENNA
ROTATE - 0N toggle switch on the LS unit is set in the "On" position and the
matching of the azimuth marker with the zero graduation of the azimuth scale
of the indicator and the target located on the midline of the ship is checked

once again.

The operation of the controls is checked by switching the appropriate controls
of the radar in operation. In this case, the correct output of instructions
and response of the radar circuit components should correspond to each position
of the controls.

— 134 -

son omcmt use ONLY
Checks and Adjustments

Check and adjust the sweep amplitude,
align the antenna. as well as the posi-
tion and amplitude of the azimuth
marker.

Check and adjust the magnetron current,
the crystal current, the radar range
or sensitivity, the AFC system and the
tuning of the local oscillator.

Check and adjust the sweep amplitude,
the tracking precision of the sweep
line. the range scales and the time
AGC.

Check and adjust the magnetron current,
range scales, sweep amplitude and AFC
system.

Check the calibration precision of the
moving and stationary range ring mark-
ers.

Adjust the regulated 115 volts and the
400 Hz frequency.

Check the magnetron current.

Check the radar range or sensitivity,
the action of the time AGC, the AFC
system; adjust the blanking pulse.

Check the operation of the beam con-
trols, the horizontal sweep line
precision, the range scales and the
sweep amplitude; adjust the sweep
center.

Check the range or sensitivity of the
radar as well as the crystal currents
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The corresponding voltages and currents are checked by means of Ac and DC
volt meters, which are connected to the corresponding jacks of the test box,
which are in turn connected to the connector of unit Lb [the power supply].
The voltages should fall in the following ranges: -9 (8.7 to 11) volts; +5
(b.5 to 5.7) volts; -150 volts +11; +150 volts +31; +300 volts, ill; urazv I
80 to 150 volts; UH - 80 to 150 volts; 115 volts regulated :22; 115 volts
unregulated, :lOZ; 27 volts tIOZ.

In the case of nonconformity of the 115 volts regulated and 115 volts unregulat-
ed, one must check the frequency and ripple of the ship power mains voltage.

In the case of nonconformity of the +300 volts, one must adjust the REC +300

V potentiometer in the LA unit.

The adjustment of the sweep brightness and the illumination of the control
console and indicator scales is checked by rotating the BRIGHTNESS and
BRIGHTENBR controls on the indicator in a clockwise direction, as well as the
ILLUMINATION control on the control console. In this case, the brightness

of the sweep and the illumination lamps should rise smoothly.

When checking the centering of the indicator sweep, the SCALE switch on the
control console is set in the "4 miles" position and the ANTENNA ROTATB - 0N
toggle switch is set in the "On" position. The origin of the sweep should
describe a circle, the center of which coincides with the intersection of the
pointers on the mechanical scale of the indicator with a precision of 2 mm.

If the displacements of the center exceed the indicated amount, then an adjust-
ment is made, for which the fastening screws for the magnet holder are loosened.
the sweep is turned on and the SCALE switch is set in the "bnmiles" position.
The antenna rotation is actuated. The centering magnet is rotated about

its center and about the opening of the pipe with a screwdriver and the origin
of the sweep is matched up with the intersection of the azimuth pointer. The

clamp screws for the magnet and the fastening screws for the plate are tightened
down.

The tracking accuracy of the sweep line is checked by rotating the antenna
manually through intervals of 30° each on its azimuth scale and comparing

the sweep positions on the indicator screen in this case. The ANTENNA ROTATE -
ON toggle switch is set beforehand to the "antenna rotate" position. The
mismatching between the antenna position and the sweep line should not exceed
l.7°. In the case of a larger value of the mismatch angle, the system is
aligned by rotating the housing of the rotating transformer about its axis.
Because of the fact that the axis of the antenna directional pattern, as was
noted above, deviates from the normal to the plane of the antenna by 6°, an
antenna rotation angle of 6° clockwise is taken as zero on the azimuth scale
of the indicator.

The tuning of the radar after replacing the magnetron or klystron when on

board ship is accomplished using radar returns by connecting the L2 unit to
the waveguide channel through a coaxial waveguide line which is included in
the kit of spare parts, tools and accessories [11]. The oscilloscope input

-136-
FIN!(HHHC1AI.USE‘DNLY
is connected to the IF AMPLIFIER OUT radiofrequency connector on the L3
indicator. Synchronization is accomplished frOm the PULSE BLANKING connector
on the front panel of the L2 unit. The TUNE control on the control console
is set in the center position, the AFC - MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL toggle
switch is set in the "Manual Control" position, and the PREPARE - OPERATE
toggle switch is set in the "Operate" position. The ZONE potentiometer in
the L2 unit is set in the center position.

By turning the mechanical tuning screw of the klystron clockwise from the stop,
the maximum number of returns is made to appear on the oscilloscope screen,

as well as the maximum amplitude of the returns from the most remote target.
In this case, the crystal current level should be a maximum. If when rotating
the mechanical tuning screw of the klystron no signals are obtained or the
crystal current does not have a maximum value, then the ZONE potentiometer

is to be turned and the tuning of the klystron with the screw repeated. It
must be kept in mind that when rotating the mechanical tuning screw of the
klystron clockwise, two maxima may be observed: the first corresponds to

the tuning of the klystron to the working frequency, while the second corres-
ponds to the image frequency.

- 137 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPPILIAL use UNLY

4.3. The "Mina" Marine Navigation Radar

The "Mius" marine navigation radar is intended for installation on vessels with
a registered tonnage of 300 reg. tons and more. The equipment complement of the.
radar includes the following units: A - the antenna and waveguide assembly,

P - the transceiver, I - the indicator, R - the repeater, V - power rectifier,

s - the power converter.

Depending on the type of shipboard power voltage, the repeater and power converter
units have the following differences: for a DC mains voltage of 110 or 220 volts:
R (. 110, 220 volts), 8 (- 110 volts) and s (8 220 volts); for single phase AC
mains at a voltage of 220 volts. 400 Hz: R (220 VAC, 400 as), s (220 VAC, 400 Hz);
for three-phase alternating current power mains at a voltage/380 volts, 50 8::

R (3 x 220/380 VAC, 50 Hz). The V unit is used only for a shipboard three phase
AC power main at a voltage of 220/380 V, 50 Hz.

Besides the units enumerated above, the radar set contains: a waveguide channel
installation set; a callibrated delay cable; a set of spare parts, tools and
accessories; a power switcher; and a GPVMZ-ZS multisection type rotary switch.

The Operational and technical characteristics (parameters) of the radar are given
below:

Wavelength, cm 3.2

Transmitter pulse power, K" 7

Pulse sensitivity of the receiver, dB 120

Range scales, miles 0.4, 0.4K. 0.8; 1, 6, 4, 8, 16, 24

Intervals between range rings, miles 0.4/0.2, 0.8/0.2, 1.6/0.4, 4/1, 8/2,
16/4, 24/«

Probe pulse width in microseconds,
on the following range scales in

miles:
0.4, 0.8, 1.6, 4 0.1
8, 16, 24 0.3
The pulse repetition rate, pulses/sec,
on the following range scales, in miles:
0.4, 0.8, 1.6, 4 3,000
8, 16, 24 2,000
Receiver bandwidth, in MHz, for pulse widths of:
0.1 12
0.3 4
Intermediate frequency, MHz 60
Antenna directional pattern width at the half power level, °:
In the horizontal plane 1.1
In the vertical plane 20
Degree of suppression of the sidelobes, in dB, no worse than 25
Rotational speed (scan speed) of the antenna, r.p.m. l7 1 2
- 138 -

FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
Maximum error in the determination of the range to targets
by means of the moving range ring (pointer), no;more than,
on the following scales:

0.4, 0.8, 1.6 miles, in m 65
4.8, 16,:24 miles, in Z of the range scale 2.5
Mean square direction (azimuth) measurement error, ',
no more than 1
Azimuth resolution on the 1.6 mile scale, degrees, no
worse than 1 . 2
Range resolution, m 25
Minimal detection range for an antenna height of 15 m
and a waveguide channel length of 10 m, in meters 30
Maximum target detection range, in miles:
Ship with a displacement of 3,000 tons 10

Average sea buoy without a reflector, 3.2 meters hight 1.8
Maximum error in the transmission of the course angles of the

antenna to the indicator sweep system, in °, no more than 1
Diameter of the CRT screen*, in II 180
Power consumption, in K", no more than 0.7
Harm-up time for the radar after being turned on, min 4
Operational reliability per failure, in hours 300

The composition of the units of the "Mius" radar is shown in Figure 0.8.

Block P1 in unit P is the modulator; it generates modulated voltage pulses with
widths of 0.1 and 0.3 microseconds and an amplitude of 6 RV to control the opera-
tion of the magnetron oscillator.

Micorwave (svch) block P2 contains an antenna switch, receive (intermediate
frequency) and automatic frequency control (APCh) [AFC] mixers, a K-9b klystron
local oscillator and other components needed for the transmission, reception and
conversion of the returns to the 60 MM: intermediate frequency.

Block P3 is the receiver and provides for the amplification of the intermediate
frequency pulses, detection, amplification of the video pulses and the transmis-
sion of the amplified signals to the video mixer 13.

Block Pb, the AFC, maintains the intermediate frequency of 60 MHz of the receiver
constant when the magnetron or klystron frequency deviates from the minimum
value.

Block P5 is a +27 and :llO volt rectifier.

Block P6 contains two rectifiers for a voltage of -300 volts and a protection
circuit.

 

*
A lens is used which increases the image size up to 230 mm.

- 139 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \nru nu. not. ‘II‘l-I

Block P7 consits of +350 volt and +50 volt rectifiers.
Block P8 contains -loO and -12.6 volt rectifiers as well as a voltage regulator.

Block P9 consists of a -100/-150 volt rectifier, a voltage switching relay and
a protection circuit.

Block P10 is an analyser to check the operability of the radar circuitry.
Block P11 is a Innotor block.

Block II of unit I is the range sweep block of the CRT indicator.
Block 12 generates the fixed range markers (NKD).

Block 13 is the video mixer.

Block 14 is the +16 KV high voltage rectifier for the anode supply of the indicator
CRT.

Block 15 contains the elements necessary for range measurements (range pointer)
and azimuth measurement (mechanical azimth pointer) as well as the scale
mechanism, the monitor circuitry for the power characteristics of the station;
etc.

Block I6 generates the cursor or range ring (PKD) [moving range ring].

The CRT unit contains an 1811158 cathode ray tube, the deflecting system,
focusing system, the electronic beam sweep centering circuitry and the course
marker circuit.

PU is the radar operational control console (panel).

The 8 unit converts the Dc voltage of the ship's mains or the output voltage

of unit V to an alternating single phase regulated voltage at 220 volts. 400 3:.
When the radar is powered from ship's AC power at 220 volts, 400 Hz, this voltage
is regulated and filtered in the S unit.

Unit V contains a -200 volt rectifier, protection circuitry, a monitor circuit,
an industrial interference filter and a radar actuating circuit. Block R1 of
unit It is a course angle or bearing repeater.

Block R2 performs the function of a mismatch signal amplifier.

Block A1 of unit A is the antenna.

Block A2 is the drive for rotating the antenna. The following aubblocks are
included in A2: A2/l is a reducer; A2/2 is a rotating microwave junction;
A2/3 is a remote asimth transmission unit.

- 11.0 .-
ron omcu‘t use ONLY
Block A3 is a test antenna.

The antenna and waveguide assembly (unit A) is a slotted antenna, and as usual,
takes the form of a waveguide horn radiator. The slotted waveguide traveling
wave radiator with an array of filters generates the antenna directional pattern
in the horizontal plane. The horn shapes the directional pattern in the
vertical plane. The probe signal energy is radiated and the return signals

are received by means of oblique slots, cut in the narrow wall of a rectangu-
lar waveguide with a cross-section of 28.5 x 12.6 as. An absorbing load of
carbonyl iron is fastened at the end of the radiator. The slots are separated
from each other by metallic partitions, which form off-mode waveguide filters
to suppress the vertical field component. There is a standard flange at the
input end of the waveguide. The radiating aperture of the antenna is hermetic-
ally sealed with a dielectric plug of ”-4 plastic foam.

To control the antenna directional pattern in the horizontal plane there are
three regulating screws, which make it possible to bend the waveguide radiator
in the horizontal plane within a certain range. The maximu- of the antenna

directional pattern is deflected from the normal to the antenna aperture by
6'.

When powered using 110 volts Dc, a SL-66l type electric motor is used to rotate
the antenna. A SL-661/R type electric motor is used for 220 volts DC. A
APN-ll/2 synchronous electric motor with a short-circuited rotor is used for
ship‘s power that is three-phase 220/380 volts AC at 50 Hz. In the case of
ship's power at 220 volts AC, 440 Hz, a SL-661 electric motor is installed

in block A2 and powered from the rectifier in the R unit.

[—E E E ESE7

I IIpuﬁMA Unit A ' Unit P ”NM " I

E E E El
Lnr_.___—.l HI P4 97 P10 I
I _-Z-»mn um E E E E-
[32 JJL._P5_..28_.__21

FEE """" [j — .7 T,__ ‘- 1?;

 

 

l

I I

l n Unit I ”WW“ I "n“ s
l

: [E I ‘“ I : manna
L_n_; _____________ J In:

Figure 10.8. The composition of the blocks of the "Mina" marine
navigation radar unit.

Key: 1. Cathode ray tube;
Unit A - antenna and waveguide assembly;

- 141 -
ma OFFICIAL us: ONLY
s vs. vs a stares. vol; \Iu‘Ll

Key [cont.]: Unit P - transceiver;
Unit R = repeater;
Unit I I indicator;
Unit 5 - power converter;
Unit V I power rectifier.

[See text for detailed key]

The rotating coupling A2/2 is used to join the rotating antenna to the station-
ary waveguide line. The transmitter energy excites oscillations in the coaxial
line through the rectangular waveguide. The center conductor of the line is

the exciting stub for the waveguide which is coupled to the antenna. The

ball shaped end of the stub makes it possible for a specified frequency spectrum
to pass through the rotating junction.

The angular position of the antenna (AZ/3) is transmitted to the R unit by
means of a SBVT rotating transformer, which is coupled by a gear transmission
to the antenna shaft. To check the precision of the tracking system and the
antenna adjustment, a removable scale mechanism with a rotation scale of 10°
and scale graduations of 0.1' is installed in the A2 unit. To generate the
course marker, a special contact device is mounted on the antenna shaft: an
attachment in the form of a contact drum with two brushes, which make contact
once per antenna revolution and switch a circuit which drives the course marker
on the CRT screen.

A test antenna (block A3) is used to monitor the power characteristics of the
radar. It is made in the form of a pyramidal hermetically sealed horn, fastened
by means of a bracket on the antenna rotation drive housing. The dimensions

of the horn aperture and its position relative to the main (slotted) antenna
are chosen so that the attenuation in the antenna--horn space amounts to 29 dB.
In order to assure the requisite delay of the monitor signal relative to the
probe pulse, block A3 is coupled to the transceiver (unit P) by a calibrated
delay line (cable) of fixed length.

  
  

1 ms 5 RV
(0,..."

    
   

[:JII

(3) Mum/mu) amen! A_”"

Figure 4.9. Block diagram of the modulator.

Key: A. To the magnetron;
3. Monitor signal to P11 [monitor block of the transceiver];

c. Range scale switch.

- 142 -

FOR‘OFFK]AI.US£1ONLY
The “Hius” radar transmitter consists of a modulator (block Pl) and a type
HI-507 magnetron oscillator. A block diagram of the modulator is shown

in Figure 4.9. The modulator is designed using a thyristor-magnet configuration
(a magnetic modulator). The modulator complement includes: master oscilla-

tor 10, the converter and first pulse compression stage 8, the second compres-
sion stage 5 for the generation of modulating pulses with a width of 0.1 usec,
stage a for generating 0.3 usec pulses, sync pulse generator 7, pulse trans-
former 3, relay ll for switching the pulse repetition rate, pulse voltage divider
2, protective relay 6, interference filters 1 and magnetron current control
circuit 9.

The master oscillator generates positive voltage pulses to trigger the converter
stage of the magnetic modulator. It consists of a self-excited transistor
blocking oscillator, a slaved blocking oscillator and an emitter follower

using two transistors connected in parallel.

The converter stage and the first compression stage convert the ~100/150 volts
DC of the power supply to positive pulses with a width of about lusec. In

the case of operation on the 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 and 4 mile range scales, the pulses
are transmitted from the first compression stage to the second and compressed
to a width of 0.1 usec. The resulting pulses are fed to a pulse transformer,
stepped up to a voltage of 6 KV, and having a negative polarity, are applied
to the magnetron cathode. Hhen the radar operates on the 8, l6 and 24 mile
range scales, the pulses are fed from the first compression stage to the
shaping circuit (stage) by means of a long line, which creates voltage pulses
at the output with a width of 0.3 usec, which are transmitted to the pulse
transformer input.

The sync pulse generating circuit triggers the sweep block ll (of the indicator),
the range cursor generation block I6 and the time AGC generating stage, block

P3. The magnetron current regulating circuit provides for a continuous change
in the magnetron current in a range of from 1 to 1.5 mA. The protection relay
which actuates if the magnetron current exceeds the nominal value by approxi-
mately three times serves to protect block Pl against a short circuit in the
magnetron. The pulse repetition rate switching circuit (relay) changes the
repetition rate: the repetition rate and width of the probe pulses as a
function of the selected range scale of the indicator.

Microwave block P2 includes the following: a ferrite circulator, which in
conjunction with a gas discharger, forms the antenna switch; the converter for
converting the microwave returns to the 60 HR: intermediate frequency; the
converter for the difference frequency between the magnetron and the klystron
local oscillator to control the AFC circuit. A block diagram of the P2 block
is shown in Figure b.10. The microwave oscillations generated by the magnetron
are fed to unit A (the antenna) through a directional coupler and a ferrite
circulator. The directional coupler is made with crossed waveguides which

are coupled at the common wall. The ferrite circulator contains two 120 degree
tees, which form four arms, which route the magnetron power to the antenna

in the "transmit" mode. The receiver is protected against the high power

- 163 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.‘V. UI'I'ILII‘L but; Ul‘lsI

magnetron pulses by a broadband RIl discharger with a firing electrode to

which a voltage of -600 volts is fed. When the radar returns are received,

the energy is routed by the circulator into the receive channel. The isolation
between the transmit and receive channels of the circulator is 20 dB. The
energy losses during transmission amount to no less than 0.5 dB and less than

1 dB during reception. The effect of spurious signals on the receive channel

is eliminated by means of an electromagnetic shielding shutter which automatic-
ally shorts the waveguide line when the radar is switched off.

   

Attenuator
Attenuator

    

Figure 5.10. Structural configuration of block 92.

Key: 1. From A3 [test antenna]; 8. Intermediate frequency

2. Directional coupler; amplifier isolator

3. slotted bridge; [sic];

a. Balanced mixer; 9. Power divider;

5. Electromagnetic shielding lO. Directional coupler;
shutter; 11. AFC isolator;

6. Receiver protection dis- 12. Magnetron;
charger; 13. Slotted bridge;

7. Ferrite circulator; lb. Balanced mixer.

The received radar returns are fed from the ferrite circulator through the
Open receiver protective discharger RZP, the directional coupler and the
slotted bridge to a balanced mixer. The output of the K-94 klystron is also
fed to this same point through a power divider, attenuator, ferrite isolator,
intermediate frequency amplifier and slotted bridge. The 60 HR: intermediate
frequency is fed from the output of the balanced mixer to block P3 of the
receiver for amplification.

-1u. -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The local oscillator output is simultaneously fed through the power divider,
attenuator, ferrite isolator of the APC and the slotted bridge to the balanced
AFC mixer. The attenuated output of the magnetron is also fed to this same
point through the directional coupler, attenuator and slotted bridge. The
difference frequency between the klystron and magnetron, which appears at

the output of the AFC mixer, is transmitted to unit PA, the automatic frequency
control circuitry. The requisite isolation is achieved between the AFC and

IF amplifier mixers by inserting ferrite isolators. In the ”monitor" operating
mode, an electromagnetic shielding shutter is used to block the receiver
channel against magnetron probe pulses getting through to the IF amplifier
mixer, where these pulses leak through the R2? receiver protection discharger.
The signals from the monitor antenna (block A3) are fed through the attenuator
and slotted bridge to the input of the IF amplifier mixer.

The receiver (block P3) contains the input circuit for matching to the mixer,

a multistage intermediate frequency amplifier, which is broken down into linear
amplifier stages and has a logarithmic gain response; a video amplifier, a
differentiating network (differentiator), and an emitter follower. Moreover,
the complement of the receiver includes the following: a time AGC circuit,

a stage for monitoring the feed of the signal to the monitor block, a switching
circuit for actuating the differentiator, switching the IF amplifier bandwidth
and switching the time constant of the differentiating network.

To reduce the noise, the receiver front end is designed around a 6SSlNV
nuvistor triode. The second and third stages use 6ElZNV nuvistor tetrodes.
All three stages operate in a linear mode. The receiver bandwidth is varied
in the second stage. When working with 0.1 uaec pulses, the bandwidth of

the IF amplifier is 20 to 25 MHz. When the pulse width is 0.3 usec, the IF
amplifier bandwidth is reduced down to 5 to 7 MHz. The remaining 10 IF ampli-
fier stages have a logarithmic amplitude response and are designed in a
circuit for the sequential addition of the detected pulses in a summing delay
line. All of the stages of the logarithmic IF amplifier have a dual resonant
circuit configuration similar to the first three stages and are designed
around 6312NV nuvistor tetrodes. The signals from the output of the IF ampli-
fier are fed to a two stage video amplifier, which in addition to amplifying,
differentiates the video pulses and transmits them to unit I, as well as

feeds out negative polarity video pulses to the monitor system.

The automatic frequency control block Pb includes the following: three inter-
mediate frequency amplifier stages, a discriminator, an emitter follower, a
video preamplifier, a first channel amplifier and peak detector, a second
channel amplifier and peak detector, a AFC test oscillator, as well as a
klystron tuning panel. The first two IF amplifier stages use I T313V transis-
tors in a two tuned circuit configuration. The third I? amplifier stage has

a single tuned circuit configuration using a transistor of the same type.

All three I? amplifier stages are looped by negative feedback.

The phase discriminator is designed around D18 diodes. The emitter follower
uses a P6168 transistor and matches the high output impedance of the discrim-

- 145 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I \In D. I .\-.l‘.e v~al. \Il‘l-O

inator to the low input impedance of the video preamplifier which uses a P4163
transistor also. Following conversion in the AFC mixer, the difference frequency
between the magnetron and the klystron is amplified by the IF amplifier stages
and is fed to the discriminator. If this frequency differs from the inter-
mediate frequency (60 MHz), then error signal video pulses will appear at the
discriminator, the amplitude and polarity of which depend on the magnitude

and sign of the deviation of the difference frequency from the nominal value.

The error signal pulses are fed from the discriminator output through an emitter
follower to the input of the video preamplifier. Following preamplification,
depending on the polarity, the video pulses are fed to a particular main
amplifier channel which uses HPZSB transistors, are detected by the appropriate
peak detector, converted to a positive or negative polarity DC voltage depending
on the error sign and are used to control the frequency of the klystron local
oscillator. The AFC test oscillator generates a period sequence of radio pulses
modulated at frequencies of SA and 66 MHz, which correspond to the maxima of
the discriminator characteristic. These RF pulses are fed to the input of

the AFC block along with the difference frequency between the magnetron and

the klystron, and produce a control voltage of about 26 volts at the output
of the AFC block, which is monitored by metering instruments in the P11 block.

There are five blocks of rectifiers incorporated in unit P.

Block P5 contains the 110 and +27 volt rectifiers. The first of them is
designed in a bridge circuit configuration using 0231 diodes and is designed
for a load current of up to 0.3 amps. The +27 volt, 1.2l amp rectifier is
likewise designed in a bridge circuit using 0231 diodes, and is equipped with
a capacitive filter for smoothing the rectified voltage ripple. A 115 volt,
600 Hz voltage is likewise picked off from the output of block PS to power
the electric clocks.

Block P6 has the following rectifiers: -300 volts, 0.05 amps; -500 volts,
0.0001 sums; -420 volts, 0.006 amps; -500 volts, 0.006 amps. 0n the whole,
block P6 takes the form of two series connected -300 volt rectifiers, designed
in a bridge circuit using 0211 diodes. A voltage divider is used to obtain
the —b20 and -500 volts. The existing protection circuit disconnects the

-300 and 220 volts, 600 H: from a number of circuits when the -420 and -500
volts is lost.

Block P7 has the following rectifiers: +400 volts, 0.007 sums and +50 volts,
0.215 amps. The +600 volts is obtained by means of the series connection

of the 350 and 50 volt rectifiers. Both rectifiers are designed in a

bridge circuit configuration and use D226 and Dle diodes respectively.

Block P8 consists of -40 volt, 0.6 amp and -12.6 volt, 0.25 amp rectifiers.
Both rectifiers are designed in a bridge circuit configuration using 0231

diodes and have compensation type regulators for the rectified voltage with
the regulating and amplifying elements connected in series.

- 166 -

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Block P9 takes the form of a ~100 volt, 0.61 amp or -150 volt, 0.42 amp recti-
fier. The voltages are switched by means of a special relay in the rectifier
circuit and the switching depends on the modulator operating mode (block P1).
The rectifier is designed as a bridge circuit using 02353 diodes. It has a
special circuit for overload protection. The operational monitoring of the
P3 block is accomplished using the voltages fed to the radar monitor system.

The operational analyzer for the blocks (block P10) monitors and analyzes the
operability of the P1, P3, 11, 12, I3 and 16 blocks and feeds out GOOD signals
to monitor block P11. Moreover, block P10 generates the modulating pulses

for the AFC test oscillator in block P4.

Blocks P1, 11, P2 and 16 are monitored with respect to the output pulse ampli-
tudes. Under normal operating conditions, the negative polarity voltage
pulses being monitored are fed with an amplitude of no less than 1 volt to
block P10. The width and repetition rate of these pulses are governed by the
range scale and the block being checked.

Blocks P3 and 13 are monitored with respect to the noise voltage level at

the block output. Under normal conditions, a negative DC voltage of no less
than 0.5 volts is fed to block P10. The check voltage is generated by means
of transducers and normalizers in the appropriate blocks, with the exception
of block P1. The check pulse for this block, the amplitude of which should
be no less than 30 volts, is normalized in block P11. As can be seen from
the functional block diagram, the check pulses of the blocks are are fed to
an emitter follower and expander through a functional block fault detector.
The emitter follower, along with eliminating the influence of the input imped—
ance of block P10 on the blocks being monitored, expands the width of the
pulses being checked out to 5 usec. The negative polarity pulses from the
output of the emitter follower are fed to an amplitude gate. The gate
generates and feeds from its output negative voltage pulses with a width

of no less than 5 usec, given the condition that the amplitude of the pulses
of the blocks being monitored is no less than the specified level. The

gated pulses are then fed to the normalizer, which generates negative voltage
pulses with a width of 15 to 20 pace and an amplitude of about 6 volts.

The normalizer pulses are converted in an integrator to a DC voltage which
powers a relay winding. When the relay actuates, the power circuit for the
GOOD signal light is closed in P11, the unit which signals the good operating-
condition of the blocks. The DC voltage is also monitored through the fault
search unit (P11),from which the Dc voltage is fed to the converter. The
converter, which is controlled by a master oscillator, generates a negative
pulse voltage with a width of 3 usec at a repetition rate of 4,000 pulses/sec
and an amplitude proportional to the DC monitor voltage.

The voltage pulses are fed from the output of the converter through block P11
to the input of the emitter follower-expander, and then, just as in the pre-

ceding case, through the amplitude gate, normalizer, and the integrator to
the signalling indicator for good operating condition of the blocks (P11).

-147-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILIAL 0.3L UNLV

A self-checking mode is provided in block P10. For this purpose, a negative
DC voltage of about 0.5 volts, which is the unnitor voltage, is fed from the
self-checking signal generating circuit through block Pll to the converter.
The subsequent signal path for the check signal is similar to that for the
operation of blocks P10 and P11 when checking the Dc voltages.

The modulating pulses to control the test oscillator of the AFC block are
generated by a special generating circuit to which positive voltage pulses are
fed from the master oscillator. Structurally speaking, the P10 block is made
on a printed circuit board, enclosed in the base housing made of sheet
aluminum alloy. Sockets are located on the side walls of the housing for
checking the block supply voltages. the no voltages of blocks P3, 13 and
self-checking as well as the pulsed voltages of blocks P1, 11, 12 and 16.
Block Pll (the monitor panel) is structurally made in the form of s panel of
plexiglass, on which the meters, switches and other elements are mounted.
Block Pll monitors the operability of blocks P4-P9 and 16, and also indicates
the operability of all of the replaceable blocks and certain assemblies in the
radar. The switching of the parameters of the assemblies and blocks being
monitored is accomplished by means of manual contact switches. The operable
condition indicators for the P1, 11, 12, 13 and 16 blocks are light indicators
using special lamps. The operability indicators for blocks P6-P9 and 14,

as well as for the magnetron, klystron, discharger and IF amplifier and arc
crystals are meters.

Block 11 of unit 1 (the indicator) is the sweep unit (Figure 4.11). It
generates the following: the range sweep current pulses, the forward sweep
trace brightening voltage pulses; and the 12 block triggering control voltage
pulses. The width of the indicated pulses is determined by the range scale
and is shown in Table 4.3.

TABLE 4.3.

 

_. _—.—____.-_

 

.——_...... .

   

  

 

 

W32. .5355... tum-“”2: ....,-...... u ‘L‘:';':.:.:"‘:::":' '
_mlea__ $323133 -._ 1-...____
c ......._
0.1". (1.1. ".8 a: mmclgnds
I.“ ‘ '22 mm
:1 5|
100
m 200 } 3“”
‘ll 3“) HI!)

2- .l’lr:&:.r '0 s I I t. Mann-Ivy» liar-.yﬁarm- wwva- upon-no was nan-rm“ n»-
-- m-p-oem recs-um : s-nyru was "7 u n .
ant-1n — us were 9 II; nouvpon — no hence M. II. "'1’ u rem-ml mm",

 

Note: The amplitude of the positive forward sweep trace brightening pulses
is 20 volts; the block 12 negative polarity triggering pulses are no
less than 9 volts; the monitor pulses are no less than 1.5 volts.

Key: 1. Pulse repetition rate, pulses/sec.

- 11.8 -
son omens use ONLY
“N uoaouﬁom nouuwﬂo I «an .AN
"mucosuao

unmsa amwmuo nooau I mzm .ow

“H usuaouo acmoauOm I Huh .aa

“numou wgmuoo~uov I 20 .wn
numaohmu

aauuo nmwmuo @003» I mzm .na

"Honcho Mnmuovumov I no .od
"N uuuaouo

unmu300u Econ conuuo~o I Nam .nn

“gouucou unocunumun I cum .ca

“ha—uh newcouman I as .nu

Anny “Isaask Igssaegﬁunv

#4. 309—: .III.
@E&.
I I I:

rlu. .
A

 

D . 8.00dn

_ “may k=n az.~u “adv
[gaﬁl a

~§o _ _
I_ K.

uncuduocom ucounso succusna I HAD
muomumaaaa uoaon mocha I as:
muuvcwnxu sauna I H:

mm noIOHHOu nauumao I Ham

“H oam_ hogan - ”Na

nauuou newuuououm

an uomum~naa oaasa I an:

“N osm— mw—uv I «NA

"hauou «.0

“heavy gunm:0umau mason” m @.o
“moons; 0:5» I ma
”wouu80mucouoa yucca“ I a»

.m—
.an
.o~

a . o . .
NMQV‘ONQ

.a

"mos

.H umca wo Schwamv suede .uu.c ouaumh

  

on .xoounu...‘ x26 .

 

 

 

Acuv n¢v

#H Jacun

_ alum" i .l I” _ . _
.A. _. ; mumﬁiﬂumﬁell I
:E I I R .. . a I

a. . . . .
a as:

   

Amy

 

A
\O
N
V

“a Adv

M nu soc—n.
- .

v. 5....

 

- 149 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ICJAL Ubf. “NLY

Key [cont.]: 22. EP3 I emitter follower 3; 41. OKHD I circuit for turning
23. Sch I (range pointer) counter; on the range and course
24. Kn I [power parameter test] markers;

pushbutton; 42. PSh I scale switch;
25. P I potentiometer; 43. RR I discrimination con-
26. T I toggle switch [ANTENNA trol [resolution];

ROTATB - OFF]; 44. R0 I [expansion unknown];
27. GUV I shock excitation 45. TD I transformer differen-

oscillator; tiator;
28. 3P4 I emitter follower 4; 46. Tg2 I Schmidt trigger 2;
29. 01 I limiter l; 47. G?" I sawtooth voltage
30. Tgl I Schmidt trigger 1; generator;
31. 01s I differentiating net- 48. KHP I comparator;

work; 49. 362 I blocking oscillator
32. B61 I Blocking oscillator 2;

1; SO. VK I circuit for turning
33. AVU I antilogarithmic on the radar;

video amplifier; 51. P2 I interference protec-
34. U0 I limiting amplifier; tion circuit;
35. V! I circuit for turning 52. To unit P;

the radar on and off; 53. To unit P.

36. R I reducer;

37. U“ I zero set control;

38. DD I maximum range set
control;

39. RA I amplitude control
[for the output pulses
of the blocking oscil-
lator];

40. P0 I control panel;

The synchronizing pulses, IS, are fed from block P1 through delay line L21,
emitter follower EPl using a 27301A transistor to the pulse expander RI: a
multivibrator designed around P4168 transistors. The control pulses are fed
from the multivibrator output to trigger pulse amplifier U12 of block 12
designed around a HPlOA transistor, as well as to the sweep power amplifier
UMP which uses P605 transistors. The amplified pulses are then fed to the
sawtooth generator GPT for the 0.4R and 0.4 mile scales as well as the saw-
tooth generator for the 0.8-—24 mile scales. The resulting sawtooth current
is fed from the output of both generators through the switching relay RK of
the output stages, the circuit for clamping the sweep origin PNR and the
antenna phase shifter PA to the deflecting system of the CRT, which consists
of two mutually perpendicular windings.

Block 12 for generating the stationary range markers (rings) is controlled
by the triggering pulses of the multivibrator through a trigger pulse ampli-
fier U12, the delay line L22 and emitter follower 8P2. These pulses are fed
to the shock excitation oscillator GUV designed around a HPlOA transistor,
which generates a sinusoidal voltage, the frequency of which is determined

by the range scale. This voltage is fed through emitter follower EP4 using a

- 150 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HPlOA transistor and limiter 01 using a D3llA [diode] to Schmidt trigger Tgl,
which is designed around P416 transistors. The rectangular voltage pulses
generated by the Schmidt trigger, are differentiated (by means of the DTs
[differentiating network]), and the peaked negative pulses trigger the slaved
blocking oscillator BGl designed around a P416 transistor which generates

the stationary range markers.

Block 13 is a video mixer and consists of an antilogarithmic video amplifier

AVU using a 2T30lD transistor; the limiting amplifier 00 uses a 2T301D transis-
tor and the output stage VK is designed around 2T3010 transistors. Block 13
generates the antilogarithmic amplitude response for the video signals, ampli-
fies, limits the so [expansion unknown] and feeds the signals to the CRT along
with the course marker signals 0!, and mixes the video signals with the station-
ary range marker (NKD) pulses and the range cursor pulses (PKD).

The control panel PU contains the following: the OKHD circuit for turning
on the course and range markers; the scale switch PSh; the discrimination
control circuit RR; the circuit for turning on the interference protection
P2 and the circuit for turning on the radar VK.

Block IA takes the form of a +15 RV high voltage rectifier to supply the
second anode of the CRT. The rectifier is designed as a voltage tripler using
selenium TVS-7-19H rectifiers.

Block 15 is intended for the readout of the angular coordinates (bearings and
course angles) as well as the range to targets. The block contains a system

of two scales: stationary with divisions of 0 to 360° and moving with divi-
sions of 0 to 180° to starboard and to port; a range pointer counter SCh with

a reducer R, which is coupled to a linear potentiometer LP; the ANTENNA ROTATE -
OFF toggle switch T; the potentiometer P in the STANDBY Pb mode, and the
pushbutton Kn for monitoring the power parameters.

Block I6 generates the voltage pulses for the range pointer with a width of
0.06 usec and an amplitude of 2 volts, as well as the voltage pulses for
monitoring block I6. The block circuitry contains the following: transformer
differentiator TD; flip-flop Tg2 using 2T301D transistors; a sawtooth voltage
generator GPN using a 2T3OID transistor; a comparator KHP using a 2T301D
transistor in conjunction with 0223A diodes and an output blocking oscillator
862 using a P4163 transistor. The circuit is equipped with the following
controls: the amplitude control RA for the output pulses of the blocking
oscillator, the maximum range set control UD and the zero set control UN.

The CRT circuitry contains the following: the deflection system 05, the

sweep origin clamp circuit FNR, the electron beam focusing elements PLl and
FLZ, the beam brightness controls RYa and the components for shifting the

sweep origin SNR. As was noted, the deflection system consists of two station-
ary windings, the magnetic axes of which are shifted through 90° (sine and
cosine deflecting coils). The clamping circuit for the sweep origin has two
clamping bridges. through which the corresponding windings of the rotating

- 151 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transformer and the deflecting coils 0! are coupled together. An armored
magnet and a magnetic conductor which encircles the neck of the CRT serve

as the elements for shifting the sweep origin. The sweep is centered by
rotating the magnet about its own axis. The video pUlses of the target
returns are fed to the cathode of the CRT through video mixer 13, along with
the stationary range marker and electronic range cursor pulses and the course
marker voltage pulses. The forward sweep trace brightener pulses and the
negative beam brightness control voltage are fed to the CRT modulator.

Unit R relays the antenna angular position data, interfaces the radar with the
gyrocompass and controls the orientation of the image on the CRT screen.

Block R1 relays the course angle and bearing, and orients the image on the
radar screen with respect to course and meridian. Block 32 is the mismatch
signal amplifier.

The V unit (power rectifier) is intended for converting the shipboard three-
phase 220/380 volts AC at 50 R: to 220 volts DC to power unit 5. The complement
of the V unit includes: the circuit for turning the radar on; the main 220

volt rectifier; the protection circuitry when the shipboard power is cut off;
the shipboard power mains voltage monitor circuit.

Unit 3 (the power converter) converts the 110 and 220 volts DC or the 220
volts, 400 Hz AC shipboard power to an alternating regulated voltage of 220
volts at 400 Hz with a sinusoidal waveform. To convert the DC voltage, the
unit 5 contains the following: a master oscillator, a thyristor inverter,
an AC voltage regulator, a filter for the fundamental frequency, a circuit
for automatically turning the radar on, and a master oscillator monitor cir-
cuit (block 51). The following are used in unit 3 for the conversion of the
input voltage of 220 volts AC at 400 Hz: an AC voltage regulator, a funda-
mental frequency filter, and a circuit for automatically turning the radar
on. In both cases, there are industrial interference filters at the input.

when ship's DC power is applied to unit 3, the master oscillator of block
81 generates two pulse trains. which are shifted relative to each other by
half a period. The pulse repetition rate is 400 to 500 pulses/sec with a
width of 300 to 500 usec; the voltage amplitude is no less than 10 volts.
The master oscillator pulses are fed to an inverter, which is designed in a
push-pull configuration using thyristors. The rectangular waveform output
voltage is fed from the inverter output to a regulator, which uses direct
Current saturable reactors, is stepped up by an autotransformer and is then
fed to the first harmonic filter. The regulated sinusoidal voltage is fed
directly to the rectifiers of the first power supply stage and the filament
transformers, as well as through the circuit for automatically turning on
the radar to the rectifiers of the second power supply stage.

When a ship's voltage of 220 volts at 400 Hz is applied to unit 5, the voltage
is fed through an industrial interference filter directly to the AC voltage
regulator.

- 152 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The specific features of the operation of the units and their operational
convenience is taken into account when setting up and installing the "Hius"
radar equipment. Unit A must be installed at a height of no less than S m
above the waterline, assuring circular scanning of the antenna. One is to
avoid hot gases and fuel particles exhausted from a smokestack falling on

the antenna. The P and 1 units are housed in the pilot house or navigator's
compartment. Depending on the installation variant, the I unit can be fastened
to a bulkhead, on an overhead ceiling or on the deck of the deckhouse. The

P unit is to be installed in such a way that the distance from the deck to

the upper part of the unit is 1.6 m. Unit S can be placed in any dry room
where the spacing from the deck to the upper part of the unit housing is 1.6
to 1.8 m. The spacing between the walls of the units and other ship equipment

should be no less than 30 cm, and no less than 80 to 100 cm between the units
and a bulkhead of a ship.

The power supply characteristics, overall dimensions and weight are given
below:

Unit A 2,430 x 895 x #40 mm; 68 kg
Unit P 464 x 304 x 643 mm; 54 kg
Unit I 380 x 660 x 800 mm; 61 kg
Unit 5 (220 volts DC) 413 x 239 x 560 mm; 33 kg
Unit 8 (110 volts DC) 613 x 239 x 560 mm; 33 kg
Unit 8 (220 volts AC, 600 Hz) 290 x 198 x 428 mm; 15 kg
Unit V 393 x 281 x 573 mm; 38 kg
Unit R (110 volts DC) 366 x 286 x 525 mm; 29 kg
Unit R (220 volts DC) 366 x 286 x 525 an; 29 kg
Unit R (220 volts AC, 400 Hz) 366 x 286 x 525 mm; 29 kg
Unit R (220/380 volts AC, 50 Hz) 366 x 286 x 525 mm; 29 kg
Unit K (110 volts DC, 220 volts Dc) 230 x 380 x 170 mm; 5 kg
Unit K (220 volts AC, 600 Hz) 230 x 380 x 170 mm; 8 kg
Unit K (220/380 volts AC, 50 Hz) 230 x 380 x 170 mu; 5 kg
The cabinet of spare parts, tools

and accessories 446 x 455 x 1170 mm; 90 kg
The GPVHE-ZS multisection type

rotary switch 140 x 206 x 145 mm; 1.75 kg
Installation set ' 30 kg

The control of the "Mius" radar is broken down into the operational control
and installation alignment.

The following are done during operational control: turning the radar on and
off; turning the range and course markers on and off; adjusting the signal
resolution and image contrast; measuring ranges to objects (targets); measuring
the course angles and bearings to targets; switching the orientation of

the image on the CRT screen; controlling the interference suppression.

Installation alignment and adjustment provides for the following operations:
interfacing the radar with the gyrocompass; matching the image to the gyro-
compass reading; mechanical and electrical alignment of the klystron; stand-by

- 153 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fine tuning of the klystron frequency; setting the duration of the time ACC;
setting the gating level of the time AGC; adjusting the magnetron current;
adjusting the illumination brightness of the CRT screen; adjusting the bright-
ness of the range markers; focusing the CRT beam; centering the image sweep on
the CRT screen; setting the signal limiting level; adjusting the brightness

of the range pointer; zero setting the range pointer; switching the antenna
rotation; switching the power feed to the tracking system.

Operational control is realized in the following manner:

1. To turn the radar on, the RADAR ON-OFF toggle switch on the indicator
control board is set in the '0m" position. In this case. one of the windows
with the numbers for the scale and the range markers should light up on the
control panel.

2. After 3 to 5 minutes have elapsed, a light with the label TRANSMITTER should
light up on the control board of unit I, which signals that the modulators
and other circuits of the radar are turned on.

3. While monitoring radar operation, make the following checks:
a) For the presence of range sweep on all scales and its threshold brightness;

b) The presence of noise and signals on the indicator screen as well as the
variation in them by adjusting the DISCRIMINATION potentiometer;

c) Matching the centers of the plan position sweep and the azimuth cursor on
the indicator screen;

d) The image quality of the range markers (MD) and course marker (OK); the
OFF-OK-OK, MD toggle switch is set in the 'OK, MD" position; in this case,
the course marker should read zero on the stationary scale of the azimuth

circle when the image is oriented with respect to the course heading;

e) The presence of the range cursor marker (VD) and its brightness;

f) The system f.r monitoring the power parameters of the radar (KEKh), for
which one of the range scales (up to 4 miles) is set, the CHECK POWER CHARACTER-
ISTICS button is pressed, which is located under the cover of the control

board on unit I, and one makes sure that a check signal is present in the form
of an arc (90° to 140°), positioned at an angle of 180° relative to the line

of the course marker and separated from the probe pulse by l to 3 mm (to

improve conditions for observing the power characteristic monitoring signals,

it is recommended that the range marker be turned off);

g) The relative precision in matching the range markers and range pointer by
means of comparing (colocating) the range pointer with each range marker
(the readings taken from the counter should not differ from the values of
the distances indicated by the range markers by more than specified in the
radar station data sheet).

a. The image on the PPI screen is matched to the gyrocompass, for which the
following is done:

- 154 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a) The IMAGE ORIENTATION SHITCBIM toggle switch is set in the "On Meridian"
position;

b) The OPERATE - HATCH TO GYROCGlPASS switch is set in the "Match to Gyrocoqass"
position;

c) Using a special key, the value of the course heading taken from the gyro-
compass repeater or its central unit is set on the course scale in unit R;

d) The OPERATE - HATCH To GYROCGIPASS switch is thrown to the "Operate" position;
e) The special key is removed;

f) The requisite operating mode is set (with respect to the course heading or
the meridian).

S. In the presence of sea wave or atmospheric precipitation clutter, the
INTERFERENCE SUPPRESSION AND 'SIGNAL DIFFERENTIATION toggle switch is turned on.
This toggle switch is also turned on where it is necessary to boost the range
resolution of objects (targets).

6. The DISCRIMINATION control is used to achieve the most complete and clear
image of the returns (from the objects or targets) against the background of
noise or interference.

7. The radar set is turned off by setting the RADAR ON-OPP toggle switch in
the "Off" position.

The operational status of the radar is monitored and a preventive check of the
monitor system is made by means of a built-in test system (VSK) for when the
radar set is turned on. The checks are made from the panel of the monitor
block Pll, which is located on the cover of unit P, in the sequence indicated

by the symbols: A"A'—A_A—A' . Soins clockwise.

All of the switches on the monitor panel, the switch on the klystron tuning
panel of unit P and the switch on the front panel of unit V should be in the
extreme left position prior to making the checks. Before making the checks,
one mat make sure that the fuses at the inputs to the power supplies are
good based on the fact that none of the signal lights above the fuses are on
in section A of the monitor panel. Lights coming on when a fuse is good
is evidence of a defective power supply. The location of the defective source
is indicated by the lable under the signal lights.

The 220 volt, 200 Hz regulated II shipboard power main, as well as the voltages
produced by rectifiers PS and P9 as well as 16 are to be checked on the
monitor panel of unit P, for which the following is done:

a) t the switch located at the boundary of the A - Q Jection to the
position;

-155-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b) By switching the POKER SUPPLY HONI'DOR control in a clockwise direction,

nake sure that in all positions, the uter needle of the meter located in 2 ,
falls within the range of the corresponding colored sector. The location of ”a
defective block is indicated by the lable opposite the control of the POWER
SUPPLY MONITOR switch.

Check the operability of the blocks in the A section of the radar by rotating
the SEARCH switch clockwise. The status of the corresponding block is registered
by signal lights with the labels 6000 or BAD. The location of a defective block
is indicated by the label opposite the switch control in each of its positions.

In the "SK" position of the SEARCH switch, the operability of block P10 is noni-
tored as well.as section of block Pll. After conpleting the checks of the
blocks, the SEARCIl switch is .to be set in the initial position "radar operate".
The NONOPERATIONAL RADAR HWE display should go out.

To check the operability of block P6, make sure beforehand that when the CHECK
BLOCK Plo switch is in the "operate" position, the pointer of the meter located
in section A , points to zero. By switching the CHECK BLOCK P4 control
sequentially to the "check I" and "check II" positions. one is to make sure

that the pointer of the meter falls in the range of the right side sector for
the "check I" position and the left sector for the "check 11" position. The
RADAR NONORERATIONAL MODE display should be on, on the monitor panel. The
departure of the meter needle outside the range of a sector signals the defective-
ness of block Pb. Set the C336! BLOCK P4 switch in the "operate" position. In
this case, the RADAR NONOPBRATINC MODE display should go out. If the display
does not go out, one must check the position of the PRBQUENCY TUNE ml)! switch on
the klystron tuning panel, which should be in the "AFC operate" position.

Check the operability of' the individual functional assemblies, for which the
following is done:

a) The switc located at the boundary of the A and A sections is set in
position ;

b) By rotating the CHECK ASSEMBLIES (current) switch clockwise, one is to nake
sure that the pointer of the meter in each switch position falls within the
range of the colored sector.

Check the operability of unit V. In the case where the MRGENCY MODE signal
light is on; imediately turn the radar off with the RADAR Oil-0F? toggle switch
located on the front panel of unit I, and check the ship mains voltage based on
the lighting of the signal lanps with the SHIP MAINS 0N label. A failure of the
laps to light indicates that voltage is not being fed to unit V from the ship
name.

Check the level of the ship nains voltage in each phase, for which it is necessary
to set switch V1 sequentially in the IF, In‘ and III? positions. In these switch
positions, the pointer of the meter should fall within the range of the sector.

If this meter does not show readings or the meter needle goes outside the sector
linits, one must check the phase .voltages at the test jacks Cl, 62, 63 and Clo of

-156-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unit V by means of the 6313 instrument. The voltage level can differ from the
nominal value by no more than 102.

Check that the contactor fuse is good from the failure of the DEFECTIVE CONTACTOR
FUSE signal light to come on.

In the absence of sweep rotation on the CRT screen, one is to make sure of the
operability of unit R, for which the following must be done:

a) Check for the presence of the power supply voltage of the tracking system of
unit R from the lighting of the POWER light. The failure of the lamp to light
indicates that the 220 volt, 000 Hz, reg. I voltage is not being fed to unit R
from s;

b) Check that the fuse in the 220 volt, #00 Hz, reg. I circuit is good based on
the lighting of the 400 Hz, 220 volt signal lamp;

c) Check that the fuse for the drive power rectifier is good from the lighting of
the RECTIFIER signal light (for the variant of unit R which is designed for
power from a 220 volt at 600 Hz ship power main);

d) check that the fuses in the antenna motor are good based on the lighting of the
mm moron signal lights;

e) Open the cover of the unit and check the position of the toggle switch in the
"amplifier" position;

f) Remove block R2 from the unit and place it with another from the spare parts,
tools and accessories kit; if the tracking system does not operate afer R2 is
replaced and the sweep line does not rotate, the power circuit of the actuating
motor with the marking H5 in block R1 is to be checked, as well as the electrical
connections of the rotating transformers in block A2 and R1.

If with a change in the course heading of the ship, the course marker does not
move on the screen of the indicator or the scale in unit R remains stationary,
one must check the position of the OPERATE - HATCH T0 GYROCOHPASS SWITCH. This
switch should be in the "operate" position.

4.6. The "Nayada" Series of Marine Navigation Radars

The “Nayada” series of marine navigation radars (SNRLS) consists of four radar
sets: the "Nayada-l", "Nevada-2", and "Nevada-h" [sic] with different character-
istics and functional capabilities.

The equipment composition of the "Nayada" marine navigation radar series is given
in Table 6.4, while the operational and technical characteristics of the radar

[8] are given below:

- 157 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
wavelength, cn
PP! sweep frequency, r.p.n.
width of the antenna directional pattern in the
horizontal plane, degrees:
"Nayada-l"
"Nayada-Z". "Nayada-3" and "Nayada-lo"
The same, in the vertical plane, degrees
Diameter of the slmsv CRT screen, In
Range scale, miles 0.5, l
Intervals between range narkers, miles 0,25,
Probe pulse width, microseconds, on the
following scales, in miles:
0.5, l and 2
lo and 8
16, 32 and 64
Pulse repetition rate, pulses/sec, on the following
scales, in miles:
0.5, l and 2
a and 8

l6 and 32

66

Transmitter pulse power, KW
Pulse sensitivity of the receiver, dB/w
Switchable bandwidths of the receiver, um:
Receiver intermediate frequency, an:
Minimum detection range for an antenna height of 15 m and a
wavelength of 10 n, no worse than, in m
The range resolution on the 0.5 mile scale, no worse, in m
Azimuth resolution on the 2 mile scale, in degrees
Maximum azimuth measurement error, in degrees, using the
following pointers:
Electronic
Mechanical
Maximum range measurement error, no more than, on the following
scales:
0.5, 1 and 2 miles, in m
The remainder, in percent of the range scale
Maximum error in the motion of the marker for the radar's own
ship in the true motion mode:
Angular error, in degrees
Speed error, in percent
Antenna directional gain, in relative units 1,200 and
Video amplifier bandwidth, MHz, no less than
Width of the range cursor pulses, microseconds
width of the heading cursor on the PP! screen, in degrees,
no more than
Antenna dimensions, in mm:
Aperture 2,38
Sweep radius 1,23
Maximum waveguide channel leng;h, m
Detection range for an antenna height of 15 m, in
miles, no less than:
Of an average sea buoy without a reflector
A 5,000 ton ship
Mean time between failures, hours, no less than
Average repair time, minutes, no more than
Continuous duty time, hours
Radar warm-up time, minutes
Power consumption, in RV, no more than:
"Nsyada-l"
"Nsyada-Z"
"Nevada-3"
"Nayada-b"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Distinctive features of the "Nayada" marine navigation radars as compared to other
modern nonautomated marine navigation radars (the "Lotsiya", Kivach", "Hius") are:

--The capability of displaying the surface situation on the PPI screen both in a
relative motion node (OD) and in a true motion mode (ID);

--The capability of measuring the angular coordinates of targets both with a
mechanical and with an electronic pointer with a digital azimuth counter;

--The possibility of operationally displacing the center (origin) of the PPI sweep
by two-thirds of the radius of the screen both in the true and relative motion
modes, which makes it possible to increase the radar scan range in a selected
direction without changing the range scale;

--The capability of solving navigational problems by means of graphical plots on
a mirror overlay plotting board (unit N) using the current radar situation which
is reflected on it from the indicator;

--Using an interface unit: a repeater (unit R), which provides for the multipli-

cation and generation of interface signals needed for the use of a second display,
as well as for interfacing additional indicators of other types and designations;

--The presence of a special de-icer in the antenna rotation drive which reduces
the danger of antenna icing under conditions of sharply reduced temperatures;

--Higher range and azimuth resolution because of the shortening of the probe
pulse width down to 0.07 microseconds, the narrowing of the antenna directional
pattern width in the horizontal plane down to 0.7 degrees and the use of a CRT
with improved resolution in the indicator.

As can be seen from Table 0.4, the "Nayada-l" marine navigation radar has an
antenna with a directional pattern width in the horizontal plane of 1 degree (a
directivity coefficient of 1,200 [front to back ratio]). In contrast to the
"Nayada-l", the "Nayada-Z" marine navigation radar includes an antenna with a
narrower directional pattern in the horizontal plane, equal to 0.7 degrees) a
directivity coefficient of 1,800); it is equipped with an overlay mirror plotting
board (unit N) for graphical plots under a removable viewing hood; a more power-
ful electric motor is installed in the antenna rotation drive. The "Nayada-3"
marine navigation radar differs from the "Nayada-Z" marine navigation radar in
the presence of an additional unit: a true motion unit (unit D). In contrast to
the "Nayada-3", the "Nayada-é" marine navigation radar has the following: a
second indicator which is used as a slaved unit; a second D unit; a repeater
(the coupling unit R), which provides pbovides for the functioning of the second
unit. All of the "Nsyada" series radars can operate with an "Al'fa" [8] ship
collision danger warning unit. The radars are intended for installation on ships
with a gross register tonnage of 500 r.p. and higher.

.The "Nayada" marine navigation radar can be powered from shipls mains at 110 and
220 volts DC, or with alternating three-phase 220/380 volts at 50 Hz. The units

- 160 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the radar are powered from static converters (unit 8) or from electrical
machine sets ("Nsyada-b") with a regulated 220 volts AC at 400 Hz. When the radar
is powered with 220/380 volts AC at 50 Hz, the radar equipment complement addition-
ally includes a ship power voltage rectifier (unit V).

The antenna rotationrmotor drive is powered directly from the ship mains through
unit I, in which a motor protection block is located (block 2D), which discon-
nects the power when an excessive overload OCCurs.

When ordering the equipment, it is recommended that one use the decimal numbers of

the 'Nayada" marine navigation radar units and assemblies, which are listed below
[12].

Unit A with an antenna directional pattern width in the horizontal plane of l',
for ship's power mains of 110 volts DC is designated by the decimal number
LA2092032; for 220 volt Dc mains, the number is LA2092033-01; for ship power mains
of 220/380 volts AC at 50 Hz, the designation is LA2092033-02.

Unit A with an antenna directional pattern width in the horizontal plane of 0.7°
for ship's mains of 110 volts DC is designated LA2092032; for ship's mains of 220
volts DC. it is LA2092032-01; and for three-phase 220/380 volts as at 50 Hz, the
designation is LA2092032-02.

Unit P has the decimal number LA2000010; unit I (console type) is LA2063008;
unit I (control panel type) is LA2043018; unit D (console type is LA2300058;
unit D (control panel type) is LA20006S; unit N is 1A23l7000; unit S (110
volts DC) is LA321100564; unit S (220 volts Dc) is LA321100766; unit R is
LA2300057; unit V is LA321506SGA; and individual ZIP [spare parts, tools and
accessories kit] is LA100063; unit K is LA2761088; and the delay cable is
LA4350050.

The "Nayada" marine navigation radar has a unit for monitoring the power character-
istics and checking that the radar units and assemblies are in good condition.

The "Naysda" marine navigation radar can be interfaced to the "Kurs-3", "Kurs-3H",
"Kurs-b", "Kurs-GM“, "Kurs-S", "Amur-3" and "Vega" ship gyrocompssses. The
"Nayada-J" and "Nayada-b" radars are coupled to “CL-25 and Lc-Z logs to provide
for a true motion display mode. The coupling to the gyrocompasses is made through
BS-AOQAN and 88-150 selsyns with a rotation scale division of 1°; they are coupled
to the logs through BS-hObAN selsyns with a scale division of 0.2 knots. The
power is supplied to the selsyns from the gyrocompass and the log.

The overall dimensions and wieght of the units are given below:

Unit A (1°) 554 x 2,600 x 833 mm; 73.5 kg
Unit A (0.7°) 555 x 3,430 x 833 mu; 102 kg
Unit I 985 x 526 x 550 mm; 105 kg
Unit D 1,180 x 520 x 305 mm; 61 kg
Unit P 840 x 601 x 390 mu; 92 kg

- 161 -
FOR 0F11CJAI.USEi3NLY
FOR OFTNCJAL UGIZ(MNLY

Unit N 80 x 400 x 600 an; 5 kg
Unit R 1060 x 255 x 139 m; 7 kg
Unit 5 (110 volts DC) 795 x 480 x 289 mm; 64 kg
Unit S (220 volts DC) 795 x 480 x 289 mm; 61 kg
Unit V 600 x 543 x 288 mm; 50 kg
Unit K (without bag) 130 x 260 x 130 mm; 2.5 kg
Unit K (with bag) 150 x 400 x 150 mm; 3.5 kg
Spare parts, tools and
accessories with unit K 1,030 x 660 x 405 mm; 160 kg

A block diagram of the "Nayada-3" radar is shown in Figure 6.12.

The antenna unit (Unit A) consists of the antenna rotation drive (block PA), the
main antenna (block AR) and the monitor antenna (block AK) in a waterproofed
design. The main antenna is a slotted type with a horizontally polarized field.
The antenna aperture in the horizontal plane for the 0.7° directional pattern is
3,927 mm with a sweep radius of 1,760 mm; for the l° pattern, it is 2,386 mm and
the sweep radius-is 1,230 mm. The monitor antenna is made in the form of a
sectoral horn with a waveguide to coaxial transition junction. It is rigidly
fastened to the housing of the drive by means of a bracket. The antenna rotation
drive for all types of radars is standardized, and consists of a reducer which
rotates the microwave junction, course angle and course marker transducers and
anti-icing heaters. The antenna rotation motor is fastened to the antenna drive
on the outside and can be changed to match the ship mains Voltage and antenna
type. The slot antenna horn is hermetically sealed with a radiotransparent
dielectric, made of fiberglass with a wire grid to compensate for the microwave
energy reflected from the dielectric. The "Nayada" marine navigation radar
antenna is designed for supporting wind loads at wind speeds of 50 m/sec and has
an ultimate strength for wind velocities of up to 70 m/sec.

The transceiver (unit P) includes the following: the microwave block, the inter-
mediate frequency amplifier block, the video pulse processing block VI, the micro-
wave generator circuitry (the magnetron oscillator HI), the transmitter modulator
block MP, the block of modulator filters PM, the tuning and metering block NK, the
automatic frequency control block APCh [AFC], and the power rectifier blocks Vl-Vb.
Besides the blocks enumerated above, the complement of unit P also includes the
control circiutry for starting up the transmitter, the circuit for switching the
magnetron filament voltage, the voltage monitoring sensors, a fan, an electrical
time counter and other components.

Besides the modulating pulses widthds of 0.7, 025 and 0.07 microseconds, the
magnetic thyristor type transmitter modulator also generates synchronizing pulses
which control the operation of the receiver (the time AGC circuit) and the indi-

cator, as well as the modulator metering pulses. The DC voltage for powering the
modulator comes from rectifier VI which is a V-180-250-l type and which produces

a regulated -180 volts at the output for a load current o; 0.45 A or -260 volts
for a load current of 0.35 A and a stabilization factor of no less than 50.

- 162 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The microwave frequency generated by the magnetron with the action of the
modulating pulses is fed to the microwave block and through a directional coupler
and ferrite circulator to the output of unit P. A portion of the probe pulse
energy is fed through a directional coupler, attenuator and slotted bridge to the
AFC mixer channel and is used for automatic frequency control of the Klystron
local oscillator of the receiver. The energy of the received returns is fed from
the output of unit A (block AR) to the microwave block, is converted to the

60 MHz intermediate frequency and fed to the IF amplifier block of the receiver,
which is designed in a superheterodyne configuration with a logarithmic amplitude
response. The detected intermediate frequency signals are fed to the video
amplifier block VI, are amplified up to a level of 0.35 to 2.2 volts and fed
through an emitter follower via a cable to the video signal mixer block SVS of
unit I [the indicator].

The time ACC voltage is also produced in the video pulse processing block, where
this voltage can be controlled with respect to pulse width and level, and is then
fed to the linear stages of the IF amplifier block.

The signal received by the monitor antenna are fed to the receive channel of the
microwave block in the overall radar set operational monitoring mode (KOR).

Built in metering of the operation of the magnetron, the klystron, the protective
discharger for the receiver (RZP), the IF amplifier and arc crystals is used in
unit P, while the Operation of the AFC unit is metered, etc. The monitoring

is accomplished by means of a meter built into the tuning and metering block NR
using the "go -- no go" principle. Moreover, there are special monitor lights
for the fuses in the input circuits of the power supplies for the unit. A
portable meter (unit K) is used to check the remaining replaceable blocks and
assemblies of unit P. The modulator filter block PM eliminates radio reception
interference which arises because of the high power pulse signals of the trans-
mitter. The V-300/600-l type rectifier V2 powers the klystron circuits, the CRT,
the ignition of the receiver protection discharger, as well as the radar actua-
tion and time delay relays. Type VK—lZ.6/27/SO—l rectifier V3 powers the blocks
and assemblies of unit 8. Rectifier V4, which is a V~27-3-l, produces a voltage
of +27 volts in unit P.

he indicator (unit I) incorporates the sweep generator block OR, the azimuth
cursor generator block VN, the range cursor control block DVD. the moving range
cursor block PVD, the block for the fixed range markers MD, the video signal
mixer block SVS, the sweep coordinator bfock KR, the block for switching the
clamping bridges KMP, the motor protecti n block ZD, the tracking system amplifier
block USS, the output sweep stage VKR, the azimuth cursor VT, the diode bridges
for cursor sweep DMV, the image orientation circuitry OI, a type VK-12.6/27/50—2
rectifier V5, which produces a regulated 12.6 volts at the output as well as a
regulated +27 volts and an unregulated +50 volts; a type V-lS/65-l rectifier V6
to power the sweep generator with an unregulated voltage of 15, 30 or 65 volts;

a type V-lSOOO-lO high voltage rectifier V7 to power the CRT and the V8 rectifier
for powering the clamping bridges at +12.6 volts and supplying the CRT with a
voltage of +400 volts.

- 163 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nnéncazu
U. .mzq 233 :2.
.93—2930 «— w .25

 

-16lo -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060001-9

36.
37.
38.
. Sweep coordinator block;
40.
41.
42.
43.
. Diode bridges for clamping

45.
46.
47.
48.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 4.12, continued]:

. Power supply rectifier 2;

Modulator filters;

. Monitor antenna;

. Magnetron oscillator;

. Automatic frequency control;
. Tuning and metering block;

. Power supply rectifier 3;

. Power supply rectifier 4;

. Electrical log;

. Gyrocompass;

. Velocity vector coordinator;
. Speed correction block;

. Current speed;

. Current direction (course);
. Transmitter modulator;

. Power supply rectifier l;

. To the blocks and devices of

unit P [transceiver];

. Speed integrator block;

. Azimuth cursor sweep generator;
. Range cursor control block;

. Moving range cursor block;

. Video signal mixer;

. Stationary range marker block;
. Sweep generator;

. Sweep output stage circuitry;
. Rotating transformer;

. Cursor sweep diode bridges;

. Rectifier 5, VK-12.6/27/50-2;
. To unit I [indicator];

. Control and tachogenerator

feedback difference signals
amplifier;

Unit D [true motion unit];
Phase sensitive rectifier;
Image orientation circuit;

Clamping bridge switcher;
Defelcting coils;

Motor protection circuitry;
Tracking system amplifier;

the sweep origin;

Rectifier 7, V-lSOOO-lo;
Power rectifier 8;

Power rectifier 6, V-lS/65-l;
Unit 8 [static converter];

- 16S -

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

54.
SS.

56.
57.
S8.
59.

60.

Inverte
Thyrist
Power 0
Main re
Ship 90
50 Hz,

sine co
Static

block;

Protect
Monitor
Auxilia
400 Hz.
I, P a
Ship po
(or -22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060001-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The synchronizing unit for the radar is a master oscillator, for which a trans-
istorized self-oscillating multivibrator is used which is located in the GR block.
This oscillator generates the triggering pulses for the electronic azimuth

cursor (BVN) and the transmitter modulator. The synchronization of the circuits
for generating the sweep, the moving range cursor markers, the PVD, as well as
the stationary range merkers in the "operate" mode is accomplished automatically
from the transmitter, while in the "standby" mode, it is accomplished from the
master oscillator.

The sweep signal and azimuth cursor sweep are generated using stationary deflect-
ing coils, OK. The indicator circuitry contains two sweep channels, which alter-
nately drive a common output amplifier. The sweep signal pulses are generated in
the CR block, while the azimuth cursor sweep pulses are generated in the V" block
in the pauses between the signal sweeps.

The sawtooth current pulses of the output stage are split by means of the rotating
transformer channels into sine cosine components, which are fed by means of
thyristor switches through diode bridges for clamping the sweep origin, DHR, to
the deflecting coils. The rotor of the signal sweep rotating transformer is
coupled by means of the tracking system to the antenna angular position sensor.
The rotor of the rotating transformer channel of the cursor is coupled to the
control for the electronic azimuth cursor on the indicator panel, and the angular
position of the electronic cursor on the CRT screen is set manually by the operator
when determing the direction to a target. The thyristor switches are turned on
sequentially for the duration of the forward sweep trace by means of the clamping
bridge switcher, the KHF, at the repetition rate of the probe pulses. This pro-
vides for the simultaneous and continuous presence of both sweeps on the PPI
screen.

The shifting of the sweep center (origin) in the relative motion mode is accom--
plished by passing a direct current of a particular level and polarity through
Special stationary deflecting coils for the CRT. The center shift mode is turned
on and the direction of the shift is controlled by means of two three-position
CENTER SHIFT toggle switches on the indicator. In the true motion mode, the
shifting of the image center is continuous to any point on the screen. In the
relative motion mode, the image center shifting is accomplished in discrete steps
in eight directions on the l, 2, a, 8 and 16 mile range scales.

The image is oriented with respect to the course heading or to north on the
indicator screen by means of switching the rotating transformer which detects the
antenna angular position. In the "North" orientation, the rotating transformer
is connected, the rotor of which is turned through an angle equal to the heading
of the ship by means of selsyn which is coupled to the gyrocompass.

The true motion unit (unit D) displays a true motion mode (ID) on the indicator.
For this purpose, voltages are generated in the unit based on data from the log
and gyrocompass which are proportional to the components of the ship's travel in
a rectangular system of coordinates with changes in the ship's speed from 0 to
35 knots and the ship's course from 0 to 360°. The current produced by these
voltages in the center shift deflecting coils of the CRT moves the origin of the

- 166 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sweep on the indicator screen in the direction of and at a speed proportional to
the route vector. The unit provides for moving the sweep origin through two-
thirds of the working radius of the screen within a circle having the center in

the center of the CRT screen as well as automatically returning the sweep origin

to the center of the screen. This operation is accomplished by pressing the RESET
button the control panel of unit D. A provision is made in the unit for the
capability of manually feeding in the course and speed for making corrections. The
true motion mode is automatically cut off when orienting the image with respect to
the course or when changing over to the 0.5, 16, 32 or 66 mile range scales. The
resolver of unit D is an analog type resolver using electromechanical components.

Unit D contains the following sections: a velocity vector coordinator Ks for
generating the velocity component of the ship along the "-8 and 5-H axes and
feeding voltages proportional to this velocity; a speed correction block P8, which
is needed for making manual corrections for the speed and direction of the current
(drift) and feeding out voltages proportional to the components of the corrections
for the current velocity along the e~w and “-8 axes; a speed integrator block IS,
which is intended for generating the component of the ship's route and feeding

out voltages proportional to this component; a U1? block, which is the difference
amplifier for the difference between the control signals and the tachometric feed-
back signal in the integrating drive; a phase sensitive rectifier block, FChV,
which converts the AC voltages proportional to the components of the ship's

route along the “-8 and 3-H axes to DC voltages of the appropriate polarity.

The ship‘s speed and course data are entered in the velocity vector coordinator
block from the electronic log EL and the gyrocompsss OR by means of remote trans-
mission using BS-bObNA or 38-150 selsyns. The summing voltages of the velocity
vector coordinator and the speed correction blocks are fed to the inputs of the
integrating drives in the speed integrator block, which generate the ship's path
components along the “-8 and 8-H axes. These summing voltages are added at the
output of each block and compared with the voltage from the tachogenerator which
is coupled directly to the shaft of the actuating motor. The difference between
these voltages is fed to the control and tachometric feeback difference signal
amplifier for amplification up to a power and voltage level necessary for the
control of the actuating motor. The rotation angle of the motor'a output shaft
will be proportional to the time integral of the input voltage. The output shaft
of the actuating motor is coupled by a mechanical transmission to the axis of a
linear rotating transformer (LVT). Voltages are picked off from the linear voltage
transformer rotor winding which are proportional to the components of the ship's
travel. After passing through the phase sensitive rectifier blocks, the rectified
voltages are fed to the CRT deflecting system true motion windings, which

provides for shifting the sweep center (origin) on the PP! screen in the direction
corresponding to the ship's heading and at a speed proportional to the ship's

own speed. I

The static converter (unit 5) is intended for converting the DC ship's main
voltages to a regulated AC voltage at 220 volts, hOO Hz. The complement of unit
5 includes: a static converter control block USP; a sine component filter £53;
an inverter, In; a thyristor voltage regulator, TRN; a power switch contactor KV
and protective circiutry SZ.

— 167 -
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pulses are generated in the static converter control block which_ control the oper-
ation of the thyristors of the voltage regulator and the inverter. The DC ship's
mains voltage, or that from the output of unit V, is fed to the thyristor voltage
regulator and to the static converter control block. The regulator operates as a
switch. The static converter control block generates three pulse trains which

are needed to control the thyristor voltage regulator and the inverter. Two pulse
trains, which are shifted relative to each other by one-half of a period of the
600 Hz working frequency, are used to alternately trigger the thyristors of the
inverter and control the main thyristor of the regulator. The third sequence of
pulses at a frequency of 800 Hz serves to trigger the conmutating thyristor. The
regulated voltage of the thyristor regulator is converted by the inverter to a

sine wave voltage with a large nonlinear distortion factor, where these distor-
tions are attenuated by a filter.

The power mains rectifier (unit V) rectifies the three-phase ship's mains voltage
at 220/380 volts, 50 Hz, producing a nc voltage of +110 volts at the output fora
load current of up to 9 amps, and +110 volts at a current of 50 mA. The alternat-
ing component of the rectified voltage does not exceed 0.7 volts. The unit con-
sists of the main rectifier, 0V; the auxiliary rectifier, VV; an industrial inter-
ference filter; a switching relay; monitor circuitry UK; as well as indicators for
the presence of ship's nuins voltage and defective fuses.

When the power is turned on, the AC voltage of the ship's mains is fed through
the industrial interference filter to the switching relay and to the auxiliary
rectifier. The output voltage of the auxiliary rectifier actuates a relay, from
which the ship's mains voltage is fed to the main rectifier which powers unit 8.
Inductive-capacitive filters are used to smooth the pulsations of the rectified
voltage in the circuits of the rectifiers.

he voltage of the ship's mains and the output voltages of the main and auxiliary
rectifiers are monitored with a meter. Neon lamps are used to indicate the pre-
sence of the ship's mains voltage as well as defective fuses.

The superimposed mirror plotting board (unit N) is an optical antiparallax
device for making graphical plots when solving navigation problems and simultane-
ously observing the radar image. It consits of a plane semitransparent mirror
and a plotter with a spherical surface made of plexiglass, which is fastened in a
metal housing and provided with variable illumination for the plotting surface.

The plotting board has a working diameter of 280 mm, a plotting surface radius
curvature of 508 mm and a power consumption of no more than 2.5 watts. A special
"Steklograf" pencil is supplied along with unit N for making the graphical
plots. The plotting board is applied to the face surface of the indicator. The

illumination of the plotting board is supplied through a connector from unit I
[the indicator].

The monitor unit (unit K) checks the operability of the functional blocks and
assemblies of the radar by means of tolerance monitoring of the levels and ampli-

tudes of the signals fed to the monitor system from the blocks and assemblies
being monitored.

- 168 —
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unit K consists of a converter, an analyzer and a generator. The converter,
which is designed around two transistors, amplifies the noise signals and converts
them to a DC voltage. The analyzer provides for tolerance monitoring of the
amplitudes of pulsed signals. The analyzer circuitry is trsnsistorized. The
pulse generator takes the form of a blocking oscillator, operating in a self-

oscillating mode. The amplitude of the generated pulses can be normalized down
to voltage levels of 6, l and 0.2 volts.

The supply voltage of 220 volts at 400 Hz is checked by means of unit K, as well
as the operability of the converter and analyzer unit K, and the input pulse
signals of the blocks and assemblies. The check sequence is set by the positions
of the switches on the K unit panel when they are rotated clockwise.

The position of the switches for each radar unit being checked is indicated in
the table on the front panel of unit K, while the defective block (or assenbly)
is indicated in the table found on the inside cover of the bag. The following
are located on the front control panel: the meter 1P1, the multiposition switch
control and toggle switches. Unit K is connected to the sockets of the units
being monitored by means of a flexible cable.

The repeater (unit R) feeds out the data and control signals to unit I and to
the interfaced units. Unit R incorporates a sublock Rs, which is a sync pulse
multiplier and a subblock RV which is a video signal multiplier, as well as the
v27-1.5-1 rectifier. The complement of the unit also includes circuitry for switch-
ing the range scales to the interfaced equipment and elements for checking the
operability of the subblocks, the rectifiers and signaling that power is present.

To power the automation circuitry and components of the unit itself, the V-27-l.5-l
rectifier produces a voltage of +27 volts. Moreover, the unit supplies the video
signals with a transmission gain of 0.9 to 1.2.

The operational status monitoring system (SK) of the radar makes it possible to
troubleshoot faults and check the tuning of the klystron, the magnetron current,
the setting of the IF amplifier and AFC crystal current, and check the functioning
of the AFC system. The parameters of the monitor system have the following values:

--Maximum error of the tolerance checking circuitry for the power characteristics
is no more than 5 dB;

--The maximum error of the tolerance monitoring circuitry for the DC signal levels
and average values of the Ac voltages fed to the testing system is no more than
:92 (with the exception of the nc voltage level of 0.08 volts, the testing error
of which does not exceed 1101);

--Pulse signal asplitudes - no more than 120%;

--Noise signals - no more than 3201;

--Dc currents - no more than 1152.

- 169 -

FOR omen/LI. use ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ON."

The monitoring system consists of the system for checking the overall operability
(K08) and the troubleshooting system (PR). The overall operational monitoring
system contains elements, which are included as individual assemblies in the
radar units and modules. The troubleshooting system has built-in monitoring
devices in units 5, V, P and K. To avoid false information about a fault, the
signals which are relayed via the interunit connections, are monitored both in
the unit in which they are generated and at the input of the unit to which they
are fed.

The operational status of the blocks and assemblies of units 5 and V is moni-
tored by means of monitor devices built into them, while units I, P and R are
checked by means of unit K. Moreover, there is an additional tuning and monitor
block (KN) in unit P, which checks the signals of the blocks and assemblies,

the testing of which is difficult with unit K.

The overall operational monitoring unit realizes the testing by mans of simulating
the point equivalent of a target, fixed in both range and direction. The overall
monitoring unit consists of a monitor antenna, which is included in unit A, a
delay cable and a monitor channel in the microwave block. The monitor antenna

is located at a fixed distance from the main radar antenna at a course angle of
180° and serves for picking. up the energy of the probe pulses. The received
simals, which are delayed by a time which exceeds the width of the probe pulses,
are fed to the microwave unit, are awlified by thegreceiver and then fed to the
indicator. A criterion of normal radar operation is the presence of a brightness
marker on the .CRT screen in the form of an arc with a width of about 120° at a
course angle of 180° at a distance of l to 3 m from the probe pulse ring.

Overall operability is checked on the 0.5 mile range scale at maximise receiver
gain. The device for checking units 5 provides for independent monitoring of
the power supplies, blocks and assemblies of units 8. The monitored signals are
fed in a definite sequence to a meter. The criterion of proper operation is the
meter needle falling in a specified sector, which is indicated opposite the
corresponding switch position.

The device for monitoring unit V provides for independent checking of the power
supplies for the unit. In addition to the device, there is also a number of test
jacks in unit V for measuring the alternating 220/380 volts at 50 Hz, the 110
volts DC, calibrating the meter IPl by means of standard meters as well as check—
ing the signal lights for indicating the presence of ship's mains power and indi-
cating that the fuses are good in the auxiliary rectifier.

The operability of unit I and the blocks and assemblies included in it is
checked by means of unit K, which is connected during the testing time to a
special socket in unit I. The normalization of the signal. being monitorer

from the BK-12.6/27/50-2, V-lS/80-1, V-15000-10-1 blocks, as well as the GR
[sweep generator] (with the exception of the range marker triggering pulses) and
the m [clamping bridge switcher] is accomplished by the sensors in these blocks,
while the normalization of the +400, -220 and +27 voltages, as well as the auto-
mation and pulse signals (sweep, range marker triggering, synchronization and
triggering pulses) is accomplished directly in the indicator unit.

~170-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The noise signal incoming from unit P is monitored at the input to the 8V3
[video signal mixer] block. The signal lights for monitoring the condition of the
fuses in the input circuits of the unit power supplies are located on the panel

of the indicator unit.

The operability of unit P is also monitored by means of portable meter K. More-
over, there is the NK (tuning and metering block) in unit P which monitors the
operability of the magnetron, klystron, discharger, as well as the APC and I?
amplifier crystals by means of measuring the current levels in these components,
and also monitors the functioning of the entire AFC system and the AFC block di-
rectly. The normalization of the signals being monitored from the VK-12.6/27/50-l,
V-300/600-l, v-27-3-1 and V-lBO/ZbO-l blocks is accomplished by sensors located in
these blocks, while the normalization of the pulse signals (modulating pulse,
synchronization and triggering pulses) is accomplished directly in unit P. The
operability of the IF amplifier and video pulse processing circuitry is monitored
based on the generalized noise signal at the output of the video processing block.
The operability of unit R is checked by means of meter K.

The layout of the units and the installation of the radar on a ship have their

own special features. The operational convenience and specific features of the
operation of the units are taken into account in their placement. The P, V, s,
KU and ZISh [spare parts and accessories] units are housed in any dry heated room.
Units P, V, s and KU are fastened to bulkheads and the set of spare parts, tools
and accessories is secured to a deck or a bulkhead.

Units I, D and N are housed in the bridge or navigator's compartment. Unit I
is fastened to a deck, and unit D is secured to unit I and the deck. The
second I and D units are housed in any dry heated room. Unit N is to be

kept in the packing box close to unit I. It is recommended that unit R be
located close to the second indicator for convenience in reading the information

on the working range scales of the second indicator from the front panel of unit R.

Units I and D in the control panel design are housed in sections of the main
control panel of the ship and are located at a distance of no less than 1 m from
the magnetic compass. To provide for access to units I and D, the spacing
between their side walls and other equipment or bulkheads should be no less than
800 mm. For better heat removal, all of the units must be installed so as to

assure an air gap between the units and other ship equipment of no less than
100 mm.

Unit A is placed, where possible, on the middle line of the ship. The "bow"
marker should be oriented towards the bow of the ship, while the bracket for the
test antenna should be oriented towards the stern. Circular scanning of the space
should be provided without any shading or distortion of the antenna beam. The
antenna waveguide channel should have no more than two twists, no more than six
corner junctions and should be equipped with a cone taper junction (with dimen-
sions of 28.5 x 12.6 mm to 23 x 10 mm) for connection to unit P. To avoid damage
to the output flange of unit P during vibration of the ship hull, the waveguide
channel should have a flexible section. The overall length of the waveguide
channel should be no more than 20 m.

-171-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR10FF1C1AI.USEZ(MQLY

The length of the connecting cable lines between the ship power mains and the

K”. V and 8 units and between units V and 8 should not exceed 20 m. The
permissible length of the cable lines between units KB and I, the electric
motor-generator and I, V and I, S and I, I and P, I and R, P and R as
well as I and A should be no more than 100 m; the cable length between the
electric motor-generator [dynamotor] and the KU unit can run up to 10 m; it can
run up to 2 m between units I and D.

The "Nayada" marine navigation radar is controlled by means of controls which are
located on units I and D. The following are accomplished on unit I: the
turning of the radar on and off; the switching of the range scales; turning the
range markers on and off and the short term turning off of the course; adjusting
the gain of the signals and image quality; interference suppression control;
measurement of ranges and azimuths to targets; switching the image orientation in
the relative motion mode; adjusting the scale illumination for the azimuth
circle; switching the transmitter operating mode (OPERATE-STANDBY); turning on
the antenna rotation and heating; manual fine tuning of the frequency (standby).

Unit D controls the radar in the true motion mode: the true motion mode is
switched on; the radar is matched to the log and gyrocompass; corrections are
made for the speed and direction of the current (drift); the sweep origin is
turned to the center of the CRT screen; and the sweep origin is shifted manually.

During repairs and set-up alignment of the radar, the following are provided in
unit P: mechanical and electronic tuning of the klystroms; adjustment of the
magnetron current; setting the gating level of the time AGC and its displacement
relative to the probe pulse. Unit I in this case provides for the following:
adjustment of the image brightness on the PPI screen; adjustment of the bright-
ness of the range markers, the range cursor, the azimuth cursor and the 0K
[?azimuth marker contactor group21; zero setting the range cursor; setting the
limiting level in the video channel.

Prior to turning the radar on, all of the controls for the units should be in the
positions indicated in Table 4.5.

when turning the radar on, the switch for the ship mains voltage is set in the
"On" position. The voltage of the ship mains is checked on unit V or S. The
RADAR--OFF toggle switch is set in the "Radar" position. In this case, the
illumination of the scale mechanism and the labels on the front panel of unit I
is turned on. The following should appear on the PPI screen: the PPI sweep of
the CRT beam, illuminated by receiver noise; the course marker; the range markers
and the line of the electronic azimuth cursor. After four minutes, the trans-
cciver should be turned on, which will be signaled by a light on the control
panel of unit I. When the transceiver is operating, the shining blip of the
probe pulse and the returns from target will appear on the PPI screen. In the
case of clutter from an agitated wave surface, it is necessary to attenuate the
clutter using the NEAR FIELD ATTENUATION control.

When the radar is first turned on, one must: adjust the brightness of the range
markers (MD) and moving range cursor (PVD); check the maximum error in matching

- 172 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the range markers and the moving range cursor; check the setting of the time AGC
strobe delay; turn on unit D, for which the TRUE HOTION--OFF toggle switch is set
in the 'TRUE MOTION" position; establishe the orientation with respect to the
meridian on the indicator unit; sequentially turn on the l, 2 or 0 mile scales,
and in this case, the display with the label on [relative motion] should go out on
unit D; match units I and D to the gyrocompass, and unit D to the log; turn
on the illumination for the plotting board N; an overall check is made of the
operability of the radar blocks and assemblies; by pressing the CORRECT 0.5 button,
the power performance of the radar is checked. A test signal in the form of an

are 90° to 120° long spaced a distance of l to 3 mm from the probe pulse ring
should appear at a course angle of 180'.

The radar is turned off by means of the RADAR-OPP toggle switch, which must be

set in the "Off" position and then the mains cutoff switch, GPV-K, is cut off.

When the station is shut down for a short period of time, one is to use the standby
mode. For this purpose there is a STANDBY--0PERATB toggle switch in unit 1.

Unit K is used to check the operability of the functional modules of the radar
units. It is recommended that the check be started with unit I. The proper
condition of the unit is determined using the meter K, observing the sequence
specified on its front panel. Prior to trouble shooting, one must check the func-
tioning of the radar modules bymeana of the XOR 0.5 button. Then the K unit is
connected to the test socket of the unit being checked. The proper condition of
the fuses is checked by means of the signal lights. Trouble shooting is accom-
plished in the circuits of the rectifier load by means of the Tw-4313 meter by
cutting off the individual loads. The 220 volt, 400 Hz voltage is checked, for
which the UNIT K--0FF toggle switch with the V1 marking is set in the "Unit K"
position, while toggle switch V3 "I-II" is set in position "I". In this case, the
meter needle of [PI should fall within the sector indicated Opposite position '%"
of the switch with the marking V2.

The power supplies for the unit being tested are checked by setting switch V2 to
the position indicated in the table on the front panel-of unit K. In all posi-
tions, the meter needle of IPl should fall within the limits of the specified
sector.

a

The operability of unit K is checked, for which the V3 toggle switch "I-Ir' is
set in position "ll“; switch V4, "I-II", is set sequentially in positions "I" and
"II". The criterion for the operability of unit K is the appearance of the
meter needle of IPl opposite the corresponding positions of switch Vb.

Switch Vb is set successively to the positions indicated in the table on the front
panel of unit K for each unit of the radar to check the pulse signals of the
functional modules. When the functional blocks are in good operating order, the
readings of the meter IPl should correspond to the values indicated opposite the
positions of switch V4. If the readings of the meter needle are less than these
values, then the number of the defective block is determined from the table found
on unit K.

- 173 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hzawmwwmzow mcwwwnmmHOZIImHnEr
UHmmmwnzagaowluo—a

355m 53:54 arms—$.30:
oocwmnsuxuwnugz otwnns

29E Munro >az=>duoz noun—.0”.
0); 02.3.3.

>232; woa>3llommll>zdmzz> ”OAK—d.
Ea.

mop—V. 52—220 noun—6..

«9383.. 22 2.3.36: «goon—dawn
bum-Ens 2264 c3612.»: 3:36:
22 3.0.32.0 36° non ms:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 4.5, continued:

Position of the Controls

 

Unit Unit Controls Prior to Turning the
Radar 0n
._________________________________
P IF MODES switch 'MEC 0 rate"
(T W
rans-

CHECK ASSEMBLIES (currents)-- "Check assemblies (currents)"

“we” 1r Hones toggle switch)
A
[Antenna] ANTENNA ROTATE--OFF switch 'Mntenna rotate"
N Illumination control Middle position
[Plotting
board]

M“

The transmitter is tuned following the replacement of the modulator block (M?) or
the magnetron in the following sequence: the STANDBY--OPERATE toggle switch on

the panel of unit I is set in the "Operate" position; the check assemblies
(CURRENTS)--IP MODES toggle switch and the check assemblies (CURRENTS) multi-
position switch, which are located on the front panel of block NK [supplemental
tuning and check module] of unit P are set in the "check assemblies (currents)"
and 'hagnetron" positions respectively; the 0.07, 0.25 and 0.7 potetiometers are
turned to the extreme left position; the RADAR--OPP toggle switch, located on

the front panel of unit I, is set to the "Radar" position, in which the indicator
lamp with the label TRANSMITTER lights up on the front panel of unit I; the range
scale switch on the panel of unit I is set in one of the following positions:
"0.5", "l" or ”2 miles"; by rotating the 0.07 potentiometer shaft, the meter
needle of the instrument located on the front panel of block NK is set at the 34
microamps division; then the range scale switch is set to position "b" or

"8 miles", and by turning the 0.25 potentiometer shaft, the meter needle is set

to 34 microamps; finally, by turning the chaft of the 0.7 potentiumater, the meter
needle is set to the fixed position of 36 microwsmps on the 16. 3‘ or 64 mile
range scales. The tuning of the transmitter is completed after the operations
enumerated above are performed.

The tuning of the klystron after it is replaced is accomplished in the following
manner: the radar is turned on, setting the RADAR~-OPF toggle switch on the
control panel of unit I to the "Radar" position; the "4" or "8 mile" range
scale is selected; the cover of unit P is opened up; the CHECK ASSEMBLIES
(CURRENTS)--IF MODES toggle switch is set in the "Check assemblies (Currents)"
position; the CHECK ASSEMBLIES switch is turned to the "AFC crystals" position;
he IF MODES switch is set in the "Tune klystron" position; the MAXIMUM CRYSTAL
CURRENT control is used to achieve the maximum readings of the built-in meter;

- 175 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if several maxima are observed in the current of the AFC mixer crystals within

the adjustment range, then the control is to use to achieve the greatest deflection
of the meter needle; the level of the IF amplifier mixer crystal currents is

checked, for which the CHECK ASSEMBLIES (CURRENTS) switch is set in the "IE
AMPLIFIER CRYSTALS" position; in this case, the readings of the meter shall in the
range of 10 to 40 scale divisions of the indicator; the CHECK ASSEMBLIES (CURRENT8)-
--lF MODES toggle switch is set in the "IF mode" position; the mechanical tuning
screw of the klystron is set in the extreme left position by means of rotating it
clockwise [sic] using a special wrench, fastened on the inside wall of the cover of

unit P.

The mechanical tuning screw for the resonator of the klystron is rotated counter-
clockwise until the first maximum deflection of the meter to the left of zero
with a transition (during the further turning of the screw) to the right of zero.
In conclusion, the klystron rasonator tuning screw is returned to the position in
which the meter is set on zero.

In the process of mechanically tuning the klystron using the MAXIMUM CRYSTAL
CURRENT control, one must maintain the maximum value of the currents of the AFC
mixer crystals. Upon completing the tuning of the klystron, the current levels of
the crystals in the I? amplifier and AFC mixers are brought to 27_-34 scale divi-
sions on the meter by means of the attenuators of unit P.

The correctness of the klystron tuning is checked by means of the To THE LEFT--

T0 The RIGHT pushbuttons using the meter. By alternately pressing the button in
the "To the left" and "To the right" positions, it is checked that when the

[F MODES switch is set in the "Klystron tune" position, the deflection of the

meter needle to each side falls in a range of 15 to 50 divisions, and when it is
set in the "AFC”operate" position, the deflection does not exceed 20 scale divi-
sions. If the meter readings are other than the indicated values, then the mechan-
ical tuning screw must be turned to the right position and the klystron tuning
repeated. Following the completion of the check, the IF MODES switch must be set
in "AFC operate" position, and in this case, the light with the NONOPERATING RADAR

MODE label shourd go out.

The radar is structurally designed in the form of units containining interchangeable
hlncks and assemblies. Electrical connections are made between the units and the
blocks indluced in them through plug connectors. The majority of the blocks are
made using printed circuits, semiconductor devices and minature electronic compo-
nnnetu. The controls of the major (Operating) elements for controlling and monitor-
ing the radar are located on the front panels of the units. The set-up tuning
controls are located inside the units, at accessible points, in the blocks or
individual boards. The structural design of the units provides for access to the
internal wiring with the covers opened. The housings of units P, I and R are
made in spray proof design. Units 3, V, D and RU are made in a procected

dvsign, while unit A is a waterproof structure.

The "Al'fa" type unit is intended for estimating the degree of danger in the
approach of the ship to objects on the water (from one to five), which are

- 176 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Cur/mom rang/local as main!»-
(7)aamm VIM-wan mmocoa

lav-ulnar [IIWMIMIW uJ "MC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
       

6mm mmmaua
(m, 62 )

    
 
 

~000I'u (Mu ’027ful 2200

   

(10

Figure 4.13. Block diagram of the 'ﬁl'fa" collision alarm.

Key: 1.
2.

3.

“NOW

Video signals from the indicator unit of the
navigation radar;

Automatic detector (threshold gate, time gate,
digital store, ring scan block and are scan block);
Switching, signaling and reference signal generating
unit (control switcher 1, control switcher 2,

audio alarm, master oscillator, control panel);

. Count and indicating unit for T351 [time to the

closest approach point] (time counter, decoder and
two digital indicator lamps);

. Video pulses to the unit and to the navigation radar;

. Syncrhonization pulse from the navigation radar;

. Count pulses from the ANGLE--NUHBER 0F PULSES converter;
. Signal ring, sector are and markers generator

(range marker generator, angle marker generator,
angular synchronizer and time synchronizer);

. Power supplies (V1, V2);
. 600 Hz AC (or 427 Hz), 220 volts.

located within the radar scanning zone at a range of from 3 to 12 miles. The
unit is designed for joint operation with the "Nayada" radar and the "Don"
radar (when a special interface is used) in the relative and true motion mode.
Evaluating the danger of an approach is made by means of special markers which
can light up on the 9?! screen of the radar, based on two criteria: the closest
approach distance Dkr and the time to the closest approach point, T351.

- 177 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The "Al'fa" unit consists of a collision warning unit (PS), a set of spare parts,
tools and accessories as well as the operational documentation. A block diagram
of the "Al'fa" unit is shown in Figure 6.13.

The technical parameters of the collision warning unit are given below:

Working setting range for the signal ring, miles from 3 to 12
Number of objects (targets) which can be processed

simultaneously 5
Operational warm-up time from the completely turned-off

state, no more than, seconds 15

Target lock-on probablity for a signal to noise ratio of
no more than 5/1, and where the number of false alarms is

no more than 3 per hour 0.9
Approach time measurement range, st1, minutes from 0 to 39
Measurement error for P351 when but = 0, in percent of

the true value 13
Mean time between failures, hours, no less than 500
Repair time per failure, hours 1
Height of the collision warning unit, Kg 34
Power consumption, watts 90
Continuous duty time, hours 24
Permissible ambient temperature, °C from -10 to +50

The automatic detector of the "Al'fa" unit is intended for distinguishing the
returns from targets from the output signals of a marine navigation radar
receiver (see Figure 4.13). The automatic detector contains the following:
threshold gate (block PU), time gate (block 5V), digital store (block TsN), ring
scanning block OK and arc scanning block OD.

The threshold gate of the detector converts the output signals of the receiver

to a train of video pulses, VI, which are amplitude normalized. To reduce the
number of false alarms caused by interfering returns from an agitated sea surface,
hydrometeors, etc., the working portion of the scan surface is strobed by means
of the time gate (block SV), while the digital store (block TsN) segregates

only those signals from the sequence of normalized pulses by means of logic
processing which periodically repeat no less than three times in five adjacent
target scanning periods.

Interscan signal processing is used to combat asynchronous interference. For
this purpose, an additional check is made for the presence of a return by means
of the ring scanning block 0K and the arc scanning block OD in the "NP
protection" (asynchronous interference) mode, with the subsequent scanning of
space and the automatic detector signal is generated only when such a nmtch
occurs.

- 178 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next element of the block
diagram is the generator for the
signal ring SK, the sector are and
the markers. The signal ring and the
markers are generated in the PHD
blocks (range marker generator blocks),
the number of which is determined by
the number of working channels. The
range marker generator blocks are
triggered by the marine navigation
radar sync pulses. The signal ring
can be continuously set at any range
in a range of from 3 to 12 miles by
means of a variable delay circuit.

The marker takes the form of a combi-
nation of radial line and circular
arc segments (Figure 4.14). The
length of the radial component of a
marker is 0.2 times the range at
Figure 4.14. Schematic of the "Al'fa" which the signal ring was set prior
marker unit. to illumination. The angular size of
a marker corresponds to the quantity
at which the line, run from the far
end of the marker through the end of
the arc, is tangent to a circle with
a radius of two miles. This radius
corresponds to the minimum shortest
approach distance, which can be
taken as safe. Thus, the circle
represents the dangerous approach
zone.

 

Key: 1. Center of the
CRT;
2. SK - signal ring;
3. Dkr = closest
approach distance.

The marker arc is generated in the angle marker generator block, the SH" (see
Figure 4.13) using the signals generated by the angular synchronizer block US,
which stores the angular position of the marker relative to the meridian. For
this purpose, 1,800 count pulses are fed to the input of the angular synchronize:
block per revolution of the antenna from the ANGLE--NUMBER 0F PULSES converter.

The approach time display and count unit for stl consists of a time counter

(the SchV block), a decoder block Dsh and two digital indicating lamps. The time
counter blocks count the approach time in binary code. The decoder block converts
the binary code to decimal code, which is more convenient for controlling two
seven-segment indicator lamps. The counting of the approach time begins at the
moment of target lock-on by the signal ring or sector are and is terminated at

the moment is locked on by the marker arc.

The unit for switching, signaling and generating the reference signals consists
of a first controling switcher (block UKl), a second controling switcher (block

- 179 -

FOR OFFNJA1.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UKZ), an audio alarm 28, a master oscillator as and an operational control panel
for the unit.

I '( 1) ‘4‘“; 'Jblhﬁ

  
    
 
     
    

leuJ EEJIL:U Figure 6.15. Control panel of the collision
(2) I'lMéI-I‘jﬁﬂll alarm. ”d
"“ Key: 1. Operating e:
Guzzwbwb @ automatic, manual,
(4 um cum check;
“(5) a a a 2. Approach time, minutes;
“""' , 3. Channel occupied;
['Ling L£J LzJ L'J a. Target dangerous;
(6) '"N"“““ 5. Channels: I, II, III,
Iv, v;
83$59' “"‘6)I“N'(7) 6. Signal ring set;
L_J LJulsﬁJ g. Signs.‘f
. I enti y'
(”L-JD“) 9. Audio; ’
(193...“ "I." 10. Manual node;
(I’LL, ll. Marker;
lI’m—IJ In .3312... 12. Coarse;
Cl L‘.|(13) (:4 13. Pine;
“(no . llo. Approach time;
““3 155 W" 15. Check;
D [:‘l 16. Reset.

The device is powered by 220 volts at 400 Hz from the interfaced marinenaviga-
tion radar through the VI type VP-5-7-l rectifier and the V2 type VK-27/6.3-l
radar.

Provisions are made in the "Al'fa" unit for two operating modes: automatic and
manual, as well as an auxiliary mode which is a check mode. In the first case.
a target (object) is automatically locked onto by means of the detector in the
zone bounded by the signal ring (or the sector arc) with respect to range with
the simultaneous illumination and storage of the position of the marker at the
lock-on point. In the manual mode, it is used in the presence of interfence,
the detector is switched off and the sighting of the target marker on the I?!
screen of the marine navigation radar is accomplished manually by the signal
ring and marker using the SET SIGNAL RING control and the pushbutton (keyboard)
for MARKER, CORRSE and PINE, which are located on the control panel of the colli-
sion warning unit (Figure 4.15). The "Check" mode is intended for checking the
operability of the unit and trouble shooting the blocks of the unit.

-180-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The structural design of the collision warning unit uses modular blocks. It is
made in the form of a rack mounted console. The operational controls and informa-
tion readouts are located on the front panel of the upper cover. The audio alarm
units are located on its rear panels. The auxiliary and operating controls of the
unit are located on the front panel in a recess under a small cover: the
ILLUMINATION button brightness control, the SK [signal ring] brightness and SK
BRIGNTNESS-NARKER marker control; the VOLUME audio signal loudness control. as
well as the MAINS--0FF power toggle switch for the unit. Also located there are
the test jacks and fuses with the signal lights.

All of the operational controls are pushbuttons (keyboard), with the exception of
the SIGNAL RING SET control, the knob for which, along with the pushbutton channel
switch is made as a separate subblock, consisting of five potentiometers, five
lighted pushbuttons, five switching circuits and a blocking device, which precludes
the possibility of the set signal ring dropping out in another channel.

The VP—5-7-l regulated voltage rectifier is located on the rear panel of the
chassis, while on the front swing-out cover there are a cassette with the main
block and the VK-27/6.3-l rectifier. All of the blocks of the unit, with the
exception of the power supply blocks, are made using double sided printed circuit
boards which are standardized with respect to size.

The hookup wiring inside the unit uses plug connectors. A handle for removing the
blocks is located in the lower portion of the front cover. An extender circuit
board is installed in a free socket of the cassette, where this extended is used
when adjusting and checking the unit.

The collision warning unit is installed to the right of the marinenavigation radar
indicator at a distance of 150 to 200 mm. The external cables are connected to a
terminal board and the radio frequency connectors, located under the cover to the
right in the lower portion of the chassis. The external cable lines are brought

in through slots in the base of the unit.

The preparation of the "Al'fa" unit for operation begins with a check. For this.
one must switch the marinenavigation radar (SNRLS) to the "Prepare" mode on the

16 mile range scale with the range markers turned off. Then the collision warning
unit is turned on by setting the POUER HAINS--OPF toggle switch to the "Power
mains" position. Then, by turning the ILLUMINATION control clockwise, the pre-
sence of lighting of all of the switches is checked which are located on the front
panel of the unit (the AUDIO. NP PROTECTION and APPROACH TIME should light up only
when switched on).

The OPERATING MODE switch on the control panel of the collision warning unit is
set to the "Manual" position; pushbutton "I" of the CHANNELS switch is pressed;
the NP PROTECTION button is switched off and the lighting of the zeros on the
APPROACH TIME digital display is checked. Then, by rotating the SIGNAL RING
BRICHTNESS control under the swing-out cover of the collision warning unit, the
presence of a signal ring on the PPI screen of the marine navigation radar is
checked.

- 181 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To check the functioning of the "Al'fa" unit, the OPERATIM MODE switch is set in
the "Check" position; the channels switch is set to position "I"; the VOLUME
control under the swing-out cover of the unit is set to the center position. Then,
by briefly pressing the TARGET button, one confirms the appearance of an inter-
mittent audio alarm signal in the form of seven short beeps, and also confirms
that the CHANNEL OCCUPIED green light comes on on the control panel of the colli-
sion warning unit and the APPROACH TIME DISPLAY goes out. When the MARKER
BRIGHTNESS control is located clockwise, a T-shaped market should light up on

the PP! screen of the marine navigation raddr, where the angular position and
dimensions of this marker should not change.

After two minutes have elapsed following the first audio signal, the next audio
signal should appear in the form of two long beeps.

The number "8" should light up on the APPROACH TIME digital display, the TARGET
DANGEROUS red signal light should come on, while the CHANNEL OCCUPIED greeen
light should go out. when the RING button is pressed on the collision warning
unit, the image of a signal ring should appear in place of the marker image on
the PP! screen, the red signal light should go out and zeros should light up on
the APPROACH TIME digital display.

Similar checks of the functioning of the "Al'fa" unit must be performed sequenti-
ally in the remaining (2-5) channels. After preparing the collision avoidance
unit for operation, its controls should be in the positions indicated below:

The POWER MAINS--OFF toggle switch "Off"
ILLUMINATION, VOLUME, SIGNAL RING AND MARKER

BRIGHTNESS controls Center
NP PROTECTION [asynchronous interference

suppression] keyboard Off
AUDIO keyboard 0n
OPERATING MODE switch 'Manual"
CHANNELS SWITCH . "1"

As has already been noted, the "Al'fa" unit is designed for three operating
modes: automatic, manual and "check" modes. The first two are the main modes,
while the latter is intended for the operational checking of the operability of
the unit and troubleshooting.

In the case of automatic operation, one of the following range scales is set with
the marinenavigation radar operating: 4, 8 or 16 miles. The collision aviodance
unit is turned on by setting the POHER MAINS-~0PP toggle switch to the "Power
mains" position. The OPERATING MODE switch should be in the "Auto" position.

By rotating the SIGNAL RING SET control, the signal ring is brought up to the
marker. At the moment the target blip intersects the signal ring (target lock-on),
a T—shaped marker appears on the PPI screen of the marinenavigation radar, and

- 182 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the signal ring disappears. During the target lock-on time, a green light in the
corresponding channel with the lable CHANNEL OCCUPY comes on and an audio signal
is sounded in the form of seven short beeps. The zeros go out on the APPROACH
TIME digital display. After target lock-on, the position of the marker on the PPI
screen does not change and the return from the moving object (the target) is
shifted relative to the marker, passing by the small arc, or after some time,
intersects the arc. In the latter case, the target is considered dangerous; the
red signal light with the TARGET DANGEROUS label lights up on the control panel
and on audio signal is sounded in the form of two long beeps (in both cases, the
audio alarm can be turned off by pressing the AUDIO key). The time reuaining
until reaching the target, Tkr. in minutes should light on the APPROACH TIME
digital display. The closest approach distance is estimated visually from the
distance of the arc segment from its center to the point where it intersects the
target. In this case, it is figured that half of the arc marker is proportional
to two miles.

If during the target observation time
within the marker zone, the green signal
light begins to flicker, then when the
TIME button is pressed, the number

“39" (minutes) should appear on the
APPROACH TIME digital display. This
means that the object or target is
going at a slow speed or has passed by
the marker arc or is considered safe for
passing.

When there are blips from several
objects (targets) on the PPI screen of
the marinenavigation radar, one must
sequentially lock onto them via each
free channel. For this. the CHANNELS
switch, in step with the locking on to
the targets is set to the "II", "III",
"IV" and "V" positions. If in the
process of observing, several targets
are locked on and there arises the
necessity of determining to which

channel a particular marker corresponds,
one must press the IDENTIFIER key (pushbutton), and determine the channel number

from the number of markers at the end of the radial component of the marker. In
the presence of asynchronous interference, which can be generated by the operating

navigation radar of an oncoming ship, it is necessary to use interscan processing,
actuating It by pressing the NP PROTECTION pushbutton.

 

Figure k.l6. Arrangement of targets
within a sector of the
scan zone.

The manual operating mode is used in the presence of interference which cannot be
attenuated by the measurers recommended here. After switching the unit to the

manual mode, the signal ring should be brought up to the selected target blip and
at the moment when the radial sweep line on the PPI screen of the navigation radar
cozncides with the target blip, one must press the MARKER key. In this case, the

- 183 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

marker lights up on the PPI screen and the signal ring will disappear. The CHANNEL
OCCUPIED green signal light comes on. The zeros go out on the APPROACH TIME
digital display.

If the origin of the marker does not precisely coincide with the target blip, it

is necessary to nutch them, using the COARSE and PINE buttons. When_the COARSB
button is pressed, the marker is shifted through an angle of 2.4“ with each revolu-
tion of the antenna in the direction of rotation of the PPI sweep, and when the
PINE button is pressed, it is shifted through an angle of 0.8’.

After the far end of the marker is matched to the target blip, the "Al'fa" unit
signals with a light that the target is locked on. There is no audio signaling
in the manual mode. Just as in the automatic mode, the closest approach distance
Dkr is determined visually in the manual operating mode, while the approach time
stl lights on the display when the APPROACH TIME button is pressed at the moment
the target blip intersects the marker arc.

Where there are several targets present on the PPI screen, manual operation also
provides for sequential lock-on of the targets via each free channel.

A provision is made in the "Al'fa" unit for the capability of operating in the
automatic mode in a selected sector of the scan zone. In this case, target lock-on
with respect to range is accomplished not with the ring, but rather with an arc
having an angular dimension of 50 to 55°. For this purpose, the SECTOR key is
pressed during the time the sweep passes through the selected zone sector. After
that, the unit operates in the automatic mode only with those objects (targets)
which intersect the indicated sector arc.(Pigure 4.16). The "sector" mode is

used when navigating a ship close to shore, in narrow straights or when there is
any strongly pronounced interference (thunderstorm clouds, etc.) present within

the field of the radar scan.

4.5. Requirements Placed on the Installation, Tuning and Operation of Marine
Navigation Radars

Installing and Hooking Up the Transceiver (Unit P). The location for the instal-

lation of the transceiver is selected by working from the permissible length of the
waveguide channel (line). The following relationship exists in practice between
the waveguide line length and the radar detection range of surface targets:

D - DlK

where D is the detection range for a waveguide channel length other than the
nominal;
01 is the detection range for a waveguide length of 10 m;

K is a coefficient which depends on the waveguide length, the values of
which are given in Table 4.6.

-181..
FOR.OFTWC1AI.US£(JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 10 . 6

Ill-us mnuom.
(1 “In" VPBI'D. N

 

 

 

 

I1 I II I If»

_..———.—

 

 

 

0.959

 

 

LOIS l I IOJIUBI 0.972 0.916 lonm

 

 

Key: 1. waveguide channel length, meters.

 

TABLE 10.7

‘Im‘mu, MI :1 Frequency

 

 

 

0J5 "III 0.5 15' 2,!" 2’0 I 2'0 “XI
___... - ..._._.--ﬂ‘__.____-.,.._..-_.._--_,
lluupum-mw mam-mums. III" 250 ")0 50 50
Radio. InterferencLllol .miCLJYQU!_—___-

 

The waveguide channel efficiency is defined by the expression:

"I“ .. .._. .._.____.—- .

n-|- K..+—-'—)o.usm

6n:

 

where Kr) a is the waveguide traveling wave ratio;

8 is the power attenuation in the waveguide, dB/m;

Z is the overall length of the waveguide line.

To increase "13- the transceiver is installed as close as possible to the antenna,
working from the conditions for reducing the waveguide channel length, having the
fewest number of bends as well as turns in the line. Hhen choosing the installa-
tion site for the transceiver. one must take into account the assurance of the
optimal radar parameters as regards the operational range and blind area.

Where possible, the transceiver should be located in closed heated room having
good shielding. When such conditions are absent, it is pernissible to install the
transceiver in the wheelhouse. In this case, it is necessary to carefully shield
the units and filter out interfering voltages. The microwave radiation power
flux density with the covers of the transceiver closed. at a distance of 0.5 u
from the unit, should not exceed 10 uw/cn [sic].

-185-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The interference voltage level at the connection terminals for the external hook up
cables should not exceed the values indicated in Table 4.7. The level of the
mechanical noise generated during transceiver operation should not be higher than
65 dB. The transceiver is not to be placed any closer than 1 meter to a magnetic
compass.

To remove the heat generated by the transmitter block, the spacing between the
ship bulkheads, the other equipment and the housing of unit P should be no less
than 100 mm. It is essential to provide for free access to the blocks of the unit,
as well as take into account the possibility of opening or removing the front
doors (or covers) and sliding out the modules, depending on the structure involved;
it is also necessary to provide for the appropriate layout of the waveguide lines
and the connection of the junction cables.

The technical specifications for the permissible length of the connecting RF
cables to the indicator unit should be taken into account in the placement of the
transceiver.

The Layout and Installation of the Indicator Unit (Unit I). The type of ship and
the requirements placed on the layout of the entire set of navigation instruments
are taken into account in the installation of the indicator unit. When one indi-
cator is present, the unit is housed in the wheelhouse, at the bow bulkhead, in
such a way that when working with the radar display, the ship's pilot faces in the
direction the ship is traveling (towards the bow of the ship).

If the radar has a second indicator or an additional accessory in the form of a
situation indicator or other analog device, then the second indicator is installed
in the navigator's chartroom or at that point where the plotting is done, i.e.,

at the navigator's table.

The indicator unit, just as the transceiver, should be located at a spacing of no
less than 100 mm from bulkheads, various equipment and other objects which
interfer with heat removal from the indicator. In this case, the ability to open
or remove the cabinet door should be assured to provide access to the blocks and
individual components of the indicator circuitry. If the indicator is installed
close to a magnetic compass, the distance between them should be no less than one
meter.

when a special electronic radionavigation console is present on a ship, it is also
expedient to build the radar indicator into it.

The Installation of Power Supplies and Auxiliary Equipment. Dynamotors and start-
up regulating equipment are installed in a special equipment room or other room
with metal or metalized bulkheads, in which the deckheads and decks make a reliable
electrical contact to the hull of the ship, assuring shielding continuity.

The axis of rotation of the dynamotor plant should be oriented parallel to the
midline of the ship. It is necessary in the installation to provide for the

- 186 -

F03‘0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL IiSI-f ONLY

capability of servicing the dynamotor and the start-up regulating equipment in-
cluding the performance of minor repairs, without removing the equipment from the
room.

The spacings between the dynamotor plant, bulkheads and other structures of the
hull or equipment should be no less than 200 to 250 mm. The start-up regulating
equipment (magnetic starter, etc.) is installed in the humediate vicinity of the
dynamotor. The remote control of the dynamotor plant should be accomplished from
the main indicator by means of the control panel or pushbuttons.

It is recommended that the voltage regulation instruments for the power plant
usually be located on the main indicator in the wheelhouse. However, because of
the comparatively rate utilization of these instruments, as well as because of

the danger of misadjustments, which can take place when the unit is installed with
the indicator in the wheelhouse, it is better to locate the indicated units di-
rectly at the power plant.

Installing the Radar on a Ship. The rooms intended for the installation of radar
equipment should have ventilation, heating (electrical) and lighting (including
emergency lighting). Illumination which is too bright and which reduces the
visibility of signals on the PP! screen must be avoided at locations where an
indicator is installed.

In the power plant room and in the room where the transceiver is installed, the
overall illumination at the deck should be no less than 20 lux for incandescent
lamps and no less than 75 lux for luminescent lights [15]. Shipboard conditions
must be taken into account in the installation and hookup of radar equipment: the
rolling and pitching of the ship, hull vibration, elevated humidity, etc.

The large equipment, which is placed on a deck (the indicator, transceiver, power
plant) is mounted on steel foundations which are welded or riveted to the metal
deck and have a height of no less than 80 to 100 mm from the deck.

The radar equipment which is located on bulkheads or other ship structures is
installed on special brackets which are also welded or riveted to the framework.

The equipment containing components which are sensitive to mechanical damge
(vacuun tubes, etc.) should be installed on shock absorbers if no shock absorp-
tion is provided by the structure of the unit.

The chassis of radar equipment should be carefully grounded (connected to the

hull of the ship). If the chassis of the unit has four fastening points or more,
then the grounding is accomplished from two points, which are located on the
diagonal. When a unit is secured at less than 4four points, one point is grounded.

Units which are mOunted on shock absorbers are grounded by means of special
metal jumpers.

when running cable lines, the bend radius of low frequency power cables should
be no less than five times their outside diameter. The permissible bend radius

- 187 —
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for RF cables is stipulated in the technical specifications. When selecting a
cable path, it is necessary to take the following requirements into account: the
cable route should be as staright as possible; the length of a cable line should
not exceed that indicated by the manufacturing plant for the equipment; cables
are to be run where possible inside ship rooms; the length of line sections which
go out onto open places on decks, superstructures, etc. should be minimal; it is
not recommended that a cable be run through radio cummunications rooms or through
areas having an elevated temperature.

Special holders or bridging braces are used to secure cable lines, to which a
cable is fastened by means of shaped clamps. The spacing between fasteners is
chosen in a range of 25 to 45 cm, depending on the section of the path, and the
outside diameter and quantity of cable.

When running cable lines through decks and watertight bulkheads, individual or
group seals are installed, which are sealed with a special compound. In case it
is necessary, when running a cable through a deck, gas tubes are used with sealing
galnds. when running a cable through bulkheads and other parts of the bull which
do not have to be water tight. steel inserts are used which protect the cable
sheething against mechanical damage. The sable lines are run in pipes or covered
with protective casings for this same purpose.

The shielding jackets of cables, within the bounds of the cable run, and where
they enter into the unit, are grounded by means of connections to the metal

hull of the ship. Grounding for the cable run is made at the entrance or exit

of the cable from a shielded room, where the transceiver or indicator is installed,
as well as at the entrance or exit of a cable from internal rooms to open areas of
decks and superstructures.

Cables which are run along bridging brackets are grounded by means of soldering
the shielding braid along the length of the cable to a copper busvwhich is run
under the fastening bracket. The shielding braids of cables entering units are
grounded in the same way. In this case, a special cuff with a flexible jumper
is soldered to a lengthwise soldered tap in the shielding braids, where the end
of the jumper is clamped under a grounding bolt of the unit or a grounding screw
at the seal gland nut. The grounding of the shielding jacket of a cable can be
accomplished in seals by means of special comb terminals, which do not require
hot soldering [15].

The Installation of Habeguide Lines. Waveguide lines (waveguide channels) are
composed of individual sections of various configurations: straight line; corner
sections bent at various angles; sections twisted through 90°; variable cross-
sections; hermetically sealed waveguides, as well as flexible (corrugated, mesh)
etc.

Individual sections are joined together by means of choke or smooth flanges. The
latter are rarely used, since they produce greater energy losses than choke
flanges. To fit the waveguide sections in place, there are usually adjustment
sections in the sets of waveguide lines, where these final matching sections have
a connecting flange at only one end. The flange is soldered on to the other end
in place after the entire waveguide line is assembled.

- 188 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hermetically sealed sections are used when running waveguide lines through gas
tight bulkheads. decks and other special rooms [15]. Settling basins, dehydrators
and moisture absorbers are used to dry waveguide lines. A settling basin takes the
form of a tank structure in the form of a cylinder or a rectangular cup, in which
the moisture formed in the waveguide drains off. A dehydrator consists of a fan
and a heating element. The heated dry air produced by the dehydrator dries the
waveguide by means of creating pressure inside the waveguide. A moisture absorber
contains a special cartridge, filled with a moisture absorbing compound, for
example, silica gel, which takes the form of a chemical composition having a high
absorbency.

To reduce noise, waveguide lines should be grounded at the first and last sections
when coupling to the units, and at the exit and entrance to rooms. Grounding is
accomplished by means of jumpers from the antenna cable or another flexible con-
ductor with terminals soldered on the ends. One end of a jumper is grounded under
a bolt of the flange connection, while the other is grounded under a special bolt
on the fastening bracket for the waveguide or the hull of the ship. To remove
dust and dirt, all waveguide sections are blown out with compressed air at a pres-
sure of 2 to 3 atm prior to installation.

The Installation of Marine Radar Antennas. When choosing the installation site of
a radar antenna, one must take into account the influence of the installation
height of the antenna: on the radar range, on the size of the blind area (minimum
range) of the radar, on the permissible length of the waveguide channel joining

the antenna and transceiver, as well as other factors.

Because of this, a radar antenna should, where possible, be located high up, i.e.,
good circular scanning should be provided. Antennas are not to be located close
to smokestacks or in regions where the temperature of the exhaust gases exceeds
+50 °C and there is a danger of soot and other combustion products falling on the
antenna. Depending on local conditions, radar antennas are mounted on ship masts
or on special hollow or truss masts, located on the upper bridge. If conditions
permit, then the antenna is to be placed on the nidline (DP) of the ship. Where
obstacles are present which degrade'the circular scanning, the radar antenna
installation is shifted relative to the midline of the ship. In accordance with
the USSR Registry regulations, an antenna must be shifted to the starboard side.

when two radars are installed on a ship, the antennas are placed on the midline,
on stages on the ship's mast or on special masts located to port and starboard [15].

The influence of radar operations on radio communications gear must be taken into
account in the placement of the radar antenna. The presence of an electric drive
and switching circuit: in the radar antenna can create interference to the opera-
tion of a aurine radio station, especially in the very high frequency band (VHF).
For this reason, it is necessary where possible, to separate the radar and VHF
radio communications antennas by no less than 3 to 5 meters, prefereably in
height.

- 189 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The influence of sidelobes may also be dis-
regarded if the radar antenna is installed at
a height of no less than 6 m from the deck of
the compass platform.

For servicing safety, the radar antenna instal-
lation site is equipped with a platform having
manropes. The antenna rotation should not
threaten the safety of the ship's crew. It is
necessary to preclude the possibility of run-
ning rigging and other objects capable of
causing damage to the antenna or failure of

the rotation mechanism from coming into the
zone of rotation of the antenna (the sweep
radius).

The Influence of shipboard obstacles on the
Precision of the Determination of the Angular
Coordinates of Targets. The presence of
obstacles on a ship in the path of radar
signal propagation (masts, superstructures,
pipes, rigging, etc.) produces systematic
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

errors in the determination of angular coordinates, creates false returns and is
the cause of the occurrence of shaded sectors on the PPI screen.

The influence of obstables (secondary radiators) is manifest in the occurrence of
errors both during the transmission of the probe signals and in the reception of
the returns. Since these factors are equivalent, they can be generalized and
treated as for the case of radar return reception.

If, for example, a reflecting object is located at point 0 (Yigure 4.17), while
an obstacle is located at point H (the secondary radiator), the total field £0
at the radar antenna input will consist of the field E1_comigg directly from the
target, and the field £2 diffracted from the obstacle: £0 a £1 + 32. The field Ez
can differ from the field 51 in phase and amplitude in the general case, and then:

he E. + n £.e"° - 6.0 + or”).

where o is the 81 field attenuation coefficient;

a is the phase shift between the fields 31 and £2 which is due to the
difference in the path of the rays Ad and the phase shift when the field
82 is reradiated by the obstacle.

As a result, the total field 30 proves to be nonuniform, and within the lhmits of
the antenna directional pattern in the horizontal plane, has a lobed nature. The
number of lobes depends on the radar wavelength and increases with an increasingly
shorter wavelength. The lobe nature of the total field shifts the maximum

(axis) of the antenna directional pattern in the horizontal plane and leads to
systematic errors in the determination of azimuth, i.e., to the occurrence of

ship radar deviation or radar deviation (RLD).

The value and sign of the radar deviation (the sign of the correction for the
radar deviation), other conditions being equal, depend on the radar wavelength,
the antenna directional pattern width in the horizontal plane and are a function
of the angle so between the directions to the reflecting target and the obstacle.
with an increase in the radar wavelength and the width of the directional pattern
of the antenna in the horizontal plane, the radar deviation also increases. An
exception is the condition when so = 0, i.e., when the reflecting object (target),
the obstacle and the radar antenna fall in the same plane. In this case, the
lobes of the directional pattern are arranged symmetrically and the error in the
determination of the direction to the target will be equal to zero (RLD 8 0).

0n analogy with the radio deviation of marine direction finders, the radar devia-
tion can be determined experimentally as a function of the course angle (KU) or
the compass bearing (KP) to the observation target. In the first case, with the
"Course" orientation of the image on the P91 screen, the following readouts are
taken simultaneously: the course (KU) is read visually from the azimuth circle of
the compass and the radar course angle (RLKU) on the PP! screen of the radar.

_ 191 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Point targets (for example, buoys equipped with a reflector), radar transponder
beacons (Rho), etc. are used as the radar bearing target.

In the case of orientation with respect to course, a change in the course angle
causes the return blip to move on the PPI screen. For this reason, the determina-
tion of the radar deviation should not be made using a turning circle, but rather
by using individual course headings at intervals of 5 to 10'.

Prior to doing radio deviation work, it is necessary to carefully center the sweep
origin on the PPI screen and to assure good optical visibility and a clear image

of the target on the indicator screen for which bearings are taken; the PPI range
scale is to be set so that the target blip image-on the indicator screen is at the
greatest distance from the sweep center (no less than half of a sweep line); all of
the rigging on the ship is to be secured as for running.

Based on the results of the observations, the magnitude and sign of the radar
deviation (the correction for radar deviation) are determined from the formula:

F 'P-q

where F is the radar deviation angle;
p is the course angle to the target on which the bearing is taken;

q is the radar course angle.

The sign of the radar deviation correction is determined from the rule "from the
false to the true". Consequently, when p > q, the quantity P will be positive.
If p < q, then P is negative. The results are entered in an observation and
calculation table (Table b.8). Using the data of the table, a graph of the radar
deviation curve is drawn for the given ship. By way of example, graphs of the
radar deviation curve for “Don" and "Lotsiya" radars installed on the motorship
"Professor Rybaltovskiy", are shown in Figure 0.18. It can be seen from these
graphs that the radar error for various radar course angles changes both in mag-
nitude and sign. For the "Don" radar, the value of the radar deviation reaches

5 to 6°, while for the "Lotsiya" radar, it reaches 9 to 10°. Such a large value
of the angle P is explained by the comparatively low placement of the "Lotsiya"
radar antenna on the ship and the presence of obstacles close to the antenna in
the form of the antenna mast of the ship's radio station and whip antenna.

Hhen determining the radar deviation by comparing the radar bearing (RLP) and
the compass bearing (KP), which are taken simultaneously on the bearing target,
the image of the target blip on the PPI screen should be oriented towards north
(the “North" orientation). since in this case, the position of the blip on the
PPI screen does not change, the determination of the radar deviation can be made
by traveling in a slow circle (the time for one complete circle should he no
less than 30 minutes), simultaneously taking readings of the compass bearing and
radar bearing to the bearing target at intervals of 5 to 10°. The results are

- 192 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE ‘0 . 8

 

‘. Mix all! P'll ICIIIIIII Re I‘kl
mm | .,_._.,, l was”...

Ham-me cymla ‘5). . .

 

Tull "WK: (6) .....

11.1? .......
Oﬁlgxrb‘snsacmmwmx 7 ).

lllxana ”sauce-m ). .
I’nccmluuc no at? . .
Range to t e. ‘1‘“th
anr . . . "gun-I .
Sea "in

————

Item No.

Course angle (p);

Radar course angle (q);
Radar deviation (P I p - q);
Name of the ship;

Type of navigation radar;

. Bearing target;

. Range scale.

Key:

mwoubunp

__—__—_.___——_———-———————-——-—

entered in an observation and calculation table (Table 6.9). A graph of the curve
F = o (RLP) of the radar deviation is plotted using the data obtained.

Along with the methods enumerated above, the radar deviation can also be deter-
mined by other well known techniques in which the course angles to the bearing

target are changed.

In addition to systematic errors in the measurement of the angular coordinates,
shipboard obstacles can cause the appearance of false returns on the PPI screen.
This is due to the fact that the shipboard obstacles have a considerable influence
on the sidelobes of the antenna directional pattern.

As is noted in the literature [15], the influence of antenna sidelobes caused by
an obstacle can be disregarded if the following condition is met:

x T
GHE>1;'l/f L .

- 193 -

ma OFFIGAL Us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is the radar wavelength;
is the obstacle diameter;
is the distance between the obstacle and the radar antenna.

an.»

   
  

   

.L
21:0 2” J20 m

200
q, degrees 1. ma

 

Figure 4.18. Graphs of the radar deviation curves for the ship "Professor
Ry‘taltovskiy":
a. "Don" navigation radar;
b. "Lotsiya" navigation radar.

- 196 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE 4.9.
91 .53)..- _.._<3>__..-_..__<4> _.___..<s_>_‘_i.;.__-_-.ﬁ-;
'1 [r w:- .W m...

N333 of the—gﬁip
Ilaaaauue cyana . . . .
Tm? °S.:%“PF: : : ;:
[1.1m Date ........
(Must. ucacnmwms(6)
Maﬁa .sc.le ......

I 5‘ ARIN-"0f?“ . .
I'mmsnue m «(Hum (7).
Mart. sea I .- Iiru-giqihd

Key: . Item "0.;

l
2. Compass bearing (KP);

3. Radar bearing (RLP);

4. Radar deviation (F - KP - RLP);
5. Remarks;

6. Bearing target; .

7. Range to the target.

 

Moreover, shipboard obstacles cause the appearance of shaded sectors. This is
observed in those cases where the size of the obstacle is commensurate with the
antenna aperture in the horizontal plane or exceeds it.

Tests of a Marine Navigation Radar Following Insulation on a Ship. Such tests are
performed in order to check the conformity of the operational and technical para-
meters of the radar to the requirements of the technical specifications as well as
the radar operating reliability under actual operational conditions. The tests

are performed in accordance with a special program, coordinated with the interested
organizations and the USSR Registry.

If the navigation radar is being installed on a new ship under construction, then
these tests are incorporated in the overall testing program for the vessel. Ship-
board tests of navigation radars are broken down in dockside and sea trial tests.

Dockside tests are performed while the ship is at the dock. The following are
checked: the equipment complement of the radar and the spare parts, tools and
accessories; the placement of the navigation radar equipment on the ship; the
condition of the equipment and the action of the controls; the grounding of the
chassis of the navigation radar equipment; the quality of the installation; the
insulation resistance of the wires and RF cables; the technical parameters of the

- 195 -
ma OmcuL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radar set; the synchronization and in-phase performance of the antenna rotation
and PPI sweep of the CRT; the synchronization of the PPI coupling to the gyro-
compass; and the precision of the positioning of the fixed range ring markers on
the PM screen.

The completeness of the radar equipment package is checked against the ordering
docmentation. The presence end condition of the spare parts, as well as the
factory and acceptance documentation for the equipment (descriptions, operating
instructions, schematics, data sheets and forms) are checked against the acceptance
documentation for the project plan and the descriptions of the contents of the
boxes of spare parts, tools and accessories.

The placement of radar equipment on a ship is checked against the working drawings
of the project plan. The reliability of the equipment fastening and the shock
absorbers of the units is checked. The operational conditions of the equipment are
checked and evaluated (free opening of the doors and covers, the sliding out of the
blocks and units, convenience in the use of the controls and monitor instruments
for the navigation radar, the illumination of the scales and other components used
for systematic observation).

The condition of the equipment and the action of the controls is checked by means
of carefully inspecting the installed equipment. The integrity of the paint and
anticorrosion coating, the absence of mchanical damage, the presence and condition
of facing screws, glass, labels, frames for meters, the integrity of the equipment
mounting (at points accessible for inspection), the reliability of the fastenings
of individual components and assemblies of the equipment as well as the cleanliness
of the contact surfaces.

The following are checked during the inspection process: the smoothness of the
operation of the equipment control, the correctness of the operation of switches,
toggle switches and pushbuttona, the smoothness of the travel of moving elements,
the condition of contact groups of moving elements; the matching of the positions
of the controls with the indicators on scales which have clamps; the correctness
and the reliabi Play of the actuation of interlocks; and the good operating condi-
tion of the signaling circuits.

The grounding of the equipment chassis should satisfy the design requirements and
its resistance should not exceed 20 HOhms. The resistance should be checked by
means of a megohmeter, one terminal of which is connected to the GROUND terminal
of the unit being tested, while the second is connected to a cleaned area of the
ship's hull near the unit.

Quality control of the installation work is accomplished by means of checking the
following: the routing of the waveguide and cable lines and their conformity to
the working drawings and schematics; the correctness of the fitting .of the cables
in feedthrough seals and the layout of the cable cores in junction boxes and in
the unit; the correctness of the connecting of shielded cores of cables as well as
the connection of their braided shields to the chassis of a unit; the correctness
of the fitting of cables in RP plug connectors; the absence of mechanical damage
to the braided shields of cables; the reliability of the connections in waveguide
channels.

- 196 -
son omcul. use ONLY
FOR‘MHHC]AI.USEIDNLY

 

_——————_—.

 
  
 

 
  

Gain Yen-Rn:

 

    
       

omen-Inc Ono-one
Imp-Inn “I“.

 

Ratio Ratio

      
     
         
         
           
     
         
     
       
     
   
   
 
        
     
   
         
       
     
   

1.000 1.0!!! 1.000 LII!) 0
1.059 I. I22 0.9“ 0.l91 0.5
2.122 1.29.! 0.89! 0.794 !.0
1.259 1.5115 0.79! 0.031 2.0
L413 1.996 0.708 0.501 3.0
1.585 2.512 0.631 0.300 4.0
1.778 3.162 0.562 0.316 5.0
1.905 3.90! 0.50! 0.26! 0.0
2.239 5.012 0.417 0.200 7.0
2.512 6.310 0.898 0.158 8.0
2.818 7.91:! 0.360 0.120 9.0
3.!02 10.1110 0.316 0.100 10
3.548 12.590 0.282 0.079! I l
3.0111 15.150 0.25! 0.063! 1')
4.467 19.150 0.224 0.150! l3
5.012 2%.!20 0.199 0.0390 1-!
5.02.1 31.620 0.178 0,0310 I5
0.310 39.100 0.158 0.0261 16
7.079 60.120 0.14! 0.1M!) I7
7.94:! (mm 0.120 0.0153 I71
8.91:1 79.4.10 0.! I2 0.0126 1!!
"1.000 100.000 0. 100 10-: 20
17.7!!! 3l6.200 0.0502 11.10-10-1 25
211.620 1000.000 0.00m 10-. an
50.23 3.162. "7' 0.0178 0.316- 10-” :15
"10.00 10‘ 10" 10-. 40
177.00 3.16% 10' 5.0210“ 0.3!0-10-‘ 4!.
310.2 10' 3.!0-10—’ I04 50
602.0 3.16240! I.78-10-' 0.3!0-10‘“ 5'.
I 000.0 10' 10" I0-‘ 60
1 770.0 3.111240. 0.562- !0-‘ 0.3IG~!0-‘ m
:1 "12.0 10' 0.316-10-' I0-’ 70
5 020.0 3.102407 0.l78-I0-' 0. :0- IG-' 75
I0 000.0 10" 10'“ Io-l so
17 I“!!! 31.16% I" 0.5132- 10-‘ 0.3111340“ 85
.11 1520.1! 1!, 0.31640“ I0-' 90
51; mm :I.IIi2-10' 0.1711» 10-! o_:m~.. lo—- 95
III-I 10-" 100

-197—

ron omcui. use ONLY
FOR‘0FFK]Al.USE(NQLY

After turning the radar on, it is essential to make sure that there are no power
leaks or sparking in the flange waveguide joints. A neon lamp may be used to
check for power leakage.

The absence of sparking can be checked visually or it can be heard [15]. Where
sparking is present, the repetition rate of the pulses is heard.

The insulation resistance is checked between individual cores, as well as between
the cores and the cable braid. Hegaohmeters at 500 and 1,000 volts are used for

the insulation measurement. The insulation resistance of any cable should be no

less than Hahn regardless of its length.

The technical parameters of the radar are checked by means of testing the following:
the actual sensitivity of the receiver; the average transmitter power; the standing
wave ratio of the antenna-waveguide channel of the radar; the spectrum of the

probe pulse.

Radar testers (RLS testers) corresponding to the band of frequencies used in the
cw mode are employed to measure receiver sensitivity.

The output power of the transmitter is estimated based on the average or pulse
power. The average power is measured by means of a special instrument: a power
meter or a radar tester used for this purpose, which is connected to the output of
a directional coupler in the radar waveguide line.

The standing wave ratio (RSV) [SWR] of the antenna-waveguide channel characterizes
the matching to the line and the radar antenna. The sun is determined with the
antenna stopped and the radar turned on. The incident and reflected wave power is
measured by means of the radar tester at the flanges of a directional coupler. The
SHR can be determined from the following expression [15]:

. 114?;
SR I KCB- -——-+.
|...'/a,

where a is the power reflection factor, which is equal to:

/ )A

Pref Pfor

P
P

ref 13 the reflected power;

for

A is a correction factor, in relative units.

is the forward power, measured through the coupler;

- 198 -

KROHKMLWEOMX
IWJR OWTWCJAL.USE1DNLY

When determining A, first the value of the coefficient in found in decibels:

where K1 is the forward coupling attenuation, dB;

K2 is the reflected coupling attenuation, d3.

Both quantities K1 and R2 are indicated by a special mark on each lead of the
coupler. Based on the value obtained for d' in decibels, the power ratio for the
attenuation is found by means of Table 4.10. The permissible value of the SHR
should fall in a range of 1.2 to 1.5.

The frequency spectrum of the magnetron przbe pulse is determined by means of a
spectrum analyzer or an echo chamber with a narrow bandwidth. In the case where

an analyzer is used, its input is connected to any flange of a directional coupler
in the radar waveguide channel.

The image of the pulse spectrum should be stable, without doubling of the main
lobe, and have brightly pronounced minima and first sidelobe maxima which do not
exceed 0.25 of the main lobe. In the case of a distorted modulating pulse wave-
form and an insufficiently matched load, the spectrum of the magnetron pulse can
prove to be distorted.

A check of the operational characteristics of a navigation radar is smde during
the sea trials. '

The minimum navigation radar range is checked by means of measuring the minimum
distance to a reflecting target, at which the return from it can be observed
separately from the probe signal and the target coordinates can be determined.

The measurements are to be made in the absence of sea clutter, with optimal
receiver gain (time ACC) and normal brightness of the return on the PPI screen.
An average sea buoy, launch or boat, which slowly approaches the ship or moves
away from it is used as the reflected target. At the moment the probe and return
signals and the PPI screen touch, the target is stopped, and the distance between
the ship on which the radar being tested is installed and the target is measured
with a measuring line.

The check of the maximum navigation radar range is made when the ship is standing
in a road or when putting out to sea. An approaching target which falls in
sectors free of shading is used for the measurements. The desired range is
measured by means of the moving range ring (PKD) or the range cursor (VD). The
measurement is made using a reliably distinguished return with a probability of
0.5, when no more than one miss follows after a blip from the approaching target;
and after two or more blips, which follow one after the other, there are no more
than two misses in a row. Since the radar detection range depends on many factors

- 199 -

FOR 0FFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY

such as the type of target, the power potential of the navigation radar, the
condition of the atmosphere, the mounting height of the antenna and the length of
the waveguide line. The value of the maximal range is indicated in the technical
specifications for the given type of radar for the particular type of target with

a definite installation height of the antenna and waveguide length. As an example,
average values of the radar detection range are given below for various sea targets:

Type of Observation Target Detection Range,

Niles

Skerriea, rocks and rock faces at a level of 0.5 to l m Up to 2
Flat sandy shore l - 5
Steep rock faces, cliffs Up to 20
Hills, mountains 15 - 40
Isolated beacons ~ 5 - 10
Bridges across rivers, channels Up to 5
Buoys:

Small 0.5 - 1

Class 2 2 1.

Class 1 lo - 6

with corner reflectors 6 - 8
Floating beacons 6 - 10
Fishing trawlers 6 - 9
Ships with a displacement of, meters:

1,000 [tons] 6 - 10

3,000 10 - 13

10,000 10 - 16

50,000 16 - 20
Individual ice floes, low icebergs Up to 3
High, large icebergs - - 15

Small boats Up to 2

 

The check of navigation radar range resolution is made when the ship is standing
still by means of neasuring the ninimn-distance. between two point targets,
located on the same heading angle, for which it: is possible to observe them
separately and determine their coordinates.

Two boats or two cutters equipped with corner reflectors are used as the reflect-
ing targets, which should be placed at distances which assure a clear image of
the return blips on the PPI screen. Upon a comsnd from the ship where the navi-
gation radar being tested is installed, both targets, which lie on the same
course angle relative to the ship, slowly come together until the moment when
their blips make contact on the PP! screen. At the moment the blips make contact,
the targets are stopped and the distance between them is measured with the
precise range finder of the navigation radar or a water resistant (kapron)
filament line.

- 200 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF: 'IAL USE ONLY

The navigation radar resolution in azimuth is checked by means of measuring the
minimum angle between two point targets located at the same distance from the
navigation radar, for which separate observation and determination of the coordi-
nates of these targets is assured on the PP! screen. During the measurements, two
cutters or boats initially come together at a range at which the returns from them
are seen to clearly merge on the PP! screen, i.e., they are not resolved. Then,
upon an instruction from the ship, the cutters or boats begin to slowly move,
moving apart from each other in the transverse direction relative to the direction
of the ship. At the moment separate blips from the targets appear on the indicator
screen, the cutters or boats are stopped on a command from the ship and the course
angles or bearings to each return blip are measured. The difference between the

measured angles characterizes the navigation radar resolution with respect to
direction (azimuth).

The determination of the maximum range measurement error is made when the ship is
docked or at a mooring. The range measurements are made using a point target.

The range to the target should be determined beforehand by geodesic scans with an
accuracy of 0.31. The range to the target blip on the PPI screen is measured
repeatedly by different observers by means of matching the leading edge of the
moving range ring to the blip from the target (the object). The maximum error for
952 of the observations should not exceed the values provided in the technical
specifications for the navigation radar.

The determination of the maximum azimuth measurement error is made sequentially
for six headings of the ship, at intervals of 60'. When measuring the direction
towards a selected point target, several readings of the course angle or bearing
are made simultaneously using the scale of the PPI indicator and an optical direc:
tion finder.- The comparison of the resulting readings represents the error, the
maximum value of which should not go beyond the limits of the technical specifica-
tions for the radar in 952 of the measurements.

The shaded sectors are determined with the ship traveling in a slow circle having
the minimal radius where the sea waves are rated at no more than one to two balls
[1 to 2 points on a 12 point scale]. A low tonnage (tug, cutter, etc.) at a

range of h to 5 miles from the radar, the returns from which are clearly seen

on the PPI screen, is chosen as the bearing target. The course angles or bearings
between which the return blip image disappears on the PPI screen are the boundaries
of the shaded sectors.

The results of the observations are entered in the navigation radar form for the
station operation accounting.

- 201 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.1. The "okean" Marine Navigation Radar

The "Okean" marine navigation radar is designed for installation on large
tonnage ships as the main radar [ll].

 

 

TABLE 2;;

Unit

Desig-

nation

Code Unit Name

A3 Antenna (3.2 cm band)

A10 Antenna (10 cm band)

A Two-band antenna

P3 Transceiver (3.2 cm)

P10 Transceiver (10 cm)

11 Indicator with the true
motion system and auto-
tracking

12 Simplified indicator

V Computer

PK A3 and A10 antenna
switcher

ATOb Power plant

AT02 Power plant

PMM Single power mains
starter

BRN Control block

Cabinet of spare parts,
tools and accessories

Box of spare parts,
tools and accessories

Overall Dimensions.

Width Deg h Height

 

3300
3300
3300
365
365

950
760
340

170
667
595

176
185

615

542

588
1265
1400
372
572

593
593
620

530
490
630

400
#25

460

572

570
570
1550
1370
1370

1360
1250
970

270
432
360

360
400

1295

865

Height,
_Es_
265
365
375
131

155

330
215
120

18
250
152

16
22

127

64

Power

Consumption
KVA

0.18
0.18
0.30
1.20
1.20

1.50
1.00
0.70

10

_————___—_————————————

The "Okean" radar operates in one of two bands (3 and 10 cn) and solves the
following problems:

1. Observes the radar situation in true and relative notion modes, and also
measures the coordinates of targets;

- 202 -

F0!.0W11CJA1.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Automatically tracks a selected target while feeding out its coordinates in
a PPI mode;

3. Automatically solves the problem of passing a target being tracked and makes
recommendations for course or speed maneuvering either separately or simultan-
eously for safe passing.

TABLE 5.2

Toﬁauqn 5.2 "

 

Amt" sunn- ‘ eig t

220 3volt} 3" nvolt

M‘N BI. ATO-d-«II-lil.
--ll2 III! llMM-III2-IM. 9.5
-|Ql 3 lil'll-ML3

II M. MO. ATO-tdm-ﬁl. ATO-Llfllﬂl.
In, "In. IlMM-lll?-l3.1. IlMM-III2-l3l. 8.6 N."
I'll. ['IE' I)” |- ”Lil “I’ll-MIG

%, ‘

A'L All). INCA-1m lil. Ann-4mm,
"3.! III" llMMJll'l-lfl“. llMM-IIIZI'II. 8.0 “.6 I'm"

"1'. HI lil'lldil-Zi lil’ll-Nl-J
[IR

A. Ilil. ATO-i-JMISI. ATO-l-lM-lll.
Hm. "I. IlMM-lll'illflil, llMM-Ill2-IIII. 9.0 7.5
"2 lil’ll-HI-fl BPH-Nl-I’

_.—__—_. . -...-‘.___..._._—__—_ .. . —

“2| A1, I". AT().'2-AM-lil. ATO-(AOO-III.
IIZ llMM-IIIQ-ISI. llMM-lll?-Il5, 4.3 III; lilll
lil’llﬂﬂ l'nl'H HI

1'3 M0. Illn. ATO-Q-Jmlil. ATO-‘ldlnm.
H2 IIMMJIIZIJI. llMM-Ill2-II5. 4.3 3L5 "50
ISI’II-‘Jvll “I‘ll-24!

Key: 1. No. of the set;
2. Power consumption.

The listing of the units incorporated in the "Okean" navigation radar is
given in Table 5.1.

Besides the units and power supplies with the start-up control equipment
indicated in the table, the radar complement also includes:

--Insta11ation kit for assembling the 3-cm waveguide channel and the microwave
cable sections for connecting the lO-cm transceiver to the antenna;

- 203 -
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

set of spare parts and accessories for the radar;
set of spare parts and accessories for the power supply;
set of plus connectors for the cables running between the units;

set of operational documentation which contains the technical description
operating instructions, the electrical schematics and kinematich circuits,
inventory and documentaticn for the spare parts, tools and accessories.
installation kit. as well as the operational documentation and packing.

  
   

to gyrocompass

to ship mains

Figure 5.1. The equipment complement of the complete "Okean"
radar set.

Key: A. 3.2 and 10 cm antenna;
P3. 3 cm band transceiver;
P10. 10 cm band transceiyer;
Il. Indicator with autotracking and true motion systems;

- 204 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [cont.]: 12. Simplified indicator;
V. Computer;
BRN. Power plant voltage control block;
PM. Single power main magnetic starter;
AP. Power plant.

Depending on the customer's requirements, the "Okean" radar is supplied with
various equipment complements.

The composition of the complete sets which are manufactured is given in Table
5.2. For any equipment complement, the "Okean" radar is supplied with a
power supply and start-up regulating equipment using the ship power mains

at 220/380 volts AC, 50 Hz.

The technical parameters and operational characteristics of the “okaaa”
navigation radar are given below:

The 0.5 probability detection range for an antenna
mounting height of 20 m above sea level, in miles:

A shore 60 m high 20
A ship with a displacement of 5,000 tons 12
Average sea buoy 5
Minimum detection range for a probability of 0.5, m 60

Maximum range determination error, in Z of the full scale
reading of the indicator scale from the moving range
ring, on the following scales:

1, 2 miles 1.5
6 miles 1.0
8, 16, 32 and 64 miles 0.6
Maximum azimuth determination error in the case of
measurements with the electronic cursor, in degrees at
wavelengths of: a
3.2 cm 1
10 cm 1.5
The 0.5 probability range resolution on the l and 2 mile
scales, in m 15
The 0.5 probability angular resolution, in degrees, in
the following bands:
3.2 cm 0.7
10 cm 2.1
The maximum error in the true motion of the marker for the
ship itself on the screen, no more than:
With respect to course, in degrees 3
with respect to speed, knots 1.5
Maximum error of the autotracking system with a quiet sea:
With respect to angle, in degrees:
In band I 0.5

- zos -
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR 0F?ﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(ﬂULY

In bend II

With respect to range, m:
In band I
In band II

Maximum errors in the calculation of the parameters for
passing a ship being tracked in the case where the ships
travel at constant speeds and with constant course
headings, no more than:

Closest approach error, miles

Error in the time remaining until the closest approach, 1
Target course error, degrees

Target speed error, knots

Carrier frequency, MHz:
In band I

In band II

Probe pulse width, in microseconds, on the following scales:
1, 2 and 4 miles
8, 16, 32 and 64 miles

Pulse power of the transmitter, in K", no less than

Pulse sensitivity of the display receiver channels, in dB, on
the following scales:

1, 2, and 4 miles
8, 16, 32 and 65 miles

Intermediate frequency of the receiver, MHz .

Receiver bandwidth, MHz: '
In the "0.5" mode

In the "0.1" mode

The antenna directional pattern width at the 0.5 level
relative to the maximum power, in degrees, no more then:
In the horizontal plane:
In band I
In band II
In the vertical plane

Sidelobe attenuation. in dB. no less than

Scan rate (rotational speed) of the antenna, r.p.m.

Antenna gain, in dB, no less than:
In band I
In band II

Working diameter of the screen of the indicators, mm

- 206 -
FIHI()FIW(1AI;IJSIICNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Range scales, miles 1, 2, A,
8, 16, 32
and 64
Interval between the fixed range rings on all scales, amounting
to one-fourth of the set scale, in miles 0.2, 0.5,
l, 2, 4
8.and 16
Continuous duty time, hours 24
Warn-up time for the radar after being turned on, minutes 4
Permissible temperature variation, degrees C:
For units A, A3, A10 and the waveguides from ~40
to +50
For the other radar units from -10
to +50

Permissible variations in the parameters of the ship power
mains, volts:

From ship power mains at a frequency of 50 i_2.5 Hz 220/380
. is:

From DC ship power mains 110/220
' _ thX

An external view of the most complex equipment complement, set No. 01, is
depicted in Figure 5.1.

Specific Features of the "Okean" Navigation Radar

The "Okean" navigation radar is a two-band radar set. which operates at wave-
lengths of 3.2 and 10 cm. This permits the maximum utilization of the
advantages of each of the bands.

The 3 cm band equipment complement provides for good resolution and precision
in determining coordinates. The 10 cm equipment makes it possible to improve
the noise immunity of the radar against the influence of precipitation and
wave agitation as well as increase its operational range.

Backups are provided for the units of the "Okean" radar through the standardi-
zation of the assemblies and blocks as well as the capability of connecting
them in the following four configurations:

l) Il--P3; 12--P10; 3) Il--P10; 12-P3;
2) Il--P3; IZ--P3; 4) I1--P10; 12--P10.

This significantly increases the reliability of the radar equipment.
The "true motion" mode improves the orientation of pilots and the decoding

of the radar information when sailing close to shores and in narrow straits.
In this mode, the actual navigation picture is reproduced on the 11 indicator

- 207 —
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

screen (see Figure 5.1), i.e., the target pips from stationary objects remain
stationary, while the pips of moving targets move on the screen at a speed
proportional to the true speed. This is accomplished by excluding the
velocity vector of the ship, the radar vehicle, from the relative velocities
of the observed targets, by means of moving the origin of the plan position
indicator in the direction of ship travel and at a rate proportional to its
speed.

It is possible in the "Okean" radar to automatically solve the problem of
passing an oncoming ship. Following manual "lock-on" to the echo return from
the target of interest, the range and azimuth automatic tracking system
generates the current coordinates for the target range and bearing, while

the computer V continuously calculates the relative path of the oncoming
ship, the closest approach distance to it, its speed and heading, as well as
the time to the moment of closest approach.

A provision is made in the radar for the capability of "playing through" the
maneuvers of one's own ship in accordance with the situation and the SHIP
COLLISION AVOIDANCEREGULATIONS(PPSS) by means of simulating the changes in
speed and heading. After finding the safe maneuver, one can give the
command for the change in the heading or speed of the ship.

A simplified block diagram of the "Okean" navigation radar is shown in Figure
5.2.

The Antennas [A, A3, A10]

The antenna consists of the radiofrequency section, the AOM32-6 antenna
drive (1.5 Kw, 220/380 volts, 50 Hz), a two-stage reducer for rotating
the antenna, four type I.0.67l.300 TU sine-cosine rotating transformers
as well as the contact device and the heating elements.

The radiofrequency section of each of the A, A3 and A10 units includes the
following major assemblies:

a) The radiator, which is a horn in the dual band and lO-centimeter antennas
and a slot antenna in the 3-centimeter band;

b) The antenna used in unit A3 is a slotted waveguide;

c) The reflector in the dual band antenna is a continuous truncated parabolic
cylinder and a grid reflector in the 10 cm antenna;

d) The rotating junction is a dual channel junction in unit A and a single
channel one in units A3 and A10;

e) The antenna channel which joins the radiators to the rotating junction.
Decoupling is accomplished between the channels in the two band antenna by

having different polarization for the corresponding horns: horizontal in the
3.2 cm band and vertical in the 10 cm band.

- 203 -
FOR'0FFKJAI.USE¢DNLY
0m.

ﬂ

'I-l

.8.3.\
£30 an:
. lé
Q: 2335: a 213.39:

Eula «gym
.. l—DE‘E: E. .

mlllll Silas lie:

IIIIII.

2:32.?
3 :
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

.uavau nouucuu>ad ;¢¢oxo: osu uo luumauv xuoan .euanuunou .~.m onsuuh

 

=82

N
n
v

D

a}. 0852...
a-I=o=schne

uuuuo>=oo

a qu> Q3\§- A.

as :5 EH 2
. .. T

 

Illa "Hun”v IIIIIII
*1 IIIIIII
IIIIEIIIIIIIIIIIIMIIII
m' u;
a
.0
V

a

          

:

L——I_I-

ﬂ

EFEI! .-

llli

Away

ﬂ

6

Sag-=3.
omaam

a: ooq ..> nu”

“'3’“.

Auwv ukdun

.J
H
I
i
1

.§

1523.» {at

- 210 -

FOR¢MWHCMULIEEIONLY
Key to Figure 5.2: l.
2.
3.
4.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

IN3R OFF1C1AI.IJSE2(NNLY

Rotating transformer and microsuitch;
3.2 cm microwave channel;

Magnetron oscillator;

Antenna switch;

. 10 cm band microwave channel;

Modulator;

Control and monitor panel;

Noise generator;

Oscillator;

Automatic frequency control circuitry;
IF amplifier and AFC mixers;

High voltage power supply for the magnetron and
modulator;

Current;

0.1 to 1.0 microseconds;

Control for the high voltage power supply for the
magnetron and modulator;

Intermediate frequency amplifier;
Receiver rectifier;

3.2 on video signal;

Monitor and control;

10 cm video signal;

True motion block;

Synchronizer 1;

Computer indicator;

Automatic range tracking block;
Orientation block 1;

Azimuth automatic tracking block;

Sync pulses;

X and Y target cartesian coordinates;
True relative motion line;

Maneuver relative motion line;
Azimuth error circuitry of the automatic tracking system;
Azimuth error channel;

To the digital navigation computer;
Video signal;

Synchronizer;

Orientation block 2;

Synchronizer block 2;

Indicator control panel.

The rotating junction consists of a waveguide to coaxial transition and a
contactless choke connection. In the two band junction, the outer conductor

of the coaxial portion
for band 11.

for band I is the inner conductor of the coaxial portion

Power is fed to the antenna rotat;on motor through a starter.

The instantaneous position of the antenna A is transmitted to the plan position
indicator by means of coarse and precise readout sine-cosine rotating

- 211 —
lN)R‘0FFIC1Al.thEZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transformers. Each pair provides for the rotation of one PPI. The coarse
readout rotating transformer (VT) is driven by the phase sensitive rectifiers
of the PPI sweep generating channels, while the precise readout rotating
transformer is driven by the azimuth angle strobe and course marker generator
circuitry.

Only one coarse readout rotating transformer and one precise readout rotating
transformer are mounted in single band antennas, since in this case, the
antenna is coupled to only one plan position indicator.

The contactor actuates at the moment the antenna is positioned along the
midline of the ship. once per antenna revolution and controls the course marker
generator circuit.

The heating elements are intended for heating the drive during the cold season,
as well as in the case of elevated humidity.

The switch makes it possible to disconnect the power to the motor when working
near the antenna, something which prevents turning on the rotation from the
plan position indicator.

The overall dimensions and weights of the antennas are given in Table 5.1.
The Transceivers

Each of the transceivers (P3, 910) consists of the transmitting and receiving
sections (Figure 5.3). The transmitting section incorporates the following:
the magnetron oscillator M1, the magnetron oscillator modulator HOD and the
high voltage power supply for the magnetron and the modulator (VVV). The
receive section contains: the microwave SVCh block, the intermediate fre-
quency amplifier block UPCh. the automatic frequency control block AFC, the
receiver power supplies block VPR and the control and monitoring panel PKU.
Type HI-l89B magnetrons are used as the microwave pulse generators in the

3 cm band and HI-lZ magnetrons are used in the 10 cm band.

The modulator consists of a blocking oscillator with a trigger pulse amplifier
(a 6N1? vacuum tube). a submodulator (‘10 TCIl-35/3 thyratrons) and a final
keying stage using a CHI-7 vacuum tube

The first stage of the modulator is designed around a 6N1? twin triode. The
left half is the trigger pulse amplifier and the right half is the blocking
oscillator.

The submodulator is designed around two TGIl-3S/3 thyratrons with storage
lines. The first thyratron operates on the 1, 2 and 4 mile range scales.

In this case, its stage generates a pulse with a width of T - 0.1 microseconds.
The second thyratron operates on the 8 to 64 mile scales. Its pulse width

is 1 - 0.5 microseconds.

- 212 -

FOR onicw. Us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The switching of the thyratrons is accomplished through the low voltage circuits
by a switcher. controlled from the PPI indicator when the range scales are

switched.

(ouuu'to the antenna

 

Figure 5.3. Block diagram of the P3 (or P10) transceiver.

1.
2.
3.
a.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Key:

13.

The T - 0.1 or 0.5 microsecond pulses having an
are fed to the control grid of the CHI-7 tube.

Magnetron oscillator;
Microwave output;
Noise generator;
Oscillator;
Magnetron current;
Filament

Ignition;
Modulator;
Operate;

Power indicator;
Tuning indicator;
Currents of the
mixer diodes;
Manual frequency
tuning on;

14.
15.

16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
2“.

25.

Mixer;

Automatic frequency
control;

Control and monitor panel;
Detector current;

High voltage power supply
for the magnetron and
modulator;

Start pulse;

Monitor and control;
Signal;

115 volts, 600 Hz;
Control on;

Intermediate frequency
amplifier;

Receiver power supplies.

amplitude of about 1,000 volts
The latter turns on. and a

voltage of 15 KV DC is applied to the magnetron from the storage capacitor.

A pulse is generated.

- 213 -
INJR<0FF1CIA1208IZCNVLY
F‘HICHJECJAL.USE1DNLN

The probe pulse from the magnetron in unit P3 is propagated in the antenna
and waveguide system through the following channels:

--A section with a metering sensor for the average probe pulse power;
--A section with a coupler for coupling the microwave power to the AFC channel;
--A ferrite-waveguide TRANSMIT-RECEIVE switch;

--A section for metering the transceiver voltage and measuring the traveling
wave ratio of the antennadwaveguide channel, etc.

The power meter consists of smell, series connected thermocouples, built into
the narrow wall of the waveguide. The average power level is indicated by a
meter in the PK” [control and monitor panel]. It is calibrated at the factory.

A unidirectional power coupler branches l/l,000-th of the probe pulse power
into the AFC channel.

The TRANSMIT-RECEIVER switch consists of a tee, a ferrite section and a slotted
bridge. It connects the antenna-waveguide channel to the transmitter at the
moment of transmission and to the receiver following the transmission of the
probe pulse.

The channel for the 10 cm band probe pulse differs from that for the 3 cm band
primarily in its structural design.

A ferrite isolator is inserted between the power measurement sections and the
TRANSMIT-RECEIVE switch. It improves the oscillation stability of the 10 cm

magnetron by means of attenuating the reflected wave by 20 dB. The isolator

losses when passing the forward wave are 0.5 dB.

A series circuit with a gas type RR-SA discharger on the receiver side and

an RR—S6 on the transmitter side is used as the TRANSMIT4RECBIVB switch.
Power is split off to the AFC channel in this same section through a limiting
attenuator.

The modulatbr is powered by means of rectifiers which are built into it.

The -27 volt at -2.5 amps rectifier, which is intended for powering all of the
transceiver relays, is designed in a bridge circuit using D-214 silicon diodes.

The +250 volt at 0.1 amp rectifier serves for powering the plate circuits of
the preamplifier and blocking oscillator stages. as well as the bias magneti-
zation windings of the saturable reactor of the high voltage rectifier. The
rectifier is designed in a bridge circuit using D-le silicon diodes with a
capacitive filter.

The +1.250 volt at 0.03 amp rectifer is intended for powering the screen grid
of the CHI-7 modulator tube. It is designed as a voltage doubler using D—1005A
silicon diodes.

- 214 -
FOI10FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The +2.5 KV at 0.013 amp rectifier serves for powering the anode circuits of
the thyratron and is designed as a voltage doubler using D-lOOSA silicon diodes.

The -800 volt rectifier, which is used to produce the bias voltage at the output
stage control grid, is designed as a voltage doubler using D-lOOSA silicon
diodes.

The high voltage rectifier consists of high voltage and filament transformers,
type V2-0.06/25 vacuum tube rectifiers, a type K—dl-lG-l6-0.l + 102 twin
capacitor, a block of discharge resistors as well as relays for protection
and turning systems on.

A doubler circuit is used in the rectifier with regulation of the output
voltage by a saturable reactor. The relays for turning on the various recti-
fiers as well as the relays for protecting the VVV [high voltage power supply
for the magnetron and modulator] are housed in the VVV block (see Figure 5.3).
In the case of rectifier overload, the power is cut off to the contactor which
breaks the power supply circuit for the primary winding of the high voltage
transformer.

Reclosure of the circuit can be accomplished by the OPERATE toggle switch in
the PKU [control and monitor panel] block or the OPERATE toggle switch in
the indicator.

The receiving section of the band I microwave block consists of the TRANSMIT-
RECEIVE switch, a gas discharger, a noise generator, mixers and K-27 klystron
local oscillator.

A voltage of -800 volts is fed to a special electrode of the RR-21 broadband
discharger to maintain a glow discharge. which facilitates the ignition of
the discharger during the operation of the-magnetron.

The GSh-Z noise generator consists of a waveguide section and a tube running
through its wide wall, inside which there is a gas discharge tube.

In the working position, the received signals pass through the noise generator
section without losses. When power is applied, the noise generator generates
noise at a constant level. This makes it possible to determine the receiver
sensitivity. '

The power of the K-27 klystron local oscillator is distributed by means of a
coaxial to waveguide junction between two channels: the signal channel and
the AFC channel. The level of the energy tapped off is regulated by means

of attenuators. The klystron can be fine tuned mechanically (when the
klystron or magnetron is replaced) as well as by means of changing the voltage
at the reflector either manually (RRCh) or automatically (APCh) [AFC].

The AFC and signal mixers are designed in a balanced circuit configuration
using DAOSA and DhOSAP silicon diodes.

- 215 -

FOR orﬁcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The operation of the mixer is monitored by means of measuring the DC components
of the rectified diode currents. The currents are tapped off to a meter of
the control and monitor panel through filters.

The microwave block for the band II receive channel includes the TRANSMIT-
RECEIVE switch, a type GSh—Z noise generator, the mixers for the arc and
signal channels as well as the type x—12 klystron local oscillator.

The noise generator is inserted in the coaxial line between the antenna
switch and the signal mixer. A portion of the line has the form of a helical
inner conductor, wound on a capsule in which a gas tube is inserted.

The frequency of the K-12 klystron oscillator is controlled by changing the
volume of the external resonator by means of a travel screw as well as by
electronic means.

A coaxial tee branches the klyatron power to the signal and AFC mixer channels.
The power level is regulated by variable coaxial attenuators.

The 10 cm band mixers are designed in a balanced circuit configuration using
D-aOSA and 0405A? [sic] diodes. The decoupling and phasing of the signals
and the local oscillator are accomplished by means of ring distributors.

The eight stage intermediate frequency amplifier, UPCh, is tuned to the inter-
mediate frequency of 60 HR: and designed around 62h9P vacuum tubes.

A low noise circuit using two pentodes connected as triodes is used in the
first two stages of the IF amplifier. The first stage is designed in a common
cathode configuration while the second is a grounded grid circuit.

The gain is 40,000. The bandwidth in the "0.5" mode amounts to b MHz and
12 MHz in the "0.1" mode.

A bandwidth of 12 Hﬂz is assured for the IF amplifier through the use of
bandpass filters having two resonant circuits shunted with resistors in the
second, third, fourth, fifth and eighth stages.

The switching of the bandwidth from 12 MM: to 4 Mm: is accomplished by blocking
the tube of the seventh stage, depending on the position of the BAND-D switch.
Following amplification, the signal is detected by an AM detector, designed
around a DBMA diode, the video pulses are amplified in a two stage amplifier
designed around 6Zh9P vacuum tubes and the left half of a 6N6? tube, and fed
through a cathode follower (the right half of the 6N6? tube) to the plan
position indicator. Distinguishing the returns from a target against a
background of interference from precipitation is improved when the short

time constant network is switched in between the video amplifier stages.

The differentiating network is switched in by means of a relay from the PPI
using the RAIN--NO CLUTTER switch.

- 216 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

The voltage for manual and time AGC is fed to the third and fourth IF ampli-
fier stages.

The automatic frequency control block, APCh [AFC], provides for the following
operating modes:

a) Automatic search and lock—on to the magnetron frequency;
b) Tracking the magnetron frequency;

c) Manual adjustment of the klystron frequency from the indicator or from the
control and monitor panel.

The AFC block consists of a three stage intermediate frequency amplifier
designed around 6Zh9P vacuum tubes, a frequency discriminator, using a 6Kh2P
tube, an actuating section and a tuning indicator.

The actuating portion of the circuit consists of an amplifier (6N3? vacuum
tube) and a diode transitron circuit configuration (the right half of the
6N3? and the 6Zh5P vacuum tube).

In the search mode, when there is no signal at the input to the AFC circuit,
the voltage at the output of the actuating circuitry changes in accordance
with a sawtooth waveform and is fed to the klystron reflector, changing its
frequency in the corresponding fashion.

When a signal is present at the input to the circuit, the output stage operates
as a DC amplifier.

The VPR3 (or VPRlO) block of rectifiers, which is intended for powering the
receivers of units P3 and P10, includes four rectifiers, two filament trans-
formers and fuses.

All of the rectifiers are designed in a bridge circuit using diodes.

The VS-lSO-0.25 rectifier (150 volt, 0.25 amp regulated rectifier) is used
to supply the plates and screen grids of the 1P amplifier and AFC tubes.

The V-200-0.l35 rectifier supplies the plate of the noise generator tube.

The VS-300-0.05 and VS-250-0.05 rectifiers supply negative voltage to the
cathodes of the klystron and transitron of the AFC channel.

The VS-300(350)-0.0025 rectifiers are connected in series with the VS-300-0.05
rectifier (in the VPRlO) or the VS-250-0.05 rectifier (in the V983) and pro-
vide a negative voltage of -550 volts (in the VPR3) or -650 volts (in the
VPRlO) to the resistors in the control and monitor panel and AFC blocks which
in conjunction with the transitron regulate the voltage at the klystron
reflector.

The control and monitor panel incorporates a meter with a switch for the
circuits to be checked and an OPERATB-HONITOR switch, which connects the

- 217 -

FOR OFFICIAL USEZCHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circuits being checked either to the controls of the console or to the con-
trols and meters of the indicator.

The control and monitor panel makes it possible to measure the following:
--The currents of the IF amplifier mixer diodes;

-—The currents of the AFC mixer diodes;

--The average power at the transmitter output;

—-The plate current of the noise generator;

——The plate current of the IF amplifier detector for metering and checking
the sensitivity of the receiver;

——The -27 volt, —600 volt, —300 volt and +150 volt rectifier voltages;
--The currents of the AFC tuning indicator;

-—The magnetron current.

 

Figure 5.4. General view of unit P3 [3-cm band transceiver].

Key: 1. High voltage rectifier
block;
2. Block of receiver
rectifiers;
3. Microwave compartment;
4. Control and monitor panel;

— 218 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. Interlock;

Magnetron;

. Modulator block;

. Compartment of plug connectors;

. Sockets for the connection of a light, headset and
soldering iron.

Key [cont.]:

\DmNO‘M

 

Figure 5.3. General view of unit P10 [lo-cm band transceiver].

[Key the same as for Figure 5.6]

The 0PERATE-—CHECK switch switches such controls in the indicator and
transceiver as:

--The network for switching the local oscillator tuning from manual to auto-
matic and vice-versa using the AFC——MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL toggle switch;

-—The circuit for turning on the high voltage using the OPERATE—-TURNED OFF
toggle switch;

——Thc circuit for blocking the actuating of the transceiver from the indicator.
It cannot be turned on in the "Check" mode if the READY—-TURNED OFF toggle
switch is switched off;

—-The RRU [?manual gain control?] circuit using the RRCh [manual frequency
control] potentiometer;

-—The gain control circuit of the IF amplifier from the GAIN potentiometer.

- 219 —
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The TUNE potentiometer for setting the initial voltage level at the klystron
reflector as well as the magnetron current control potentiometers are located
in the control and monitor panel.

The transceivers P3 and P10 (Figures 5.4 and 5.5) are structurally designed

in the form of racks. Each rack is broken down into compartments by horizontal
partitions. The receivers and their power supplies are housed in the top
compartments. while the transmitters are housed in the lower ones.

Plugs for external cable connections are located in a compartment in the lower
section. The compartment is connected by a pipe to the upper compartment.

The lines to the transmitter pass through the wall of the compartment by
means of feed-through capacitors. This provides for the requisite decoupling
between the receiver and transmitter units.

The racks are equipped with exhaust ventilation. The external air in the
room is sucked in through louvers, cut in the side walls and rear wall of

the cabinet where the major heat liberating blocks and components are located:
the magnetron, modulator tubes, as well as the high voltage power supply

for the magnetron and modulator, the AFC and IF amplifier blocks. The air
flow is routed through branch pipes from the louvers to the heat radiating
surfaces and radiators of these surfaces; the same branch pipes remove the
heated air to an air duct on the rear wall of the chassis. An exhaust fan
with an output of 50 l/sec is mounted at the distribution pipe of the air
duct or the ship's exhaust system is used. In this case, the excess heating
of the air in the region of the transceivers does not exceed 5° C. In the case
of failure of the ventilation system, a protection circuit cuts off the
transceivers if the temperature of the magnetron block exceeds the ultimate
permissible level (+140° C).

The upper and lower compartments of the racks are closed with swingout covers,
which have electrical and spray protection seals about the perimeter.

The transmitter assemblies which are subject to high voltage are insulated
by potting them in epoxy resin, while the connections between them are made
with shielded high voltage wire.

Access to the components of the blocks in the units is possible after the
blocks are removed, which are connected to the rack by means of special cables.

when the cover of the lower compartment is opened, an interlock contact
breaks the power supply circuit for the unit, while a mechanical discharger
automatically shorts the high voltage circuits to chassis ground. Plug
sockets are provided in the transceiver racks for the connection of a light,
headphones and soldering iron.

Indicators.

The [l and 12 indicators are the major units for the control, monitoring,
display and reading of information.

— 220 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following is accomplished in units 11 and 12:
-Generates the signals which synchronize radar operation;

-—Generates the radar plan position indication of the situation based on
information received from the transceiver, antenna, gyrocompass and log;

-Automatica11y determines the current coordinates of the target selected by
the operator and transmits them to the computer;

--Operationally controls and monitors the entire radar station;

--Re1ays the power voltages incoming from the power plant to all of the radar
units;

-Relays signals between units of the radar.

The following assemblies and blocks are included in the complement of indicator
11 (Figure 5.6):

a) Indicator tube block TRl;

b) Orientation block 0R1;

c) Computer indicator block IV;

d) True motion block 10;

e) Block of tracking systems for automatic azimuth tracking, PA;

f) Block of tracking systems for automatic range tracking DA:

g) Azimuth autotracking error channel assembly KOP;

h) Range autotracking error channel assembly KOD.

The functional links between the blocks and assemblies, the output signals
and voltages as well as the interconnections to other units of the radar

are also shown in Figure 5.6.

The following are incorporated in unit 12 (Figure 5.7):

--The indicator tube block TRZ;

--The orientation block 0R2;

--The indicator control console PU.

Also shown in this same figure are the ties between the blocks of unit 12 and
those to other units of the radar set. Besides the indicated assemblies and

blocks. each indicator includes switching. connecting, metering and protective
components.

The TRl tube assembly of the plan position indicator (Figure 5.6) is intended
for displaying the radar image and consists of three functional groups:

1) A type bSLﬂlv CRT with sweep generating elements;
2) The synchronizer;

- 221 -
son omcm. Us: on“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

*‘1
”J ;P3

..-J

II
-I .
--I no P10
Inn . ( ,
'q-II m m 2

~-- (5)

-
s C
-!

I'm"- a...

    
  
  

 

!
Illlll

2
o
I

    
   

   

Figure 5.7. Block diagram of indicator unit 12.

Key: 1. Manual frequency control; 12. Phase sensitive rectifier;

2. AFC, manual frequency 13. Phase sensitive rectifier
control; netering;

3. ’idco signals; 14. Sand - D [?range?]:

6. Operate (signal); 15. Tine AGO, gain;

5. Synchronization; l6. Controls;

6. P3 [3.2 cm transceiver] 17. Course, course stabilized;
ready, P10 [10 cm trans- 18. Antenna bearing;
ceiver] ready; 19. Antenna angle;

7. Operate (signal); 20. Indicator control panel;

8. Gain, time A60;

9. Video signals; operate;
10. 10 en on;

11. Orientation block 2;

l. Adjusting controls;
2, 6. Switch;
3. Controls for the range and bearing cursors;
u. s. Readout display;
7. Readout display for the transmitters and antenna.

- 223 -
FOR onion is: ONLY
FOR(NHWCJAL.USE(NVLY

The true motion block serves to derive control signals, which shift the origin
of the sweep of the indicator CRT in the direction and at the speed of travel
of the ship, represented with the same scale as the image.

The target range tracking (DA and KOD circuits) and azimuth tracking channels
(the PA and K0? circuits) operate in the "tracking" mode when resolving the
problem of passing and determining the parameters of an oncoming ship.

All of the controls for the computer, the display and readout scales, on
which the computation results are displayed, are located on the computer
indicator block. Additionally, some controls for the radar and the indicator
are located on the front panel of the unit.

Indicator 12 does not provide for radar operation in "true motion", "tracking"
or "computer" modes.

The TR2 tube block (see Figure 5.7) contains the following:
-A type ASLHlV cathode ray tube with sweep elements;
-Synchronization units;

-Rectifiers and sweep elements.

Orientation block 0R2 incorporates the main controls for the indicator. This
unit does not have any relay or diode logic circuitry for mode switching or
universal joint links to other blocks.

The indicator control panel block incorporates the controls for the indicator,
rotating transformers for image orientation, relays with elements for turning
on the power plant, the antenna, the transceiver and the indicator. '

it is expedient to treat the indicator units in terms of the functional
structural configuration, which consists of the stages for generating,
amplifying and converting the signal as well as feeding it out to the final
stage.

The synchronizer channel consists of the channel of peakers and the crystal

controlled master oscillator (KOK). the scale frequency channel (KHCh), as
well as the channel of voltage amplifiers which drive the phase shifters (KUS).

The pulsed voltage of the master crystal oscillator is generated in the XOR,
as a result of the division of which by means of the flip-flop divider of
the scale frequencies channel, a grid of scale frequencies is obtained, from
which the various synchronization signals are generated in the plan position
indicator blocks.

The voltage amplifier channel is used only to segregate the sinusoidal voltages
at frequencies of 5 KB: and 81 K“: from the "meander" type voltages at the
same frequencies, and then subsequently amplify them.

- 224 -
FIH!(HWH(JAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The channel for generating the transmitter start pulses. the cursor and
signal sweep brightening and width pulses generate: the following signals:

a) The reference cursor and signal start pulses;
b) The transmitter start pulses;
c) The electronic cursor and signal sweep width pulses;

d) The pulses for brightening the cursor and signal sweeps.

The channel incorporates the stages of the scale frequency channel and crystal
controlled master oscillator and peaking channel blocks.

The channel for generating the time AGC voltage generates a negative voltage
which blocks the receiver. Clutter from an agitated sea surface is suppressed
by changing the time constant and voltage level.

The generation of the stationary range ring markers is based on the use of
scale frequencies generated by a flip-flop divider of the synchronizer. The
channel for generating the stationary range ring markers consists of elements
of the scale frequencies channel and the crystal controlled master oscillator
and peaking channel.

The phase metering technique of obtaining moving range rings is used in the
"Okean" radar. The generating channel includes stages of the scale frequencies
channel, voltage amplifier channel, automatic range tracking system and

crystal controlled master oscillator and peaking channel blocks.

The plan position indication sweep is generated in the PPI by means of two
mutually perpendicular stationary deflecting coils by means of passing
sawtooth waveform pulses through them, the envelope of which is modulated

by the antenna rotation with a phase shift of 90’. The channel for generating
the signal sweep. the cursor sweep and the Lon [relative motion line] consists
of elements and stages of unit A [the antenna], the computer indicator block,
as well as the indicator tube assemblies for units 1 and 2. Changing the
"north--stabilized course" orientation is accomplished by switching in the

corresponding sine-cosine rotating transformers in the computer indicator
block.

The true motion block generates the voltage for shifting the sweep origin in
the same direction and at a speed proportional to the motion of the ship
itself. This makes it possible to eliminate the vector of the ship's speed.
the radar vehicle, from the relative velocities of the targets, i.e., to
create a true motion mode.

Based on the log and course data, a speed vector is constructed in the computer
indicator block in "North—-South“ and "Hest-East" coordinates. The components

of the travel route are obtained by integrating the scaled components of
the speed vectors by means of integrating drives in the true motion block.

- 225 —

FOIlOFFﬂJAl.lEHE(HVLY
FORGDFFKJA1.USE(MVLY

The resulting voltage is applied to the displacement coils of the indicator
tube block 1. In this case, the sweep origin is displaced at a speed propor-
tional to and in the direction of motion of the ship itself.

A provision is also made for automatic reorientation of the image if the
center of the sweep is shifted beyond one-third of the radius of the CRT
screen or if the course of the ship deviates by :90' from the initial heading.

A true motion mode is provided only on the l, 2, 6 and 8 mile scales with the
"North" orientation.

The automatic range tracking channel turns on the DA [block of automatic

range tracking systems] and the K00 [automatic range tracking error circuitry]
blocks. and provides for automatic range tracking of a selected target in a
plan position indication mode.

A tracking circuit using two integrators is employed in the radar. In the
automatic range tracking block, the target is "locked on", and a time delay
is generated by the phase metering method. Range gates are generated in

the automatic range tracking error block, and a time comparison of the gates
with the normalized return from the target is also accomplished in this
block. Using a "number to voltage" converter, the autotracking error is
converted from a number to a voltage and fed to the automatic range tracking
block. Following amplification and modulation, the error signal controls
the drives of the main and supplemental integrators so that the autotracking
error tends to zero. '

The azimuth automatic tracking channel provides for automatic target tracking
with respect to angle in a plan position mode and incorporates the PA [auto-
matic azimuth tracking] and K0? [automatic azimuth tracking error] blocks.

The target is "locked on" manually in the automatic azimuth tracking block,
and a time delay is generated in the form of the envelopes of the rotating
transformers. In the automatic azimuth tracking error block, a gate pulse,
strobe center and strobe pulses are generated from the envelopes. The time-
wise mismatch of the strobe and envelope of the target return is converted
from a number to a voltage and fed to the automatic azimuth tracking block,
where the rotors of the sine-cosine rotating transformers are rotated by
means of the main and auxiliary integrators to that position in which the
autotracking error in azimuth tends to zero.

The Computer Indicator

All of the remote controls for the computer are concentrated in the computer
indicator block (IV), as well as the scales and display for the computer
results. Moreover, some controls for the radar and the plan position indi-
cator are located on the computer indicator block.

The major electrical components of the unit are combined in four functional
assemblies: for the course K, speed ch time remaining to the closest approach
To and the time delay (see Figure 5.2).

- 226 -
FOR ommi use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.8. General View of the orientation block and the computer
indicator of indicator unit 11.

[See text for key]

The speed circuitry contains the elements for converting the information on
the speed derived from the ship log.

The course assembly is composed of elements for converting the information
incoming from the gyrocompass, as well as the rotating transformer plotters
for the speed vector.

The closest approach time circuitry incorporates the components for solving
for To using the relative course and speed data of an oncoming ship, as
well as the range and azimuth to it.

The COURSE CORRECTION and SPEED CORRECTION controls are used to play through
a maneuver when solving the passing problem. The function of the remaining
controls and displays are described in detail on pages 173-174.

The rectifiers supply the voltages to power the transistors of the assemblies
and blocks. as well as those for the switching and control circuits.

- 227 —

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Each regulated rectifier consists of the main and auxiliary rectifiers, as
well as the regulator.

The main rectifiers are designed in a bridge circuit configuration, while the
auxiliary rectifiers use a doublet circuit. The rectifiers produce voltages
of 27, 600, 600 volts as well as 6 and 15 KV.

The orientation block (Figure 5.8) incorporates the controls for the indicator,
which generate the corresponding control voltages and currents.

In terms of the functional designation, all of the controls can be broken
down into several groups.

The following are included among the controls and readouts for the indicator
operating mode:

--The PPI BRIGHTNESS control (1) and PPI FOCUS control (2) by means of which
the optimal brightness and focusing of the image on the screen is set;

--The COURSE MARKER control (3), by means of which the requisite brightness
of the course trace is set;

-—The NlCD [STATIONARY RANGE RING] control (28), PKD [MOVING RANGE RING] control
(29) and CURSOR control (30), which are intended for setting the requisite
brightness of the stationary range rings, the moving range ring and the
electronic cursor line on the PPI screen;

-—The INDICATOR--0PP toggle switch (25). which serves for turning the indicator
on and off;

--The BAND--D [RANGE] control (27). by means of which the range scales on
the indicators are switched (the signaling that a scale is switched on is
accomplished on a display);

--The RANGE control (32). intended for controlling the position of the moving
range ring on the image sweep and the cursor sweep (the range is indicated
on a display panel in the form of a numerical value with a precision of
down to hundredths of a mile);

--The BEARING control (45), which serves to control the angular position of
the mechanical and electronic cursors (the bearing is read on the circular
scale only in the "north" mode);

--Thc RADIUS control (36), which in the "relative motion" mode moves the
sweep center of the image radially outward from the center of the screen;

--The ANGLE control (60), which in the "relative motion" mode moves the
center of the image sweep in a circle with a radius set by the RADIUS
control;

--The ILLUMINATION control (35). by means of which the brightness of the
circular scale and display framing the indicator screen is set.

- 228 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thc following number among the controls and readouts for the transceivers
and the entire radar:

-The POHER PLANT ON--OFP buttons (34), by.means of which the power plant is
started and stopped by remote control;

--Togg1e switch 3-10 (8), by means of which the working frequency is chosen
in the two-band radars (when both transceivers are connected to one PPI,
the control can be realized only from the main indicator, a fact which is
signalled by the MAIN and DUPLICATE display);

-The READY-OFF (7) and 0PERATE--OPE (6) toggle switches, which are intended
for turning on the transceivers and applying the high voltage to the
magnetron. The READY display signals the readiness of the high voltage
to be turned on, while this turning on is accompanied by the lighting of
the OPERATE display;

-The NORTN--COURSE-COURSE STABILIZE (37) switch, by means of which the
orientation of the image is changed on the indicator screen. Displays are
mounted above the screen which show the orientation which is turned on.

In the "course stabilized" mode, the COURSE and COURSE STABILIZED displays
are turned on. If the ship deviates from the course matching that when the
unit was turned on, the COURSE display goes out;

--The ID--OD [TRUE Morrow-mauve MOTIW] toggle switch (39), which is
intended for turning on the "true motion" mode (in this case, the TRUE
MOTION display lights up);

-The RAIN—-NO INTERFERENCE toggle switch (62), which in the "rain" position
switches in the MTV [small time constant] circuit in the video signal
channel, which promotes a reduction of clutter from precipitation;

--The ANTENNA ON--0FF toggle switch (26), which serves for switching the
antenna rotation on and off (in this case, the ANTENNA display lights up);

--The APC--MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL toggle switch (63), by means of which
one switches from AFC to manual control by means of the RRCh control [manual
frequency control];

--The SEA CLUTTER control (66), by means of which the time automatic gain
control system is adjusted;

--The CURSOR-RELATIVE MOTION LINE toggle switch (54), which in the "relative
motion line" position provides for a mode such that the direction of the
electronic cursor indicates the relative heading of the ship itself with
respect to the target, which is automatically calculated by the computer;

--The GAIN control (31), which is intended for adjusting the radar receiver
sensitivity;

-—The UNIT V--0FF toggle switch (4), by means of which one switches to the
mode for the solution of the passing problem;

-The TEST (5) button, which serves to switch the II indicator computer to a

check mode in which the output data of the indicator computer should
correspond to the values given in the tables attached to the panels of the
units;

- 229 -

FOR omcuu. Us: ONLY
FOR¢MHHCJAI.USE(MVLY

—JThe OPP-LOCK-ON-TRACK toggle switch (33), which is intended for turning
on the target tracking and lock-on modes;

-The TARGET SPEED button (23), which when pressed. the meter needle indicates
the speed of the target; when the button is released, the unit indicates
the closest approach range;

--The COURSE CORRECTION (l3) and SPEED CORRECTION (21) controls in indicator
I1, by means of which one plays through the maneuver for passing in the
passing problem solution mode, while in the "true motion" mode, corrections
are made for the drift and current. The course and speed, taking the
corrections into account, are read out from the scales which are placed
above the controls. The MATCH COURSE and MATCH SPEED displays indicate the
necessity of setting the controls to the initial positions;

-The RETURN button (41), which is intended for re-orienting the image in the
"true motion" mode.

The following are included among the metering and readouts for the radar:

--The CHECK switch (38), which makes it possible to check the values of the
voltages and currents_of the units (the noninal value of the parameters
being checked corresponds to the setting of the meter needle within the
range of the red or green sectors, as well as to the zero mark in he center
of the scale);

-The BEARING (1k) and RANGE (26) scales which serve for the precise readout
of the coordinates of a target being tracked; -

-The CLOSEST APPROACH TIME scale (22);
-The T MIN scale (11);

-The APPROACH TIME GREATER TRAN AN HOUR display (16), which displays the tine
remaining until the closest approach to the target being tracked;

--The PASSING display (15) which indicates the fact that the target being
tracked is going away;

--The PROBLEM SOLVED display (17), which in the turned on state, guarantees
the accuracy of the output data;

-The MANEUVER display (18), which signals a change in course or speed of
one's own ship or a ship being tracked, which is signified by a rotation of
the relative motion line through 5° or a change in the relative speed of
the ships by 1?.5 knots;

-The APPROACH DANGEROUS display (12), which lights up in the case where the
calculated distance of the closest approach is less than 2 miles;

-The TIME CIRCUITRY FAILURE display (19), which lights up when the most
important part of the computer fails;

-The scale (20) with two "small ship" pointers, which make it possible to
read out the course of one's own ship (the small white ship) and the ship
being tracked (the red one).

.- 230 -
ros OFFICIAL is: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The BAND-D [RANGE] switch and the NORTE--COURSE--COURSE STABILIZB toggle
switch are independent switching controls for the indicator nodes.

The modes can be changed by means of other controls following the definite
setting of the controls indicated above. To change over to the "true
motion" mode, one must beforehand set the "north" orientation and switch to
one of the range scales: 1, 2, a or 8 miles. The "lock-on" and "track"
modes can be switched on only on the 8 and 16 mile range scales in the
"relative motion" mode.

The Computer

The computer, in conjunction with the range and azimuth autotracking blocks,
and the computer indicator of indicator Il, automatically solves the problem
of the ship which is the vehicle for the "Okean" radar passing a ship, the
blip of which is being tracked automatically.

The indicators of the major parameters calculated by the unit are given on
pages 155-156 and below:

Path along the true motion line which assures the
solution of the problem with the precision indicated
on [one to two words obscured or missing in original],

in miles, no more than 1
Range of parameters which can be computed:
K0, degrees 0--360
Do, miles 0--12
To. minutes 0--60
V0, knots 0--60
K degrees 0--360
tar t’
“fit. knots o--3o
Av, nots 0--30
AK, degrees 0--360
Parameters of the course sensing selsyn:
Type BS-éOhATV
Revolution scale division, degrees 1
Maximum load moment, g ' cm 20
Parameters of the speed sensing selsyn:-
Type NS-bOhATV
Revolution scale division, knots 0.2
Maximum load moment, g ' cm 30
Power consumed from the 115 volt, #00 Hz mains, in KVA:
In the "lock-on" mode 0.13
In the "solution" node 0.53

The computer incorporates the following individual electromechanical structural
assemblies:

- 231 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1WCIAL.USE(MVLY

a) The unit for the increments in the relative path components A80:
b) The plotter for the vector of the relative path K0;

c) The relative velocity v0 unit; _

d) The converter for the course data K incoming from the gyroconpass;
e) The converter for the velocity data v incoming from the log;

f) The converter for the time data T incoming from the autorecorder, the clock
unit or the BTV unit itself;

g) The plotter for the relative velocity vector K0 - var., when playing through
a maneuver;

h) The power supply and generator for the PROBLEM SOLVED signal and the raw
data for the "test" mode (P);

i) BTV is the current time unit (not present in the first batch of radars).
The basic circuit of the unit takes the form of a schematic showing the
electrical connections between the external sockets of the units enumerated

here, as well as their connections to the external plug connectors of the
unit.

The Control of the "Okean" Radar

The controls and the initial positions corresponding to them before turning
the unit on are indicated below:

Toggle switch 25, INDICATOR--OFF "Off"
Toggle switch 7. READY--0FF "Off".
Toggle switch 6, OPERATE--OFP "Off"

Image orientation switch 37, NORTH--COURSB-COURSE STABILIZED "North"
Toggle switch 42, RAIN--N0 CLUTTER "No clutter"
Toggle switch 43, APC--HANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL ' "AFC"
Toggle switch 39, ID--0D [TRUE MOTION--RELATIVE MOTION] "0D"

Toggle switch 45, CURSOR-RBLATIVB MOTION LINE "Cursor"
Toggle switch 33, OFF-LOCK-0N--TRACK "Off"

Toggle switch 4, UNIT V [computer]-OP? "Off"

The positions of the remaining controls are set after the unit is turned on.

The radar is turned on in the following order: the power plant is turned on
by means of the black pushbutton 34; the indicator is turned on with toggle
switch 25; the frequency is selected by means of toggle switch 8; by setting
toggle switch 7 in the "ready" position, the transceiver is switched on; the
brightness and focusing of the stationary and moving range ring markers is
adjusted, as well as the course marker, using the appropriate controls; the

- 232 -

ma omcuu. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

antenna is turned on, by pressing black button 26. After four minutes. display
7 lights up: READY 3 CH (or READY 10 CH). Toggle switch 6 is used to turn
on the high voltage, and in this case the OPERATE display lights up.

The radar is turned off in the opposite order.

Depending on the specific conditions, the selection of the orientation mode
is accomplished by means of toggle switch 37: NORTH-GOURSE--COURSE STABILIZED.

It is possible to shift the center of the sweep in a range of two-thirds of
the radius in the case of true motion indication on the l, 2, 4 and 8 mile
scales by means of controls 36 (RADIUS) and 40 (ANGLE).

The "relative motion" mode is the main one for both indicators. The "true
motion" mode is possible in the indicator I1 when the following controls are
turned on beforehand: range scale switch 27 is set to one of the "l-8 mile"
positions; switch 37, NORTH--COURSE STABILIZED-COURSE, is set in the "north"
position; toggle switch 39, TRUE HOTION--RELATIVE MOTION, set in the "true
motion" position.

A provision is made in the radar for the possibility of manually returning
the sweep origin to the initial position by means of pressing pushbutton 41,
RETURN.

Operation of indicator 11 is possible in the "autotracking" mode with the
"North" orientation and the relative motion indication set on the 8 and 16
mile range scales. In this case. it is necessary to perform the following
operations:

a) Toggle switch 33, OPP--LOGK-ON--TRACK, is set in the "lock-on" position.
The cross at the end of the electronic cursor indicates the position of
the autotracking strobe;

b) By rotating controls 10 (BEARING) and 9 (RANGE), the cross is matched up
with the selected target;

c) Toggle switch 33 is thrown to the "track" position.

The scales of units 14 and 24 will show the current values of the bearing
and range of the target being tracked.

The computer is turned on by pushing button 4, COMPUTER.

After the blip of the ship being tracked passes the one mile point on the
relative motion line, display 17, PROBLEM SOLVED, comes on. The results with
the specified precision are shown on the scales of the computer indicator.
If the approach time exceeds an hour (for a ship traveling with the radar
ship). display 16. APPROACH TIME GREATER THAN AN HOUR, lights up. In the
case where a departing target is tracked. the PASSING display 15 cones on.

- 233 ~
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
IWIR‘OFTNCJAl.lﬂ5EZ(NﬁLY

A provision is made in the "Okean" radar for playing through a maneuver, i.e..
simulating the course or speed changes (or both simultaneously), so as to
pass the ship being tracked at the distance desired. The correctness of
computer operation is checked by means of the "test" mode.

5.2. The "Okean-H" Marine Navigation Radar

The "okean-H" marine navigation radar is intended for installation on large
tonnage ships of the merchant marine and fishing fleets, for the purpose of
improving navigation safety in the open sea, as well as close to shore and

in narrow straits.

 

 

TABLE 2;;
Unit
We 31:223.... ... Power
Desig- Unit Decimal ------L---- Height, Consump-
nation Numbert pre Unit Name Width Depth Height kg tiontKVA
A LYe2.092.014.SP Parabolic, com- 3690 965 1197 ' 500 1.8
bined, two-band
antenna
A3 LYe2.901.011.SP Slotted waveguide 3295 810 809 300 1130
3-cm band antenna
A10 LYe2.09l.012.SP Slotted waveguide 3461 1015 1150 400 1130
lO-cm band
antenna
P3 LYe2.000.047.SP 3-cm band trans- 590 470 1560 158 0.9
ceiver
P10 LYe2.000.048.SP lO-cm band trans- 590 470 1560 180 0.9
ceiver
I LYe2.048.064.SP Indicator 600 880 1390 280 0.6
V LYe2.300.020.SP Computer 700 347 1350 280 0.5
ID LYe2.316.005.SP True motion unit 494 270 680 50 0.33
Kl LYe3.622.052.$P Switching unit 352 226 675 30 0.12
for the single
band version
K2 LYe3.622.051.SP Switching unit 500 250 620 60 0.24
for the two band
version
K3 LXe3.622.053.SP Radar switching 536 126 295 15 --

 

unit, equipped
with units V or
ID

-236-

 

FOR(HHH(1AI.USE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 5.3 [cont.]

 

 

Unit Overall
Code DimensionsI mm Power
Deaig- Unit Decimal Height, Consump-
nation NumberI Type Unit Name Width Depth Height kg tion,KVA
K1 LYe2.33b.000.SP Transmission 230 128 182 3 --
metering unit '
K93 LYe2.735.000.5P Voltage metering 475 275 282 25 --
unit for P3
KPlO LYe2.735.001.SP Voltage metering 360 280 302 25 --
unit for P10
ATO-Z-aoo Converter 365 710 450 170 6.1
ATO-b-AOO Converter 518 716 587 280 7.6
PEN-1112 Single mains 248 174 396 10.5 --
starter
BEN-143l3 Voltage regula- 35k 146 302 13 --
tor block
-- 81-49 oscillo- 170 630 223 8.5 0.038
scope
-- Ta-431 volt-ohm- 110 205 80 1.5 -
milliammeter

__——_____—_————__————_—

The "Okean-H" radar operates in one or two bands (3 and 10 cm) and provides
for the following:

--Observation of the radar situation in a true or relative display mode on
a PPI screen, as well as the measurement of the polar coordinates of targets;

-—Automatic target tracking in a circular scan node at ranges of from 1 to
15 miles for a relative speed of from 0 to 60 knots with continuous feedout
of the current coordinates of the target (range and azimuth). The automatic
tracking is accomplished with preliminary manual lock-on to the selected
target;

--Automatic solution of the problem of passing a target being tracked with
the feedout of data on the range to the target, its speed and the time
to closest approach. Playing through the course or speed maneuvering or
both of these simultaneously makes it possible to come up with recommenda-
tions for safe passing.

The "Okean-M" navigation radar is a modernized version of the “0kean” naviga-
tion radar. It is manufactured and supplied in different equipment packages:
one and two band radars; with autotracking. true motion and computer systems,
as well as without them.

- 235 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

( 1) “Gamma. ”new. In!

N I“
:aa 413%.“

attnﬁ (4)
lynx-mun? suns (5

 

Key: 1. Designation of the cabinet or box of spare parts, tools and
accessories;
2. Weight, kg;
3. Number, pieces;
4. Rack cabinet;

5. Packing box.

The listing of the units incorporated in the "Okean-H" navigation radar com-
plement is given in Table 5.3.

Besides the indicated units, the radar complement also includes:

-—lnstallation set for assembling the 3 cm band antenna-waveguide channel
and the microwave cable for the 10 cm band radar;

--Sets of spare parts, tools and accessories for the radar (Table S.h) and
the power plant;

-The set of plug connectors for the interunit connecting cables;

--The set of operational documentation.

The "Okean-H" navigation radar equipment complement, which is manufactured in
complete sets, is listed in Table 5.5.

Any radar package is supplied with the power plant using the ship power mains

at 220/380 volta Ac and 50 Hz. A block diagram of the "Okean-H" navigation
radar is shown in Figure 5.9.

- 236 -

roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

£39.80: 9.3.50 1023003 233002500 :0 2 mm :25 .n
95 0095030 0:00 :0 we 9:030:00 3500003 van H8330 .«
0.25 :3 2:3 :0 o3 Houuaoo 3.0— .c Coins 00.500 2— "hov—

uavun 00.30330: :zéwoso: 05 no 5980.2. 0.00.:— .o.n 0.5m:

               

.ﬁi:

Jim—'H'MDOT’H'M
mm M

   

IMWWW
J00» 9022

  
    

  

U71? mm 'm"} I"

 

”
...Il.nll II N
I III Ell... II'IIIIIIS I o
“Mm“ﬂJ... 9. . __ ..:..........u. m w
. ..iL IQ. IWNI ..I. ﬁdv ' ADM I. n W
Illl. Hll‘l”.|l|i I“ R i: NR. E I. M 1
: .1;\_3:\ u H a .i. _:.__Wh;§!§ta§ In. .w

 

IIIII N a __ . ,i I..|.l Jlx gnu-:Eng

SC .22: ESE...»

 

        

2:25.33: 9399253., . . , . . .. .” .l..||.|...|:.||.l
IllllJﬂmlhl .. u , . . NH
$194.2. .5. as

.2355
HI. J. .99

a... 59...... .. $0.553 99.0.9.5- 9.9.9.909...
INF Mask. ..:...

.EE. -: - . w

.ill--l. 9m...» Bari.‘

nNnvzicEzt .3» 5 gate. S...
035.. 3:5»

 
  

       

 

3.0....

 

~237—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key [cont.]:

Key for Antenna Unit A3 [3-cm band antenna]:

P3 [3-cm

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY

3-cm microwave channel;
Control and metering;
Video signal;

Start P [transceiver];
Course marker;

Antenna angle;

Band-D;

Start 50 microseconds;
"Volga" markers;

Start 12 microseconds;
Start 2 "Volga";
Switching between indica-
tor units II and I2;
3-cm transmission moni-
toring;

Indicator 12 master;
CRT circuitry;

OR I orientation block;
Control console;
Synchronization;
Relative motion line,
true motion line, auto-
return;

Track, lock-on;
Metering, control;
Speed, course;
Metering, control;
Play-through [maneuver
simulation];

Relative motion line,
true motion line;
Indicator II is master;

VP I Rotating joint;

VTl I Rotating transformer 1;
VTZ I Rotating transformer 2;
Kontakt I Switch contact;

D I Motor;

KI3 . 3 cm band transmit monitor;

transceiver]:

PM I Submodulator;
MOD I Modulator;
PK . Power supply and metering block;
MI I Pulsed magnetron;
APCh I Automatic frequency control;
UPCh I Intermediate frequency amplifier;
PUPCh I IF preamplifier;
SVCh I Microwave circuitry;

- 238 -

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

38.
39.

40.
41.
42.
43.

44.

45.
66s
47.
‘8.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
S4.

55.

Track "Volga";

Antenna angle;

Rotating joint;

Motor;

Video signal (transmit);
"Volga" markers;

To indicator II, indicator I2,
transceiver P3, transceiver P10
and the computer V;

-27 volt rectifier;

True motion line, relative
motion line, autoreturn;
Start 50 microseconds;
Start 12 microseconds;
Power;

Power for the motor of the
3-cm antenna;

Power for the motor of the
lO-cm antenna;

Ship power main;

Start, signaling;

Power plant;

Band-D;

Turn on true motion;

ID I true motion block;
Metering and control;
Course stabilized;
Synchronization;
Play-through [maneuver simu-
lation];

Return.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [cont.]: KP3 - 3-cm band voltage metering unit;

[Unit V. the computer]:
PSL - Log speed converter;
PA - Automatic bearing (assembly);
RVV - Time delay relay;
OS - Signal processor
DA - Automatic range unit;
UK - Metering unit;
HSK - Course and speed maneuver assembly;

[Unit 10 - True motion circuitry]:
PKS - Speed and course converter;

IPS - Speed projection integrator.

The major technical and operational parameters of the "Okean-M" navigation
radar are given below:

The 0.7 probability detection range for the case
of an antenna mounted at a height of 15 m above
sea level, miles:

A shore line with a height of 6 to 60 m 10-22
A ship with a displacement of from 20 to 5,000

registered tons 6-13
Intermediate sea buoy at a wavelength of 3.2 cm 5.9
The same, for 10 cm 3.3

Minimum 0.7 probability detection range for an
antenna mounted at a height of S m above sea level
at a wavelength of 3 cm, no more than, in meters 50

The same, at a wavelength of 10 cm, no more than,
in meters 70

The range measurement precision, in percent of the

maximum range scale:
Using the moving range ring +1.0
Using the electronic cursor +2

The same. using the sutotracking system on a
straight line section, in m +25

The azimuth measurement precision in degrees:
At a wavelength of 3.2 cm il.0
At a wavelength of 10 cm il.0
With autotracking on a straight line segment 10.2

The range resolution for the case of a separate
observation probability of 0.7 using the 1 mile
scale, in m 15

The azimuth resolution, measured by the electronic
cursor, with a probability of 0.7 degrees, at a
wavelength of:

- 239 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.2 cm
10 cm

The course reading precision, in degrees:
Using the "K i’AK" scale of unit I [the indicator]
Using the course marker

Precision of the true motion indication (for equipment
sets with the computer or true motion unit):

With respect to course, degrees

With respect to speed, percent

Precision of the speed transmission from the log on
the "v :_Av" scale of the unit, in knots

Pulse modulation frequency, MHz:
In the 3.2 cm band
In the 10 cm band

The pulse power of the transmitter at the flange of
unit P [transceiver], in K", more than

Receiver sensitivity, in dB, on the following scales:
1, 2, 4 miles
8 - 66 miles

Pulse repetition rate, in Hz, on the following scales:
1, 2 miles
4 miles
8, 16, 32 miles
66 miles

Pulse width, in microseconds, no more than, on the
following scales:

1, 2 miles

4 miles

8, 16, 32 miles

66 miles

Intermediate frequency, in HE:

width of the directional pattern at the half power
level, for unit A, in degrees:

In the horizontal plane in the 3 cm band

The same, in the 10 cm band

In the vertical plane in the 3 and 10 cm bands

The same, for unit A3, in degrees:
In the horizontal plane
In the vertical plane

The same, for unit A10, in degrees:
In the horizontal plane
In the vertical plane
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The working diameter of the indicator screen, mm 600

Range scales (numerator) and the graduation interval

between the fixed range rings (denominator), in miles 1/0.25,
2/005, 4,1,
8/2, 16/4,

32/8, 64/16

Image scales on the screen of the indicator unit, on
the following scales:

1 mile 1:3,200
66 miles l:598,000
Antenna rotational speed, r.p.m. 16

The "Okean-H" navigation radar has the following specific features:

a) The "Okean-M" navigation radar is a two band radar (3.2 and 10 cm) with
separate slot antennas and standardized drives;

b) A standardized indicator (I) is used;
c) A true motion unit has been developed (ID);
6) Redundancy is provided for units A, P, and I;

e) The autotracking system with the true motion unit is placed in the computer
unit V and provides for radar operation in a true motion mode. The relative
and true motion lines (LOD and LID [respectively]) are reproduced on the CRT
screen. The problem of passing ships can be solved for the case of any stabi-
lization. The relative or absolute speeds are read out as well as the range
and closest approach time by means of moving range rings and time markers

on the relative and true motion lines;

f) The range readout precision using the moving range ring has been improved
and its circuitry has been simplified;

g) The operational stability of the transmitter has been improved through the
use of four probe pulse widths, as a function of the range scale:

h) The offset mode for the cursor sweep origin makes it possible to determine
the bearing from one target to another target and measure the distance between
them;

1) The phase sensitive rcctifiers of the indicator have been standardized;

1) An exhaust system has been developed for the transceiver units using a
single fan;

k) The ferrite isolaters of the switches for transceiver units P3 and P10 have
been standardized;

l) The image brightness of the PPI sweep has been stabilized when switching
range scales;

m) The reparability has been facilitated and the possibility of manufacturing
radar units has been improved through changes in their structural design;

- 21.1 -
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
.IIII|II||I|

             

    

.. ..x .=
.55. .2: .c.<

5125.33. _ a:

. . .. E
a... .325. a... ....= _.....e...............:..... n

8.9». _ £369... c5“

 

5. .3. .2 6:2

a)": .. _..:

 

.3....=8...== _..: _...u_.................. E:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.08.38. _ u...
c. 68:25 _ m...

8.08.95. . ”.5.

 

 

 

 

war
it

a... .ﬁnwﬁuc 3 3.....S.z.= e... .e.< a... 8.95.3.1:
.-
III ..mS .52.. 3” - I- i-- |.l|._- . -alll ..... l
:31... ....
a... SS =6...§.§.:.._. _..n.o§.3 _..... 83. E3"... .2... 9...... in _ Mugﬁgnha
_.- 22.4.4.7 ..- . . -.I. I _ - - I. .iul.l ll:-.|.|.|:
. . :elb.93.§._u= :36}. 953;: . . . . .. a .v. = as 82:85 3....
a... ..3..:.... ..hx...§.=.....:.= ......._..:..........= _ _ 85. as Z: s... a: .2 e...” 3.8...8...:....
. - . . . .. _. . . . .. . . 5. ..x .: can 9.68.8.2:
« a ﬂaking... 53.8.1»: _... Sci... _..... 8 S. as Z: a... .5. .2 a... 8.3.5:...
.3 $2.3... 1| ll iI ||u|zt§
: . . .. . . . .. . . 3. .: .5... . 8.... .. ..n.
a... QC .3 S... S... ...=.. _ _... 8.28 E: 8.. E. I: .5. .2 We .«u ﬁsh“
am m
VM m co.- 5. . 1a u
um. thaw” . Luna"? _..... .p................ s... .23.... ..um "ﬂak...
. I.” Iran-3.. .A-qwli ml“
3...“. E G. .3 3 . . .3 .

I
A

. " -DK°X one
- v

- 2102 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

        

         
 

   
         

.. .5. .«x ...

3n _ 3.?B.§..u< an

=ﬂ.§.§ «up... : ...—=4. m-U.
...... .2.
S. 5. .9. ... _

35.9.8.8...5:

    

    

damn-6.3.98.5: 5.315655

 

  

           

  

.<
.. .2519...
2: ...... .<

.. .. . . . . ... 3.3..nnoémz. $93.82;: .5
<9 .13 3.9.. Sodb§§ ”E. §.§¥.§._u:. Fa.

 

 

              

       

    

5.23.842... .9. .25. ...

   

      

   

= .3. —

3.6.8.23. E... _ a

 

  

           
       

 

       

       

        

      

 

 

 

           

   

    

     

         
     

.2... ...: :9..§.§..u: ...u~e.c€.§.....: 2.92.053: ... ......x .2: #468,325: 2.
n: 2.. .e<
.3... ...... 5. .9.
. .2: it: ., . . . . . . . . 4... ... ... .25.
5.. .. .. ~....... to: SH. 088.. .m: ....3368: ...: a. S. ...8 B: .5... .2:
.....3. ....E. a a. ...... .2
.. .8 Quit»... ca
38 :n.§.8a.n..: . ... .5. ....
...... :m...8.....8..m.: 5.868.833 ...S...§.z.: cans”... «......

 

 

          
     

    

    

C: .3. .2
.: 6:5. 6::
9.: .3. .<

   

32.8.23. .25 :n~b.§.§..w—s . a. 6.2 63.35.

 

   

         
       

     

    

  
     

e. ...
.... ...... .... .89.... .....8. .32.... . 8.8.68.5: ... .25. ......z 2:. 2.98.8...3 ...
. .. .5 So .: 8.. 2.. .5. .< ...... ......8...8.:.: ...

      

     
 

  

 

.-
8:. e... <98.9.8.§._m=~ 23L”? §.3_.o~b.vm:. «anxgohuzx .raN. 208,925.53 2
5l||l|l.llll .o.< .e<. E3” 9. 80.0.5.3: :—

 

    

      

55......2
.~.....zz:
.81...C._.<
a... c... ... $3.. ...
...... 3.12.»; It:

      

   

<03.?8.§. _ u: :5”: .50.§..m=~ a. 6.8.95.5: ....

...-18.3543:

 

 

  

 

 

 

        

 

 

           

.. A". .ulll||.|.lul~|w.. x

_ .... .

3.8.58.3: 3:... ...... 2...
a... .93. .5. ......

n 2.. ... ...

8.3.2.1.: .2: ...... ...... 9:.
5. .2< ...< i...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

misd— =95.§h..§. Zn: w..N¢.Q¥.§. . up... w“ ...ﬁgu.““ v"
.. .||I|.||I|||| mu m li|||.i.u|u.l
.m ..m 3...... ...“... ......
. ... :...h......... ......ﬁauﬁ... ...a ......ﬁ? ...... .23.... ...“... "sauna... .
n I. Ilsa-.... 3.85.2 m.“ A— %
as... a“: .3 E .3 . .3 3 . E

..IIIIII l'lll'll||l|lllll|ll|llllul

- 243 -
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Key to Table 5.5: 1. Equipment set number;

2. Decimal number of the radar station

3. Three-phase ship mains voltage, 50 Ba, volts

4. Equipment complement [units];

5. Installation set;

6. Spare parts, tools and accessories

7. Operational documentation

8. Power plant with start and regulating equipment, and
spare parts, tools and accessories

9. Power consumption from ship mains, KVA

10. Radar station weight. in kg

11. For ship power mains at 380 volts and 50 ﬁzz;

12. For ship power mains at 220 volts, 50 Hz:.

n) The radar has built in manual tolerance metering of the operability of
the assemblies, blocks and voltages of the transceivers;

o) The service life of the radar is 10 years; the operating life (operating
time until the ultimate status is reached) is 25,000 hours; the service life
between repairs is 5,000 hours.

Antennas

The antennas are intended for the directional transmission and reception of
microwave energy pulses with circular scanning.

Single hand (unit A3, the 3 cm band antenna and unit A10, the 10 cm band
antenna) as well as two band [unit A - two band antenna (3 and 10 cm)] antennas
are used in various radar equipment complements. The major technical para-
meters of the A3, A10 and A units are given below:

The sidelobe radiation level in the horizontal plane
relative to the main lobe on both sides of the main
lobe, in dB, no less then:

In a range of 5° in the 3 cm band for units A3 and A 24
In a range of 5° in the 10 cm band for units A10 and A 24
In a range of 15° in the 3 and 10 cm bands for units
A3, A10 and A 28
The voltage traveling wave ratio, no less than 0.5 '
Power mains for the motors of the antenna drives, three-
phase, 50 Hz, volts 220 or 380
Power consumption by the drive motors. in RV [sic], no
more than:
Unit A for a wind speed of up to 50 m/sec 1.5
Units A3 and A10 0.9
Power consumption from the ship mains by the heating
elements, in watts, no more than 80

- 246 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Each of the units A3, A10 and A consists of three major assemblies:

1. A slot radiator (two radiators in unit A);

2. A rotating microwave junction: a single channel type in units A3 and A10.
and a dual channel type in unit A;

3. The antenna rotation drive.

Units A3 and A10 take the form of slotted waveguide radiators. The directional
pattern in the horizontal plane is shaped by a system of slots in waveguide
sections. while it is shaped in the vertical plane by a horn. There are
adjustment bolts and inductive stubs on the back side of the horn of unit A3;
the position of the bolts and stubs is set when the antenna is set up at the
manufacturing plant and should not be disrupted during operation. There are
only adjustment bolts on the back side of unit A10. The polarization is
horizontal.

The rotating microwave junction is mounted on a bracket in the lower portion
of the drive housing and takes the form of a waveguide to coaxial junction of
a button or probe type.

The rotation drive for units A3, A10 and A consists of an electrical motor,
a reducer, a rotating microwave junction, transducers for the remote trans-
mission of the antenna rotation angle to the indicator and computer units
as well as a start sensor for the course marker generation channel in the
indicator units.

The antenna is rotated clockwise by an asynchronous three-phase motor through
a two stage reducer.

Power is delivered to the electric motor, depending on the equipment complement,
either through the starters of unit K2 (the two band equipment sets), or
through the starter of unit K1 (the one band equipment set).

There are two sine-cosine rotating transformers in the drives of units A3 and
A10 to produce the plan position indication sweep in indicator unit I as
well as the azimuth gates in unit V [the computer].

The magnetically controlled electrical contact actuates once every antenna
revolution, when the main transmission lobe matches the midline of the ship.

The heating elements and the ANTENNA DRIVE AND TRANSHIT switch are also
installed in the drive.

The heating elements are intended for heating the internal spaces of the drive
for the purpose of reducing humidity following long term downtimes of the

unit during the cold season of the year and under conditions of frequent
dewfall on the external surfaces of the ship.

- 265 -
FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ANTENNA DRIVE AND TRANSMIT switch serves to break the power circuit for
the electric motor of the drive and the heating elements, as well as the
interlocking in the power circuits for the high voltage rectifiers of units
P3 and P10 to prevent the possibility of transmitting microwave probe pulses
when performing repair and preventive maintenance work in the area of the
A3 and A10 antennas.

Unit A contains two 3 and 10 cm band radiators similar to the radiators of
units A3 and A10. The microwave power is fed to the radiators through a
dual channel rotating junction. The rotational drive for antenna A is
structurally similar to the drives for units A3 and A10. Pour sine-cosine
rotating transformers are located inside the drive for unit A to transmit
the antenna rotation angle to indicator units 11 and 12 as well as the
computer V. The function and structure of the electromagnetic contact is
the same as in units A3 and A10.

The radio frequency channels are intended for transmitting the microwave
power pulses from the transmitter to the antenna and the target return pulses
received by the antenna to the receiver.

Transceivers

The transceivers, units P3 and P10, are intended for generating and shaping
the microwave sounding pulses, as well as for the conversion and amplification
of the target returns and the transmission of the latter to the indicator

and to obtain target blips on the CRT screen, as well as to the computer unit
V to provide for the operation of the automatic target tracking channels.

The major technical characteristics of units P3 and P10 are given on page 179
and below:

The receiver intermediate frequency, MHz 60 + 2

Maximum amplitude of the receiver output pulse, in volts,
no more than 2.8 + 0.5

Pulse width at the receiver output on the l and 2 mile
range scales, in microseconds, no more than 0.35

Manual control range for the receiver gain, in dB, no
less than #0

Maximum time constant of the time A60 in microseconds,
no less than 100

Parameters of the negative triggering pulse incoming from
the indicator unit I:

Amplitude, volts 5 - 7
width, microseconds, no more than 1.5 i 0.5
Rise time. microseconds, no more than 0.2

Receiver bandwidth, in MHz, no less than, on the following
range scales:

- 246 -

ron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1, 2, 3 and 4 miles 12

8, 16 32 and 6h miles 6.5 1 1.5
Power consumption from the 220 volt, 400 Hz mains, in VA,
no more than 900

Each of the P3 and P10 units consists of the transmitter (Figure 5.10), the
complement of which includes the magnetron oscillator HI, the modulator
block MOD, the submodulator block PM, the high voltage rectifier for the
transmitter VVP, the power supply and metering block PK, and the receiver,
which contains the microwave assembly SVCh, the intermediate frequency pre-
amplifier PUPCh, the intermediate frequency amplifier UPCh, the automatic
frequency control block AFC, the metering and control block KU as well as
the blocks of power supply rectifiers.

Units P3 and P10 include a number of components which are installed in racks
and which are not included in the complement of the blocks enumerated above:
a storage capacitor and charging resistor for the transmitter, a receiver
protection discharger RZP, a ferrite isolator and switch, a block of emitter
followers BPS, etc.

The interconnections between the individual blocks is shown in Figure 5.10.

The "start transmitter" pulse is fed from the transmitter start generator
channel through the delay line of a block of emitter followers to trigger
the submodulator. A pulse with an amplitude of 1,000 volts and a width
corresponding to the range scale set in the indicator is generated in the
submodulator block.

The circuit of the block contains two channels:
1. The channel for generating the leading edge of the pulse;
2. The channel for generating the trailing edge.

The second channel is triggered through a delay line as a function of the
range scale. Each of the channels consists of a blocking oscillator (the
right half of a 6N1P-Yev vacuum tube) with a trigger amplifier (the left half
of the indicated tube). The output pulses of the blocking oscillators are
fed through cathode followers (a 6NlP-YeV vacuum tube) to the trigger ampli-
fier (the right half of a 6GHI-6 tube) and a TCIl-35/3 thyratron respectively.
The leading edge of the output blocking oscillator pulse (the left half of
the CHI-6 vacuum tube) coincides with the start of the first channel pulse,
while the trailing edge coincides with the start of the second channel
blocking oscillator pulse,‘and the width of the output pulse is governed by
the delay of the second channel start in the second delay line. The relays
which are controlled from the indicator switch this delay.

The pulse generated by the submodulator block is fed to the modulator block
MOD, which uses a CHI-7 tube. The cutoff modulator is first turned on and
the storage capacitor of the high voltage rectifier, the VVP, is connected to

- 247 -
FOR OFFICIAL' USE ONLY
INJR‘OFIWCJAl.lEﬂ£1)hﬂUY

(l) -'
Coupler Xhit to antenna

— 1M . .
m — wintry: " ""‘"' ' '
QB ‘— """”Receive '

I'm}.- -:..'. a.- '
9r». :1:

ﬁ Transmitter
/

I ' 'J-ﬂ'xﬂr ..
'1'
”V (12) (13)

Figure 5.10. Block diagram of transceiver units P3 and P10.

Key: 1. KP3 (KPlO) - units for monitoring the 3 cm (or 10 cm)
band voltage;

2. Protective discharger for the receiver;
3. Shutter;

k. I? amplifier mixer;

5. AFC mixer;

6. SVCh3 (or SVCth) [3 cm (or 10 cm) microwave circuitry];
7. Mixer currents;

8. Magnetron oscillator;

9. Magnetron oscillator current;

10. Modulator;

11. Submodulator;

12. Submodulator metering;

13. Power supplies;

14. Rectifier blocks;

15. AFC;

16. IF preamplifier;

17. IF amplifier;

18. 16 RV metering;

19. High voltage power supply;
20. Submodulator start;

 

 

   

- 248 -
FOR<OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [cont.]: 21. Emitter followers;
22. Triggering;
23. Time A60 l;
21.. Start transceiver;
25. To the indicator;
26. Oscillator;
27. Metering and control unit.

the magnetron. The width of the microwave pulse generated by the magnetron is
governed by the width of the subjodulator pulse.

In the intervals between pulses, the storage capacitor is charged by the VVP
block (16 KV).

The microwave pulses from the magnetron are fed through a directional coupler
to a ferrite TRANSMIT-RECBIVE isolator, which routes them through the radio-
frequency channel to the antenna.

The directional coupler is intended for transmitting part of the transmitter
power to the automatic frequency control system, the AFC, of the receiver.

The ferrite isolator-switch provides for the operation of the receiver

and transmitter using one antenna, and also protects the magnetron against
high power pulses reflected from ship structures and inhomogeneities in the
radiofrequency channel. The switch consists of a ferrite section with a
slotted bridge and a twin tee with a load.

The magnetron power incoming to unit P3 (or P10) is estimated based on the
width of the return signals from a tunable echo chamber of unit KP3 (or KPlO),
which are observed in the form of a flare spot on the indicator screen.

The radial line of the flare characterizes the power potential of the trans-
ceiver. It increases with an increase in the transmitter power or receiver
sensitivity. The signal received by the antenna is fed through the microwave
channel, the ferrite isolator, and the receiver protection discharger to the
microwave block (SVCh3, SVCth) of the receiver.

The gas discharger (RR-83N-T for SVCh3 and RR-OP-7 for SVCth) serves for
additional attenuation of the probe pulse power which leaks through the
slotted bridge of the ferrite switch into the receiver. This pulse can
cause the receiver mixer diode to fail.

The transmitter is powered from a high voltage rectifier, the VVP, and the
three power supplies of block PK.

The high voltage power supply, in addition to the high voltage rectifier,
contains protective and voltage switching and adjustment components.

The VN-1500-0.025 rectifier block is designed as a doubler. It supplies the
plates of the output blocking oscillator tube in the PH [submodulstor] block
and the screen grid of the CHI-7 tube in the modulator block.

- 249 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The block of VN-800-0.01 and VE:250(110)-0.01 rectifiers power the tubes of
the submodulator stage and supply bias to the control grid of the modulator»

There are test jacks for checking the pulse parameters and measuring the volt-
ages in the transmitter blocks, and provisions are also made for metering the

operation of the transmitter using meters in the KB [metering and control
block] and PK [power supplies] blocks.

The SVChJ (SVChIO) block serves for converting the received SVCh [microwave]
pulses to the intermediate frequency, as well as for protecting the mixer
diodes Sm against the high power signals incoming to the receiver input from
other radars when the station is turned off.

Block SVCh3 consists of the following major assemblies: the electromagnetic
shutter, the K-714 klystron, the intermediate frequency amplifier mixer using
D4053 diodes, the AFC mixer using DAOSV diodes, a slotted bridge, and an
attenuator with a splitter and a block of slotted bridges.

The electromagnetic shutter covers the waveguide channel of the receiver when
the radar is shut down, and when the radar is turned on, it opens the channel
up and passes all of the received signals without attenuation. The shutter
takes the form of a waveguide section with a cross section of 23x10 [Ill],

in the wide wall of which there is an electromagnet with a core. When the
radar is turned on, a voltage of 27 volts is applied to the electromagnet,

the core pulls in and opens the waveguide. At the moment the radar is cut off,
the electromagnet is de-energized and releases the core, which is pushed into
the waveguide by a spring and covers it.

A klystron with an internal resonator and a waveguide output with a cross
section of 23 x 10 [mm] is used as the local oscillator. The frequency of
the klystron is tuned after it is replaced or the magnetron is replaced by
means of mechanically tuning the klystron resonator.

Tuning the frequency in a range of 20 to 30 NH: during operation is accomplished
by changing the voltage applied to the reflector. The operability of the

local oscillator is checked based on the mixer diodes and resonator currents

at the control and metering panel.

Three variable attenuators are used in block SVCh3, one of which is inserted
in the channel for splitting off the probe pulse power to the AFC mixer.
while the two others are inserted in the channels for splitting off the local
oscillator power to the Arc and IF amplifier mixers. The attenuators provide
for the attenuation of the power in a range of 1 to 25 d8.

There are two mixers in block SVCh3, one of which converts the microwave
signals received by the antenna to the intermediate frequency, which is fed
to the IF preamplifier, while the other converts the transmitter signals

which are split off to the intermediate frequency for the operation of the
AFC block.

- 250 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Block SVCth consists of the following major assemblies: the klystron local
oscillator, the blocks of attenuators, and the mixers of the APC and IF ampli-
fier channels. There is no magnetic shutter in the SVCth block. Its functim
is performed by a diode limiter in the protective device for the receiver,
which is located after the discharger and which considerably attenuates the
influence of external signals.

The mixers of block SVCth which are designed around D408 and 0408? diodes
perform the same functions as those in the SVCh3 block. A klystron with an
external toroidal rescnator is used as the local oscillator. The local oscil-
lator frequency is changed by means of changing a contact stub in the
resonator cavity, while the frequency is tuned during operation by changing
the voltage applied to the reflector.

The variable IF AMPLIFIER MIXER CURRENT, AFC MIXER CURRENT and AFC SIGNAL
LEVEL attenuators regulate the power level fed from the local oscillator to
the AFC and IF amplifier mixers respectively as well as the level of the
probe pulse power split off to the AFC channel.

The intermediate frequency amplifiers (PUPCh [IF preamplifier] and UPCh [IF
amplifier]) amplify the received signal. The most important characteristics
of the IF amplifier and preamplifier channels are given below:

The Intermediate Frequency Preamplifier, PUPCh

Bandwidth at the 3 dB level, in MHz, for the following
range scales:
8 to 64 miles 4 + l
l, 2, and 4 miles 18 :_3.0

Center frequency of the passband. in MHz. on the
following range scales:

1 to 5 miles 60 i 2

8 to 64 miles 60 t 0.7
Gain. in dB, no less than 17
Time constant of the time ACC, in microseconds 0.3 to 7(
Current consumption, in mA, no more than. for the .
following circuits:

+50 volts #0

—12.6 volts 30
Intermediate Frequency Amplifier, UPCh
Bandwidth at the 3 dB level, in MHz 14 t'Z
Center frequency of the passband, MM: 60 :.l.5
Gain, in dB. no less than 10
Input signal range, in dB 40

- 251 -

FORlOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR_OFTWC1A1.USE1NNLY

Maximum amplitude of the output signal, in volts,

no more than . 2
Maximum level of the echo chamber signal, volts 0.6 i 0.1
Current consumption, in mA, no more than 70

The intermediate frequency channel as a whole is characterized by the following
main electrical specifications:

Center frequency, MHz 60
Bandwidth, in MHz, on the following range scales:

1 to 6 miles. no less than 12

8 to 64 miles,\no more than 6
The gain when receiving weak signals, in dB, no less than 80
Output signal polarity Negative
Maximum amplitude, in volts, no less than:

0f the signal 2.0

Of the noise 0.3
Gain control Manual, and

' Time AGO

The signals from the output of the mixer are fed to the input of the intermediate
frequency preamplifier, which is designed for time A60.

The first stage is designed around a low noise 6SSlN-V triode. The remaining
three stages are designed around radiofrequency 6Zh453-V pentodes. A provision
is made for changing the bandwidth when switching range scales.

The gain of the IF preamplifier is adjusted by means of a time automatic gain
control circuit (VARU) [time A00]. The time A00 voltage (negative) blocks

the receive channel during the time of probe pulse transmission (leak-through)
as well as during reflections from inhomogeneities in the waveguide-antenna
channel. In the subsequent time period, the amplitude and waveform of the time
ABC voltage is changed so that the level of sea clutter at the output of the
receive channel is compared to the internal noise level. The time AGC gene-
rator circuit consists of amplifiers for triggering the time AGC, designed
around 1T308V transistors, two blocking oscillators designed around lT308V
transistors and an OR gate also using lT308V transistors.

The time ADC voltage is obtained as a result of mixing the time A00 I and time
AGC'IIpulses in the OR gate. The time AGc I pulse reduces the receiver gain
during the time the probe pulse acts as well as the primary reflection from
the inhomogeneities of the antenna and the rsdiofrequency channel.

The time AGC II pulse varies the receiver gain with time in accordance with
an exponential law from a minimum value up to the nominal value in the zone
of exposure to reflections from sea waves.

- 252 -
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE1DNLY
FOR!DFFKJA1.LE“EONLN

The eight stage main intermediate frequency amplifier, which is designed

around 6Zh658-V vacuum tubes is intended for manual gain control of the

signals at the intermediate frequency as well as the detection and transmission
of these signals to the indicator.

Dual and single resonant circuit section bandpass filters are used in the
amplifier between the stages.

The amplified signal is detected by means of a 018 diode, amplified by a
video detector designed around a 2T6023 transistor and fed through the emitter
followers of unit K2 (or Kl) to the indicator.

In the two band radar set, the video signals are switched from units P3 and
P10 between indicators 11 and 12 in unit K2.

Manual gain control is provided by feeding a voltage of -12.6 volts to the
control grids of the first three stages of the main intermediate frequency
amplifier in the I? amplifier block either from the CAIN potentiometer in the
intermediate frequency block of unit I [the indicator] in the "operate" mode,
or from the GAIN potentiometer in the Ku block of unit P3 (or P10) in the
"check" node.

In the two band radar sets, the switching of the gain control circuits of
units P3 and P10 between units 11 and 12 is accomplished in unit K2.

The automatic and manual frequency tuning channel, the APCh-RPCh (see Figure
5.8), is intended for maintaining the difference between the frequency gene-
rated by the klystron and the magnetron equal to the intermediate frequency

of the receiver. This is accomplished by tuning the klystron frequency

through changing the voltage applied to its reflector by either the manual
frequency control, RPCh ("RPCh" mode) or automatically (the "APCh" [AFC] mode).

The AFC--manual frequency control channel contains the AFC block, the AFC
mixer of block SVCh3 (or SVCth) and the control and metering elements in
block P3 (or P10) as well as the elements in block PU [indicator control panel]
of indicator unit I.

The AFC block consists of a four stage intermediate frequency amplifier using
6ZhbSB-V vacuum tubes, a discriminator designed around a 6Kh7B-V vacuum tube,
a video amplifier using a 6Zh9C-V tube, a peak detector, a DC amplifier and
search oscillator using a 6Zh103—V tube and an output cathode follower.

The major technical specifications of the AFC block are given below:

Discriminate: frequency response:

Spacing between maxima, MHz 10 :_2
Zero, MHz 0.5 1 0.7
Slope, volt/MHz, no less than 70

- 253 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sawtooth search voltage:
Peak-to-peak, in volts, no less than 20
Range, microseconds 0.6 i 0.10
The AFC block provides for the following operating modes:
a) Automatic search for the magnetron frequency;
b) Tracking the magnetron frequency;

c) Manual frequency control for the klystron, accomplished from the indicator
control panel of the indicator unit I or block KB [metering and control unit].

 

TABLE 2:6

Deviation of the

Voltage from the

Nominal Value when Anplitude of the

the Mains Voltage Alternating Compo-

Changes by 3;; or nent of the Output
Rectifier when the Load Current Voltage, Volts,
Designation Drops to ZeroI Volts No More Than Remarks
VS 1 300-0.05 i 0.6 0.06 —
VS-300(-255)-
0.05 i 0.6 0.06 300 volts for P3
VS—12.S-0.025 i_0.6 0.05 255 volts for P10
VS-50-0.25 :.0.25 0.01 --
VN-12.6-0.08 -- 0.01 -

 

 

The switching of the AFC--HANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL modes is accomplished in
the AFC block, which is controlled in the "Check" mode by the TUNE AFC--
MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL toggle switch, which is located in the metering and
control unit of unit P3 (or 910). or in the "Operate" mode by the AFC-HANUAL
FREQUENCY CONTROL toggle switch, which is located in the indicator control

panel of indicator I.

In the two-band radar sets, the switching of the control circuits for the
AFC--HANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL channels of units P3 and P10 between indicators
11 and 12 is accomplished in unit K2 using the "3-11-10", "3-12-10" and

"Il-master-IZ" signals.

The receiver is powered by the following blocks: V$1300-0.05, V8-300(255)-0.05;
VS-12.S-0.025; VS-50-0.25; VN-12.6-0.08.

The main technical specifications for the power supplies are given in Table 5.6.

The rectifiers of the VS:§00-0.05, VS-300(255)-0.05 and VS-12.5-0.025 blocks
power the klystron, the manual frequency control circuits and the output

stages of the AFC block.

-254-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The VS-50-0.25 and VN-12.6-0.08 blocks supply the plate circuits and screen
grid circuits of the IF amplifier and preamplifier blocks as well as‘the
intermediate frequency amplifier of the AFC block, the time AGC circuitry
and the video amplifier of the IF amplifier block. This same block supplies
the 6.3 volts at 500 Hz for the filament circuits of the IF preamplifier,

IF amplifier and AFC block vacuum tubes.

The receiver can be metered in its blocks through sockets and contacts intended
for checking the pulse and voltage parameters.

A provision in made for built-in metering of the operational mode using a
meter in the monitor and control block, KU. The monitor and control block of
P3 (and P10) includes a meter, switches for the circuits being checked, and
controls for the unit. The monitor and control block is intended for measuring
the voltages of the rectifiers. the receiver detector in the IF amplifier
block, the amplitude of the time AGC pulse. the currents of the APC and IF

amplifier mixer diodes, as well as the current consumption of the IP amplifier
and AFC blocks.

The power potential of the transceiver is monitored based on the pulse width
of the signals from the tunable echo chamber of unit RPS (or KPlO), which
are observed as a flare trace on the screen of the indicator unit I. The
power potential metering channel includes the KP3 (or KPlO) unit and the
ECHO--CHAMBER toggle switch which is located on the indicator control panel
of the indicator unit I.

 

TABLE 2;]

Values of the Parameter
Parameter Designation Unit KP3 Unit KPlO
Echo chamber sensitivity, dB/usec 7.5 4.8
Working band of frequencies. MHz 9,400-9,460 3,030-3,090
Electromechanical tuning range, MHz 35-60 35-40
Electromechanical tuning period, seconds l6 16

Frequency readout error. ““2. no more
than 5 S

 

Note: The indicated parameters of the units apply to any frequency in the
working band.

Unit KP3 (or KPlO) consists of an echo chamber and a mechanical tuning assem-
bly (NPR). The major technical specifications of the RPS and KPlO units are
given in Table 5.7.

The echo chamber of the unit consists of a volumetric resonator with a tuning
piston, a detector section with a microammeter and a plotting board with a
graduated frequency graph.

- 255 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR!JFFNJAI.USEIOhﬂN

The mechanical tuning assembly of unit KP3 (or KPlO) provides for the follow-

ing:

--Automatically tuning the resonator off of the transmitter frequency follow-
ing the completion of operation;

—-Continuous manual tuning of the resonator by means of reading the tuning
frequency;

—-Continuous automatic tuning of the resonator in a range of 30 to 40 MHz.

The mechanical tuning assembly consists of an electric motor, a reducer with
two graduated scales and the TUNING control, the OPERATE--OP?--HAICBING toggle
switch for echo chamber control and the HATCHED signal display. Power is

fed to the mechanical tuning assembly after the BCRO-CBAHBBR toggle switch is
thrown on the indicator control panel of indicator unit I. ‘

__—_—._

 

Figure 5.11. External view of units P3 and KP3 (a), and P10 and

KPlO (b).
Key: 1. Submodulator block; 7. IF preamplifier, 1P ampli-

2. Modulator block; fier and AFC blocks;

3. Power supply and 8. Mixers;
metering block; 9. Receiver power supplies;

a. Block of emitter 10. KP unit [test unit consist-
followers; ing of echo chamber and

5. High voltage rectifier; mechanical tuning assem-

6. Magnetron compartment; bly];

11. Metering and control block.

The resonator of the echo chamber is tuned manually by the TUNING control in
the mechanical tuning assembly of unit KP3 (or KPlO) to the transmitter

- 256 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

frequency, based on the maximum deflection of the microammeter needle of the
tuning indicator.

In the case of remote tuning from indicator unit I, the chamber is tuned
automatically in a range of 30 to 40 MHz around the carrier frequency of the
transmitter. The power potential is estimated based on the maximum flare
spot on the PPI screen.

The transmitter frequency is measured from readings on the echo chamber scale,
which is tuned to this frequency by means of the graphs.

The echo chamber can be used to tune the klystron.

The power potential of the radar is monitored based on the length of the flare
(in miles) on the CRT of indicator unit I in the AFC mode. The nominal flare
length for each radar set is written in the data sheet. The duration of the
echo signal usually falls in a range of 11 to 17 usec for P3 and 17 to 25 usec
for P10.

The structural features of units P3 (or P10) and KP3 (or KPlO) are shown in
Figure 5.11. The blocks of the units are housed in a welded cabinet, which
is divided by a horizontal partition. The receiver units are housed in the
upper compartments of the cabinet, while the transmitter is housed in the
lower ones.

The major electronic blocks of unit P3 (and P10) are made in the form of box
chassis, within which the electrical circuitry is concentrated.

The Indicator (Unit I)
The indicator performs the following functions:

a) Generation of the signals which synchronize radar operation;

b) Generation of the image of the radar situation based on the information
received from the transceivers, antennas, gyrocompass and log;

c) Display of the reSJlts of solving a collision avoidance problem, performed
by the computer;

d) Operational control and metering of the station.

The major technical specifications of the indicator unit are given on page
179 and below:

Range sweep and PPI cursor nonlinearity, in percent,

of the greatest range of a band. no more than S

Angular error in the PP! cursor and range sweep, in

degrees, no more than 1.0
- 257 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hutual angular error in the cursor and range sweeps
within limits of three-fourths of the PPI radius,

in degrees, no more than 0.7
Error in the moving range ring, percent of the
greatest range of a band, no more than 1.0
Parameters of the transmitter triggering pulse:
Amplitude, in volts, no less than 5 -
Polarity Negative
Width, microseconds 1.5 i_0.5
Repetition rate, in Hz, on the following range scales:
1 and 2 miles 3,500
a miles 1,700
8, l6 and 32 miles 850
64 miles 425
Video signal:
Bandwidth, MHz, no less than 1‘
Amplitude, in volts, no more than 2
Effective noise voltage, in volts, no less than 0.3
Polarity Negative

Power consumption from the 220 volt, 400 Hz mains, in
VA. no more than 570

The indicator unit 12 consists of the tube block TR, the orientation block OR
and the control panel PU (see Figure 5.9). '

The tube block contains the following: the synchronizer which generates the
signals which provide for the operational modes of the radars (13 assemblies);
the scale chokes assembly (HDR), which incorporates a discharge network and
scale chokes for the cursor and range sweep; four phase sensitive rectifiers
of the generator channels and two rectifiers for the shifting of the cursor
sweep and main sweep; two switched amplifier assemblies (UKR) of the cursor
and range sweep tracking and generating channels; range (D) and bearing angles
(P) for manual control of the electronic cursor; two blocks of Vﬂil2.6-1.5,

VN120-2.S. VR1125-0.4 and VVI-lS KV rectifiers for powering the CRT of the
indicator unit.

The orientation block 0R incorporates the electromechanical cursor and range
sweep stabilization and orientation elements, as well as the controls for
units P3 (or P10), the computer and the true motion unit.

The control panel PU contains the radar operating controls and the built-in
metering elements.

The sync signals control the transmitter and indicator operating modes and are
generated in the crystal controlled oscillator assembly (GKCh), in three pulse
frequency divider assemblies (DChI), two sweep pulse generator assemblies

(FIR); a phasing pulse generating assembly (PIS), an advanced start generating

- 258 -

INJR OWTWCJAL USEZCNHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

assenbly (FUS), a cursor shift and advance assembly (USV). a brightening ampli-
fier assembly (USP), a video amplifier assembly (VUS), a coarse range readout
assembly (GOD) and a precise readout assembly (TOD).

The layout of the indicator I1 controls is shown in Figure 5.12.

    

6 7 09

ill "12 1.!

Figure 5.12. The layout of the controls of indicator 11.

Key:

10.
11.

12.

M 37 J6 35 39 J.) J2

CROSS LINES control; 13.
. AK control; 14.

K + AK scale;

OPERATE--OFP toggle 15.

switch; 16.

AK ENTERED display

light; 17.
. OPERATE display light; 18.
. LOCK-0N display light; 19.

TRACK display light; 20.
. PROBLEM SOLVED display

light;

RELATIVE MOTION LINE

display light;

TRUE MOTION LINE dis-

play light;

SIMULATION display

light; 21.

- 259 -
FOR OFFICIAL Us: ONLY

TRUE MOTION display light;
TRUE MOTION--V [computer]
switch;

Av ENTERED display light;
TRUE MOTION RETURN toggle
switch;

v + Av scale;

VOLCA control;

Av control;

l/O.25, 2/0.S, 4/1, 8/2,
16/4, 32/8 and 64/16 dis-
play lights, which signal
that the range scale is
turned on, and the NORTH--
COURSE STABILIZED display
light for the kind of
orientation;

BAND-D switch;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [cont.]: 22. MILE scale; 36. "2" check switch;
23, 24, 25. FIXED RANGE RING, MOVING 37. "1" check switch;
RANGE RING, CURSOR controls; 38. MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTRO --
26. CURSOR SHIPT--CURSOR--CENTER AFC toggle switch;
SHIFT toggle switch; 39. MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL
27. RANGE control; control;
28. ILLUMINATION 2 control; 40. "1" illumination control;
29. PRECIPITATION control; 41. BEARING control;
30. PRECIPITATION--0FF control; 42. NORTH--(XJURSE-COURSE
31. "4" check switch; STABILIZED toggle switch;
32. GAIN control; 43, Mo, 65. BRIGHTNESS, FOCUS, COURSE
33. "3" check switch; MARKER controls;
34. Test meter; 46. ECHO CHAMBER toggle switch.

35. SEA CUJTTER control;

The elements for generating the visible image in the indicator unit can be
functionally combined in several channels:

The channel for generating the reference voltages provides for the timewise
tying together of all of the processes in the radar. Included in it are the
following blocks: the crystal oscillator, DChIl [pulse frequency divider l],
DChIZ, DChI3. PIS [phasing pulse generator], FIR-D [sweep pulse generator for
the range] and the FIR—V [sweep pulse generator for the cursor]. The channel
for generating the range sweep brightening and width pulses generates the
range sweep width pulses for controlling the switches of the UKR-D assembly
[switched amplifier for the range circuitry] to generate the forward range
sweep trace pulse and the course marker in the brightness amplifier assembly.
The channel is designed around the components of the range sweep pulse genera-
tor circuitry.

The channel for generating the cursor sweep brightening and width pulses feeds
out the pulses for controlling the switches of the cursor and the generation

of the cursor forward trace brightening pulse. The channel is designed around
the components of the range sweep pulse generator and brightness amplifier
circuits. The channel for generating the range sweep, RD. provides for the
generation of the main plan position sweep. It incorporates components of
units A (A3 and A10), the CRT blocks and the orientation block of indicator unit
I.

The cursor sweep generating channel generates the cursor sweep after the com-
pletion of the main sweep at the pulse repetition rate on the 1 to 16 mile
range scales and incorporates the components of the tube, orientation and
control panel blocks of indicator unit I. The principle for the generation
of the cursor and range sweeps in the "Okean-M" radar is similar to that in
the "Okean" radar.

In equipment sets with unit V [the computer]. the cursor sweep generator channel
is used to reproduce the relative or true motion lines on the CRT screen. The
channel for shifting the range sweep center and the cursor sweep center provides

- 260 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the simultaneous manual shifting of the centers of the range and cursor
sweeps. The channel is also used for the simultaneous automatic shifting

of the sweep centers in the "True Notion" mode and for the automatic shifting
of the cursor sweep center with a stationary range sweep in the "Relative
Motion Line", "True Motion Line" and "Simulation" modes. The channel for
shifting the range and cursor sweep centers incorporates components of the
control panel, orientation and CRT blocks of indicator unit I.

The channel for generating the cursor sweep shift pulses and advanced starts
produces the pulses for controlling the displacement of the cursor sweep in
the case of an unshifted range sweep, for the generation of the phasing pulse
in the SIU [7phasing pulse generator?] of the orientation block of the computer
unit, for the control of an interfaced "Ladoga" electronic indicator (EIS)

and "Volga" fishing fleet radio coordinator, as well as for the control of the
precision delay of the moving range ring generator channel. The channel
includes USV [cursor shift and advance] and PUS [advanced start generator]
assemblies.

The channel for generating the pulses to trigger the transmitter and the time
AGC circuitry produces the time Acc and "Start P" transmitter triggering
pulses at a zero start pulse repetition rate and incorporates the components
of the FIS [phasing pulse generator] assembly.

The course marker generator channel generates the "Course Marker Brightening"
pulse train once every revolution of the antenna when the direction of radia-
tion of the antenna coincides with the midline of the ship. The channel is
composed of elements located in the antenna units (A3 and A10) and in the
brightening amplifier assembly.

The brightening pulse amplifier channel (USP assembly) is intended for mixing
and azplifying the pulses incoming to the cathode of the CRT to brighten the
range sweep, the cursor sweep or the To markers of the computer unit and the
course marker.

The moving range ring generation channel produces a pulse, which following
amplification and inversion in the video amplifier, is fed to the CRT modula-
tor and is observed on the cursor and range sweep.

The moving range ring pulses are generated by a dual readout device. which
incorporates components of the indicator control panel as well as the D [range],
TOD [precise range readout]. GOD [coarse range readout] and VUS [video ampli-
fier] assemblies, an electromechanical contactless phase shifter with phasing
elements, as well as a potentiometer with scaling resistors of the range
assembly of the CRT block.

The dual readout device consists of the precise range readout circuitry using
the phase shifter of the range assembly and the coarse range readout circuitry
with the potentiometer delay of the COD assembly. The fixed range ring
generator channel produces range calibrated pulses for the approximate

_ 261 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0R1OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

measurement of distances on the CRT screen. The channel incorporates elements

of the intermediate frequency block as well as the PChI [expansion unknown] and
video amplifier assembly.

The video amplifier (the VUS assembly) is intended for amplifying the video
signals from the receiver of unit P3 (or P10), the fixed and moving range ring
marker pulses, the cross-lines where a computer unit is present as well as

the markers for a "Volga" radio coordinator which is interfaced to the radar.
The amplifier output is connected to the CRT modulator.

The power supply and control channel for the cathode ray tube includes the
controls and power supplies for the tube assembly block and the indicator
control panel.

Five blocks with unregulated rectifiers located in the CRT block are used to
power the blocks of the indicator unit: two VN:l2.6-l.5 power blocks, a
VN+20-2.S block, a VI+125-0.4 block and a VVI-lS KV block. Their technical
specifications are given in Table 5.8.

TABLE 5 8

 

 

I Voltag—eTvolts 111......” ucpcmson
nasal-venue sump-mavens Ilsupsmeuse. I muses-menus“: to
ctifior Design tion '“""'"" ' "

 

 

 

mm- 12.5.1.5 [2.61: m 0.05
ml.|;20-2.5 203.2 0,0!
m I: 1210.4 125,, 12.5 :1

l251—I2.5 0,!

sums. nu Isfoot‘lgoo Ii;
1w ”5:... —
" ~10 I.5

—— _—————-___—__—'———_

 

Key: 1. Amplitude of the alternating component of the output voltage,
in volts, no more than.

The operation of the indicator unit I and its assemblies is monitored by means
of jacks for checking the parameters of the supply voltages and pulses. A
provision is also made for monitoring the operating modes of the indicator

and transceiver units using a meter in the indicator control panel block by
means of four monitor switches in this block. The operability of the trans-
ceiver is checked by means of the "1" monitor switch.

The values of the supply voltages for the indicator unit are checked in posi-
tion "2" of the monitor switch; in position "3", the operability of the major
assemblies of the indicator is checked by measuring the DC component of the
pulses and voltages; in position "4", the switched amplifier and FChV [expan-
sion unknown] assemblies of the channels for generating and shifting the
center of the range and cursor sweeps.

- 262 —
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The blocks and assemblies of indicator unit I are structurally located on three
major support components of the chassis: the rack, which swings out below the
CRT block and which opens above the indicator control panel. The electro-

mechanical block of the orientation unit is mounted on the upper platform of
the rack.

All of the electrical connections between the blocks and assemblies are made
by means of plug connectors.

The true motion unit is intended for realizing the "True Motion" and "True
Motion Simulation" modes in radar equipment sets without the computer unit.

on the 1 to 8 mile range scales and where the "North" and "Course Stabilized"
image orientation is set.

The true motion unit performs the following functions:

a) It generates the voltages for moving the center of the range and cursor
sweeps on the CRT screen of the indicator unit in the direction of the heading
and at a speed proportional to the ship's speed based on the data from the

log and gyrocompass;

b) It generates the return signal for the reorientation of the image on the
CRT screen;

c) Generates the voltage for the initial shift of the sweep center vertically
downward based on the return signal when the "Course Stabilized" orientation

is set, or shifts it in a direction opposite to the course, when the "North"

orientation is set;

d) Provides for working out the maneuver for safe passage of oncoming ships
using the simulation method.

The basic technical specifications of the true motion unit are:

--The error in generating the speed components does not exceed 11 of the
maximum value;

-The error in generating the course components does not exceed 1°;

--Thc radius of the circle delineating the reorientation boundaries amounts
to 0.5 + 0.05 of the radius of the CRT screen.

The true motion unit takes the form of an electromechanical computer, composed
of assemblies and components of the computer unit V. which realize the "True
Motion" mode. The following assemblies are incorporated in it: PKS - the
speed and course conversion unit; the IPS - two speed projection integrators;
the ASI - the unit for automatically resetting the integrators. Also included
in the unit are two UI-16A amplifiers and a number of other components.

In the single band equipment sets, the true motion unit is connected directly
to the indicator. in the two band equipment sets without the K3 unit, the
true motion unit is connected directly to indicator I1. "here unit K3 is pre-
sent. it is possible to switch the true motion unit between indicator units 11
and 12.

- 263 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. The speed and course converter converts the data from the log and gyrocompass
concerning the speed vector from polar coordinates to cartesian coordinates
(the axis of the initial course K, i.e., the vertical axis of the CRT screen,
and the axis perpendicular to it), by means of a sine-cosine rotating trans-
former coordinator and scales the result by means of “VT [2scaling rotating
transformersY].

The integrator assembly converts the speed projection on the indicated axes
to voltages proportional to the route components. These voltages shift the
sweep origin in the direction and at a rate proportional to the speed of the
ship itself by means of shifting coils.

The automatic integrator reset unit generates the RETURN signal for the auto-
matic reorientation of the image when the center of the sweep intersects the
boundaries of a circle having a radius equal to half of the CRT screen radius
in a direction opposite to the course (the "North" mode) or vertically down-
ward (the "Course Stabilized" mode).

The image reorientation can also be accomplished manually.

The simulation of a maneuver is accomplished with a relative motion of the
target blips using the components which effect the "True Motion" mode, and
for this reason, the mode is called "True Motion Simulation".

Because of the persistence of the phosphor, traces of the relative motion of
targets can be seen on the screen, which make it possible to determine the
relative motion line. In the case of a dangerous relative motion line, the
navigator using the entry controls for AK and Av changes the relative motion
line so as to determine a safe maneuver.

The true motion unit is constructed in a spray proof variant in a cast silumin
housing.

Unit K1 is incorporated in the complement of single band radar sets and is
intended for the following: turning the power plant on and off as well as the
drive motor for the antenna A3 (A10), unit P3 (or P10) and the computer indi-
cator; feeding a voltage of -27 volts to the radar units, which powers the
connecting elements, as well as a voltage of 24 volts at 50 Hz for a soldering
iron and a lamp, for heating the drive of antenna A3 (or A10); supplying a
voltage of -10 volts which supplies the antenna microcontactor: relaying the
branching interunit connecting lines (telephone, video signal, etc.); signaling
normal functioning of the power actuation circuits which actuate the ANTENNA,
TRANSCEIVER READY, PREHEAT display lights; coupling to the "Volga" and "Ladoga"
electronic indicator interfaces; and for metering the station operating time.

The technical specifications of the K1 unit are given below:
The output voltage, in volts, for the following load
current, no more than:

5 A 27 i 10:
0.7 A 24 t 102

- 266 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Test video signals:

Amplitude, volts 2 :_0.5
Repetition period, microseconds 1 - 1.5
Width. microseconds 300 - 2,200
Polarity Negative
Duration of the delay relative to the transmitted

pulse. microseconds 10 :,0.1

The equipment complement of unit K1 includes: the VN127V-25A block; the BPZ
assembly - emitter followers; and the radar set operational metering assembly.

Unit K2 is incorporated in two band radar sets and performs the following
functions: turning the radar units on and off and switching between them,
supplying voltages, and the other functions indicated for unit Kl.

The technical specifications of unit K2 are similar to the characteristics of
unit K1.

The complement of the unit K2 includes two VN327V-5A blocks, a EPl assembly
of emitter followers, and a KRS assembly: a unit for monitoring the radar
set operation.

The K3 unit is included in two band radar sets in which a provision is made for
the capability of switching the true motion unit (or computer) from indicator
unit 11 to indicator 12, i.e., to any unit which performs the functions of the
master unit.

The Computer

The computer (unit V) is intended for the following:

--Solving problems of passing ships which come near and feeding out the solution
results and recommendations for maneuvering on the PPI screen in the form
of Lon relative motion lines or LID true motion lines with time markers on
them from which the relative speed v0 or true speed v1 is estimated, as well
as the time to the closest approach point To;

-Assuring a true motion mode when the orientation of the image is set on
"North" or "Course Stabilized" on the l to 8 mile range scales.

The major technical specifications of the unit are given below:

Mean square error in calculating coordinates in the
"Track" mode, no more than:

With respect to azimuth, minutes i 18

with respect to range, m 1,25
The computational error in the "Track" mode:

of the relative course K0, in degrees, no more than i_3

0f the target course Kt- in degrees, no more than :_6

0f the course K or AK maneuver. in degrees, no more than t_7

of the v speed maneuver, in knots, no more than 1.1.6

- 265 -

FOR omcut use ONLY
The minimum solution time for the passing problem
(for the actuation of the PROBLEM SOLVE!) display light)
from the moment the "Track" mode is switched on, in minutes

The processing time for the maxim of the range and
azimuth mismatch in the "Lock-on" mode, seconds

Processing the coordinates of strobe centers in the

"tack-on" mode, no more than:
With respect to azimuth, minutes

With respect to range, m

The MARKER To negative polarity signal in the "Track" mode:

Amplitude, volts
Relative width, microseconds

Initial shift voltage in the "True Motion" mode, volts
RETURN signal voltage in the "True Motion" mode, volts

Shift voltage in the "True Notion" mode, with precisions of:
With respect to speed, knots
With respect to course, degrees

The characteristics of the MARKER signal are given in Table 5.9.

 

 

TABLE .S._9
Ampli-
tude, Pulse Width,
MARKER Signal Volts Esec
Normalized S i 2 1.8 1 0.2
Cross-lines:
Angular component 5 1 2 0.5 _-i_-_ 0.1
Radial component 5 i 2 7 1 2

Radial component

H Ir-IH-N
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the reset for generating To, the 200 usec pulse, the To GATE and TARGET IN THE
GATE .

The range error expander (ROD) is intended for generating the TARGET GATED and
ROD PULSES signals.

The coarse range readout circuitry (GOD) is intended for generating the approxi-
mate value of the current range to the target (the rough reading) and tying
the range gates to the PPI sweep.

The precision range readout circuitry (TOD) generates the pulse corresponding
to the current range to the target (the precise reading).

The cross-lines and range gates unit (PDP) generates the lST GATE RANGE. 2nd
GATE RANGE and CROSS-LINE R (radial component) and CROSS-LINE A (angular compo-
nent) signals.

The azimuth strobe generator (PSP) is intended for generating the STROBE
AZIMUTH and RESET AZIHUTH signals.

The time marker generator (GMV) generates the pulses for brightening the
relative or true motion lines on the CRT screen.

The bidirectional pulse counters (RSI's) are intended for counting a number
equal to the difference in the GATED VIDEO pulses located in he first and
second azimuth gates, as well as in the first and second range gates (RSI-1D
and RSI-2D).

The circuit for controlling the pulse counters (081) generates the AZIHUTH
GATE CENTER, RANGE GATING and AZINUTH gate signals.

The KOD assemblies are intended for converting the numerical azimuth error
(KPN-P) or the numerical range error (KPH-D) to an error in the form of a
600 Hz voltage corresponding to the bearing and range.

The tracking error amplifier (UOS) is intended for amplifying and scaling the
AP [A Azimuth] and AD [A Range] errors.

.The metering assembly and timing relays are intended for turning on the PROBLEM
SOLVED display light after the solution of the passing problem and the comple-
tion of the transient processes in the automatic target tracking systems.

Two VN: 12.6—1.S unregulated rectifiers generate a voltage of +12.6 V to power
the circuits of computer unit V.

The assemblies of the electromechanical section of computer unit V perform a
number of functions.

The log speed converter (PSL) converts the log speed data.

- 267 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The automatic azimuth tracking assembly (PA) is intended for generating signals
which determine the angular position of the gate in the "Lock-on" and "Track"
modes, as well as entering the course maneuver being simulated when playing
through safe passing situations.

The automatic range tracking assembly (DA) generates signals for the tracking
error block which determine the time position of the range gate of the auto-
tracking system.

The course and speed maneuver assembly (HSK) generates signals which define the
rotation angle of the relative or true motion lines on the CRT of indicator
unit I when selecting a maneuver for safe passing during the simulation of
situations.

Two speed projection integrators (IPS) produce components of the speed vector
vox and v0}, in cartesian coordinates.

The automatic reset assembly for the integrators is intended for generating the
AUTORBTURN signal.

The solution of a passing problem consists of several steps which are performed
sequentially.

In the "Lock-on" mode (step I). the operator sets the azimuth and range con-
trols so that the target which is being locked on to is located at the end

of the electronic cursor. With correct lock-on, the length of the radial line
of the cross-line is doubled, which indicates that one can change over to the
"Track" mode.

In the "Track" moie (step II), the integrators process the current position of
the range and azimuth gates. Simultaneously. the speed vector components vox
and v0y are calculated in cartesian coordinates.

Step III begins at the moment the transient process is finished in the azimuth
and range autotracking units, and the PROBLEM SOLVED display light comes on.
In this case, the course and speed maneuver unit, using the projections of

the v0 and v0y vectors, generates voltages in the "L00" [relative motion line]
mode which are proportional to the value of the argument (the course K0) and
the scalar value (the speed v0), while in the LID [true motion line] mode. it
generates the parameters [or the true motion of the target Kt and vc. The
time markers T0 are generated at the same time. Thus, the following display
is reproduced on the CRT screen:

—-The course of the relative motion of the targets K0 (in the form of a rela-
tive motion line in the "LOD" mode);

--The true motion course of the target Kt (in the form of a true motion line
in the "LID" mode);

--The target tracking time To to the point of closest approach Do in the form
of dashed lines of a brightened true or relative motion line, the number of
which is proportional to To.

-268-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF11C1AL USEilNLY

The closest approach distance Do is determined by means of the moving range
ring at the moment of touching the relative motion line. If the closest
approach distance is small (Do - 2 miles) and the bearing to the target is
constant or changes extremely little, and To - 15 to 20 minutes, then the
navigator is obligated to carry out step IV in solving the collision avoidance
problem: determine the recomended maneuver for his own ship for safe passing.

The simulation of the maneuver is accomplished as follows. Using the AK and/or
Av controls on the indicator unit I, new values of the course and/or the

speed are set using the "K :_AK" and "v + Av" scales so that the relative
motion line is tangent to or turns away from the previously established two
mile moving range ring. As a result of entering the simulated AK and/or Av,
the computer unit V supplies the recommended increments of the values AK and

Av to realize a safe passage.

Structural Features of the Computer Unit V. Unit V is made in a spray-proof
cast silumin housing, which is closed with a swing-out cover. Inspection

windows are provided in the cover to observe the scales for the bearing,
course, range and speed.

The electromechanical assemblies are secured on the inside on the cast frame,
while the assemblies of the OS block are secured to the lower rotating frame.
The electrical connections are made between the assemblies in the unit by

means of screw-down terminals. The external cable entrance is realized through
windows existing in the bottom. The spray protection for the unit is accom-
plished using a rubber washer between the cover and the housing.

Recommendations for the Layout and Operation of the "Okean-H" Radar Units

The radar units and the power plant (with the exception of the antenna units
A, A3 and A10) are to be installed in closed rooms.

It is recommended that units A, A3 and A10 be positioned so that there are no
shaded sectors. The units should be oriented in line with the STERN--BOH
indicator. located on the housing of the antenna drive.

The installation platform for the antenna should be parallel to the plane of
the true horizon with a precision of 11°.

In sets with two antennas (A3, A10), they are arranged one above the other on
the midline of the ship. A stepped placement of the units on the midline of
the ship or symmetrical with respect to it is permitted. The spacing between
the vertical axes should not exceed 3 m. The slotted radiator should be
spaced in hr‘ght at a distance of no less than 1 m.

Units P3 and P10 should be placed in separate rooms in such a way that the
length of the waveguide channel does not exceed 20 m.

Units KP3 and KPlO are installed on top of units P3 and P10, where holes are
provided for the fastening bolts.

- 269 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

.—_—.___——-__————

Type, Cross-Sect :1 "mm- Clee [to e

 

 

"out." Finn-acacia. . ___.._
gituuo. .5 av npuonpa I undo"
I Klll’3 3x6 Illm mama mi‘ ) IIMM~2II2
'2 KHI’3 002.5 "MM-2| I2 Arm-4m
3 KING 3X |.0 “NI-“NJ K2
4 MW?) 2X 6.0 [ITO-44m K2
.5 KHI’S 7X I,0 ATO- 4- 400 BI'II-I'IIIIZI
r. Runs 1x|.0 IIMM 2m (1 K2
7 Klll’3 3X6.0 lllm mm can ‘3)
II KIIP3 4x?,5 IIMM 2! 3" ”runner?- 1i up;
amp-mamas»
9 KIIPS 3x LO mm "In
In KHP3 .‘IX LO Km “.1
II, I2 I’K-MII I'IIO I(2
I3 KHI’3 2X6.0 "I0 ' K2
H MSPIIIlI-IOO 2XI.0 I'IIO K?
I5 M3P||IIl-Iw I2Xl.0 I'IIO K2
I6 KIIP3 |2X|.5 "I0 K2
l7. I3. I9 KIIP3 I2Xl.5 A (3) II
20 KHPS ”(2.6 "page; A K2
2i. 22 M3I’IIIII-Im I2XI.0 I13 K2
23 KIIP3 I2XI.5 I13 K2
24 KIIP3 2X61) "3 K2
25. 26 PK-‘I‘S-l-II I13 K2
27 MBI’IIIII-IOO |2Xl.0 K2 III
28 MBPIIIII-lm I27.|.0 K2 III
29 KI-IP3 2X 6.0 K2 III
30 KIII'3 2X6.0 K2 III
3|. 32. 33. PK-m-Il K2 HI
3‘. 35. M '
37 KIII’3 2X0.0 K2 "2
38 MSI’IIIH-IOO I2XI.0 K2 I12
39 M3I'IIIH-Im I2XI.0 K2 I12
40 KIII’S I2X LS K2 ‘ "2
4| PK-7S4-ll HI "2
42 KIIP3 7x I.0 I‘npmmunlc (lo I"
43 KIIPS 7X I.0 , II?
44 KIIP3 7XI.0 JIar Log HI
4? :IIQ ;>€ Lg H2
4» XI. I‘n noun: 1. II
47 Kllva 7x I.0 Palm-Lo; II
In KIIP3 12x! L6 K2 II
49 KHP3 3x! .0 K2 KS
50 KIIP3 I2XI.5 K3 III
5| KHPS I2X I. 5 K3 Ill
52 MSPIIII-I-Ioo szm x3 m
5" KHF3 12x L5 K3 I12
54 KHP3 I2XI.5 K3 II?
55 M3I’IIIII IN I2XI.5 K3 II2
50. 57 KIWI-I I2XI,5 K3 II
53 MPIIIlI-IOO I2X|.0 K3 II
59. 60 PK-754-II - K2 II
5' KHPS I2Xl.5 A I!

 

(Z2. III. I“ KIN”) I2)I L5

 

 

6.1 (Eli, 67 I’K-75‘4-Il
m m 70 M’N'IIIIHM I2"I.0
7| 7Z,‘ 7;) I‘K-75-4-II
7| KIII'3 I2XI.5
7f". 76 M3I’IIIll-Im l2"|.0
77. 7X. 79 I'K-75-4-II
- 270 -

ron tin-1cm. us; ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Table 5.10: 1. Ship power mains panel;
2. Fan of the transceiver;
3. Antenna drive;

4. Gyrocompass.

Indicator I is placed in the wheelhouse and secured to the deck. The height
of the seat above the deck level should be about 120 mm. The rear wall of the
indicator should be separated from the bulkhead by a spacing of no less than
300 mm. The distance from a magnetic compass to the indicator unit should be

no less than 700 nun otherwise these units should be separated by a steel
shield.

It is recommended that the computer unit be installed in the wheelhouse or
navigator's compartment and secured to a deck or bulkhead. The height of the
deck cushion should be 120 1,10 mm. The cable entrances are on the rear wall.

It is recommended that the true motion unit be located in the wheelhouse or
the navigator's compartment and secured to the deck or to a bulkhead. The
height of the base of the unit above the level of the decking should be 800
to 1,200 mm. The cable entrances are brought into the rear wall.

It is recommended that units K1 and K2 be installed in the wheelhouse and
secured to bulkheads. The height of the bases of the units above the decking
level should be 700 to 1,200 mm. The cable entrances are on the rear walls.

Unit K3 is located in any accessible room.

The power plant with the start and regulating equipment should be housed in _
the equipment room in accordance with MRTU 615-6853-63.

The interconnections between the "Okean-H" radar units are made using cables
of the following types: KNRE, HERShN-lOO and RKPTS-h-ll.

The length of the cables between the units should not exceed the following
values:

100 m between units P3, P10 and the indicator unit I;
20 m between units located in the wheelhouse and navigator's compartment;

120 m between units A, A3. A10 and the indicator unit. as well as the
computer unit.

The length of the radiofrequency cables should be the same in the two band
version.

The cable documentation is given in Table 5.10.

Technical Operating Rules

- 271 -
FOR OFIHCIAL lEﬂE<NVLY
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE¢NNLY

The Power On and Off Control for the Units and Blocks. When the black button
is pressed for turning on the POWER PLANT power, the "Power Plant" light comes
on (see Figure 5.12).

All of the radar units are turned on (with the exception of the computer and
true motion units) using the following switches on unit K2 (or Kl): INDICATOR
l--OFF. INDICATOR 2-OFF, P3--0FP, PlO~-0PP, as well as the pairs of A10 and
A3 pushbuttons with the indication shown by the corresponding display lights
of the units 11 and 12: P3 READY, PlO READY, ANTENNA--3, ANTENNAr-lo. The
READY-3 and READY—-lo display lights cone on three to four minutes after
turning the transceivers on. When the OPERATE-OFF toggle switch is turned
on, the OPERATE display light comes on.

The computer and true motion units are turned on automatically when the
appropriate mode is set on the master indicator. when only one indicator is
turned on, it must be set in the "Master" mode.

Operating Node Controls for Indicator Unit I. The BRIGRTNESS potentiometer
regulates the brightness of the CRT display.

The NKD [fixed range ring], PKD [moving range ring]. CURSOR and COURSE MARKER
potentiometers adjust the brightness of the fixed and moving range ring markers,
the cursor and the course marker respectively.

The beam of the indicator CRT is focused by means of the FOCUS control.

The ILLUMINATION-1 potentiometer regulates the brightness of the display
lights and scales located outside the viewing hood, as well as the MILES
counter.

The ILLUMINATION-2 potentiometer adjusts the brightness of the display lights
and scales found inside the viewing hood.

The ranges to the target of interest and the azimuth to it are measured by
means of the RANGE and AZIHUTH controls.

The Operating Mode Controls for the Radar. These include the NORTH--COURSE-
COURSE STABILIZED, TRUE HOTION--RELATIVE-MOTION-SIMULATION, COMPUTER, CURSOR
and SHIFT CENTER switches.

The BAND-~RANGE switch sets the requisite range scale with the appropriate
signaling on display 20 (see Figure 5.12).

The scale display light indicates the RANGE SCALE in the numerator and in the
denominator. the distance between the FIXED RANGE RING markers for the given

range scale.

The distribution of the frequency bands between the indicators, and the setting
of one of them in the "Master" mode is accomplished by the following

- 272 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

pushbuttons: 3--INDICATOR Il-lO. 3-INDICAIOR IZ--10 and Il-MASTER--IZ, which
are located on the subpanel of unit K2 under the lower door.

The SEA CLUTTER. GAIN, MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTRDL--APC and MANUAL FREQUENCY
CONTROL potentiometers adjust the operation of the receiver in unit P3 (P10).
The PRECIPITATION--0PF toggle switch turns on the short time constant circuit
for the differentiation of the video signals in the video signal amplifier of
the transceiver unit P.

The PRECIPITATION potentiometer continuously varies the time constant of the
dif ferent iating network.

Switches for Monitoring the Parameters and Operability of the Units and Blocks.
The CHECK-l switch monitors the magnetron current, the mixer current in units

P3 (or P10) as well as the operation of the rectifiers and assemblies of
indicator unit I in the first three positions. In the fourth position, the
microammezer is disconnected. while in the fifth position, it is switched over

to switch CHECK-2, which by means of the microammeter makes it possible to

check the power supply of the unit and connect the microammeter to the CHECK-3
switch. Using the latter, one can check the operability of the CRT sweep
assemblies and the test outputs for the low current circuits of the synchronizer.

The ECHO CHAMBER--TRANSHIT toggle switch turns on the echo chamber to check
the power potential of the transceivers.

The switches, toggle switches and microaunnter of the KU block [metering and
control block] serve for monitoring the supply voltages and the major parameters
of the transmitter blocks.

Turning the Radar 0n and Off, Orienting and Adjusting It

The positions of the controls for the units prior to turning the radar on
(initial positions) are given in Table 5.11.

The radar in equipment sets having the K2 unit is turned on using the controls
located on it a the following order:

a) Press and release the 220 volt, AOO Hz pushbutton to turn on the power plant;
in this case, the 220 volt, 600 Hz light comes on;

b) Using pushbuttons 3--INDICATOR 1--10, 3-—INDICATOR 2--10 and INDICATOR 1--
HASTER--INDICATOR 2 located on the subpanel of the unit K2, distribute the
frequency bands between units I1 and 12; set one of them in the "Master" mode.
The circuit configuration chosen is reflected in the display light in the
upper part of the unit;

c) Set the II and 12 switches in the vertical position; in this case, the II
and 12 display lights respectively should come on, and power is fed from the
power plant to units 11 and 12;

- 273 -
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 5.11
Initial

Units Controls of the Units Position

K2 (K1) INDICATOR Il--0FF; INDICATOR IZ-OFF "Off"
switches

K2 (K1) P3--0FF; P10--0FF switches "Off"

K2 (K1) TRACK toggle switch "0kean"

I OPERATE--OPF toggle switch “Off"

I PRECIPITATION-0FF toggle switch "Off"

I SHIFT CURSOR--CURSOR--SEIPT CENTER "Cursor"
toggle switch

I MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL-~AFC toggle "AFC"
switch

I COMPUTER switch "Off"

I NORTH--COURSE--COURSE STABILIZED toggle "Course"
switch

I TRUE HOTION--R£LATIVE MOTION toggle "Relative
switch Mot ion"

A3. A10 TRANSMIT AND ANTENNA DRIVE switch "On"

I TRUE MOTION--COHPUTER switch "Off"

KU TEST-~0PERATE switch "Operate"

 

 

d) Set switches P3 and P10 in the vertical position. After three to four
minutes. the READY P3 and READY P10 display lights are turned on, which means
that units P3 and P10 are ready for the “Operate" mode to be turned on;

e) Push buttons A3 and A10; in this case, the ANTENNA 3 and ANTENNA 10 display
lights respectively are turned on (in radar sets having antenna unit A, the
start-up is accomplished with any pair), which means that units A3 and A10

(or A) are started.

The radar in sets having unit K1 is turned on using the controls located on it
in the following order:

a) Press and release the black 220 volt, 400 Hz button; in this case. the 220
Volt. 600 Hz light comes on;

b) Press and release the black A button; in this case, the ANTENNA display
light should come on, which means that units A3 and A10 are started;

c) Open the cover of the front panel of unit K1 and set switches I and P in
the vertical position; in this case, the I and (after three to four minutes)
the READY P display light should come on;

- 276 -
FOR OFFKJAI,USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d) Using the operating mode controls of the indicator, set the requisite bright-
ness of the display lights and scales, brightness of the screen display and all
markers and check for their presence on the screen;

e) Check to see that the readings of the K 1 AK course and v + Av speed scales
match the readings of the gyrocompass and log repeaters with a precision of

i 0.3° and + 0.2 knots; in the case of a difference in the readings, match them
up by pressing and rotating the MATCH COURSE and MATCH SPEED controls which
are located under the cover of block on. This operation is also performed in
unit V [the computer] or ID [true motion]; '

f) Switch off the AK ENTERED and Av ENTERED display lights by rotating the AR
and Av controls, if they were turned on;

g) Set the 0PERATE--0PF toggle switch in the "Operate" position, making sure
beforehand that the READY P3 (or P10) display light is on in unit K2, and the
READY P is on in unit K1; in this case, the OPERATE display light comes on;

h) Check the nominal readings of the meter in the PU [indicator control panel]
block in the following positions of the check "I" switch: "Magnetron" (green
sector), "IF amplifier mixer" (black sector) and "AFC mixer" (black sector);

1) Set the SEA CLUTTER and GAIN controls in a position such that there is no
additional brightening of the screen by sea returns and the targets are clearly
observed.

To check the power potential of the radar on the "8" range scale, it is neces-
sary to throw the ECHO-CHAMBER toggle switch of indicator unit I. A flare

trace from the echo chamber should be periodically observed on the screen in
the form of a lobe, the length of which must be measured by means of the

moving range ring and compared with the value indicated in the radar data sheet.

Check the readings of the MILES counter by means of matching the moving range
ring to the second stationary range ring. In this case, the counter should

read 0.5 + 0.01; 1 i 0.02; 2 1 0.04; 4 i_0.08; 8 + 0.16; 16 :_0.32 and 32 : 0.6h
on the l, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64 mile scales.

Normal operation of the transmitter is monitored based on the magnetron current

if the “I" monitor switch of the indicator control panel of indicator unit I
is set in the 'Nagnetron" position.

During the operation of transceivers P3 and P10, individual breakdowns in the
magnetron and modulator tube are possible, which cause the transmitter overload

protection to actuate. In this case, the OPERATE display light goes out,
while the meter needle goes to zero.

To restore normal operation of unit P3 (or P10), it is necessary to throw the
OPERATE-0FF toggle switch to the "Off" position, and after four to five
seconds, again set it in the "Operate" position. If after turning the unit
on three or four times the OPERATE display light does not come on, one is to

troubleshoot and eliminate the defect in accordance with the instructions for
radar set operation.

- 275 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The major frequency tuning mode is AFC. Manual frequency control (RPCh) is
recommended in the case of failure of the AFC.

Manual frequency control is realized only in the case of returns from a target,
sea clutter or an echo chamber signal in the following order:

a) Set the APC-MANUAL FREQUENCY CONTROL toggle switch in the "Manual Frequency
Control" position;

b) Rotate the GAIN and SEA CLUTTER controls clockwise to the stop;

c) Set the check "I" switch of the indicator control panel in the "I? Amplifier
Mixer";

d) By smoothly rotating the manual frequency controls, establish-the maximum
brightness of the target returns.

The radar is turned off in the following order:

a) Set the OPERATE toggle switch on the indicator unit I in the "Off" position;
in this case, the OPERATE display is turned off;

b) Set the P3, P10 (or P), 11, and 12 (or I) switches on unit X2 (or K1) in
the horizontal position; in this case, the READY P3, READY P10 (or READY P),
I1 and 12 (or I) display lights respectively are turned off;

c) Press and release the red A3, A10 Cor A), 220 volts, 600 Hz buttons on unit

K2 (K1); in this case, the ANTENNA 3, ANTENNA 10 (or ANTENNA) display lights and
the 220 volt, 400 Hz light respectively are turned off.

The choice of the image scale and orientation on the PPI screen is realized

by the BAND-D [RANGE] switch. The range scale which is turned on and the

distance between the fixed range rings are indicated by lighted numbers on a
display located above the screen (under the viewing hood).

When navigating in straits, skerries, along shorelines, in channels and when
coming into port and leaving port, it is recommended that the "l", "2", "a"
and "8" range scales be used [lb].

As the ship's speed increases, the scales must be increased. A "ID" ["True
Hotion"] mode is provided on these scales, as well as the possibility of shift-
ing the image center by one-half of the screen radius with relative motion by
means of the AK and Av controls.

It is recommended that the center shift be used in the case where it is desir~
able to have maximum information from one side of the ship while preserving
the scale being employed.

The "8" and "16" scales are recommended for navigation safety in the open

sea, since in this case, large and intermediate vessels are detected reliably
at the maximum range. At the sane time, these scales have a sufficiently
large scale for the detection of small ships and objects close to the ship.
Operation in the "Computer" and "Cursor Shift" modes is provided only on these
scales.

- 276 -
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

It is recommended that the "32" and "64" scales be used only to determine the
ship's position where correctly identified reference markers are present at
ranges of up to 64 miles.

with normal refraction, the radar detects targets 200 to 1,000 meters above
sea level at ranges of up to 32 miles.

with super-refraction, low lying shores, islands and other targets can also
be detected at the indicated range.

The choice of the image orientation on the PPI screen is accomplished by the
NORTH--COURSE-COURSE STABILIZED toggle switch. The set orientation mode is
reflected on the correSponding NORTH, COURSE and COURSE STABILIZED display
lights, which are located under the screen.

The "North" mode is recommended as the main one in the open sea and when navi-
gating near shore, where the radar is used to determine the ship's position and
determine the danger of approaching oncoming ships.

In the "Course Stabilized" mode, the image is oriented along the midline of
the ship and stabilized in a range of + 3° from the gyrocompass. This mode is
used when sailing in straits, skerries- and channels, since the image is not
blurred with the yawing and turning of the ship.

In the "Course" mode, the image is oriented along the midline of the ship. This
mode is most convenient when visually piloting the ship using large scale range
scales. A drawback to the mode is the smearing of the image when the ship
rotates and yaws.

The relative motion (00) is switched on when the OD--V [RELATIVE HOTION-COH-
PUTER] switch on unit I is set in the "Off" position.

The azimuth is measured by the electronic cursor (EV) on the l to 16 mile
scales for all orientations, as well as in the case of a shifted center on the
l to 8 mile scales.

Azimuth measurement on the 32 and 64 mile scales is accomplished with the
“North" orientation only by the mechanical cursor (NV).

In the “Course" orientation mode, the course angle on the l to 64 mile scales
is to be measured only by means of the mechanical cursor.

The range in all modes can be measured by means of the electronic cursor and
the moving range ring. 0n the 32 and 66 mile scales, the range is measured

only by means of the moving range ring. An approximate reading of the range
can be made by means of the stationary range ring.

The measurement of the directions between targets on the l to 66 adle scales
can be made by means of the mechanical cursor.

- 277 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The precise measurement of the azimuths between targets, as well as the range
between them on the 8 and 16 mile scales can be made using the offset electronic
cursor.

The relative motion line (LOD) on the 8 and 16 mile scales can also be precisely
determined by means of the offset electronic cursor.

The true motion (ID) mode is possible in radars which have the computer and
true motion units incorporated in the indicator unit, on the l to 8 mile scales
in the case of the "North" or "Course Stabilized" orientation. The true motion
mode is recommended for navigation in straits, channels, along shorelines,
between islands and when entering and leaving port. The smearing of the image
is prevented in the true motion mode and the identification of moving targets
is assured. In this case, the estimation of true speeds and courses of all
moving targets based on me trails their blips leave by persistence on the PP]
screen are relatively easily estimated.

The true motion mode can be switched on by preliminarily setting the following
controls on indicator unit I: the BAND--D [RANGE] is set to the "l", "2", "A"
or "8" position; the NORTH--COURSE-COURSE STABILIZED switch is set to the
"North" or "Course Stabilized" position; the CURSOR SHIPT--CURSOR--CENTER SHIFT
switch is set the "Cursor" position. -

The moment the true motion mode is turned on, the center of the sweep is shifted
along the opposite course heading by a distance of half of the screen radius

and than begins to move along the course at the speed of ship travel for the
scale s the set range scale.

The limits of sweep origin motion are chosen from the condition of reliable
viewing and are determined by the moment of actuation of the autoreturn system.
The latter actuates if the sweep center is shifted by half of the radius from
the CRT center and if there is a change in the ship's course by 1 (175 + 5)°.

The sweep center can be shifted manually to the origin by means of turning
on the CHECK V [COMPUTER]--RETURN ID [TRUE MOTION] toggle switch to the "Return
ID" position. It is recommended that the manual return be matched to the point
in time which follows directly after the completion of the ship's maneuver.

The motion of blips from known stationary targets.indicates the drift of the
ship with the action of wind or current or the presence of an error in the
readings of the log or gyrocompass.

The AK and Av controls are used to enter course and speed corrections until
the blip becomes stationary. In this case, the true course and speed of the
ship relative to ground can be read out from the K 1 AK and v : Av scales.

Solving the problem of passing an oncoming ship is accomplished by means of the
computer unit. For this, the controls are set in the following positions on

indicator unit I, which is switched to the "Master" mode: BAND--RANGB to
position "16"; NORTH--COURSE--COURSE STABILIZED to the "North" position; TRUE

- 278 -

F0l.0FTWC1Al.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOTION--CMPUTER to the "Off" position; and SHIFT CURSOR--CURSOR--SHIPT cam
to the "Cursor" position.

The target lock-on and switch to the sutotracking mode are accomplished in the
following manner:

a) The COMPUTER switch of the indicator unit is set in the "Lock-on" position;

b) The CURSOR and CROSS-LINES controls are used to set good brightness of the

cross-lines at the end of the electronic cursor with each revolution of the
antenna;

c) By turning the AZIHUTH and RANGE controls, the end of the electronic cursor

is matched up with the center of the near boundary of the blip of the target
being locked-on.

with proper lock-on, the length of the radial line of the cross-lines will
double.

The "Track" position is turned on at the point in time when the sweep approaches
the position of the cursor line at an angle of 20 to 50°. In the case of target
loss during autotracking, the length of the radial line of the cross-lines

is cut in half; in this case, it is necessary to repeat the lock-on.

During the automatic tracking process, one can use the electronic cursor to
determine the coordinates of other targets.

The moment the transient process is completed in the target autotracking system
is registered by the actuation of the PROBLEM SOLVED display light on the 0R
block of indicator unit 1.

After this, the COMPUTER switch is to be set in the "LOD" [relative motion line]
position; in this case, the relative motion line of the oncoming ship lights
up on the screen and the LOD display light is turned on.

The distance Do is determined by means of setting the moving range ring
tangential to the relative motion line. The time To in minutes is determined
by means of counting the number of markers on the relative motion line segment
from the blip of the ship being tracked to the tangent point on the periphery
of the moving range ring and multiplying the resulting nunber of markers times
6 minutes.

The true motion line (LID) of the ship lights up when the COMPUTER switch is
set in the "LID" position; the LID display light is turned on in this case.

The relative or true speed of an oncoming ship is determined using the T
markers for the relative or true motion lines respectively in the following
sequence: by rotating the RANGE control, the moving range ring marker on the
true motion or relative motion line is matched to the start of the second
marker (counting from the origin of the true or relative motion lines); the
readings of the MILES counter, multiplied by 10, correspond to the relative
or true speed of the oncoming ship in knots.

- 279 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If to = 15 to 20 minutes, and D = 2 miles, then in accordance with the Regula-
tions for Preventing Collisions at Sea and in line with the specific conditions,
it is necessary to determine the unneuver for the ship by means of simulation.
A maneuver is simulated with the COMPUTER switch thrown to the "Simulate" posi-
tion; in this case the SIMULATE display light comes on, and the relative ration
line will be indicated on the PPI screen.

Taking the particular navigation situation into account and using the AR and Av
controls, those values of the course and speed are chosen for which a safe
closest approach distance is assured. After this, the decision is made to
execute the maneuver.

By rotating the AK and Av controls, the AK ENTERED and Av ENTERED display lights
are turned off and the COMPUTER switch is set in the "Relative Motion Line"
position.

The observation of the new passing situation continues in this position after
the execution of the maneuver.

5.3. Specific Features of Marine Radionavigation and Radar Complexes

The major reason for the increase in the danger of collision is the increased
complexity of ship navigation conditions, which is due to technical progress
in the construction and development of the world-wide fleet. The increase in
the displacement of seagoing vessels leads to a degradation of their maneuver-
ing qualities and a limiting of the maneuvering area because of the increased
draft, which transforms the open sea into confined water routes.

The construction of new types of sesgoing vessels, as well as the use of pro-
gressive methods for loading and unloading ships in port and the substantially
elevated specific share of the running time in the operating period have all,
along with the increased demand for sea shipments, led to a significant increase
in ship traffic.

The rise of the accident rate in the merchant marine, which is due to collisions
of ships at sea, leads to increasing losses of transport facilities and the
cargo being shipped, to the loss of crew and passengers and to ever increasing
contamination of the water environment.

Under the conditions which had come about by the beginning of the 1960's,
there arose the clear necessity for the creation of effective ship collision
warning systems (PSS).

The volume of necessary information which should be made available to the
pilot by any ship collision warning system during the process of passing one
or more ships was ascertained on the basis of a study of the visual manner of
solving this problem under conditions of good visibility.

Any ship collision warning system should provide the ship's pilot with four
kinds of information (four phases):

- 280 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) Information on detected objects which threaten a collision or a dangerous
approach;

2) Information on the established headings of targets, since this governs the
use of the ship collision avoidance regulations;

3) Information on the evaluation of the safety of a course or speed maneuver
being undertaken by the ship itself relative to a dangerous target, as well as
relative to other ships, initially of no danger as regards a collision;

4) Information on the estimate of the passing dynamics to avoid a new danger
of collision as a result of maneuvering a threatening or other ship.

Under the conditions of the continuing growth in the traffic density on the
major maritine routes, the role of radar as a means of early detection of
targets representing a collision danger has increased significantly. Because
of this, specialists have set about a detailed study of the questions of
collision warning, specifically by means of radar.

The difference in the approach to the principles of processing radar returns,
the degree of automation and the form of the information presented to the ship's
pilot has led, despite the unity of the requirements placed on it, to the
appearance of various systems, the number of which now exceeds 25.

All of these systems, which reflect the effort to automate to a greater or
lesser extent the process of ship passing, can be broken down into two main

groups:

1) Systems with data storage which use various memories and which produce on
the indicator screen the trajectories of the passed motion of the targets;
either an endless loop of magnetic tape (the Marconi Predictor radar of the
"Marconi" Company) or a screen coated with a long persistence phosphor (the
unit ofthe "Kelvin Hughes" Company) or a digital computer (the "Scan-100"
system of the "P8H Systems" Company [10]) can be used as the data store;

2) Systems which predict the position of targets at a certain point in time,
where digital computer processing and evaluation of the radar data is used

for these purposes; both a specialized digital computer (the "Digiplot" system
of the "Lotron Corp.") and a general purpose computer (the "Compact" system

of the "CBC-A53" Company) can be used as the computer.

The complement of the majority of systems includes the fcllowing functional
blocks: -

l. The radar - the main information sensor which provides for visual observation
of the target.

2. The situation indicator - usually a plan position indicator on the screen
of which the following can be shown: the alphanumeric data generated by the
digital computer as well as circles and vector lines.

- 281 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The induced information usually takes the form of:
-The ordinal number of the target;
-The data of the autotracking system;

--The moving marker used for indicating the position and locking-on to a target
for autotracking.

The trajectories of targets, the relative velocity vectors and other forms of
data display are displayed where necessary.

3. The control panel - a unit which provides for the control of the system and
is directly tied to the indicator.

The operating mode of the system is set from a special panel of switches, which
is additionally used for entering and retrieving data, locking-on for auto-
tracking, manual tracking and simulating a maneuver.

a. The digital computer - a general purpose digital computer for the execution
of the computing operations needed for system functioning.

5. An interface block - a unit needed to match the digital computer to the
remaining system units. It includes such functional components as an alpha-
numeric data generator, a vector line generator, a data entry module, a system
synchronizer, an autotracking module and an indicator synchronizer.

6. The log and the gyrocompass are course and speed information sensors for the
ship itself, needed for system operation.

The following are incorporated in the system for the purpose of rendering the
maximum aid to the ship's pilot when solving a problem of passing:

--An autotracking unit which makes it possible to automatically track a target;

-A manual tracking unit which makes it possible to track a target "Manually"
under conditions of strong interference from an agitated sea surface;

--A trajectory generator, which serves to generate the markers for the past
position of the targets;

--A unit for computing the position of the closest approach point, which makes
it possible to generate information on the distance and the time of closest
approach to the target;

--A safety ring generator, which generates so—cslled safety rings on the indi-
cator screen at a definite radius around the ship itself, which when these
rings intersect target blips, actuate audio and visual alarms, which alert
the ship's pilot to the presence of an oncoming ship in the zone being
monitored;

--A maneuver simulator, which makes it possible to evaluate the situation for
a certain in time ahead when changing the ship's own speed and heading, but
with the assumption that the course and speed of oncoming ships are constant;

- 282 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

 

Figure 5.13. Block diagram of the "Briz-l" system [collision
warning].

Key: 1.
2.
3.

9.

Data computer complex;
Recording unit;

From the technical
facilities;

a. Situation indicator;
5.
6. Standard time genera-

Synchronizer;

tor;

7. Switching unit;
8.

Computer control con-
sole;
Plan position indicator;

10.
ll.
12.
13.

lh.
15.

"Decca" and "Omega";
Digital autocomputer;
Automatic plotter section;
From the navigation sen-
sors;

Radar complex;

Navigation complex.

--A true motion unit which makes it possible to obtain a true motion display

on the indicator.

Comprehensive navigation systems have been developed in recent years, an integral

part of which is the ship collision warning subsystem.

The "Bria-l" system is intended for solving the following problems [10]:

a) Automatic computation and plotting of the ship's route;

b) Determine the ship's position in geographic and route coordinate systems;

c) Ship collision avoidance;

d) Solve applied problems in accordance with preset programs.

- 283 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)R‘0F11C1AI.IJSEZ(NULY

The "Brit-l" system is broken down into three sets in accordance with the
structural configuration and the problenw being solved (Figure 5.13): the
radar, the data computer and automated navigation systems.

Functionally speaking, the "Brit-1" system is broken down into navigation and
ship collision warning subsystems.

The main data sensor for the ship collision warning subsystem-is the radar
complex, consisting of a two-band radar (3 and 10 cm), a PPI display and a
situation indicator, the IS. The primary radar and secondary graphic informa-
tion are displayed on the latter.

The radar complex provides independently for the following:
--The display of the surface radar situation on plan position indicators;

--The measurement of the ranges and azimuth to surface targets on the PPI
display;

-The automatic detection of surface targets when they intersect signal rings
at ranges of 12.9 and 5 miles.

In conjunction with the data computer complex, the radar complex provides for
the following:

-Automatic tracking of 12 surface targets where they are initially entered
manually and automatically in the case of autodetection;

--Semi-automatic tracking of up to 3 targets where the overall number of
targets which can be tracked runs up to 15;

--Generating the coordinates of the motion parameters, components of the
approach to and the tracking of targets as well as their display in vector

and digital form;
—-The automatic identification of dangerous targets when they are tracked;

--Hanually playing through a maneuver for passing by means of simulating the
course or speed of the ship itself with the display of the extrapolated
secondary information at the time the maneuver is conpleted;

--Automatically generating the recommended maneuver for the ship itself to
pass all of the targets being automatically tracked;

--Digital display of the coordinates, parameters of motion and conponents of
the approach to any of the targets being tracked at the selection of the
ship's pilot;
--Predicting the development of a situation with a lead time of up to 30 minutes.
The navigation subsystem incorporates independent navigation data sensors (the
dual mode "Vega-K" correcting gyrocompass, the "Sektor-K" remote data trans-

mission magnetic compass, timers, the "Ugra-K" induction log and the "Onega"
Doppler log) as well as nonsutonomous units (the "Decca", “Loran” and ”Omega"

- 284 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radionavigstion display receivers in a rack mount design as well as the "RumU'
80?).

The problem of automatically determining the ship's coordinates is solved by
means of the general-purpose computer and the navigation data transducers, in-
cluding the data from radar reference points. The entering of the raw data into
the computer is accomplished automatically from all of the transducers.

An autoplotter can be used in conventional and observational computation modes.
In the latter case, the position of the ship is continuously corrected auto-
matically based on radionavigation and radar data.

A provision is made for the possibility of determining the ship's position via
teletype. In this case, the attribute of the problem being solved and the
requisite initial data are entered in the data computer conplex (WK). The
results of the cosputstions, along with the estimate of their precision, are
displayed on a digital display, printed on a paper strip and after pushing

a button, are transmitted to the route plotter.

By employing manual entry, one can solve astronomical problems more precisely
than by conventional techniques, as well as calculate the azimuth and determine
the range to a specified point via a rhumb line or a great circle route, com-
pass corrections, drift, etc.

The switching unit (PK) makes it possible to switch the 3 or 10 centimeter
band radar PPI display to the plan position indicator and the status indicator
at the discretion of the navigator.

The synchronization unit PS provides for tisewise synchronization of the system
channels.

-285-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFNJAI.USE1UNLY

CHAPTER 6. DOPPLER NAVIGATION RADARS

 

6.1. Specific Features of Doppler Navigation Radar Operation

The operational principle of the Doppler-Belopol'skiy radar system, as is well
known, consists in the fact that with the relative motion of a radar and a target,
the frequency of the received reflected signals does not remain constant, but
changes in accordance with a definite law. This property was discovered in 1852
by the Austrian physicist c. Doppler, and was confirmed experimentally for the
first time under laboratory conditions for light waves by the Russian physicist
A.A. Belopol'skiy in 1900 [17].

The amount of the frequency change indicated above depends on the velocity and
direction of the relative motion of the radar and the target, as well as the
wavelength (frequency) of the radar. A block diagram of the simplest doppler
radar (DRLS) is shown in Figure 6.1. The transmitter transmits probe signals in
the form of CH unmodulated oscillations at a frequency of £1. The frequency f2 of
the returns from the target which arive at the receiving antenna of the radar
will differ from the frequency f1 of the probe signals by the amount of the so-
called doppler frequency FD: f2 I f1 1 PD. The plus signncorresponds to the case

where the radar and the target are coming together, while the minus sign corres-
ponds to separation.

The attenuated probe signals and the received returns are fed to the receiver input,
a beat frequency at the difference frequency of f1 - f2 is produced, and following

detection. we obtain the doppler frequency at the receiver output, which is equal
to:

PD I f1 - f2 I ZVP/A

where vp is the radial component of the target velocity;
l is the wavelength of the radar probe signals.

If the wavelength is expressed in centimeters, and the radial velocity of the
target is expressed in kilometers, then the formula for calculating the doppler
frequency in Hertz will assume the form:

FD - 55.6(vP/A).

- 286 -

ron omaAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The doppler frequency expressed as a function of the direction of travel of an
object (target), located at point 0, can be characterized by the pattern in
polar coordinates which is shown in Figure 6.2 [17]. In this diagram, the radius
vector characterizes the direction of target motion, while the length of the
vector characterizes the value of the doppler frequency, taking the sign into
account. An increase in the doppler frequency is noted in the diagram with a
plus sign, while a decrease is noted with a minus sign.

The Doppler-Belopol'skiy effect causes the frequency spectrum of the reflected
signal to shift, something which can be illustrated graphically (Figure 6.3).

If one assumes that the probe and return signals take the form of a sinusoidal
oscillation of infinite duration, then the frequency spectrum is characterized by
a single spectral line.

A target approaching and going away from the radar causes a corresponding frequency
shift in the returns of from fmin = fl - £3 to fmax = fl # FD. Consequently, the
spectral lines will move along the frequency axis f as shown in the figure.
Because of the fact that the reflected signal practically is an infinitely long
sine wave, as well as because of fluctuations in the effective back-scatter cross-
section (EPO) of the targets, and in the beam scanning of the antenna and the
acceleration of the targets, the spectrum of the return will be somewhat wider

than shown in Figure 6.3.

 
   
      
   
 

  
  
 

  
    
     

Transmitter .._... r ,
Mgndamvun
f:
Indicator Receiver
Hudunamap ﬂpuemmn
F» 4': ‘ I 2 [2

Figure 6.1. Schematic of a doppler radar.

CH doppler radars are widely used to measure the velocity being made good by
aircraft, wind speed, the speed of motor vehicles, etc.

Doppler radars have recently begun to be widely used in ship navigation for
measuring the docking speed of ships. This is explained by the fact that the
appearance of large tonnage vessels, in particular, tankers with displacements
of 150,000 to 200,000 tons and more have made it necessary to take steps to
take steps to prevent damge when mooring such ships to a dock.

-287-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equipping ships with transverse thrusters, the use of docking tugs and similar
measures do not completely solve the problems. During mooring, the ship pilot
should have exhaustive information on the position of the ship relative to the
dock and the ship's speed. 1he visual methods of determining the ship's speed and
the distance to the wharf using objects on shore when docking large tonnage ships
which have been used up to the present time are becoming unsuitable. Many of the
existing docks cannot sustain a collision of 150,000 to 200,000 ton displacement
ship with it if the ship's speed exceeds 3 to S m/min. Consequently, it becomes
necessary to precisely measure the speed of the ship, which goes down to 0.5 to

l m/min [12].

A block diagram of'a dappler radar (DRLS) is shown in Figure 6.4. It contains

the following: an unmodulated CW microwave oscillator at a frequency of f0. csvch;
an isolator, RD; a directional antenna A; a mixer, Sm; a doppler frequency
amplifier. UDCh and an indicator. The sounding microwave pulses at £0 pass through
the isolator to the antenna. and at the same time, following attenuation in the
isolator. are fed to the input of the receiver mixer.

The reflected signals at a frequency of f0 1 Pp are fed to the mixer input and are
mixed with the probe signal frequency £0. The difference frequency bests produce
a doppler frequency FD at the mixer output which is amplified by the doppler
frequency amplifier stages.

A device which measures the doppler frequency serves as the indicator. since the
radial velocity of the target v and the doppler frequency are related by the
linear function v - PD(l/2), t e indicated indicator, a frequency meter, can be
graduated in velocity units (for example. meters per minute). In practice, when
using a doppler radar as a speed meter for the motion of targets, it proves to be
necessary to ascertain in which direction the target is moving relative to the
doppler radar, i.e., whether it is approaching or going away.

This task can be carried out in several ways. For example, using individual
filters which are tuned to frequencies of f0 - F0 and f0 + FD, which fall on
both sides of the probe signal frequency f0 [sic]. In the first case, the re-
flected signal frequency proves to lower than the frequency f0, and consequently,
the target is moving away from the doppler radar. 0n the other hand, in the
second case the frequency of the returns proves to above the frequency f0 and
consequently, the target is approaching the doppler radar.

The sign of the doppler frequency can also be determined by the phase method,

by means of processing the received returns in a dual channel receiver, as shown
in Figure 6.5 [17]. If the target is approaching, then the output voltages of
channels 1 and II will be expressed by the following functions:

E, n Emma (2nFDl-l- q»);

l?”- Entos (2n!-’Dl-i-9-|--%),

- 288 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where: Em is the signal voltage amplitude;

¢ is a constant phase angle, which depends, for example, on the initial
detection range of the object (target).

“0

""9 ‘1 ’l'rl ’

Figure 6.3. Graph of the return signal
spectrum.

Key: a. The signal amplitude;
f . Frequency .

 

(1) When the target is moving away from the
doppler radar, the output signal voltages of
ﬂPM' both receiver channels will be determined by

the fol lowing equations:

Figure 6.2. Pattern in polar 5|‘£.‘°’(2“FD“°)‘
1|

coordinates. £"_ Emu” (23f"(_Q——;) .
Key: 1. Doppler radar.

Thus, the direction of target motion is

determined by the lead or lag of the output
signal phase of channel II of the receiver relative to channel I. The indication
of target direction can be made. for example, by using a two-phase synchronous
electric motor. Hhen measuring the output signal phase, the direction of
rotation of the electric motor indicates the direction of travel of the object

(the target).

6.2. The "Istra" Radar for Measuring the Docking Speed of Ships

The "Istra" unit is a doppler radar for the measurement of the docking speed of a
ship. The following units are incorporated in the "Istra" doppler radar set: the

radar (RL), the indicator (1?), the pedestal (‘1‘), the distribution panel (Rshch),
the junction box (SYa) and the ATO-l-loOO type power plant (AP) [12].

—289-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢MHWCJAL.USE(MVLY

 

Figure 6.4. Block diagram of a doppler radar.

Key: 1. CH microwave generator;

2. Iaolator;
3. Doppler frequency amplifier;

6. Hixer.

 
   

  

Trananitto
ﬂapdamwu

  
  

 

(1) mantra/nap
c cuuxpommu

uttnpodlupamenen

 
   

Figure 6.5. Block diagram of a dual channel doppler radar receiver.

Key: 1. Indicator with a synchronous electric motor.

-290-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The radar unit is a speed frequency sensor and takes the form of a portable
doppler radar. The radar unit is structurall designed to be water proof and is
stored in the interior rooms of a ship in the packing box.

The indicator unit is intended for feed out information on the measured speed.
It is of a waterproof design and is permanently mOunted on the flying bridge.

The pedestal is intended for the installation and mounting of the portable radar
on it. The pedestal unit T is mounted permanently on deck close to both sides,
at the bow, in the middle and at the stern of the ship. To connect the radar set,
the pedestal has a cable with a plug connector. The pedestal is equipped with a
rotating device having a clamp to aim the radar in azimuth and elevation at the
target. when the ship is underway the upper part of the pedestal (rotating
mechanism and the power cable) are covered with a protective cap.

The distribution panel (unit Rich) is intended for connecting the units, monitor-
ing the power mains voltage and for the installation of the fuses. The units of
the radar are interconnected by cables run in the ship.

 

 

TABLE 6.1
Number of Units in a Set
Complement of Doppler Radar Units No. 1 No. 2 No. 3
Radar 2 2 1
Mounting pedestal 6 4 2
Distribution panel 1 l l
Indicator 2 2 0
Junction box 2 l 0
Power plant 1 l l

 

'nre complement of units in the "Istra" doppler radar and the equipment set variants
are shown in Table 6.1. A block diagram of the connections of the units for all
of the equipment set variants is shown in Figure 6.6. As can be seen from the
Table and the block diagram of the connections of the units, there are no indica-
tor units in set No. 3. In this case, the speed is read out by means of the indi-
cator unit located directly in the radar set.

The radar set is a portable doppler radar, a block diagram of which is shown in
Figure 6.7, and contains the following elements: the radio frequency CHJ-cm band
oscillator with a power of 10 m" using a Gunn diode; an isolator, which consists
of a directional coupler and a circulator, which provide for the operation of the
Doppler radar transceiver into a common antenna having a directional pattern width
of 6°, with a beavertail pattern; a dual channel receiver which consists of
mixers, Doppler frequency amplifiers and a test signal generator.

- 291 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6.6. Circuit configurations of the “latte" Doppler
radar units.

Key: 1. Mounting pedestal;
2. Indicator;
3. Junction box;
lo. Power plant;
5. Distribution panel;
6. Radar.

 

Figure 6.7. Block diagram of the radar set.

Key: 1. Directional coupler;
2. RF generator;

- 292 -
son OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 6.7, continued]:

3. Balanced mixer;

. Doppler frequency amplifier;

. Gravitational elevation angle sensor;
Speed measurement block;

. Speed indicator;

. Test signal generator.

Additionally, the doppler radar circuitry includes the following: a speed measuring
block, speed indicators and a gravitational elevation angle sensor. The receive
channels have a quadrature characteristic, i.e., when receiving returns from
approaching or departing targets, two identical doppler frequencies are produced

at the output of the receiver mixers having phase differences of +90° or -90'.

Following amplification, the doppler frequency is fed to the speed metering unit,
which contains a meter at the output which is graduated in meters per minute with
zero in the center. The deflection of the meter needle to the right corresponds to
the doppler radar approaching the reflecting target and the deflection of the needle
to the left corresponds to moving away from the reflecting target.

When measuring the speed at which a ship approaches the dock using signals reflected
from dockside structures, the signal pdwer level fluctuates greatly, and as measure-
ments have shown, can reach 30 dB and more [I2]. For this reason, the indicator
unit in the lattest models of the "Istra" doppler radar contains a logic circuit

for the analysis of the received signals. This makes it possible to improve the
operating reliability of the indicator and eliminate dropouts in the measurement

of the docking speed of a ship.

To prevent errors in measuring speed which are caused by aiming the radar unit
during dockingata large elevation angle relative to the horizontal, a gravitation
elevation angle sensor is provided in the doppler radar circuitry having a potenti-
ometer which is inserted in the speed indicator circuit. When the radar unit is
aimed at an angle to the horizontal, the value of :he sensor resistance changes,
correcting the meter readings.

The technical characteristics of the "Istra" doppler radar are shown in Table 6.2,
and for comparison, the technical characteristics of the similar TDl/l doppler
radar produced by the English "James Scott" company [12].

Prior to docking, the radar units are installed on the bow and stern mounting
pedestals on that side where the ship will be moored to the dock. If the dimen-
sions of the dock do not allow for measuring the docking speed from two points,
then the radar unit is installed on the mounting pedestal located in the center
part of the ship.

- 293 -
IN)!!0FFICJAI.lﬂSE2(HULY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060001-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

TABLE 6.2
The "Istra"
Technical Characteristics Doppler Radar
Transmitter carrier frequency, Gil: 9.108
Transmitted power, m" 10
Width of the antenna directional
pattern, degrees 6
Range of speeds which can be measured, 0-150, 0-30 and
m/min 0-15
Speed measurement precision, Z 10
circuit for improving the speed
measurement reliability YES
Operational range, mm:
Maximum 800
Minimum
Aiming angle of the speed sensor,
degrees:
In the vertical plane 10—45
In the horizontal plane 90
Error correction for speed measurement
when the radar unit is inclined in
the vertical plane YES
lnfornat ion on the direction of radar
aiming on the indicator unit YES
Operational monitoring of the radar
unit using a doppler signal
simulator YES
Electrical power supply Pram the ship mains

through a converter

 

After turning the radar on and checking its operability, the
radar unit at any object on the dock, which gives a good retu
given direction, and reads the docking speed from the meter <
unit. Then, the data obtained on the course angle to the re:
the speed and its sign are relayed to the indicators of the :
the two radar units, which provide for separate measurement t
bow and stem of the ship.

- 29b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080001-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1 MARINE INFRARED ﬂ TELEVISION EQIPHENT

 

The use of infrared and television equipment on ships significantly improves the
resolution of a number of navigation problems, prcvides for remote control

of machines, mechanisms and power plants and facilitates the monitoring of
their operation and the performance of loading and unloading operations.

Infrared and television equipment makes it possible to obtain additional
information for navigational purposes under conditions where the use of radar
is limited (observation in the blind area of the radar, during docking, or
going through locks).

Infrared night vision equipment makes it possible to observe the surrounding
situation on the water surface and on shore at night when there is no visibility
in optical instruments. This is especially important for ships navigating
rivers, through skerries, and narrow channels in a complex navigational
situation.

The inadequate range and considerable dependence on meteorological conditions
are holding back the application of infrared equipment on fishing and merchant
marine vessels.

7.1. The "Hgla" Infrared Night Vision Equipment

The ‘Hgla" equipment is intended for observing the surrounding situation on
the water surface and on shore at night in the absence of naked eye visibility
or visibility in optical instruments.

The equipment is installed on ships of the river fleet and provider for high
quality readings and failure free service in a temperature range of from -10°
to +30° C. .

The "Hgla" infrared night vision equipment (Figure 7.1) consists of the PNV-l
infrared telescope 6, the M-loS infrared projector 2, the power supply 5 and
the synchronous control mechanism which provides for tracking the projector
in azimuth and elevation with the night vision unit.

The synchronous control unit incorporates drive 4 of the PNV-l night vision unit,
as well as drive 1 of the H-loS projector and the remote coupling cable 3
between the unit and the projector.

The overall dimensions of the units and the locations for their installation
on a ship are shown in Figure 7.1.

The major technical data for the infrared night vision equipment are given
below:

Optical characteristics:
Magnification from 2.3 to 2.7
Field of view, degrees 16 t 52

-295-

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

     

 
   
       

u'n

' In" mq' lllli‘ "III"
., a" Illlll“

  

Figure 7.1. The "Hgls" equip-ent snd its mounting position on'
s ship.

Key: 1. Approximately 1,600 [n] to the floor of the wheelhouse.

Objective focal length, m 200
Relative aperture [F number] 1:1.65
Eyepiece lens magnification, degrees [sic] 5
Exit pupil diameter, mm 80

- 296 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(M§LY

Electronic-optical characteristics:

Photocathode Oxygen-
cesium
Resolution in the center, m/nn 24
Magnification from 0.57 to
0.67

Diameter of the working field of the

photocathode, mm 50

working voltage, KV 18
Electrical characteristics:

Supply voltage, volts 220

Power mains frequency, Hz 50

ac voltage, volts 20
Overall dimensions of the power supplies, mm 210x2068161

Telescope length, mm 836

Sweep radius, mm 125
Weight, kg:

Telescope 16.5

Power supply 4.5

Set in the packing 65
Delivery equipment complement:

Infrared telescope 1

Power supply 1

2RH22KPBChGZVl insert 1

SShRZOPZEc6 insert 1

Cover 1

Packing box 1

Stowage box (spare parts, tools and accessories) 1

Technical description and operational instructions 1

Service log 1

Operational Principle

The night vision unit is an infrared radiation receiver, where the IR radiation
is either radiated by the target or reflected from it.

The infrared telescope (Figure 7.2) is a monocular electronic-optical sighting
unit, based on the principle of converting invisible (infrared) rays to visible
ones by means of an electronic-optical converter (BOP).

The infrared rays are projected by the six-lens objective 3 onto the photo-
cathode of converter 5, which converts the light image to an electronic one.
This image is then transferred to the screen and converted to an optical one
which is viewed by means of eyepiece lens 7.

The light filters 1 and 2 suppress the visible portion of the spectrum and pass
only the infrared rays into the instrument.

- 297 -
son omen. Us: on“
FOI1OFFKJALIE§IOHHJ'

, :3? "my;
9. Lu ‘ ~

(III-Ilsa:

“I/M/II/m/ﬂ/A

    
    
  

I
|

llll

H «W

Figure 7.2. The infrared telescope.

   
   

  
   

    
  

    

  
       
 
  
  
   
 
 

It Wm

       

Protective glass 8 protects the parts and assemblies located inside the instru-
ment housing against moisture and dust.

An iris stop 4 is placed between the fourth and fifth lenses of the objective
to limit the entrance aperture of the objective in the case of excess illumina-
tion. The stop drive is coupled with a hinge to hand-wheel 10, by means of
which the aperture is stopped down.

The moving section of the instrument is the converter 5 and the eyepiece 7.
The high voltage is fed to the converter by means of cable 6, while the
negative charges are tapped off through contact 9.

The power supply consists of the following functional assemblies: the rectifier,
the voltage regulator, the self-excited oscillator and the high voltage recti-
fier.

When powered from the ship power mains at 220 volts, 50 R: by means of the
low voltage rectifier, which is designed around a transformer and a bridge
circuit using diodes, a DC voltage of 24 volts is obtained. This voltage or
the same voltage of the mains is stabilized by scans of regulators and a
transistor and is fed to the oscillator, where the DC is converted to AC. The
alternating pulsed voltage is stepped up to 10 to 12 volts [sic] by means of

a transformer and rectified using a selenium stack rectifier. A rectified
voltage of 17 to 20 RV is obtained at the output of the power supply, which is
fed to the electronic-Optical converter.

Brief Instructions for the Installation, Mounting, Alignment and Operation of
the Unit

The night vision unit is secured to hanger 7 of the drive (Figure 7.1). The
drive provides for the rotation and inclination of the unit when aiming it
at a target, the fastening of the unit in the wheelhouse, as well as the
synchronous transmission of the position taken by the unit to the projector.
The housing of the drive 4 is installed on the roof of the wheelhouse and
fastened to the base with bolts.

- 298 -
FIHlCHﬁﬁCJAI.lEﬂB(MﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The synchronous orientation of the PNV-l night vision unit and the H—bS
projector is provided by a drive using coupling cable 3.

The structural design of the drive nukes it possible where necessary to take
the night vision unit down (slip down) from under the ceiling of the wheel-
house.

In the operating position, the PhV-l night vision unit is lowered under its
own weight by means of a hydraulic shock absorber.

The H-bS projector with the infrared filter is installed on the housing of
drive 1, the base of which is secured to the mounting on the roof of the
wheelhouse. The drive is controlled by the coupling cable.

The remote coupling cable 3 couples the horizontal rotation pulleys and the
vertical travel rods of the PNV-l night vision unit and H—AS projector drives.
The coupling cable assembly includes the following: steel cables, thimble
eyes, internediate inserts for the coarse setting of the projector and unit
positions, as well as rigging screws for the precise setting of the optical
axes of the night vision unit and the projector.

The guidance of the telescope is accomplished in the horizontal and vertical
planes by the synchronous control mechanism.

The brightness of the image is adjusted by stop a depending on the visibility.
When a bright light source falls within the field of view, one is to work with
the light filter and stop the objective down to normal brightness.

It is necessary to keep the night vision unit clean and in good working order.
The external optical components may be cleaned only using the materials supplied
with the unit.-

One must protect the PIN-l night vision unit against shocks during operation

and transportation. The condition of the drying agent in the cartridges must

be checked no less than once a month. During the operational period, care of
the synchronous control mechanism reduces to the timely tensioning of the
cables, checking the operation of the shock absorber and breaks, and lubricating
the vertical rods of the projector and night vision unit drive.

7.2. The "Gorizont" Marine Television Installation

The "Gorizont" marine television installation is intended for the following:

-A navigation aid for ship piloting (docking, checking and observing the course
when following a ship, going through locks, etc.);

--0bserving loading and unloading operations in holds and on the deck;

-Remote observation of the operation of machinery, power plants and mechanisnm;

--Remote monitoring and control of production processes in the port area.

- 299 -

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE{NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on the quantitative complement of equipment units, distinctions are
drawn between the following: the "Gorizont" and "Gorizont-l-l" single camera
installations; the five-camera "Gorizont-Z", "Corizont-Z-l" and "Gorizont-2-2"
installations [2].

The complement of the various equipment sets is shown in Table 7.1. Supplied
along with the units is a set of spare parts, tools and accessories, an instal-
lation set as well as cables and operational docuentation.

The unjor technical parameters of the units are given below:

The interlace sweep standard:

Frame frequency 25
Number of lines per frame 62
Frame aspect ratio 10:3
Horizontal resolution, lines:
In the center, no less than 550
At the corners 1050
Number of brightness gradations which can be distinguished,
no less than 7
Image size on the video monitor screen, In 300x226

111s automatic gain control attack time for a brightness
change of from 200 to 100,000 lux, in seconds, no more than 5

Maximum coupling line length, ma [sic] 500
Continuous duty time in the operating mode, hours 24
Supply voltage, volts 220 z 22
Supply voltage frequency, Rs 50 1 2.5

Power consumption, Kw:
"Gorizont-l“, "Corizont-l-l"
"Gorizont-2", "Gorizont-Z-l", "Gorisont-2-2"

I-IO
was

A block diagram of the "Gorizont-Z" television installation is shown in Figure
7.3

The KTP--KTPS transmitting cameras convert the light image to an electrical
signal.

The KTP-Slo camera has a single objective optical attachment lens with remote con-
trol of the stop and focusing, with interchangeable OKSl-ZZ-l, "Gelios-33",
"Yupiter-3" and "Yupiter-9" objectives.

The KTP-SIo-l camera has a dual objective optical attachment with "Gelioa-33" and
"Yupiter-9” objectives, which are included in the set of attachments with remote
control of the focusing, the stop and can interchange objectives with a scale
change by a factor of 2.6 times.

-300-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IDLE 7.1

(1’ l «II-AM“: l - n

Knmnul. umm ”mt-on

I

ruby-nut punter“.
nu

ufo’mII-I u
arouse»! -|o
c rowan-2»
woman-2 In
cropnmrf-b

Gar
.8 his“. ‘5

bboovoouoeooc

Kﬂhﬁ
KTILSIJ
Kﬂtﬁ
[X325
VH6
VH8
BK”
5¥®6
"Mu
"MM'
I I! K40
50%
(Mﬂn
Stand

§3H35§§

——»»|——nag;ua
A
“99?

.......¢.¢§ —-—! low!

‘3

 

Key: 1. Equipment couplenent, nunber of. units;
2. Overall dimensions, In.

 

r— +22.
2 I
u) ( ) (4 m |
»- . m . .
m ‘5 [Mill :
(7) (3) | l
, x1112 ' :
Eﬂ‘ll 1m R“*Ellll
(9) ( l

L _ _ __l
6!! H 220 VAC

’ m "2“ (n)
I- “ "‘iﬁlﬂ

m
m
: -(?.2)
P m
(ma- 220 vac : I
(p,
m ' '

(15)
> m
m‘ | [112 :u4)
(16) L __ _ ._ J

Figure 7.3. Block diagram of the "corizont-Z" urine televiuion installation.

-301-

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
[Key to Figure 7.3]:

OQNOms‘uNr-I

. Transmitting TV camera 1;
. Interconnection block I;

. Main observation post;

. Control console I;

. Video monitor 1;

. Control and guidance 1;

. Transmitting TV camera 2;
. lnterconnecting block 2;

. Switcher;

. Driver and amplifier unit;
. Remote observation post;

. Video monitor 2;

. Connecting block 6;

. Control console 2;

. Transmitting TV camera 5;
. Control and guidance unit 5;
. Connecting block 5.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The KTP-SS camera has a single objective optical attachment with remote control
of the stop and focusing with interchangeable "Gelios-33", "Yupiter-3" and
"Yupiter-9" objectives.

The camera can be cited on the object being observed either remotely by means of

the UN-6 control and guidance blocks or directly by means of the UN-9 [control
and guidance unit 9].

The 35-25 and 88-28 connection blocks generate the supply voltages for the trans-
mitting camera and provide for the connection of a supplemental lighting source.

The video signal from the KTPl--KIPS [TV cameras 1-5] is fed through the BSl--BSS
connecting blocks and the BR switching block to the amplification and driver
circuitry, the BUF. The composite television signal is fed via a cable to the
IVKl and IVKZ video monitors for the playback of the image.

The PU-63 control console is used in the single camera installation and provides-
for the following: remotely turning the standby and operating modes on and off,
aiming the cameras at a target and focusing, stopping the objective down and
changing the objective (scale), as well as feeding out instructions for addi-
tional lighting and turning the back-up sync generator on and off.

The PU-ba control console is used in a multiple camera installation and provides
for switching the camera and performs the functions indicated above.

In a multiple camera installation with P01 and P02 [control consoles l and 2], the
main control is conducted from the main observation post, the CPR. The same
picture is present on video monitor unit 2 of the remote observation post, the
VPN. In the on-duty mode, the main observation post, or when it is shut down, the
control of the installation can be realized from the remote observation post.

The transmitting end units are (Figure 7.4): the KTP-Sa (or KTP-Sb-l) television
camera. the 88-25 connection block, and the UN-9 and UN-6 guidance units can be
placed on decks, superstructures on and on masts.

The receiving end units are (Figure 7.5): the PU-44 and PU-h3 control consoles,
the IVK-40 video monitor. the BK-38 switching block, the BUY-6 driver and ampli-
fier, the 38-26 connecting block as well as the KTP-SS transmitting TV camera
should be housed in inside rooms.

The "Gorizont" installation is designed for applications under conditions of
haor-frost, sea fog, severe mechanical loads as well as magnetic and electrical

fields. All of the units can operate in a relative humidity of up to 981 at a
temperature of +40 °C.

The following types of cables are used for the connections between the units:
KHPVE-SOO (7 x 1.5) between transmitting TV cameras 1 - 5 and guidance and control
units 1 - 5; TKOSV-37 between transmitting TV cameras 1 - S and connecting blocks
1 - 5 and the switcher; KMPVE-SO (30 x 1.5) between the switcher and control
consoles l and 2; RK-7S-7-12 between the driver and amplifier unit and video

- 303 -

FOR 0FFK]Al.USEl)NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 7.5. General view of the receiving units.

PU-ha control console;

lVK-AO video monitor;

BK-38 switcher;

SUP-6 driver and amplifier unit;
38-26 connecting block;

. Stand.

Key:

Omwav-t

monitors I and 2; WWI-500 (4 x 1.0) between connecting blocks 1 - 5 and video
monitors 1 and 2.

~304-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 IBLIOGRAPKY

1. Bayrashevskiy A.M., Nichiporenko N.‘1‘., "Sudovyye rsdiolokstsionnyye sisteuy".
["Msrine Radar Systems"], Moscow,"'rransport" Publishers, 1973, 352 pp.

2. Bogdanov I.I., Dogdanov V.A., Karasik V.G., "Sudovyye televisionnyye ustanovki
'Gorizont'" ["‘1‘he 'Gorizont‘ Marine Television Installations"], "Ekspress-
Infornatsiya. Ser. Sudovozhdeniye i svyaz'" ["Express Information. Series:
Ship Piloting and Conmnications"], No. 8 (103), Moscow, TaBNTI MM? [Central
Office for Scientific and Technical Information, Ministry of the Maritime
Fleet], 1977, pp 19-27.

3. 11be V.I., "Ispol'zovaniye priyemoindikators 'Pirs-l': Uchsbnoye posobiye"
["Using the 'Pirs-l' Display Receiver: A Textbook"], Moscow, Public Informa-
tion office of the Ministry of the writine Fleet, 1975.

4. Bykov V.I., Kuklin Yu.I., Nikitenko Yu.I.. "Sudovyye vizual'nyye radiopelen-
gatory" ["Msrine Visual Display Radio Direction Pinders"], Moscow, "‘l‘r'ansport" "
Publishers, 1962.

     
   
  
  

I

S. Sykov V.I., Nikitenko Yu.I., "Sudovyye radionavigstsionnyye ustroystva"
["Marine Radionavigstion Equipment"], Moscow, "Transport" Publishers, 1976

6. Bykov V.I., "Radionsvigatsionnays sistany 'Qnegs'" ["‘l'he '(hega' Radio iss-
tion Systen"], Moscow, "Transport" Publishers, 1978.

7. Bykov V.I., "Rukovodstvo po ispol'zovaniyu priyenoindikators [CPI-5F sudakh
norskogo flots" ["Instructions for the Use of the KPI-SP Display R elver on
Ships of the Maritime Fleet"), Moscow, Public Infornation Office 1 the Minis-
try of the Maritime Fleet, 1976.

8. Vasil'yev V. N. ., Oleynikov Yu. D., "Seriys unifitsirovsnnykh sudovykh radio.-
lokatsionnykh stantsiy 'Nsysda'" ["‘l‘he 'Nayada' Series of Standardized Radars"],
Moscow, TsBN‘l‘I IMP,1974,30 pp.

9. Bolynets V.l-'., "RLS 'okean'" ["‘l‘he 'Okean' Radar"],"‘l‘ransport" Publishers,
1971., 197 pp.

10. Zurabov Yu.G., Moskvin 6.1., Bogdanov V.A., "Novyye tekhnicheskiye sredstva
sudovozhdeniya" ["New Ship Navigation Equipment"], "Obzornays informatsiya.
Ser. Sudovozhdeniye i svysz'" ["Review Information. Series on Ship Piloting
and Comanications'q, Moscow, TsBN’l‘I MP, 1978, pp 39-106.

11. Vasil'yev V.N., Degment'yev V.G., Kurov R.V., et 31., 'Morskaya navigstsionnsys
RLS 'Lotsiya'" ["The 'Lotsiys' Marine Navigation dear"], lbscow, "Transport"
Publishers, 1974, 120 pp.

12. Moskvin G.I., Surovets L.A., "Doplerovsksya radiolokatsionnaya stantsiya

'Istra'" ["‘l‘he 'Istrs' Doppler,Radar"], "Ekspresa-infornstsiya. Ser.
Sudovozhdeniye i svyaz'", No. S (90), Moscow, ‘l‘sBN'I'I MP, 1976, pp 3-11.

-305-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.

1‘.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hoslwin 0.1., "Ustroyatvo 'Al'fa'" ["‘l‘he 'Al'fa' Equipaent"], “sprees-
Infornatsiya. Ser. Sudovozhdeniye i svyaz'", No. 2 (87), macaw, TsBNTI HEP,
1976, 36 pp. '

Simnovakiy 3.6., "Sredatva promyslovogo sudovozhdeniya" ["Equipnent for
Fishing Ship Navigation"], "Pishchevaya pronyshlennost'" Publishers, 1976,
222 pp.

"Sudovyye radiolokatsionnyye atantaii: Atlas" ["Harine Radar Stations: An Atlas"],
Edited by Adi. Bayruhevakiy, Moscow “Transport" Publishers, 1977, 162 pp.

Aver'yanov V.Ya., Bayrashevskiy A.H., Georginnov K.V., et al., "Sudovyye
radiolokatsionnyye atantaii i ikh prineneniye" ["Hnrine Radars and Their
Applications"), Sudostroyeniye Publishers, 1970, 266 pp.

Finkel'shteyn H.I., "Osnovy radiolokataii" ["hmdauentals of agar-"l, mace-v,
Savetskoye Radio Publishers, 1973, 1096 pr.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1979

8225
080: 81M /1 953

-END-

-306-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY