FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10276
25 January 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10

25 Januar

NEST EUROPE REPORT

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(F000 1/82)

CONTENTS

TRANSPORTATION

Current Research Efforts in Magnetic Levitation Technology
(Herbert Heb; ZBITSCHRIFT FUER BISEWBAHNHBSEN UND

WWH, wt 81) no.oooooooooooooo-ooo-00.0.3000...

-a- [III-WE-lSl

can nun-Irv. v I ICE “I" V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

CURRENT RESEARCH EFFORTS IN MAGNETIC LEVIIATION TECHNOLOGY

was: Berlin zarrscum'r was nsmummsm mm vmmns‘rscmn in German Oct 81
pp 311-319

[Article by Prof Dr-Eng Herbert "eh. Technical University of Braunschweig: "Re-
search Efforts in the Areas of Magnetic Suspension Technology and Linear Drives"l

[Text] 1. Introduction

Contactless transport technology is still today at the beginning of its develop-
ment. In the PEG the direction taken by magnetic suspension technology is char-
acterized by a developmental trend in which components are employed for combined
propulsive and support functions.

The area of application of various designs always enlarges whenever it is possi-
ble to improve the characteristics of the functional elements. This continues
to be true when it is a matter of applying contactless transport technology to
small vehicles and to goods transport. Both of these latter cell for a substan-
tial simplification and cheapening of the primary structural components.

The research studies described in the following paper relate in each case to
subdomains of contactless support and propulsion technology. They are segments
of the research projects carried out at the Institute for Electrical Machines.
Propulsion Systems and Roadways of the Technical University of Braunschweig for
the German Federal Ministry of Research and Technology (BMPT). These projects
aimed at developing further improvements for the future application of magnetic
suspension technology.

2. The Design of an Energy Supply for Long-Stator Drives

The long-stator drive presents us with the task of outlining and developing
while maintaining the desired high efficiency a cost favorable procedure for
processing energy and conducting it to the winding. Here one must take into ac-
count the need for keeping thrust variations law. There are also a number of
technological prerequisites which must be taken into account here. For reasons
of economy preference is given to the use of conventional switches to serve as
switching elements connecting the winding sections with the power lines. The
transmission voltage must be set at about 5 kilovolts in order to limit losses
at the given conductor cross section.

1

FOR OFFlCl-AL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The power feed design and winding arrangement for the Ensland Transrapid Test
Facility (TV!) are shown schematically and in single phase in Figures is to 1c
[1]. The winding sections are fed alternately by the inverted converters (HR) I
and II. This synchronous procedure [2] permits a shackless motion of the vehi-
cle from one winding section to another but on the other hand gives rise to only
about 50-percent utilization of the inverted converters. The latter involve a
pulse rectifier with automatic cosmtation which accounts for a substantial
fraction of the cost of the substructure equipment. The engineering design
which is still satisfactory for the test series of the Emsland project appears
to be too expensive for the connercial use of magnetic suspension technology.

,/_,

 

H:

'12:

u
- ,.

Figure l. Single-strand winding, synchronous circuit (one slot per pole and
phase).

The basic idea of a new design which is being investigated with the support of
the BHFT is:

1. full utilization of the inverted converters and
ii. reduction of the apparent power of the winding sections.

By subdividing the winding strands of the three-phase winding into two parallel
substrands and by feeding then separately through the inverted converters l and
2 it is possible to sharply reduce the inverted convertzr power by using the
power feed scheme sketched in Pigure 2s and 2b.

The circuiting is so selected that in providing vehicle power both winding
strands carry current. Thus normally both inverted converters are in use. It
is not necessary to hold an additional inverted converter in reserve. In addi-
tion there is the fact that as a result of the displaced longitudinal arrange-
nent of the winding sections their total idling power demand is reduced in com-
parison with the single-strand arrangement. This situation is also shown in the
voltage diagram 2c and there in particular corresponds to the length of the in-
ductive voltage xd/a'- For the same total length of the winding sections, the
full magnitude of the surface magnetic energy is generated only by the section
within whose two strands current is being carried. However. in comparison with
the single-strand winding it has only half the length. 0n the remaining half of
the corresponding section the magnetic energy is lower. Here the current in the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

winding in reduced by at 1eaet half ao that the aurfaca energy enounta to at the
noat one-quarter.

 

Figure 2. Double-atrend arrangement. one inaide the other.

I! the "ahort-circuit ayaten" ia daeigned in accordance with Figure 2a than one
met elao take into account that in the unfed winding as a conaequence of the
magnetic field in the fed winding a current ie induced which further weaken- the
primary field. The effect of this procua heconaa all the greater the note
cloaely the two atrcnda lie together (Figure 2b). In the caee when the arrange-
ment ia in eeparate equidiatant alota the coupling ia about 20 percent. The re-
aulting voltage drop then correaponde roughly to that of the diagra- in Figure
2c. It nay he aeen that in conpariaon with the single-attend winding deaign one
ohtaina 9. aharp reduction in the phaee angle between current and voltage. The
apparent power of the two circuite in clearly leaa than the apparent power of an
uneutdivided winding.

It is evident that the procedure of douhle-atrand diaplaced winding aectione ia
not exclusively confined to the uee of "abort-circuit teed linee" but can alao
he need jointly with the tap line deaign (in analogy to Figure la). The two
auhconductora can here alao without diaadvantage be placed in a m alot.
kanination of the problena'of twitching over ahewe that here. too. there are
clear advantagea on the aide of the double-atrend winding. In the cane when the
awitching proceae coepele a current interruption for one winding attend the re-
sidual thruet etill anounta under the moat peaaiaiatic eaaulptiona to 50 percent
of the initial value. Through dynamic proceeaee in the current circuit. through
the tendency of the winding to keep the magnetic flux conetent. the thruet-gen-
erating winding will. however. carry a aonewhat higher current and will time
partially conpeneate the interruption of force.

In order to obtain e full aaoothiag out of the thruet variationa the ewitching
on of the new winding section can he carried out already prior to entrance of
the vehicle. If one ainultaneoualy mloyeaa in the other strand a aonewhat in-
creaaed current than the two co-aon-fed sections can be operated at a reduced
current with very alightly increaaed voltage. Since the otertup proceoaee tehe
place very rapidly and can he very rapidly atabilined by noon: of the regulating
system it in poaaible to avoid oacilletione in the thruet if the inverted con-
vertera ere alightly overdinenaioned. The rated output of the inverted convert-
era 1 and 2 taken together is also in thia case no higher than that aaeociated

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with about 50 percent of the power of the inverted converters I and II in the
case of a single-strand winding.

3. Inverter Design for Short- and Long-Stator Drives

The magnitude of the drive power requires for the transport of energy transmis-
sion voltages in the range of S kilovolts. Low-loss linear drives are at the
present time fed via automatically commutated inverted converters. This places
a restriction on the conditions which must be met in order to obtain limited
costs for the substructure equipment in the case of a long stator and to obtain
low structural volumes and weights for a short-stator drive attached to the ve-
hicle. In addition there is the fact that while it is possible for additional
transformers to he used on the load side of the inverted converters in the case
of the long-stator design nevertheless this gives rise to difficulties in
achieving simple and cheap switching arrangements. Also in the case of short-
stator drives a transformer on the vehicle implies an undesirable increase in
weight which in turn must be paid for with greater drive power. Thus there
arises a demand for frequency converters of sufficiently high voltage and having
a design which is as simple as possible. Converter circuits which get along
with natural commutation are most likely to meet this demand. Another argument
in favor of such converters is the fact that semiconductor components are avail-
able which permit a higher blocking voltage and greater currents. Admittedly.
the use of naturally commutating converters should not he insisted upon at the
cost of having to operate the linear motor in a state of hyperexcitation. This
could result in too great disadvantages for the overall process of energy con-
versions; with traditional inverted converter circuits it also implies limita-
tion of the inverted converter function to frequencies which are not too low.

A compromise solution-may be found if one employees adjustable idle current in-
puts on the load side. such as switchable condensers. They permit. e.g.. natu-
ral commutation above 50 percent of the highest frequency while in the lower
range they serve as energy reservoirs for the quenching circuits of the auto-
matic commutation.

An inverted converter design operates throughout the entire frequency range
without change in circuitry; its intermediate circuit is designed (Figure 3) in
the form of a resonance circuit [3]. The connection to the primary power supply
as well as to the load is through an inverting rectifier for single-phase con-
nection to the oscillating circuit. This inverter is thus fully controllable
with regard to frequency and power-in both directions. so far as the power is
concerned. It requires for the primary power supply no idle current in reserve
and imposes no requirements on the load resistance. Its control design is sim-
ple; its frequency range is large and not tied to the frequency of the primary
power supply. A series arrangement of the rectifiers for adaptation to high op-
erating voltages appears here to be far freer of problems than in the case of
automatically commuting inverters. The described inverter design obviously
eliminates the frequency variations so familiar with direct inverters but in-
volves only two-thirds of the rectifiers required by the latter. Within the
framework of the research project funded by the IHPT investigations are being
carried out of the properties and dimensioning conditions of this type of in-
verter.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 ‘

['""""'""_-"1-'T_'—--'—""'1 _____ 1
I
l
I

    

Figure 3. Circuit and current profiles of s new inverter design.

Key: 1. Inverting rectifier ... 3. Load
2. Current intermediate circuit

The obviously favorable structural volume makes this inverter appear to be very
well suited to application to vehicles. Figure b shows a circuit in which two
inverters of this type. each of which feeds a linear motor, are electrically
connected in series. Here the power is fed from the DC power supply. or in
other words. via DC current carrying electric rails having a voltage of. e.g..

b kilovolts. The voltage diVision is symmetrirsd by a current control which op-
erates on the two motor current circuits. In the design of the motors the se-
ries circuitry has the advantage that the windings need be insulated only for
the half-voltage and this is important for heat dissipation and in the construc-
tion of lightweight motors. Through the saving in transformers and the favor-
able design of the motors it is possible to obtain a clear improvement in the

vehicle design.
A. The Use of new Magnetic Materials

The technologies of magnetic suspension and electrical linear drives are of par-
ticular interest to the engineer specializing in magnetic technology because it

is apparent that often very slight improvements in individual parts (magnets)
can lead to considerable savings in other vehicle or roadway components. Thus.

roe omdAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IS}: ONLY

‘0

e.g.. merely an increased flux density in the magnets-even when this involves a
certain added expense-can lead to a quite significant cheapening of other vehi-
cle or roadway components. Simultaneously it is possible with new and more ef-
ficient magnets to achieve an improvement in the levitation characteristics.
More favorable dynamic properties in the levitation magnets yield a more rapid
return to a new position of equilibrium after a perturbation. In turn one can
also derive from this savings in the control elements of the magnets. In the
chain of elements. mutually interdependent in their dimensioning. the supporting
and propulsion magnets assume a "strategically" important place; improvements in
these specially critical locations have a particularly marked effect upon the
characteristics of the entire system.

 

Figure 4. Series circuitry of the inverted converters for feeding power to lin-
ear motors. _

The use of new magnetic materials makes possible, as has :ecently been learned.
a new design of linear motors which are in fact of a type previously written off
because of their too unfavorable operating characteristics for use in the trans-
port sector. It now seems to be becoming possible to achieve high efficiencies
and power factors simultaneously with acceptable weights for the drive. In con-
sequence the installation of power-carrying motor parts into the vehicle (short—
stator technology) is again becoming more attractive. Specially favorable de-
sign solutione evidently arise whenever the motor can also take over the func-
tion of the supporting element.

As a further example of the use of high-energy permanent magnets (REC magnets)
some statements should be made regarding possible improvements in the repulsive
support process on the basis of permanent magnets. This support technology had
already been suggested more than 10 years ago; however. its characteristics for
use in transport technology had not yet become sufficiently favorable. Then the
course was adopted of using superconductive coils as vehicle magnets and of in-
troducing current-carrying rails or coils in place of magnets (normally conduct-
ing) along the side of the roadway. This procedure which has been still further
developed by the JNR in Japan requires a relatively high energy consumption for
the support technology and leads to a rather complex overall system.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. high-Energy Permanent Hagnets in Long-Stator Technology

Synchronous long-stator drive is either designed with superconducting exciter
coils in the vehicls--in which case it then uses an irouless stator-«or else the
iron-containing stator variant is employed so that electromagnsts and/or perma-
nent nagnsts can be used for the exciter field. In the case of iron-containing
technology it is also possible to use the normal forces of the motor to compen-
sate the weight of the vehicle. When a controlled magnetic field is used one
can dispense with further supporting elements such as wheels [6].

For high velocities the dynamic effects produced by perturbing forces and inac-

curacies in the roadway acquire increasing significance. In the case of mechan-
ical guidance they give rise to increased wear of the (mechanical) guiding ele-

msnts. For this reason contact-free suspension is an attractive transport vari-
ant; not least of all it also has the advantage of reduced maintenance cost.

But in addition it is also possible to allow greater tolerances in the accuracy

of the roadway and this in turn can yield a cheapsning of the roadway construc-

tion.

The disadvantage of the electromagnsts lies in the fact that particularly in the
case of low-loss design they possess a large time constant. In order to achieve
adequately rapid interventions in stabilizing the supporting function there are
therefore required high values of maximum voltage and high power amplifications.
The result is an increase in the quantity of power-electronics devices in the
vehicle. If one dispenses with a high response speed in the magnets then this
implies greater deviations between the roadway contour and the magnet pathway.
This requires a greater average distance from the rail and a higher magnet power.
The simultaneously increased magnet mass has an additional negative effect upon
the levitation behavior and the attainable riding comfort.

Especially from the dynamic point of view a relatively narrow range of options .
is available in the design of supporting magnets and propulsion magnate.

Low magnet weight. low losses and high force gradients are the desired goals.
An average gap of about 1 cm is sought. The maxim gap deviations resulting
from flexurs of the carriers should not exceed 3 -. In thin way it is possible
to meet conventional comfort criteria. which essentially restrict the vertical
accelerations of the passenger cabin. up to velocities of more than 600 lam/hr.
here it is assumed that over carrier spans of about 25 meters the maxim flea:-
ure amounts to about 0.8 en.

The use of high-energy permanent magnets (REC magnets) for carrying and propul-
sion substantially increases the range of design options in achieving a high
riding comfort for given roadway tolerances. A placement of the permanent mag-
nets directly at the air gap permits. with renanencs inductions of about 0.9 T.
flux densities from 0.4 to 0.5 T and is characterised by small leakage flux.
However. the use of additional control coils turns out with this form of magnet
to be very unsuitable.

The additional electrical excitation of the nagnet required for gap control re-
quires. it is true. a modified magnet design. The average nagnetic flux. which

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corresponds to the stationary state. generated by the permanent megnet has su—
perimposed upon it an adjustable flux generated by a coil. with relatively
small additional flux components it is possible because of the quadratic rela-
tion between flux and force to produce proportionately great control forces. It
is certainly important for the magnetic circuit to be so configured that the ad-
ditionally required flux components can be generated with limited circulation of
magnetic potential through the coils [5]. The latter should also continue to be
small for the maximum value of force as compared with the value required for
electromagnets. In this connection experimental investigations have been car-
ried out with the support of the Federal Ministry of Research and Technology in
the Institute for Electrical Machines. Drives and Roadways (see Figure 5) which
confirm the superiority of controlled permanent magnets in comparison with elec-
trcmagnets. As the force current characteristic curves show when compared as in
Figure 5 it is possible to carry out the control of the permanent magnets with
relatively small circulations. Figure 6 shows an arrangement of magnets in
which the flux-conducting magnet surface is greater than the pole surface (flux
focusing) and in which soft iron poles serve to deflect the flux in the region
of the air gap. In this way the magnetic resistance of the permanent magnet
segment is diminished. As a consequence of the relatively small circulation of
magnetic potential the winding cross sections can be reduced in comparison with
the electromagnets. The magnetic time constant which is proportional to the
winding cross section is also reduced. In this way the dynamic behavior of the
magnet is made more favorable; the force gradient rises with constant voltage
elevation. with the aim of obtaining the same dynamic behavior it is possible
to diminish the power amplification (size of the current regulators) [5-7].

 

Circulation of'magnetic potential ﬂu!

Figure 5. Supporting force comparison between permanent magnet and electromag-
net .

A consideration important for applications in the case of long-stator drive is
the reduction in levitation power. This power. apart from some other smaller
elements. decisively determines the on-boerd energy requirement and is thus of
essential importance for the provision of energy on board the vehicle. If it is
desired to accomplish the latter without resorting to turbine power supplies or
to a special power transmission system then one can make use of an induction ef-
fect. Through the slot openings of the stator there arises in opposition to the
fundamental wave of the exciter field a harmonic wave which varies relative to
the exciter poles as a function of travel velocity. Its energy can be decoupled

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
by means of an alternating current winding in the poles of the vehicle.

FOR OFFICIAL IFSl-I 0NI.\

The use

of the permanent magnets contributes significantly to limiting the power of this
linear generator.

 

Figure 6.
m1 5 -- . '
Pergurbationomr I 4‘ l
a mum air all!
' |
— _---I
“811‘. 529'- _ Ill-l
°°m°1 l_--ml
““5”“ n I-I-III
2 M Di-. .r" “F
“ ‘- J
m-Il 3
Power loss '
of control I -
coil I -
'va «an I |
0
2 I. sic s

be

5-

0

Permanent magnet arrangement .

----
II'El-EII

§§=a=u

Wu:-

-----
IIm-II
--lI-Il
.‘I’N-ll
-----
- 2 ' L sec a

Controlled permanent magnet Ug-ISV Blectromagne: U.-55V

Figure 7 .

Oscillograns of controlled permanent magnets.

Figure 7 shows oscillograms which display the favorable behavior of controlled

permanent magnets .

The measurements show that in the case of electromagncts of

the same weight perturbations of the same size are responded to with about the
same gap deviations as in the case of the permanent magnet only if the battery

voltage is approximately tripled.
carrying rail with a pulse generator.

A perturbation was produced by exciting the
It is also apparent that for the control-

led permanent magnet the power peaks are very much lower than for the electro-

magnet.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL RSI”. ONLY

If one attempts to simulate the effects of carrier flexure at high velocity
(400 km/hr) on power requirement one can make a computational estimate of the
requisite carrying power. To this end the selected simple two-mass model sup-
plies a comparatively conservative estimate (with a proportionately high value).
Converted to a vehicle which is about 50 meters long the simulation shown in
Figure 8 yields a power peak of about 20 kilowatts; the average power is very
much lower. These power values are to be compared with a carrier power of more
than 300 kilowatts in the case of a vehicle using electronsgnets.

N
I)
.5

v
I

Power P [W]

 

Figure 8. Power requirement in the case of sinusoidal perturbation (As - 8 an);
nominal force of the magnets: Fo - 15,000 N.

The qualitatively favorable levitation behavior can be made useful for high-
velocity vehicles in various ways. Besides the positive effects upon the design
and size of the control elements as well as upon the necr-asary on-board power
the greater force gradients also permit more favorable conditions for allowing
greater roadbed tolerances [7].

In order to test the adequacy of this nagnet design on the scale of actual ap-
plication there was developed in cooperation with Thyseen lienschel and Thyssen
Stainless Steel Works a combined carrying and propulsion magnet having the di-
mensiona appropriate to the IVA vehicle TR 05. Figure 9 shows the magnet on the
test stand in the institute. Lifting devices were used in constructing the
large-volume magnet units; also used were special assembling devices for in-
stalling the magnets.

with an 8-nn gap to the stator the carrying force in the currentless state
amounts to 16.000 N; this is about 30 times the weight of the SmCos material and

about 6 times the magnet weight.
6. A New Short-Stator Linear Motor With High Efficiency

The linear motor designs known up until recently could be adapted to a number of
conditions of use; but without exception they all displayed a low efficiency
which did not correspond to their power level—this efficiency being clearly

less than 90 percent. In the case of a linear induction motor because of the
so-called end effects one is limited to efficiencies below 80 percent. In con-
sequence of the large gap and of a relatively high leakage the power factor is
generally far lower so that it was hardly possible to exceed products n ° cos 6 -
0.1.. This in turn iapliee very great design power for the frequency inverter

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFK14|.USF.OVLY

required on the vehicle, thus giving rise to a considerable additional space and
weight requirement. If it is to be possible to solve the problem of energy sup-
ply at high velocities then there exists moreover the problem of designing a
linear motor having an apparent power which is not substantially greater than
the yielded mechanical power.

 

Figure 9. Test stand for investigating Figure 10. DELSYM model motor.
controlled permanent magnets

Within the framework of a research program for developing vehicles having short-
stator drives investigations are being carried out at the Technical University
of Braunschweig of a new synchronous motor with permanent magnet excitation. In
contrast to previously known types this motor has no electrical excitation but
an excitation through REC magnets. thus reducing in this way the losses and the
motor weight. By doubling the exeiter arrangement it is possible to achieve an
additional amplification of the interaction between the magnetic field and the
armature currents. The effects of a homopolar and of a heteropolar interaction
are superposed and lead to an increase in the induced voltage. The armature
winding is designed with toroidal coils [9].

Figure 10 shows the model motor as used for the first tests for force measure—
ment. The rail employed here is of massive design. Measured force values are
plotted in Figure l1 as a function of the surface current of the armature wind-
ing; the magnet height amounts to 2 cm. It is apparent that the force densities
required for propulsion can be generated with relatively small surface currents.
This in turn implies that the motor can be operated with low winding losses so
that an efficiency of about 95 percent appears to be obtainable. Of special in—
terest with regard to achievement of a light vehicle is a motor configuration
which provides not only the propulsive forces but also the carrying force and
when necessary the lateral force. The cross section of such an arrangement is
sketched in Figure 12. In addition to the REC magnets there is an arrangement
of guide coils which via a control element excite the additional flux components
required for dynamic stabilization. A control coil inserted in the toothed re-
gion outside the winding produces by means of inward or outward field displace-
ments controllable lateral forces for guiding the vehicle. These flux compo-
nents generated by the control coils can also generate lateral forces when the
vehicle is in the middle position.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
secmd"? Part: :

cross section

Prim"? Part:
°’°98 aecc1on
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

design power of the inverted converter as compared with previously known design
solutions.

in addition operates without power [sic] [10]. This was also especially attrac-
tive because the repulsive magnet arrangement leads to a magnetic vehicle which
is fundamentally very simple in its structure. permits a small vehicle cross
section and allows a simple attachment of the magnet to the vehicle. Quantita-
tive investigations of ferrites yielded. however. several problem areas. As
Figure 13 indicates the attainable force densities in repulsive csrrier technol-

of less than 2.5 N/cm2 are attainable and this gives rise to very broad magnet
rails or magnet coverings and a large magnet mass in the vehicle. Despite low
specific magnet costs the result is very expensive vehicle equipment. The pro-

support is lossless and accordingly takes place without damping it is easy to
prove that the procedure is not suitable for vehicles which are intended to
reach speeds greater than 50 km/hr.

Also the bilateral use of REC magnets in the roadway and on_the vehicle does not
come within the sphere of discussion. while this magnet arrangement does yield
the desired reduction in magnet weight nevertheless the still absolutely large
magnet weights for the given roadway structure are substantially too expensive.

The basically obvious idea of using ferrite magnets on the roadway and 33$ mag-
nets in the vehicle is to be sure fascinating. but it is not without its prob-
lems. For it must first be made sure that the ferrite magnets are either not at
all or very little demagnetised in the curved portion of their 3(H) characteris-
tic. This must also be the case when taking into account temperature variations.
This is all the more readily achieved the thinner the REC magnets and the higher
the ferrite magnets and the more favorable their 3(H) characteristic profiles
(Figure 14). Such magnet combinations lead to force densities close to 5 Mom2
and lie approximately in the middle between the two characteristic curves for
magnets of the same type according to Figure 13. To this value of the force
density there corresponds a reduction in the magnet weight to less than 40 per-

son much use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I28}? (IVIA

in the range below 4 mm are "blocked" by suitable coverings. In this way there
is produced at the nominal point of the force a gap of 8 mm. Here the carrying
force per side amounts to 10 kN/m. In consequence of the low weight of the REC
carrying magnets it is possible. when the latter are coupled opposite to the ve-
hicle in individual suspension. to attain a resonant frequency up to about 13 Hz.
This yields with regard to the dynamic properties not only gradual changes but

pure ferrite combination. If the magnets are connected via springs and dampers
to the suspension structure and if this latter is then connected via the ”sec—

ondary" springs and dampers at low frequency with the vehicle body then one ob-
tains an oscillatory system (Figure 16) which is well damped over a large exci-
tation range. Also without damping in the range of magnetic support it is pos~
sible at all velocities of interest to limit the accelerations of the passenger
cabin to values which meet comfort specifications (Figure 17).

U1

    

NE D

U C

\ o

2 vi
U

__ 0

Li- '3

.‘0 5

0

LI

0

U

u

I:

1-!

Es

G

u

0 as L0 Figure 16. Denagnetizstion charac-

Rntio hM/bM teriatica.

Figure 13. Carrying force as a func-
tion of magnet geometry.

The use of REC magnets with a remanence induction of about 1 T has the effect of
causing a highly interesting solution to arise out of a practically unusable de-

sign. The computational results shown here were experimentally confirmed with
regard to the support characteristic curve (force as a function of magnet spac-
ing) for an appropriate material combination.

Further improvements in the 3(a) characteristic curve with REC magnets and fer-
rites will have an additional favorable effect upon reduction of the magnet vol-
ume.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      
 
  

       
   

 

   

:cu- \“iL £52k Ma
b) _ I
g

 

o lo 20
Air gap 6km]

Figure 15. a) Field pattern. b) carrying force as a function of the air gap.

 

Figure 16. Hultimaas model for simulating the vehicle dynamics: m - mass, f -
resonant frequency. D - damping, index K - cabin. Z - intermediate
plane. M - magnet.

For dimensioning the support setup the attainable force densities for a particu-
lar gap and also the attainable stiffness represent properties which are of
equal importance. A low vehicle magnet weight is of great interest with regard
to good dynamic properties. In order to be able to extract the energy of oscil-
lation from the oscillatory eagnets when there is excitation coming from the
track. the intermediate plane (suspension structure) inserted between magnet and

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FI’K‘IM. l-Sli ONLY

vehicle body must possess a definite minimum mass. This is practically realiz-
able. e.g.. by connecting the propulsive motor to the suspension structure.

 

o m w w w 1m in
Velocity vlnol

if L -1

U

 

    

'\"
t: E
0 ac
UIN
a I: 07 " '1
III III! .
0 .0 - g
'3 8 o . . . J ..-_J.. ...J...-.-.'
3 u o 70 w on no 100 m)
< 0 Velocity v lm/sl

Figure 17. Dynamic operating behavior.

The shock absorptive connection between the magnet and the intermediate plane is
in this latter case accomplished with a resonant frequency lying between that of
the magnet support and the secondary spring system (see Figure 16). For mag-
netic suspension technology there would probably be great advantage in being
able to secure contectless support without resorting to control-theoretic sta-
bilization. The number of required electronic devices and components can be
substantially restricted and in this way a far greater measure of protection
against perturbations can be achieved than was the case with the previously con-
sidered engineering solutions.

But the fact remains that the lateral guidance of the vehicle. if this is to be
contactless. is impossible without resorting to an active control system. The
mere use of an uncontrolled permanent magnet guidance system orthogonal to the
stably operating carrying forces would produce destabilization for the latter.

The multidimensional suspension of bodies in a magnetic field by permanent mag-
nets is known to contradict the Barnshaw theorem. But this is not to say that
the described supporting procedure cannot be translated into an entirely favor-

able systen design involving a sharply reduced expense of control electronics.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Eitlhuber. 8., "The Transrapid Test Facility in Emsland." ETR. Vol 29,
No 6. 1980. pp 202-204.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

4.

5.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL I'SE 0N!)

Parach. C. P., and Raschbichler, H.-G.. "The Ferrous Synchronous Long-
Stator Motor for the Transrapid Test Facility in Emsland (TVE)." ZEV—GLAS.
ANN.. Vol 105, No 7/8. 1981. pp 225-232.

Schuarz. P. C., "An Improved Method of Resonant Current Pulse Modulation
for Power Converters." IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS AND CON-
TROL INSTRUMMATION, Vol II CI-22. No 2, May 1976.

Web, 3., Vollsted. U.. and Mains, J., "Model of an Integrated Support and
Propulsion System of ElectrOmagnetic Type." ELEKTROTECHNISCHE ZEITSCRRIFT-A,
1974. p 686.

Web, H., "Linear Synchronous Motor Development for Urban and Rapid Transit
Systems." IEEE TRANS. 0N MAGN., Vol MAG-IS. No 5, 1979. p 1522.

May, H., "Controlled Permanent Magnet (CPM) Configurations Generating
Forces for Lift, Guidance and Thrust." 1832 PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNA-
TIONAL CONFERENCE 0F CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY. 1980. p 793.

Kaupert, 6.. Huebner. K. 0.. and Web. H., "Dynamic Behavior of Controlled
Permanent—Excited Carrying Magnets for High-Speed Railways," ELEKTROTECH-
NISCHE ZEITUNG--archive (to appear shortly).

"eh. H.. "Linear Synchronous Propulsion With Permanent Magnet Excitation.”
IEEE PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONPMCE OF CYBERNE'I‘ICS AND SOCI-
ETY, [980, p 1042.

Web. H., and May, H.. "Investigation of Synchronous Linear Motor With
Double Permanent Magnet Excitation," PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CON—
FMCE ON ELECTRICAL MACHINES, 1980. p 192.

Polgreen, G. R.. "New Applications of Modern Magnets." MacDonald, London.
1966.

Heh, H., "Uses of Rare-Earth Permanent Magnets in Tracked Vehicles," paper
No 11-3 at the Fifth International Workshop on Rare Earth-Cobalt Permanent
Magnets and Their Applications, Roanoke, VA, June 1981 (book by University
of Dayton, KL-365, Dayton, Ohio, 65469. USA).

COPYRIGHT: Georg Siemens Verlagsbuchhandlung 1981

8008
£80:

3102/80 END

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY