FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10265
20 January 1982

USSR Report

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, cr following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10265
20 January 198

USSR REPORT
ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
(F000 1/82)

CONTENTS
AMPLIFIERS
Noise in Perroprobea and Magnetic Amplifiers...................... 1
Amplifier for KHPZOIU?! Automatic Suitch.......................... 61
ANTENNAS
Antennas and Feeder Lines......r.................................. 62
Antenna Device Hith Electrical Bean Oscillation in Two Planes..... 75

CERTAIN ASPECTS OF COMPUTER HARD AND SOFT HARE: CONTROL, AUTOHAIION,
TBLEHBCHANICS, TELEHETERING, MACHINE DESIGNING AND PLANNIﬂG

Magnetic Bubble Data Storage and Processing Devices............... 77

Device for Taking Median Value.................................... 120

Microprocessor Psychodiagnoatic Device Patent..................... 123
CERTAIN ASPECTS OF PHOTOGRAPHY, MOTION PICTURES AND IBLBVISION

TV Contour Detector............................................... 124

Parameter Selection of Optical Systess for Scanning Reproducing
Devices With Kinescopes......................................... 134

Hultinicroproceaaor System for Processing Audio Signal in
Frequency Region....”nun”...nunu...n.................. 1‘1

Automatic Restoration of Movie Films by Conputer.................. 150

- a - [III - USSR - 212 551' PC
FOR OFFINM. USl-I ONLY

WCATIONS, WICATION EQUIPMENT, RECEIVERS AND TRANSMITTERS,
NETWORKS, RALIO PHYSICS, DATA TRANSMISSION AND PROCESSING, INPORMATION
THEORY

Microwave Delay Line..............................................
Methods for Finding Breaks in Optical Csbles......................

Control System for Arc Discharger Switching Using Field
Distortion Technique............................................

Hideband Photoelectronic Receiver.................................
Device for Controlling PIN-Diode Attenuator.......................

Silicon Radio-Frequency p-i-n Diodes for Cal-unications
Bquimnt.O'COOOOOIOQOOIOOOIIO...0e...'00...OOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOO...

Principleo of the Design of Nonlinear Pulse-Frequency Signal

Selectors.......................................................

Device for Addition of Powers.....................................

Radio Receiver Patent.....................................,.......

CONVERTERS, INVERTERS, TRANSDUCERS

Haveguide Reflecting Phase Inverter...............................

Solid-State Phase Inverter Control Device.........................

INSTRUMENTS, MEASURING DEVICES AND TESTERS, METHODS OF MEASURING,
GENERAL EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES

Precision Digital Infrared Phase Meter With Frequency
Conversion of Laser Radiation...................................

Panoramic Measuring Device for Complex Parameters of Microwave

DeviceB.-uo.u........-..u.o...no.ooo.....-.....o..u........»

wideband Integrated Circuit Digital Power Meter for Laser

Radiation..o...................o......oo.o.....-...o...o........

Subnanosecond Pyroelectric Infrared Radiation Detector............

Integrated Temperature Sensor Using Silicon Diode Matrices........

- g -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

156
158

166
170
176

179

186

204
207

208
212

216

221

225
229
233
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MICROBLBCTRONICS

Prospects of Using Media With Higher Dielectric Constant in
Microwave 618 Technology........................................ 236

Problems of Modeling Elements of Large-Scale Integrated
Circuits With Submicronic Dinensions............................ 264

Selected Abstracts of Articles From Journal 'MICROELECTEDMICS',
September-October 1981.......................................... 269

OSCILLATORS, MDDULAIORS, GENERATORS
Technological AMTs 1550 Crystal 0scillator........................ 273
PUBLICATIONS, INCLUDING COLLECTIONS 0P ABSTRACTS
Abstracts From Journal 'MBTROLOGY', September 1981................ 275
Acoustical Distance Measurement and Control Methods............... 278
Cascade Generators................................................ 283
Classification of Thyristors...................................... 286
Control Systens for Thyristor Frequency Converters................ 289
Digital Encoding of Television Images............................. 292
Electrical and Optical Properties of Semiconductors............... 296
Electronic Microwave Devices...................................... 299.

Industrial Telephone Con-unication, Electrical Signaling and
In.t.11‘t1°n of Electtic clocks.O0.000IOODOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOD... 307

Measurement Elements in Power Systen Emergency Autonatic
muimntolIO...DOOIUIOCOOIOOI00.......00.0000000000000IOIIOD... 310

Mechanical Section Design for Overhead Superhigh Voltage Lines.... 313
Modeling and Testing of Radio Equipment........................... 317
Modern Methods and Devices for Data Display....................... 321
Pulse Radar Circuits.............................................. 328

Problems of Optinal Detection and Localization of Malfunctions
in Radioelectronic Equipment.................................... 332

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR (ll-"HUM. “SI-I ONLY

Kethods of Optimization in Controlling Electrical Power

systCuooeooeeoaooseo.ooaeoooeoooe0.0000000000000000...ooooeoooo

Prospects for Development for Maritime Electrical Engineering.....

Radar Data Processing Against Interference Background. . . . . . . . . . . . .

M10 m.urmt’eo ooooesoeesaeoeaoeoeeooeoooseeooooaooeaooosooe

Superconducting Accelerating Microwave Structures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

335
338
362
351
355
FOR¢0FHKJA1.USEIMVLY

AMPLIFIERS

UDC 620.179.143:621.375.3
NOISE IN FBRROPROBBS AND MAGNETIC AMPLIPIBRS
Moscow IZHERBNIYA, KONTROL', AVTOHATIZATSIYA in Russian No 6 (38), 1981 pp 37-53
[Article by Yu.v. AFanes'yev and V.N. Gorobey. engineers]

[Text] Introduction

Perroprobes (Pz's) and magnetic amplifiers (HU's) have received extensive applica-
tion in measuring equipment and automation [1-6]. Pz's and Hﬂ's are distinguished
by high reliability and long life. noise immunity and the ability to operate over

a wide temperature range, low power requirement and low cost. The high sensitivity
characteristic of 32's and “0's has been responsible for their use for detecting
and measuring very low values of a magnetic field or current.

The maximum capabilities of Pz's and HD's are limited by the level of their in-
trinsic noise. This concept usually includes noise from induction from the power
circuit, the noise of cores, detectable during cyclic reversal of magnetization,
and the thermal noise of windings. Noise in cores, which has begun to be called
magnetic noise, has the highest value.

The nature of magnetic noise has been studied already for sore than 30 years.
However. in spite of the successes achieved, many aspects of this phenomenon,
which is interesting from the viewpoint of physics and important from that of
practical application. have continued to remain unclear.

In 1971 N.N. Kolachevskiy's monograph was published, which summarized the results
of theoretical and experimental studies of the nature of magnetic noise during the
preceding period. New experimental data requiring analysis have been gained since.
then [5].

In this article an attempt is made to discuss these data, and also to turn atten-
tion to certain experimentally established facts making it possible to lower the

level of magnetic noise in ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers by one to two
orders of magnitude.

Transformation Ratios of Perroprobes and Magnetic Amplifiers

Perroprobes and magnetic amplifiers are active inductive transformers, i.e.,
additional energy is induced in them (by means of an excitation winding supplied

FOR‘OIIWCIAI.IEHICMULY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NULY

with alternating current), because of which transformation itself is rendered
possible.

The e.m.f. in the output winding (called the measuring winding below) is determined
by the equation:

-. a'— -

s:--niﬂ;:;'8:(’hﬂ.

(1)
where s is the total cross-sectional area of the cogss covered by the measuring
winding; w is the number of turns of the winding; 1 is the magnetic axis
inormal to the plane of the winding's turns); 6 < l is t e design factor [2];

is the vector of total gnetic induction; it . i + is the vector of
the total fiﬁld strength: 1 is the vector of tge stfengtg of the excitation
field; and 0 is the vector of the strength of the measured field.

For magnetic amplifiers the relationship between the field strength and input
current, 1vkh . is determined by the expression

”0 - was In" t

where w is the number of turns of the input winding and l is the length
of the czhger line of a ring core. ~

Experience has shown that components e2(t) . multiples of the frequency of the
excitation field, because of the nonlinearity of the characteristics of ores of
ferropro s and magnetic amplifiers, prove to be functions not only of 1 , but
also of 0 , and even when H0 - const .

Let us expand nonlinear dependence 3i(ii) into a Taylor series. being limited for
sufficiently low.valuea of no to two terms of the series [6]:

mm - o A I.
52““)- F." 9.”: + ""101 .
(2)
where ﬁ* is the tensor of the relative magnetic permeability of the core,

u* is the normal relative permeability of the core and "0 is the magnetic
constant.

Tensor 0* takes into account the anisotropic properties of the core acquired by
it in superposition of field 31 . whereby the daterial of the core is assumed to
be isotropic. +6di§eted for the principal axis (the axis of symmetry of the core,
x, y and z ; x I ), tensor 0* becomes diagonal and is defined by three com-
ponents. whereby on of then, u* , is the same as the differential permeability,
u; - u - (l/uo)/(dB/dh) , andxfhe other two. u* and u*: , as the normal per-
meabili y, u* - (llv )/(B/H) . In all cases the’Xsterisk indicates the necessity
of taking into scco t the demagnetization coefficient of the core (in a ferro-
probe) in the respective directions. -

Substituting (2) in (1), we find

F0!‘0FFKJA1.U§I(NVLY
EOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MMLV

 

2 dumb
"I -” ‘
c:=-—- t at +
. o ..J

ll “cow

91 «mm
+rgbﬂo '

p. cocoons!

(3)

where s << is the so-called imbalance coefficient, taking into account the non-
ideal isolation of the ieaeﬁring circuit from the excitation circuit, and angles
a and 8 equal: a I 0: 1 and 8 - Io ; i .
m l

The expression obtained makes it possible to study transformation processes in
ﬁerro robes an magnetic amplifiers with any relative orientation of vectors

0 , and m , in particular, with a longitudinal (a - 0). transverse (n - 1/2)
and relating (a - wt) excitation field, as well as with various spectral composi-
tions of the excitation field.

Having become widespread is the operating mode of a ferroprobe and segnetic ampli-
fier utilizing the central symmetry of the major hysteresis loop of the cores.

In this mode the cores are excited by means of a strong variable field whose spec-
trum contains only the fundamental wave and odd harmonics. Then the spectrum of
permeability "3 and u* will contain a constant component and even harmonics:

vim -n;.+2 pkcosmwnm.
III-l

nun-u: + i "menol-l-vc).
mu!

(6)
where u? n and ut‘ are the amplitudes of even harmonics or Fourier coeffi-
cients cdmsuted in a‘certain manner from analytical dependences path (t)] ,
p*[ﬂl(t)] ; n - l, 2, 3, ... ; u is the angular frequency of the fundamental
wave of the excitation field, H (t) ; and 62“ represents initial phases depending

on the value of the coercive fofce of the dynamic hysteresis loop.

Substituting (4) in (3) we find that the imbalance o.m.f., associated with the
first determinant of expression (3), will have an odd-harmonic spectrum, since the
net e.m.f., proportional to the value of H and associated with the second de-
terminant, will have an even-harmonic spectgum. Therefore ferroprobes and magnetic
amplifiers operating in this mode are often called even-harmonic.

S)

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since any even harmonic in the spectrum of the output e.m.f. (usually called the
second harmonic) can be easily filtered from odd harmonics of noise, then the
threshold sensitivity of ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers operating in the mode
indicated is determined not by the peak value of components of the imbalance e.m.f.,
but by the level of the magnetic noise in cores near the even harmonic used. It

is not difficult also to demonstrate that within the framework of the assumptions
made fluctuations in harmonics of the excitation field, a (t) , in harmonics of
permeability ua(t) and u*(t) and the imbalance coeffiéient, € , can result in
broadening of t e lines of only odd noninformative harmonics of spectrum e (t) .

This is the main advantage of the ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier operating mode
discussed.

Taking into account expressions (3) and (6) it is not difficult to obtain expres—
sions for the transformation ratios of a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier. Por
example, for a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier with longitudinal excitation with
a piecewise linear approximation of curve 3(H) of the cores and sinusoidal,

triangular and square-pulse forms of the excitation field wave, we get the follow-
ing transformation ratios for the second harmonic:

 

" " \
- Les—- 1 ' -Jl/l _ _L ’
Garaa n ”wshlamu”. ‘ (HI) .

48.
45 4 a . H
Gm'i'tmmuworﬁ -

as t .
0., =Ids, m.“ > us-Toﬁgp‘ms‘Mu—n' 1

(5)
where 30 y you is the induction of the nessured field; B is the peak value
of the e.m.f. 09 the second harmonic; ﬂ is the strength 0 the saturation field
of the cores; 3. or n x is tho peak'or maximun value of the excitation field;
and r is the duration 3! a pulse.

The dependence of the transformation ratios of a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier
on the degree of relative overexcitation of their cores is illustrated in fig 1.

Calculations performed according to equations (5) have demonstrated that in prac-
tice ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier transformation ratios of dotens of micro-
volts per nanotesla (uV/nT) are completely achievable. Since the noise level of
electronic amplifiers connected to the output of a ferroprobe and magnetic ampli-
fier is estimated in tenths and hundredths of a microvolt (at frequencies above
103 Hz in the 1 Hz hand), then these numerical values of the transformation ratios
of ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers are totally sufficient in order to detect
and measure by their means magnetic fields at the level of single numbers of
picoteslas. However, the-magnetic noise of ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers
interferes with this.

FINtCHHICJAl.USE¢H‘LY
FOR!0FFNJAL.USE(NVLY

 

Figure 1. Dependence of Transformation Ratios of a ferroprobe and Magnetic
Aaplifier on Degree of Relative Overexcitation of Cores

Key:
1. Square-pulse 3. Sine-wave
2. Triangular

Magnetic Noise Spectrum; Relationship Between Noise Level and Threshold Sensitivity
of Perroprobes and Magnetic Amplifiers

Cyclic smgnetic reversal of the cores of ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers is
accompanied by Barkhausen abrupt changes whose paraseters-inteneity. duration and
initial phase-fluctuate, varying from cycle to cycle, which results in the origin
of magnetic noise.

It has been established experimentally that the spectrum of magnetic noise is
periodic. In it it is possible to isolate relatively uniform and sufficiently
extended sections situated between discrete 1ines-—harmonics of the frequency of
magnetic reversal (excitation) of the core, as well as distinctly uniform and
considerably less extended sections directly abutting the discrete lines and charac-
terized by a rise in spectral density.

The manifestation of noise in sections of the first type can be described by means
of the so-called "shot model" [5, 7, 8].

The appearance of noise in sections of the second type does not follow free any
kind of theoretical structure, as the result of which noise in these sections has
begun to be called excess. Excess noise was detected experimentally [5, 9].

Later it was established by many authors that the rise in spectral density of
excess noise obeys the rule 1/:1 . where f is the frequency of tuning out from
a line (for a demodulated ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier signal, the excitation
frequency) and y is an indicator which varies over a range of 0.5 to 1.8. 0b-
servance of this rule has provided an occasion for making certain analogies. in
connection with which excess noise has begun to be called also flicker noise [5].

5

FIN!()FF1CIAI.I£3£‘OF“UY
Nil OFFK‘IM. "SI-I ONLY

It must be emphasized that in many practical cases (when measuring constant and
slowly varying magnetic fields and electric current) it is precisely excess noise
with its characteristic rise in keeping with the l/f rule which determines the
threshold sensitivity of ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers. Therefore, studying
the nature of excess noise and finding methods of effectively suppressing it have
become of first-rate inportance for practical applications.

Let us now dwell on the relationship between the noise level and the threshold
sensitiVity of ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers.

If the noise process is stationary and ergodic (this assumption agrees with the
experimental data), the root-mean-square value of the noise's e.m.f. equals

I
n- fame.
h

where gf is the spectral power density of the noise process in VZIF: and f1

and f2 are the lower and upper limits of the frequency band selected.

Let us call the output noise level of a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier the

value of B - , where t is a coefficient depending on the law of distri-

bution of mSEneticB noise and the prescribed confidence level of the estimate [4].

As illustrated in [10], the noise of a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier is dis-

tributed according to a normal law; therefore. with r - 3 the value of the esti-

mate of E h equals the maximum (with a probabilitz_of 0.997) peak value of the

noise's e.h.f., which makes it possible to relate B h to the frequently encoun-

tered_estimates "for the width of the noise track" of "from peak to peak," equal

to 28 .
sh

As was demonstrated in the first section. the output e.m.f. of a ferroprobe and

magnetic amplifier depends on a whole series of factors; therefore it is more

convenient to use not the value of B , but the value of B , determined from

sh sh
the equation

I
_ 52,0“!
E. o
5" " 7 " a '

(6)
where G is the transformation ratio of a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier
(when these devices operate at the second harmonic of the output e.m.f.. G - 62 ).

we call the value of 5

sh also the threshold sensitivity of a ferroprobe and
magnetic amplifier [4].

IN)! OPINC1A1.lEﬂE(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The noise level is often also related to the value of bf - V’s—[G (T/lizllz).

The value of b can be called the spectral density of peak vilues of magnetic
noise. The relationship between bf and ash is determined by the expression

3.."‘V 30:10:11.

Let us note that the increase in values of i. and b when nearing the discrete
lines (excess noise) is considerably mother than in t e

value of gf . This is
b/e_c_ause of the fact that both quantities 8“! and bf are proportional to
St -

Let us make the following calculation. Let us represent the spectral density

curve, g (f) , of the demodulated signal of a ferroprobe and magnetic. auplifier

in the fgrn of uniform (f > £2) and nonuniforn (f < f. ) sections, where f is

the upper-limit frequency of excess noise, corresponding to the bend in th curve
(fig 2 . For the uniform section, 3f“) - g - conat ; for the nonuniform g (f) -

- self. . Let y - 1 and f - 1 Hz (with strong overexc‘ltation of the cor s
of a ferroprobe and magnetic lifier these values are close to real). Then

for the nonuniform section of the spectrum it is possible to write
I '-
0; - V5?” - ﬂ‘h-f‘ .
I

Taking into account the respective va'lues of f

and _f
according to_(6) Be _‘\_: aB , we find that for *1 - 10 3232
for £1 - 10 7n: , Habit/g.

and keeping in mind that
, ssh g 2.6/3: and

 

Figure 2. Spectral Power Density of Magnetic Noise of a Deuodulated Signal

of a Perroprobe and Magnetic Amplifier

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is obvious from this calculation that increasing the time for observing the
noise process from dozens of minutes to several months does not result in any
substantial increase in the level of excess noise over the level of ordinary mag-
netic noise. For the same frequency band with s width of 1 Hz this excess is

2.6— to fourfold (these values correspond to the experimental data in [11]), which
makes it possible to estimate the threshold sensitivity of a ferroprobe and mag-
netic amplifier fron recordings of noise obtained in relatively brief realizations.

Let us also note that at frequencies below 10-3 B: it is difficult to distinguish
the recorded noise of a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier from zero fluctuations
and drift whose origin can also not be related to processes taking place in cores.
This zero drift and fluctuations on one hand hamper obtainment of the spectral
distribution of excess raise at ultralow frequencies and on the other explain the
often encountered inclmsistency between calculation and experimental data on the
noise level at these frequencies.

Prerequisites for the Origin of Excess Noise Near the Second Harmonic‘

As was already mentioned, the appearance of excess noise does not follow from any
theoretical constructions. This relates especially to excess noise near the second
harmonic of the magnetic reversal frequency. Therefore, attempts have been made
from the very beginning and continue to be ends to find some independent sources of
fluctuations causing the origin of excess noise.

The idea that the excess noise of ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers operating at
the second harmonic is of a different physical nature than ordinary magnetic noise
was first expressed by R. Ya. Berks-I [9], but he did not suggest any physical or
formal mathematical model explaining the origin of excess noise.

M. Vsyner [12] sttemted to explain the appearance of a false signal for the second
harmonic and the rise in noise near it on account of the ugtletostriction pheno-
menon. He correctly established that magnetostrictive lengthening of the cores of
a ferroprobe results in the movenent of lines of force intersecting the turns of
the measuring winding twice per cycle; however, he did not study the change in
direction of these lines tron half-cycle to half-cycle. as the result of which the
original equation presented by him proved to be invalid. A critique of.Vayner's
model is given in [13]. In spite of the erroneousness of Vayner's model, the fact
itself of a correlation between the level of excess noise and the magnetostriction
coefficients of the ferromagnetic'materials used is interesting and has been es-
tablished by other Authors and. as will be demonstrated below, finds an explana-
tion within the franework of the dislocation model of noise.

N.N. Kolachevskiy and coworkers [5, 1‘] suggested that excess noise in ferromag-
netics magnetic-ally reversed cyclically can be associated with fluctuations in
magnetic permeabil ity, similarly to how flicker noise in granulated resistors
observed during'the passing of electric current through then is related to fluctu-
ations in the value of resistances. However, as already indicated above, fluctu-
ations in the magnetic permeability of cores, on the assmption of central sym-
metry of the hysteresis loop and the absence of a constant component and even
harmonics in the excitation current, cannot result in the origin of excess noise
near even induction or e.n.f. harmonics, i.e., this assumption taken by itself

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cannot serve as the basis of the mechanism for the origin of excess noise near
even induction and e.m.f. harmonics.

Actually. let us assume that the differential permeability of the cores, ua ,
fluctuates. Then instead of series (a) it is possible to write

n1 (0-14“- fpgﬁmn «1+ a.) +
Q-I

+Ap:o(n+2An:a.meos<2not+m.
where ”30 and u n are the mean values of the parameters and Avao and
“”32n are incremenzs in the parameters (their fluctuation values).

By definition Au* (t) - 0 and Au32n(t) - 0 . It is possible to assume also

that the fluctuatign spectrum is concentrated near zero frequency and even harmnnic
lines. Substituting (7) in (3) with H - 0 and H - H sin mt , and assuming
that the fluctuation processes in diffe ent cores ar mutﬂally not correlated,

we find the output e.m.f. of a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier with longitudinal
excitation (a - B - 0):

9(1) -—3w£p,ﬂ. cosm’l c [p.34- 23.n(2nol-i-
+m] +h"" mm»

+ gawommwwll.

(8)

where k is the number of cores. It is obvious from the expression obtained that
the output e.m.f. spectrum contains only diffused lines of the fundamental frequen-
cy and odd harmonics.

Some investigators perceive the common physical nature of both ordinary and excess
noise. The periodicity of the spectrum of g(u) with its characteristic rises
neg; even and odd harmonics of the magnetic reversal frequency is explained by
them by the correlation of Barkhausen abrupt changes originating in different mag-
netic reversal cycles [15].

Let us note that the correlation approach was used earlier, too, for explaining
the periodicity of the g(w) spectrum. For example. P.V. Bunkin. based on ful-
fillment of the obligatory condition 3(0) - 0 , demonstrated that correlation of
the peak values of Barkhausen abrupt changes separated by a whole number of mag-
netic reversal half-cycles must result in rises in spectral density near odd and
in dips near even harmonics. This conclusion was used for a long time in order to
prove the impossibility of describing rises in noise near even harmonics by means
of the correlation approach. However, as N.N. Kolachevskiy correctly observed,

F0l,0IF1CIAl.lEﬂi(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the result obtained by Y.V. Bunkin is only one consequence of the assumption of
preservation of the strict symmetry of the hysteresis loop during cyclic magnetic
reversal.

P.Ye. Kotlyar [16], based on the opposite assumption (first expressed by K.A.
Goronina) demonstrated that the correlation approach is totally suitable also for
describing rises in noise near even and odd harmonics. 8e obtained an equation
from which it followed that the level of noise near even harmonics is higher the
more significant the asymmetry of the loop and the longer the correlation time for
Barkhausen abrupt changes.

The assumption of the asylmetry of the hysteresis loop as the major prerequisite
for the origin of excess noise near even harmonics was also used in studies by

the authors of the present article [6, 17]. He believe that this assumption does
not contradict the law regarding the minimum free energy in a ferromagnetic. This
law lies at the basis of the extremely great symmetry of the major dynamic loops
of ferromagnetics but its statistical nature is revealed with an increase in the
sensitivity and accuracy of measurements. The law begins to be fulfilled only

"on average," in a stretch of a great number of magnetic reversal cycles, which at
the same time indicates the fluctuation nature of the appearance of asymmetry of
the loop.

Formally, within the framework of the transformation mechanism which we discussed
in the first section, the appearance of excess noise near even induction and e.m.f.
harmonics must be related to the presence of odd harmonics of the permeability of
ferroprobe or magnetic amplifier cores. Actually, with violation of the symmetry
of the loop we must write, instead of (A),

1|:(0= #1:. + zukcos(2nut+ “rpm,”
a-l
+2m.(!)u2m—usin[(2n— l)u!+
s-l
+W~i+591 .

(9)
where as is the phase increment caused by asymmetry of the loop and
v 2_ (t) represents random weighting functions with a mathematical expectation
of zéro (v2n_1(t) - 0).

Substituting (9) in (3) and limiting ourselves to a discussion of noise only near
even e.m.f. harmonics, we find by analogy with (8) and under the same conditions
that:

10

FOR‘0FFNJAI.USEINVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

ea) - —ak""sw§p.ﬂ.oowt 2%.“) x
III
x vim—mm [(2n— l)ol+%+A¢] -

- _»r"-n:2~c..wsussn(2not+ol).

(10)
where B n represents coefficients of the series (the constant conponent and peak
values of even induction harmonics);

ﬁ-FWh—MM).

It is obvious from expression (10) that the spectral distribution of excess noise
near the zero frequency and even harmonics depends on the spectrum of weighting
functions v2 _ (t) . If the energy spectrun of functions v n_1(t) varies
according to Eh; llf rule, then the energy spectrum of exce a noise will also
vary according to the same law.

In fig 3, in which a schenatic representation is given of asymmetric hysteresis
loops corresponding to an individual cycle or some sequence of magnetic reversal
cycles. it is obvious that the asymnstry of the loop can be related to a differ-
ence in positive and negative coercive forces (fig 3a). to a difference in residual
induction (fig 3b), to the different slope of loop back edges (fig 3c) or to their
bending (fig 3d), to different squarsness ratios of the loop or different values

of maximum induction (fig 3e). A constant component and even induction and e.s.f.
harmonics are evidenced in all these cases.

K.V. Bukharov [18] directly related excess noise near zero frequency and even
induction harmonics to fluctuations in coercive forces and residual induction of
the loop, considering these fluctuations statistically independent. Be denon- :
strated that relative deviations in these values of by 10'3 to 10 “ are completely
sufficient to cause excess noise at the level observed in practice and he estab-
lished a quantitative relationship between noise levels at zero frequency and

in even harmonics. From the expressions obtained by hin it also follows that

the spectral distribution of excess noise obeys the law of the spectral distribu—
tion of fluctuat1ons in these parameters of the loop.

Thus, fluctuations in parameters of the dynamic loop of a ferromagnetic, resulting
if only in short-duration asymmetry of it, as well as the presence of a correlation
in Barkhausen abrupt changes, explaining rises in spectral density of the noise,
are basic. if not the major, prerequisites for the origin of excess noise near

even induction and e.n.f. harmonics.

11

non omen“ use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

E}?
,u
5E: “by
82/

a) b)

(a 3m:
ﬂu
" (if,

d) e)

 

Figure 3. Asyluetric hysteresis Loops
let us investigate the physical essence of these prerequisites.
"Dislocation" Model of Noise; Role of Magnetostriction

Barkhausen abrupt changes originate primarily as the result of elastic interaction
between loving domain boundaries and defects in the crystal lattice. Dislocations
are the largest defects in ferronagnetics [19, 20].

The interaction of a boundary ﬂith a dislocation is described by the Peach-
Keller equation [19]:

..' -1-

'b--Idl(o b).
' (u)

where 3 is the force 0‘ interaction; d? is an element of the length of the
dislocation line, 1 3 0 is the tensor of nagnetostriction internal stresses
caused by the change in the direction of nagnetization at the boundary; b is
the Burgers vector.

6. Rider made a calculation of internal stresses for the most important plane
boundaries encountered in iron, nickel and cobalt. It was demonstrated that with
the proper choice of the system of coordinates (axis 2 is oriented along the
normal line to the boundary) it is possible to utilize only three cooponents of
tensor 0 . for a.straight-line dislocation situated parallel to the plane of
the boundary. from (11) it follows that

12

INJI‘OIWﬂCJAI.lﬂSI:(N‘LY
FOIlOFFKJAl.USIZONlJ

p, - 34‘: 1,1,, —3,£_'.1,b, + 3:; (1,», — 1),) .
+ (12)
where :1 and b1 are components of vectors 2 and b .

Let us find the conditions under which force p is minimized and, consequently,
the intensity of Barkhausen abrupt changes and Ehe noise level associated with
them are diminished.

It is obvious from (12) that force p becomes equal to zero if vector I or b
are perpendicular to the plane of thezboundary. These orientations are permissible
and possible for single cases of interaction between boundaries and dislocations.
However, it is not known how to render so favorable orientations possible if.not
for all but if only for a sufficiently great number of these types of interaction.
Therefore, for practical purposes another method of minimizing forceaﬂpz is ob-
viously more effective--reducing the absniﬁte values of components 11 , 022 and
012 of the tensor of internal stresses, .

r
As Rider demonstrated [19, 20], components on , a“ and 0H are proportional
to magnetostriction coefficients 1100 and *l'l 3; the ferfglagnetic material
or alloy. In turn, coefficients A and A i depend on the percentage content
of nickel in the alloy [21]. Both iggiiicimi has. through zero with a nickel
content of 80 to 83 percent. Consequently, according to expression (12), alleys
with this nickel content must possess minimum intensity of Barkhausen abrupt changes
and the lowest noise level.

This conclusion agrees totally with experimental estimates of noise levels found
earlier (for a wide range of alloys) [2, 12, 16, 22].

Elaboration of the conditions for minimizing force p for alloys with values of
coefficients ‘1 \ and A close to zero is of interest. The point is that in
the nickel contegf range indicated (80 to 83 percent) coefficients A 00 and hill
become equal to zero not sinultsneously (cf. table 1) [23]. Therefore, in mini-
mizing force p it is necessary to take into account both the absolute values

and signs of shine coefficients, and a relationship with which both coefficients
(the positive, 1100, and the negative, X111 ) will differ from zero can prove to
be optimum.

Experiments and calculations [24, 25] which we have made have confirmed this assump-
tion.

Curves, plotted from our experimental data, characterizing the relationship between
the noise level and the saturation magnetostriction, A . of alloys used for vari-
ous types of ferroprobes are presented in fig 6. (Thesparameters of the ferro-
probes are presented below in the note to table 2.) It is obvious from fig 4 that
the noise minimua is shifted into the region of negative values of A . The
values found in the experiment, A - -(0.5 to 2.0)'10 5 , are achieved only when
coefficients A100 and A111 have different signs and coefficient A111 is neg-
ative.

13

iron omcul. use ONLY
Table 1.

Key:
1.

Figure 4.

Key:
1.

Dependence of Hagnetostriction Coefficients 1100 and 1111
centage Content of Nickel in Ni-Hn-Fe Alloys

l A. .....xlo"‘
w
M26 2.”

3.” I,”
5.0 0.63
2&9 -4.W

 

Percentage content

striction, A
probes

Bsh’ nT

Relationship Between Noise Level, B.

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

 

 

 

 

.5 -4 -2 o z {-w")

l",xld‘

032
~039

435.

—234

on Per-

. and Saturation Magneto-
. , of Nickel-Iron Alloys for Various Types of Ferro-

The experimental data do not agree completely with the calculated, since expression
(12) was obtained with certain assumptions and, in addition. was extended by us to

polycrystalline specisens of alloys.

However. the results obtained testify to

the advantage of the "dislocation" Iodel of noise developed here and indicate a

14

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

different, as compared with that suggested earlier [12, 16], role of nagnetostric-
tion in the mechanism of the origin of noise.

Because of mametostriction interaction is established between elements of the
domain and dislocation structures of the ferromagnetic. Therefore, its role re-
duces to regulating these forns of interaction. Since the noise is determined

by the intensity of these forns of interaction, the pattern described above is
observed: with strong interaction the noise level correlates with the value of

IA I ; with slight interaction, when it is necessary to take into account the
signs of coefficients 1100 and 1111 , the noise minimum shifts to the region of
negative values of As .

The relationships found relate to an equal degree both to ordinary and to excess
noise.

Let us now explain on the basis of the "dislocation" model the excess noise pheno-
menon itself.

Since action equals counteraction, then from (11) it follows that not only does

a dislocation act on a boundary with a force of p , preventing its motion, but
the boundary acts on the dislocation with the same force, but with the opposite
sign. But the reaction of a dislocation to this effect is considerably slower
than the opposite. This is due to kinetic restructuring of the dislocation's struc-
ture, obeying the laws of plasticity [19]. A dislocation has low mobility. Rates
of their motion (under low stresses) equal 10"9 ale and less. Domain boundaries,
on the other hand, are exceptionally sobile. Therefore, "repeatability" of events
of interaction between boundaries and dislocations for the duration of hundreds
and thousands of magnetic reversal cycles is precisely the physical prerequisite
for the establishment of the correlation of Barkhausen abrupt changes and, con-
sequently, the appearance of excess noise near discrete liner-harmonics of the
magnetic reversal frequency. '

Let” us now discuss aspects of the interaction of magnetization with dislocations
resulting in asynetry of the hysteresis loop and fluctuations in it.

In [16] attention was turned to the presence in ferrousgnetics of asyllsetric micro-
hysteresis loops. It was noted that in spite of considerable averaging, taking-
place with the superposition of these loops in the bulk of the ferromagnetic,

the resulting or macrohysteresis loop can remain asyuetric. Here two questions
remain unclear: that causes the asymmetry of nicroresistive loops and why averag-
ing does not resu1t in strict symtry of the resulting loop. The answer to the
first question is given in [20]. The authors discovered a "gate effect." con-
sisting in the fact that when a domain boundary passes through a dislocation in

a number of instances a new domain originates, and the very fact of its origin
depends on the direction of notion of the boundary. If a domain originates in
forward motion of the boundary, then its reverse motion "erases" the domain. This
fact also causes asymmetry of microresisrive loops. The answer to the second ques-
tion must be found in the kinetics of the restructuring of domain and dislocation
structures. In spite of the fact that a domain structure rather quickly "adapts"
to s dislocation structure. the very fact of the restructuring of the latter
creates situations in which the overall gate effect in the ascending portion of

15

FOR OFFICIAII. USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

the loop can predominate over that in the descending portion and vicedversa.
This predominance is evidenced in a difference in the coercive forces of the loop
(cf. fig 3).

Stresses created by dislocations influence not only displacement processes but

also processes of rotation and center formation. Inducing anisotropy, these
stresses prevent synchronous (i.e., with the frequency of the excitation field)
magnetic reversal of "inflexible" regions and fix for a certain time centers for
the origin of regions of opposite magnetization. The characteristic delay times
here are also determined by the kinetics of restructuring of the dislocation struc-
ture, which results in if only a short-duration difference in the residual and
maximum induction of the loop, as well as in a difference in its squareness ratio
(cf. fig 3b and 3).

As mentioned in the preceding section, fluctuations resulting in asymmetry of the
loop are completely sufficient for the origin of excess noise near even harmonics
of the magnetic reversal frequency.

Thus, within the framework of the "dislocation" theory it is possible to find con-
ditions under which minimization of the magnetic noise of ferromagnetics subjected
to magnetic reversal cyclically is achieved, which is of great practical signifi-
cance. In addition, it is possible to explain the role of magnetostriction in the
mechanism of the origin of noise (which previously appeared puzzling), to under-
stand the nature of the correlation of Barkhausen abrupt changes separated by a
great number of cycles and the nature of fluctuations of the parameters of the
resulting hysteresis 100p and, at the same time, to explain the origin of excess
noise near discrete lines-harmonics of the magnetic reversal frequency-including
near even harmonics.

Factors Influencing the Noise Level in Ferroprobes and Magnetic Amplifiers

The difficulties in studying the basic mechanisms and in constructing an appropri-
ate theory of magnetic noise lie primarily in the multifactor nature of this
phenomenon. Noise depends not only on the properties and-parameters of the ferro—
magnetic material or alloy used, but also on the volume and form of cores, their
fabrication technology. heat treatment features, parameters of the excitation field,
external mechanical stresses and the temperature gradient in the bulk of cores.

Let us discuss the influence of these factors on the noise level in ferroprobes and
magnetic amplifiers.

Composition of the Alloy

As was already indicated above, the cores of low-threshold ferroprobes and magnetic
amplifiers must be made of alloys containing 80 to 83 percent nickel. The fact of
a correlation between noise level and the percentage content of nickel in the
alloy was noted in [2, 22]. An experimental alloy containing 81.2 percent Ni,

2.5 percent Ho and 16.3 percent Pa wns recolmended in [16] as a low-noise alloy,
and in [26] an alloy containing 81.5 percent Ni and 6 percent Ho.

16

FIIICHﬂﬁCIAl.USE(MWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In connection with the development of new nickel—iron alloys, we made studies of
the noise properties of new alloys and ones previously used with a percentage
content of nickel close to that indicated [17, 24].* The results of these studies
are given in table 2, in which the noise levels measured are compared not only,

with the values 01 saturation magnetostriction, 1‘ , but also with other parameters
of alloys.

Table 2. Relationship Between Noise Level in Perroprobes and Parameters of
Nickel-Iron Alloys

 

' a... m... L3)
n Ymmwa.ﬂaumum
: 2) w c .m...l.thsM:m-mmml-Mu
Mar-s cases-
1) .M x‘r‘ I ”‘.A.’Il I ﬁx” lay..75 E a! n, “3 l 5.

 

    

79H!“ 2.0 8.2 N — — -
“NI IM 2 .0 2.4 20 0.82 0." —
soaxc — 2.4 22 - — —
815th 0.5 1.6 68 0 40 0.!2 0.026
BIHMA' 0.5 0.83 66 0 3‘ 0456 0,0!5
32mm —l .5 1.33 64 0.27 0.04 0.0!:
“H —M — — 2.0 — —
Key:
1. Type of alloy 3. Noise level in terroprobe. B h ,
2. Parameters of alloys nT (in the 0.001 to 1.0 ﬂ: fie-

quency band) for {our different
samples (Nos 1 to 6)1
6. T

1Parameters of ferroprobes: No 1-core dimensions 130 X 2.8 X 0.1 mm, frequency
Ev - 1 kHz ; No 2-core dimensions 10 X 1.2 X 0.05 mm, frequency fv - 25 kn: ;
No 3--core dimensions, loop (20 x 6) - (18 x b) x 0.05 mm. frequency f - 25 the;
No 4--ring (diameter 13.2 In, width 1.5 mm, thickness 0.12 mm), fv - 12?5 kHz .

2Annealing was performed at 800 ’C, holding for 3 h, cooling at a rate of 200 'c/h
to 600 'C, then at a rate of 600 'c/h.

*The alloys were developed by the TleIChermet [Central Scientific Research In-
stitute of Ferrous Metallurgy] imeni I.P. Hardin Institute of Precision Alloys.
The parameters and characteristics or the new alloys (except alloy BZNHP) are re-

gulated by COST [All-Union State Standard] 10160-75, "Alloys, Precision. Magneti-
cally Soft.“

17

FOI‘OFIHC1A1.lEﬂB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From table 2 it is obvious that new alloys 81RHA, 83R? and 82NHP have a lower

noise level than alloy 79"! and SGRKhS used in ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers

previously. Purthermore. alloys alNHA and §3NP are characterized by a lower value

of saturation nagnetostriction, A - 0.5'10 6 .' Alloy BZNHP (BZNMP-VI), character-
ized by a negative value of A, -'-(0.5 to 1.5)010 5 . has the lowest noise level.‘

Shifting of the noise minimum into the region of negative values of A is in I
agreement with the “dislocation" model of noise and the theoretical pogtulates
discussed in the preceding section.

Magnetic Properties of the Alloy

The magnetic properties of alloys and the parameters characterizing them are di-
vided into structure-sensitive and structure-insensitive. Under the heading of
structure-sensitive parameters come the coercive force, 3 . permeability, u ,

and hysteresis losses, H ; under structure-insensitive c saturation induction,
3 . and other parameters. Within the framework of the "dislocation" theory of
ngise developed by us it is to be expected that it is precisely the structure-
sensitive parameters of alloys which will correlate with the noise level observed.

It is also obvious from table 2 that for the group of alloys with positive magneto-
striction (A > 0) the noise level measured actually correlates both with the
coercive forge, He , and with a value which is the inverse of the initial magnetic
permeability. ", . These data do not contradict those obtained earlier in [22. 27].

If the main contribution to noise power is actually made by the halting of domain
boundaries in dislocations, then the spectral density of the noise's e.m.f., g ,
must be proportional to the volume density of dislocations. D . and, consequenfly,
according to what was said in the second section, the following proportionality
must also be observed:

Bl~9.h .

0n the other hand, from applications of the theory of the ductility of materials
to ferromagnetics it follows that [19]:

Hc~lh.' ~51. °
Therefore, withim_the framework of the "dislocation" model a relationship between
the noise level, 3 , and quantities a and u 1 is completely natural. The

curve reflecting th s relationship is shSwn in :13 5 [17].

In [15] on the basis of certain experimental data and assumptions regarding the
capacity for the fulfillment of an inverse proportion relationship between the

 

*The parameters and properties of alloy 82NHP are presented in the catalogue _
"Novyye pretsizionnyye splavy” [New Precision Alloys]. Moscow. Chermetinformatsiya.
1979.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LG! ONLY

coercive force. ll . and maxim perneability, u , the conclusion is drawn

that for the purpSse of inproving the signal-tom‘s?“ ratio it is necessary to
strive to increase the ratio 1: / Ix I . In this connection it is necessary to
lake the following consents. mt, 31th an increase in u not only the le-
gitinste signal can increase, but also the noise, «paraffin» the increase in

u is caused by formation of the alloy‘s tuture. Therefore it is hardly pos-
sible to achieve considerable ilprovenent of the signal-to-noise ratio only by
increasing the value of. "m . Second, a distinct inverse proportion relationship
has been established up to now only for quantities I! and u. [17, 19], but not
for quantities II and u . Third, as was already explained in detail, it is
not possible to usilize thg‘gbsolute value IA I . since the noise Iininun is shifted
into the region of negative values. a

Let us discuss the relationship between noise and hysteresis losses. Hysteresis
losses, H , are proportional to product BCB ; therefore the spectral density of
the noise lust be proportional to this quantity. however, since the structure-
sensitive pareneter of an alloy is all the same the coercive force, I! ,.and not

the saturation induction, 8 , then the noise correlates more strongly with quan-
tity ac than with as (c!. table 2).

 

Figure 5. Dependence of Noise Level, 5 h“; on Coercive Force, 0 , and the

Inverse Value of the Original gnetic Permeability, x , with a
Coupling Constant of 5-10“

Key :

l. ssh , nT

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The equareness of the hysteresis loop also influences the noise level. Already
with the data of [1] it was possible to conclude that the noise increases with

an increase in r- mreness of the loop. New data [14, 28] confirm this. It was
noted in [lb] th in alloys with a square loop the noise increases on account of
the consolidatior )1 individual regions magnetically reversed simultaneously. It
is also noted that the consolidation of these regions and, consequently, the re-
duction of their nmﬁer, must result chiefly in an increase in excess noise. In
our opinion the increase in both excess and ordinary noise in alloys with a square
loop is associated primarily with the presence of a texture preventing the magnetic
reversal of "inflexible" regions. This question will be discussed below.

Volume and Form of Cores; Their Fabrication Technology

It was denonatrated above that the spectral noise density, 3 , is proportional
to the value density of dislocations, p . Prom this the conclusion can be drawn
that with a given 9 the spectral noise density must be proportional also to the
volume of the core, i.e., gf g 9.

However, since with a change in the volume of cores, v , not only quantity gf
changes, but also quantity 6 —the transformation ratio of ferroprobes and magb
netic amplifiers--and both these quantities enter into expression (6) for the
threshold sensitivity, 8 , then dependence 3 (v) will be more complex. Let
us discuss some particuls cases. ‘h

Let there be a ferroprobe with relatively short cores. The mximum differential
permeability of these cores is deterained by the expression [1, 2]:

' 3 8A3-
l‘am .. = u‘ an m ’ ’
(15)
where u is the maximum differential permeability of the material; m is the

permeabiiigxof the form; and A - A“, s) is a function depending slightly on
i and s .

Substituting expression (15) in (5) and disregarding dependence A“, s) , we get
6 g 1.2 , i.e., the transformation ratio of a ferroprobe with short cores does not
depend on the area, s , of their cross section. Therefore, with one and the some
internal maximum strength of the excitation field, disregarding the influence of
the demagnetization factor on processes of the origin of Barkhausen abrupt changes
and their space correlation [5], we get from (6):

— —'is
BI“ -"l-l$ ~V s

t-NdO
(16)
It is obvious from expression (16) that in ferroprobes it is feasible to increase

the volume of cores only on account of increasing their length. when the volume
of cores is increased on account of increasing their cross-sectional area with

20

' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an assigned length. _a_s the experimental data in [1, 19] demonstrate, the reduction
in the noise level, 3 , is exceedingly slight. noreover, as will be demonstrated
below, with an “913x123 length ferroprobe cores have an optimum cross-sectional
area (with regard to the noise minimum).

The situation is otherwise with magnetic amplifiers. In closed cores of magmtic
amplifiers a demagnetization factor for the circular field measured is lacking, as
the result of which the transformtion ratios prove to be proportional to the cross-
sectional area of the cores, i.e., c N s . Therefore, with the same assumptions

we get from (6):

-II.

BI My ~ 0
l - oil-t -.

(17)

From this it is obvious that, unlike ferroprobes. in magnetic amplifiers it is
feasible to increase their volume precisely by increasing their.cross-sectional
area.

It must be emphasized that the transformation ratio of a magnetic amplifier, be-
cause of the absence of a demagnetization factor in its cores, is always higher
than the transformation ratio of a ferroprobe. Therefore, in spite of the higher
exponent for v in expression (16) the noise level, 3 h , is higher in a ferro-
probe than in a magnetic amplifier [1]. Hith a great increase in the length of
ferroprobe cores condition 1: << "6 is violated and expression (16) becomes
invalid. At the limit, when the influence of the demagnetization factor in ferro-
probe cores can be disregarded, dependence Bah“) will be described by expression
16 .

Expression (l7) agrees well with the experimental data in [1, 10] (as noted in [2],
this agreement with the experimental data indicates the absence of substantial
transverse correlation of noise in cores) and reflects rather graphically the fact
that the spectral density of noise power is actually proportional to the volume

of the cores, gf «a v . 0n the basis of this, in [10] it is suggested that the
noise properties of materials and alloys be characterized by parameter (13

(let us use our symbols—cf. the second section):

'I. l' 8/”
Cg: =3 U," ‘3 VH7.

which does not depend on the volume of cores, since gfv N v2 and cm [magnetic

amplifier] N v (with 9. - const ).

The cores of ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers are usually made of a rolled
narrow strip 0.02 to 0.1 xmn thick. Thinner strips are not used because of worsen-
ing of their magnetic properties (reduction of initial and maximum permeability ,

21

FOR-OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and increase in coercive force [29]), and thicker ones because of the spin
effect and losses associated with it [1. 29].

Cores are made by the method of die forging or winding onto a supporting frame
(a spool). In the latter instance a strip of the prescribed width is cut by
means of precision roller shears. After the stock is cut out and cut burrs are
removed and their surface is chemically or electrically polished. These opera—
tions reduce the density of defects (dislocations) originating in large quantity
in the vicinity of the cutout line or cutoff line.

A further reduction in the density of defects is achieved by heat treating the
cores.

Heat Treatment of Cores

The great influence of this factor is explained by the fact that in the heat treat-
ing process certain types of defects are partly eliminated and internal stresses
are reduced [19, 21].

The mode of heat treatment of cores is characterized by the maximum annealing tem-
perature, the medium in which annealing takes place and the rate of cooling of
cores.

The dependence of the noise level on the maxim annealing teaperature for cores
was studied in [26, 30]. It was established that the minimum noise level for cores
made of alloy 81% is achieved at annealing temperatures lower than those recon-
mended. and precisely at 800 '0. According to the data of [30], at the same an-
nealing temperature a noise minimum is observed also in cores rude of alloys

79m and 83m, and for alloy 79:01 this effect occurs if the alloy is produced by
the electron beam remelting method. but not by open induction melting. In [24]
the effect of a reduction in noise level with a reduction in the maximum anneal-
ing temperature for cores is related to an increase in the hardness of the alloy.
and in [30] to the formation of its fine-grained structure. These explanations
are contradictory and the effect itself requires further study.

The dependence of the noise level on the medium in which annealing of cores takes
place was noted in [26, 30]. Annealing in a hydrogen atmosphere as counted with
annealing under vacuum results in an approxiutely 1.5-fold reduction in noise
level.

The dependence of the noise level on the cooling rate of cores has been discussed
in a number of studies. In [22] the following general rule was established for a
considerable number of binary nickel-iron alloys: The noise is reduced with rapid
cooling of cores. Unfortunately, in this study data are not given on the procedure
and rate for cooling cores and an explanation is not given of the pattern observed
itself. It is necessary to judge regarding this from the data of other studies.
For example, in [21. 31] it is noted that with the rapid cooling of cores the
alloy becones less ordered and more ugnetically soft than with slow cooling.

Rapid cooling is conducive to a reduction of magnetic anisotropy [21] and, con-
sequently, to the probability of the existence of "inflexible" regions which

22

m omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

result in asymmetry of the loop and is one of the reasons for the appearance of
noise near even harmonics of the output e.m.f. of a ferroprobe and magnetic am-
plifier.

The question regarding the magnetic texture of the material acquired in the process
of cooling of cores deserves attention. The permeability of the form of ferro-
probe cores varies over a range of (l to 20)°103. Therefore, even in the magnetic
field of the earth induction in cores can have values on the order of 0.1 T and re-
sult in the formation of a magnetic texture. The appearance of a texture will also
be conducive to the securing of "inflexible" regions.

In [26, 30] a study was made of the influence of the rate of cooling of ferroprobe
cores at 100 and 1500 'C/h over a temperature range of 700 to 350 'c. A noticeable
difference was not observed in the minimum achievable noise levels corresponding

to these rates. However, it was found in [30] that two- to threefold lower values
of the excitation current correspond to a faster rate of cooling (1500 'C/h) for
cores made of alloy 79NM, whereby the same noise minimum is achieved. These studies
are of undisputed interest since they make it possible to obtain information on

the mechanisms for the origin of noise at the stage of rotation processes and
therefore should be continued.

Excitation Field Parameters

These include peak value. degree of inhomogeneity. direction and frequency.

A curve characterizing the dependence of the noise level, i , on the peak value
of the excitation field. an , for ferroprobes and magnetic saplifisrs with longi-
tudinal excitation and output at the second harmonic is shomn in fig 6.

It is possibe to explain this shape of the B (H ) curve if this curve is repre-
sented as the resultant of two other curves, slso'shown in fig 6. The first charac-
terizes the growth in volume density of the interaction of domain boundaries with
defects (dislocations) or, which is the same thing, the increase in the number of
Barkhausen abrupt changes; the second characterizes the drop or reduction in fluc-
tuations of the parameters of abrupt changes and consequently parameters of the
hysteresis loop as the maximum magnetic reversal cycle is approached.

With very low peak values of the excitation field, interaction of domain boundaries
with dislocations is reversible (the Rayleigh region), Barkhausen abrupt changes
still do not originate here and noise in the ordinary sense of this word (i.e.,
as_some random process) is absent. However. strong displacements (on the order of
10 a to 10 5 T) are observed in magnetic amplifiers and ferroprobes. These dis-
placements are the result of a great number of "inflexible" regions not partaking
in the magnetic reversal process, and can be regarded as a "frozen" fluctuation of
a specific parameter of the hysteresis loop.

As the peak value of the excitation field increases, the interaction of boundaries

with dislocations becomes irreversible. Barkhausen abrupt changes originate and

individual "inflexible" regions begin to be magnetically reversed (although not in
step). The "brittle springs" model [32] gives a clear idea of these processes.

23

INJR‘OF1NCJAl.lﬂSE2(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sudden rise in noise in this section is directly related to the increase in

the voluae density of these forms of interaction. Finally, with a specific peak
value of the excitation field the growth in noise ceases. In spite of a continued
increase in the number of Barkhausen abrupt changes the mechanism for the suppres—
sion of fluctuations of the parameters of abrupt changes and for stabilization of
the parameters of the hysteresis loop goes into effect. The balance of increases
in these two trends also detenines the point of the maximal on the Bah“ ) curve.
The noise level is reduced, first rather quickly and than more slovly, with a
further increase in the peak value of the excitation field.

 

Figure 6. Dependence of Noise Level, 33 , (Normal Component) .on Peak Value
of the Excitation Field, I!“ k?“ x : -- curve characterizing
intensity of Barkhausen abrupt 25.33“; --- curve characterizing

number of "inflexible" regions and level of fluctuations caused
by them

Key:
1. Bah , relative units

A similar dependence for i (R ) is observed in testing various designs of ferro-
probes and magnetic amplifigl‘s T1, 2, 9, 10, 16, 33]. Furthermore, as enphasized
in [10], the drop in noise is associated precisely with the peak or maxim value
of the excitation field and not with the form of its wave. At the same time,

since the value of B is inversely proportional to the transformtion ratio,

6 . (cf.' expression (85‘), which in many cases diminishes with an increase in the
excitation field, effective lowering of the noise level on account of an increase

in the maximal value of the field is made possible with a square-pulse wave form
(cf. fig 2). A close to square-pulse wave torn is achieved, for crawls, in the
ferroresonance mode of exciting nagxietic amplifiers and ring ferroprobes [36].

26

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

Experience has demonstrated that with an increase in the peak value of the excita-
tion field both ordinary and excess noise are reduced. furthermore, excess noise
is "retained against," as it were, discrete lines-—harmonics of the magnetic re-
vetsdl frequency [11]. This behavior of excess noise can be related to the ever
more complete and synchronous (i.e., with the frequency of the excitation field)
magnetic reversal of "inflexible” regions. as well as to sysmetrisation of the
hysteresis loop, which was talked about in the third and fourth sections.

The fairly slow drop in noise in strong fields is associated with the existence

of crystallographic and induced anisotropy. It is precisely anisotropy which pre-
vents the synchronous magnetic reversal of "inflexible" regions. Therefore, for
the purpose of the effective suppression of noise on account of an overexcited
operating mode for ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers it is necessary to use ma-
terials possessing not only low values of saturation magnetostriction, but also

low values of crystallographic anisotropy constants, as well as slightly textured
materials. Under the heading of these materials come the already discussed nickel-
iron alloys, in which the effectiveness of noise suppression on account of overex-
citstion increases with an increase in the rate of cooling of cores after they are
annealed [22, 30, 31]. The strong influence of the rate of cooling of an alloy on
the noise level leads to the conclusion that not only these alloys but also the
amorphous materials under intense development [35] can prove to be promising for
use in ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers. The fabrication of amorphous materials
involves the exceedingly rapid cooling of a melt put into a rotating drum. The
cooling rate can reach 166 'c/s. As a result a magnetically soft material is pro-
duced with a homogeneous structure and lacking magnetocrystalline anisotropy.

Data on magnetic noise in these materials is presented in the section "Ring Ferro-
probe with Low Threshold Sensitivity."

It has also been demonstrated in an experiment that the effectiveness of the sup-
pression of noise by increasing the peak value of the excitation field depends on
the degree of inhomogeneity of this field. In the majority of studies [1, 2, 27]
devoted to studying the nature of excess noise, this dependence is directly related
to the existence of "inflexible" regions and the hysteresis memory of cores, de-
termined from the level of the residual signal of a ferroprobe or magnetic ampli-
fier after the short—duration influence on its cores of a strong steady magnetic
field. It is known that the noise is reduced if, other conditions being equal,
arrow-shaped or ring cores are used, making possible high uniformity of induction
along their length. The external constant field (the measured or compensating)
must also be homogeneous. It has been noted also that inhomogeneity of the external
field results in asymmetry of the hysteresis loop [36].

An attempt at a "model" interpretation of the phenomena discussed here was made

in [6]. Based on a model of "reversible ellipsoids of striction" various experi-
mental facts were compared and again the role of crystallographic and induced an-
isotropy in suppressing noise by means of changing the parameters of the excita-
tion field was emphasized. It was demonstrated that the elongated (sheetlike)
shape of "inflexible" regions in the direction of the excitation field prevents
their magnetic reversal and is one of the main reasons for the origin of excess
noise, hysteresis memory and asymmetry of the magnetic reversal loop of ferroprobe
and magnetic amplifier cores.

25

FOR‘0FFK]AL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The model of "reversible ellipsoids of striction" makes it possible to understand
also the dependence of noise level not only on a change in peak value, but also

on a change in direction of the excitation field. In particular. the fact of a
reduction in noise in ferroprobes with transverse excitation with the application
of an added longitudinal variable field to cores [37], in a Schonstedt ferroprobe
_with "skew magnetic reversal” of cores [38], and in a Langvagen ferroprobe with

the excitation of cores by means of a rotating field [39] becomes totally explain-
sblc. From the same model it is not difficult to draw the conclusion that the
methods of excitation enumerated will be effective only with the presence of aniso-
tropy. If the anisotropy is eliminated, the noise must depend slightly on the
change in direction of the excitation field, which has been observed experimentally.

with the excitation of ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier cores by means of a rotat—
ing field with a sufficiently high "peak value," displacement processes and, con-
sequently, events of the interaction of domain boundaries with dislocations re-
sulting in Barkhausen abrupt changes are practically eliminated from the magnetic
reversal cycle. This means that, at least, the level of ordinary magnetic noise
in a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier with a rotating excitation field must be
considerably lower than in ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers with longitudinal
excitation. A rotating field acts effectively on excess noise and hysteresis mem-
ory only with the presence of crystallographic and induced anisotropy. The spec‘
tral distribution of noise in ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers with a rotating
excitation field requires additional study. The promise of these ferroprobes and
magnetic amplifiers for measuring the parameters of weak and ultraweak magnetic
fields is undisputed.

Let us now discuss the dependence of the noise level on the frequency of the ex-
citation field. It is obvious that with an increase in the frequency of the ex-
citation field the number of interactions of domain boundaries with dislocations
per unit of time also increases. By analogy with what was said above we conclude
that the spectral density of noise, gE , (cf. the third section) must be propor-
tional to the frequency, f 4 m/ZI , of the excitation field. i.e., g m fb .
However, the noise level, B , depends not only on g , but also on the trans-
formation ratig of the ferrosfobe and magnetic amplifies. Since according to (5)
G N Eb , for Bsh we have [1,2]:

3 ,h {-1/2
v

sh (18)

It is obvious from (18) that the noise is reduced with an increase in the fre-
quency of the excitation field. however, at least two factors prevent an unlimited
increase in the frequency of the excitation field: an increase in magnetic rever-
sal losses and ever greater manifestation of the spin effect; and approaching sub-
harmonics or the fundamental frequency of the magnetostrictive resonance of cores.
Both factors result in an increase in noise [1, 2, 16]. Let us dwell in greater
detail on the second factor. It was experimentally established in [16] that both
ordinary and excess noise increase abruptly as magnetostrictive resonance is ap-
proached. In [16] this rise in noise is associated with fluctuations in the para-
meters of defects (dislocations) and with their possible migration. Within the
framework of the model of "reversible ellipsoids of striction" the rise in noise

26

HOR¢Nﬂﬂ€1Al.UGE(MVLY
FOR 0F11C1AI.USEGDNLY

can be associated also with induced (on account of mechanical vibrations of the
core) macroscopic and microscopic anisotropy (A. 35]. It is possible to avoid
these undesirable phenomena if the length of a ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier
rod core and the diameter of a ring core. with an assigned frequency, f . of the
excitation field. do not equal the forbidden values, determined by equa ions
(19):

 

“""4;.Iv/%§u

dw-ﬁl—mVjtVl+(l-k)'.

 

(19)
where n - l. 2, 3. ... represents the order of perturbing vibrations (taking
into account the parity of the magnetostriction effect); k - l, 2. 3,... is the
order of mechanical vibrations of the cores during resonance; 3 is the elastic
modulus; and p is the density of the core material.

External Mechanical Stresses

As we know [21], external unidirectional mechanical stresses resulting in the
extension or compression of cores alter substantially the shape of magnetization
curves. Here the effects observed depend on the sign of saturation magnetcetric-
tion, A . If A > 0 . then extension of a sample results in a sudden increase
in maximﬂm magnetig permeability and a reduction in initial permeability. with

A < 0 the opposite picture is observed. Already from these facts, taking into
eacount what was said above, it would be possible to conclude that the noise should
increase with the extension of cores made of alloys with A > 0 and decrease

for those made of alloys with As < 0 . s

The results of direct measurements are presented in [60]. The author relates to
the indecticn of magnetic anisotropy the rise in noise in samples with A > 0'
with the presence of a tensile load. Tension results in an increase in d8mains
the direction of magnetization in which is close to the direction of tension. This
direction also becomes an easy axis. If the external field is directed along this
axis then on average Barkhausen abrupt changes should increase. In samples with

x < 0 the easy axis is perpendicular to the direction of tension. Therefore.
when a field is applied in the direction of tension the intensity of Barkhausen
abrupt changes will be reduced. With this samples become less anisotropic than
before the beginning of tension.

-The model of "reversible ellipsoids of striction" [6] gives a clear idea of the
mechanisms described here.

It is hardly feasible to utilize these mechanisms for the purpose of suppressing
noise. however, they should be recalled in all cases when cores are subjected to
external stresses because of working conditions, e.g., when they are rigidly

fastened to a base and the transformers themaelves-the ferroprobe and magnetic
amplifier—-are designed for operation over a broad temperature range.

27

INHIOFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
roe OFFICIAL use on“

Temperature Changes

Let us dwell first of all on the dependence of the noise level, i; , on the change
in the mean temperature of cores. Direct measurements of the spec ral density of
magnetic noise in various ferromagnetics over a wide temperature range-fron

helium temperatures to Curie points-dmade by N.N. Kolachevskiy [5] have demonstrated

that the noise level remains unchanged for nickel-iron alloys in the 100 to 300 'K
temperature range.

Invariability of the noise level in the range indicated for the variation of mean
temperatures of the samples studied can be associated first with the relative
constancy both of saturation magnetostriction and of magnetic anisotropy [21] and
second with the relative constancy of magnetic characteristics, i.e., the coercive

force and initial permeability, which bear information regarding the volume density
of dislocations [l9]. .

with an increase in temperature to values close to the Curie point, saturation
magnetostriction and magnetic anisotropy begin to diminish suddenly (more rapidly
than saturation induction), the coercive force is reduced and initial permeability
is increased, which, taking into account relationships (ll), (13) and (1b), as
well as what was said above, should result in a reduction in Barkhausen abrupt
changes and noiae level. The dependence of the noise level on the change in tem-
perature as the Curie point is approached for alloy 72NHDKh with a low Curie point
was analyzed in detail in [41]. In fig 7 these dependences, B (T) , are compared
with dependences B (T) and n (T) for the same alloy, takenshy us from [29].

It is obvious from Ehe dependenSes presented that a maximum on the u curve
corresponds to the noise minimum, which agrees with equations (13) and (16).

 

Figure 7. Dependence of i h , B and "a on Temperature as the Curie Point
Is Approached to! Allo’ 72NHDKh

Key: _

l. Bah , relative units 2. B. , T; u. (relative)

28

INJR‘0F1HCJA1.USIZ(NULY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the region of low temperatures (less than 100 'K) magnetic anisotrOpy begins

to increase [21]. which according to the model of “reversible ellipsoids of
striction" and what was said above should result in an increase at least in excess
noise [4]. An increase in noise in a ferroprobe at low-temperatures was described
in [$2]. The terroprobe was placed in a superconducting shield and cooled from
room temperature to the temperature of liquid helium. At room temperature (300 'K)
the noise level equals 0.3 nT, at the temperature of liquid nitrogen (77 'K) 0.9
n! and at the teuperature of liquid helium 3.0 hr. i.e., an order higher than at
room temperature.* The ferroprobe was also heated to 423 ’K. Within the range of
300 to 423 'K a noticeable change in noise level in the ferroprobe was not detected
(the ferroprobe cores were made of alloy 79R! with a Curie point of e - 723 'K).

Let us now proceed to a discussion of the question of the influence of time and
space changes in temperature on the noise level.

In [5] a brief survey of publications is given in which a study was made of the
relationship between the nonrecurrence of Barkhsusen abrupt changes and temperature
changes. Referring to [43], in which a strong dependence of the noise level in
nickel-iron alloys on the rate of change in temperature was observed, the author
expressed the hypothesis that this dependence is caused by the "settling" of

energy states and by a change in the magnetic structure of the ferromagnetic.

Another interpretation of this dependence is also possible. Hith a sudden change
in the temperature of the environment, because of the slower propagation of heat
in the core, described by the heat conduction equation, a temperature gradient
originates in its depth. Both fluctuations in the parameters of Barkhausen abrupt
changes and fluctuations in thermoelectric current [64]. which add their contribu-
tion to excess noise, can be associated with the origin of a gradient and its sub-
sequent elimination on account of equalization of the temperature in the core.’

A direct relationship between the noise level and the temperature gradient compon-
ent for the length of ferroprobe cores was established in [55]. Cores of uniform
cross section were used, the magnetic induction in which. as we know [1. 2], is non-
uniform even with a homogeneous external field: Induction is maximum at the center
of the core and diminishes toward the ends according to a parabolic law. The
temperature was measured along the length of cores when the latter were retained
against bases made of AG-AS or DSV molding material with low heat conductivity

and it was established that the shape of the T(x) curve, where x is the dis-
tance from the center of the core, in general features agrees with the shape of

the B(x) curve. Furthermore. the noise level in the ferroprobe was measured.
Then the same cores were placed on bases made of VTl-O titanium, the thermal con-
ductivity of which is two orders of magnitude higher than that of bases made of

*Thie experiment was partly repeated at the All-Union Scientific Research Institute
of Hetrology imeni D.I. Mendeleyev Scientific Production Association in 1978 by
V.I. Sheremet and V.N. Gorobey with a ferroprobe of a different design. At the
temperature of liquid nitrogen the noise level proved to be three- to fourfold
higher than at room temperature.

29

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

molding materials. The measurements demonstrated that with the presence of ti—
tanium bases the temperature along the length of the cores is equalized, and the
noise (chiefly its excess component) is reduced two— to 2.5-fold.

Later the authors of this article made a similar experiment (without plotting the
T(x) curve) with arrow—shaped cores making possible sufficient homogeneity of
magnetic induction along their length. Replacement of the bases did not result in
such a considerable change in the noise level in the ferroprobe.

From these experiments it follows that, first, the noise level is actually associ-
ated with the temperature gradient in cores and, second, the temperature gradient
itself in many cases is caused by the inhomogeneity of magnetic induction in cores,
appearing either on account of their shape or on account of the inhomogeneity of
the excitation field. Both these facts must be taken into account in designing

a low-threshold ferroprobe and magnetic amplifier.

In our opinion studies of temperature influences on the noise level, especially
in the area of explaining the physical pattern of these influences, should be
continued.

Other Factors

Let us dwell briefly on some other factors the mechanism of the influence of which
however still requires its own interpretation.

It has been observed that the noise is reduced when ferroprobe and magnetic ampli-
fier cores are placed in a viscous medium or fluid, e.g., glycerine. The core of

a ring ferropzobe was placed in GKZh-96 fluid, and a three- to fourfold reduction

in noise was observed.* This effect is apparently associated with a reduction in

the intensity of magnetostriction vibrations of the core on account of suppression
of the reflected acoustic wave [66].

A dependence of the noise level on the diameter of the turns of an excitation coil
has been observed. It has been established that with the same excitation current
a threefold reduction in the diameter of the turns of an excitation winding results
in a two- to 2.5—fold reduction in noise level. We observe this effect both for
rod and for ring ferroprobes.

A dependence of the noise level of a ferroprobe on the diameter of the turns of
the measuring winding was observed even earlier [33] and again confirmed by our
experiments. It was established that the greater the diameter of the turns the
lower the noise level. In our experiments a twofold increase in the diameter of
the measuring coil resulted in s 1.5- to twofold reduction in noise (with s simul-
taneous and quite considerable reduction in imbalance e.m.f.). One '

*The experiment was prepared by L.Ya. Bushuyev and was conducted in a superconduct-
ing shield by v.1. Sheremet, Yu.N. Bobkov and V.N. Gorobey.

30

FOR OFTICIAI.USEiﬂVLY
Will OII‘I-‘It'lAl. USE ONLY

noncontradictory explanation of the noise reduction effect is given in [33] and
other explanations can be given on the basis of taking into account features of
the space correlation of the e.m.f. of the noise in the vicinity of ferroprobe
and magnetic amplifier cores [16].

Ring terroprobe with Low Threshold Sensitivity

Taking into account the ideas developed in this article regarding the nature of
magnetic noise and earlier established and newly discovered experimental factors
resulting in a reduction in noise. we developed a ring ferroprobe with low thresh-
old sensitivity.

The advantage of a ring ferroprobe over a rod type is first of all the high homo-
geneity of the excitation field. which eliminates a number of sources of noise
indicated in the preceding section.

Actually the ring ferroprobe was invented by Ashenbrenner and Goubou. Considerably
later improved designs of ring ferroprobes were suggested by Geiger and, indepen-
dently of him, R.Ya. Berkman [2]. Gordon [13, 26] substantially improved the para-
meters of ring ferroprobes on account of using a new nickel-iron alloy (close in
chemical composition to domestic alloy 82NHP) and using a metallic supporting loop
onto which a strip of this alloy was wound and was annealed together with it.

As a material for the supporting loop Gordon used the alloy Inconel x-7so, with
negligibly low magnetic susceptibility and a temperature coefficient of linear
expansion close to that for permalloy. Structurally the ferroprobe is designed so
that the ring core, fastened to the supporting loop and surrounded by the excitation
winding, can turn in relation to a fixed measuring coil rigidly fastened to the
ferroprobe's case. Because of rotation balancing of the ferroprobe was achieved,
making possible minimum imbalance e.m.f.* This ferroprobe was used with success

in making magnetic measurements in outer space.

The ring ferroprobe described here imitates Gordon's design in its general features.
but domestic materials were used for the supporting loop and core and other di-
mensions were selected for the core.

In keeping with the considerations discussed above, a strip 0.02 mm thick and 1.5
mm wide of a nickel-iron alloy--permslloy 82NHP-dwas used for the core. Ohmic-
resistance alloys, in particular, alloy NH23KhYu [29], were selected as materials
for the supporting loop. After fabricating and pickling the supporting loop, the
turns of the pernalloy strip are laid into its groove and the last turn of the
strip is fastened to the one preceding it by spot welding. After this the core
together with the supporting loop is heat treated.

*Of course, the balancing of rod-type ferroprobes is accomplished by matching cores

in pairs.

31

F08¢ﬂﬂﬂ€JAl.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(N§LY

The dimensions of the core were selected out of design considerations and from
the assigned frequency of the excitation field-12.5 kHz. The diameter of the
core, d - 13.2 mm . was calculated by taking into account equation (19). The
thickneQBtof the per-alloy strip (A n 0.02 and was selected from the relationship
in [1, 2]:

A < A“ a ‘f‘q/l.

As we know, a ring core possesses the property of demagnetization in relation to
the external measured field. Therefore. as well as taking into account the com-
plex nature of the dependence of the noise level in a ferroprobe on the area of
the core's cross section, we experimentally found the number of turns of the strip
in the core with which the noise is minimal; this number proved to equal six.

The permeability of the shape of the ring core was calculated from the equation
in [h]: -

 

1.28“ -419.

In -
3.64
45h(ln°—+-;— ])

where d , 6 and h are the diameter, width and thickness of the core (6 - 1.5
mm . h - 6 and A - 0.12 an ).

On top of the loop with the core is wound a single-layer toroidal excitation
winding whose number of turns equals 130. At the moment of the core's saturation
a current of 0.6 A flows through the winding, which creates a circular field
strength of ”max - 1700 A/m (approximately equals 20 Go).

The loop with the core and excitation winding is placed inside the measuring coil,
designed as two sections and wound in order to make possible identical capacitive
coupling between its output terminals and the excitation circuit. The number of
coil turns equals 500. The maximum achievable transformation ratio under no-load
conditions is calculated by taking into account equations (5) and (15) by the equa-
tion

.-°: -l6hdhn£m.

.‘hm

6"“1

With {b - 12.5 kHz , on - 0.13 mm2 . wz - soo , 5 - 0.6 [2] and m - «19 ,
- 6.5 uV/nT . The computed value of G agrees well with that determined

C
egpgfimentally (approximately 5 uV/nT). 2max

On top of the measuring coil on a special loop are wound a compensation winding,
feedback winding and other windings.

32

IN)! OWWHCJAI.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOIIOF}1(1AI.USE(NNLY

The circuit of the measuring apparatus by means of which the noise level in the
ferroprobe developed was estimated is presented in fig 8. It includes the ele-
ments of a standard magnetometer, a recorder. a spectrum analyzer and a shield

(superconducting or ferromagnetic) inside of which the ferroprobe is placed in

the measuring process.*

 

Figure 8. Diagram of Measuring Apparatus for Estimating the Noise Level
in a Perroprobe: I-ferromagnetic and/or superconducting shield;
II--electronics of magnetometer; III-testing and recording devices;
l--ferroprobe; 2--input circuit capacitor; 3--differentia1 ampli-
fier; 6--driver; S-selective amplifier; 6-synchronous detector;
7-d.c. amplifier; 8-spectrum analyzer; 9--recorder; 10-cali-
brator; ll-calibration coil

Voltage of triangular form with a fundamental frequency of 12.5 has produced by a
precision oscillator (a loo—kHz quart: self-excited oscillator, an 8:1—countdown
frequency divider and an integrator) is supplied to the ferroprobe's excitation
winding. The level of even harmonics in the oscillator's output voltage does not
exceed 0.01 percent, which in combination with effective balancing of the ferro-
probe (suppression at a frequency of 2! - 25 kHz is not less than 50) guaran-
tees minimum zero drift. As already mentioned, the current at the moment of satu-
ration of the ferroprobe's core equals 0.6 A.

The ferroprohe's measuring coil is tuned by means of a capacitor in resonance

to a frequency of 2f - 25 kHz . With this the ferroprobe's transformation ratio
with the maximum exci ation current indicated increases to 40 uV/nT. The loop thus
formed is connected to the input of a wideband differential amplifier. Then the
ferroprobe's signal sequentially enters a selective amplifier with a gyrator
filter. a synchronous detector and d.c. amplifier. The real band of the measuring
channel in terms of the demodulated signal is 0 to 100 Hz.

3The circuit diagram of the magnetometer was developed by Yu.N. Bobkov.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“)3 OFFICIAL [Bl-Z ONLY

The channel's output is connected to a type “-327 recorder and type 84-56 spectrum
analyzer. '

The measuring procedure reduces to the following. The ferroprobe being tested

is placed in the working space of the ferromagnetic or superconducting shield and
is fastened to a special turning table by means of vhich the ferroprobe is turned
around its center 180 degrees. As the result of this turning, the ferroprobe's
steady zero drift is revealed in the shield's residual field. Then the position
of the ferroprobe is fixed and the noise is recorded. The duration of the record-
ing (realization) is determined by the lower limit of the section of the spectrum
analyzed and by the conditions of the experiment: In a ferromagnetic shield whose
residual field is subject to changes, short, e.g., 304ninute realizations. are re-
corded (which corresponds to a lover-limit frequency of 0.001 H2); in a super—
conducting shield uhose residual field is stable over time [42], extended, e.g..
24-hour realizations are recorded. The noise recording scale (the transformation
ratio of the measuring channel) is tested periodically by supplying the required
current value to the ferroprobe's calibration winding or to a standard coil put
onto it.

A fragment of a recording of noise (loaninute realization) and of the excess com-
ponent of noise for eight hours of the operation of a ferroprobe in a supercon-
ducting shield is presented in fig 9.

‘,'b 1)
4}
w ‘
h———-
2) nuns
a)
lbw
0': .L' ° '4 9. .e

 

Figure 9. Results of Tests of a Ring Perroprobe: a-rfragment of recording
of noise; h-excess component of noise

Key:

1. Bah , nT 3. Hours
2. Minutes

34

WOR10FFRJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The processing of experimental data (in the tnfralow frequency region of the
spectrum processing can be performed both manually and automatically [57]),
obtained for no less than five samples of the ferroprobe developed, showed that _
with the excitation conditions selected the spectral distribution of noise actually
has the form presented in fig 2. In the 1 1107100 B: section the noise is uniform
and, adjusted for the 1 112 band, equals 3 h 3 0.005 n‘r ; in the 0.001 to 1 Hz
section B h g 0.01 to 0.015 n‘l‘; and finally the zero drift after 8 h of observe-
tion does Rot exceed 0.1 n'l'. As mentioned earlier, at the present time it is
still difficult to say whether the zero drifts observed are a reflection of noise
processes in the ferroprobe's core or are the result of the existence of coherent
noise in the channel's electronics. We consider only the zero values measured in
the 0.001 to 100 ll: frequency band reliable.

The data presented testify to the fact that in the ring ferroprobe developed the
noise level adjusted for a unit of volume of the core is an order of magnitude

lower than .the adjusted noise level obtained earlier [9], which was achieved mainly
on account of using new nickel-iron alloys with a low value of A and primarily
alloy 82100, as well as on account of taking into account other factors enumerated
above. The noise level reached, of course, is not the limit. In our opinion in the
imediate future ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers will be developed with a noise
level on the order of 0.001 n'l‘ (1 p‘l‘). Information is already available to the
effect that on the basis of using new alloys the noise level in a magnetic ampli-

f ier has been brought to the level of the thermal noise of the input winding.*

In conclusion let us note that in addition to alloys 82m, 81m and 83“? (cf.
table 2) amorphous alloy MKSR-A was also tested in the ferroprohe developed.

A strip 0.04 an thick and 1.5 mm wide was used, which, just as the permalloy,

was wound and fastened to a supporting loop. The core was not annealed. Under the
ferroprobe excitation conditions and with the measuring procedure indicated earlier
in the 0.001 to 1 Hz frequency band a noise level of B 1 0.1 M: was achieved.
And although this is an order lower than that achieved alien using alloy 82109,

the result all the same must be considered quite encouraging since amorphous ma-
terials are being studied and developed intensively. In addition, in a nutter of
cases the requirement of ensuring the maximum low threshold sensitivity is not
imposed on ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers. Therefore, amorphous materials

can be used already now in ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers. The advantages of
these materials are obvious. In particular, cores sade of them do not have to be
heat treated and are not very sensitive to mechanical stresses.

Conc lus ion

The picture of the origin of magnetic noise which we have discussed is obviously
not complete and lacking internal contradictions. It will of course be refined as
the result of further theoretical and experimental research. This relates

 

*R.Ya.7?érkman's report at the third interdepartmental "Msgnetic Noise in Ferro-
probes and "emetic Amplifiers" conference. Moscow, KPH [Moscow Physicotechnical
Institute], dctober 1979.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

especially to precisely defining the role of magnetic anisotropy. But what has
already been established testifies to considerable potential possibilities for

suppressing magnetic noise, primarily by the intelligent and purposeful choice

of ferromgnetic uterials. At the present moment we have available a group of
new nickel-iron alloys (81m, 8381' and 821“?) which make it possible, other eon-
ditions being equal, to reduce the noise level by an order of magnitude as com-
pared with alloys 79m and BONKhS, used previously in low-threshold ferroprobes
and magnetic amplifiers. There isno doubt that the developmnt and study of new

alloys, including amorphous, will lead to further progress in the area of reducing
the level of mystic noise.

The establishment of a correlation between the level of magnetic noise and indi-
vidual parameters of the ferromagnetic materials used will make it possible to use
the "noise" method for controlling the quality of the materials themselves.
Agreeing with the authors of [108], who have developed this trend and stress its

promise, we wish once more to emphasize the multifactor nature of the phenomenon
studied.

In our opinion further efforts in the area of studying the nature of magnetic noise.
constructing a quantitative theory of the phenomenon and developing low—threshold
ferroprobes and magnetic amplifiers, as well as of using the "noise" method in
nondestructive testing of ferromagnetic materials should be directed toward iso-
lation of all the many factors and determination of the influence of each factor
individually. of course, painstaking analytical work is required here and the
creation of unique apparatus with ferromagnetic a'nd superconducting shields and

the formulation of sufficiently detailed and polished experiments.

The need for the coordination of efforts is also obvious.

Bibliography

1. Rozenblat, FLA. "Hagnitnyye elementy avtomatiki i vychislitel'noy tekhniki"

[Magnetic Elements of Automtion and Computer Technology], Moscow, Nauka,
1966, 768 pages.

2. Afanas'yev, Yu.V. "Perrozondy" [Perroprobes], Leningrad, Energiya, 1969, 168
pages.

3. Razin. 6.1. and Shchelkin, A.P. "Beskontaktnoye izmereniye elektricheskikh
tokov" [Noncontact Measurement of Electric Current], Moscow, Atomizdat, 1974,
160 pages.

lo. Afanas'yev, Yu.V., Studentsov, N.V., Khorev, V.N., Chechurina, YeJI. and
Shchelkin. A.P. "Sredstva izmereniy parametrov magnitnogo polya" [Equipment
for Measuring Parameters of a Magnetic ‘Pieldl, Leningrad, Bnergiya, 1979,
320 pages.

5. Kolachevskiy, 8.8. "Magxlitnyye shumy" [Hagnetic Noise], Hoscow, Nauka. 1971,
136 pages.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Langvagen. Ye.N. "Methods of Eacperinental Determination of Differential
Magnetic Permeability of Perromagnetics with Complex Magnetization,"
IZVESTIYA vuzov. nmmmmn. No 3, 1970, pp 250-256.

7. Ruskin. P.V. "0n the Question of the Statistical Nature of the Magnetic
Reversal of Perromagnetics," 2317. Vol 26, No 8, 1956, pp 1782-1789.

8. Grachev. A.A. "0n the Continuous Spectrum of the B.M.F. of Cyclic Magnetic
Reversal," IZVESTIYA WZOV. RADIOI'IZIKA, Vol 1, No 2, 1958, pp 71-76.

9. Berkman, R.Ya. "Intrinsic Noise of Ferroprobes and Procedure for Studying It,"
csonzrcmzsm nmoxosmmm. No 7. 1960, pp 25-43.

10. Afsnasenko. M.P. and Derkman, R.Ya.' "Intrinsic Noise of Magnetic Modulators”

in "Otbor i peredacha informatsii" [Information Screening and Transfer],
No 102, 1971., pp 53-60.

11. Afanasenko, M.P. and Berkun, R.Ya. "Influence of Design and Electrical
Parameters on Level of Intrinsic Noise of Magnetic Modulators" in "Otbor i
peredacha informatsii," No 42, 1976. pp 61-65.

12. Neiner, M.M. "Magnetostrictive Offset and Noise in Flux Cate Magnetometers,"
IEEE runs. on mom, Vol 5, No 2, 1969, pp 98-105.

13. Gordon. D.I., Lundsten, R.N. and Scarzello. J.P. "Offset and Noise in
Pluxgate Magnetometers," IEEE TRANS. 0N MACE. Vol 6, No 4, 1970, p 818.

16. Kolachevskaya, V.V., Kolachevskiy, N.N., Rozhdestvenskiy, V.V. and Strygin,
L.V. "Spectral Distribution of Magnetic Noise Near Harmonics of the Magnetic
Reversal Frequency," RADIO'I'BKNNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 16, No 7, 1971, pp
1211-1215.

15. Mari, Zh. "Nizkochastotnyye parametricheskiye usiliteli s ortogonal'nym
magnitnym upravleniyem" [Low-Frequency Parametric Amplifiers with Orthogonal
Magnetic Control]. Moscow, Mir, 1967. 231 pages.

16. Kotlyar, P.Ye. "Issledovaniye magnitnykh shumov v ferrozondakh" [Investiga-
tion of Magnetic Noise in Perroprobes]. author's abstract of candidate's
dissertation, Novosibirsk. USSR Academy of Sciences Siberian Division
Institute of Automation and Electrometry, 1971, 17 pages.

17. Afanas'yev, Yu.V., Cor-obey. V.N. and Trukats, V.A. "Some Results of the

Investigation of Magnetic Noise in Ferroprobes." TRUDY METROLOCICNBSKIIGI
INSTITUTOV SSSR. No 215 (275), 1978, pp 67-52.

18- Bukhsrov, M.V. "Influence of Fluctuations of Hysteresis Loop Parameters on
Level of Excess Magnetic Noise in Mngnetomodulation Transformers" in "Pizika
magnitnykh materialov" [Physics of Magnetic Materials], Kalinin, K60, 1979,
pp 13-19.

3_7

FOR oquL us: ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Berner. R. and Kronnyuller, G. "Plasticheskaya detornstsiya nonokristallov"
[Plastic Defornation of Single Crystals], edited by A.N, Orlov, Moscow, Mir,
1969, 272 pages.

Vlasko-Vlasov, V.K., Dedukh, L.M. and Nikitenko, v.1. "Polarization-Optical
Investigation of Processes oi Magnetization Around Individual Dislocations
in Single Crystals of Yttrium-Iron Garnet," ZNMRNAL BKSPERIMENTAL'NOY I
TBORBTICHBSKOY PIZIKI, Vol 65, No 1, 1973, pp 377-395.

Vonsovskiy, S.V. and Shur, Ya.S. "Perronagnetizn," Moscow and Leningrad,
Gosudarstvennoye izdatel'stvo tekhniko-teorsticheskoy literstury, 1948,
816 pages.

Gordon. D.I. "An Bxperinental Study of Barkhausen Noise in Nickel-Iron
Alloys," REVIEHS 0P MODERN PHYSICS, V01 25, No 1, 1953, pp 56-57.

Pusey, I.M. and Molotilov, B.V. "Magnetostriction of Nickel-Iron-Molybdenun
Alloys." IZVBSTIYA AN SSSR, SERIYA YIZIKA, V01 22, No 10, 1958, pp 1264-1250.

Afanas'yev, Yu.v., Gorobey, V.N., Mart'yanovs, K.D., Pluchek, B.Ya., Sosnin,
V.V. and Sherbakova, T.I. "Lou-Noise Nickel-Iron Alloys for Cores of
Perroprobes and Magnetic Modulators," IZMERITBL'NAYA TEKHNIKA, No 10, 1977,
pp 63-65.

Afsnss'yev, Yu.V. and Gorobey, V.N. "Role of Magnetostriction in the Mechan-
ism of the Origin of Noise in Perroprobes and Magnetic Modulators." METRO-
LOGIYA, No A, 1980, pp 47-54.

>cordon, D.I., Lundsten, R.H., Chiarodo, R.A. and Hells, H.H. "A Pluxgate
'Sensor of High Stability for Low Field Magnetonetry," IBBE TRANS. 0N MAGN.,

Vol 6, No 3, 1968, pp 397-401.

Yanus, 3.1., Drozhzhins, V.I., Pridnan, L.A. and Vedenev, V.A. "Influence of
Coercive Force of Perroprobe Cores on Stability of the Zero Signal."
GEOPIZICNBSKOYE PRIBOROSTROYENIYB, No 7, 1960, pp 5-16.

Lavrent'yev, A.G. and Pononarev, Yu.F. "0n the Question of the Relationship
Between Magnetic Noise and Amount of Magnetostriction," PIZIKA METALLOV I
METALLOVEDENIYE, Vol 41, No 6, 1976, pp 1182-1187.

Holotilov, B.V., editor. "Pretsizionnyye splavy. Spravochnik" [Precision
Alloys, a Handbook]. Moscow, Metallurgiys, 1976, 868 pages.

Yefrenov, V.P., Kadinskays, 1.6., Yur'yeva, Ye.K., Shcherbakova, T.I. and
Sosnin, v.v. "Materials for Ferroprobes with a Low Level of Magnetic Noise,"
GEOPIZICHBSKAYA APPARATURA, No 65, 1978, pp 23-31.

Bozort. R.M. "The Pernslloy Problen," REVIKHS 0P MODERN PHYSICS, Vol 25, No 1,
1953, pp 62-48.

38

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
32.

33.

36s

35.

36.

37.

39.

60.

01.

£2.

63.

66.

IN3R40FF1C1AI.IEHE(HVLY

Baldwin, Y.A. and Milstein, P. “Barkhausen Noise Power Versus Size 0: a
Minor Hysteresis Loop." J. APPL. PHYS.. Vol 44, No 10, 1973, pp-4739-4142.

Scouten. D.C. "Sensor Noise in Lou-vael Pluxgate Magnetometers," IEEE
TRANS. ON MAGN., V01 8, No 2, 1972, pp 223-231.

Acuna, M.H. “Pluxgate Magnetometers for Outer Planets Exploration," IEEE
TRANS. 0N MAGN.. V01 10, No 3, 1974, pp 519-523.

Mssumoto, T., Hashimoto, K. and Eujimori, R. "Recent Development of Research
on Amorphous Metals," TOHOKU UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE SCIENCE REPORTS,
SERIES A. Vol 25, No 6, 1975, pp 232-266.

Berkmsn. R.Ya., Mikhsylovskiy, V.N., Martynyuk-Lototskiy, R.Ye. and Spektor,
Yu.I. "Quadrature Component of the E.M.P. of Magneto-odulstion Sensors in
Measurements in Inhomogeneous Magnetic Pields" in "Msgnitnyye elementy avto-
matiki, telenekhaniki, izmeritel'noy i vychislitel'noy tekhniki" [Magnetic
Elements in Automation, Telenechsnics and Measuring and Conputing Equipment],
Kiev, Izdatel'stvo AN USSR, 1964, pp 183-189.

Afanss'yev. Yu.V. "Status and Prospects of the Development of Perroprobe
Magnetometry." CEOPIZICEESKAYA APPARAIURA, No 60, 1977, pp 17-35.

Ness, N.P. "Magnetometers for Space Research," SPACE SCIENT. EEV., Vol 11,
1970, pp 459-554.

Lsngvagen, Ye.N. "Perroprobes with Excitation by Means of a Rotating Field,"
GEOFIZICHESKAXA APPARATUEA, No 57, 1975, pp 31-37.

Kolschevskiy, N.N. "Experimental Study of the Influence of Elastic Stresses,
Heat Treating and Crystalline Structure of a Ferromagnetic Sample on Inten-
sity of Magnetic Noise," PIZIKA METALLOV I MBTALLOVEDENIYE, Vol 11, No 2.
1961, pp 211-216. '

Afsnssenko. M.P. and Eerkman. R.Ya. “Reduction of Intrinsic Noise of Magnetic
Modulators When the Core Operates Near the Curie Point," 0TBOR I PEREDACHA
INPOEMATSII, No as. 1976, pp 83-86.

Bondarenko, 8.1., Sherenet, V.I., Vinogradov, 8.8. and Ryabovol, V.V.
"Multilayer Superconducting Shield for Producing a Deep Magnetic Vacuum,"
ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY PIZIKI, V01 65, No 1. 1975, pp 126-129.

Lutgemeier. H. "Magnetization Processes in a Bulk Nonnsgnetic State which

Occur as the Result of a Change in Temperature," ZS. ANGER. PHYS., Vol 16,
No 3. 1963, p 167.

Sanoylovich, A.G. and Korenblit, L.L. "Thermionic Eddy Currents in an Aniso-
tropic Medium. PIZIKA TVERDOGO TELA, Vol 3, No 7, 1961, pp 2054-2059.

39

FOI.0FF"JAL.USE(NNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

«5. Zaytsev, A.V. and Gorobey, V.N. "Influence of Temperature Gradient of
Cores on Noise Level in Perroprobea." METRDDOGIYA, No 4, 1980, pp 53-47.

66. Mayer, V.V. "Prostyye opyty s ul'trazvukon" [Simple Experiments with Ultra—
sound], Moscow, Nauka, 1978, 160 pages.

47. Afanas'yev, Yu.V., Gorobey, V.N. and Hakeyev. V.I. "Automated Analysis of
Magnetic Noise in the Infralov frequency Band" in "Tezisy dokladov. Vse-
soyuznaya nauchno-tekhnicheakaya konferentaiya 'Povysheniye effektivnosti
proizvodstva i kachestva produktsii na osnove standartizatsii' (g. Gor'kiy,
may, 1977)" [Theses of Papers; All-Onion Scientific and Technical Conference
"Improvement of Production Efficiency and Product Quality on the Basis of

Standardization" (Gor'kiy. Hay, 1977)], Hbacov, Standarty, 1977, pp 327-
329 .

68. "Magnetic Noise Method in Nondestructive Testing" (papers relating to this
section) in "Tezisy dokladov nauchno-tekhnicheskogo soveshchaniya 'Effekt
Barkgauzena i yego ispol'zovaniye v tekhnike'" [Theses of Papers at the

"Barkhausen Effect and Its Employment in Engineering" Scientific and Technical
Conference], Izhevsk, 1977, pp 127-179.

COPYRIGHT: Taentral'nyy nauchno-issledovatel'akiy institut infer-atsii i tekhniko-
ekonomicheskikh issledovaniy priborostroyeniya, aredatv avtonatizataii i sisten
upravleniya (TaNIITEIpriborostroyeniya), 1981

8831
cso: 1860/59

60

INJR OIWNCIAI.IE§ELCHVLY
I708 OFFK’IAI. USE ONLY

000 621.375
AMPLIFIEI FUR KEPZOiUPI AUTOMTIC SHI'I‘CR

“0300!! PRIBmY I SISPM UPRAVLD‘IYA in Russian NO 9. Sep 81 p 23
[Article by engineer V. I. Shalenko]

[Text] The amplifier for the xmowpr autontic switch is designed for use in a
set with a polarised relay without self-reset for the protection of combined elec-
rical neasureaent devices fro- electrical overloads. The mini-us operating voltage
at ainilua voltage supply is not greater than 0.6 volts. The leakage current at
the input is not greater than 0.02 aicroalperes. The bandpass is not snller than
0-20.000 as. The output current is not saaller than 20 aillialperes. The consuap-
tion current is 100 aicroalperes. The minu- allouable input voltage is 1000

volts. The operating conditions are as follows: tenperature range -- -iO to+ 50°C.?
relative air humidity at 25°C -- up to 98%; air pressure -- 86 to 106 ink.

The amplifier is nnufactured by the ”Hikroprovod" NPO [Scientific Production Asso-
ciation] (Kishenev).

COPYRIGHT: Iadstel'stvo ”hshinostroyeniye". 'Pribory i sisteay upravleniya”.
i981

2291
cso: 1860/75

kl

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY

ARTBNNAS

unc 621.396.67(075.8)
ANTENNAS AND FEEDER LINES .

Moscow ANTENNO-FIDERNYYE USTRUYSTVA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 8 Dec 80)
pp 2-4. 238-265. 278-280

lAnnotation, excerpted foreword, chapter 13, appendix 1 and table of contents from
book "Antennas and Feeder Lines", by Georgiy Nikolayevich Kocherzhevskiy, Third
Edition, revised and supplemented. authorized by the USSR Ministry of Higher and
Intermediate Special Education as a Textbook for Students of Higher Educational

Institutes Studying in the Speciality "Radio Communications and Radio Broadcasting",
Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 20,000 copies, 280 pages]

[Text] The major topics of radio wave transmission and reception theory and the
operational principles of the main types of antennas are treated. Methods of
designing antennas with specified properties are analyzed, for exaaple, broadband.
frequency independent, etc. The types of antennas and feed lines for radio commun-
ications and broadcasting, television, space communications. etc. are treated. As
compared to the publication which cans out in 1972, the material has been sub-
stantially revised, and chapters have been added where the parameters which charac-
terize the directional properties of antennas are treated, as well as a section on
the influence of metal bodies on the radiation of antennas, etc.

The book is intended for students at electrical engineering communications insti-
tutes. The book was reviewed by Ye. N. Vasil'yev.

Foreword

The book consists of two parts. The fundamentals of antenna theory are printed in
Part 1 (Chapters 1-7). The najor types of antennas used for various frequency
bands are treated in Part 11 (Chapters 8-13). Considerable attention is devoted to
the specific features of antennas for line-of-sight radio relay links, passive
repeaters, space radio communications, television, etc.

General questions of_e1ectromagnetic wave transmission through feed lines (the
types of feeders and their components, latching techniques, etc.) are set forth in

the course on engineering electrodynamics, and for this reason, only the specific
features of antenna feed lines for various wavelengths are treated in this course.

62

FOR¢OFFKJA1.USEIDNLY
POI! OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Attention is devoted to a number of questions in the book which are of considerable
practical interest. These include: the application of the results of solving the
integral equation of antennas (the method of point matching) to the calculation of
the input impedance of a symmetrical dipole and the current distribution in coupled
dipoles; accounting for the influence of metal bodies on antenna radiation; the
design of antennas with a modulated phase velocity; optimum feed radiators for
single reflectors and dual reflector antennas; some new types of dual reflector
antennas and antennas for radio broadcasting at medium wavelengths; feed lines for
delivering high power to shortwave antennas; self-complementary antenna arrays;
ring directors; methods of antenna miniaturization; a procedure for calculating
(using a computer) currents in multielement antennas with a series feed (traveling
wave antennas with coupling elements, log periodic antennas), etc.

The author would like to express his gratitude to the head of the department of
antennas and engineering electrodynsmics of the Moscow Electrical Engineering
Institute for Communications, honored scientist and engineer, doctor of the engin-

eering sciences and professor 6.2. Ayzenberg for assisting in the work on the manu-
script and for considerable valuable advice.

The author is grateful to the reviewers, the head of the department of antennas and
radio wave propagation of Moscow Electrical Engineering Institute and doctor of
the engineering sciences, professor Ye.N. Vasil'yev and senior instructors V.N.
Volovskiy and v.v. Belostotskiy, who made a number of valuable comments which
assisted in improving the contents of the manuscript; he is also extremely grate-
ful to candidates of the engineering sciences and lecturers G.A. Yerokhin, H.E.

Zhurbenko and V.A. Sokolov, who courteously allowed the use of several of the
resultsuof their work.

CHAPTER 13. ANTENNAS FOR RADIO COHHDNICATIONS AND BROADCASTING AT HYRIAMETBR
(VERY LONG), KILOHETBR (LONG) AND HECTOHETBR (MEDIUM) WAVELENGTHS

13.1. Problems in the Design of VLF, LP and HP Antennas

Specific features of VLF; LP and MT band antennas. Very low frequency (V13),
1 - 10 - 100 km and low frequency (LP), X - l - 10 km. waves propagate in two ways:

from the lower boundary of the ionosphere (a space wave). Ground waves are
comparatively poorly absorbed in the soil and bend (diffract) well about the
spherical surface of the earth. At distances of up to 2,000 to 3,000 km, communi-

cations is accomplished using ground waves, while at greater distances, by virtue
of space waves.

Medium frequency wavelengths (MP) of A - 100 to 1,000 m are absorbed much more
strongly inthe soil than LP and VLF waves, and bend more poorly about the spherical

surface of the earth. For this reason, the propagation range of ground waves is
limited to a distance of 500 to 700 km and falls off with decreasing wavelength.

43

IllltnﬂﬂCJAI.lliE(H'LY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HNLY

Communication at medium wavelengths is stable only in the absence of interference
between ground and space waves, which occurs at a distance of approximately 50 to
200 km from the transmitter (the reliable reception zone). The near fading zone is
located further out. where the field of the ground and space waves are commensurate.
As a consequence of the continuous change of the space wave field phase, reception
in this zone is unstable. The near field fading is of a selective nature: waves
corresponding to the different modulating frequencies interfere in different ways.
As a consequence of this, there are nonlinear distortions during reception. With a

further increase in the distance from the transmitter, the space wave field begins
to predominate.

Reception in the space wave field zone is possible only during nighttime hours.
Reception here is also unstable, since waves which are reflected once or twice
from the ionosphere (the phenomenon of far field fading) as well as waves with a

changed polarization plane, can arrive here at considerable distances from the
transmitter.

The positive properties of VLF and LP frequencies are the stable field intensity
at the reception site and the fact that the intensity is not dependent on the
season of the year, day, meteorological conditions, state of the ionosphere, etc.
This also applies to medium waves which propagate in the form of ground waves.

Drawbacks to_VLF, L? and HT communications are: the considerable absorption of
electromagnetic energy in the soil (which increases with decreasing wavelength),
the comparatively high level of atmospheric!interference, and the impossibility of
using antennas with a significant directional gain. Because of this, a field
intensity level sufficient for reception can be assured only by means of high
power transmitters. One of the drawbacks to medium and long wave lengths is also'
the impossibility of transmitting wide bandwidths.

At the present time, LP and VLF are primarily used for radio telegraph service,
in particular. for radio communications with submarines, for radio navigation,
etc. The shortwave portion of the long wave band (1,050 - 2,000 I0 is used for
radio broadcasting. Medium wavelengths are employed for radio broadcasting (the
200 - 550 m portion of the band), for communications with mobile radio stations,
in aviation radio service, etc.

Because of the specific features of VLF, L? and HP propagation, the radiation
maximum of antennas for these bands should be directed along the surface of the
earth. Unbalanced vertical dipoles (see 55.3) have the appropriate directional
patterns and produce a vertically polarized field. The use of horizontal antennas
which create a horizontally polarized field is not expedient, since they radiate

poorly along the surface of the earth. Such antennas are used only for reception
(see 513.3).

The height of antenna supports is governed by engineering and economic considera-
tions (the cost of a support increases approximately in proportion to the cube of
the height). An acceptable height for supports at VLF and LP frequencies is usu-
ally 150 to 250 m. Some medium wave antennas have a height of up to 350 and even

66

FOI¢0FFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR‘OFFIJAI.USEINVLY

up to 500 m. Because of the low relative height of VLP and LP antennas, their
directional pattern in the vertical plane is essentially no different from the
directional pattern of an elementary dipole. In the medium wave band, the antenna
height can be commensurate with the wavelength and is usually equal to 0.161 -
0.63A. For this reason, HP antennas have greater directional properties in the '
vertical plane, which is especially important to eliminate radiation at large n
angles to the horizontal, increase the zone of reliable reception and place the
near field fading zone far away from the transmitter.

Antennas used for radio broadcasting in predominantly some definite direction or
for radio service between two points should have unidirectional properties in the
horizontal plane, something which is achieved by using two or more radiators
(coupled dipoles).

Because of the small relative length (height) of VLF and LP antennas, their radia-
tion resistance is low (tenths or units of ohms); it can be ecumensurate with the
loss resistance, and in a number of cases, is considerably less than the latter,
because of which the efficiency of an antenna, without taking special steps, proves
to be extremely low. For such antennas to radiate a high power, the currents in
them should be large, something which leads to large energy losses in the ground,
the tuning elements, the insulators, etc.

The reactive component of the input impedance of a short antenna is extremely
large (it can achieve several thousands of ohms) and is of a capacitive nature. For
this reason the voltage at the feed poincs of the antenna is also high: 0° -

- Io + n’ where “in I 380 + nloss‘ R10.. is the loss resistance referenced
to the current at the feed points of the antenna. Since X1“ >> R1“, then one can

approximately set 00 ' onin-

To avoid electrical flashover of insulators, flare leakage (the "corona" pheno--
menon), etc., the voltage at the antenna terminals. as well as the voltage between
its various points and ground should not exceed the permissible level. This limits
the power which can be delivered to the antenna.

A large reactive power is stored in the antenna because of its large reactance and
large current. The Q of the antenna is quite high, because of which, such an
antenna has a very narrow bandwidth, which can sometimes prove to be inadequate
even for the slow transmission of telegraph signals. The major tasks of VLF and LP
antenna design are outlined from what has been said: increasing the power in the
transmiting antenna; reducing the voltages in the antenna; extending the passband
of antenna frequencies: increasing antenna efficiency.

These problems can be solved by increasing the radiation resistance, reducing the
loss resistance and the reactance of the antenna.

In the case of HP antennas, the solution of the problems posed above is simplified
significantly, since these antennas have a comparatively long relative length and
their radiation resistance amounts to tens of ohms. However, an additional problem
arises in the design of HF antennas, which consists in designing an antenna which
has antifading properties, the use of which increase the reliable reception area.

45

FOR OIINCJAI.UEIICNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

Mcthalu calculating the major parameters of VLF, LP and MP antennas. To increase
the radiation resistance without increasing antenna height (see 55.3), as well as
reduce the potentials in the antenna and expand its bandwidth, VLF and LP antennas
are made in the form of T, r-shaped or umbrella radiators with extremely extensive
horizontal and vertical nelbers (consisting of several parallel wires). In this
case, the horizontal portion is intended'only for increasing the antenna capacitance
and almst plays no part in the radiation, since the field generated by it is
cancelled out by its mirror image field. The antenna curtain usually contains from
2 to 16 conductors. The spacing between the conductors is l to 3 meters. Copper
or bronze stranded cable with a diameter of 6 to 10 nm is usually eaployed for the
conductors. The ends of the conductors of a horizontal curtain are secured to
antenna spreaders (Figure 13.1s). The support towers (steel or wood) are held in
the vertical position by neans ' several levels of guys. The guys are broken up
into short sections to reduce .e currents induced in them by the antenna field.
The length of a horizontal section can run to 250 n and more. One of the generator
terminals is connected to a system of conductora buried in the ground - the ground-
ing systes (Figure 13.1b).

Ground

 

Figure 13.1.

The characteristic impedance of an antenna with very extensive horizontal and verti-
cal sections can amount to about 150 to 200 ohns. However, even with this low
characteristic impedance, the antenna bandwidth proves to be extremely narrow
because of the low radiation resistance.

Since there is no need at nediun wavelengths for an antenna with an extensive hori-
zmlta lg section, nedium wave broadcasting antennas are usually made in the form of
antenna nests (Figure 13.2a) or antenna towers (Figure 13.2b). The base of the
antenna tower is secured to the ground by means of insulators; no guys are needed to
secure this antenna. Antenna masts are held in the vertical position by a small
number of guys. In these antennas, the generator is connected to the lower end of
the steel masts or.-tower. and the radiator is the mast or tower itself. In a nusber
of cases. to increase the effective height, the antenna masts or towers are equipped
with a capacitive load at the top. This load takes the fern of either a metal
(solid or wire) disk, or a portion of the upper level of guys. Adding a capacitive

66

POIOMUEMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

load at the top makes it possible to reduce the antenna height by 20 to 30 percent.
The height of antenna towers usually runs to 60 to 200 meters, and that of antenna
masts from 60 to 350 meters. The positive properties of these antennas as compared
to wire ones are: the presence of just one mast or tower (in the case of. wire listen-
nas, a minimum of two masts is required), something which saves antenna field space;
less distortion of the directional pattern because of the absence of a large nutter
of guys, suspension cables, etc.; and the greater mechanical strength.

      

:1

 
  

4»

   

   

:4 .14 D

   

QP

     

   

4>;<r

      
      

'21 ’2‘ n

a

  

‘7 ”law’s-'2. 'ﬁ. (4'. . ,

(aw

Figure 13 .2.

Key: 1. Insulator;
2. Concrete foundation;
3. Base support insulator;
6. Anchor.

The radiation resistance of very long wave and long wave antennas is computed from
(5.8). In the case of a short vertical antenna (l/l < 0.)), without its horizontal
section the effective height 25 - 1/2 (see 55.3). "here there is an extremely
extensive horizontal portion [see (5.12)]. 14 = Z, i.e., it almost doubles. Thus,
in the sense of boosting the radiation resistance, an extensive horizontal section
of an antenna is equivalent to approximately doubling the height of an antenna.

It is enormously simpler and less expensive to make even an extremely extensive

horizontal section than to increase the heidn of an antenna, for example, from
200 to low In. '

The radiation resistance of a medium wave, unloaded antenna, referenced to the
current antinode, if Z/A > 0.2, is computed from (3.21); in this case, the constant
factor is chosen equal to 30. The graph of Figure 3.6 can be used for this same

purpose. The more complex formula of [7] is used to calculate kg, of a medium
wave loaded antenna.

(07

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the inequality 13 < 0.35 (13 is the equivalent antenna length), then the radia—
tion resistance referenced to the current at the feed points is:

Ru - RM". ‘1’.

If 13/) > 0.35, then the law governing the current distribution along a vertical
antenna is close to a hyperbolic sine and the radiation resistance referenced to
the current at the feed points can be determined from the approximate formula [7]:

- 4&3—
80 . .
_ . (Ramp-Hum.

where "B is the characteristic impedance of the vertical section of the antenna.

Another way of increasing R; consists in using couples: antennas of several vertical
coupled dipoles (antennas with several downleads). Such antennas are employed for
high power very long wave and long wave radio stations. A schematic of a couple:
antenna is shown in Figure 13.3, which in essence consists of three T-antennas con-
tiguous with each other. The feed fron the transmitter is delivered to the central
downlead. All of the downleads are tuned by means of the variable inductances I.
so that the currents in them prove to be in phase and approximately equal. The
radiation resistance of each vertical conductor is the sun of the inherent resis-
tance of the given conductor and the resistances induced in it by the other vertical
conductors. The induced resistances can be calculated using the induced e.n.f.
technique (see 54.2). and the internal radiation resistances of the downleada are
calculated using (5.8). Because of the fact that the currents in all of the down-
leads are in phase and approximately equal in magnitude, and the spacings between
the downleads are small as compared to the wavelength (the spacings between the
downleads anount to a few hundred meters), the induced resistances prove to be close
in magnitude to the internal resistances. For this reason, the overall radiation
resistance of one download is Ru =- nkgn, where 3:11 is the internal radiation
resistance of the downlead; n is the number of downleads. The total radiation
resistance of the entire antenna is R; I Rm 4- 382 + + R2" =- nzllnl.

Thus, the radiation resistance of an antenna with several (n) downleads increases
approxintely as n2 as conpared to the radiatdon resistance of one vertical antenna

of the sane length.

Such a large rise in the radiation resistance is achieved at the cost of a consider-
able increase in the complexity and expense of the antenna. It should be kept in

mind that the radiation resistance of cmlex very long wave and long wave antennas,
consisting of several downleads. is nonetheless low and usually amounts to units of
ohm. Since the radiation resistance of an antenna with several downloads increases
as compared to a single antenna by a factor of n2 tines, while the loss resistance

increases approxinately n times, the efficiency of a complex antenna is increased.

Efforts are made in the design of VLF, LP and HP antennas to red-.ce the electro-
nagnetic energy losses and increase antenna efficiency. The losses in the surface

‘8

FOIOWICIALIBEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 13.3. Figure 13.4.

of the ground which is incorporated directly in the antenna current circuit, and

in the tuning elements (especially the loading coils) play a major role. The losses
in the coils are reduced by means of an efficient structural design and the use of
wires with a low ilpedance at high frequencies. To reduce losses in the ground,

a grounding system or a counterpoise is set up, the underlying concept of which
consists in reducing the currents flowing directly in the upper layer of the soil.

A ground can be made in the form of a system of radial conductors buried a small
depth in the ground (down to about 0.5 m), which are joined together at the center
and connected to a terminal of the generator (see Figure l3.lb). Since the specific
resistance of the ground conductors is considerably less than the soil resistance,
the majority of the currents shorted to ground flow to the generator terminal via
these conductors, because of which, losses in the ground are reduced.

A counterpoise is made in the form of a grid of wires suspended below the antenna

at a slight height above the ground. All of the conductors are joined together and
connected to one of the generator terminals. In this case, the majority of the
displacement currents branching off to ground from the antenna is intercepted by
the counterpoise conductors and routed in the fore of conductance currents to the
generator terminal. Thus, it is as if the counterpoise shields the antenna frm
the ground; approximtely 60 to 70 percent of the antenna current is shorted through
it and 30 to 1.0 percent through the ground. Counterpoises are usually employed at
nedium wavelengths in the case of soil which is poorly suited for grounding devices

(hard or poorly conducting soil), as well as at short wavelengths for mobile radio
stations with asyuetrical vertical antennas.

A ground or counterpoise should encompass the area on which the bulk of the near
field is concentrated. The number of radial ground conductors is usually 80 to 120.
Vertical antennas without a horizontal section or umbrella antennas have all of the
radial wires of the same length, exceeding 10 to 20 percent of the antenna height.
In the case of T or F-shaped antennas, the length of the ground (counterpoise)
conductors increases as the projection of the horizontal portion of the antenna
onto the ground is approached and should exceed the anount of this projection by
approximately the mast height. Complex (sectionalized) grounds are sometines used
in high power LP and VLF transmitters. Antenna efficiencies close to 90 percent

(49

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have been successfully achieved at VLF frequencies using such grounds, as well as
by means of special measures to reduce losses in tuning elsnents. To calculate
the losses in the ground and grounding systas, it is necessary to know the current
density distribution in the near field of the antenna. S.l. Nadenenko [59] and

B.V. Brande [60] have made a substantial contribution to the development of design
methods for grounds.

The peruissible power in an antenna is governed by the value of the electrical
field intensity components, En, normal to the conductor, at which electrical break-
down of the insulators can occur or the imitation of air close to the antenna
begins (the "corona" phenomenon), as well as by the current level at which the
conductors begin to heat up. The cross-section of the antenna conductors should be

chosen so that the current density in then does not exceed 5 aq1/lll2 (the effective
value).

Porcelain antenna insulators sustain a voltage of approximately 1 kilovolt. In the
case of comparatively low power transmitters (tens of kilowatts and less), insula-
tor strings sustain a voltage of up 50 RV are used for the antenna. In the case of
high power transmitters (hundreds of kilowatts), special insulators are used which

sustain voltages above 100 KV.

The permissible field intensity at the conductors should be less than the critical
value (see $12.2). The amplitude of Ecr at VLF and LP frequencies in the case of
moist air amounts to about 14 R'!/cm [60]. In the case of a vertical antenna with
a horizontal portion (Figure 13.3), the voltage at any section of the equivalent
vertical antenna, U, a U,cos k(Z 4- b3 - z), where U. is the voltage amplitude at
the voltage antinode (point C).

The voltage between the end of the vertical section of the real antenna (point 3)
and ground is:

-._'U,.-:=U,‘coskb,.- " (13.1)

It is known fro. the theory of long lines that the voltage and current in the
corresponding antinodes are related by the expression:

0 . I w '.-'v;,ai.;_V,.- (13.2)

II 11V

where "v is the characteristic impedance of the vertical part of the antenna;
‘lg'u'ldsin at“; , (13.3)

By replacing U1. in (13.1) with expression (13.2) and substituting expression
(13.3) in place of I', we obtain:

'93,". ’0 ""- «'55an #1.; 3 (13 .1.)

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The voltage in a real antenna is maximum at the end of the horizontal part (point A).
Since the voltage distribution is U; - UA mxcos k(b - x) along the horizontal
section AB, where x is the present coordinate read out from point B, then the
voltage at the end of the vertical portion of the antenna (point B), and the maxi-
mum voltage at point A are related by the expression: ,

Ua-Uamcosﬁb. (13.5)
Equating (13.4) and (13.5), we find:

U , ' i,'v.oo.'u. (13.6)

”mg" cumin/u.— '

It can be seen from the given expression that to reduce the voltage in the antenna
it is necessary that: for a specified input power, the current 10 be reduced (i.e.,
increase the antenna radiation resistance); the characteristic impedance of the
vertical pa t of the antenna be reduced. i.e., increase the downlead capacitance;
the equivalent length increase b3 be increased, for which the ratio "hot/"v should
be reduced, as can be seen from (5.9). i.e., increase the capacitance of the hori-
zontal portion of the antenna as compared to the vertical (Clhor > Clver)~

He will note that expression (13.6) is also justified for T-shaped and unbrells
antennas. In all cases. b is to be understood as the length of one arm (beam).

The voltage UA nax should notexceed the permissible level, i.e., DA sax ; Unmu’per].
The power delivered to the antenna is Po - I kin/2. Stbstituting its expression
from (1L6) here in place of lo. we obtain t e formula for calculating the per-is-
sible level of power delivered to the antenna:

_ - "‘15, 04 cumulus-W ' 7
Po Per P9... 2 (—3'-'——— "mm. ). (13.)

For an antenna without a horizontal section (b - 0), expression (13.7) assumes the
form:

u

it! U“. -. ,
Pun-f 2 (#3,. sin”).

Keeping expression (12.5) in mind and replacing WA in it with W.- ["hor], expression
(13.7) can be written in the forts:

H-435 . an' muslnk'llg)‘ "
Pesos .2 ”kah' . (13.8)

where a is the conductor radius; n is the number of conductors in the horizontal
part.

51

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFRJAI.USE(NULY

In those cases where [/1 L 0.35, the current in the antenna should be considered as
having a hyperbolic sine distribution. In this case, if the antenna does not have

a horizontal part, the permissible power can be computed from (12.9), keeping in
mind the fact that "A - Hg [- “verlo

To calculate the permissible power, the permissible value of En as well as other
quantities, it is necessary to know the characteristic impedances of the vertical

and horizontal parts of the antenna. The characteristic impedances are calculated
by any approximation technique, for example, Hou's method [6, 50].

The characteristic impedance of an antenna meet or antenna tower can be approxi-
mated with the formula "A - 60(lnIZ/b3] - l), where 93 is the equivalent radius of
the tower. If the antenna mast or tower has a triangular or square cross-section,
then 93 represents the radius of a circle inscribed in the cross-section.

In the case of a large number of conductors in an antenna curtain, B.V. Braude [60]
proposed the substitution of solid metal surfaces for the wire curtains in the cal-

culations, where these surfaces have the size and shape of the corresponding wire
sections of the antenna.

The passband of VLF, LP and H? antennas is governed by the dependence of the input
impedance of the antenna on frequency (the directional properties of the antenna
change little with a change in frequency). Hith small changes in frequency asucom-
pared to the resonant frequency, the antenna behaves as a conventional resonant
circuit. The antenna bandwidth is defined on analogy with such a circuit as the
frequency passband, at the edges of which the current amplitude in the antenna with
a constant voltage at its input drops off by a factor no more than If as compared
to the current amplitude at resonance. The current phase within the bounds of the
passband should change linearily with a change in frequency and be symmetrical
relative to the resonant frequency.

We shall consider an antenna operating in a heavily loaded mode (AP >> )0 or

13 << xp, where )0 is the resonant wavelength of the antenna; AP is the working
wavelength), representing it in the form of a series resonant circuit, consisting
of an input reactance x1“ - -iwv cot kla, having a capacitive nature in this case,
a loading coil inductance Ly (Figure 13.5a) and the resistances R1“ - R20 + 310.3.
The relative passband of such a circuit when operating close to resonance is
ZAEPQA, where QA is the quality factor of the antenna circuit, as is well known,
equal to QA - x1n,,/R1n; fp is the resonant (working) frequency of the antenna
circuit; Xin.r is the reactive component of the input impedance of the antenna when
f'fp.

Since in this case:
Consequently, QA B Hv/kplsﬂin and the relative passband is 2Af/f - Rinkp(l + baa/‘9.
Thus, to increase the antenna bandwidth, kin must be increased ( y virtue of

increasing the radiation resistance), the characteristic impedance of the antenna
must be reduced and its equivalent length increased.

The bandwidth of antennas operating in lightly loaded or shortened modes can be
calculated from the formulas available in [6], 62].

52

FOI|0lll(1hl.lEﬂ!(NVLY
FOR10FHK1AI.USE(NVLV

Antrnnu jﬁw7L The food for wire antenna» is usually accomplished by means of
transmitting the electromagnetic energy from the output circuit of the generator
using special coupling elements to the antenna dounlead. In this case, the antenna
downlead is brought directly to the radio station building. Antenna masts and
antenna towers are fed using coaxial feed lines. Sometimes, coaxial lines are made
in the form of a number of conductors, Hound along the generatrix of a cylinder.
In the first case, the load on the generator is the input impedance of the antenna.
To transmit the maximum power from the generator to the antenna, this load should
-be purely resistive and have a magnitude determined by the operating conditions of
the generator. In the second case, for the same purpose, the feeder should be
loaded into a resistance equal to its characteristic impedance v, i.e., it should
operate in a traveling wave mode. The generator in this case.is loaded into a
resistance equal to the characteristic impedance of the feeder.

   

0(a) " = m):-

Pigure 13.5. Figure 13.6.

The task of matching the antenna to the generator or to the feed line can be broken
down into two parts: tuning the antenna to resonance by means of compensating for
the reactive component of its input impedance and transforming the input resistance
of the antenna to the requisite value. Hatching is accomplished by means of lumped
reactive tuning and coupling elements. To illustrate the design procedure for
coupling elements [50]. we shall consider a capacitively coupled matching circuit
(Figure 13.6). If the antenna is tuned to resonance by means of tuning elements
L“ [Lload] and Ca [Cload]. then the impedance at points 1-1 is:

Rn“, 0 IC .-

or, by eliminating the imaginary component in the denominator,

I 5-; “kn/(1 +"’ Cl. kin-1"» Ca. Rijq fave; RS); -

So that the cable operate in a traveling wave mode, the impedance at points 2-2
should be purely resistive and equal to the characteristic impedance of the cable.
This will be the case when the following conditions are met:

R.,/(l+m'(::. Raf-W; uL“—_-(9c¢.np/(_1Lpa'cg, 129—0..

53

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(IWLY
FOR‘OFFMJAI.USE¢MNLY

where LOB [Lcoupling] is the inductance inserted to compensate for the reactive
component of the impedance 21-1.

The unknowns 003 and Leg can be determined from these equations:

I -‘ l' ". "I . -' I: if: '
ccoup}. C“ my g —I'L" TVf—dw,’ (13'9)’ (13°10)

-.I

As can be seen from the formulas cited here, this circuit can operate only when
kin/w > 1, i.e., it is a step-down configuration.

13.2. Medium Have Broadcasting Antennas

Guide antenna masts are used primarily for radio broadcasting at medium wavelengths.
In antenna masts with an insulated base (see Figure 13.2), the insulator not only
provides electrical isolation of the antenna from ground, but is also the mast
support. This insulator should have good electrical and mechanical strength, since
the weight of the tower resting on the insulator can 100 to 200 tons.

Because of the nonuniform pressure distribution over the cross—section of the
insulator for other reasons, mechanical damage to support base insulators is pos-
sible, something which can lead to a serious accident. The use of support inau-
lators increases the antenna cost and reduces its operational reliability. For this
reason, antenna masts with a grounded base which do not require support insulators
are of considerable interest, where these towers are mounted on metal foot bearings,
fastened to a firm reinforced concrete foundation.

Also interesting is the possibility of transforming already finished and existing
towers and masts at radio centers which were constructed for other purposes (tele-
vision towers. etc.) into a radiator. There are two types of antenna masts with a
grounded base: shunt fed and top fed antennas, proposed by 6.2. Ayzenberg [63].

In the case of the shunt fed antenna (Figure 13.7). the radio frequency voltage is
fed to a certain point a, located at a distance 12 from the lower end of the tower,
by means of an inclined conductor, which is the continuation of the center lead of
the coaxial line.

If the length (height) of the mast, 21 + 12 - l, amounts to Alb, then the react-
ances of the segments 11 and I; cancel each other out. The input impedance of the
antenna is purely resistive in this case. By selecting the feed connection point
a. it can be made equal to the value H of the feed line and matched so that the
antenna and the feed line have no additional matching devices. If the input imped-
ance of the antenna is complex, then its reactance is compensated by a variable
reactance inserted in the sloping line. Since the sloping line, the lower part of
the tower and ground form a loop antenna. the radiation of which is superimposed

on the radiation of the antenna tower, the directional pattern of the latter is
slightly distorted.

54

FOI10FFKJA1.USB(HVLY
INDR‘OFTWCIAI.II5EICNVLV

To explain the operational principle of a top fed
antenna tower, we shall represent it in the form of a
circular netal cylinder with a grounded base, inside
which the vertical conductor is fastened to insulators
(Figure 13.8a). A metal disk which represents a capaci-
tive load, is connected to the upper end of this con-
ductor, which extends out beyond the cylinder. In
structural terms, this load is usually a.portion of the
upper level of guys, while the cylinder is a conven-
tional type tower. The feed from the generator to the
antenna uses a coaxial line, the shield of which is
connected to the body of the tower, while the inner

 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  

anagnetic field. For this reason, from a radiation
nerator is inserted between points a and b, i.e..
tower (Figure 13.8b). At the grounded base of the
ys a current entinode (using the method of mirror

To increase the reliable reception
area. the antenna radiation at angles
greater than 65' to the horizontal
should be reduced, so that-the angles
of arrival of the space waves in the
near fading field amount to AS - 85°.
Antennas which have directional pat-
terns in the vertical plane which pro-
vide for maximum radiation along the
surface of the earth and little radis-
Figure 13'8' tion at comparatively high angles
(starting at 40 to 50') are called
antifading. It is conventionally

assumed that an antenna has satisfactory antifading properties if the field intens-

ity at elevation angles exceeding 50’ asounts to no more than 10 to 15 percent of

the field intensity in a horizontal direction. The best directional pattern,
the viewpoint of antifading properties, is had b
FOI‘OUFKJAI.USE(NVLY

'0’
'I’

(a) II (b) 1)

 

Figure 13.9. Figure 13.10.

The use of antifsding antennas makes it possible to increase the reliable reception
area by a factor of 2 to 2.5 times as compared to a short antenna. It should be
kept in mind that the thinner antenna (the greater its characteristic impedance),
the better its antifading properties will manifest. with an increase in antenna
thickness, the current at the node increases (Figure 13.9b). the sidelobe widens
and ratlation is found at angles which are the nest dangerous from the viewpoint of
near field fading. A large characteristic impedance leads to a rise in the potent-
ials in the antenna (a reduction in the pernissibls power) and to a decrease in

the bandwidth. For this reason, the characteristic iupedance is to be chosen
taking into account obtaining sufficiently good antifading properties, the requi-
site bandwidth and the specified power.

Both antenna seats with an insulated base and antenna nests with a grounded base
can be used as antifading antennas.

Hire antennas and antenna masts with grounded or insulated bases cannot operate
throughout the entire radio broadcasting band (200 to 2,000 no. The working band
on the long wave side is limited by the reduction in the radiation resistance and
the corresponding decrease in the efficiency; on the short wave side it is limited
by the sharp reduction in radiation along the surface of the earth, if 1/1 > 0.7.
The broadband antenna with a variable current distribution (ARR!) proposed by

6.2. Ayzenberg, can operate throughout the entire broadcast range at wavelengths
of 200 to 600 and 600 to 2.000 n. In this case, this antenna has antifading pro-
perties in the 200 to 600 a band [66].

One of the variants of an ARRT antenna [65. 66] takes the fern of an antenna last
260 m high. insulated at the base (Figure 13.10a). The lower portion of the nest.
H. which anounts to one-third of its height I, is surrounded by a cylindrical
shield with a diameter of about 10 I, consisting of 9 to 12 wires. The lower ends
of these wires are connected to the shield of the wire coaxial line, coming from
the generator. In a first approximation, the wires of the shield can be treated
as a solid cylinder and the entire lower portion of the antenna enveloped by this
cylinder can be treated as a coaxial line.

56

FOI<0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
INDI‘OI1IC1A1.I£SEZ(HVLV

To reduce the characteristic impedance of the antenna (down to 170 to 100 ohms),
widen the passband correspondingly and increase the maximum transmitter power (more
than 150 K“), the upper portion of the tower is surrounded by a wire cylinder, '
which is insulated from the lower cylinder. The lower and upper ends of the wire
of the upper cylinder are connected to the start of the upper portion of the tower
and to its top end respectively.

The points a and b (the upper ends of the lower portion of the tower and the
lower cylinder) can be considered the generator connection points. The radiation
is produced by currents flowing through the wires of the lower and upper cylinders
(Figure 13.10b). We will note that the current exiting at point b to the exter-
ior surface of the lower cylinder coincides in phase with the current flowing
through the upper portion of the antenna. The current distribution can be adjusted
by a variable reactance x“ inserted between ground and the lower end of the wire
shield. It is made in the form of a short circuited loop. for which the external
shield of the feed line is used. The quantity xu is adjusted by moving the short
circuiting device. The current antinode is located at the short circuit point and
is moved when the short circuiting device is moved. The antenna operates without
current distribution adjustment in a range of 600 to 2,000 m. It has an elevated
radiation resistance in this made.

An antenna was subsequently designed having two feed points 44, 66]. With the
appropriate alignment and a tower height of 300 n, this antenna has a greater gain
(up to tour).

A specific feature of ARRT antennas is the extremely slight dependence of the
directional pattern on the characteristic impedance of the antenna. This is
explained by the fact that the power is delivered to the antenna at its base, but
at a height of H - 0.31 to 0.51, because of which, the nature of the current dis-
tribution depends slightly on "A and is close to sinusoidal. For this reason,

even for a low value of "A (100 to 170 ohms), the antifading properties remain good.

In a nunber of cases, it is desirable for medium wave radio broadcasting to use
antennas which are directional in the horizontal plane. This makes it possible to
distribute the radiated power in specific directions, as well as to reduce cross-
talk interference of radio stations.

To provide broadcast coverage for a territory having the shape of a sector, an
antenna system has been designed which consists of four shunt fed antennas, located
at the corners of a square [67]. Two of them are fed from the transmitter, while
the other two play the part of a passive reflector. One can obtain four coverage
sectors by combining the dipoles which operate as the antennas and reflectors in
various ways by means of an appropriate switching system.

To provide broadcast coverage for territories which are considerable distances
away, a medium wave antenna system has been developed which consists of eight shunt
fed antenna towers, arranged in two rows [68]. Four towers, arranged in one row.
are fed from a transmitter; the other four play thepart of a tuned passive reflec—
tor. The spacing between the rows is 75 m. The antenna-has a controlled direc-
tional pattern in a sector of 190°. The gain of the antenna system in a range of

57

mi m1. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

pa. :3." To the .transnitter
Figure 13.11.

185 to 575 n varies from 28 to 5. Shunt fed antenna towers with a reduced charac-
teristic impedance ("A :5 Ohm) were chosen as the radiator. The reduction in
HA is achieved by means of suspending a wire cylinder with a dianeter of 15 n
around the trunk of the tower, where the cylinder is nade fron 15 to 16 wires with
a diameter of 16 an. The wires of-the cylinder at the top of the tower and at a
height of 0.5 II are connected to the grounded trunk of the tower. The height of
the antenna tower is 1! - 110 II.

The antennas considered here require an extruely complex tuning and switching
system. Moreover, when the wavelength changes, the directional pattern in the
vertical and horizontal planes change substantially.

“hen the vertical antennas are replaced by four logperiodic antennas, suspended on
one canon support (Figure 13.11). each antenna, with the appropriate choice of
the configuration and outer of eleaents, makes it possible to obtain a directional
pattern with a width of 70 to 100' in the horizontal plane and a satisfactory
directional pattern in the vertical plane (from the viewpoint of antifading pro-
perties) [69]. Changing the irradiation sector is accelplished by switching the
transmitter to the corresponding antenna. The directional properties of the an-
tenna practically do not change in a wavelength range of 200 to 600 a. The travel-
ing wave ratio in the feeder in this range does not drop below 0.5.

The develop-em: of strong poly-er fill technology created the conditions for the
design of new antenna structures. 6.1. Ayzenberg and v.11. Uryadko in the USSR
developed a pneumatic antenna nast made of solid polymer aaterial. It takes the
form of a truncated cone 60 neters high (Figure 13.12) [not reproduced] trade of
high strength polymer, maintained under an excess air pressure (the pressure in the
balloon is somewhat higher than atmspheric pressure). Either Ietal guys intended
at the same tine for also supporting the antenna in a vertical position or a system
of wires tightly fitting the cylinder are used as the radiators. The advantage

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.US£(NULY

of such antennas consists in the set-up speed, the possibilities for adjusting the
height, etc.

When placing several antenna towers on a site of limited size, it is necessary to
take steps to reduce the electromagnetic coupling between them (to increase the
isolation), which leads to the distortion of the directional patterns of the an-
tennas, i.e., iwr'ove the electromagnetic conpatibility of the antennas. work which
has been done in this area indicates that it is essential to provide for special
tuning of the antennas by means of inserting tuning impedances in them in conjunc-
tion with filter circuits, the value of which depends on the spacing between the
antennas and their height.

13.3. bong Have and Medium Wave Receiving Antennas

The maja' types of receiving antennas. VLF, LP and 11? receiving antennas differ
significantly from transmitting antennas both in terms of the structural design
and types. The problems related to delivering large powers to the antenna and the
appearance of large potentials in it are absent in receiving antennas. The effic-
iency of these antennas down to a certain minimum is likewise of no great inert—
ance. In the wavelength ranges considered here. atmospheric and industrial inter-
ference, as well as interferencefrom other radio stations have a high level, and
to increase the signal/noise ratio it is necessary to use antennas which have a
more or less directional pattern. However, the use of such antennas, because of
their large dimensions, is possible only in the case of professional radio recep-
tion, and even then not always.

The main types of receiving antennas are: loop antennas of various types, traveling \
wave antennas, ominidirectional vertical unbalanced antennas. The latter differ
from transmitting antennas only in the small dimensions and structural design.

Loop antennas. A loop antenna takes the form of one or more series connected
turns of a conductor. In this case, the loops can have different shapes (circular,
rectangular, triangular, etc.). The planes of the loops are arranged perpendicular
to the surface of the earth (a vertical loop). Loop antennas are used as the re-
ceiving antennas for radio comunications, radio broadcasting and various special
purposes. The dimensions of loop antennas vary in a wide range: from very small
(tens of centimeters) multiturn loops with magnetic dielectric cores, housed imide
the receivers, to external loops installed in a loop antenna field, the linear
dimensions of which can exceed 100 m. The size of all loop antennas (even the
largest) used in the VLF, LP and MP bands are small as compared to the wavelength.
For this reason, these loops can be considered elementary (see 51. 2)

If a plane vertically polarized wave iminges on a single turn rectangular loop
(Figure 13.13a), the sides of which, ab and ce are perpendicular to the horizontal
plane, where the direction of arrival of the wave makes an angle 9 with the plane

of the loop (Figure 13.13b). then the electrical field intensity at the point a

—_m
is EeEoe’ ‘ﬁﬂ , where Bo is the field intensity in the center of the loop.

59

POIOFFICIAIJBEONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NULV

Corrospondingly, the field intensity at point c 1. £2 - soe(1kd/2)cou. Since

the loop is an elementary one, the e.n.f.'s induced in conductors 1 and 2 of the
loop are deter-ined by the expressions:

‘
-—“~O 4-3:...

al-E.he

    

A nprmmu’ a)
To the recei er

Figure 13.13.

 

These e.n.f.'s are identical in value, but shifted in phase because of the dif-
ference in the path of the rays and act counter to each other. The resulting
e.n.f. across the terminal of the loop is equal to their difference:

39-3i_31 - l 25. hsin (tame/2).

Since the loop dimensions are small and d/A << 1, the sine can be replaced by its
argument. Then:

3,=I£.Iadhcos @- (13.11)

As follows from the given formula, the directional pattern of a loop takes the for!
of a regular number eight. This has already been established in 51.2 fros the
analogy between an elenentary loop and an elementary Isgnetic dipole. The phase of
the e.n.f. changes to the opposite sign when the direction of wave arrival changes
by 180‘. If a wave arrives from a direction perpendicular to the plane of the loop
(9 - 90°), then the e.n.f.'s 31 and 32 induced in conductors l and 2 have identical
phases (the difference in the travel of the rays is zero) and tne resulting e.n.f.
is equal to zero. In this case, there is no current in the loop and the voltage
across the terminals is zero: there is no reception. The reception maximum is
obtained in the case where the direction of wave arrival coincides with the plane
of the loop (0 - 0).

60

EOIiOFFKJAl.UBE(MNLY
FIIIIHHWCJAI.USI(NVLY

By employing the concept of effective length to a loop antenna, based on (6.12),
we obtain:

(Fm/5...? 3..

where S - hd is the area encompassed by the loop.

Since the effective length of a loop is extremely small, the radiation resistance
is also low (even for large outdoor loops, it amounts to only tenths of an ohlo.

The radiation resistance of a loop antenna is significanly less than the loss resis-
tance and the antenna efficiency is very poor. For this reason, loop antennas are
not usually employed as transmitting ones (radio beacons are an exception). To
increase the effective height of a loop antenna, multiple turns loops are employed,
i.e., loops made of a number of series connected turns.

The reactive component of the input impedance of a loop is usualiyuof—an inductive
nature (a short circuited line of short length), and a capacitor is inserted to
compensate for it (tune the loop to resonance). when tuning the resonant circuit
of the loopo-capacitor, the voltage across the receiver terminal increases by a
factor of Q times, where Q is the quality factor of the loop circuit. The
effective length of a tuned loop also increases by a factor of Q. The quality
factor of a loop circuit can reach values of 200 to 300. -

To increase the signal/noise ratio, the
directional pattern of a loop must be
turned so that the direction of arrival of
. the interference coincides with the perpen-
‘ h a dicular to the plane of the loop. 0f
' ‘ ' primary importance for reception quality
is the depth of the directional pattern

~e\ \ ~‘ minima of the loop. Minima in the direc-
” - 4’ tional pattern are equal to zero only in
the case of a completely electrically
Figure 13.16. symmetrical loop; this symmetry is disrupted

if conductors 1 and 2 of the loop have

different impedances for the current flow-
ing in them (for example, if the sides of the loop-have different capacitances to
ground because of their unequal positioning with respect to it or any other objects)
(Figure 13.14) as well as in the case where the loop is connected to the unbalanced
input of a receiver.

If the impedances of the vertical sides of the loop are not equal, then with a wave
incoming from a direction perpendicular to the loop plane, the identical e.m.f.'s
induced in then generate unequal but constant currents over the length of each side
of the loop, 11 and 12. Because of this, a certain resultant current 1 - 11 - 12
is established in the loop, and a potential difference appears across the loop
terminals, i.e., the reception takes place. This phenomenon is called the antenna
effect of a loop. As a result of the antenna effect, the directional pattern is
distorted, the null (reception) directions disappear and instead of then there are
shallow minima. "here the antenna effect of a loop is present, the ability to tune

61

ETHICIQHCJAI.USE10NLY
: ,
unr-
.unun

        
       
   

mm M
I“

IV.
E!

    

I
I

I

.\\‘.

x

I
II!
I

I

Ill

um
um

       

Receiver

Figure 13.1.6.

out interference incoming free a particular direction is degraded. If the loop
is used for direction finding, the antenna effect leads to errors in deteruing the
location of the target.

To eliminate the antenna effect, the signs of the loop and the conductors of the
feed lines should he completely syllutrical relative to ground and surrounding
objects. Horeover, the input circuitry of the receiver front end should also be
symnetrical. However, such a circuit is used rather rarely, since in this case
the design is cosplicated and the cost of the receiver is increased. Considerably
more widespread is the connection of the loop to the ssymetricsl input of a re-
ceiver using any kind of balancing device.

To conbat the antenna effect, it is most effective to use shielded loop antennas
(Figure 13.15), where the receiver is housed in a cannon shield with the loop. A
shielded loop antenna takes the forts of a single turn or multiple turn loop 1,
enclosed in a metal tube (shield) 2. There is a cutout 3 at the top of the tube,
which is usually covered with a dielectric sleeve. The lower part of the twe
sakes a transition to metal housing lo. in which receiver 5 is housed. An inconing
wave induces an e.n.f. in the outer surface of the shield, because of which, at
points a and b of the gap there proves to he an applied potential difference,
which generateszza current in the inside surface of the shield. The outer surface
of the shield and the conductors of the loop represent a coaxial line. For this
reason, a current appears in the conductors of the loop which is equal in ugnitude
but opposite in direction to the current flowing in the inner surface of the shield,
and a voltage is generated across the terminals of the receiver. The nest iuport-
ant fact is that the potential difference applied to the gap. which generates the
current in the loop. is governed exclusively by the currents in the outer surface
of the shield and does not depend on any itslance in the arms of the loop, in the
input circuits of the receiver, etc. The sides of the shield (more precisely, their
exterior surfaces) are usually synetrical with respect to ground, and when a wave
arrives perpendicularly to the plane of the loop. the e.n.f.‘s occurring in the

62

mornmuseomv
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exterior surfaces of the two sides of the shield prove to be equal in magnitude and
phase. because of which the potential difference applied to the gap is zero and no

current appears in the conductors of the loop. Thus, a shielded loop proves to be
free of the antenna effect.

Magnetic dielectric cores are used to increase the effective length of a loop
(Figure 13.16). The e.m.f. induced in a loop with a magnetic core can be deter-3
mined from the formula [7]:

3,- —l’%un$£.cos¢. (13.12)

It can be seen from a comparison of (13.12) and (13.11) that inserting a core in
the loop which is made of a saterial having magnetic properties increases the
effective length of the loop by a factor of ll times.

Magnetic dielectrics are used the cores. i.e., materials having a high mgrletic
permeability and a low conductivity (ferrites, and Alsifer. etc.).

The effective loop length and the e.m.f. increase by a factor only in the case of
a rod of infinite length. In actual cases, the increase in the effective loop
length amounns to ueff times. where vet'f < u because of the end effect (the de-
magnetization of the ends of the core). Thus,

21
Zd I (Zl/Xhleffns. IA‘TMHS.

The quantity ueff depends on the relative mgnetic permeability of the core
material and its shape. The demagnetizing effect of the ends of the rod, and con-
sequently, the reduction in ueff as compared to u, is greater, the smaller the
ratio of the rod length Z is to its cross-section (Figure 13.17). The effective
length of a loop antenna is proportional to the area of the loop, however, it is
not advantageous to increase the loop area, since in this case, ”eff decreases.
The number of turns in the loop cannot be chosen too great: in this case, the
internal capacitance of the coil (the loop) rises and it becomes difficult to tune
the loop with a capacitor. Loops with magnetic dielectric cores (magnetic antennas)
are widely used broadcast receiver antennas; the small overall dimensions of such
antennas make it possible to place them directly inside the receiver. The use of
magnetic antennas is not limited to the LP and MP bands. The range of applications
for these antennas extends in the direction of shorter wavelengths in step with

the improving parameters of magnetic dielectrics, and reaches the VHF band.

The effective length of a loop antenna is proportional to the loop area; therefore,
for professional radio broadcast reception (radio repeaters) or for other types of
professional reception. large stationary loop antennas are used, which are set up
in an antenna field using towers. The major advantage of loop antennas over
vertical asymmetrical antennas is the presence of reception nulls in the horizontal
plane. which make it possible to tune out interfering signals, while in the case

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of small loop antennas used for individual reception, the directional patterns are
controlled by simply rotating the loop or the entire receiver, complex and expens-
ive structures are required to rotate large loops.

 
  

”IF

: -|g:_-_' Search coil.

(yummy
(a) d)_ To receiver?“ '3‘“

Figure 13.18.

The directional pattern of large stationary loop antennas can be controlled by
means of an extremely simple (goniometric) device. A goniometric antenna system
(Figure 13.18a) consists of three main parts: an antenna of two mutually perpen-
dicular loops 1 and 2, two balanced feed lines} and 14 and the goniometer G. The
goniometer consists of three small coils: two stationary (stator) 1 and 2, posi-
tioned in mutually perpendicular planes, and one moving (rotor) so-called search
coil. The stator coil 1 is inserted in the circuit of the first loop, while stator
coil 2 is inserted in the circuit of the second loop. The rotor coil rotates about
an axis passing through the center of the stator coils. It is connected to the
rece.ver. Tuning elements are inserted in the circuit of the search coil and the
circuit formed in this fashion is tuned to resonance with the station being re- i
ceived. The goniometer is set up a considerable distance away from the antenna in
the receiving station room.

He shall consider the operational principle of a gonionetric antenna. The normal-
ized directional characteristics of loops 1 and 2 are determined by the expressions:

F: (a) - cos a: : F. (9) =91}: v.

where o is the angle between the direction to the station being received and the
plane of the first loop (Figure 13.18b).

With the action of the e.m.f.'s induced in the loops, currents appear in the sta-
tionary coils inserted in these loops. The current flowing through the coil con-
nected to loop l is 11 - Iocoso, where 10 is the current in the coil when the
direction of the incoming wave coincides with the plane of the loop.

The current flowing through the coil inserted in loop 2 is 12 - losine. In both
formulas, the current Io is the same, since both loops and the coils inserted in

64

FOR OFFIOAL [SE ONLY
l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

them are completely identical. The coefficient of mutual induction between the
stationary coil 1 and the search coil is H1 - Mcoso, where o is the angle between
coil 1 and the search coil (Figure 13.19c); H0 is the coefficient of mutual induc-
tion when the planes of the stationary and moving coils coincide. The coefficient
of mutual induction between coil 2 and the search coil is E2 - Hoaino.

The electromotive forces induced by the stationary coils 1 and 2 in the search coil
are equal to the following respectively:

3t-I.0Mom0w¢;3'-I.WM.sin“m0c -

The resulting e.m.f. in the search coil is equal to the sum of the e.m.f.'s
induced by the stationary coils: 3p - 31 + 32 - louﬂokosocoso + ainbsino). This
foruula can be transformed: 3 - Iowﬂo cos(¢ - 0). Thus, the normalized direc-
tions] pattern of the goniomegric antenna is:

13.13
“mucus—0)-

This directional pattern is no way different from the directional pattern of a
conventional loop antenna. As can be seen from (13.13), by changing the position
of the search coil (the angle a), one can control the directional pattern of the
antenna. The maximum reception direction is obtained when d - a; there is a
reception null when 0 - O - i_90'. Thus, the rotation of the search coil yields
the same effect as the rotation of the loop antenna.

A goniometric antenna makes it possible to tune out interfering stations by means
of setting the null of the directional pattern on the interfering station. This
antenna also allows for reducing the level of directional atmospheric interference.

Bach outside loop of the goniometer is usually made in the form of an isosceles
triangle, for which the base is approximately four times the height. Only one
tower is needed to string such an antenna. The lower conductor is suspended at a
height of 2.5 m. At LF wavelengths, the height of the loop runs up to 70 to 100 m
and at HP wavelengths, up to 10 m and more. Antennas are being developed in which
small ferrite antennas are used instead of the large outside loops.

If a vertical unbalanced antenna is added to a loop or goniometric antenna, posi-
tioning the vertical antenna, for example, in the center of the loop (Figure 13.19a),
then unidirectional recepti)n (a cardioid directional pattern) can be obtained by
means of n special phasing device. This is easily illustrated if the loop antenna
is replaced by the magnetic dipole equivalent to it. Then the loop antenna and the
electrical dipole can be treated as two mutually perpendicular dipoles: an electri-
cal and a magnetic one (Figure 13.19b). It is well known (see 51.6) that the direc-
tional pattern of such an antenna (see Figure 1.8) is defined by the formula

(F(¢) - 1 + case. A unidirectional cardioid type pattern (Figure 13.19c) has ad-
vantages over the bidirectional pattern of a loop or goniometer, since it permits

a significant reduction in the level of an interfering signal incoming from

65

F0!‘0FFNJALI£EIONIN
IND! OFFICIAI.USIICHULY

directions in a range of angles of 90 to 270° without markedly reducing the useful
signal level. Moreover, such a directional pattern makes it possible to unambig-
uously determine the direction to the station being received. Detailed data on
loop antennas can found in [70].

The single wire traveling wave antenna. (08). Radio broadcast reception quality

at radio repeaters can be improved by using an atenna with considerable directional
properties. Such antennas include the single conductor traveling wave antenna (0B).
This antenna takes the form of a horizontal conductor (Figure 13.20a) with a length
(L) of from a half-wave to several wavelengths, strung at a height of 2.5 to 4.5 m
above the ground. One end of the conductor is connected to the receiver, while
the other is connected a resistance Rn, equal to the characteristic impedance of
the conductor. The other end of the load resistance is connected to a ground lead.
Althought the antenna is positioned horizontally above the surface of the earth,

it is designed for receiving the vertically polarized field of a ground wave. Be-
cause of the finite conductance of the soil, the Poynting vector of a vertically
polarized ground wave, radiated by a transmitting radio station, is not parallel to
the surface of the earth, but makes a certain angle as with it. Because of the

 

Figure 13.19. Figure 13.20.

slope of the Poynting vector, a horizontal component of the vector 3 appears

(Eh - B sin At) of the incoming field, which induces an e.m.f. in the conductor.
With the action of the e.m.f. in the conductor, a current appears, the second con-
ductor for which is the ground. Although the antenna is used as a receiving one,
it is more convenient to analyze its operation in a transmit mode. Since the con-
ductor is loaded into a resistance equal to its characteristic impedance, a travel-
ing current wave is established in the conductor. Because of the fact that the
spacing between the conductor and ground is small and the conductivity is not
infinitely high, the currents penetrate a certain depth into the earth. The soil
has a substantial influence on the parameters of the conductor. Because of the
fact that dielectric permittivity of the soil is greater than the dielectric
permittivity of air, the phase velocity of the wave in the conductor proves to be
less than the speed of light.

The electromotive force induced in an element of the conductor is proportional to
the value of the Ez field intensity component parallel to the axis of the

66

FOI‘OIIHCIAI.USE!MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conductor (Figure 13.2%). This component is B; - those, where O is the angle
between the 8,, component and the axis of the conductor.

III' A" ”'0‘ 'ﬂ' 0' ’r The maxim e.m.f. is induced in an

"—_ 7‘ 1r element of the conductor by the wave in-
‘ Hull'lmoo’ “

    
       
  

’, coming from a direction which coincides
\\\\"”,"’O 6"“‘ r with the axis of the conductor. Based

. KQ‘V' ,7I/4ggﬂ‘I " ‘ on what has been said, as well as keeping
' =§\-y/2.‘=‘I-- 0‘ (7.36) in nind, the directional pattern

   

of the single wire traveling wave antenna
in the horizontal plane. if the current
attenuation in the conductor is not taken
into accomt, can be represented in the

Figure 13.2].
Wavelength - 600 m; moist soil.

form:
our 0 kl.
f (0) - m sin [? (cw—cosm] . (13 . 14)

The directional pattern of a 2,000/2.S single wire traveling wave antenna (the
numerator in the fraction is the antenna length; the denominator is the antenna
height; both dimensions are in meters) in the vertical plane of the antenna is
shown in Figure 13.21. In the case of moist soil, the antenna has a directional
pattern which is pressed closer to the earth and a lower sidelobe level than in
the case of dry soil. The efficiency and directional gain of the single wire
traveling wave antenna. because of the high energy losses in the soil and in the
absorbing resistance, are quite small. because of which this antenna is not, as
a rule, used as a transmitting antenna.

The gain of the antenna can be increased by making it from two or more conductors,
spaced a certain distance apart [71].

67

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

APPENDIX 1
Questions of Antenna Miniaturization

The use of active radiators. As was indicated in 57.7, the realization of the
phenomenon of antenna ultradirectionality (the possibility of an unlimited increase
in the directional gain of an antenna with finite dimensions) is extremely difficult.
The narrowing of an antenna directional pattern and increasing directional gain in
practice entail increasing its dimensions.

The problem of reducing antenna size basically reduces to decreasing the dimensions
of poorly directional antennas, forming complex highly directional antenna systems.
It is well—known that the directional gain of a poorly directional antenna of suf-
ficiently small dimensions almost does not decrease with a further reduction in its
size (the directional gain of a symmetrical dipole with a reduction of an arm from
1/1 - 0.25 to nearly 0 changes from 1.64 to 1.5). However, with a reduction in
the length of a conventional dipole, the resistive component decreases (by virtue
of radiation) and the reactive component of its input impedance increases, which
leads to a narrowing of the bandwidth of the antenna and to a reduction in its
efficiency. Such a dipole begins to behave like an ultradirectional antenna. The
attempt to match such an antenna to a feed line or to the input circuits of a re-
ceiver by means of a passive four-pole network made of reactive components does

not yield the requisite results, even in an extremely narrow paasband.

Theapplicationof radiators with active semiconductor devices inserted in them
(active radiators, see 511.5) is promising in the sense of designing poorly direc-
tional, extremely short electrical or miniature magnetic dipoles. Such radiators
with low noise sensitive amplifiers built into them are the elements of a complex
antenna array operating in the short wave or meter wavelength bands, and can find
independent applications as receiving antennas. The application of an active
element with a high gain and considerable sensitivity directly in an antenna in-
creases the sensitivity of the receiver, facilitates the matching and makes it pos-
sible to achieve considerable band coverage of the device with small overall dimen-
sions.

 

(b) ”
Figure Al.l. Figure Al.2.

68

IOI‘OFFKIA1.USI(NNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

Active miniature dipole antennas, used as independent receiving antennas installed
in fixed and mobile facilities are called ultraminiature integrated circuit
antennas (81A).

By way of example, a dipole A of very short length is depicted in Figure A1.1,
where the active element, transistor T, is inserted in a cutout in the dipole, and
the transistor is intended both for amplifying the received antenna signal and for
matching it to the coaxial cable coming to the receiver (points ab) [6, 72]. The
short conductor, Sh (loop), which is connected to one of the transistor leads, where
the other end of the loop is shorted to ground, has an inductive reactance, which
is transformed by the transistors so that the capacitive reactance of the antenna
is compensated at points ab. The extremely low resistive component of the antenna
input impedance is also made equal to the characteristic impedance at points ab '
by means of the transistor. Transistor matching proves to be extremely broadband.
Thus, for the circuit of Figure Al.l. the voltage at the receiver input in a fre-
quency range of 2 to 50 MHz changes by a factor of approximately 1.5 times.

If there is no broadband requirement, then one can use the device, the operational
principle of which is explained in Figure Al.2a. The active element T is con-
nected to one end of a quarterdwave line, made in the form of a loop or helix and
arranged above metal plate 8. The other end of the loop is connected to the plate
by means of the short circuiting device K, which plays the part of the radiator.
An equivalent circuit of the device is shown in Figure Al.2b. This device has the
following parameters: the height of the short circuiting link is KAISO: the trans-
verse dimensions of the plate are x/20; the efficiency is n - 80 percent; and the
passband is 1 percent. Such an antenna is housed in the helmets of astronauts

and serves for communications with the spacecraft.

Strinline antenna array designs. Inﬂatable and pneumatic antennas. Other trends
in tne reduction of antenna size. Imparting a flat shape to dipoles and reducing
the antenna wave is achieved by using multiple dipole antennas in a stripline
printed circuit board design. The feed system is simplified in such antennas and
fabrication while observing the requisite precision is facilitated. This makes it
possible to use printed circuit multiple dipole antennas in the decimeter and centi-
meter bands. Dipolcs and other elements of antenna arrays (segments of coupling
feed lines, phasing elements) are made in the form of conducting lines (strips) on
dielectric plates (or polymerfilms), which in turn are placed on metallic substrates
(shields). A shield can take the form of a thin metal film applied to a polymer
film. Such a technique can be used to make, for example, in-phsse multiple dipole
antennas, director antennas, surface wave antennas, etc.

Stripline antenna arrays can be used in inflatable antennas. Such an antenna takes
the form of an air balloon made of soft polymer film. Two flat film partitions are
placed inside the balloon sphere at a distance of approximately Alb from each other,
where the stripline antenna array is applied to one of the partitions using printed
circuit technology, while the other is coated with a continuous metal film (an
aperiodic reflector).

If a portion of the sphere is coated widrasolid metal film and it is given the
shape of a paraboloid, then one can make an inflatable parabolic antenna. When not
operating, inflatable antennas occupy very little space.

69

INDIiOFFICIAI.IISEI(H‘LY
IN)!‘0FFICIAI.IISEE(HNLY

Pneumatic antenna masts can be used in the short wave and medium wave bands (see
513.2, Figure 13.12 [not reproduced]). the positive qualities of which are fast

set-up and take-down, transportation simplicity, the possibility for adjusting the
height, etc.

Radio electronics hardware makes it possible to increase the effective surface of
mobile receiving antennas by many times through the use of artificial (synthesized)
apertures (see 511.5).

Hultibeam antennas can be included among the techniques of reducing antenna size.
In this case, several antennas which provide for communications in different direc-
tions are replaced by one antenna.

Nearly flush mounted dielectric or ribbed surface wave antennas yield a savings in
overall dimensions (see 59.3).

Miniaturiaation of waveguide channel components. It is known that a reduction in
waveguide size is accompanied by an increase in losses and a reduction in the
ultimate power. However, it is expedient in a number of cases to use miniature
channel components. Hhen a waveguide is filled with a dielectric, the transverse
dimensions are reduced by a factor of J5; times. The attenuation factor in metal
as compared to the attenuation factor in a conventional waveguide increases by
approximately J3; times. The attenuation factor in a wave uide, which is governed
by the losses in the dielectric. is proportional to tand c (tand is the tangent of
the loss angle). High quality dielectrics are frequently used to reduce the attenu-
ation in the dielectric (sapphire ruby, polycor, sitall, etc.), for which er -

- 7 to 10 and tand a (l-6) - 10".

A further reduction in the cross-section is possible by means of using striplines.
A stripline can be produced by applying metallic strips with a thickness of a few
microns and a width of a few millimeters to a dielectric.

Dielectric filled waveguides, and striplinea make it possible to design miniature
resonators, and consequently, miniature filters for various purposes. Small cross-
section lines can also be used to produce miniature directional couplers, circula-
tors and other oomponenta of a waveguide channel. The composition of ferrite ele—
ments and volumetric resonators makes it possible to reduce the system of isolation
filters used on radio relay links.

Interest has been manifest recently in the use of subcritical waveguides. i.e.,
waveguides which operate at frequencies below the critical, as various components
or microwave channels [73]. If subcritical waveguides are used in the waveguide
components installed in satellites and other flight vehicles, this will make it
possible to reduce the overall size of a number of microwave assetblies by a factor
of 5 to 10.

A subcritical waveguide section in conjunction with an inhomogeneity introduced

into it (stops. pins), makes it possible in principle to design microwave assemblies
for various purposes. Such waveguides are used as resonators, stopband and bandpass
filters, etc.

70

.l-‘OIOMCIALUSEONLY
FOI‘OFF“JA1.US£1ONLY

Also interesting is the possibility of utilizing subcritical waveguides as the
radiating elements of a phased antenna array. Such an elmentntakes the form of
an extremely short waveguide section with a small cross-section (at a wavelength
of 1 = 10 cm, the length of an element is about 2.5 cm and its cross-section dimen-
sions are approximately 1.9 by 0.875 CID, which is driven with a coaxial line. '
With a large scanning angle of the phased antenna array, the spacing between adja-
cent elements is 1/2. The cost and weight of such a phased antenna array is con-
siderably lower than for an antenna with conventional waveguide elements.

Table of Contents

Foreword
List of Main Symbols Used .
Introduction
Part I. Fundamentls of Antenna Theory 9
Chapter 1. Elementary Radiators _ 9
1.1. The radiation of an elementary electrical dipole 9
1.2. The radiation of an elementary magnetic dipole 11
1.3. An elementary radiating slot 12
1.4. The radiation of a Huygens source ' 15
Chpater 2. Parameters Characterizing the Directional end Polarization
. Properties of Antennas 16

2.1. General-remarks. The directional characteristic (pattern) of an

antenna 16
2.2. The directional gain (KND) and gain (KB) of an antenna 20

2.3. The polarization parameters of an antenna. The tourniquet radiator 22
2.4. On the problem of electromagnetic compatability (ENS) of antennas 26

Chpater 3. The Symmetrical Electrical Dipole in Free Space 27
3.1. The problem of the radiation of a thin electrical dipole 27
3.2. The directional properties of a symmetrical dipole 32
3.3. The radiation power and radiation resistance of a symmetrical diplole 36
3.4. The input impedance of a sylmetrical dipole 37
3.5. The directional gain of a symmetrical dipole. The effective length
- of an antenna 39
3.6. The symmetrical slot dipole 40
Chapter 4. The Mutual Coupling of Dipoles 43
4.1. The directiona1.ptoperties of a system of two coupled dipoles 43
4.2. Calculating the radiation resistance of coupled dipoles using the

technique of induced e.m.f.'s 47
4.3. Calculating the current in passive dipoles 51
4.4. The problem of current distribution in coupled dipoles in a

rigorous formulation 52

71

FOIIOFFKJA1.U§B(IVLY
Chapter 5. The Influence of Ground and Metallic Bodies on the Radiation of
Antennas Located Close to Them
5.1. The solution of the problem of the radiation of a dipole located above

FOR OFIWCJAl.lEﬂi(lNLY

the surface of the earth using the method of mirror images

The radiation of synmetrical dipoles positioned above the surface of

the earth
Asymmetrical vertical grounded dipole

The influence of metallic bodies on the radiation of dipoles located

close to them

Chapter 6. Some Questions of Receiving Antenna Theory

6.1. The application of the reciprocity principle to the study of receiving

6.2.
6.3.
6.6.

antennas

The power dissipated in the load of a receiving antenna
Polarization matching of receiving and transmitting antennas
The equivalent noise temperature of an antenna

Chapter 7. Methods of Obtaining Narrow Directional Patterns

7.1.

a e o

UéUN

o .

\l‘l‘l‘l

Nu
.

wax
.

Radiator arrays. The uniform linear antenna array
The in-phase antenna array

. Controlling the directional pattern of a uniform linear array

End-fire antenna arrays (traveling wave antennas)

The radiation of excited surfaces. The directions] pattern and
directional gain of a radiating aperture

The influence of phase distortions on the directional properties of
a radiating surface

Planar (two-dimensional) antenna arrays

. The problem of antenna design. Optimal directional patterns

Part II. Types of Antennas

Chapter 8. Dipole and Slot VHF Antennas

8.1.
8.2.

o

. s a
ombu
o o 0

“9““

8.7.

Simple dipole antennas

Methods of increasing the working bandwidth of dipole antennas
Frequency independent antennas

Logpcriodicantennas (LPA's)

Feed for simple dipole antennas

Slot antennas

The radiation of a slot cut in a flat shield of limited dimensions
or in the wall of a waveguide (127). Multiple slot waveguide
antennas (131)

Television antennas

The antennas of television transmitting centers (134). Receiving
television antennas. Community TV reception systems (138).

72

IND! OFIICJAI.IISE'0%HJV

54

56

S7
61

65
68

68
72
74
76

79

79
82
85
87

9.4

102
105
107

110

110

110'
113
115
118
123
127

136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 9. End-Fire VHF Band Antennas

9.1.
9.2.
9.3.

Chant
10.1.

10.2.
10.3.

10.4.

10.5.

Director antennas

Helical antennas

Surface wave antennas (APV)

General remarks (149). Dielectric rod antennas (150). Impedance
antennas (152). Phase velocity modulated antennas (155). Past
wave antennas (157).

er 10. Aperture Antennas

Horn antennas '

Operational principle and majo- properties (158). Horns with a
circularly polarized field (164)

Lens antennas

Reflector (parabolic) antennas

The operational principle of a parabolic antenna and its direc-
tional pattern (170). The directional gain of a parabolic
antenna (176). Parabolic antenna subdishes (180). The influence
of the fabrication precision of a reflector antenna on its direc-
tional properties (185). A reflector antenna in the form of a
parabolic cylinder (189).

The parabolic horn antenna (RPA). Dual reflector antennas.
Periscope antennas

Passive repeater antennas for radio relay links

Chapter 11. Multi-Element Antenna Arrays with a Controllable

11.1.
11.2.

11.3.

11.4.
11.5.

Chapter 12. Shortwave Antennas for Radio Communications and Broadcasting

12.1.
12.2.
12.3.
12.4.
12.5.
12.6.
12.7.

Directional Pattern

General information
The maximum permissible spacing between the elements of a phased
antenna array. Mutual coupling of array elements

Methods of electrical control of the directional pattern of a phased

antenna array. Methods of controlling phase shifters
Arrays of active radiators. Multibeam and repeater arrays
The concept of antenna arrays with signal processing

Specific features of shortwave antennas

Some general questions of feeding shortwave antennas
Simple shortwave antennas

The in-phase horizontal broadband antenna (860 antenna)
The rhoubic antenna

The traveling wave antenna with coupling elements

The log periodic antenna

Chapter 13. Antennas for Radio Counmnicationa and Broadcasting at

13.1.

Myriameter (Very Long), Kilometer (Long) and Hectometer
(Medium) Wavelengths

Questions of very long, long and medium wavelength antenna design

73

INUI‘OUIICLAL [EIBCMILY'

140

140
143
149

158
158

165
170

191
200

203
203

204

207
211
213

213

213
215
219
221
226
231
235

238
238
FIIICNNNCJAI.US£!ONLN

Specific features of VLF, LP and HF band antennas. Methods of
calculnting the main parameters of VLF, LP and HP antennas. Antenna
feed.

13.2. Medium wave broadcasting antennas

13.3. Long wave and medium wave receiving antennas
The major types of receiving antennas. Loop antennas. Single
wire traveling wave antenna (03)

Appendix 1. Questions of Antenna Hiniaturization

The use of active radiators. _Stripline antenna arrays. Inflatable
and pneumatic antennas. Other trends in antenna size reduction.
The miniaturization of waveguide channel components.

Appendix 2. The Solution of Hallen's Integral Equation by the Technique of
Point Hatching

Appendix 3. Calculating the Currents-in Dipoles Fed with a Series
Balanced Peed Line (Traveling Wave Antennas with Coupling
Elenents; Log Periodic Antennas)

Appendix 4. Calculating the Directional Pattern of an Antenna in the Porn
of a Paraboloid of Rotation

Appendix 5. Calculating the Directional Pattern of a Parabolic Cylinder

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981

8225
C50: 1860/41

76

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(IVLY

247
269
256

261

262

265

267

270

272

275
FOR (WHOAI. USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.6 (088.8)
ANTENNA DEVICE RITE ELECTRICAL BEAM OSCILLAIION IN THO PLANES
Moscow OPISANIYE IZOBRBTENIYA 586769 in Russian 23.?eb 81

[Description of USSR Patent No. 586769 by V.H. Ginsburg and I.N. Belova. filed
8 Mar 60, published 23 Feb 81, class K pl Q 21/00]

[Text] This invention is in the area of antenna technology and can be used in
radar.

There exists an antenna device with electrical rocking of the beam in two planes
which consists of a reflector, radiator and lens.

However, the existing antenna device cannot transmit high power levels and does
not eliminate aberrations when the beam rocks through a wide scanning sector.

The purpose of the present invention is to increase the transmitted power level
while improving efficiency and reducing abberations.

In order to do this, a lens is inserted between the reflector and its focus, dis-
placed from the focus along the axis of the reflector, the coefficient of refrac-
tion of which is varied electrically under program control. The lens consists of
a matrix of waveguides containing electrically controlled phase inverters.

The drawing shows a schematic representation of the proposed antenna device.

The antenna device with electrical bean rocking in two planes consists of reflector
l. radiator 2, and lens 3. Lens 3 is located between reflector l and its focus.
and is displaced from the focus along the axis of reflector l.

The lens consists of waveguides a, which form a matrix. The waveguides contain
electrically controlled phase inverters.

The proposed antenna device operates as follows.

Let reflector 1 be parabolic with focus at point P. At a certain moment in time
‘1' lens 3 converts the planar wavefront incident upon it to a spherical front with
center at point P, i.e., the beam of the antenna device will be directed along the

reflector axis 9‘P. At thr next moment in time t2, lens 3 must convert the incid-
ent planar wave to a certain different spherical front whose center is moved away
from the focus to point 3 (shown by dotted lines). Then the beam of the antenna

75

INJR 0FF1C1AI.lEHE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

device is tilted with respect to the axis of the reflector by a certain angle in
accordance with the shift of the new center of radiation from the focus.

The beam can thus be rocked within the required solid angle by electrically changing
the parameters of lens 3, comprised of matrix of waveguides 6, and with the help

of the electrically controlled phase inverters in the waveguides.

Since only a snail portion of the energy strikes each electrically controlled phase
inverter because of the relatively large number of elements and the substantial
distance between lens 3 and primary radiator 5, the proposed antenna device can
transmit and receive high power levels. Furthremore, parallel feed ensures high
efficiency even with relatively high losses in the phase inverters.

This system makes it possible to compensate for beam distortion during rocking.

1 order to accomplish this, instead of simply turning the wavefront at the output
of the lens, it is necessary to introduce additional changes in the phase along
its aperture which would create distributions at its output such as to compensate
for phase front distortions caused by aberrations.

 

Patent Claims

1. An antenna device with electrical rocking of the beam in two planes comprised

of a spherical reflector, radiator and lens, distinguished by the fact that in order
to increase the transmitted power level with improved efficiency and reduced aber-
ration distortions, a lens is placed between the reflector and its focus and

shifted out of focus along the axis of the reflector, the coefficient of refraction

of which is varied electrically under program control.

2. A device per paragraph 1 above, distinguished by the fact that the lens used
consists of a matrix of waveguides containing electrically controlled phase inverters.

6900
050: 8144/0218-3

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CERTAIN ASPECTS OF COMPUTER HARD AND SOFT
HARE: CONTROL. AUTOMATION. WMICS,
mmrmnc, MACHINE DESIGNING AND PLANNING

UDC 68l.3.016:669
MAGNETIC BUBBLE DATA STORAGE AND PROCESSING DEVICES
Moscow IWRENIYA. KONTROL' , nVTGiATIZA‘I‘SI‘IA in Russian No 4 (38) . 1981 pp 18-36
[Article by H.A. Rozenblat, doctor of technical sciences]
[Text] Introduction

In 1960-4970 a new class of magnetic materials was discovered and created which
possess special properties not characteristic of magnetic materials. The most
important of these properties consist in the fact that in thin wafers (films)
made of these materials and mgnetized in a direction perpendicular to the plane
of the wafer cylindrical magnetic domains [mgnetic bubbles] can form, bounded by
the upper and lower surfaces of the wafer (fig l).* The region surrounding a
bubble is magnetized in the opposite direction. These bubbles have high mobility,
moving at a relatively high speed under the effect of an external (controlling)
magnetic field directed in a certain manner. In this respect the behavior of
bubbles is similar to the behavior of cylindrical permanent magnets floating on
the surface of a fluid: If a thin magnetically soft wafer is presented to such

a magnet then it will be attracted to the end of the wafer, magnetizing it. Under
the influence of another permanent magnet or electromagnet a floating 'cylindrical
permanent magnet will either be attracted to it or be repelled by it with a force,
F . depending on whether they face one another with unlike or like poles. liobile
bubbles behave in precisely the same manner with the only difference that their
motion is associated not with sass transfer, but with a change in the direction of
magnetization of adjacent regions, which also explains the ability to produce high
rates of motion for bubbles. The mutual repulsion of two closely positioned bub-
bles can be used for the purpose of implementing logic functions in bubble devices.

0n the basis of mobile bubbles integrated large-capacity memories have been con—
structcd in which the presence of a bubble corresponds to a binary l and its ab-
sence to a binary 0. In these memories, executed in the form of shift registers,
the following basic operations with bubbles are usually implemented: entry of

*A magnetic domain. is a region of spontaneous magnetization in a magnetic material

distinguished by the fact that the magnetic moments of all atoms in this region are
directed parallel to one another and behave as a single team. Each domain is Iag-

netized to saturation in some direction [1].

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

data by the generation of a bubble; moving bubbles certain strictly fixed dis-
tances under the influence of a control (propagating) signal; retention of bubbles
at certain strictly fixed positions when the power is cut off or propagating
pulses cease; erasure of information by the annihilation of bubbles; formation of
an electrical signal depending on the presence or absence of a bubble in a given
position; switching the direction of motion of bubbles (switching the direction of
information transfer); and splitting of a single bubble (branching of information).

 

Figure 1. Magnetic Bubbles in Thin Magnetic Films with Uniaxial Anisotropy:
m—thin magnetic film; h--thickness of THY; lien-external magnetic
field; H—saturation magnetization of m; l, 2, 3--magnetic
bubbles: d-diameter of bubble

Key:
1. TM?

Developments under way in the area of bubble memories have been occasioned by the
possibility of creating on the basis of mobile bubbles compact reliable and rela-
tively inexpensive memories, necessary both for filling the gap with regard to
access time which exists between modern semiconductor memories with random access
(access time of 0.1 to 0.6 us) and disk memries (access time of 10 to 100 ms) used
in computers with a large memory capacity, and as a relatively inexpensive external
(bulk) storage in microcomputers and microprocessor systems, installed on the same
printed circuit board as the microprocessor and retaining information when the
power is cut off (the power independence of bubble memories).

The main advantages of bubble memories as compared with semiconductor memories

with random access (ZUPV's) is their lower unit cost (the cost per unit of informa-
tion stored) and power independence, and as compared with disk storages—short

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFTWCIAI.USE10NLY

access time. compactness and high reliability. These advantages of bubble mem-
ories are caused both by the fact that their operating principle makes it possible
to create simple small-sized memory cells and by the fact that the main component
of a memory-the storage, formed by-memory cells together with the bubble readin,
switching. branching and readout elements-is fabricated by the same integrated
technology as are semiconductor ZUPV's, but with a much smaller number and greater
simplicity of technological operations (table 1). As a result, greater information
capacity can be obtained for a bubble storage, reaching approximately 106 to 107
bits/cm . These advantages of bubble memories make their application especially
promising in computing. data processing, testing and measuring and control systems
where high reliability and low cost and small size and low power requirement are
of first-rate importance.

Table 1. Comparison of Technology for Semiconductor and Bubble Integrated Circuits

Characteristics of technology Type of integrated circuit

 

and parameters of integrated Semiconductor Bubble
circuits Using bipolar Using
transistors g1;
transistors

Total number of technological

operations 130 38 8
Number of basic technological

operations 32 22 4
Number of high-temperature

operations 10 2 None
Number of masking operations 6 5 2(1)
Number of diffusion operations 6 2-3 None
Number of intracircuit con-

nections 6-10 2-10 None
Memory capacity achieved, kbits b 64 1024

The major development work at the present time is aimed at constructing large-
capacity memories on a single chip. However, on the basis of bubble logic cir-
cuits it is possible to create memories with distributed internal logic, associ-
ative memories. single-chip microprocessor systems based on bubbles, etc. The
possibility of designing mini- and microcomputers in which all necessary pro-

cessing, storage and data transfer functions are implemented with bubbles is dis-
cussed in [2, 3).

Bubble magnetic media materials possess good magnetoopticsl properties: a low
coefficient of light absorption in the visible region of the spectrum and a
strongly pronounced magnetooptic Faraday effect (rotation of the polarization
plane of linearly polarized light when it passes through a magnetized body).
These properties are possessed to a greater extent by orthoferrite wafers and
bismuth-containing ferrite garnet films, for which the magnetooptic Tarsday co-
efficient equals approximately 10“ deg/cm [4]. These properties of bubble mater-
ials make it possible to construct on their basis magnetooptic devices for the
preparation of data, displays, light modulators, changeable transparencies for
holographic recording, magnetically controlled diffraction gratings and two-di-
mensional light-deflecting devices. 0n the basis of bubble materials it is

79

FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
R0!!Mﬂﬂ(3Al.USE(NNLY

also possible to create integrated heads for multichannel recording on magnetic
tape with enhanced density and other devices in which the external fields of
bubbles create an appropriate control effect.

The application of magnetic bubbles represents a new rapidly developing and pro—
mising field. The purpose of this study is a systematized presentation of the
physical fundamentals and design principles of bubble devices (basically memories)
and a discussion of their properties, development prospects and application.

Conditions for the Existence and Properties of Mobile Magnetic Bubbles

In any magnetic body, including in a thin magnetic film (THP), a domain structure
is established which is in conformity with the minimum value of its total free
magnetic energy, H . One condition for the existence of mobile bubbles in a THP
(and in wafers) is the presence in them of a single direction, cot-Ion to the entire
film, of easy magnetization, perpendicular to its surface and characterized by

a sufficiently high value of the internal field of uniaxial anisotropy, H .

Under the influence of this field, even with the existence of external fields,
whose strength should be much lower than H , a THP is magnetized only perpendi-
cularly to its surface, i.e., along the axis (direction) of easy magnetization
(OLN), which corresponds to a zero value of the energy of magnetic anisotropy,

H . The strength of H is numerically equal to the value of the strength of the
field which must be applied perpendicularly to the OLN of the film in order to

turn the direction of magnetization 90 degrees. In a film evenly magnetized along
the OLN there is an internal demagnetizing field, H I -H , where H is the
film's saturation magnetization. The condition H r> (H 7 [as publisﬁed] must be
fulfilled for bubble devices, since otherwise selfggenertion of a bubble is
possible under the influence of field H . The ratio Q - H llHrI - H In is
called the figure of merit of a bubble midium material. It 18 desirablg that

Q 1 2 . For orthoferrites Q >> 1 and not infrequently is greater than 100, and
for ferrite garnet films usually Q - 2 to 5 .

In the absence of an external magnetic field,strip domains, illustrated in fig 2,
where the black and white strips correspond to opposite directions of magnetiza-
tion, form in a bubble medium material under the influence of the internal de-
magnetizing field. Here the mean magnetization of the wafer practically equals
zero. In view of the fact that the diameter, d , of a bubble depends on the
strength, H , of the external (homogeneous) magnetic field, a bubble medium ma-
terial is often characterized by the width, bP , of strip domains with He ' 0 .

Each domain is bounded in the body of the wafer by a cylindrical boundary (wall)
having a finite width of A z 0.1 to 0.5 u . Hithin the limits of a domain bound-
ary a gradual transition is made from one direction of magnetization to another,
corresponding to the next domain. This transition can be of various natures,
which substantially influences the dynamic properties of bubbles. So-called

Neel boundaries exist in which the direction of magnetization rotates around the
axis perpendicular to the plane of the wafer, and Bloch boundaries in which the
change in magnetization between neighboring domains takes place by means of grad-
ual rotation of the direction of magnetization around an axis situated parallel to
the surface of the wafer and perpendicular to the walls of the boundary. Some
combination of Neel and Bloch boundaries is often observed in bubbles.

80

FORloFFﬂJAl.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Strip Domains in the Absence of an External Magnetic Field

Key:

1. b

P

Assuming that H - 0 (magnetization of the bubble is parallel to the axis of
easy magnetizatiSn (0LN)), for the free energy of an isolated bubble under the
influence of field H directed along the OLE counter to the magnetization of the
bubble, we get N - H3 + W + W , where W is the energy caused by the in-
ternal field of the babble,8rw eis the energy of a domain boundary and W is
the energy of the bubble in exégrnal field H . Energy W t tends to expgnd the
bubble and H and U to compress it. Ines certain range of values of R an
equilibrium aggte is esfablished (aw/ad - 0), characterized by a certain valug of
the diameter of the bubble, d - f(He) . The value of d also depends on the
thickness, h . of the bubble medium material and on its physical properties [4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9]. which can be characterized by parameter Lo , called the character-

istic length of the material:
0 ” °gr/“o": '
2

where o r is the specific energy of the domain boundary in J/m and no - 4ﬂ°
-10 7 H/ﬁ is the magnetic constant.

I.

For bubble materials h is usually chosen to equal (5 to 10)}.o , whereby the
mean diameter of the bubble equals d - 0.5(d + d ) 3 1020 , where d is the

minimum diameter of a stable bubble wgfh H = h pand d is the max mum dia—

meter of a stable bubble with He - a (3 < E‘f. With ”H > a x annihila-
tion of the bubble takes place, and thh Hop< “min the bubble ismgransformed
81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)R1OF1ﬂ(1AI.l£5EICNNLY

into a strip domain (fig 3). Therefore, the condition for stable operation of a
bubble device is H < SH-a . B:tio; d ﬁldka and Hn x5IH depend on the
ratio h/l Hithniﬁ/iﬁ d l n. The re-

quired valge of d determined By e prescribed $.10rnagion1 storage density.
is achieved by selectin materials with values of o and H making it possible

to obtain 1 N 0. 1d 3r , whereby air depends on thﬁrtype of domain boundary.

0—

 

Figure 3. Dependence of Diameter of a Bubble on Strength of the External
Magnetic Field

Key:
1. Strip domain region A. H
2. Stable bubble region 5. H
3. Collapse region

35

The following equation is true:

d - (de..x ' dkaminnmmax - “min) - (dp - d[Jae/(“max ' Ruin) '

H <a<u .withH-0.5(n +1! )-H d-d".

nin e max - e min max sr [nean] '
Let x equal the coordinate of the center of the bubble along a certain direction
in the plane of the bubble medium material. If the components of energy H of
the bubble are functions of x , then the bubble is influenced by the force

_« rr_. «.2,

.
"I H J: . dx

82

INJI‘0!1ﬂ(JAI.lh§EZCHHLY
FOR OFFICIAL ISE ONLY

which causes displacement of the bubble if it exceeds a certain threshold value
of F , corresponding to the coercive force, I! , of the bubble medium material
(it 19 assumed that the values of individual deﬁivatives are constant within the
limits of the area occupied by the bubble). Then from this expression it is
possible to find the velocity, V , of the bubble along direction x [10]:

V=%(0,N1—a,AH,-: a,AM,—a. x

x .80., — % H, sign V' ,

where u r is the mobility of the domain boundary; Ah , AH .15 “a and Ac r
represenﬁ changes in the respective quantities along a distaﬁce of one bubbls
diameter in direction x ; and a1 , a2 , a3 and a‘ are positive coefficients.

Ah=dl -.-..dgru.lh(x).'

01

AH, 2—- dgrad H,(x), etc.

It is obvious from this expression that motion of the bubble can be accomplished
by creating a gradient in the thickness of the wafer, external field, magnetization
or domain boundary energy in the required direction. By the creation of a speci-
fic distribution of the thickness, magnetization or external field gradient it is
possible to produce preferred motion "paths" or steady positions of the bubble,
which makes it possible, in particular, to reduce the influence of random fields
(interference). Other conditions being equal, the bubble will move in the direc-
tion of the thicker section of the TH? (wafer), of the section with the higher
value of H , in the direction of the lower value of H (AH < 0), etc. By
utilizing, for example, the dependence of M on temperiture? it is possible to
control the motion of a bubble by means of a‘laser beam which causes local heating
of the wafer. In particular. if M increases with the temperature (AM > 0) and

it is possible to disregard the influence of a change in o r , then the bubble
will follow the motion of the laser beam. 8

In the majority of bubble devices control of the bubble's motion is accomplished
by means of local changes in He with h - canst , H - const and o - const .
In this case the absolute value of the velocity of thesbubble equals

'Ll\lI—+:Ifr) ,HIAH—H.). AH>H,,

where u is the mobility of the bubble, All is the absolute value of the differ—
ence of components, normal to the surface of the film, of the strength of the
external (local) magnetic field at the front and rear boundaries of the bubble,
determined in relation to the direction of its motion, and H is the threshold

field caused by the coercivity, Hc , of the bubble medium matgrial. Equations
u - "gr/2 and Ho - Bile/x are of an approximate nature.

83

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A specific relationship exists between the dynamic and static parameters of
bubble materials [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]:

47* A M.

I. o, ,

 

Prp 3'

where y is the gyromagnetic ratio, equal to 2.22-105(H/K) for electron spins;
A is the Landau-Lifshits damping parameter, characterizing the influence of via-
cous drag and having dimensionality of the frequency; and A - o2 l8ﬂ M is a

constant characterizing the exchange energy of the material. gr ‘ s

Obviously.

I», - $1 = % (2%))". .

i.e.. other conditions being equal. an increase in the figure of merit, Q , of a
bubble material results in a reduction in u and. consequently. in u . An
effective method of increasing u (the speeﬁrof response of bubble devices) is
the creation of materials with heightened values of y and/or low values of A .

Hith an increase in AB there is a reduction in u . In addition, the velocity of
a bubble is limited at the higher end by the maximum value of V r . The value

of u also depends on the structure of a bubble boundary. Genegally, the boundary
of a bubble consists of sections with a Bloch boundary structure separated by
sections with a Neel structure and called vertical Bloch lines (VBL's). The
number, n . of heel sections or VBL's is always even and can be positive or nega-
tive. In the particular case when the structure of a bubble boundary conforms
everywhere to a Bloch boundary. n - 0 . The value of n is positive in those
cases when in moving along the direction of magnetization of Bloch sections of the
boundaries of a bubble Néel sections are encountered in which the direction of
magnetization corresponds to the general direction of the transfer of magnetic flux
from the bubble into the surrounding region. Otherwise n < 0 . The state of a
bubblc boundary is characterized by parameter S - l + n/Z .

The expression presented above for velocity V corresponds to S - 0 . It is

important that with S - 0 the direction of motion of the bubble coincides with
the direction of the maximum value of grad ﬂ . With an increase in the abso-
lute value of S , u is reduced and angle 8 (angle of drift) increases, com-
posed of the direction of motion of the bubble and the direction of grad He [9]:

88V

==a
T "ﬂnydamf

 

The static properties of the bubble change simultaneously: H x is increased and
dk is reduced. The absolute value of 8 increases in the pgscess of motion of

8b

l!”l(ﬂﬂﬁ(3Al.lﬂﬂE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the bubble and dynamic restructuring of the domain boundary takes place. Bubbles
with high absolute values of S are called hard or inflexible.

Among the methods eliminating the formation of hard bubbles, the most widespread

is the method of forming on the surface of the bubble medium material a thin

(less than one micron) layer with anisotropy of the "easy plane" type. This
method is distinguished by the fact that any direction in the plane of this layer
is a direction of easy magnetization. As a result, the boundary of the bubble can
receive only a definite structure corresponding to S - 0 or s - l . In bubble
media fabricated in the form of thin ferrite garnet wafers with a negative magneto-
striction coefficient, an "easy plane" is most often formed by the method of ion
introduction (ion- implantation), e.g., by the implantation of hydrogen or neon
ions, which causes compression of the surface layer.

With 8 - l , the change in mobility of a bubble as compared with the mobility of
a bubble with S - 0 is inconsiderable, although the angle of drift, 0 , can be
quite noticeable. This phenomenon is utilized in certain bubble memories which
have been developed for increasing the density of the storage of informtion, which
is written in the form of a definite structure for bubble boundaries, e.g., a
structure with S - 0 corresponds to a binary l and a structure with S - l to
binary 0 [9, ll].

Bubble Medium Hateria ls

Orthoferrites, representing antiferromagnetics with a chemical composition of

RF 0 , where R is any rare earth element or yttrium or a combination of two
elgmgnts (R - R' R" ), were first used as bubble media [6, 6]. Orthoferrites
have high valued of’fheir figure of merit, Q , bubble mobility and the magneto-
optic Faraday coefficient. However, the mean diameter of bubbles in them is rela-
tively great and for materials with a single rare earth component it equals 80

to 100 u. Only for mixed orthoferrites is it possible to obtain d - 20 to 25
u , but with considerable worsening of the temperature stability of'Ehe material's
parameters. Therefore, orthoferrites are used primarily in various 'magnetooptic
devices where a small diameter of bubbles is not required.

0f other materials in which stable mobile bubbles can exist, in bubble memories,
only ferrite garnet thin films are widely used, grown on a nonmagnetic garnet
substrate (usually of gadolinium gallium garnet, Gd Gaso ) by the liquid-phase
epitaxy method [10, 9. 12, 13, 11., 15, 16, 17]. At Ehe pfgsent time many composi-
tions of epitaxial ferrite garnet films have found an application, having the
formula (R1R ...)3(Peli) 0l , where R is a rare earth element or yttrium,

H is a metal (usually aluminum or gallium, sometimes Ge, Si or Mn, partly replac-
ing Fe). By changing the composition of the film it is possible to change over

a widd range the values of H , H , Q , l (d ) , u and their dependence on
the temperature. Uniaxial anisotrSpy with Qhe Ofﬁ perpendicular to the surface

of the film in ferrite garnet films is usually the result of great magnetocrystal-
line or exchange anisotropy induced in the process of growing the film. In cer-
tain cases it can also be the result of mismatching of the lattice constants of
the substrate and film, which causes great elastic stresses in the film and re-
sults because of magnetostriction in the formation of the required Ha field.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The key parameters (5 certain ferrite garnet epitaxial films making it possible
to obtain values of d of 0.5 to 10 u are given in table 2 [13, lb. 15, l6,
17]. The parameters oIra number of other files and their temperature character—
istics. which are of first-rate importance, are also presented in [6, 9, 12].

Table 2. Key Parameters of Some Ferrite Garnet Thin Magnetic l'ilms

Gar-m 1) Inn ‘ h.-| Q Ins'w! 31).”: Fm'a-c '53:?

042.2 “0.0 7%.: Mn... ”0.: on “'2 2-32 '5 20.6 ‘50
5“” “9.: “4.: No.1 0,, ”o
5'12: ”on 7%.: Mn... “on on '00

an

all.“ 70.6 01.: Fan 5‘” 0'” on
VL: “0.5 5%.. 00.9 ’94.! 0's: 0,,
Y1 ”on 5%.: 00.. “we 5'” on
“0.0 “2.1 9"" Fe” 5'03 012

“or: ”no 5%.. 00.0 Ru 0*“ 0,,
5": Tm, has “on on

5"” Tm“ Ru 05,; .012

5“” “1.: Rs 0,,

232333333

   

Key:

1. Composition of film ’0. u , cm2/A-s
2. h . u 5. V , mls
3. H , A/cm “"

max

Studies are being conducted on the use in bubble devices of two-layer and even
three-layer films with layers differing in chemical composition and physical pro-
perties [4. 9]. Two-layer films can be used for eliminating the formation of
hard bubbles, for producing stable bubbles without an external field, H , or for
constructing bubble devices based on the use of interaction of the dons no of

two different layers.

Basic Elements of Hagnetic Bubble Integrated Circuits (Ic's)

To the basic elements of integrated circuits employing magnetic bubbles belong
elements making possible the generation of bubbles, the propagation of bubbles
along shift registers. fixing of the position of bubbles in the intonation storage
mode (without propagagion). changing the direction of motion of bubbles, the ex-
change of bubbles between two shift registers, the multiplication (splitting) of
bubbles, the readout of information. the erasure of bubbles and logic operations.
The major portion of the area of integrated circuits employing magnetic bubbles

is occupied by propagation elements. forming shift registers. Since all functional
elements must be fabricated in a single technological process with a minimum nuder
of lithographing and registration operations. the choice of design principle and

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0W1ﬂ€1AI.llBEI(ﬂQLY

type of propagation elements to a considerable extent determines the choice of
all remaining functional elements of integrated circuits utilizing magnetic
bubbles, which must match propagatton elements in the technological respect and
with respect to regions of stable operation (OUR's).

Two main classes of bubble device shift registers exist. The first includes in—
tegrated circuits in which local changes of the magnetic fields causing the shift-
ing of bubbles are accomplished by an external magnetic field which is alternating
in terms of direction and is common to all integrated circuits; under the influ-
ence of this field magnetization of thin magnetically soft (per-alloy) elemrnts
located on the surface of the bubble film or of structures implanted in the sur-
face layer of the film with anisotropy of the "easy plane" type takes place. A
charc-teristic feature of integrated circuits of this class, which we will call
bubble integrated circuits with common field control, is the absence of conduc-
tion lines in the integrated circuits, used for propagating the bubbles. To the
second class belong magnetic bubble integrated circuits with local current control,
in which local changes of the propagating magnetic field are accomplished by means
of electric current flowing through conductors arranged in a certain manner on the
surface of the bubble film. Bubble integrated circuits of the first class with
permalloy control elements have been preferred for use at the present time.

A circuit for controlling the motion of bubbles by means of magnetizing a permalloy
core is presented in fig 4. The bubble medium, 1, is covered with a dielectric,

2 (usually $102 with a thickness, h , of 0.b to 0.5 u), on top of which is placed
a rectangular core, 3, made of a pegmalloy thin magnetic fi-s (core thickness of
0.3 to 0.5 u). An external magnetic field, H , m1kﬂs possible the existence of
stable bubbles (cf. fig 3). Possible initialepositions of bubbles are designated
by the numbers A, S and 6. The external control field, H , directed along the
longitudinal axis of the core, 3, from right to left, is ngned on the instant

the bubble is at position 6 (fig éb). The core is magnetized and at its left end
is formed a north pole, which attracts the bubble, causing it to move from posi-
tion h to position 7, corresponding to the minimum free energy of the bubble in
the total external field. If the bubble is at position 5, then it is repelled by
the right south pole of the core and also goes to position 7. A bubble at posi-
tion 6 is repelled by the core and moves to the right. '

The force acting on the bubble and its stable position (UP) under the permalloy
core are determined by the distribution of component H , normai to the surface
of the film, of the core's external field, averaged forzthe thickness, h , of the
bubble medium film. The distribution of this component along the longitudinal
axis (x) for a value of y - 0 is shown in fig be for the case when it is possible
to disregard the influence of the bubble on magnetization of the core. The hub-
ble's stable position (U?) corresponds to the region of minimum values of H ;
this region is usually called a magnetostatic well (HSYa). The problem of eh-
abling a specific path of movement of the bubble reduces essentially to enabling
the corresponding law of displacement of the HBYa, which carries along the bubble
in it.

Hith H - 0 , the permnlloy core can be magnetized, although to a lesser degree,
under tﬂgrinfluence of a bubble located near it. Here for a bubble at position 6
or 7 with H - 0 , position 7 is stable as previously, corresponding to the
minimum of £985 energy. For a bubble at position 5 or 6, the nearest stable

87

FOR¢0FFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR(Nﬂﬂ(1ALlﬁﬂEONLY

position is the right edge. 8. of the core (the center of the bubble is set
beneath this edge). Thus, the same per-alloy elements can be used not only for
controlling the notion of bubbles, but also for fixing the position of bubbles

when the power is cut off (“upr - 0).

 

Figure 6. Diagram for Controlling the Motion of a Bubble by Means of
magnetizing s Permalloy Core

Key:
1. h 3. UP [stable position]

2. “3p: [control] 4. HBYa [magnetostatic well]

Field Hz . acting on a bubble and the magnetostatic well, is directed counter

to He and results in an increase in the diameter of the bubble. Therefore, in
bubble devices with permalloy control elements as is selected to be greater than
H r n] (cf, fig 3) for the purpose of enabling a broad region of stable
oSerLPign (OUR). As a consequence, the annihilation of bubbles is sometimes ob-
served when “u r is cut off and there is a corresponding reduction in the depth
of the magnetosfatic well. This is often eliminated by orienting the permanent
magnets creating field H so that a shall field component is formed in the

plane of the thin nagnetig film of the bubble medium. This component, magnetizing
pernalloy cores with H - 0 , creates magnetostatic wells which reliably retain

bubbles at specific posggions.
88

FIMICHHHCJAI.USB(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

let us discuss the principles of the design of bubble shift registers (SR's)
based on permalloy control elements having the form of a T and I (fig 5). Here
four directions are distinguished (l, 2, 3, 4), of the control field, H“ ,
clockwise, and on the permalloy elements by these same numbers are indicREed
positions at which with these directions of n positive poles are formed.
With the first position of H let a bubbleugg at position 1 of an element I.
When H is turned 90 degrgg; (to direction 2) a north pole forms in position
2 of thigrelement and the bubble goes into this position. One more turn of

Hu r by 90 degrees moves the bubble to position 3 of element I. With the next
tugn of H“ by 90 degrees (direction 6) a north pole forms at lower end 4 of
core A and Ehe bubble goes into this position. When ﬂ is turned 360 degrees
the bubble occupies position 1 under element II, i.e.. larshifted by a single
cycle by a linear extent of A . T-shaped elements I, II, III. V. VI and VII
and cores A and b located between then serve the purpose of shifting the bubble
linearly along the SR and elements 0 and IV of changing the direction of motion
of the bubble. With a change in the direction of rotation of ﬂu the direction
of motion of the bubble is changed to the opposite, which is the result of the

symmetry of the shifting elements.

m n v
‘CL $ £5 2
o — IV
( A s 1
I 0 n7 1) 4

 

Figure 5. Magnetic Bubble Shift Register Utilizing T-I Permalloy Elements

Key:

1. ﬂ
upr

In recent times preference has been given to shifting elements with a single gap
with a shift cycle of X , which are less critical with regard to the width of
the gap. 6 . between neighboring elements and make it possible to increase the
ratio 6/d and to reduce the ratio A/d and the mutual influence of bubbles
moving aloﬁg adjacent tracks (SD's) and tosixpand the integrated circuit's OUR.
The use of these elements increases the information density of bubble integrated
circuits without increasing the resolution of the photolithography equipment used.
Some of the most widespread single-gap permalloy shifting elements. which have
many modifications, are presented in fig 6 (a and b-asymmetric chevrons; c and d--
asymmetric subdisks; e--a “tapir”; f and g-—synmetric chevrons; and h--a symmetric
Y element) [18, 19. 20, 21, 22, 23]. In the first five types of elements bubbles
can be moved only from left to right with rotation of the control field. H .
clockwise (fig 61) and in the last three in any direction depending on theupr

89

FORiOFFKJAl.USE(HVLY
INJR 0FF1C1AL USEZCHvLY

direction of rotation of H (fig 65). The wider OUR in asymmetric elements

(a to e) is caused by the ngE that the increased mass (area) of the permalloy

at the end of the element "receiving" the bubble facilitates the bubble's crossing
the gap between two neighboring elements. Symmetric elements g and h have a wider
OUR than simplest chevron f. which is used primarily in bubble expanders included

in magnetoresistive readout devices. passive magnetic bubble splitters and some

., WA
mﬂﬂﬂﬁxﬂ

c) mmmm

«n mmmm
e, CARRR

r) AAAA “"
’1‘

a ﬂﬂﬂﬁ
mvvvv ”

figure 6. Single-Gap Permalloy Shifting Elements

Key:
1. H
upr

Displacement field He is usually created by two flat permanent magnets (l and 2
in fig 7a) and field Hu r by current i and i flowing through two ortho-
gonally positioned coilsP X and Y . inside of which there are one or more mag-
netic bubble integrated circuits. The coils with the integrated circuits and the
permanent magnets are placed in a single case. which serves simultaneously as a
magnetic shield protecting the bubble module from the influence of external magnet-
ic fields with strength up to 4000 Ala [24]. With identical permanent coils x

and Y current i - IIn sin wt and i - I coa mt flowing through them create
field “up! . which rotates in the plane of Ehe bubble integrated circuit with an

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

angular velocity of u and a constant amplitude. However, the amplitude of

H can also not be constant. Therefore, control current 1x and i of
tgigngular form (fig 7b) are widely used. which are more simple to form! espe—
cially when a bubble lemory operates in the start-stop node [25]. In this case
the vector of ﬂu r in a polar system of coordinates describes a rectangle with
corners situated 8n axes x and y (fig 7c), where axis x is in line with the
direction of motion of the bubble. The change from the bubble shift node to the
storage node is carried out at moment mt - 2n! (n - l, 2, ...), where i .-

- 0 , by changing current i from -I to zero (current 1 thereby nus! re-
main equal to zero). Motionxoi the bubgle is restored by changing i from zero

to its maximum negative value with i - 0 and by subsequently changing 1x and
iy according to fig 7b. y

       

 

' outta/nun].
callus-luau

 

Figure 7. Diagram of Formation of Displacement and Control Fields for a
Magnetic Bubble Module
chy on following page]

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFIC1AI.USEGDNLV

Key:
1. Stop 3. a
2. Start "Pr
Three main principles are known for designing magnetic bubble generators (G's):
by means of a current loop. creating a local magnetic field directed counter to
H and sufficient for the origin of a bubble (fig 8a and b); by means of division
by means of a current pulse, 1 , of a bubble self-originating beneath a massive
permalloy element with a largesleakage field (fig 8c); by using a massive permalloy
element as the units generator (61) and erasing by means of current 1A the bubble
formed, if it is required to write a 0 (fig 8d).

1) ‘# rw l“

n 2) '0 ﬂ
, a
a) b) ‘Ab'

If“ ,n t“!

f!
a. c) ”7”,, “to
ma a

I! g! n 'ﬁby
7; (”“5

Figure 8. Diagram of Functional Elements of Bubble Integrated Circuits

Key:
. H a. Pa [passive annihilator]
2. Tppfcurrent loop] 5. AA [active annihilator]
3. Bubble

The erasure device. also called an annihilator, can be designed similarly to the
current generator (fig 8a), but with the reverse direction of current 1A for the
purpose of creating a total field greater than the collapse field, H . In addi-
tion to such an "active" annihilator (AA). passive annihilators (PA':,xare used.
designed similarly to passive "l" generators (fig 8d). Bubbles approaching a
"massive” pernalloy element are captured by it and are not transmitted further.
Current loops are formed by thin-film lines usually made of an Al-Cu allay.

Bubble generators for other shifting elements are designed sinilarly (cf. fig 6).

92

FOR‘OPFKJAI.USE(MNLY
a u - o...- ~. .-... -~.- . - .- v-I— - .Qm’om—-.~ -~ .- .-..- - us-.. .I

Foi‘d‘ cm. use own“

Current pulses i and i must be phased in a specific manner in relation to

H , as is convgntionally illustrated in fig 8, for the purpose of enrbling
tngproper operation of 6's and AA's. In a generator (fig 8c) the distance between
element 1 and Cl is such that with i - 0 element 1 cannot capture a domain
formed on the right face of 61 with the corresponding direction of h . In

the circuit given (fig 8d) such capture does take place and with the ggfation of
H a domain is stretched and then split, forming two magnetic bubbles, one of
wHREh continues moving around generator 61, and the other is directed toward the
AA.

'In essence generator 0 in fig 8c forms an active splitter or replicator (AR),

and in the circuit in fig 8d, a passive bubble splitter (PR). These bubble split-
ters (replicators) are used in bubble integrated circuits for branching information
for the purpose of readout without removing the bubble from the shift register
(SR), which serves the purpose of the prolonged storage of information. Many
variants of AR's exist, one of which is presented in fig 9 [22, 23, 26]. Here the
AR serves the purpose of transferring information from SR-l to SR—Z while storing
the transferred information for the purpose of readout without removing the bubble.
SR-l is designed in such a manner that with a certain direction of H the
bubble, traveling beneath it. is stretched along the entire element. “2? at this
moment current pulse 1 is supplied to the current loop (TP), then the bubble

is divided into two par s which are mutually repelled. One of them continues to
move through SR-l, and the second goes to SR-Z. If current pulse 1 is supplied
to the point of stretching of the bubble along element 1, the bubbleparriving at
this element is conveyed to SR-Z without splitting. In this case we get a one-
way switch (OP) for the direction of motion of the bubble (only from SR-l to SR-Z).
Two-way switches (DP's) exist, making it possible to transfer a bubble both from
SR-l to 5392 and from SR-Z to SR—l. The function performed is determined by the
phase shift between the switching current, i , and the control field. With 1 .
- 0 , bubbles are moved in step independentl of one another through SR—l and P
SR-Z. In addition to these elements, according to the same principle are designed
switches (Ko's) for swapping bubbles between two shift registers and universal
switches (KO-R's) which implement either the function of swapping bubbles or the
function of splitting bubbles depending on the instant of the supply of and phase
of the control current [22, 23, 26].

In fig 10 is presented a diagram of a passive bubble splitter (PR) designed with
permalloy elements of the symmetric chevron type. Moving from left to right along
element 1, the bubble is captured by elements 2 and 3, is stretched and is di-
vided into two bubbles, which continue to move through channels I and II. If the
direction of rotation of H is changed, then the bubbles will be moved through
channels I and II from righpro left. In this case elements 1, 2 and 3 form an
OR circuit implementing a logical on function with the entry of a bubble through
one of the channels (the simultaneous entry of two bubbles can cause failure
because of their mutual repulsion).

The readout of information, represented by the presence or absence of a bubble,
can be accomplished by any circuits reacting to the magnetic field of a bubble or
its alteration and based on utilization of the electromagnetic induction phenome-
non, the magnetoOptic effect, the magnetoresistive effect, the Hall effect, etc.
Only the magnetoresistive effect has received practical application in modern
bubble memories in view of the technological advantages: execution of the

93

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE!DNLY

magnetoresistive bubble sensor (detector) from the same permalloy thin magnetic
film as the other functional elements of the integrated circuit in a single tech-
nological process. The level of the output signal of the sensor is Us I

- I.ARd - I de . where I is the current of the sensor and and is ﬁne change
in ghe initial resistance of the sensor. Rd , under the effect of the magnetic
field of the bubble read. The value of I is limited to a value on the order of
S to 10 nA. and coefficient k is low (0.82 to 0.03). Therefore, for the purpose
of raising U h to the level required for reliable readout against a background
of interferengs. increasing R by increasing the length of the sensor is resorted
to, whereby it is necessary at the same time to stretch the bubble read in order
for the sensor to be completely under the influence of its field. The simplest
variant of a readout unit (80) consisting of a chevron domain expander (RD) and

a sensor (MD) formed by a chain of series-connected per-alloy elements is illus-
trated in fig 11. Behind the sensor usually comes a circuit which reduces the
domain to normal dimensions. after which the bubble can be directed to any SR or
annihilator (PA). if erasure is required after reading. Often a second compensat-
ing sensor is provided, positioned directly behind the first and connected together
with it in a bridge circuit for the purpose of reducing noise caused by the field
of H . Not infrequently in RD's asymmetric chevrons of a special shape are
used far the purpose of expanding its OUR. as well as other methods of connecting
MD elements for the purpose of raising the level of the output signal [20, 22, 23].
In bubble devices with a nominal domain diameter of 2 to 3 u the number of chevrons
in the MD reaches 300 to 500. which makes it possible to produce a strip domain

1.5 an long. This stretching of the bubble read is usually achieved in 15 to 30
cycles of the shifting field.

CP72 1)

Figure 9. Diagram of Active Bubble
Splitter

Key:
1. SR-2 3. Current loop

2. it 4. Active splitter

 

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7:7

U
V

‘§>}>>}>}>>>}>}>>}>

‘-
v

'>
El

8
>>>>>2>>>>>>>

>>> >
5222/

l

2)
1) ’4 1,} Ma

Bubble Integrated Circuit Readout Unit

r] 3. I
6. Pg [passive annihilacor]

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Structure of a Magnetic Module (Integrated Circuit) for a Bubble Memory

A bubble memory magnetic module is a functionally and structurally complete item
consisting of one or more magnetic bubble integrated circuits and elements creat-
ing magnetic displacement and control fields (cf. fig 7a) and placed in a shared
shielding case with the necessary electric terminals. The structure of a magnetic
module is determined by the structure of the bubble integrated circuit, which
depends on the purpose of the memory and on the principle used for controlling

the magnetic bubble .

Two main classes of bubble memories exist. In memories of the first class the
sequential single-channel and/or multichannel readin and readout of binary in-
formation are accomplished the same as when recording on moving magnetic tape.

To the second class belong nemories in which information is written and read in
pages or blocks according to an address assigned for each page. The writing or
reading of information (words) takes place sequentially within the limits of a
page. The addresses of pages can be assigned in an arbitrary manner. Bubble
memories of the second type make it possible to reduce substantially the time for
accessing information, the minimization of which is one of the main objectives when
using bubble memories as part of a computer.

A typical structural diagram of one memory bubble integrated circuit of the first
class is presented in fig 12. The circuit works in the following manner. During
readin. current pulses, i , phased with current creating a rotating

H r field, enter the coﬁgrollgaigdbble generator, 6 ,_so that when a l is written
augubble appears in the output of the G and does not when a 0 is written. The
bubbles generated are moved under the influence of B in the direction of the
merger point, 5 , and enter the shift register, SR . "If N is the capacity of the
SR and n is the number of cycles between G and point 5, then H + n shift
periods (ﬁgtations of H ) after the beginning of the entry the freeG§R is
filled. Here the entry gggurs only during the first h periods, and during the
entry period the current in the active annihilator. AA. equals 1 - 0 . The last
written bit will be at point 5. and part of the written information in register
section SV. Often the entire capacity of the SR, N , is not used, but only the
capacity, N , of the section of the SR from point 8 to the active splitter (re-
plicator), in. In this case after the completion of an entry (after “r + “cs
periods) the first bit entered will be found opposite the splitter. an, and

can proceed to be read out immediately, by supplying current pulses, ir . to the

An in step with the shifting current. The bubble in the AR is split: One part is
sent to the readout unit. Sch, and then to the passive annihilator, PA. and the
second to point 3 for further storage in the SR. After kn periods, where k is
a whole number, the information written in the SR assumes its initial arrange-ant.
If it is necessary to erase or to replace information entered earlier, than when
the bubble arrives at the position of AA an erase pulse, 1 , is supplied. It is
possible to enter new infornation simultaneously, since th distance (number of
cycles) from G and from AA to the merger point, 5. is made identical. X
The readout (access) tine for the first bit, t1 , and the average time for‘reading

out a random bit, t8r . after the entry of nr bits equals: ‘

96 X

F0!:0FFNJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2:, HI
I -N:! .5 '.
‘- ‘9- 2 '

where n h is the number of cycles between the AR and detector, MD, of the
readout 5&1? (cf. fig 11) and f is the operating frequency of the rotating

field.

 

Figure 12. Structural Diagram of Bubble Integrated Circuit with One Shift

Register
Key:
1. i l e din] 6. Passive annihilator
2. G29 r a 7. Active splitter
3. S 8. i
b. Output 9. Shift register
5. Readout unit 10. V

The number of electric terminals for a single integrated circuit equals 2 - 8
when using a single magnetoresistive sensor in the readout unit. When tuneMD's
[magnetoresistive sensors] are used, £ - 9 . The total number of terminals of

a bubble module with a single integrates circuit, taking into account the terminals
of the coils creating the control field. equals L - 1 + 4 . Up to eight in-
tegrated circuits are often placed in a single module fog the purpose of reducing
the cost of a memory. If recording and readout take place in them in parallel,

as in a multitrack tape recorder. then the lines controlling the operation of the
AA and R's can be connected in series, and one of the enns of all write and read
lines can be connected to a coumwn point. Then the minimum number of module term-
inals equals Le m 2n + 9 , where nI is the number of integrated circuits
in the module. Bulnif indgpendent writing gr reading are required, then all AA's
and AR's must have individual terminals, and then L - bulc + 5 . The value

of Le min limits the maximum number of integrated Sigéaits in a single module.

97

FINICMHRCJAI.I£§E|3NIA!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is another limitation in the fact that all integrated circuits of a given
module must have identical OUR's [regions of stable operation]. Otherwise the
OUR of the module will be smaller than the OUR of an individual integrated cir-
cuit.

The key parameters of some magnetic modules designed on the basis of single-regis—
ter integrated circuits are presented in table 3 [27, 28. 29].

Table 3. Key Parameters of Some Bubble Memory Modules with Single—Register
Integrated Circuits

 

 

Type of moduleI Module parameters
firm, country Mean domain Module Qperating Mean Tempera— Maximum
giameterI capacityz greaaencz, aicess tgre range, Eggs:
ra.!m n . _i___£ 5.22; _._ £292_E£:
—°- Légté t“. 2 ML

 

mmu
in; nation

 

were
29A, Western

Electric, USA 3 4X68 as 0.71 0;+50 ~40;+80 b
PBMSlDA, Fujitsu,

Japan 3 4x74 125 0.29 -20;+70 -40:+90 2
POS-8, Rockwell

International,

USA 6 8x103 160 0.32 -10;+60 -60;+85 6.2

In single-register bubble integrated circuits usually N g 100 kbits , since any
defect in a sequential register puts the entire integrated circuit out of order
and increasing N increases the probability of the occurrence of defects. The
optimum value of rN increases in proportion to improvement of the technology for
producing bubble integrated circuits.

Typical examples of the application of first-class bubble memories are airborne
high-reliability sequential information recording and readout systems. equipment
for the digital recording and repeated reproduction of voice messages, systems
for the numerical program control of machine tools and the like.

Second-class bubble memories have been developed and used most widely. Numerous
variants of the structure of bubble integrated circuits exist for these memories
[20-23, 26, 30-36]. One of the first structural diagrams which received practical
application is presented in fig 13. The integrated circuit contains one distri-
buting register, RR. also called an input/output register, and m storage regis-
ters. NR's. serving the purpose of storing information. The distance between ad-
jacent NR's equals two cvcles. Bach NR is connected to the RR via its own exchange
switch. K0. All KO's are ordinarily controlled in step by a single shared current,
i , for the purpose of reducing the number of integrated circuit
c8¥3133f8¥‘2§°3 However, the use of several independently controlled groups of

98

F!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NNLY
BOR‘OFFICJAI.USIZCMVLY

Ko's increases considerably the flexibility of an integrated circuit and often
makes it possible to speed considerably the accessing of iniormation.

 

Figure 13. Structural Diagram of Bubble Integrated Circuit with Many
Storages and a Single Distributing Register

Key:
1. i 7. Readout unit
2. G2" [readin] 8. PA [passive annihilator]
3. Distributing register 9. Active splitter
4. Exchange switch 10. 1r
2. 3:2:3ge registers 11. iobm [exchange]

with i - 0 , the RR and “R's are not interconnected and bubbles love through
all registers independently of one another. During a write operation. a block of
information, usually in the form of like bits of n words forming a single page.
is entered into the an by means of the generator. G. “hen the first word (bit)

is opposite and the last opposite , a current pulse. 1 . transfers the
entire page from the RR to the “R's. If other information was previously entered
in the individual locations of the NR's, then by means of the I pulse it is
first removed to the an (the bubbles removed are placed between 8R9 bubbles of the
new page to be entered). after which the new information is transferred from the
RR into the NR'e. The page removed can be read out. just as in the circuit in

fig 12, and then erased by means of the AA and PA. It is also possible to erase
without reading out. if ir is set equal to zero. For the purpose of reading out
without erasing, the bubbles removed from the storage registers to the input/out—
put register. I + 1 periods after the removal. passing the AR, AA and
point 8. again a ive at their Ko's and are transferred by current I b back to
the storage registers. Here “NR and "RR are the capacities of thg gtorage

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1WC]AL.USEIMVLY

and input/output registers, respectively. They differ by one. since when in-
formation is removed from the NR's to the RR this information is delayed by
a single cycle.

entered into the input/output register during a write operation. and the same dis-
tance is obtained in the removal of information from the storage register to the
input/output register for readout; the time of a complete accessing cycle during
readout, made up of the access time and the regeneration time (input back into the
storage register), is relatively long. A number or nethods have been suggested
for eliminating these shortcomings [23, 26, 30-33], the implementation of one of
which is illustrated in fig 16. In the circuit presented in this figure. at one
end of all storage registers there is an input/output register, RR-l, connected

to the storage registers by means of exchange switches (Ko's), and at the other
end an output register. RR-Z, for the readout unit, Sch, connected to the storage
registers by means of active bubble splitters, AR's. The input and output of in-
formation vith the speed of its movement through the storage registers are made

   

possible by dividing the storage registers into two gr odd and even.

Bubble generator 61 opera eld and 62 at even,
1.0.. the write operation When new information is
entered the old informati switches is erased in the
passive annihilator. . out removing it from
storage registers. on the odd and even storage

registers through th a merge at point 8 into a
single flow, which e
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mean time, t' . for producing a word (bit) of a random page in the circuit
in fig 14 during Eeadout equals:

«.-+<1;L+%+~.>-

where tech 3 m/2 is the number of cycles between AR and Sch [readout unit].
The minimum value of t r approximately equals liﬁY} and is achieved with

1 2m , where N - is the information capacity of the integrated circuit.
e mean time. t1 , for accessing the first word of a random page equals:
-Lh
"1(2 +l“)‘

The mean time. t
equals:

zam . for replacing a random page after its preliminary readout

M
lm-f.'+ 4:, .

With an assigned value of the capacity. N , of the integrated circuit, the choice
of ratio /m is determined not only on the condition of minimizing the access
time in a specific operating mode of the memory (readout, write, replacement of
infatuation after readout). but also by the required size of pages (usually m -

- 2 , where k is a whole number) and by the permissible power dissipated by the
Ko's and AR (the dissipated power increases in proportion to m ), and by the
feasibility, for technological reasons, of using bubble media chips having a shape
close to square, which for the circuit in fig lb is consistent with “NR 3 4m .

If in the circuit in fig 16 symmetric (reversible) shifting elements (cf. fig 6)
are used and a page to be read out is moved to the terminals of the AR into na-z

in;gpg%_the shortest route, then with “NR 3 6m we get a minimum value of car 1

The speed of the input and output of information is also brought to the speed of
its movement in storage registers by increasing twofold the length of shift ele-
:ents in the input/output register as compared with shift elements in storage re-
gisters. In this case a bubble travels the distance between two neighboring
storage registers through the input/output register in only one cycle of the rota-
:13; field and the necessity of dividing storage registers into odd and even dis-
engeare (cf. fig 14). Bubble integrated circuits have been designed on this prin-
ciple (fig 15), possessing the same properties as integrated circuits designed

acct-ding to the circuit in fig 14, but simpler in the technological respect [23.
34 .

101

FOR¢NHHCJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 15. variant of Structural Diagran of a Bubble Integrated Circuit
with Short Access Tine
ICE. figs 12, 13 and 16 for key]

Since storage registers (NR's) occupy the aajor portion of an integrated circuit.
defects in a chip or pernalloy element most often cause malfunctioning of only one
or several NR's of the class of memories discussed (cf. figs 13, 14 and 15).
Therefore, an excess number, a sh . of storage registers is usually provided in
them. which makes it possible to increase considerably the percentage of the yield
of suitable circuits under conditions of series production. The relative value

of m1 b/m is determined by economic considerations and depends on the production
technology level reached. The addresses of malfunctioning or unused “R's can be
stored either in an auxiliary NR (VR in the cuits in figs 14 and l which has
individually controlled exchange switches (K0 's) and replicators (AR 's) con-
necting this V3 to RR-l and RR-Z, or in a read-only (programmable) storage (PPZU).
When a VR is used it also serves the purpose of storing tags (a code) for the
starting position of all “R's, which is necessary for synchronizing the operation
of a bubble memory when it changes free the storage node to write or read modes.
Otherwise information on the current position of information in the “R's nust be
stored permanently in an external semiconductor counter with a scaling factor of
"NE . including when the controlling magnetic field is switched off.

In addition to redundant storage registers (Ra's) which serve the purpose of in-
creasing the yield of suitable integrated circuits, additional Nn's are often
provided, employed for using codes which detect and c rrect errors. There are

four different kinds of errors. They are 'hdld" errors originating only during
readout (they cannot appear in repeated readout); "serious" errors originating as
the result of the disappearance or appearance of a superfluous bubble in the NR;
errors appearing in catastrophic fsilure of an NR, KO or of the AR connecting

“R's with the RR; and errors resulting from failure of the generator, an or readout
unit. i.e., complete failure of the integrated circuit. The probabilities, 91 ,

102

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the appearance of errors of each kind are interrelated as follows: Pd <<

<< P3 << P2 << P1 . Therefore, even the detection of errors and repeated readout
in the majority of cases are sufficient for the elimination of errors. The re-
dundant codes used correct the first three kinds of errors. when errors of the
third kind are detected (catastrophic failure of NR's. KO's or the An) in modern
bubble integrated circuits a transfer is provided by means of software from the
malfunctioning NR to one of the redundant. Redundant bubble integrated circuits
or magnetic modules are used in the moat inportant cases for eliminating the in-
fluence of total failure of the integrated circuit.

The key parameters of some series-produced bubble modules with an RR-NR structure
are presented in table 6 [21. 23. 31-37]. The temperature ranges for normal opera-
tion and the storage of information without losses are approximately the same as
indicated in table 3 and, for example, for a module of the RBH 256 type equal

-10 to +65 °C and -50 to +100 'C, respectively. Unlike bubble modules of the first
class of memories (table 3) a single second-class memory module (table 4) includes
as a rule only one integrated circuit. which is explained by the great number of
terminals and great complexity of these circuits and the need to limit the total
power dissi~ated in the KO's and AR and to provide a sufficiently wide region of
stable operation (OUR). The use of one high-capacity integrated circuit per mo-
dule makes possible the high flexibility of bubble memories and is economically
feasible. The mean access time, t - lﬁ', increases with an increase in the capa-
city, N , of integrated circuits. 8Therefore, for the purpose of reducing t

and increasing the data transfer rate, integrated circuits are used which cosfain
several (C) RR-NR groups operating in parallel. each of which has its independent
generator and readout. For example, in a module of the Texas Instruments (USA)
T131000 type, C - 2 and in a Nippon Electric (USA) module on which there are data
available only for experimental models C - 6 [21]. Its distinctive feature is
the fact that because of the use of symmetric shifting elements (cf. fig 6h) and
the two-way motion of bubbles in NR’s a low value of tar is achieved.

um. m - 2" . by selecting the page length, Q - 2q < m (o - o, 1, ..., K-l) .
during a single operating cycle of K0 switche! or the AR the simultaneous input
into NR's or output into RR—Z of R - m/Q - 2 -q i 2 pages of information are
possible. And if the number of cycles between 6 and K01.and between K01 or A31
and the readout unit in the circuits in figs 16. 15 and 16 does not have a common
divisor differing from one, then in these circuits it is possible to accomplish
the continuous readin or readout of several (s) blocks of information, i.e., it is
possible to obtain a page capacity of Q - sm §_N . s - 2, 3, ..., N/m . Thus.
by the appropriate choice of the parameters of the integrated circuit and by pro—
gramming the memory's operating mode it is possible to obtain any page size re-
gardless of the value of m chosen.

The effectiveness of using error combating coding for increasing the reliability of
bubble modules can be characterised by the data presented in table 5 as applied to
modules of the Texas Instruments (USA) T131000 and TIBSOO types (cf. table 4),

for which m - 256 and m5 - 18 [36). The probability of the apprwrance of a
page with an undetected an uncorrected error (table 5) correspond: I the rate

of the appearance of undetected and uncorrected errors. A - 1.$~‘ s[bit .

Hence. the mean time between failures for a bubble memory with a -apacity of 100
Hbits and a data transfer rate of 5 Hbits/s, prior to the appearance of an unde-
tected and uncorrected error. equals 4 years with continuous round-the-clock

103

FORIOFTWCIAI.IEHECHWLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operation. Theretore. the appearance of errors of the first or second kind,

not associated with catastrophic failure, is the most probable. Based on mag-
netic nodules of the 905—8 type (cf. table 3) an airborne bubble memory has been
desiped with a capacity of 100 Hbits with a mean time between failures of not
less than 61,000 h (38].

Table 10. Some Parameters of Bubble Hemory Modules with an nit-NR [Input/Output
Register - Storage Register] Structure

 

 

 

 

" )
._,___————_

ﬂ30203 ‘l'eus lnsltumcnlh m I I3 llll
TIBIOOO. fuss lnslIumtnls.Cl.|JA 2x44 lib-2w ”1—302 "3—5. 1.2 8?
1190500. Texas lustrumcnlsﬁulk « loo—zoo 05-17! II.2—5. L2 89
"80250. Tens Instruments. CUM M I‘ll—2w 6-!13 5.0-2. L2 3?
”£11226. Rockwell International. 26 I50 136 4 0.82 may
“(SEAL Rockwell International. 60 I50 I35 88' M IIIBV
FBMQSDA. Fulitsu. Room 12: 8 la) 97 6 0.67 11113!

an 3?
Moayns ¢apuu Nippon Eleculc. - aoo mo 0.34 - -

ﬁnouaa

lM7ll0. Intel. CIIIA 60 .5— 5—110 25—50 . 1.9 39
new. National Sanltoadutlor. 36 Ill! 9| 7 0.15 BP

 

CHM

Key:
1. Type of module, firm, country 8. Mean readout time, t“ , ms
2. Mean diameter, d , u 9. l’ower requirement. P . V-A
3. Useful capacity,'§*. bits 10. Storage of information on defective
lo. Capacity of storage registers. “R's
n x , bits 11. USA
5. Nmabe of redundant registers, 12. Japan
"ixb 4- IR 13. Programme non or VR [auxiliary

6. Operating frequency. f . kHz "31".”

7. Data transfer rate. It a“ ,
kbits/s

*Determined by the number, m , of working “R's without taking into account “121)
and IR .

**Deternined by the operating trequency, t , the number of parallel write and read
channels. the number of redundant “R's (‘izb and I:k ) and VR's.

1010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. Improvement of Reliability of Bubble Memories with Error Combating

Coding

Kind of errors in 256-bit Probability of Corrected Detected errorsI Z
page of data appearance of errorsI Z

a page with

an error
Isolated random error 340:: 100 -
Isolated constant error 3-10 100 -
Random pair of random -8
errors 3-10 50 100
Package of two random _9
errors 3-10 100 -
Package of two constant --11
errors 3-10 100 -
Package of three or four -11
random errors 3-10 - 100
Random pair of constant _12
errors 3-10 50 100
Package of five random _12
errors 3-10.“12 - 100
Any three random errors 3-10 - 87
One random and package _13
of two random errors 8-10 - 100
Undetecred and uncorrected _13
errors 4-10 - -

Bubble Hemory Control and Interface Circuits

Bubble memories, in addition to mgnetic nodules, contain two groups of electronic
circuits. The first serves the purpose of directly controlling bubble modules
and performs the following functions: the formation of current 1: and i cre-
ating the controlling magnetic field; formation of readin current, iz . exXhange
current, i , splitting current, i , and information erasure curreng, i ;

and the au$1¥fication and formation of output signals, U , during readout.
These functions are usually performed individually for euhhbubble module, but
with the presence in a module of several integrated circuits or integrated circuits
with several independent RR-NR groups, a readin current generator and a readout
amplifier are provided for each of them. In individual instances for bubble mo-
dules operating in parallel shared current generators are used for in , i

9
i1' and i (in the circuit described in [33] these currents are shared by four
modules operating in parallel).

The second group of electronic circuits, forming the so-called controller, serves
the purpose of linking the bubble memory with a central processor (Ta?) (or a
microprocessor (19)), an on-line memory in the form of a random—access menory
(ZUPV) and/or other units. as well as for performing a number of operations making
it possible to improve the reliability and speed of response of the bubble memory.
A controller's functions usually include the following: conversion of a parallel
flow of data arriving from the central processor or random-access memory through
a k-wire data line (usually I: - 8, 16 or 32 ) into one or more (according to the

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

number of bubble modules operating in parallel) sequential flows of data for

entry into the bubble memory and reverse serial-parallel conversion during

readout; matching rates of transfer of data between the central processor, random-
access memory and bubble modules by means of a buffer storage operating at a
variable speed; selection of bubble modules in keeping with instructions arriving
from the central processor (or microprocessor) and control of resdin, readout and/
or the erasure of specific pages; control of the start and stop of motion of
bubbles and ensurance of the preservation of information and of its position in
bubble modules with a sudden cutoff of power; storage of information on the current
position of pages or the restoration of this information after the memory is turned
on; ensurance of a specific page size; ordering the sequence of readin signals

and of signals readout taking into account the presence of malfunctioning “R's;
coding and decoding of information for the purpose of detecting and correcting
errors; repeated readout with the detection of uncorrected errors; checking the
working order of the memory and protecting it from improper influences; output of
information on the state of the controller and memory; enabling tlfe memory to oper-
ate in the interrupt mode; implementation of the optimum procedure for satisfying
requests for access to the bubble memory according to the criterion of the minimum
mean operating time; and enabling the possibility of increasing the capacity of
the memory by adding new bubble modules; etc. [33, 3!», 35, 39].

The implementation of these functions is achieved by a combination of hardware and
software. The controller is a control unit with microprogram control. Programs
are stored in the programnmble RON of the controller and can be changed within
certain limits with a change in the structure of bubble modules and the method of
controlling the memory (e.g.. for the purpose of enabling its operation in paral-
lel or multiplex modes, the direct-access mode, in a mode minimizing the mean
access time, etc.). Bubble memory controllers are usually designed as special-
purpose semiconductor large-scale integrated circuits (LSIC's), but can be designed
also on the basis of standard microprocessor elements and integrated circuits.

The structure of controllers can be modified over a wide range depending on the
structure of bubble modules and of the entire memory, the set of functions to be
implemented. etc, [32. 33, 34, 35].

One or more bubble modules together with the cannon control circuits form a memory
unit. A structural diagram of the simplest memory unit with one bubble module

(of the type illustrated in fig 14 or 15) is presented in fig 16. In this circuit
the current generators and readout amplifier represent actuating units performing
instructions arriving from the controller through the instruction line ($11K).

Data to be entered or read out arrive through the data line (Shh). Individual
control elements are often designed as a single integrated circuit which can serve
several bubble modules included in a single memory unit. Since the greatest power
is dissipated in continuously operating coil current generators, they are usually '
designed on the basis of transistor and diode microassemblies. A typical circuit
for a current generator for one coil (Y) and the control voltages of transistors
are illustrated in fig 17. With n1 1 t 1 (n + 0.25)1‘ , where n - 0, 1, 2,
and ‘1‘ is the cycle of the control field. voltages U]. and U3 render trans-
istors 1‘1 and 1‘3 conducting and current i rises exponentially with a time
constant determined by the coil‘s inductance aXd the circuit‘s resistance. With

r. - (n + 0.25)! transistors 1‘1 and 1‘3 are cut off and current i . closed
via Schottky diodes D1 and D3 . diminishes exponentially. With t’- (n + 0.25)1'

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F1JR 0$1ﬂ(1Al.lﬂBE 0WﬁlY

transistors T2 and T4 are opened for a quarter cycle, forming a negative
half-cycle for current i . Current 1 produced in this manner has a form
close to triangular (cf. fig 7b). Conter voltages 01 , U3 and 02 , Ué for
the 1x current generator are shifted in phase one quarter cycle relative to the
like voltages of the generator for current i . Transition to the information
storage mode is accomplished by stopping the Xupply of control voltages to both
generators with t - n(T) . The level of voltage 01 is greater than 03 and
U2 is greater than U4 , since voltages 01 and 02 must make possible the
saturation of transistors T1 and T2 at the appropriate intervals. Control
voltages can enter the coil current generators from the controller or be formed
by means of logic elements and voltage level bias circuits included in the coil
current generators themselves. In the latter instance the number of lines linking
the controller with the memory unit is reduced and changeover iron the shift mode
to the storage mode or vice-versa can be accomplished under the influence of a
single control signal ("start-stop") arriving from the controller to the coil
current generators.

 

Figure 16. Structure of Memory Unit with Bubble Modules

Key:
1. Bubble memory controller 7. Exchange current generator
2. Instruction line 8. Splitting current generator
3. Data line 9. Readout amplifier
4. Current generator for coil X 10. Bubble module
5. Current generator for coil Y 11. Memory unit
6. Readin current generator

A diagram of a second-class bubble memory controller (an integrated circuit with
an RR-NR-RR structure) is presented in fig 18. The data register makes it possible
to convert the parallel k-bit code into a serial code during readin and to change
it back after the readout of information from bubble modules. The addresses of
NR's unused and, if this is required, microprograma for controlling the control

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Instruction generator (PRU) are stored in the programmable ROM (PPZU). A page
counter with a scaling factor equal to the capacity of the NR serves the purpose
of storing the current address of pages. The binary code in its output corre-
sponds to the number of the page found opposite the exchange switches (KO's).

When this number agrees with the address of the page to which access is required.
the address comparator included in the TKU operates and the FKU issues an exchange
instruction to the memory unit selected. A replication instruction during readout
is formed similarly, for a specific address, taking into account the fact that

the AR's in the circuits in figs 14 and 15 are shifted [2 cycles relative to
the xo's. Ordering of date is accomplished in the foll ng manner. During readin
signals from the address decoder and word counter enter the rrzu, in which inform-
ation on malfunctioning NR's is stored, and if the NR for the address in question
is malfunctioning, a 0 appears in the PPZU's output and the word to be entered

is transferred for entry with a delay of one cycle. During readout, a word (bit)
arriving from an unused NR is omitted, i.e., does not enter the data register.
These functions are easily implemented by means of a shift register, for example,
designed with D-V flip-flops, which can also be included in the error correction
circuit.

 

Figure 17. Circuit for Generating Control Coil Current

Key:
1. Diode

For the precise synchronization and phasing of signals controlling bubble nodules
there is a stable synchronization pulse generator whose frequency is 50- to 100-
fold higher than the frequency of the bubble module's control field. The beginn-
ing, end and intermediate changes in control signals are formed by timer-counters
included in the IKU.

The presence in the controller of one or more buffer data registers operating at
variable speed makes it possible to accomplish the exchange of data between the
bubble memory controller and central processor or random-access nemory with high
speed (up to S to 10 Hbits per single buffer register). The controller can control

108

llﬂICMﬂWCLALIISEibNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the operation of a great number of memory units in the multiglex mode, whereby in-
dividual memory units are connected by turns to common address and data lines.

and the ordering of data and the detection and correction of errors are performed
for each block [34]. For the purpose of improving the efficiency of the bubble
memory the controller can organize its operation in such a manner that part of

the memory units_accomplish the exchange of information with the central processor
or random-access memory and part with peripheral unite, and then they change
places, etc. A typical structural diagram of a microcomputer is presented in fig
19, which includes a random-access memory, programmable ROM. ROM and bubble memory
and the possibility is provided of directly linking the input/output unit (UVV)
both with the microprocessor (HP) and with the bubble memory.

 

Figure 18. Structural Diagram of Bubble Memory Controller

Key:
1. Address and instruction line 10. Data ordering circuit
2. Data line 11. Pulse counter
3. Synchronization pulse geners- 12. Word counter
tor 13. Error correction circuit
6. Instruction register 16. PPZU [programmable ROM]
5. Address register 15. Controller
6. Page length register 16. Control instruction generator (PKU)
7. Date register 17. To memory units
8 Instruction decoder

9. Address decoder
Trends in Further Development of Bubble Memories

Major trends in further development of bubble memories reflect the aspiration of
lowering the unit cost, of improving the speed of response and reliability and of
expanding the functional characteristics of these memories. Reduction of the unit
cost of a bubble memory (cost in terms of memory capacity) can be achieved by
increasing the information storage density, 1 , or capacity of a single integrated
circuit upon the condition that the capacity of the integrated circuit increases

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more rapidly than the cost of production. Hitherto an increase in the informa-
tion density, 1 , of bubble integrated circuits has been achieved by reducing the
mean (nominal) diameter. d r , of the bubble and the spacing of the shifting
structure, A - ad” . Hitﬁ this 1 jg A 2 .

    

  

  

a) 5) 6)
M” 039 may I739 UM
as!

         
 
    

alum 31mm: 8)

Figure 19. Structural Diagram of Hicrocomputer Containing a Bubble Memory

Key:
1. Input/output unit 7. Bubble memory controller
2. Microprocessor 8. Data line
3. Address and instruction line 9. Bubble memory unit
a. RAM
5. Programsble ROM
6. son

The minimum value of a , limited by the mutual influence of neighboring bubbles
when using single-gap shifting elements (cf. fig 6), equals lo. The minimum .value
of d for bubble integrated circuits with the familiar types of permalloy
shifting elements (cf. fig 6) is limited by the resolution of the lithographing
equipment used and by substantial worsening of the effectiveness of the use of
pernalloy elements for controuing the motion of bubbles with a reduction ir their
linear dimensions in keeping with d with a simultaneous increase in the re-
quired value of H MOI? At the present time integrated circuits
are being producedue'fthcgnﬁﬁgﬂe diameter of d - 1.8 to 2 u. (A - 7.5 to B n).
It is assumed that the minimum values of d “d A for integrated circuits
with permnlloy shifting elements equal resSEctively l and (one, which makes it
possible to obtain an information density, _1 , on the order of 6 Hbits/cmz.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among bubble integrated circuits with shared field control the most widespread
have become integrated circuits with ion-implanted shifting structures [41. 42].
In these, upon rotation of the external control field, H“ , bubbles move along
a chain of abutting nonimplanted disks (“D's in fig 20a) 85 rectangles (NP's in
fig 20b). Nonimplanted chains are formed by coating by the method of photolltho-
graphy individual regions of a ferrite garnet film with a protective layer which
does not admit ions implanted in the surrounding region. In the implanted regions
(Yo's) an "easy" surface is formed, magnetized in the direction of the influence
of field H . At the interface of implanted and nonimplanted regions magnetic
holes form,u hich exert a corresponding influence on the bubbles, which can be
moved simultaneously along both directions of the chain of abutting disks (rect-
angles), e.g., clockwise. The chain of shutting nonimplanted disks thus forms a
closed bubble shift register. Elements have been developed which implement in
ion-implanted bubble integrated circuits the functions required for constructing
a memory (bubble generation, switching. readout, etc.) [42].

6) 10) r
”-2

’3--'"--<>'§o<> ”j,”
m mom-«(mo m

mew/ﬂ

Kn 8)
9) 'b)

Figure 20. Ion-Implanted Bubble Shifting Structures

Key:
1 Nonimplanted disk 7. Nonimplanted rectangle
2. Implanted region 8. Exchange switch
3. Bubble 9. Readout unit
6. Storage register 10. Generator
5. H il. Generator current
6. Iggflt/output unit No 2

Ion~implanted shifting structures have two important advantages as compared with
the permalloy discussed earlier: less strict requirements for lithographic re-
solution because of the absence of gaps which are critical in terms of their size
between neighboring elements (approximately eightfold lower resolution is required

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY

for producing the same d and _A in these structures), and the lack of the
need to increase H iﬁrproportion to a reduction in d r and A [50].
These structures, bggxuse of the absence of nontranspsrent permalloy elements
on the surface of the ferrite garnet film, can be used in various magnetooptic
domain devices (displays, changeable transparencies. etc.).

Another method of creating local changes in the magnetic properties of ferrite
garnet films for controlling the motion of bubbles is the selective annealing of
individual sections of a film by means of a focused laser beam. For example, by
this method are produced parallel annealed channels with enhanced magnetization,
M . along which bubbles are propagated under the influence of an appropriate
cgntrol field [#3].

The minimum distance, 1 , between neighboring bubbles in integrated circuits can
be reduced twofold (from 4d to 2d ) if the active section of the integrated
circuit (the storage) is camﬁletely filled with bubbles. In this case a so-called
domain array is formed in which the interaction of neighboring bubbles is of a
constant nature, which makes it possible to reduce a and X - ad . Here in-
formation (a 0 or 1) must be represented not in the form of the absence or pre-
sence of a bubble, but in the form of a certain state of its boundary, character-
ized by the value of 5 (cf. the section "Conditions for the Existence and Pro-
perties of Mobile Bubbles"). With a given value of d the utilization of domain
arrays makes it possible to increase fourfold the surfage density of information,
3 . The propagation of bubbles in the array, in particular, can be accomplished
by means of permalloy elements with large gaps of noncritical size [11].

A quite promising method of lowering the cost of a bubble module is the creation
of functional elements making it possible to fabricate bubble integrated circuits
with permalloy or ion-implanted elements with the use of only one lithography
stage. In the first group of circuits for this it is necessary to form permalloy
conductors simultaneously with propagating elements [20, an, 45, 46]. A bubble
module can be simplified by employing two-layer ferrite garnet films as bubble
media not requiring a permanent bias field [67].

A disadvantage of a bubble module with a shared control field is the relatively
high, primarily reactive, power which must be supplied to the coils creating the
rotating controlling magnetic field, H . This power is proportional to the
space in which the field is created andPEhich is much greater than the volume of
the ferrite garnet film with control elements. The required power grows somewhat
more rapidly than the operating frequency, f . since with an increase in frequency
it is necessary to increase H . It is precisely the permissible value of the
power required for the coils whish limits the maximum operating frequency of a
bubble integrated circuit with field control to values of approximately 300 kHz,
which is far below the maximum operating frequency determined by the mobility or
maximum speed of bubbles. One way of substantially reducing the power requirement
and accordingly increasing the maximum operating frequency of bubble devices is

to change from shared field control to local current control. In the latter in-
stance local magnetic fields accomplishing the propagation of bubbles are created
by the current flowing through conductors located on the surface of the ferrite
garnet film. At the same time there is a drastic reduction in the space occupied
by the controlling magnetic field and the reactive power necessary for creating it.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE10NLN

A number of designs of bubble integrated circuits with local current control

have been suggested [45, 48]. An operating frequency of 4 to 5 ME: has been
obtained for some experimental bubble propagation circuits and this is not the
limit. Quite promising is the accomplishment of local current control (without
permalloy elements) by means of two perforated conducting layers applied to the
surface of a ferrite garnet film with an intermediate insulating layer [68].

The current flowing around a hole (perforation) creates a local magnetic field
which influences a bubble near the hole. By the appropriate distribution of holes
in two conducting layers and by alternating the current flowing through these
layers it is possible to provide the required propagation of bubbles, as well as
to perform the functions of generating, stretching and changing the direction of
motion of bubbles. It has been predicted that on the basis of this local current
control bubble integrated circuits will be created with an information density of
j g 107 bits/cm2 and with an operating frequency reaching 6 to 20 MHz.

One more important trend in the development of bubble integrated circuits is the
creation of new types of functional elements (coders, decoders, logic elements,
arithmetic units, etc.) compatible in the technological respect and in terms of
region of stable operation with propagation elements [49, 50, 51]. The creation

of these elements will make it possible to increase considerably the effective-
ness of the application of bubble memories in computing systems (to reduce access
time and the amount and cost of external electronics and to improve the reliability
and expand the functional capabilities of memories).

Substantial improvement of the characteristics of bubble memories can be achieved
by structural and software methods: by dynamic ordering of information in the
memory by organising a memory with minimum access time, by accomplishing content
accessing, etc. [32, 51, 52, 53, 5b]. Let us limit ourselves to discussing only
one possible bubble integrated circuit structure making it possible to improve
considerably the speed of response of a memory. We divide a bubble integrated
circuit into four groups of individually controlled registers: input register
RR-l, input register RR-Z, a group of buffer registers (BR's) and a group of
storage registers (NR's) (fig 21). It is assumed that by means of control current
i , i2 , i and it is possible to enable the operation of any group either
1% the bubblg motion e or in the stationary bubble storage mode, regardless of
the state of the other groups of registers. A bubble integrated circuit mith local
current control [48] affords this possibility. The BR's and NR's are intercon-
nected by means of exchange switches (KO's) and with RR-l and RRPZ by means of
universal switches (UK's) which implement, depending on the phase for supplying the
control current, either an exchange function or a switching function. The storage
in short buffer arrays of pages which are required before others considerably re-
duces access time in readout. Consequently, it is advisable to enter directly

into the BR by means of generator 62 pages which in the immediate future must be
removed to the central processor or random-access memory. Otherwise, if all

buffer registers are filled, it is possible to use cl, as in the circuits in figs
16 and 15. If the required page is in storage registers, then it can first be
transferred to buffer registers and then to 33-2 for readout. Furthermore, the
mean access time for these pages is not longer than in bubble integrated circuits
with the ordinary structure (cf. fig 16 and 15), since the Bk's and “R‘s operate

in the independent start-stop mode, which makes it possible to coordinate their
operation. The addition of an added readout unit for RR-Z makes it possible to

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE:(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reduce the mean time for access from NR°s. The structure of this circuit (fig 21)
possesses important advantages even without 62 and Sch2 [readout unit No 2].

The ordering of information in "R’s and BR's is accomplished easily in it. The
page to be reordered is removed from the NE to RR-l, where it is stored without
movement and the information in the NR is shifted the required number of steps.
after which the page previously removed is put back into the HR, etc. Similarly.
by means of RR-Z, information in BR's can be ordered. too. In connection with the
increase in the capacity of the bubble integrated circuit the implementation of
two memory levels (BR's and NR's) in a single integrated circuit can serve as a
quite effective means of reducing the access time which. of course, necessitates
complication of the controller.

 

Figure 21. Use of Buffer Registers in a Bubble Integrated Circuit for
Reducing Access Time

Key:
1. Generator current 8. Exchange switch
2. Generator No 2 9. Buffer registers
3. Input unit No 2 10. Buffer register current
6. Passive annihilator 11. Exchange current
5. Readout unit No l 12. Storage register current
6. Output voltage 13. Storage registers

7. Universal switch
Conclusion

The above reflects the results of only the first stage in the development of

bubble integrated circuits and memories based on them. Already now the feasibility
is clearly obvious of extensively using bubble memories in instrument making.
control systems and computer equipment, especially taking into account the real

114

FORlﬂﬂﬂK1A1.USEIMNLV
IN)R OFFICJAI.USI3(NHLY

prospects for reducing the unit cost, improving the speed of response and reli-
ability and expanding the functional capabilities of. bubble mories.

The highest technical and economic result from the use of bubble memories can be
achieved only if the potential capabilities and distinctive features of these
memories are taken into account as early as the stage of designing a new instru-
ment, unit, computer or system.

At the present time the most promising areas or application or bubble memories are
the following: the bulk storage of microcomputers and microprocessor systems;

a relatively high-speed computer butter storage between the randomraccess memory
and main external storage; the bulk storage of dispersed computing, control end
data processing systems, e.g., s terminal storage; reliable and compact storage

of modified control programs, a.g., in systems for the numerical program control
of machine tools; and measuring and testing instruments with mathematical process-
ing of measurement results.

In the next few years must be expected the appearance of bubble devices which
accomplish not only the storage but also the processing of information, including
for performing the functions indicated in the introduction.

Bibliography

1. Vonsovskiy. S.V. "Magnetism" [Magnetism], Moscow, Hanks, 1971, p 1031.

2. Minnick, R.c. et a1. "Magnetic Bubble Computer Systems," APIPS PROC., Vol
41. pp 1279-1298.

3. Naden, R.A. "One-Chip Stored-Program Magnetic Bubble Processor" in "Proc.
1838 National Aerospace and Electronic Conf.," 1974, p ‘2.

6. Balbashov, A.M. and Chervonenkis, A.Ya. "Msgnitnyye materialy dlya mikro-
elektroniki" [Magnetic Materials for Microelectronics], Moscow, Energiys,
1979, p 216.

5. Boysrchenkov, M.A., Prokhornv, N.L., Rayev, V.K. and Rozental', Yu.D.
"Magnitnyye domennyye logischekiye i zapominayushchiye ustroystva" [Magnetic
Domain Logic and Memory Units], Moscow, Energiya, 1976, p 176.

6. Bobek. E. and Della Torre. E. "Tsilindricheskiye magnitnyye domeny" [Magnetic
Bubbles], Moscow. Bnergiya, 1977, p 192.

7. O'Dell, T. "Magnitnyye domeny vysokoy podvizhnosti" [High-Mobility Magnetic
Domains]. Moscow, Mir, 1978, p 200.

8. Bar'yakhtar, V.G. "Magnetic Bubbles," USPEKHI FIZICHESKIKH NAUK, Vol 121,
No 4, 1977, pp 593-628.

9. Lisovskiy. P.V. "Pizika tsilindricheskikh magnitnyye domenov" [Physics of
Magnetic Bubbles]. Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1979, p 192.

115

INDR‘OFFICJA1.lﬂ5li(NNLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

220

23.

24.

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thiele. A.A. et: al. "the Energy and General Translation force of
Cylindrical Magnetic Domains," BSIJ, Vol 50. No 3. 1971, pp 711-726.

Brown, 3.11. et a1. "High-Density Devices Using Pemlloy Propagation of
Wall-Coded Bubbles," IEBE TRANS. 0N HAWKS, Vol 15, No 6, 1979, pp 1501-
1506.

Dudorov, V'.N., Randoehkin, V.V. and Telesnin, RN. "Synthesis and Physical
Properties of Single-Crystal Films of Rare Earth ferrite Garnets." USPEKBI
r121cussx1xn usux. Vol 122. No a. 1977. pp 253-293.

Doyle. H.D. et al. "A Comparison of Prequency Limited Bubble Device Per-
formance and Material Characteristics," IKE! TRANS. ON MAGNETICS, Vol 16,
1978. pp 303-305.

Breed, D.J. et al. "New Bubble Materials with High Peak Velocity," 188]!
TRANS. ON MAGNETICS, Vol 13, No '5, 1977, pp 1087-1094.

Makino, B. and Hibya, '1‘. "Comparison of Eight Mixed Garnet Systems for
7 ml Period Bubble Devices," J. APPL. PHYS., V01 50, No 11, 1979, pp 7815-
7817. .

Kestigian, M. et a1. "Past, Present and Future Smell Bubble Diameter
Magnetic Memory Materials," .1. APPL. PHYS., Vol 50, No 3. 1979, pp 2161-2166.

Blank, 8.1.. et a1. “Design and Development of Single-Layer Ioniqalantable
Seal]. Bubble Materials for Magnetic Bubble Devices," J. APPL. PHYS., Vol 50,
No 3. 1979. PP 2155-2160.

Dimyan, M.Y. and Hubbell, H.C. "Comparison Between the Propagation Margins
of Asymtrical chevron and Half-Disk Circuits at 100 kHz." J. APPL. PHYS.,
Vol 69, No 3, 1978, pp 1900-1907.

Il'yashenko, 3.1. et al. "Optoelectrical Study of Bubble Propagation in
Field Access Devices," IBEB TRANS. MAGNETICS, Vol 15, No 3, 1978, pp 1120-
1123.

Lomov, L.S., Perinov, Ye.P. and Chirkin, 0.x. "Plsgxuetic Bubble Integrated
Circuits," ELEKTRONNAYA PROMYSHLENNOST', No 6 (60), 1977, pp 65-75.

Yoshiai, K. et el. "Design and Characterization of 3 un Bubble Menory Chips
Using Patterns," J. APPL. PHYS., Vol «‘09, No 3, 1978, pp 1918-1923.

Orihara, S. et al. "An 8 um Period Bubble Memory Device with Relaxed
Function 08013113," 1283 TRANS. MAGNETICS, V01 15, No 6, 1979, pp 1692-1696.

Bullock, D.C. et a1. "Design and Pabrication of Large Capacity Bubble
Memory Devices," IEEE TRANS. WICS. V01 15, No 6, 1979, pp 1697-1702.

Hayes, v.3. "Single-Chip Bubble Memory Packaging,“ Inna trans. MAGNETICS,
Vol 15, No 6, 1979. pp 1901-1903.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
25.

26.

270

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

60.

FCIICHﬂﬁCIAl.lﬂiE(MNLY

Ysmigishi. K. et al. "A New Proposal on Field-Access Bubble Drives,"
1333 TRANS. MAGNETICS. V01 11, No 1, 1975, pp 16-20.

Bonyhard, P.I. "A Novel Major/Minor Loop Memory Chip Organization for
High Performance Without Block Replication," J. APPL. PHYS., Vol 50, No 3,
1979, pp 2213-2215.

Hilliams, J.B. "Magnetic Bubble Memory in Telephone Systems" in “Proc.
Conf. 'Electro'," 1977, pp 12-13.

Yamagishi, K. “The Progress of Magnetic Bubble Development in Japsn" in
"Proc. 3rd USA-Japan Computer Cont.," 1978.

Becker, r. J. et al. "An 8 x 105 31: Bubble Hungry c.11 for Spacecraft
Applications“ in "Digests 1980 tntermag. Conf., N. Y.," 1980. pp 12-2 [as
published].

Ypma, J.E., Gergis, 1.8. and Archer, J.L. "64K Fast Access Chip Design,"
PROC. AIP, Vol 29. 1976, pp 51-53.

"Single-Chip Magnetic Bubble Memories with a ZSO-kBit Capacity," ELEKTRONIKA,
No 17, 1978, pp 3-5.

Dzhordzh, P.K. and Reyling, Dzh. "Magnetic Bubble Memories-State of the
Art and Development Prospects," BLEKTRDNIKA, No 16, 1979, pp 23-26.

Meviti. 0.x. "Use of Bubble Memories in s Bulk Storage," ELEKTRONIKA, No 7,
1979. PP 36-43.

Koks, Dzh. "Series of Three Bubble Memories with High Packaging Density
and a Complete Set of Interface Integrated Circuits," BLEXTRONIKA, No 23,
1979. pp 41-69.

Brsyson, D. et a1. "Set of Large-Scale Integrated Circuits for Joint Use
with Bubble Memories," ELEKTRORIKA, No 9. 1979, pp 23-32.

"Fujitsu Bubble Memory" (firm's catalogue). 1979.

Chester, M. "Magnetic Bubble Memory Update," COMPUTER DESIGN, No 5, 1980,
pp 232-236.

Sterner. R.L. "Bubble Memories for Spacecraft Data Recorders” in "Digests
Intermsg Conf.," Csl., 1977.

Kartsev. M.A. "Arkhitektura tsifrovykh vychislitel'nykh msshin" [Architecture
of Digital Computers], Moscow, Nsuks, 1978, p 296.

Kryder, M.N. "Magnetic Bubble Device Scaling and Density Limits," 1338
TRANS. MAGNETICS, V01 15, No 3, 1979, pp 1009-1016.

117

INDR'OFIHCLAL.USE(MHLY
41.

43.

44.

55.

46.

67.

68.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

FOR'0FFKJA1.USE(M9LY

Milchev. Yth. and Chirkin. G.K. "Ion-Implanted Structure for Propagation
of Cylindrical Magnetic Domains," ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELEKIRONIKA, No 12,
1978, pp 68-69.

Nelson, T.J. et a1. "Design of Bubble Device Elements Employing Ion-
Implanted Propagation Patterns," BELL SYSTEM TECH“. J., V01 59, No 2, 1980,
pp 229-257.

Argyle, 8.8. and De Luca, J.C. "Bubble Autonotion Channels by Laser Anneal-
ing" in "Digests Internag Con£., N.Y.," 1980, p 27-2.

Ahn, K.Y. et al. "Fabrication of SLM Conductor-First 2 un Bubble Devices,"
IKE! TRANS. MAGNETICS, V01 15, No 5, 1979, pp 1333-1335.

Dekker, E.h.L.G. et a1. "Conductor and Transfer-Gate Performance of Single-
Mask Field-Current Access Magnetic-Bubble Devices," J. APPL. PHYS., Vol 59,
No 3, 1978, pp 1927-1929.

Ahn, K.Y. and Kane, s.M. "Toward a Single-Mask Processing of Ioninplanted
Bubble Devices," IEEE TRANS. MAGNETICS, Vol 15, No 6, 1979. PP 1648-1650.

Zebrowski, J.J. and ﬂunpherey, P.B. "Dynamic Behavior of Domain Halls in
Double Layer Self-Biasing Garnet Pilma," IEEE TRANS. MAGNETICS. Vol 15, No 6,
1979, pp 1915-1921.

Bobeck, A.H. et a1. "Current-Access Magnetic Bubble Circuits," BELL SYSTEM
recu. 1.. Vol 58, No 6, 1979, pp 1453-1540.

Boyarchenkov, M.A., Vasil'yeva, N.P. and Rozsntal', Yu.D. "Logicheskiye
ustroystva na nagnitnykh sredakh a upravlyayeayn dvizheniyen donsnov" [Logic
Devices Employing Magnetic Media with Controlled Motion of Domains], Moscow,
Energiys, 1978, p 160.

Teyerman, V.A. and Titov, G.V. "Circuits with Selective Accessing of In-
formation for Magnetic Bubble Meaories." ZARUBEZHNAYA ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA.
No 16, 1979, pp 3-45.

Chang, a. ”Major Activity in Magnetic’Bubble Technology," COMPUTER DESIGN,
No 11, 1979, pp 117-125.

Lee. S.Y. and Chang, H. "Associative-Search Bubble Devices for Content-
Addressible Memory and Array Logic," IEEE TRANS. COMPUTERS, Vol 28, No 9,
1979. pp 627-637.

Bongiovanni, C.C. and Luccio, P. "Peruutation of Data Blocks in a Bubble
Memory," COMMUN. ABM, Vol 22, No l, 1979, pp 21-25.

118

FOR OFFKJA1.USE¢NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

54. Lin, w.s. and Jino, )1. "Intelligent nagnetic Bubble Hemories and Their
Applications in Data Base Management Systems," rm TRANS. COMPUTERS, V01 28,
No 12. 1979, pp 888-906.

COPYRIGHT: Taentral'nyy nauchno-iesledovatel'skiy inatitut infomtaii 1 tekhniko-
ekononicheakikh isaledovaniy priborostroyeniya. aredstv avtomtizatsii i aisten
upravleniya (TsNII'l'BIpriborostroyeniya), 1981

8831
(250: 1860/59

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.355 (088.8)

DEVICE FOR TAKING MEDIAN VALUE
Moscow OPISANIYE ImBRETENIYA 702381 in Russian 7 Dec 79

[Description of USSR Patent No 702381 by LI. Kerbnikov, NJ. Kengazetdinov
and H.A. Rozenblat, filed 6 Jun 78, published 7 Dec 79. class 6 06 G 7/12]

[Text] This invention is in the areaof automation, computing and measure-eat
technology and can he used in high reliability, high precision systems for mass-
uring and transmitting analog signals.

There exist devices which take the asdisn value [1] which extract the median from
an ordered sequence of input signals. These devices contain an odd nulber of
channels operating in parallel whose outputs are contained and connected to a con-
non load.

The closest known median-extracting device to the proposed invention is that des-
cribed in (2], which has in each nonlinear conversion channel an amplifier which
is connected through a current liaiter to the load and which has co-on negative
feedback.

In this device. the amplifier in each channel can be in thelinear region under
the condition ‘ "

’("ini'mma‘i I‘ ‘o '
(1)
where "in -- voltage at input of ith‘channel;
nous-wikwnuout)w~
”’(°1"¢'°out~)';.--o. (2)
(“1“ Muout )‘nml‘

- device output voltage;
K1 - gain of shorted amplifier of ith channel;
to - size of linear zone of current liniter;
2n+l - nuaber of channels operating in parallel.

When condition (1) is not set, the amplifiers in the nonlinear conversion I
channels are saturated. In practice, when K >> 1, only one channel is

120

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operating in the linear region, while the amplifiers in the other channels are
saturated. The saturated condition of the amplifiers has no effect when

dc signals are being converted, since there is always at least one amplifier
in the linear state.

When processing time-varying input signals (especially if the signals are
close to one another), condition (1) is necessarily violated for the channel
in the linear condition due to changes in frequency and level of input signal
and variation in K from amplifier to amplifier. This causes the channels to
be switched abruptly. When this happens. the amplifier which had been in the
linear region is saturated, and an amplifier in another channel for which
condition (1) is met must be switched to the linear condition. However,
there is a delay involved in the latter amplifier eating the saturated con-
dition. The time difference between the entry of the amplifier into the
saturated condition and its exit from that condition causes excursions of
the voltage at the output of the reproducing device, the presence of which

constricts significantly the frequency response of undistorted signal
transnission.

The purpose of the present invention is to increase the speed of the device
and expand the operating frequency band.

This goal is achieved by adding a smoothing capacitor in parallel with the
current limiter to the median-extraction device, which contains 2n ri- 1
channels, each of which consists of a series-connected input scaling resistor,
amplifier and current limiter, the output of which is connected to the output

of the device and also to the input of the amplifier through a scaling
feedback register.

The drawing shows the functional diagram of the device for extracting the
median value.

Each channel of the device contains input scaling resistor l, amplifier 2,
current limiter 3, scaling feedback resister lo and smoothing capacitor 5.

Amplifier 2 in each channel is connected to the cannon load through a
parallel network (capacitor 5 - current limiter 3).

The device operates as follows.

When channels are switched, the change in the voltage at the output of the
anplifier which had been in the linear region passes through smoothing
capacitor 5 and resister 4 to the input of that amplifier, thus causing

it to take longer for the amplifier to become saturated. When the times
required for the amplifier to reach the saturated state and to exit that

state are the same (which is easily achieved by selecting the value of
capacitor 5), the distortions at the output of the device are fully eliminated,
and the operating frequency band is increased to the bandwidth of a single
amplifier used in its channels.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of the capacitor makes it possible to expand the operating frequency
band maximally (up to the bandwidth of the amplifiers used) at minimun cost
(one additional element per channel), while the operating frequency band of

the prototype is narrower than the bandwidths of the amplifiers used in it
by a factor of 2-4.

Patent Clains

A device for extracting a median value, consisting of 2n + 1 parallel channels,
each of which consists of series-connected input scaling resister, amplifier
and current limiter, the output of which is connected to the output of the
device and also through feedback scaling resistor to the input of the amplifier,
distinguished by the fact that in order to increase speed and expand operating

bandwidth, each channel contains a smoothing capacitor connected in parallel
to the current limiter.

Information Sources
Used in Evaluation

1. Gil'bo, Ye.P., Chelpakov, 1.8. "Obrabotka signalov na osnove uporyadochennogo

vybora" [Signal Processing Based on Ordered Selection]. Moscow, Sovetskoye radio,
1975.

2. UK Patent No 1362378, class NXI G b 6. published 1974 (prototype).

 

6900
CSO: 8144/0218-8

122

INDRIOFFICJAL USEZCNQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MICROPROCESSOR PSYCIIODIAGNOSTIC DEVICE PATENT

Moscow OTKRYTIYA. IZOBRETENIYA, PROHYSWB OBMZTSY, TOVARNYYE ZNAKI
in Russian No 29, 1981 (signed to press 10 Jul 81) p 296

[Text) Patent No 11032

Claim No 20122
Class 26-02

Microprocessor Psychodiagnontic Device

Authors! P. I. Romanov, N. v. Danilin, u. u. Zubov, P. x. Malyutin. v. A. Herkulov,
A. V. Sturshikov and H. A. Khadzhiakhnetov

Priorlty as of 1 August 1979

 
  

      

l‘)il-'~Au'\r M

1 ‘~;1~;.; :,,L
5' F (“87173

13h,» '7‘"
:5

     

 

COPYRIGHT: VNIIPI, 1981

C80: 1860/80- P

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CEREAIR ASPBCIS OF PHOTOGRAPHY,
MOTION PICTURES AND “VISION

UDc 621.397.2
TV cm'roua pmscroa

Hoscou rmm xmo I TEEVIDUIYA in Russian No 9. Sep 81 pp ‘60-‘53

Artic1s by A. v. Anen'in. ‘1'. s. Gryaznovs and H. N. Stinov, Institute of
lectricai Engineering of Comunications. Novosibirsk]

[Text] (me way of increasing the transit capacity of TV commnications channels
is to use adaptive TV systems capable. (depending upon the subject of the trans-
mitted picture, dimensions of picture parts. the presence or absence of aovenents
etc.), of controlling the TV channel parameters automatically. This makes it
possible to elisinate redundancy in the transaitted data and nultiplex the com-
nunicaticns channel with additional data. Contour and motion detectors my serve
as picture analysers of such adaptive system. The first are used to evaluate
the contour diaensions of the picture parts end their conplexity (presence of
bends. sharp angles) and. therefore. the necessary width of the transmission band
of the TV channel; the second are used to evaluate the speed of aovenalt of the
picture elements and. therefore. the possibility of such mltiplexins in tile at
which there will be a hardly noticeable or no stroboscopic effect in the repro-
duced picture.

This paper considers one possible variation of the Ii‘ contour detector, 1.. which
the principle of electronic-optical filtration (nor) is used. This nethod is the
simplest from the technical ilplsasntation viewpoint and mites possible its wide
use of standard TV equipment in the device.

As is well known, the statistical distribution of contour eleaents of real pic-
tures have axisa in the vertical and horizontal directions: therefore, the prob-
les of separating full contours can be considered solved to a great degree of
authenticity if the problem of separating the vertical and horizontal boundaries

of the contours is solved. The proposed device uses the filtration properties

of the electron bean of an electron bean tube which has a certain aperture [1.2.3].
As shown in [It]. the siaplest filter capable of solving the problea of separating
contour boundaries is electron-optical shading (shading focus). -

The spectral function of mergy distribution in the shading aperture of the been
for a ncrml law my be described by expression (“J

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0’ a)

3
?(x.v)-%up‘—(;ﬁ+ﬁ?)]. (I)

where h and 3‘: are respectively horizontal and vertical dissnsions of the shading.

As follows fros (1). depending upon the orientation of the shading with respect to
the scanning direction. it my fulfill the function of the lover (5553) as

well as the upper spatial frequencies —(‘:>.’s)- The nor isplessntation process
is shown in Fig. i. ‘

The shading aperture of the electron been of rsceivi electron-boas tube can be
formed by a single or double quadrupole ngnetic loo 5]. placed in the neck of
the tube where there is no deflecting field.

The orientation of the shading fros frees to franc is deterained by the direction
of the current in the coils of the quadrupole lens. If. in the first ire-e. the
shading is oriented nornlly to the scanning direction and the horiaontal boundar-
ies of the contours are separated. then in the second frsse. with a horisontal
orientation of the shading. the vertical boundaries of the contours are separated.

  

/////////////

       

Fig. l. Isplesentatinn of electron~optical filtration in the TV receiving tube.
1 -- initial pictures 2. 3 -- for polarity inversion of adjacent lines and
elements and undistorted bean aperture: ‘0, 5 -- at nor output of lower and upper
boundaries.

125

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 2. Structural arrange-ant of a device for separating contours of optical
objects.

a. 381 d . (3?
b. KSI e. Video output
c. SCI

A two-gradation operating node is used in the device in which the output signal
can assume only two values. '1.“ (white level) and “0" (black level). Reducing
the signal to two grades (limiting the video signal output of the caaera) it:-
proves the signal/noise ratio and eliminates the nonunifornity of the video signal.
hnreover. processing the video signal in the digital for- is silplii‘ied consider-
ably. The block diagral of the device is shown in Fig. 2. and Fig. 3 shows the
signal tine diagrass at corresponding points of Fig. 2.

Video monitoring device 13 and TV transnitting tube canera fora an optically
coupled pair ((BP).

The vertical boundary signal is foraed as follows.

The output signal tron TV casera i is sent to video algal processing unit 2 in
which the level of black is established. Pros the processing unit the signal is
sent to anplifier-lisiter 3 which reduces it to the two-gradation torn. To in-
prove the transition boundaries fro- black to white and back. the output signal

of the amplifier-limiter is sent to toning device ‘6. To nke possible the transi-
tion from black to white and back. it is necessary to have direct, as well as in-
verse video signals for which purpose inverter 5 is introduced in the circuit.
Video signals are sent fro- the forning device to the strobing pulse toner 6

that forms the pulses into deco-position elesents t3" long. with the start of these

pulses coinciding with the boundaries of changes in the brightness of the picture.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m ”um «mm: (1)

---- '3' ET“;
:E' ' '- I I
0- - ;- ‘
0 ’_l ’ c

<2) I I I
WHIIIIIIIIIIIII IIIII IIII IIIII I.

IIIHWI

   

 
   

I -C

Fig. 3. Tile diagram of the eeperetion process of vertical UPI end hprisontel 01',

contour boundaries
1. Threshold boundaries 3.
u

2. t9.” . kai

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To obtain elesent-by-elenent switching. an ispact excitation oscillator 7 is in-
troduced in the circuit which is synchronized by horizontal sync pulses (ﬁl). The
oscillation period of the oscillator is equal to the tins of decomposition elenent
t 3:! . Pros the inpact excitation oscillator the signal is sent to trigger 8 and

we have syuetrical pulses at the trigger output with a period equal to two do-
composition elelents 2t”, . i.e.. an elsnent-by-elsnent switching is practically
inplessnted.

If the initial picture contains the vertical boundary of the brightness drop. then
a signal appears at the output of etrobing pulse for-er 6 that disconnects inpact
excitation oscillator 7 for the duration of the decomposition element. In this
case, at the trigger 8 output. two adjacent elenents of the horisontal line have
the sale polarity at the assent the strobing pulse arrives. It the initial pic-
ture does not contaln the vertical boundary of brightness drop, then there is no
strobing signal, the oscillation node of the inpact excitation oscillator does not
change and this seen: that the signals of all adjacent elenents of each horizontal
line have different polarities.

The forsation of the horimntal boundary signal occurs as follows. The video sig-
nal from processing unit 2 is sent to anplifier-liniter 16 which changes it to the
two-gradation fora. Then the signal passes through forning device 17 and invert-
er 18. The direct and inverse video signals proceed to electronic switch 19 con-
trolled by s synetrical pulse with period Zt‘ iron trigger i5. initiated by

horizontal sync pulse (331). As a result. direct and inverse signals in turn ap-

pear at the output of the electronic switch. If the initial picture contains

a horizontal boundary brightness drop. the signal polarities of two sdJsCent lines
coincide where the drops occur. when there is no horizontal boundary of bright—
ness drop in the initial picture. the video signal polarities of adjacent lines
are different.

A8 noted previously. the infatuation on the full contour say be obtained by sepa-
rating i‘ron the video signal one infornation trans about the vertical boundaries
and another one about the horizontal boundaries. For this purpose. the output
signals fro- elenent-by-elenent switching trigger 8 and line electronic switch 19
are sent to line electronic switch 9 controlled by syuetricsl pulses with period
ZTk Pros trigger ii. The switch output simal is anplified by prealplitisr 10

and is then sent to nonlinear adder 12 where quenching pulses SCI are nixed into
it. The video signal formed in this unner is sent to video nonitoring device

13 which is a cosponent part of the coupled pair USP). The (BP in this case
fulfills two basic functions: first. it provides for the output of intonation

on the contours in the fora of electrical signals. and secondly. due to the inertia
of the transnitting tube of USP caners 1n. the alternation of infatuation on the
horizontal and vertical boundaries of the contours mos trans to frase are trans-
forsed into continouous inforntion.

The cortent direction in the quadru le magnetic lens 21 coils. placed in the neck
of the VKU [Video monitoring device (6? kinescope. not change m. trans to

trees. This is achieved by a device for controlling quadrupole lens 20. done by

128

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

voltage-current converter [6] controlled by synetrical pulses with a period of
2'1‘k produced by trigger ii.

A characteristic feature of the device is that. depending upon the spatial dis-
position of the initial picture elenents. the contour boundaries observed on the

M) USP screen say be dark or light with respect to background brightness.
The instantaneous brightness of the background Bop (averaging the brightness of

two adjacent lines or elelents when scanned by the shading aperture) and of the
vertical BB and horizontal Br boundaries for double scanning of the phosphorus

elements with a high afterﬂow tile ’1’.” is evaluated by expressions:

B'.-o.s a... up (-«1,). fags... anupx—rlgt

where 1” is the ties constant of the phosphorus glow of the V!!! kinescopel there-

fore. the brightness of light boundaries is found to be twice that of the back-
ground. while the brightness of the dark boundaries is equal to zero (B190), when

the sodulation characteristic of the kinescope is fully utilized. In this case.
the output signal of caners 06? is found to have three gradations (”WA .3).

me of the basic parameters of the device is the contrast sensitivity which say be
evaluated by the sininus signal/noise ratio that provides for a reliable separa-

tion of the optical object contours. For a small number of gradations. the fol-
lowing expression [7] is true:

1:7?“- Vﬂnldllsus'i'” . (2)

here k_= coefficient that takes into account the reliability of detecting the
boundary signal.

Although (2) is true for linear systess in which there are no gradation distortions
( Y =1). it say be used to sole approxintion at the given case because‘Y‘sPrv i.

—-

Value kn takes into account the presence of noises depending. as well as not de-
pending. on the signal: therefore [7]:

u
qu. c We.

where lower boundary k. is set for systems in which there are no noises related

directly to the signal (only external noises are present). while upper boundary It
is for systess in which the noises are related directly to the signal. For
estimting calculations, it my be assunsd that Rik.

129

N3 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POE OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Coefficient k determines the probability of detecting the signal of bomdary pc

in a given interval of the (6? output signal. When relating k and pc. deternined
by the probability interval. assuaing pc=i-10'5 (error probability of 10'5 is
entirely acce table for Inchine data processing of contours) we will find he: “32.
According to 2), in this case .ani‘.

The obtained value hug‘sust be fulfilled for the highest frequency cosponents of

the boundary simal. in this case for the signal of vertical boundaries that have
frequencies of fB=6.5 negaﬁz of the standard TV channel. if a vidicon transmit-

ting cal-era is used in the (SP. the basic factors influencing the tun will be the

noises of the output preaaplifier stage (vidicon noises are insignificant and nay
be neglected). as well as aperture distortions of the vidicon. The first deter-
nine the value of the equivalent noise current at the preanplifier input and the
second -- the reduction in the value of the signal current due to the aperture-
frequency characteristic of the vidicon.

By using a silple antinoise correction and a field effect transistor at the input
stage. the value of the equivalent noise current at the preanplifier input can be
8 0

obtained by expression f
‘T
thin—H! [tiawiu H "R°']dr. (a)

where 1|»;- equivalent quadratic nean of noise current of the field effect transis-
tor; 1m: -- equivalent quadratic leans of noise enf of the field effect
transistor; R -- resistance of vidicon load; c -- capacitance at uplifier input
which includes the capacitance of the wiring. the input capacitance of the field
effect transistor and the capacitance of the vidicon target with respect to the
transistor source.

in accordance with (3). the aperture-frequency characteristic of the vidicon for
Gaussian distribution of mergy in the electron beam

3
°“'"""°"P[-(‘n"i£—) ]. (4)
where a.-2r.ld -- relative transverse dinension of the electron bean; r -- its

9
radius; 8 =h/s -- scanning pitch; § III/s'f/fB -- relative scanning frequency.

Using (3) and (u). the following expression can be used for the sisal/noise ratio:

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL 083 MY

[c _ M: 2

.- ~°" H“)
«1; , a." ‘ .(5)
R “n+7?" H's-swap

   
 
 

______ ____.__..._

, I . III-I-I-I-I-
I I J 0 5 6 7

19).,

Fig. 16. Relationship between the algal/noise ratio of high frequency coaponents
of the contour boundary signal and trans-lesion bandwidth of the device.

1. Vidicon mu: 5 3. twang)
2. Vidicon 1.11418 ‘

Fig. 1‘ shows the relationship between the sisal/noise ratio of high frequency

cosponents of the contour bound signal and the tranasission band of the device
designed on the basis of foraulfij) In calculating curves in Fig. lb. the fol-
lowing paraseter values were used: ic=0.2'aicroalpoa 0820 picofarede: R=i segohaa

the field effect transistor was -
a— -16 a .9

In the operating node, taking into account the effect of reading the front edge of
the bean and for standard raster dimensions up; 0.8 for 1.1.1615 and 0."!— 0.6 for

1.11618.

It may be seen from Fig. I; that for £336.5 negaﬂz values Y =7 and '9’ =14 do not
reach the necessary value of 1? =15. However. if the transaiesioo band is

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reduced to 6.2 negaHs (quality indicators of the device will be practically pre-
served). it is possible to reach the required values of 1"” for the 05? casera

using the LIMB vidicon. It follows from what was stated above that when using a
device for separating contours in adaptive TV consunications channels. higher
resolution vidicons should be used in the USP calera.

An experiaental nodel of a device for separating contours nude with an arrangement
as per Fig. 2 had the following characteristics.

Swing of the output signal boundaries with load P 3150 ohm. not less than 0.5
volts.

Signal/noise ratio for vertical boundary of contour not lees than 18 (vidicon
1.3618 used in the USP caners).

Swings of control signals not less than 1.5 volts.

The investigations mde confirmed the possibility of using the setth of electron-
nptlcal filtration in detectors of full contours of optical objects. which lake it
possible to create them on the basis of adaptive TV comnicatione channels.

In conclusion, it must be noted that the method described for separating contours
by the electron-optic filtration ssthod may be isplessnted by two arrangesente.
In the first. electron-optical filtration is used directly in the TV transsitting
tube as considered above. In the second case. it is necessary to have a spatial
coupling between the basic TV camera and the canera for contour separation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

i. Harkovich, H. 6.: Ol'khovitskiy, L. Au Teukkerlan, I. I.“ Electron-Optical
Filtration contours." TREND“ KING I TEBVIDBIIYA. 1965. No 7, pp “1-164.

2. Baykin. I. A. "Spatial Filtration of Pictures by Sisultaneous Scanning with
Apertures of Different Dimensions and Shapes." Probless of Radioelectronice,
series “Tekhnika televideniya.’ 1960. No 1‘.

3. Hezhov. F. D.; Noshchenko. V. 8.; Sersdinskiy. A. V. 'Two-Dimsional Filter
for Suppressing Interferences in TV Pictures.“ Problem on Radioelectrcnics.
series ‘Tekhnika televidenlya.“ 1968. No 1.

a. Gorelik. S. In: Kate. 3. 14. ”Electron Bean Tubes in Data Processing Systems."
Hoscow, ”magma." 1977.

5. Harkovich. u. a. “Short Double. Four. 31x4. Right-Pole Lenses as Aberration
Correctors when Deflecting Electron Beans.“ ZhTF[Journa1 of Technical Physics].
1972. No I. pp lu2-1W.

6. Katayev, S. L: Uvarov, N. 3. “Voltage to Current Conversion for ET [Elec-
tron Bea- Tube]. rmm KDIO I TEEVIDENIYA. 1974. No 3. pp 55-57.

132

FOR OYPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ML!

7. Curovich, 8. B. "Efficiency and Smaltlvity of TV System. " Leningrad.
“Margin.“ 1964.

8. Gorshberg. A. Ye. 'rmallttin; TV Taboo with Intu'nal Photocffoct.‘ laminar“.
”margin.” 1973.

9. Ryftin. Ya. A. "TV System,“ Moscow, ”Sov, radio,“ 1967.
COPYRIGHI‘: "Telmnlka Rim 1 tolevidoniya'. 1981

2291
cam 1860/77

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621397.13

PAEAHE‘I‘ER SEMICN 0F OPTICAL SYSTEIB FOR SCANNING RMOIXICING DEVICE WITH
KINESCOPB

Moscow TENN!“ KIND I Tﬂab‘VIDHIYA in Russian No 9. Sep 81- pp 37-39

Article by v, s, Babenko and A. I. Kravets. Institute of Civil Aviation
ngineers. Kiev]

LText] Scanning systems (TVS) include systems with conparatively large scanning
angles along the horizontal (100° and greater). The scanning zone is increased
and the efficiency of spatial perception is raised in scanning TVS which is es-
pecinlly important in several TV applications. In developing scanning TV systems
it is necessary to solve a number of cosplicated problems related to the develop-
ment of the general principles of scanning TV and the creation of scanning
Eran3aitting cameras. a communications channel and reproducing scanning devices
PW Q

in spite of the abundance of various projects. the closest to realisation are
seaming TV systems of the multichannel type. Multichannel PVU are used in such
systems for the reproduction of pictures. The general visual field in such PVU
is. divided optically in three parts and is transmitted over three parallel chan-
nels. The scanned picture is reproduced either on a cylindrical screen by sense
of three TV projectors. or by several kinescopes. The basic shortcomings of pro-
Jection PVU are awkwardness, complexity and high cost. The shortcoaing of PVU
using kineecopes is the relatively short observation distance and the presence of
visible seams in the picture at the Junction zone of the screws. Multichannel
PVU with collieation system kineacopee are free from such shortconings. Such
systems. acting as magtifiers. site it possible to separate the pictures fro- the
kinescope screws and transfer them comparatively long distances. In this case,
parameters or the system may be selected so that there are no seaae at the bound-
aries of the partial pictures. This ilproves the reproduction characteristics of
space sharply and increases the scanning effect of the Pill].

u. will consider the basic relationships for the optical part of this type of PVU
and will determine the conditions that its paraneters lust satisfy. lie consider
the dimensions and other. parameters or partial pictures in the kinescopes and the
collimation systems equal. while the observation angles of the partial pictures
are considered comparatively small.

13’.

1'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic arrangement of the three-channel projection system (top view) of the PVU.
satisfying these conditions is shown in Fig. i.

 

Fig. 1. Basic projection system (top view) for a three-channel PW.

Partial pictures are formed on kinsscope screens A1. A2 and A3. These pictures
are viewed by the observer hos point 0 through lenses L . L2 and L3. The virtual
ingee A1. A2 and A3 viewed by the observer are amplified and carried a coupon-

tively large distance. Uith a correct choice of the parasstsrs of the projection
systes. the partial virtual pictures are found to be Joined.

The course of beans in the channel for forming one partial picture is shown in
Fig. 2. In calculating the dissnsions of the projection system. it is necessary

to take into account the conditions for Joining the pictures on the kinsscops

screens and the virtual pictures: the virtual partial pictures along the horisontal;
and the collimtion lenses along the horisontal. The basic forsulas relating to
the optical paraseters of an n-channelPVU are shown in the Table.

Depending upon the value of b n /f' the following cases are possible:

1” /f' > i. i.e.. the eye of the observer is at a distance fro. the lens that
exceeds the focal distance. and b/bJ, < 1:

1,1 /f'=i. i.e.. the eye of the observer is located at the focus of the lens and
b/bn =1;
lﬂ/f'4 1. i.e.. the eye of the observer is located a slaller than focal distance

mm the lens and b/b,,> 1.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 2. Course of beans and basic values that determine the projection arrange-
nent of the partial picture.

The analysis of the cited expressions indicates that the smllest optical distor-
tions and the greatest boundaries for possible location of the observer's eye with
respect to the lure corresponds to the case where the observer is renewed fro- the
lens by a distance that exceeds the focal distance. However, in this case. the
angles of the viewed partial pictures are coaparativsly small (2"; =10 to 20°):

therefore, a fairly large number of kinescopas lust be used in the Pill]. The fact
that the “.1. should be wider than the picture on the kinescope screen should also
be considered a drawback. 0! interest is the case where the observer is located
in the focal plane of the lens since conditions for Joining the elements of the

optical systen in this variation do not depend on anplification. But such a system
may be realised only when the lens paraaetsrs satisfy relationship

. .slz r‘u it”

In the third case (distance between observer and lens is less than the focal dis-
tance). large viewing angles 2U}. my be obtained with a snll number of kine-

sopes. But under such conditions. various kinds of optical picture distortions
are more prominent and the boundaries of possible spatial location of the observ-
er's eye are ninilal.

In calculating the PVU projection systea. horisontal 2|!r and vertical 2% angles

of the pictures viewed are initial. The remaining values are partially given and
partially determined. The following variations of disensional calculation are

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pa; atgrs

Prinz-y partial
pictures:
width
height
distance between
centers of adjacent
kineecope screens

Lenses
focal distance
width

height

Projection system
distance from lens
to kinescope screen
distance from lens
to observer
systen amplification

Virtual ilege
width
height
distance fro- lens

Observations
general horizontal
viewing angle
horizontal angle of
partial picture view-
ing
vertical viewing an-
gle
viewing distance

‘9' ’a+‘-b’/2l¢v

22m

t-[o,+2l'(v-Imv;]lv
hulha+’f'(V—l)i".lv
4-2(ln+e)slnv;

r -l,lV(b/b,.)- "/0 -V)
’1! " ”a '1 U;
h. - 2a. (3 v;

“-I’W-mv
l=a, wag/me;
' 6‘
v- (H- (-5-) ”gunman-w)
0': ov=21,t¢v;

n'=nv—2I,uw. .
a' -(b-2mv;)mt¢ v.-b/r)

2v, - any;

2w; + 2nch (0/21,)

2" 3 2 "Ct! (II/2!.)

o

I’

*Valuee in formulas explained in Fig. 2.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

case. the position of the elements of the projection systen and the dilsnsione
of the pictures on the kinescope scream are deternined

 

Fig. 3. Nonogran for calculating the basic PVU paranoters.

To illustrate the nature of the relationships and to evaluate the realieability
regions. a nonogra- is shown in Fig. 3 that interconnects the basic paraneters of
the projection system. This nonogran eases the PW calculations greatly. When
calculating the dimensions of the PW prozection systen. it is necessary to pro-

ceed from the eininun nunber of channels the amber of kinescopes and lenses
respectively).

When using standard kinescopes and couplets filling of their screen with pictures.
ratio b/h is 1.25 to 1.33 for horiscntal and 0.75 to 0.8 for the vertical position
of the width of the kineecope screw. The problen of selecting the nunber of
kinescopes my be einplified by usi the nonogren in l-‘ig. 1‘ that shows the rela-
tionship between viewing angles "r 7:, and the nunber o! kinescopes for various

138

FOR OFFICIAL US! 081.!
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1+. Noaograa interconnecting the relationship between viewing angles "r ﬁn
and the nuaber of kinescopee at various orientations of kinescope screws:

 

- horizontal orientation kineecope screens:
‘— ~-“ - vertical orientation. '

orientations (horisontsl and vertical) of their screens. It should be takm into
account that the nuaber n should be only discrete. If ratio "r ”8 produces

fractional n, then its values lust be rounded out to the nearest whole nuaber and
a suller value of n will seen a less full utilisation of the height of the screen
while a greater. value -- a less full utilisation of the width of the screen. The
utilisation of the vertical position of the kinescope ecreme for a given it, ”8

ratio is related to an increase in the nuaber of kineecopes and lenses. but bakes

it possible to increase the diaeneione of the resulting picture. Utilising
kinescopes with large screens sakes it possible to obtain large pictures with
aoderate saplitications. but is related to the necessity of using larger disaster
lenses.

Single lenses produce geoaetrical and chi-antic distortions. especially noticeable
at the edges of the field of the picture. These distortions are greater the
greater the system amplification and the r. star the deviation of the observer's
eyes iron the central position. Practically. the anplitication should not be
greater than 3 to 5, while the spatial position of the observer's eyes when view-
ing the pictures should not change essentially. Geosetrical and chrontic die-
tortions say be reduced by introducing correcting eleaents into the optical systea
whose para-stern are deterained as a result of corresponding calculations.

The distortions may be reduced considerably in a two-lens systea, although the
systea coaplexity is increased while the coefficient of the optical trans-lesion
is reduced.

139

FOR OHICIAL USE MY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The necessity of using lenses of fairly large disensions causes serious difficul-
ties. The use of plastic Fresnel lenses my be considered a cosprolise solution.
However. the use of such lenses leads to noise caused by beats between the TV
picture and the lens rasters. PVU of the sirror type are tree fro- my short-
comings of the lens system. since their basic optical elements are spheric lirrors.
For 8P5tial spacing between kineecopes and the observer. additional senitrsns-
parent nirrors are used in mirror PW that cosplicate the systea and. what is very
essential, reduce the optical transsission coefficient. The calculation of sirror

PVU dimensions has. of course, specific features although the basic principles are
the sane as for lens PVU.

To obtain high quality pictures. special Ieasures lust be taken on the nechanicsl,

optical and electrical matching of conponente and projection systen parameters of
partial pictures. Single type kinescopes with latched characteristics (color.
brightness and contrast) must be used in the channels. Distortions caused by

noncorrespondence in position. diseneions. linearity and partial pictures (espec-
ially along the vertical) etc. should be reduced to a linisus.

In conclusion. we will note that the principles considered above may be used to

calculate the dilensions not only of scanning. but also of wide-angle W [Repro-
ducing devices] of the mosaic type whose picture field is cospoeed of kinescope
screens set up on both the horizontal and vertical directions.

COPYRIGHT: “Tekhnika kino i televideniya". 1981

2291
(30. 1860/77

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.84: 621.3.037.372
nmmcnceneuscn stem ran P3003836 AUDIO SIGNAL IN FREQUENCY REGION
Moscou TBHNIKA xmo I TEEVIDBIIYA in Russian No 9. Sep 81 pp 210-28

Rum. by Ye. I. Grinberg and M. I. Peregud. All-Union Scientific Research Motion
cture Institute]

EText'] The process for producing phonograns for cinema files is related to .a
erge nunbsr of conversions inplelented on the initial audio sigmals. In the
developnent of equip-ant and nethoda for the digital processing of audio signals
it is possible to separate a nunber of stages. each of which is typical in its
level of treat-ant of coaputer facilities.

In the first stage. at the beginning of the seventies. investigations of basic
types of signal conversions on universal conputers began. The aoet iaportant re-
sult of the work at this stage was the understanding of the necessity to create
specialised devices to process signals in real tins and use Fourier transform.-
tions for the inplenentation of alnoet all kinds of filtration of the audio signal

[3].

In the second stage. work was done on creating specialised digital devices with
low and nediua degrees of integration. Due to the high cost of ilplsaenting con-
putsr operations on the given conponent base. digital delay lines. reverberatora
and other devices using the delay line principle becale the first to be used
widely in audio recording equip-eat [1. '6].

At present. considerable experience has accumulated in our country and abroad on
sinulating the digital conversion processes of audio signals. and creating spe-
cialised devices to inplenent individual functions.

The realisation of the laJority of electroscouetic conversions (adaptive noise
reduction. adaptive interference coapeneation. frequency correction) is related
to the calculation of a signal packet with a pulse characteristic of a converter.
Inasnuch as the nest efficient method is calculating packets in the frequency re-

gion. a nultinicroprocessor systel for processing audio signals was created as a
basis. using equip-ent to transfer. initial Fourier aimala.

1‘1

1‘0! OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The parameters or the systea were selected on the basis of work carried out in the
electroacoustic laboratory of the HUI [All-Union Scientific Research notion
Picture Institute] [3].

According to the results of the indicated work. the systes should be able to do the
following:

1. Inplenent audio signal conversion in the Frequency region for discretissticn
frequencies of up to no kits in real tine. process the spectrus and restore the
signal in the tine dosain.

2. Inplenent audio signal conversion into a 16-bit binary code with a total error

not exceeding 3 to h low-order bite (the nusber of spectral cosponents up to 102“
complex nusbers). -

3. Provide the possibility of being increased to provide for processing in real
tine signals with higher discretisation frequency.

h. Provide the possibility of simltsneous conversion of several audio signals
with a Joint processing of the spectral characteristics.

5. Be inexpensive. null and light. highly efficient and have a single type of
universal systen to carry out investigations, as well as to produce specialised
devices on its basis.

6. Have a design anticipating the connection of new data sources and users with-
out changing the equip-eat part of the systen center.

7. Have a low level of internal audio noises. required for operation in special-
ized places.

The purpose or this paper is to describe the design of the systen and its cospo-
nent parts for processing signals with the greatest discretisaticn frequency.

In appropriate consents. possibilities will be indicated for reducing the cysts:
when the diecretisatioh frequnoy and the number of initial signals are lowered.

The basic problen in creating the system is the inplesentation of direct and in-
verse Fourier transformations of the high speed initial signal. '

The realization of the Fourier processor using low and udius degrees of integra-
tion circuits leads to very substantial expenditures for aicrocircuits and cur-
rent consuaption and, as a result. to a high cost of equip-eat. large sise. low
reliability etc.

In recent years. the appearance of dosestic microprocessors made it possible to

design econosical Fourier processors. The series [589 aicroprocessor set was
selected as the basic one.

The given set has the highest speed of operation asong the aicroprocessors being
nnufsctured.

142

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nicroprogras organisation mites it possible to control. by expanded arithmetic,
external circuits simultaneously with the operation inplesentation in the procee-

ear. The indicated advantages determine practically a one-to-one choice of
series K589 series microprocessors for the Fourier analysis of the audio simls.

The general structure of the system is shown in Fig. 1. Four basic parts my be
separated in the system specialised processors with an expanded arithletic on
the K589 microprocessor series,analog-digital and digital-analog converters for
counnications with sources and users of audio data. a control device with the
580 series of aicroprocessors and service equip-out.

The initial audio signals are converted by analog-digital converters fro- the
analog to the digital fore and are stored in a buffer memory. As it beooses freed.
the first specialised processor reads the stored data. Having isplesented a given
number of algorithm “layers” on the obtained data. the specialised processor. in
the course of isplesenting its last on algorithm "layer." transfers the inter-
nediste results to the next specialised processor and introduces the next in turn
input readings. All specialised processors included in the systes operate the
sane. Thus. all specialised processors operate in parallel which sakes it possi-
ble to provide for processing signals in various ranges of frequency discretisa-
tion by changing the number of specialised processors. Uhen increasing the
discretisation frequency. the number of layers in the algorithm being isplesented
in one processor is reduced. while the nusber of processors is increased. insuring
the required transit capacity of the systes.

For comparatively low discretisation frequencies (in the case of processing speech
signals, in the digital adaptive interfermce compensator etc.) the nunber of
algoriths "layers” implemented in one processor is increased. while the total
number of processors in the syste- is reduced. This general principle for design-
ing systeas for processing rapidly flowing siaaals. which provide. ﬁr the is-
pleaentation of the above-cited basic requireaents. was laid at the basis of
creating a multisicroproceseor system to process audio deals in the frequency
region.

The last specialised processor processes the obtained spectrus (for exanple. nul-
tiplication by the weighting function. smoothing etc.) and transfers the processed

values to the first processor for isplenentating the inverse Fourier transform-
tion.

After completing the algorithm of the inverse Fourier transformation. the data

fros the last specialised processor are entered into the buffer aesory (or into
the required external device). which inplesents the equalization of the period
of output readings ahead of the digital-analog converter.

The calculation of the weighting functions for processing the spectrum. the re-
quired constants. the loading of data into the last specialized processor and
the system control are isplessnted by the control unit ads of series K580 micro-
processors. The use of the sicroprocessors is detersined by the requireaents
of the relative simplicity of prograsing and the colparetivsly low speed in re~
ceiving the data. The system controller is used basically only in the investiga-
ting cosplex, since the required data is already calculated and stored in the
per-uncut nesory of the last specialised processor.

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
   
 

J!

”nasal

  

Fig. 1. Structure of e multiprocessor systen {or processing audio signals in the
frequency regions.

1. initial audio signal 6. mtput buffer nenory end enelog-
digitel converter

2. Anslog-digitsl converter [ATsP]

and input buffer nenory 7. Control unit
3. Specialised processor 1 8. Drive of TV nonitor
h Buffer nenory of the weighted function 9. Output enslog eudio signal

5. Specialised processor n

Service devices the it possible to represent the spectrsl chsrscteristice ohteined
on the TV nonitor end assign the required solitude-frequency chsrscterietice by

neens of e ”light pen."

The specialised processor consists of the following: the 16-bit processor proper.
s parallel 16x8 bit nultiplier. e per-nest nenory (P20) of trigononetric Motions
and output registers.

It is well known [1. 2] thet conversion done on such reading in eeoh 'lsyer" of the
rapid Fourier tmsfomtim (3P!) slgorithn consists of four mltiplier operations
and several edding operetions where one of the nultipliere is e sine or cosine of
the given srgunent. Since the eultiplicetion operetion end. eepecislly. the calcu-
lstion of the trigononetric tunotione nde in the processor require lnrge expendi-
tures of tine. s sultiplier end e perment nenory o! trigononetric constants are
introduced into the epecislised prooeeeor es externsl devices.

166

P03 OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 2. Structursl arrange-mt of the specislised processor

1. To externsl devices 6. Processor input bus

2. Processor dsts bus 7. mtput registers

3. Processor control bus 8. Per-meat senor: for trieonosetric
functions _

a. Central processor 9. mts input bus 1

5. Mltiplier 10. Into input bus 2

The processor itself (Fig. 3) consists of eight nicrocircuits of the [589302 cen-
trsl process unit Um}. s “89303 sccelersted transfer circuit. s “891101
nicroprosrss control un t (am). e nioroprosrsned perment sesory ads of K556Rr5
cosponents end s min senory adept [$1301 sicrocircuits.

In the reprogrsnble permanent senor) (m) there are recorded nicroprogrsns for
isplesenting those concrete “layers" of the slgorithn done by the given processor.
set in n concrete position in the systes's structure.

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3. Structure of the central proceeeor

i. Reprograeed peruanent eeeory (PPZU) 5. Date file of the central proceeeor
2. conveyor regieter coeponente
3. Control unit 6. Control hue
u. thin eeeory 7. but hue
8. late hue

Besides the eicroproa-en of the given part of the total algorith- of the eyetee,
service eicroprogrene for cleening out the min eenory (C20). the initial eettins
of all proceeeor resietere end expended erithletic. as well ee eonitoring the ef—
ficiency of the proceeeor are recorded in the PPZU.

Ach uicroinetruction along with etendard control fielde Bill and ’i‘ePE. includes
nonetendard control fielde of recording end reedout proceeeee of all external cir-
cuits connected to the proceeeor and the (EU. Additional regietere are introduced
into the proceeeor circuit to increeee the operating epeed of the proceeeor end
epen the operatione conveyor regietere in tile which are inetelled at the outpute
of licroprograe PPZU end Ike it poeeible to reduce the eynchronoue eigxel period
of the proceeeor. Input regietere of date end on: eddreeeee nke it poeeible .tor
the central proceeeor mite to do the convereione without waiting for the end of
the ecceee cycle to the ozu.

The (EU hee a capacity of ax 16-bit worde. Half the Ieeory ie need for etorine
the internediete reeulte of direct convereion. while the eecond half -- for etorins
the intereediete reeulte of the inveree Fourier tmefomtim (the reeult of the

gist tione -- up to 10215 ebeolute valuee of the epectrue end up to 10215 pheu
e .

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. ‘1. Structural arrange-ant of the multiplier

1. Data bus 5. Input bus

2. Hultiplicand register 6. Pros perment aeaory of trigono-
3. Parallel 16x8 bit aulfiplier astric functions constants

15. Output aultiplexer register 7. Control bus

8. Input mltiplemer

The basic processor functions are:

i. Fora addressee. data and control signals for nicroprograa Pm, (EU and P20
trigonoaetric constants.

2. Do arithnetic operations of adding and subtracting taking into account the
signs of the values.

3. Control loading and reading of lultiplier data.

‘3. Control data recording into output registers and data reading m. Us? or
previous specialised processors. Also control the weighting function and required
0211 functions.

In choosing the structural arrangement of the multiplier. it is necessary to es-
tablieh a compromise between expenditures for equip-mt and speed of operation
taking into account the possibilities of the remaining parts of the specialised

processor. The structural amng’e‘aent of the multiplier is shown in Fig. 5. Its
operational part is a parallel i 8-bit nultiplier.

The multiplicand value is stored in a 16-bit register. Data to the mltiplicand
register inputs is entered iron the data buses of the central processor. The

1107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control of recording in the sultiplicand register is isplesente'd by a separate
microinstruction field.

An 8-bit number is entered into the lultiplier inputs from the sultiplexer outputs.
In accordance with the address sent to the sultiplexer input fros the separate
nicroinstruction field. the sultiplier say use the high-order byte in the PZU of
trigonometric constants. the low-order byte of the sale PZU. the high-order byte
on the data processor buses or the low-order byte on the data processor buses.

The output multiplier multiplexer sends either 16 high-order bits of the result or
8 high-order bits of the results to the input processor buses.

To reduce the size and power consusption of the sultiplicand register. the input
and output sultiplexers are nde with x555 series nicrocircuits. Such a connection
of the aultiplier to the processor sakes possible rapid isplesentation of operations
on the nunber in the process of calculating the direct and inverse Fourier tra‘s-
formations. as well as in processing the obtained spectral characteristics.

Besides the sultiplier. two data sources that have s controlled tristable output

(for example“ the ATsP and the preceding specialised output) my be connected to
the buses of the input/output processor.

Permission for the passage of data fros the Al's? or preceding specialized processor
is given by separate sicroinstruction fields. The specialised processors are
coupled by seans of an output register ads of K555IRié aicrocircuits.

The absolute value and phase are calculated in the last specialised processor in
accordance with the obtained 10215 colplex readings of the spectrus. Each point
of the absolute value my be sultiplied by the correspondin value of the weight-
ing function (or processed according to the given algoriths after which the re-
sults obtained are sent to the first specialised processor for the start of the
inverse process of the Fourier transforsstion. Reading the weighting Motion
values and the required constants in processing the spectrum is isplenented over
the second external. bus (instead of over the Al‘s? output).

To provide for the possibility of a flexible change in the systes of the nusber of
specialized processors. a cosplex of sicroprogran is being developed that takes

into account the distribution of the nusber of "layers” in the BP!‘ algoriths in
each specialised processor.

Conclusions

The analysis which was carried out indicated that in using three specialised proc-
essors (each sounted on three KAHAX plates). it is possible to convert, process and
restore audio signals with discretination frequencies of 160 kﬂs in real tine.

Connecting 10 specialised processors nkee it possible to expand the frequency
range of the processed signals to discretisstion speeds of 100-125 kHz.

if, in the investigation process. it is required to obtain spectra without restora-

tion of signals in the ties domin. then for the ease number of special processors
the discretisation frequency say be doubled.

168

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP'PICIAL USE ONLY

At preeent. only echemtic diagram- heve been developed. The deeign documtetion
for the eyeten 1- being developed.

ammonium!

1. Retainer, P.; Gould. B. "meaty and Application of Digital Processing of Sig-
nale." Moscow, ”Mir." 1978.

2. Gold, 8.; Reyder. Ch. "Digitel Processing of 8191313.“ Beacon. “Sov. Radio.“
1973.

3. Belkin. 3. 6. ”Development of e. Digital Syeten for Recording-Reproducing
Sound in Motion Pictures. "Teldmike Rim 1 televideniye,” 1978. No 11. pp 3-12

a. Belkin, 3. 6.; Beryetmenkov. Yu. ".3 Gordon, H. 6.; Neverovekiy. K. v.;

Raver. L. Yuq Teygenkov. H. V. "Digital Devicee for Proceeeing Audio 819131-

13831031 Title.“ Toletokhnlka-GO" exhibition. Scientific-Technicel reports.
1 .

COPYRICKI‘: "rekhnika kino 1 televideniye". i981

2291
080: 1860/ 77

169

1’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 791.“.025: 681.322
AUTOMATIC WWII“ OF MOVIE FILE BY COMB
Hoscow wanna K1110 I TEWIDUYA in Russian No 9. Sep 81 pp 32-36

[Irticle by B. L. Borllin and V. V. Pospelov. USSR Scientific-Research Center
of Technical Documentation]

[bucerpts] In recent years. auto-.ted methods for processing pictures based on
using the cosputer are being used widely [7-16]. These Iethods are used to solve
problems of various natures; autosatic analysis of pictures. recognition of visual
hages, improvement of picture quality. easing of their visual interpretation etc.
The processing of pictures with computers consists of three basic stages:

conversion of the picture into digital for. and its introduction into the conputera
aatheaatical processing of the digital data in the conputer:

withdrawal of the processed digital data tron the coaputer and its reverse conver-
sicn into a picture.

Plcture processing in digital fora may be done in two nodes: automatically in
accordance with given progress, and in a dialogue node with the coaputer. a proc-
ess in which the operator watching the picture on a TV screen of a special display
can intervene in the processing. selecting necessary programs and their parameters.

The automated methods used to solve the problem of eliainating defects and raising
the quality of the picture make it possible to do the following:

eliminate a large nuaber of picture defects (correction of various distortions and
filtration of various kinds of interferences).

process the entire picture. as well as its individual parts up to its smallest
elements with dissnsione of 10‘2 to 10’3 an:

carry out the processing with high ﬂexibility due to the dialogue selection of
program and pars-eters;

obtain high reproducibility of processing results due to the ability of the con-
puter to repeat many tines and convert the picture to a given accuracy:

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preserve the original picture mlly since only its “digital inge" is subjected to
the conversions:

reduce the number of manual operations to a minimum.

Due to its advantages. methods for processing pictures by computers are used widely

for improving the quality of space astronoaic, medical and other pictures which
is confirmed by many publications 12-1“. 17-20]. This article describes briefly

the results of the theoretical and experimtal investigation of the automated

method of restoring photographic documents. and discusses the possibilities end
prospects for automted restoration of $113 at the NI’i‘s‘rD 8883.

Any black and white photograph and photographic document can be represented mathe-
Istically by a Motion of two variables U(x. y) that describes the optical density
distribution in the photographic nterial plane. The defective photographic doc-
ument may be described by another function V(x. y) obtained from U(x.y) by several
conversions

may) (1)

The difficulty in the problem of restoring the initial picture U(x.y) is that. as
a rule. the exact form of operator A is unknown.

Therefore. hypotheses are proposed with respect to the kind of conversion of A.
on the basis of the analysis of the distorted document. after which the parameters

of this conversion are chosen in the process of solving equation (1) on the col-
puter. The correctness criterion of the proposed hypothesis and of the ters
selected is an expert evaluation of the quality of the restored picture (x.y).

As a result of investigating defects of archival photographic documents [21], it
was proposed to divide them into seven groups: frequency-contrast, gradation. cracks
structural. spots. scratches. and other defects (not included in the basic groups).

i’athemtical models of the most typical defects of photographic documents of the
six basic groups are now available and theoretical and experimental investigations
of methods for their elimination by means of a computer were carried out [22]. It
was established that the nest efficient are dialogue (interactive) methods for the
restoration processing of photographic documents which allow the operator flexi-
bility in controlling the restoration process by watching the picture and selecting
the necessary programs and parameters to process it.

The investigations done mde it possible to for-ulats basic requirements for the
autouted system for processing pictures (A8012) intended for the restoration of
photographic documents.

The A5012 was created on the basis of the LSI-Z minicosputsr. apparatus for input-
output of photogra he of the American firs "Optronice" and the Pericolor" (ﬁance)
display processor 23]. At present. system software is being developed and pro-
duction work is being done (so far on a stall scale) on digital restoration and

recording in digital form of unique and especially valuable photographic documents
of the USSR State Archives Fund.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He will consider the possibilities and prospects of the automated restoration of
movie films. The black~and-white aovie fill is described lathemtically by a func-
tion of three variables U(x. .t) where t is tine; a color Iovie fill is a vector
function {R(x.y,t). C(x.y.t{. B(s.y,t)} where R, G. B are respectively the red.
green and flue components of the optical density of the color Iovie film. If

each frame of the black-and-white aovie file in the digital fore represents a two-
diaensional data file of.i.5 million eight-bit binary digits, then the volume of
digital data containing the inforntion about the entire aovie fill will be tens
of billions of bytes. Processing such large data files. even with nodern powerful
computers. is impossible at present. However. the rapid developaent of conputer
equipment lakes it possible to hope that digital restoration of novie fills say be

done in the near future. In our opinion, promising ways to solve this problem
are:

using matrix processors that sake it possible to process in parallel thousands
of picture elements (by using such a processor. a rapid Fourier trensforntion of
a data file of a thousand numbers may be lads in 0.01 seconds [25]):

creating program controlled digital devices that do various operations on process-
ing pictures in real time (with the speed of the video signal passing through
then).

In this case. the ASOIZ could play the role of a syste- that would develop algo-
rithns for the elimination of typical defects in Iovie films. Then specialised
devices. created on the basis of these algorithm. would take it possible to
process hundreds of movie filn fraaes at a high speed.

As already Ientioned before. from the Iathesatical standpoint. a movie file my be
considered as a function of three variables. An important feature of this func-

tion is the presence of two groups of variables essentially different in nature:
these are spatial variables x. y and time variable t. For such functions a very
proaising interference filtration aethod is an expansion of this function into a
bilinear series [2km

U(X.y.t)=Ut(x.y) in“) 02(X.y)%t (2)

Obviously. in restoring novle film. it is advisable to subdivide then into parts
(plans) containing uniform frames averaging 2 to 3 seconds in length.

The general principles of designing a systen of digital processing of movie film
were formulated by L. F. Artyushin [26]. Autonted systess for restoring sovie
files auet consist of a specialised A3012 containing three basic subsystems: con-
verting movie films into digital for-s and back: processing and storing data files
of digital data: visual representation of digitalised aovie fills.

Requirements of these three subsystess are greater than the corresponding A8012

subsystems intended for restoration of movie films. The subsysten for converting
movie film into digital form and back may be created on the basis of high speed

TV or laser scanning devices (for exaaple. electronic copying equipment for

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

element-by-elsment printing of movie film pictures [27]). The subsystem for pro-
cessing and storing digital data files mat contain a high speed computer operating
in the time sharing mode (or a complex of several computers). a ntrix processor.
specialised p ogram control digital devices for processing pictures and high capac-
ity (about 10 bytes) math: disc memories.

The subsystem for visual representation of the digitalised movie films must be an

interactive display processor (one or several). equipped with a main memory. a
high speed processor and ﬂexible dialogue facilities for processing the pictures
(light pen. courssr. trackball etc.) .

The processes for the input-output of movie film pictures and the transfer of
digital data files between subsystems mast be controlled by micro or minicomputers
without the loss of time by the central system processor.

The development of an automated system for restoring movie film pictures is a
complicated but realistic problem, substantiated by an already created electronic
mltiplication system and by obtaining combined movie film pictures by computers
[28. 29]. In the future. when autontsd systems for processing movie film pic—
tures are introduced in practice. it will become possible to use digital methods
to create movie film. Their realisation will open up great prospects for the
restoration of movie films. as well as for the development and improvement of
technical and creative cinentography processes.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

i. ”tunnel for Recognising and Eliminating Defects in hovie Films and Hicrofilms.”
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Document Megemsnt and Archives.
Moscow. 1973.

2. Pridmsn. I. 24.; Petrov. A. I. “Storing Lenin‘s hovie Films.“ Tamra KING
I rusvmnuu. 1970. No 1‘. pp 19-26: 1980. No b. 99 3-7.

3. Volkmsn. H. "Thesen sur muerkonserviertmg und Restaurierung Audiovisueller
Inforntionstrager.“ Berlin. 1975.

1.. “Storage and Restorationsl-Gonssrvational Processing of hovie Films and Micro-
films.” Interrepublic Tecmical Conditions (for Document Standardisation)
55-15-69. Moscow. 1969.

5. “hovie Films. Additional (Restoration-Preventive) Processing of Initial Film
Materials at Cinema Studios and Movie Film Coyping Factories. ”RT! [Guiding
Technical Materials] 19—6-71. Moscow. 1971.

6. ”Restoration of Faded Photographs. Review of Domestic and Foreign Literature
on action Picture muipment." Moscow, 1973. No i (5).

7. Rozenfeld‘. A. "Recognizing and Processing Pictures by Digital Computers.“
Hoscow. "Mir.“ 1972.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

ii.

12.

13.

1“.

15.

16.

17.

i8.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23s

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jrishin. H. P.; Kurbanov. an. H: Parkelov. V. P. ”Automtic input and
Processing Photographs by Computers.” Moscow. "Busrgiya." i976.

Khant. B. R. “Digital Processing of Pictures.” in book The Use of Digital
Processing of Signals.“ Moscow. "Mir.” 1980 pp 192-267.

”Processing of Pictures and Digital Filtration.“ '1‘. Khusng. editor. hoscow.
“Mir,” i979.

andryus. C. “Use of Digital Computers for Processing Pictures.“ Moscow.
”Elusive.“ 1977.

"iconics. Spatial Piltra..ion of Pictures. Photographic Systems.” Sysposium
of articles. D. :5. Lebedev. editor. Hoscou. "Hanks." 1970.

"Iconics. Digital holography. Processing of Pictures." Sysposius of arti-
cles. D. S. Lebedev. editor. Moscow 'Nauka." 1975.

"Iconics. Digital Processing and Filtration of Pictures“ D. S. Lebsdev.
editor. ”Problems of Cybernetics.“ No 38. Moscow. VDlI’l'I [All-Union Institute
of Technical Inforntion]. 1978.

"Processing Pictures by Digital Computers.“ Syspoeius of articles.
6. azdryus and L. Inlo. editors. Moscow. ”Mir.“ 1973.

Yaroslavskiy. L. P. ”Introduction to Digital Processing of Pictures.” Moscow.
"Sov. Radio.” 1979.

Belikovs. T. P.; Kronrod. H. An Chochia, P. A.: Yaroslavskiy, L. P.
"Digital Processing of Pictures of the hrs Surface transmitted by "liars-3"
and ”Fare-h” MB ggutonatic hrs Station]. “Space Investigations,” 1975.
13, No 6. pp 898- 6

“Space investigations of the Birth. Methods of Processing Video nits by
Computers." Moscow, "Hanks.“ 1978.

Klinenko. V. L. “Digital Processing of Pictures." ”Radioelectronics Abroad“
1975. No 1+ 99 13-32.

Digital Processing of Simals and its Application.“ Symposium of articles,
L. P. Yaroslsvskiy. editor. Moscou, "Hanks." 1981.

Borilin. B. L. "Qualinetric Evaluation of Archive Doculent Defects.
"SOVESKIYB ARKHIVY. 1981. No 3 pp 3740.

Borilin. B. In; Chochia. P. A. “Restoration of Photographs by Gosputers.“
SOVEPSKIYE ARKHIVY. 1980. No 3 pp 105-158.

Borilin. B. In! Pospelov. V. V. "Restoration and Conservation of Photographs
by Computers.” hpress inforntion. VNII Docunentation and Archive Dhnage-
lsnt. Series ”Nora and Specifications for Storing Documents.” 1980. No 2 (11).

PP 1'7.
154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2h. Pospelov. V. V. ”Approxilation of Motions of Several Variables by Products
of Motions of (he Variable." Freprint DH [Institute of Applied htheutice]
1978' N0 32.

25. Integral Array Processor for soups. 3/250. Prospectus of nets General eo..
United States.

26. Artyuehin. L. F. “Prospects of Using Electronic and Coaputer Eminent in
Technological Processes of Cinentography.“ uxunm K1110 I TEEVIDBIIYA.
1979 No 11. pp 7-17.

2?. Artyushin, 1.. Fa Ioshin. O. 1.; Ovilko, O. 6.; Huohiyev, S. G. ”Kinotele-

vision System of Printing and Recording Color Pictures by a Laser Bean on a
Movie Fill fro- Fils Materials and Video Tapes. *rmmnu KING I TEWMHA,“

1977' NO 70 PP 3‘11.

28. Tel'nov, N. I. “Processing Pictures by Conputers and Electronic Mtiplica-
tion." Tﬂﬂﬂlm KING I TEEVIDBIIYA.“ 1978. No 7. PP 70-81.

29. Holt. V. The New Electronic Composite Photography and Inge Modification
systel. American Cinemtographer. 1975. 5. No ‘0. PP “214.25. 1638. “7“-

COPYRIGRl‘s 'Tekhnika kino i televideniya". 1981

2291
0303 1860/77

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

WICATIONS, WICATION EQUIPMENT, RECEIVERS
AND TRAISHITTBRS, mars, RADIO PHYSICS, DATA
TRANSMISSION AND PROCESSING, INFORMATION THEORY

UDc 621.372 (088.8)
mcnouavs nsuw use

Moscow OPISANIYB IZOBRETENIYA 637900 in Russian 15 Dec 78

[Description of USSR Patent No 637900 by A.V. Vashkovskiy. v.1. Zubkov, V.N.
Kil'dishev and LA. Murmuzhev, filed 9 Dec 76. published 15 Dec 78, class
H 01 l P 9/00]

[Text] This invention is in the area of radio engineering and can be used in
antenna feeder systems to delay microwave signals.

A microwave delay line exists which contains a rectangular magnetized ferrite plate
and input and output coaxial antennas installed at opposite ends of the ferrite
plate [1].

However, this device has a small delay; furthermore, parasitic resonances are
excited in it. .

The purpose of the present invention is to increase the delay time and eliminate
parasitic resonances.

In order to accomplish this, the ferrite plate in the microwave delay line contains
an additional flat metal spiral with width and spacing which are multiples of half
the length of the surface magnetostatic wave; furthermoer. the beginning and end
of the metal spiral are located directly at the coaxial antennas. which are in-
stalled at opposite corners of the plate; the portion of the ends of the ferrite
plate on which the metal spiral is wrapped is rounded.

The drawing presents a diagram of the proposed microwave delay line.

The microwave delay line consists of rectangular magnetized ferrite plate 1 and
input and output coaxial antennas 2 and 3; ferrite plate 1 is furthermore magne-
tized by permanent magnet lo, and metal spiral 6 is wrapped around its rounded
ends 5; in addition. input and output coaxial antennas 2 and 3 are fastened to
opposite ends 7 of ferrite plate 1.

The microwave delay line operates as follows.

Input coaxial antenna 2 in the vicinity of face 7 of ferrite plate 1 excites a
surface magnetostatic wave signal which propagates along the waveguide region

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'roe omcm. use ONLY

formed by flat metal spiral 6 and the adjacent upper surface of ferrite plate 1.
The surface magnetostatic wave signal follows rounded phase 5 to the bottom of
ferrite plate 1 and propagates to the poposite side along the second turn of flat
metal spiral 6.

Thus, the surface magnetostetic wave signal moves from the top of ferrite plate 1 to
its bottom n times (where n is the number of turns of flat metal spiral 6), each
time propagating over a different turn of flat metal spiral 6 to output coaxial
antenna 3. where the surface magnatostatic wave signal is converted to a delayed
electromagnetic signal.

 

Patent Claims

1. A microwave delay line containing a rectangular magnetized ferrite plate and
input and output coaxial antennas fastened to opposite faces of a ferrite plate.
distinguished by the fact that in order to increase delay time and eliminate
parasitic resonances, an additional flat metal spiral is wound on the ferrite
plate with width and spacing multiples of half the length of the surface magne-
toetstic wave; furthermore, the metal spiral begins and ends directly at the
coaxial antennas, which are fastened to opposite diagonals of the plate.

2. A microwave delay line as described in paragraph 1, distinguished by the
fact that the portion of the faces of the ferrite plate around which the metal
spiral is wound.

Information Sources
Used in Evaluation

1. L.H. Brundte, N.J. Preedmann 1, "Electron. Lett" 1968, lb, 7, p. 132.

6900
C80: 8144/0218-8

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 621. 372.8:535

METHODS FOR FINDING BREAKS IN OPTICAL CABLES

Moscow ELEKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 9. Sep 81 (manuscript received 6 Aug 80)
pp 25-28

[Article by 8.". Vernik and Adi. Kuznetsov]

[Text] Successful operation of co-unication links is deter-
mined to a significant extent by the capability for finding
breaks with sufficient accuracy. The solution to this
problem usually involves major difficulties both in developing
measurement methodology and in creating neasursment instrumen-
tation. For optical cable conunication links (OCCL), espec-
ially long links vith attenuation on the order of 30-60 dB,
solving this problem involves additional difficulties arising
from the complexity of the propagation and reflection of

light signals in optical fibers (01').

We shall examine possible methods for finding breaks in 01’ and
DC as a whole, priaarily methods suitable for use on long links.

It is known that not all actual breaks in an optical fiber (0?) result in complete
cessation of signal propagation. For example, a break in an 0? with vertical
spalling and 2-5 um separation of the 0? in the cable causes only an insignificant
increase in signal attenuation. Therefore. we shall consider an 0? break to be
damage which causes the propagation of light energy to crease completely. There
are three basic methods for locating OF breaks.

The method of measuring the li ht ener emitted into the environment is used for
quality control of initial semifiniehed items, or "bars". from which optical fibers
are drawn, and for finding 01' breaks and large (of the order of 2-31) imperfec-
tions. Quality control of bars is done by irradiating them with a visible-spectrum
gas laser (A - 0.62 um). "hen this is done. the spots at which the 0P imperfec-
tions are located glow. The quality of the bar can be judged by the intensity of
the glowing and the number of glowing spots. By processing the visual observations
statistically, a correlation can be established between bar quality and 01’ imper-

fections.

The spots in which large 0? imperfections are located emit part of the light signal
energy into the environment. The measurement signal input to the 0? consists of
powerful light transmissions (on the order of 1-3 H) transmitted at a frequency

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORioFFﬂﬂAl.USE(MHLY

of 1-5 KHz. The light signals emitted into the environment are captured by the
photodetector in the receiver and converted to current (voltage) pulses, which

are then amplified in a high-gain narrowband amplifier which is tuned to the repeti-
tion frequency of the light pulses.

During the measurement process, the OP is moved with respect to the photodetector
and the radiation intensity is recorded. with the power distribution of the
emitted signals along theROP characterizing the distribution of the imperfections.
The location of a break in the OP usually corresponds to high amplitude of the
emitted signal. Preliminary findings indicate that this method can be implemented
if the dynamic range of the receiver is between'llo and 140 dB.

The method of measuring the intensity of Rayleigh backseatter is widely used in
measuring the distribution of imperfections along OCCL and the internal attenuation
of 0? and 0C.

Figure 1 shows a functional diagram of a measuring device which implements this
method. The measured OCCL S is pulsed with short (2-5 as) high-power light pulses
(1-2 V), which are input to the optical cable through differential device b. The
reflected backward scattered flux reaches receiver 6; the screen of CRT 7 (or other
display) displays the intensity of the backward scattered flux as a function of

the length of the line (or signal propagation time). as well as the location of
imperfections in the optical fiber. A break in the OP is characterized by a

sharp drop in scattered power.

The basic shortcoming of this method is the low level of the backward scattered
flux, which prevents this method from being used to find breaks in long OCCL
because of the insufficient sensitivity of the receiver. In addition, when there
are relatively large imperfections (which occurs at the existing level of 0? and
OC fabrication technology) the power of the oncoming light pulse flux may be
significantly higher than the power of the Rayleigh scattering flux. This cir-
cumstance results in distortion of the measurement findings.

 

Figure l

The location method for finding breaks in optical fibers is identical to the im-
pulse method of measuring imperfection distribution on cable communication links.

The functional diagram of the instrument used in the location method is analogous

159

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

to figure 1. Generator 1, which outputs light pulses 5-10 as long is triggered
by electronic master oscillator 2, which simultaneously triggers CRT sweep
generator 3 with a slight delay (12). The outgoing pulse is passed through
differential system lo into the measured optical fiber 5. Part of the energy
reflected from imperfections in the or creates backward light flux which
reaches photodetector 6 and is converted to voltage pulses. After amplification
in amplifier 7, these are applied to the vertical plates of the cm, causing the
electron beam to be deflected up or down from the middle of the y axis. The
arrival time of the reflected pulses is registered in the scale of the sweep time
s(t), which is easily converted to the distance in kilometers to the break
(figure 2):

x - 0.5 s(t) v (1)

where v is the propagation speed of light energy.

 

Figure 2

The location of the break is determined by the distance 3, beyond which no
reflected pulses reach the receiver.

The main difference between the parameters of the scheme in figure 1, which is
used to measure the location of breaks and distribution of imperfections using
the location method, and the parameters of analogous schemes used to measure
the intensity of the backward scattered flux, is that the receiver used in the
location method has a narrower operating bandwidth. This makes it possible

to implement a receiver amplifier with a dynamic range of 50-60 dB. Further-
more, as was indicated above, the signals reflected from imperfections and
breaks usually exceed the intensity of the backward scattered flux by several

orders of magnitude. This method thus makes it possible to make measurements
on long 0001..

It is apparent from examining the functional diagram in figure 1 and the
description of its operation that it is analogous to the well known circuits
used in type R5 or DIP devices [3], which are intended for investigating the
distribution of ilperfections and finding breaks in cable conductors as a large
imperfection in which the coefficient of reflection is equal or close to unity.
This circumstance is of great significance, since it makes it fairly simple

to implement a device to determine a location of optical fiber breaks in the

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

form of an attachment to the type RS devices which are in quantity production.
However, when measuring optical cables it is necessary to allow for the sin-
gularities of optical signal propagation and reflection of optical flux in
optical fibers, which lead to the appearance of additional errors.

Error of location method. During transmission over optical fibers, optical
signals are attenuated due to losses in the OP, which causes the energy of
the outgoing light pulse we at the end of an optical cable with length L to
drop to

"L . w..-°.23GL
where a is the 01" attenuation factor, dB.

The energy of a pulse fully reflected from the end of the line as measured
at the beginning of the line

wref ' "avowed:

Knowing the amount of attenuation of an 0661. repeater section grep. we can
determine the minimum dynamic range of the instrument an“ - Zare . In
order to determine the dynamic range of the instrument, we must add to 0min
the attenuation airef which characterizes the energy loss during reflection
at a point located at a distance of L1 front the beginning of the OCCL.
These losses are random, and comprise the function (I of the set of random
quantities made up of the absolute value of the coef icient of reflection
at the ith point P1, the distribution of the angles at which light waves of
various modes arereflected from the surface of the break in the optical
fiber 0111, where u is the mode umber of the light wave. Furthermore,
airef is a function of the OP aperture angle 6 and the propagation conditions
for individual modes in the 0?. Thus,

51,er ' 1’1 (P1: ¢i s 6)

is random as well.

Figure 3 shows some possible profiles of optical fiber breaks and the oscillo-
grams of the reflected signals which correspond to them. The smallest losses
occur if the surface of the break is perpendicular to the axis of the fiber
(figure 3a), while the greatest losses are observed if the angle between the
plane of the break and the axis of the fiber is 45° (figure 3b); when the
surface of the break is complex (figure 3c), the amount of loss is random.

In addition to losses due to reflection, losses in the differential section
a“; of the measuring instrument must also be allowed for. Consequently,

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

81:: - Zarep 4' ant + Gdsf (5)

If we limit ourselves to measuring the location of an optical fiber break
from both sides of a repeater sector,

sin min ' 3rep + aref + ldef (6)

The maximum value of sin which can he realized in practice is 80-90 dB with
outgoing pulse power of the order of the 1-2 W. Losses in the differential
device are usually 8-10 dB [1], while the attenuation of the repeater

sector is 30-35 d). It follows from this that emf cannot be more than 0-10 dB
when measuring from one end of a repeater sector; the value is 25-35 :13 when
measuring from both ends, which makes it possible to locate the 0? break quite
accurately.

figure 3

The duration of the ulsin s1 al also has an effect on the error in determining
the location of an 01’ break IEI. In determining this error. allowance must be
made for pulse stretching in the line. Propagating through an optical fiber,

a light pulse with duration to at the beginning of the fiber stretches due to
the dispersion of the 0P naterial. the relationship between the grOup delay time

and the mode nuaber of the light waves, and the radon dispersion of the group

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

delay time values in the Optical fiber.

These distortions cause the outgoing pulses to become longer in proportion to their
distance from the light source. As a result, the resolution of the method is uneven:
it is greatest at the beginning of the line and least at the end. The amount by

which a pulse is stretched depends upon the type of fiber and the characteristics
of the radiation source.

For example, when an incoherent light pulse with duration to is transmitted
through a multinade fiber, it stretches to a length of [1]

'.
I.— «3+ on, L'+Ar'L')7 0’

by the end of a repeater sector with length L, where 61' is the dispersion of
the group delay time per unit of length in the multimode fiber caused by the
presence of different modes; A‘l’d is the pulse expansion per unit of length

due to dispersion in the material and the dispersion of the intrinsic waves.

When the intrinsic modes arelmined in fiber imperfections, the pulse at
the end of the fiber expands to a value of [1]

4- (8)
1, - (1?. «M 1" L‘+6" («1-) .

where LC is the average length of the optical fiber within which there is a com-
plete exchange of energy between nodes.

In practice I. > Le; Ar >> Ara and the amount of pulse widening At is proportional
to IL. For example, for n/n - 0.01 the dispersion At of the group delay time

is 48.10 ns/ka, while it is 26.2 ns/km for a coherent light source. For a grad-
ient fiber, we have $.84 nslkm and 2.42 ns/km, respectively. Thus, with an
outgoing pulse of to - 10 ns, when the light source is incoherent the pulse
stretches to 34.2 us by the end of the first kilometer of the line. These

data indicate that there is no point in making the outgoing pulses any shorter
than 5-10 no.

The maximum measurement error of the location of a break corresponds to the
maximum value of emf, where no reflected pulse is observed on the screen of
the instrument at the point of the break (cf. figure 3b). In this case, the
operator usually assues that the break is located at the fiber imperfection
which is closest to the pulse generator (figure (on), which has the appearance
shown in figure lob after the break. The measurement error here will be deter-
mined by the highly regular sector lgeg of the optical fiber where no reflected
pulses are observed.

As the quality of optical fibers improves, 1“: will increase to the length of
the optical cable lines, since junction reflections which are recorded by
pulsed devices generally arise at the points at which cables are joined.

163

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With the help of the location method, these reflections can be used to determine
the structural length of the optical cable within which the break has occurred.

 

Figure 10

Conclusions. Analysis of the location method for finding optical fiber breaks
shows that possible measurement errors are a strong function of a number of
random factors which can lead to intolerably large error. In order to limit
this error, it is seen as advisable during 0001. construction to measure the
distribution of imperfections along the cable and include these characteristics
in the OCCL docunentation. Changes in these characteristics, as measured from
both ends of a repeater sector and supplemented vith factual data concerning the
length of optical cable structural sements. the distribution of imperfections,
the amounts of reflections at structural interfaces and the actual optical

cable attenuation can be used to judge the steadiness of optical cable parameters
by periodically measuring the distribution of imperfections, and to find

optical fiber breaks more precisely. The characteristic of the distribution

2f inperfections obtained during these latter measurements can be used as a
baseline for finding optical fiber breaks. Measuring the distribution of imper-
fections from both ends of a repeater section to the point of a break and

beyond will promote a further iwrovement in the accuracy of locating fiber
breaks.

Bibliography

1. Unger, G.G. "Opticheskaya svyaz'" [Optical commication]. Hoscow, Izdatel'stvo
svyaz'", 1979.

1610

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Grodnev, 1.5., et. a1., "Koaksisl'nye ksbeli svysri" [Coaxial Commicstion
Cables]. Moscow, Irdatel'stvo'svyaz", 1970.

3. Kuchikyan. L.I. "Fizicbeskaye optika volokonnykh mtovodov" [Physical
Optics of Fiber Light Guides]. Moscow, lzdatel'stvo "Energiys", 1979.

lo. Huradyan, A.G., Ginsburg, S.A., "Sisteny peredachi informstsii po
opticheskomu kebelyu" [System for Transmitting Iniomtion Over Optical Cable].
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "ovyaz'", 1980.

5. remain, 1.1., "Volnovody opticheskoy svysri" [Optical Cot-Imitation
Waveguide]. Hoscov, Izdatel'stvo "svyaz‘.", 1978.

6. Mskhlin, R.Ye., ‘l‘itov, I.V., 'Msasuremnt of Reduced Coefficient of
Reflection From End of Fiber During Break in Cable of Fiber Optic Commutation
Link," Pis'na'th’rF". Vol. 1, No. 11, 1975.

7. Makhlin, 11.101, Kuznetsov, A.A., Titov, I.V., "Observation of Optical
Pulses Reflected From Distant End of Fiber". Radiotekhnika i elektronika,

Vol. 20, No. 6, 1975.

8. Guttnsn, J., Kruapholz, 0.. "location of Imperfections in Optical Glass-Fiber
waveguides," Electronics Letters, 1975, Vol. 11, No. 10

9. Veno Y. Motoh Shimiru. Optical Fiber Fault Location Method. A9911“ Optics.
1976, Vol. 15, No. 6.

10. Personik, 0.1)., Photon Probe - an Optical-Fiber Time Domain Reflectoneter.
981.1, 1977, Vol. 56, No. 3.

il. "Detection and Localization of Fiber Breaks in Optical Communication Cables",
m2, Vol. 90, No. 11, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: IZDAI‘EL'STVO "RADIO I SWAZ'",'BLH(TROSVYAZ"', 1981

6900
C50: 1860/61

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma otncm use ONLY

UDC 621.373.é3
CONTROL SYSTEM fOR ARC DISCRARGER SUITCRING USING FIELD DISTORTION TECHNIQUE

Moscow PRIBORY I TBKHNIKA EKSPBRIHBNTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 30 Nov 79) pp 133-135

[Paper by A.I. Cerasimov and Ye.c. Dubinov]

[Text] A discharger-enhancer filled with a gas up to 1 HPa

is inserted in breaks in 26 chble sections, charged up to an
identical potential difference of 15 to 30 RV, each with its
internal conductor connected to the control electrode of its
own arc discharger. When all of the cables are shorted
(impedance of 2 ohms) by a cannon switcher, the rise tine of
their discharge current wave, Tl - £0 to 70 nsec, is reduced
by the enhancer down to 3.8 nsec. The scatter in the instants
of discharge enhancer is 3,0.1 TI. The discharge is of a
multichannel nature when the discharge enhancer is filled with
nitrogen and has a gap of l to 2 In between the electrodes.

In dischargers where the electrical field distribution is distorted, it is necessary
to rapidly change the polarity of the control electrode voltage [1]. Hhen synchron-
ously switching a large number of dischargers. sections of coaxial cables are used,
the inner conductors of which connect the control electrodes of the dischargers and
the switcher which is common to all the cables [2-4]. The precision of the mutual
actuation of the dischargers, as well as the uniformity of the development of the
current channels in them and the current distribution over the channels depend
substantially on the rise time of the cable discharge current [2, 3]. If the
cables which are connected in parallel to the shorting switcher number several tens
of cables, while their charging voltage 00 is 3_20 RV, then the rise time of the
current through the switcher is usually 3 10 nsec.

A system of 26 sections of RK-SO-ll-l3 cables (overall impedance of p - 2 ohms)
connected in parallel, which makes it possible to generate a cable discharge cur-
rent wave with a rise time of < S nsec when 00 Z 15 KV, is described in this paper.
A schematic of the control system for the 26 dischargers being actuated, P1-P26,

and the switcher for the capacitive store c or the individual storage devices
driving the load, V, is shown in Figure l. The innner conductor of a RK-SO-ll-l3

166

F0! OIIICIAl.lﬂii(MVLY ’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cable section 10 m long is connected to each control electrode 1 of the diachargers.
The high voltage electrodes 2 and the storage device c have apotantialof U
applied, while electrodes 1 and the center conductors of the cables have a potential
00 of the same polarity applied; 00 usually is 0.30 - 0.50. A common gas filled
discharge enhancer, no, similar to that described in [5], is inserted in breaks in
the inner conductors of the cables. The equalization of the potentials shared by
the electrodes of the enhancer of the cables sections of the shaping line (FL) and
peaking line (0L) is accomplished through inductance coil L and resistor 31; the
peaking line section can be connected to the charging source just as the shaping
line section. The switch K serves to short the cable. The parameters of the dis-
charge current pulses of the shaping and peaking line cable sections are measured
across shunt resistors R2 and R3, consisting of 20 TVO-0.25 resistors connected in
parallel which are positioned in breaks in the outer conductors, while the voltage
pulses at electrode 3 and at control electrodes 1 are measured by capacitive divid-
ers 01 (Cl, 02,) and Dz (C3, C4) respectively.

 

Figure 1. Schematic of the control system for the actuation of 26 die-
chargers, which switch the capacitive storage device c into
the load. C1 and C3 are 10 capacitors of 51 de each.

Key: A. To the oscilloscope;

FL - shaping line;
0L . enhancement line.

Following the actuation of switch K, adischarge current wave is produced in the
shaping line cables; it is reflected from the enhancer discharger as from a closed
end with a change in the polarity of the electrode 3 voltage. When 21 >> 9, where
21 is the impedance of L and R1 in series, the maximum pulse potential differ-
ence between electrodes 3 and b is 2Uo. By selecting the spacing 6 between the
electrodes, the pressure p and the kind of gas in the enhancer discharger, with
a high overvoltage across the gap, one can obtain a multichannel discharge in-the
peaking discharger, which enhances the rise time of the discharge current pulse of
the cables in the enhancement lines The current wave reaching electrodes 1 has a

leading edge shorter than the leading edge in the shaping lines, which stabilizes
the actuation of dischargers P1--P26.

167

FOI1OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR O‘NHCJAI.IEIECN¥LY

The system was studied for the case of Do - 15 to 30 RV, an enhancer discharger RO
filled with N2, an electron gas (SP6) and mixtures of them [6], where an air dis-
charger or a discharger with mechanically destroyed film insulation was used as the
switcher K. The studies were conducted in sequences consisting of one-time actua-
tions of the system with the subsequent polishing of the electrodes prior to each
successive start. The inspection of the electrode surfaces of the peaking discharger
showed that the number of erosion spots on the discharger electrodes with a diameter
of 135 mm, filled with N2, was greater than when filled with a mixture of SP6 + “2
and pure SF6 and amounts to g 3; as a rule, a single discharge channel is produced
in $95. The recording of the current pulses in two diametrically arranged enhancer
line cables confirmed the multichannel of the discharge in N2; the difference in the
points in time when the wave reached resistors R3 did not exceed the travel time for
the speed of light around one-sixth of the peripheral length of the ring electrodes
of the peaking discharger. Uniform spacing between electrodes 3 and a over the
entire length of the periphery (a scatter of g 0.05 nm) is important for normal
Operation of the discharger. The calculated electromagnetic wave propagation time
over half ofthe peripheral length of the electrodes amounts to about 0.7 nsec; in
mixtures of gases and in SP5, the indicated time difference was observed to run up
to 0.6 nsec. The time scatter AT of the enhancer breakdown in N2 was also less with
the same gaps between the electrodes of the enhancer discharger. Taking these
circumstances into account, results of measurements are given below for an enhancer
discharger filled with N2.

Typical oscilloscope traces of the discharge current pulse of the shaping line
cables and the voltage changes across electrodes 1 of the dischargers corresponding
to it when solid insulation of lavsan film [synthetic fiber similar to dscron] was
used in the switch K, and the cables were charged at voltage of Uo ' 23 XV, the
gap 6 was 2 nla and the pressure p was 0.85 HPa N2, are shown in Fig. 2 [not shown] . It
is seen that with a switching current rise time of T1 = 40 nsec, the voltage change
time is T2 3 5 nsec. when 6 is reduced down to 1 mm, the time T2 decreases down to
a 3.8 nsec. For six values of Ho and 6, increasing the pressure p shifts the
moment of enhancer discharge breakdown to the peak of the current pulse, however,

T2 changes little in this case. The scatter AT of the moments of enhancer dis-
charger breakdown relative to the start of the current pulse in the shaping line.
measured from the superimposition of 10 and more signals (Figure 2b), was 5.6 nsec
in a series of 100 actuations of the switch K. Under these same conditions, the
scatter in SP6 is greater by approximately a factor of two. shortening the leading
edge of the current pulse T1 in the shaping line reduces the scatter in the time AT;
when an air gap discharger is used, T1 increases up to 70 nsec and AT correspond-
ingly increases up to 7 nsec. Splitting each cable in the enhancer line near the
dischargers P1-~P26 into conductors up to 2 m long which were matched to the charac-
teristic impedance (100 ohms) did not degrade the speed of voltage polarity re-
versal at their ends, which made it possible to control the operation of 52 dis-
chargers.

The enhancer discharger reliably operated throughout the entire range of variation
in 00, so that with static and pulsed charging after I 100 microseconds. no poten-
tial difference was produced between electrodes 3 and 4 of this discharger.

168

FIHI(NHNCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘DFFMJAI.US£(MNLY

A similar system can be designed with a large mater of cables. A further reduc~'-
tion in 72 can be achieved by the sequential breakdown of several enhancenent gape

[7].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barnes P.N.. Gruber J.B.. James 1.3.. J. SCIENT. INSTRUN.. 1967. Vol 44. No 8.
p 599.

Bosanykin V.S.. Gerasinov A.I.. Zenkov 0.1. et a1.. "Gatorazryadnyye pribory
(Trudy konferentaii po elektronnoy tekhnike" ["caa Discharge Devices (Proceedings

of the Conference on Electronics Engineering)"], Moscow. "Elektronika" A11-Union _‘

Scientific Research Institute. 1970. No. 2 (18). p 94. 95.

Pavlovakiy A.I., Gereeianv A.1.. Tenanakin V.A., et a1.. PTB [EXPERIMENTAL
ENGINEERING AND INSTRUMENTS], 1970. No 2. p 122.

Pavlovskiy A.I.. Gerasinov A.1.. Zenkov 0.1.. et 81., ATOHNAXA ENERGIYA, 1970.
Vol 28. No 5. p 632.

Pavlovskiy A.1. Kuleahov G.D., Gerasimov A.1., et a1.. PTE. 1976. No 6. p 136.
Gerasinov A.I., Saltykov V.B.. PTE. 1979. No 4. p 265.
Vorob'yev P.A.. Potalitsyn Yu.P.. Collected Papers. "Elektrofizicheskaya

apparatura i elektricheekaye izolyateii" ["Blectrophysical Equipnent and
Electrical Insulation"). Moscow. Bnergiya Puinahers. 1970. p 160.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Nauka". "Pribory i tekhnika ekaperinenta", 1981

8225
C50: 8146/0178

169

FOI‘OFFKJAI.UBB¢NNLY
FOI1DFFK3AI.USE(HNLY

UDC 621.383.98
HIDEBAND PHOTOELBCTRONIC RECEIVER

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No b, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 3 Bar 80) pp 199-202

[Paper by R.R. Agishev, 6.1. Il'in and A.N. Pikulev, Kazan' Aviation Institute
imeni A.N. Tupolev]

[Text] The circuitry and operational principle of a photodector
with a photomultiplier are described, which has a stepped amplitude
response and makes it possible to receive optical signals in three
modes: with manual setting of the gain. with timswiae gain control
and automatic gain control. The dynamic input range is 80 dB, the
passband is 25 MR: and the maximum time for switching from channel
to channel is 100 nsec.

The dynamic range of variation in optical signals fed to the input of a receiver

can reach 80 to 100 dB, and without taking special steps to coapress the dynamic
range, this unavoidably leads to the overloading of the optical receiver and inform-
ation losses. The most well-known methods of dyanamic range compresssion are the
introduction of automatic and timewise gain control as well as the use of func6 u
tional amplifiers; however, the precision of measurements of the output data in

such optical receivers is poor.

One of the promising methods of dynamic range compression with high measurement
precision and a large dynamic range of the signals being measured is the technique
of stepped gain control. However, there are no sufficiently universal photodetec-
tors at the present time which employ the given principle of analog signal com-
pression. The circuit proposed in [l] for stepwise automatic gain control (a.g.c.)
is convenient when working_with sufficiently "smooth" signals, but cannot be
satisfactory when recording rapidly changing signals. The use of delay lines

[1, 2] to prevent information losses during switching leads to a narrowing of the
passband of the entire device. Moreover, delay lines are inefficient in the case
of repeated switching. A photodetector with timewise automatic gain control
(t.a.g.c.) yieldstbhe best results [3], in which it is possible to select the
requisite portion of the signal by setting a definite program. It is necessary in
a number of other cases to analyze the entire signal at a fixed gain. Then it
becomes expedient to manually control the photodetector operation: the signal is
picked off-of the selected dynode.

170

ltlltﬂﬂﬂtlAl.USE(NVlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Functional block diagral of the wideband photoreceiver.
M1 - H3 - 155143; H4, H5 I 155146; 01 - DI. . K0503.

Key: 1. Trigger;
2. Automatic gain control;
3. Tine controlled auto-atic gain control;
4. Manual control;
5. 8th dynode;
6. 10th dynode;
7. EP1 - emitter follower 1;
8. EP2 - emitter follower 2;
9. Inv.2- inverter 2;

10. EPO . emitter follower end limiter;
11. 3P7 - emitter follower 7;

12. 2P6;

13. Ogrl - liniter 1;

14. 081 " eupplenentalanplifier l;
15. K1. - switch lo;

16. 88V - output notching circuit;
17. luv 1 . inverter 1;

18. cc - "Comb" generator;

19. RS? I voltage shift register;
20. A01" amplifier diacrininator 1;
21. A03 - amplifier diecrininator 3;

171

FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOIGNHNCJALIﬂﬂEONLN

[Key to Figure 1, continued:]

22. SSLI - logic level matching circuit 1;
23. LSVK I channel selection logic;
24. $01 - control circuit 1.

A photodetector is described in this paper which can operate in any of three
modes: manual control, and with a.g.c. and t.a.g.c. The optical signal receiver
is designed in accordance with the circuit described in [a]. The output signals
are picked off of load resistors inserted in the dynode circuits of the photo-
multipliers. As studies have shown, to obtain a dynamic range of 104. the output
signals can be picked off of the 8th and 10th dynodes and the anode of the photo-
multiplier, and a supplemental amplifier with a gain of 10 can also be used for
the signal from the anode. In this case, the relative error is g 5 percent [5].

A functional block diagram of the receiver is shown in Figure l. The signals from
the 8th and 10th dynodes are fed to two identical channels. By way of example, we
shall consider the passage of the signal from the 8th dynode. The signal is simul-
taneously fed to inverter Inv l and amplitude discriminator AD1 through emitter
follower 8P1. The negative polarity signal from Inv l is fed through emitter fol-
lower EP3 to switch K1. The signal picked off of the photo multiplier anode is
simultaneously fed to emitter follower and limiter RFC and emitter follower 8P6.
The voltage from the emitter follower and limiter is fed to discriminator AD3 and
emitter follower 3P5, and then to switch K3. The signal from the output of 3P6 is
fed to the additional amplifier 081 (to avoid overloading the amplifier by large
signals, there is a limiter, Ogr l in the circuit) and goes through emitter fol-
lower BP7 to switch 4. At each fixed point in time, only switch Ki is unblocked,
and the signal is fed from it through the 88V output matching circuit to the output
of the device.

We shall treat the operation of the circuit in various modes. when the switch

31 is in the "manual“ position, a logic 1 voltage is fed to the sliding contact of
the dynode switch 36- The switch 35 can feed the l voltage to logic gates H1-3,
M2-2, H3-1 and M3-a. The voltage which appears in this case at the output of one
of the four integrated circuit elements H4 and N5 unblocks the corresponding switch
Ki through the control circuits $01, and the signal is fed at the selected gain
level to the output of the photodetector.

when operating in the time controlled a.g.c. mode, the switch 31 unblocks gates
H1-1, "1.4, H2-3 and "3-2 with a logic 1 voltage. A synchronizing pulse triggers
the "cmmH' generator cc, which generates a series of four pulses. A voltage shift
register (rap) generates a train of query gating pulses from the "comb", which are
fed through isolating diodes DI - 04 to switches 82 - 35, which accomplish the
requisite setting of the strobes. The interval between the comb generator pulses
can be varied by means of potentiometers R1 - 34, and the channel interrogation
time will change in this case.- Thus, the requisite amplitude-time characteristic
of the t.a.g.c. is generated. The strobe pulses in the selected sequence unblock
the switches Ki in interrogating the channels. through the unblocked t.a.g.c. “
gates, integrated circuits H4 and H5 and the 801 control circuits.

172

FOR OFFICIAI.lEﬂL(H'LY
when operating in the a.g.c. mode. the logic I level incoming from switch 31
unblocka gates "1.2. H24, "2.4, and H3-3. In this case, the control of the
switches is transfered to the channel selection logic (LSVI). As has already been
indicated, the input signals from emitter follower l, emitter follower 2 and the
enitter follower-liniter are fed to amplitude discriminators ADi; designed around
tunnel diodes. Then the logic 1 and 0 levels.are fed to the channel selection

. Depending on whether the
the corresponding diodes,
the switches K1 through
each time the enable

the channels are designed so that
only one switch K4 in open in this case. If the amplitud

photomultiplier input is smell. then the atatee of the d'

e of the signal at the

--_‘.‘-—- ‘19.,“5-7
:- ------- -I
5..__£'£-—.:_‘°Iﬁ-y
r----'--1
--—£’.‘.--.s ‘M

law :luuVOutput

'3'. ”"1” To
' ,_ "2-1
III-ii!” .

     

     

  

— Ml
-------- zit)
1' M
' ; a I" T“. "3

"a ‘ . ‘ r
:I 4 I..I .:I I
- N

Figure 2. Basic schematic of the unit containing the analog processing

and switching stages as well an the threshold gates and the
channel selection logic.

173

FOR OFFICJAI.IEII(NVLY
FOI<OFFKJA1.USB(NNLY

[Caption and key to Figure 2, continued:]

H1 ' 190KT1; H2 ' ISSLRI; M3 ' 155LA3; T1, 16, 110 and T13 I KT315A;

T; - KT316A; 13. Ta, 13 and T9 - KT326A; Ts, T1 and T11 I KT361A;

T15 and 716 I KT339A; T12 and 114 - GT3113; 01, D3, 04 and 09 - KD503A;
Dz - GI305A; 05 - Dg - 08160.

Key: 1. 3P1 - emitter follower l;
2. luv 1 - inverter 1;
3. BP3 - emitter follower 3;
A. 8th dynode;
5. Emitter follower 2;
6. Inverter 2;
7. Emitter follower a;
8. 10th dynode;
9. $04 - control circuit 4;
10. LSVK - channel selection logic;
11. SUI - control circuit 1;
12. SSL1 - logic level matching circuit 1;
13. A93 - amplitude discriminator 3;
14. SSL3 - logic level matching circuit 3.

 

Figure 3. Basic shenatic of the CG "comb" generator and the ESP
voltage shift register. H1 and H2 - 155LA3; H3 - lSSIRl;
1'1 and 13 - r7 - KT361A; 1‘2 and Is - mam; 01 - KDSO3A.

A basic schematic of the unit in which the analog processor stages, the switching
stages as well as the threshold gates and LSVK channel selection logic are

174

INJB‘OIIIC1A1.USE:CHULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

included is shown in Figure 2. A basic schematic of the 66 "comb" generator and
the RS? voltage shift register is shown in Figure 3.

Figure lo. The amplitude-light response
of the photo receiver when
operating in the a.g.c. node.
Phre)" is the normalized
light flux at the photo-
multiplier input.

 

0,01 ,
I I0 ma moo mm am,

During testing of the photoreceiver in the a.g.c. mode, its amplitude-light re-
sponse was recorded, which is shown in Figure lo. The characteristics were re-
corded with an PRU-86 [photomultiplier] in a monopulse node. The light signal was
generated in the form of a pulse 20 nsec to 1 nsec wide by a high power LED, to
which a vo1tage was fed from a 65-56 generator. The output signal was monitored
with a 88-12 oscilloscope.

The all-purpose photoreceiver makes it possible to register signals with a dynamic
range of. 80 dB and the passband of the devices is 25 m. The switching time from
channel to channel is g 100 nsec. When operating in the t.a.g.c. mode, the device
makes it possible to produce an arbitrary amplitude-tine characteristic with an
operating time for each of the four channels of 0.5 to 5 usec.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Aver'yanov G.A., Safronov Yu.N., Ssvichev 3.11., PTE, 1976, No. 1., p 162.

F)

. Brunov H.V., Colovkov V.P., Corbatyuk V.V., et a1., PTE, 1975, No 6, p 137.
3. Il'in 6.1., Pikulev A.N., Pol'skiy Yu.Ye., PTE, 1980. No 5, p 199.

1:. Il'in 6.1., Pikulev A.N., Pol’skiy Yu.Ye., Collected Papers, "IV Vsesoyuz.
simposium po rasprostraneniyu lazernogo izlucheniya v atmosfere" ["Fourth
All-Union Symposium on Laser Radiation Propagation in the Atmosphere"], Tomsk.
Institute of Atmospheric Optics of the USSR Academy of Sciences Siberian
Department. 1977, p 55.

5. Il'in 6.1., Collected Papers. "Vsesoyuz. simpozium po lazernomu i skusticheskomy
zondirovaniyu atmosfery" ["A11-Union Symposium on Laser and Acoustic Sensing
of the Atmosphere"), Tomsk, Institute of Atmospheric Optics of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, Siberian Department. 1978, Part lo, p 138.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8225
C80: 8141.]0178

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.376.5 (088.8)
DEVICE FOR CONTROLLING PIN-DIODE ATTENDATOR

Moscow OPISANIYE IZOBRBTRIIYA 746784 in Russian 17 Jul 80

[Description of USSR Patent No 746784 by A.V. Andriyanov, A.V. Goryachev and
(3.3. Dukhtser, filed 5 Jan 78, published 17 Jul 80, class I! 01 P 1/22
H 01 P 1/40]

[Text] This invention is in the area of radio engineering and can be used to
construct high-speed pin-diode attenuators in the microwave band.

There exists a device for controlling a pin-diode attenuator which contains series-
connected master oscillator, delay eluent and first auxiliary oscillator, the
output of which is cemented to the control input of the pin-diode attenuator; be-
tween the other output of the first auxiliary oscillator and the control input of
the pin-diode attenuator is connected an element with two stable states, and a

second auxiliary oscillator is connected to the control input of the pin-diode
attenuator [1].

However, this device is not fast enough.

The purpose of this invention is to reduce the duration of the leading edge of the
attenuator output pulse.

In order to accomplish this, the device for controlling a pin-diode attenuator,
consisting of series-connected master oscillator, delay element and first auxil-
iary oscillator with output connected to the control input of the pin-diode
attenuator, has an element with two stable states connected between the other
output of the first auxiliary oscillator and the control output of the pin-diode
attenuator; a second auxiliary oscillator is connected to the control input of the
pin-diode attenuator, the output of the master oscillator is connected to the other
input of the element with two stable states, and an additional delay element is
connected between the output of the master oscillator and the input of the

second auxiliary oscillator.

Thd drawing shows the functional diagram of the proposed device.

The pin-diode attenuator controller contains pin-diode attenuator 1, master
oscillator 2, element 3 with two stable states, first and second auxiliary os-
cillators 4 and 5, delay element 6 and additional delay element 7.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The device operates as follows.

Hhen a pulse is output by master oscillator 2, element 3 with two stable states is
in a state which allows the working current to pass through the pin-diodes, as a
result of which there is practically no microwave signal at the output of diode
attenuator l. The leading edge of the pulse coming from master oscillator 2 trig-
gers additional delay element 7, simultaneously switching element 3 with two stable
states to a state which cuts off the working current to the control input of pin-
diode attenuator l (a slight cut-off voltage is usually applied to the diodes in
this case), as a result of which the charge begins to be dispersed from the base of
the pin-diodes. Sometime later. additional delay element 7 triggers second auxil-
iary oscillator 5, which outputs a powerful enough pulse to the control input of
pin-diode attenuator l to accelerate the dispersal of the accumulated charge from
the base of the pin-diodes, as a result of which the output microwave power level
rises rapidly to its maximum value. Additional delay element 7 is adjusted so that
when the pulse is applied a significant portion of the accumulated charge is dis-
persed from the base of the pin-diodes, but the microwave power level at the output
of pin-diode attenuator 1 does not exceed the value from which the counting of

the length of the leading edge of the pulse begins (for example, 0.1 of the ampli—
tude). As a result of this, the leading edge of the microwave power pulse is
short, and the speed increases. The cutoff of the pulse from master oscillator 2
activates delay element 6, which, in turn, activates first auxiliary oscillator

a somewhat later. A pulse is applied to the control input of pin-diode attenuator

1, providing rapid charge accumulation and, consequently, short cut off of the
microwave power pulse.

Simultaneously, first auxiliary oscillator 6 acts upon element 3 with two stable
states, resetting it to its initial state. Delay element 6 can thus also act as
a pulse width regulating element.

and, consequently, a wider range of modulating frequencies during pulse modulation.
Furthermore, it also provides maximum suppression of the microwave signal during
pauses.

Patent Claims

A device for controlling a pin-diode attenuator containing series-connected master
oscillator, delay element and first auxiliary oscillator, the output of which is

connected to the control input of.the pin-diode attenuator, with an element with
two stable states connected between the other output of the first auxiliary os-
cillator and the control input of the pin-diode attenuator, and a second auxiliary
oscillator connected to the control input of the pin-diode attenuator, distin-
guished by the fact that inorder to decrease the duration of the leading edge of
the attenuator output pulse the output of the master oscillator is connected to
the other input of the element with two stable states, and an additional delay
element is connected between the output of the master oscillator and the input of
the second auxiliary oscillator.

177

FINR<0FTWCIAL USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Information Sources
Used in Evaluation

1. Dzekhtaer. 6.5., ct. 31. "P-i-n-diody v siiirokopolomnykh uatroyatvakh SVCh"
[Pin-diodes in Hideband Microwave Devices], Phaecov. Sovetskoye radio, 1970,
p 160, figure 4.19 (prototype).

6900
CSO: 8166/0218-3

178

FUHI(JFTWCJAI.IHBEZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 621.389
surcou mm—mwucr P-I-N moon Iron connmrcnmls mum

hoscow EMRCBVYAZ' in Russian No 8. Aug 81 (unuscript received 15 Oct 79)
PP 51-52

[Article by m. a. Nosov]

[Text] Silicon pin diodes are used widely in radio and wire cos-unications. They
are used in the SVCh [Super-high frequency] range as switches. Iodulators. attenu-
ators and power limiters. Lately pin diodes are being widely used in the VCh
(High-frequency) range in various A80 EAutonatic gain control] circuits. variable
rectifiers etc. In controlled attenua ore. pin diodes are capable of providing
ARI]. both flat and sloped of up to 60-70 db with very high linearity and with a
sinima of introduced noises. However. the develop-ant of such donsstic devices
was retarded by the lack of corresponding cosponents. The proposed diode -- one
of the first such types of doaestic diodes has good electrical characteristics.

in recent year. the use of silicon switching and liaiter diodes with a pin structure
find wider and wider application. It was found that in the VCh range. such devices
ny be very useful in ARU and power liliter circuits etc.

Fig. 1 shows a KDMBA. B diode: a -- exterior view; b -- the pin structure cir-
cuits c -- the distribution of charge carriers in the switched-off state (solid
line) and at various forward currents (broken lines); d -- equivalent circuit of
the pin diode (i -- dif‘ 2 -- ctr‘ 3 -- ck are diffusion, Junction and device

capacitances respectively: I'k -- inductance of the device). h -- rd“. is the
differential resistance of the diode. 5 -- If is forward current.

The pin diode operates as follows. At fomrd current flowing through the diode.
an intensive "pumping" of charge carriers into the base low conductivity region
(1 region) and their accululation in it are implemented due to the effect of a

double injection fro- the strongly alloyed n* and p‘. regions. First, at fairly
high frequencies. the rectifying action of p-i and n-i Junctions ceases (diffusion

capacitance Cd“. in Fig. to is large) and the high frequency signal can pass through

the diode without significant distortions. Secondly, the resistance of the base
region becoaes snail and its value becoaes dependent on forward current. Thus.

in some frequency range. the pin diode is a current controlled resistive coaponent.

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Differential
raaiatanca at
If=ZIa and
f=50ﬂﬂs.
rdlf' ohla

not not
less late
than than

30 60
40 80

Switching
charge at
If=2aa.
Urov'10
volts.

Q.o not

not less
than

2
2
The operating mechanism cited is achieved in type WELD devices whose electrical
para-eters and minus allowable operating nodes are shown in Tables 1 and 2. The
lower boundary of the working frequency range is determined fairly strictly by
switching charge Q . Its value for the pin structure is related to the effective
lifetine of charge‘carriers in the base Toff by a simple relationship

Q33 Jif «ceff

Table 2

Operating nodes of KDMJAJ devices in the -60 to+ 100°C temperature range

 

 

Name of node Conventional designation Allowable
Value

Maximal allowable constant or Ifm 20m

average forward current

Minu- allowable constant Urevmx 2“ volts

reverse voltage

Minu- allowable scattered power“ P Is): 20 uw

”The power liberated at the diode is calculated fraapproxinte formula
9:13.1f+ :2; rd“. , where If -- forward bias current, I -- effective value of the
high frequency current through the diode. r -- differential diode resistance at

dif
the selected value of if. Condition Pg Pm sust be fulfilled.

The results of experinental investigations of the devices described are shown in
Fig. 2.

 

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a broad range of forward current changes, 1:.“ my be considered constant and
lying in the interval of i to 2 sicroseconds to a precision of up to 10-20%. The
condition for deteraining the low value of the working frequency has the form

will! ”5.11.. II 7) 10
where the value of n depends on the allowable level of signal distortion (incosplete
disappearance of the rectifying action of the pin structure) and. in the majority
of practical applications, say be assused to be n=30...100. Thus. for the NBA.
3 diodes we have

rain ~ nit. % 3...10 segaﬂs.

~

§?fo.

The upper boundary of the working range is detersined by parasitic reactances
(inductance. capacitance) of the design and of the pin structure itself and lies
within 300...500 aegaﬂzu A typical value of the full capacitance of the diode at
fairly high reverse biases ( ~ 10 volts) is close to 0.1...0.2 picofarads; the
parasitic inductance of the structure is 2 nanohenries.

The basic paraseter of the pin diode as a resistive cosponent is its differential
resistance at a given direct current aeasured at high frequencies (£350 segaﬂs)
and the far- of relationship rd1f=f( It).

To sisplify the selection of the operating aode of the device with respect to the
forward current. a two-sided lisitation on the rd“. paraaater is introduced (Table

1); its actual spread is still speller.

  

"!'l== (5)

an 40 so u! n95..ar

r15. 3. 3 -- Knu13A; a -- Knuianu 5 -- r

dif' ohss:

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 3 shows the diode distribution function with respect to rdif values. 1, 2

are boundaries of s 95 percent spread. In the region of value change of If by
3...“ orders of Isgnitude (fros 5...10 nicrossperes to 10...20 sillisnperes). the

relationship between the differential resistance and the constant forward current
is described to s high degree of accuracy by

’61 13‘“:
where A=?0...110 sillivolts for group A and A“)0...iUO Iillivolts for group B.

Structurally. the KnhijA.B diodes sre Isde in the fora of sinisture ell-glass
1.2x2.8 In cylinders with axial lead-outs end are suitsble for wiring in hybrid
nicrocircuits.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo “de10 i svysz'“. 'llektrosvynz'“. 1981

2291
(:50: 1860/78

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.39l:621.3l7.75
PRINCIPLES OF THE DESIGN OF NONLINEAR PULSE-FREQUENCY SIGNAL SBLBCTORS
Moscow IMRENIYA, KONTROL', AVTOHATIZATSIYA in Russian No 10 (38), 1981 pp 510-61
[Article by v.1. Korchun, engineer]

[Text] Devices possessing the properties of frequency selection are most often
designed on the basis of classical analog structures (line filters) which, because
of their simplicity and universality, are widely used in various fields of engineer-
ing. however. in recent times the attention of investigators and developers has
been attracted by methods of designing nonlinear frequency-selective devices based
on digital logic circuits [1]. In these devices the methods and principles of
pulsed and digit ! equipment are used primarily; therefore, only digital circuits
and components . required for implementing them. Interest in these methods can

be explained by a, following reasons:

The modern integrated technology for fabricating the components of electronic cir-
cuits is more compatible with engineering solutions based on employing the methods
and principles of digital equipment, and not analog.

Frequency selection devices designed on the basis of digital logic elements make it
possible to obtain specific values of a nuaber of parameters and characteristics
(speed of response, selectivity, stability of characteristics, simplicity of re-
tuning, etc.) which are difficult or impossible to obtain by means of analog line
circuits [2].

A great number of terms are required for designating nonlinear frequency-selective
devices based on digital logic circuits, such as "nonlinear digital filter,"
"numerical filter," "discrete filter," "repetition rate pulse selector," "frequency
detector," etc. Taking into account the fact that in designing these devices digi-
tal principles of isolating the frequency trait of pulsed signals are employed,
below we will use the term "pulse frequency signal selector" (SChIS), limiting our-
selves to the class of nonlinear devices.

SChIs's are used in various automation, computing and measuring equipment devices.
They are used in particular for the precise fixing of the moment of time when

a parameter, varying over time, of a process characterized by a frequency trait
reaches a predetermined value. The basic functions of SChIS's are to analyze

electrical signals belonging to a specific frequency region and fixing the
moment of crossing specific threshold values.

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FfMR()FF1C1Al.lﬂ§Ei0hﬂUV

Let us note that in spite of the common nature of problems solved by neans of
SChIS's and line filtering devices it is impossible to draw a parallel between
these two classes of devices. rinding a mathematical equivalent of an SChls in
the categories customary for the theory of analog filters is quite a complex prob-
lem which still cannot be considered solved. Nevertheless. for the purpose of
characterizing an SChIS it is possible to select parameters (cutoff frequency,
transmission band, mean transmission frequency. equivalent figure of merit. etc.)
which in the physical sense are sufficiently close to the corresponding parameters
of line filters. This makes it possible to compare these devices to some extent.

A characteristic feature of nonlinear SChIS's is the .bsence of a distinct‘y pro-
nounced transition region between the disappearance and appearance of the device's
output signal. Therefore. by the cutoff frequency. f , is understood the boundary
value of the input signal's frequency with which the g§istence of a reaction in the
SChIS's output is possible. The transmission band, 2Af , is defined as the differ-
ence between the high—frequency, f , and lowhfrequency, f , limits of the region
of existence of the SChIS's output reaction, and the mean transmission frequency.

fo , of band selectors is found from the equation:

_ n+1,
I. 2 '

The selective properties of an SChIS can be characterized by the percentage ratio
of the transmission band to the mean frequency, or by the equivalent figure of
merit, Qekv . determined by the expression

Q ”rebut...
us 3’ 20.4.)

(1)

The physical meaning of this parameter differs from the concept of the figure of

merit of resonance systems; therefore, the term "equivalent figure of merit" is
used.

The operating principle of an SChIS is based on comparing the time interval of

the input pulse signal with the time parameter fixed. For the purpose of revealing
the general properties and features of various SChIs structures, in this study

the classification of selectors is based on the principles of the formation of the
fixed time parameter and methods of implementing the comparison operation. It is
possible to distinguish between the following groups of SChIS's according to this
classification: SChIS's with a signal delay for a fixed time [3]; SChIS's which
discriminate a time interval of specific duration [4]; SChIS's with direct compari-
son of the time interval of the input signal with the duration of a reference pulse
[5]; and SChIS's which compare the measured and reference frequencies [6].

Depending on the required kind of output signal, the implementation of each of the
design principles for SChIS's is accomplished by several methods, whereby special

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attention is paid to improving the accuracy of fixing specific threshold values of
the frequency [7] and also to improving the noise innunity of the device [8].

SChIS's uith Delay of the Signal for a fixed Time

A structural diagram and tine diagrams of the operation of a selector asking it
possible to discriminate pulses repeating at a frequency of f are shown in fig
la and b. The controlled pulse train enters the input of a degay line, L2, with

a frequency of f (period T - l/f ) and one of the inputs of an AND gste. An
input signal delayed for a time of r . To enters the other input of the AND gate.
If the repetition frequency, f , of igput pulses equals f , where to - l/T -

- l/Tz . then the delayed pulses are synchronized with the following input pu sea.
U kh . Furthermore, a pulse signal, va . with a frequency of f is for-ed in
the output of the AND gate. It is easy 0 verify that the SChIS admits without
hindrance also those pulses of multiple frequencies (f I kfo ; k - 2, 3, 6, ... )
the distance between which equals To .

1) ‘51 2)&Guu

 

Figure 1. Circuit (a) and Time Diagrams of the Operation (b) of an SChls
with a Delay Line

Key:

1. "an [input] 3. 1.2 [delay line]

2' uvykh [output] 4' I:

The transmission band of the selector at the mean frequency of 10 depends on the
duration, 11 . of input pulses:

 

 

A a: — I —. | “A
2 I is f1:- 1'.—t. 7.0+“ 8 1}

The equivalent figure of merit, Q . according to equation (1), also depends on
ekv
the duration of input pulses:

186

FOR 0F1ﬂC1Al.USEJDNlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“oz-L.
2's

Because of the influence of transient processes in the AND gate and delay line.
L2, as well as because of the effect of destabilizing factors causing instability
of the delay time, T: . the duration, T , of input pulses must not be less than

a certain value. On the other hand, indreasing the duration of input pulses re-
sults in a reduction in selectivity (selection accuracy). Therefore, it is neces-
sary to select duration t1 by taking into account these facts [9].

Since the SChIs (cf. fig 1) has an exceptionally high speed of response (the time
for responding to the appearance of frequency f - f does not exceed the period
of the input signal). then the appearance of even a single noise pulse removed
from the information pulse by a time of T g t < To + T will result in the
appearance of a spurious output pulse. Po? the purpose 3f improving the noise im-
munity of SChIS's of this type it is possible to increase the number of inputs of
the AND gate to 3 to 10. With this signals with an increasing delay, 1 - T ,
T - 2T0 . T: - 3T . etc., are supplied to each successive input of fhe ANB
gife, for which purpgse a sectional delay line is most often used [10]. Combina-
tion logic circuits (KLS's) containing AND gates, OR gates and flip-flops are
often used instead of an AND gate [11].

With a high level of pulse noise and the presence of omissions of information
pulses in pulse trains being discriminated. instead of a delay line controlled
delay generators and gate generators synchronized with one another are used [12].
Selection is accomplished by gating the input signals with pulses of s set dura—
tion which follow at intervals of T . By repeated triggering of the delay gene-
rator and gate generator it is possigle to check the first signal picked up re-
peatedly for truth. At the same time gate pulses can be generated also with in-
dividual omissions of information pulses (up to a certain predetermined number of
information pulses omitted in succession), because of which the signal pickup time
with fading of the pulse train-othe SChIS's readiness time-is reduced to a mini-
mmm (on the order of the period of the input signal).

A general shortcoming of SChIs’s with delay of the signal for a fixed time is the
existence of a reaction at frequencies which are a multiple of the assigned. This
shortcoming can be eliminated by means of the method of n-fold comparison per
period [13]. whose essence consists in the following. To a multi-input AND gate
-is fed an n-multiplet of additional pulses with intervals of T whose formation
is possible only upon condition of the arrival in succession of n + l pulses

of the controlled train with a period of T . The method is implemented by means
of a so-called delayed regeneration loop exgcuted on the basis of a sectional
delay line. registers and combination logic circuits. The time for the appearance
of a pulse reaction in the output of an SChIS of this sort from the moment the
input signal is supplied equals nTo .

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The lower limit of the frequency band of these SChIS'a is determined by the maxi-
mum achievable delay time. 1 . and the upper limit by the speed of response of
logic elements and it can reach dozens of megahertz, which makes it possible to
use the selectors in various radio engineering devices.

SChIs's with Discrimination of a Period of Specific Duration

Selectors of this type are designed on the basis of the principle of digital mea—
surement of the period of the input signal. Passage of the input controlled pulse
train to the device’s output is permitted or inhibited depending on the result of
the measurement. A structural diagram and operating diagrams of a an SChIS for
narrowband selection are shown in fig 2a and b.

 

Figure 2. Circuit (a) and Time Diagrams of the Operation (b) of a Narrouband
Digital SChIS

Key:
1. U 6. Base pulses 10. Clock pulses
2. Aﬁbhsligput] 7. Control signals 11. Gating signal
3. Counter 8. Reference voltage 12. Differentiation
4. Decoder 9. Timer circuit
5' vakh {output}
188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From voltage Uv of the controlled train, by means of a one-shot nultivibrator,
N , base pulses,kﬂ , are formed, with a duration of t . In turn, the base
pulses, Um , are d¥fferentiated by means of differentiafion circuit DS , in
whose output are formed control signals, U r . of short duration, which coincide
in time with the termination of the base p3 ses. Having received the next con—
trol signal, U , the pulse counter, ST . is reset to the zero state and auxili-
ary flip—flop r by means of the same signal is set to the "one" state at the

8 input, thereby permitting the entry of clock pulses, U , from the output of
the reference generator, 011 (with a frequency of f ) “rough the AND gate into
the counting input of the counter, ST . The decoder?pDSh , analyzes the state

of the n outputs of the counter and fixes the moment of the accumulation of

the set number. N , of pulses (in this case N - S ), thereby forming the gating
signal, Us . With the arrival of signal U flip-flop T is set to the zero
state and closes the AND gate, at the same time inhibiting the entry of clock
pulses, U , into the input of the counter. ST . "hen signals U and Um are
synchronized (for the purpose of clarity these signals are presenied on the same
diagram) the output AND gate forms a pulse reaction, U k . The counting process
begins from the start with the arrival of the next conffol signal, Uupr .

From the time diagrams (cf. fig 2b) it follows that with an assigned duration,

T , of base pulses, U , a fixed value of the frequency, f . of the timer,

691 , and a set counte? state decoding number, N , the syncﬁfonization of signals
U8 and Um and, accordingly, the appearance of signal U in the SChIS's
output are possible only in a limited region of input sianIEhkah , frequencies

[a].

The mean transmission frequency, the effective transmission band and the equi-
valent figure of merit of the SChIS are expressed, respectively, in the following
manner:

thoL ant—Hug...

2 N(N-—l+hlca)' (2)
_ ulna—l ,

2“ I‘MN—Hnlod' (3)
_ 2N—l+snlgl

Q” zunlon—l) ' (’0

This circuit for an SChIS, as is obvious from the equations given, with the
appropriate choice of the values of N , T and f , can make possible.
generally speaking, as high indicators of gelectionosarameters in the narrowband
region as desired. As an example of the practical application of an SChIS of
this sort can be cited the typical problem of producing frequency nmrkers for a
narrowband swept-signal source. In the 215 to 217 kHz band the selector makes it
possible to produce markers with an error not greater than 2 Hz [2].

An analysis of equations (2) to (4) demonstrates that for the normal operation of
the SChIS (fig 2) it is necessary to fulfill the coaditions f << f and N >>

>> T fo > 1 . Since the value of the upper limit of frequency f op is determined
by the gpeed of response of the digital element base and equals (f8? the most

189

FOR43FFN7A1.USE(NQLY
ﬂOR OFTHCJAL USIZ(NVLY

widespread series of digital elements) 10 to 50 Hﬂz, then it is feasible to imp
plement according to this circuit an SChIS in the 100 to 500 kHz frequency band.
This limit can be increased by one to two orders of magnitude in the immediate
future [14].

In the transmission band the output signals of this SChIS can differ from the input
in terms of the shape of pulses. Tn the majority of cases the following units of
equipment are constructed on the basis of the direct use of the pulse reaction and
additional conversion is not required. However. sometimes the problem is posed of
discriminating pulse trains with a specified pulse repetition rate without their
distortion [15].

In measuring equipment and in pattern recognition systems in signal processing the
need often arises for the wideband selection of pulses, whereby the upper cutoff
frequency is one to two orders of magnitude higher than the lower frequency. This
type of selection can be accomplished by means of the SChIS whose structural dia-
gram and operating diagrams are shown in fig 3a and b. Unlike the preceding cir-
cuit, here two different states of the pulse counter are decoded, characterized by
the numbers K and N . whereby K << N . Number K is selected from the con-
dition f2 - f [K , where f is the reference frequency and f is the upper
cutoff frequengg and number “P is selected from the condition f1 - fop/N ,

where f1 is the lower cutoff frequency.

The selector operates in the following manner. The circuit is set to the initial
state by the trailing edge of the base pulse, U. (of. fig 3b), after which the
counter, ST , begins to be filled by pulses, U , from the reference generator,
GTI . During the time corresponding to fillingpof counter K with pulses, decoder
DShl by means of its output signal, 0 , resets flip-flop T1 to the "one" state.
If frequency f of the input signal satisfies condition f < f < f2 , then by
the moment of the arrival of the next pulse of the input signal, U , "one"
levels will be present in the direct output of flip-flop T1 and Yhhthe inverse
output of flip-flop T2 . The passage of input pulse Uv through the AND gate
to the output of the SChIS is permitted by "one" levels 0 signals ”ti and U .
If f > f2 , then by the arrival of the next U k pulse counter ST is not 3812
to number K pulses and a "zero" level is mainfained in the output of flip-flop
Tl , inhibiting passage of pulse thh through the AND gate.

If f < f , then counter ST is able to number N pulses. By means of signal
Ut from the output of decoder DShZ flip-flop T2 is reset to the "one" state,
and signal U 2 (zero level) from the inverse output of the flip-flop inhibits
the passage of the next input pulse, kah , through the AND gate.

Thus. input pulses are transmitted to the output of the SChIS only upon the condi-
tion that f < f < f . The selector makes possible the wideband selection of
pulse signal; with eagily retunable values of threshold frequencies. Improvement
of accuracy at the limits of the transmission band is achieved by increasing the

reference frequency, fop , and reducing the duration, TP . of the base pulse, U.I
[16].

The time for the appearance of a pulse reaction in the output of an SChIS designed
according to the principle of discriminating a period of specified duration is

190

FIHRIJFFICIAI.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFl-‘K‘IAI. USE ONLY

not greater than the value 0! I n 1/! , where f 4 f < f . Here splitting of
the selected tiae interval between adjacent pulse}, causedzby the superposition

of pulse noise, results-in disabling of the SChIS and not only pulse noise but
also the legitimate signal do not travel to its output. Por the purpose of elimi-
nating this shortcoming special measures for blOcking spurious signals are used
which complicate considerably the selector‘s circuit [17].

 

Figure 3. Diagram (a) and Time Diagrams of the Operation (b) of a Hideband
Digital SChIS

ICE. £13 2 for key]

SChIs with Direct Comparison of the Period of the Input Signal with the Duration
of a Reference Pulse

The operation of these SChIS's is based on utilization of the phase relationships

between pulses of the input signal and reference pulses [18]. The basic diagram

of the selector and the time diagrams explaining its operation are presented in
fig 6.

191

INJR 0l11CIAL USIZCMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 4. Circuit (a) and Time Diagrams of the Operation (b) of a
' Frequency Discriminator

Key:
1. Input signal 4. Flip-flop
2. Hultivibrator 5. Output signal
3. Reference signal

The controlled pulse train, Uv , enters the input of a one-shot multivibrator,

H . which generates a reference signal. UI . of duration To , and the synchroniza-
tion input of flip-flop T . The reference pulse. UII , from the output of the
multivibrstor, H , is supplied to the information input (D) of this flip-flo;.
Since the leading edge of the SChIS's input signal in any case is in advance of
the rise edge of pulse U (because of the finite triggering time of the Inlti-
vibrator), then the firstupulse of train U does not remove flip-flop T from
the zero state. If the repetition rate of input pulses equals T > To , then by
the noment of the arrival of the next pulse the nultivibrator is able to return

to the initial state. Thus, with f < f , vhere fo - l/To , in the direct out-
put of flip—flop T there is a steady ero level of U kh and in the inverse
output a steady "one" level of U . And if the inpgx pulse repetition rate

is equal to or greater than f .“Ihhn by the moment of the arrival of the next
input pulse. U . the "one" Revs of the reference pulse, U , is retained in
the informatio nput of flip-flop T . as the result of which the flip-flop
changes to the "one" state. Consequently, the state of the outputs of flip-flop

T provides information on whether the frequency of input pulses exceeds the
assigned threshold value of to or not.

It is possible to use as s nultivibrator any circuit which makes possible the
sufficient stability of reference pulses. A one-shot multivibrator based on a

D-flip-flop fabricated according to the CHOS technology (e.g., the domestic series
K176) makes it possible to create an exceptionally economical pulse selector

192

FIHICHﬂﬁCIAI.UBE10NlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circuit (fig 5). With an input pulse frequency of f 1 f , a single pulse is
formed for each pair of input pulses in the circuit’s out ut. With f < £0 a
pulse signal is absent. By changing the values of R and C1 . determining the
duration, T , of the reference pulse of the multivibrator, assembled from flip-
flop Tl , 2t is possible to vary the selector's cutoff frequency from dozens of
Hz to dozens of kHz. whereby To §_0.66 RS . Diode V makes possible rapid re-
storation of the initial state of the multivibrator and capacitor C serves the
purpose of delaying the leading edges of the reference pulse in relagion to input
signal pulses. enabling stable operation of the selector [l9].

 

Figure 5. Circuit of Frequency Discriminator Employing CHOS Flip-Flops

Key:
1. Input 3. T1 [flip-flop]
2. Output

This circuit can be used in various automation devices. Since the permissible
range of values of resistance R is sufficiently broad (20 k9 to 10 HR). instead
of a resistor it is possible to use also other resistive elements. e.g., thermis-
tors or photoelectric cells. With a fixed repetition rate for input pulses

(from a reference source) and varying resistance R , on the basis of this circuit
it is possible to design an alarm signal sensor: When a specific temperature or
illumination level is exceeded the selector begins to generate a train of output
pulses. This signal can be used for automatically turning on or off various actu-
ating mechanisms.

The employment of two frequency discriminators designed according to the circuit
presented in fig 4 and an AND gate makes it possible to construct an SChIS by
means of which it is possible to control not only the deviation of frequency from
an assigned value but also the input signal frequency's lying in a specific range
[20]. The values of the lower, f , and upper, f , cutoff frequencies of the
SChIS are set independently of on; another by the appropriate choice of the dura-
tions (T1 and T2 ) of one-shot multivibrators M1 and H2 (fig 6). This
SChIS possesses an internal memory which can prove useful in certain measurements,
e.g., with the disappearance of an input signal consisting of radio pulses the

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flip-flops are not switched and all the output signals do not change before the
appearance of an input signal.

The problem of the transmission of an input pulse train without distortion to the
output of the SChIS is solved by adding an additional AND gate to one of whose
inputs is supplied the input signal and to the other a control signal from an
individual output of an scurs designed according to the circuit presented in fig 6
[5. 7].

 

Figure 6. Circuit of General-Purpose SChIS

1. Input

If it is a problem of just narrowband selection then it is possible to do without
flip-flops, using the circuit shown in fig 7. The input differentiating circuit.
DS . makes possible independence of the SChIS's operation on the duration of input
pulses. The duration of the output pulse of the one-shot nultivibrator. H1 . de-
termines the period of the assigned lower cutoff limit, f , and the output pulse
of one—shot multivibrator H2 sets the required upper-liiit cutoff frequency, f2 .
A distinctive feature of this selector is that multivibrators H1 and H2 must
have a paraphase output for producing the required logic levels of reference
pulses U and U2 , and also possess the possibility of repeated triggering by
the trailing edges of output pulses U (fig 7b). The duration of output pulses
in the transmission band corresponds t8 the duration of pulses Ud [21].

The characteristics of an SChIS with direct comparison of the period of the input
signal with the duration of the reference pulse are determined by the character—
istics of the one-shot multivibrator (recovery time, tenperature stability, sin-
plicity of retuning duration of a pulse and the like); therefore, the choice of the
multivibrator's circuit is basic in designing an SChIs of this type. For example,
the use of the one-shot multivibrator discussed in [22], in addition to high sta-
bility indicators (e.g., relative variation of the duration of the output pulse
with variation of the voltage of the power supply by one percent does not exceed
0.005 percent) also makes possible program-ed setting of the value of tbe.cutoff
frequency.

19“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 7. Circuit (a) and Time Diagrams of the Operation (b) of an SChIS
with Separate Setting of the Limits of the Transmission Band
(Parallel Connection of One-Shot Hultivibrators)

1. Input 6. AND gate
2. Differentiation circuit 5. Output signal
3. Differentiation output

The stability of durations T and T fully determine the stability of the
transmission limits of a band selector; therefore. in designing an SChIS with a
narrow transmission band according to the circuit presented in fig 7 certain diffi-
culties arise. with close values of f and f , under the effect of destabiliz-
ing factors, superposition of the trail}ng edges of reference pulses is possible

(T g_T ), which results in disturbance of the circuit's normal operation. This
disadvantage is eliminated in the circuit presented in fig 8. One-shot multivi-
brator H1 sets the upper cutoff frequency and multivibrator H2 the transmission
bandwidth of the selector. In the circuits shown in figs 7 and 8 multivibrators
with a paraphaae output are used [21].

It is necessary to pay special attention to the noise immunity of the device when
designing an SChIS employing a one-shot multivibrator. Since a multivibrator

has high sensitivity to pulse noise it is necessary to take special measures to
prevent false triggering. Hultivibrators exist which possess high internal noise
immunity, The circuit of one of them, a so-called digital monostable circuit, is
shown in fig 9. With the presence of a high level in its output the multivibrator
can be triggered only upon the arrival of a timing pulse (positive-going pulseh

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By selecting the appropriate duration and frequency of timing pulses the noise
immunity of the device can be increased by 60 to 80 d3 [23].

 

Figure 8. Circuit (a) and Time Diagrams of the Operation (b) of an SChIS
with Series Connection of One-Shot Hultivibratore

Key:
1. Input 4. AND gate

2. Differentiation circuit 5. Output signal
3. Differentiation output

 

Figure 9. Diagram of Noise-Innune One-Shot Multivibrator

Key:
1. Input 3. AND gate
2. Timing 4. Output

The operating reliability of a narrouband SChIS in the aelection of signals against
a backgrOund of pulse noiae can be increased alao by integrating the isolated
signal by means of a pulae counter. A reaction appeara in the aelector'a output

only if the number of pulaea discriminated in the transmission band reaches a cer-
tain number [8].

196

FOR1OFFKJAI.U5840NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SChIs with Comparison of the Heasured and Reference Trequencies

The structural diagrans of these selectors differ from one another in the methods
of inplementing the comparison operation. The circuit of a selector is shown in
fig 10 in which conparison of the controlled frequency. f . with the reference,

f , set by the timer. GTI , is accomplished by means of a combination logic
cggcuit containing RAND gates (14 and IS). flip-flops (T1 and T2) and a delay
line, Lz . If frequencies f and fo are equal and the pulses of both trains
are synchronized. then elenent I1 fogms inhibit pulses equal in duration to the
input pulses, the state of the outputs of elements I2 and IS does not change

and flip-flops T1 and T2 remain in the original (zero) state. Here a pulse
reaction of the SChIS is absent in'the outputs of elements 14 and IS . with

lack of synchronization or the partial synchronization of input pulses (and with
equality of the frequencies) a reaction is also absent in the selector's output,
since the flip-flops at the moment of arrival of each pair of input pulses are

in states opposite one another, alternately inhibiting the passage to the selector's
output of input pulses delayed by means of the delay line.

 

Figure 10. Circuit of SChIS with Simultaneous Comparison of the Input Pre-
quency with the Reference Frequency

Key:
1. Clock 4. II

2. Input 5. Delay line
3. Reference frequency

If frequencies f and f differ from one another, then a pulse reaction forms
in the appropriate outputoef the combination logic circuit; since flip-flops TI
and T2 will be in the inhibit (zero) state, [words missing] time segments equal
in duration, periodically admitting (with division by two) input pulse flux
through the elements of circuit 14 or IS . In essence this circuit is the cir-
cuit of a frequency discriminator whose cutoff frequency, f . is set by means of
an external reference frequency generator. GTI [23]. °P

A disadvantage of the comparison of frequencies by means of a combination logic
circuit is that proper operation of the SChIS depends on the duration of input

197

FINICHHWCJAI.USE(MNLY
FENICHNNCJAI.USE10NLN

pulse trains. Usually input signals must be preliminarily normalized in terms
of pulse duration.

This disadvantage is eliminated in SChIS's whose operating principle is based on
the integration of pulse trains by means of pulse counters and the comparison of
accumulated values upon the expiration of a certain fixed time segment [24]. The
selector contains (cf. fig 11) a reference frequency generator, GT1 , two frequency
dividers. DChl and DCh2 , a flip-flop. T . and a presetting unit, BU . If the
controlled frequency, f , of the input signal is lower than the reference frequency,
f° , then a carry pulse appears earlier in the output of divider DChl than in the
ougput of divider DCh2 (the scaling factors. N , of the dividers are equal to

one another). Here the output pulses of divider DChl retain flip-flop T in

the zero state. Simultaneously with this a signal from the output of divider DChl
"zeroes" divider DCh2 before the appearance of a carry pulse in its output. If

f > £0 . then a carry pulse appears earlier in the output of divider DCh2 ,
setting flip-flop T into the "one" state. By the same signal divider DChl is
zeroed and. in addition, the presetting unit. 80 , is triggered. The initial num-
ber. N , is entered in counter-divider DCh2 by means of unit BU . Then flip-
flop T is in the "one" state until the controlled frequency becomes-less than

f (N - N )/N . Thus, the selector has hysteresis. which makes it possible to
eliminate erroneous operation at the cutoff limit from phase noise. The value of
the hysteresis is determined by initial number N1 and can be varied over a wide
range [25].

 

Figure 11. Diagram of SChIS with Frequency Dividers

Key:
1. Clock 4. Input
2. Reference frequency 5. Presetting unit
3. Frequency divider No l 6. Output ‘

The selector executed according to the circuit presented in fig 11 has a potential
"one" output with f > f and a "zero" with f 4 f . when it is necessary to
produce an undistorted 9p or 2 pulse train in tﬁg output, SChIS's are supple-
mented with switching circuits cggtrolled by the outputs of the flip-flop [26].
The noise immunity of the selector increases with an increase in scaling factor

N . However, it must be kept in mind that the speed of response of the device is

198

FOR‘OFIHC1A1.USE4ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reduced since the tine for the appearance of a reaction in the output of the
circuit from the moment of the supply of the input signal equals N/f .

This principle of designing SChIs's lakes it possible to implement also devices
for the band selection of pulses. which are designed on the basis of general-
purpose binary counters operating in the frequency division node [27]. The
controlled pulse train with a frequency of f (cf. fig 12) is supplied to the
counting inputs of counter S‘l'l with a scaling factor of H and of counter 5T2
with a scaling factor of N . whereby N > M . Reference frequency pulses, fo
differentiated by means of the DS block. are supplied from the output of p
auxiliary generator on to the setting inputs of counters SH and 8T2 .
After the next setting to the zero state counters STl and 8T2 begin to be
filled with input signal pulses with a frequency of f (f >> f ) . After period
of time “If , a carry pulse appears in the output of counter 991 , which enters
the counting input of counter 8T3 (resultant pulse counter), whose reset input

is connected to the output of counter 8T2 . The condition for formation of a
carry pulse in the output of counter 8T1 , H/f < l/f ; and the condition for the
absence of resetting of counter 3T3 to zero by the sgrry pulse of counter 8T2 ,
N/ f > 1]! , determine the condition for the accumulation of pulses in the re-
sultant cSBnter. mop < f < Nfop .

’

 

Figure 12. Diagram of Bend SChIS Employing General-Purpose Binary Counters

Key:
1. Input 4. Differentiation circuit
2. Clock 5. Counter No l
3. f 6. Output

0P
The parameters of the SChIS are determined in the following manner:

Mean trans-lies ion frequency

M+N
fo'fn 2
(5)

 

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Transmission band

 

Mf-fa-(N—M).
(6)
Equivalent figurc of merit
_ M+ﬂ
0" 30"” (7)

As follows from expressions (5) to (7) the required parameters of the selector

are made possible by selecting the appropriate values of H , N and f .

Thus. with H - 255 and N . 256 (two series-connected standard countgfs. e.g.,
series K155) the relative value of the transmission band equals less than 0.4 per-
cent (an equivalent figure of merit of about 255). The disadvantage of this cir-
cuit is its low speed of response: The time for the appearance of a pulse reaction
in the circuit's output equals T - K(M/f) , where K is the scaling factor of
counter 5T3 . The SChIS has a wiax frequency band, determined by the choice of
the value of the reference frequency and the speed of response of the counters [14].

Use of SChIS's for Processing Harmonic Signals

The design principles for an SChIS discussed call for the input signals being in
the form of periodic pulse trains. For operation with signals whose shape differs
from rectangular (e.g.. harmonic signals of frequency-response communications and
remote control systems), it is necessary first to convert the input signal, using
special shapers (an amplifier-limiter. a Schmitt circuit. comparator and the like),
which make possible the required curvature of the leading edges of the signal.

In many cases better results can be obtained when using digital methods of select-
ing frequency signals than when using line filters. For example, a nonlinear
SChIS (fig 13) designed on the basis of two frequency discriminators is economical
and has high selectivity and speed of response. It is based on the circuit dis-
cussed earlier in fig 6. A multivibrator assembled from comparators K1 and K2
(series K150 or K157 microcircuits) and flip-flops T1 and T2 makes possible
the formation of two intercorrelated reference pulses of stable duration. Flip-
£lops T3 and TS fora a lower cutoff frequency discriminator and flip-flops

Ti and T6 an upper cutoff frequency discriminator (all flip-flops are of series
K176). The mean transmission frequency can be varied over a wide range from 200
he to 20 kHz by changing the values of R and C of the timing circuit. The
circuit's selectivity is determined by ratio R1/R2 and does not depend on the
mean transmission frequency. The typical value of Q is on the order of 100.
The speed of response of the selector is one to two of rs of magnitude greater
than that of resonance devices with similar selectivity. It is feasible to employ
additional input signal processing devices for the purpose of improving the noise
immunity [28].

200

FOR OFFIC1A1.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
Key:

1.

A.

5.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 13. Diagram of Narrowband SChIS

1. Input 3. AND gate
2. Flip-flop No 1 lo. Output
Bibliography
Mashbits, Inn. "Tsifrovays obrabotka signslov v radiotelegrafnoy svyszi“

[Digital Processing of Signals in Radio Telegraph Comnications]. Moscow,
Svyaz', 1974, pp 56-80.

Mashbitv, L.H., Yanshina, OJ. and Chernonortsevs, V.P. ‘Troduction of
Frequency Markers in Swept-Signal Sources for Observing Frequency Response
of Receivers," VBSTNIK SWAZI. So 3. 1968, pp 13-15.

‘riaskhov. 0.11. and Lyubchenko, V.K. "Solektory iqul'sov" [Pulse Selectors].
lbscov, Sovatskoye radio. 1966. p 33.

Hashbits. 1.1!. "Analytical Relationships in Discriainating a Period of
Predeteruined Duration in Voltage Varying in Terms of Frequency," RADIOTBKRNIKA,
Vol 210. No 6. 1969, pp 70-75.

McKinley, 3.1. "Versatile Digital Circuit ﬁlters Highs, bows or Bands,"
ELECTRONICS. Vol «'04, No 13. 1971, p 66.

USSR Patent No 387493. "Device for Comparing Frequencies." 1.1‘. Zinin,
published in 3.1. [BYULLETEN' IZOBRETENIY‘]. No 27, 1973, p 168.

USSR Patent No 721909. "Frequency-Type Pulse Selector," v.1. Korchun and
V.V. Lebed', published in 3.1., No 10. 1980, p 210.

USSR Patent No 738137. "Pulse Selector," V.I. Korchun and V.V. Lebed', .
published in 3.1.. No 20, 1980, p 311.

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Itskhoki, Ys.S. and Ovchinnikov, N.I. "Inpul'snyye i tsifrovyye ustroystva"
[Pulse-Driven and Digital Devices], Moscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1973, pp :52-
553.

Haksinov, ILV. "Zashchits ot rsdiopolekh" [Protection from Radio Interference],
Hoscov, Sovetskoye radio, 1976, p 361.

USA Patent No 3732563. "Pulse Train Decoder-Degerbler," G.P. Nelson,
published 8 Hay 1973.

USSR Patent No 660223. "Repetition Rate Pulse Selector," v.u. Zsytsev,
L.H. Zhavoronkov et s1., published in 8.1., No 16, 1979, pp 276-277.

USSR Patent No 660222. "Repetition Rste Pulse Selector," S.V. Popov,
published in 3.1., No 16, 1979, p 276.

Dubitskiy, L.A., Tafel', v.n. and Shvetskiy, 3.1. "New Structures for
High-Speed Decimal Counters," IMENIYA, KONTROL', AVTOHATIZATSIYA, Moscow,
TsNIlTBIpriborostroyeniya, No 3 (11), 1977, pp 68-52.

USSR Patent No 699665. "Pulse Selector," A.I. Balendin, Ye.P. Larichev and
Ye.N. Okennov, published in 3.1., No 63, 1979, p 236.

USSR Patent No 6815109. "Pulse Train Selector," Yqu. Yerofeyev and V.V.
vaerin, published in 3.1., No 31, 1979, p 210.

USSR Patent No 681550. "Frequency-Type Pulse Selector," E.Ye. Nesterov,
published in 3.1., No 31, 1979, p 210.

Alike, P. "Frequency Discriminator Uses One-Shot and Flip-flop," ELECTRONICS,
Vol (.6, No 18, 1973, p 92.

Yen, 1.1. "mos Flip-Flop Csn Do More than Logic Tasks," ELECTRONICS, Vol 48,
No 6, 1975, pp 123-126.

Pearson, 3.3. "One-Shot/Plip-Flop Pairs Detect Frequency Bands," ELECTRONICS,
Vol (05, No 9, 1972, p 1010.

Volk, A.H. "No-10 Digital Filter Varies Psssbend Besily," ELECTRONICS,
Vol 66, No 6, 1973, p 106.

Shah, ".1. "Programble Honostsble Is Imune to Supply Drift," ELECTRONICS,
Vol 66, No 3, 1973. PP 98-99.

USSR Pstent No 677087. "Device for Comparing Frequencies of Two Pulse
Trains," lull. Hel'nikov, AN. Herselov et a1., published in 3.1., No 28,
1979. p 202. ‘

USA Patent No 3500069. "Pulse Repetition Frequency Discrisinator," R.R.
Iohns, published 10 Mar 1970.

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

25. USSR Patent No 661761. "Frequency Threshold Device," A.A. Sams'. published
in 3.1.. No 17, 1979, p 263.

26. Andreyev, 14.1. "Digital Frequency biscrininator kploying Microcircuits,"
P1113081! I TBKHNIKA EKSPERIHEM‘A. No 1. 1979. Pp 116-118.

27. Newman. S. "Tone Detector Sharpens'nigitsl Filtur'e Response." ELECTRONICS.
Vol 52, No 24. 1979. pp 118, 119, 121.

28. Glinchenko, A.S. and Chnykh, 11.x. "Digital Device for Eliminating Erroneous

Crossing of a Signal through Zero," P313011? I m EKSPERMTA, No 2.
1979. PP 112-116.

COPYRIGHT: Tsentral'nyy nsuchno-issledovntel’skiy institut infornstsii i tekhniko-
ekonomicheskikh issledo'rsniy priboroetroyeniys, sredstv avtomstiuteii i sizten
uprevleniye (TsNII'l‘BIpriborostroyeniys), 1981

8831
(:50: 1860/59

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.872 (088.8)

DEVICE FOR ADDITION OF POWERS
Moscow OPISANIYB OEBRBTENIYA 733081 in Russian 7 May 80

[Description of USSR Patent No 733081 by LV. Lebedev, v.c. Alybin, D.Ya.
Ashkenazi and V.P. Belyayev, filed 8 Aug 77, published 7 May 80, class
H 03 B 7/16 H 01 P 1/15]

[Text] This invention is in the area of radio engineering, and can be used
in various microwave devices.

There exists a device for addition of powers which contains a waveguide segment
in the cross- sectional plane of which is located an exciter array in the form

of natal rods running parallel to the wide sides of the waveguide segment: diodes
placed on the narrow walls of the waveguide segment are connected to the ends of
the metal rode; furthermore, the Iiddle of the rods are joined by posts which are
perpendicular to then and are connected to the voltage feed elements [1].

However, this device has low operating power and a narrow operating bandwidth.
This is because the diodes in the exciter array are not identical.

The purpose of the present invention is to increase the power and expand the
operating bandwidth. '

In order to achieve this, the device for addition of powers. which contains a wave-
guide eegnent with an exciter array nounted in its cross section consisting of
metal rods running parallel to the wide sides of the waveguide sepent with

diodes fastened to the narrow walls of the waveguide segIent connected to the ends
of the rods; furthermore, the middle of the rods are joined by posts which are
perpendicular to than and which are connected to the voltage feed elements, and
each post and rod of the exciter array separated by an additional dielectric layer
which is located in the planes of the longitudinal sections of the waveguide
segnent passing through the axis of sy-Ietry of the power feed ale-eats.

The drawing shows a cross-sectional view of the construction of the proposed device.
An excited array is contained in the cross-sectional plane of waveguide segnent l
comprised of natal rods 2 which are parallel to its wide walls. Connected to the

ends of the rods are diodes 3, which are fastened to the narrow sides of the wave-
guide segnent; furthermore. the middle of the rods are joined by posts 6 which

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are perpendicular to the rods and which are connected to voltage feed elements 5.
Each post 4 and rod 2 are separated by dielectric layer 6, which is located in
the plane of the longitudinal section of waveguide segment 1, passing through the
axis of symmetry of voltage feed elements 5 to terminals 7.

The device opcates as follows.

when voltage is applied to terminal 7, direct current passes through diodes 3
and their impedance drops to an extremely low value, providing a condition in

the resonant array of total reflection of the microwave power passing through the
waveguide segment. when voltage is absent from terminal 7, diodes 3 represent

a large capacitive impedance, and conditions are met in the resonant array for
unimpeded transmission of incident microwave power through it.

Dielectric layer 6 runs in the same direction as the microwave currents; con-
sequently, it introduces no additional losses in microwave energy, regardless
of the high-frequency properties of the dielectric.

The presence of dielectric layer 6 makes it possible to apply voltage separately
to each diode 3. This increases reliability and improves the parameters of the
devices which are dependent upon the degree of symmetry of the array, for
example, the maximum generated or switched power.

Patent Claims

A device for addition of powers containing a waveguide segment in the cross-sec-
tional plane of which is an exciter array comprised of metal rods running para-
llel to the wide walls of the waveguide segment with diodes located on the narrow
walls of the waveguide segment connected to the ends of the rods; furthermore,
the middle of the rods are joined by perpendicular posts which are also connected
to the voltage feed elements, distinguished by the fact that in order to increase
power and expand the operating frequency range, each post and exciter array rod
are separated by an additional dielectric layer running in the planes of the
longitudinal sections of the waveguide segment passing through the axes of
symmetry of the voltage feed elements.

Information Sources
Used in Evaluation

1. USSR Author's certificate No. 566207, class H 03 B 7/16, 1975 (prototype).

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
     
    
 
 

 
  

\\\\\\\\\
”WI/Aﬂ’y/j---_--1

  

 

 

 

rrrrrrrrrrr

 

 

 

 

   

 

\\\\x\\\\\“\

81414/0218-8

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RADIO RECEIVER PATENT

Moscow OTKRYTIYA, IZOBRETENIYA, PROHYSHLENNYYB OBRAZTSY, TOVARNYYB ZNAKI
in Russian No 29, 1981 (signed to press 10 Jul 81) p 296

[Text] Patent No 11031

Claim No 20095
Class 14-03

Radio Receiver

Authors: I. I. Dezhurnyy. V. H. Kuz'lin, V. S. Toyﬁalyuk. 0. D. Pom,
V. I. Zubkov, Ye. A. Lugovoy and V. I. Gvozdonko

Priority as of 26 July 1979

 

COPYRIGHT: VNIIPI , 1981

050: 1860/80-P

207

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONVERTERS, INVBRIBBS, TRANSDUCERS

UDC 621.372.852.27 (088.8)

WAVEGUIDE REFLECTING PHASE INVERTER
Moscow OPISANIYE IZOBRETENIYA 743084 in Russian 25 Jun 80

[Description of USSR Patent No 743084 by v.6. Vinenko and I.A. Ovechkin,
filed 13 Jun 75, published 25 Jun 80, class B 01 P 1/18]

[Text] This invention is in the area of radio engineering and can be used in
microwave devices where discrete phase change is required.

There exist waveguide reflector phase inverters which use pin-diodes.

One of the existing phase inverters contains a waveguide transsission line contain-
ing a flat diaphragm with two slits, each of which contains a diode structure. A
control signal causes the phase inverter to assume four phase states in sequence [1].

Design complexity is a shortcoming of the existing phase inverter, since it requires
that the diaphragm be fabricated with great precision.

The technical treat-ant which is closest to the present invention is a waveguide
reflecting phase inverter which contains a waveguide transaission line which is
closed at one end, two waveguide stubs placed in series with the waveguide line,
and pin-diodes located at the end of the two stubs [2].

Relatively large size is a shortcoming of this phase inverter. The stubs are
located at a distance of 13/4 froa one another (X3 - wavelength in waveguide),
which provides the needed phase shift, and the distance from the short-circuiting
switch of the main transmission line to the closest stub is also A3/4. The

total length of the phase inverter is thus over A3/2. The lateral dimensions

are relatively large because of the extending stubs which are placed at a right
angle to the main transmission line. The approximate length of the stubs is A/4.

The purpose of the invention is to reduce the size of the device.

This is achieved by placing the stubs, which are an extension of the waveguide,
one on top of the other and connecting them to the wide wall, and fastening pin-
diodes to the input of each stub.

Figure 1 shows the construction of the waveguide reflecting phase inverter;
figure 2 shows view A of figure 1.

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The waveguide reflecting phase inverter consists of waveguide sepent 1, wave-
guide stubs 2, 3, pin-diodes lo, 5, which are fabricated as seniconducting struc-
tures, and tape 6 used to apply control current to then.

The conductivity of diodes 5 and 5 which are connected to the beginning of stubs
2 and 3 can take on two values under the influence of control signals. For
diode S, which is connected to stub 2, these values will be jb'l and 53" 1.

The conductivity in the plane in which diode 5 is connected is the algebraic

sun of the conductivity of diode 5 and the conductivity of shorted stub 2, (ya),
which can be written with the help of a familiar relationship as

‘ .‘Iz‘cotA E.“-

where z, - characteristic inpedence of stub:
11 - stub length.

(1)

Thus, the total conductivity of stub 2 with diode 5 connected to its beginning can
be written as ‘ (2)
1

1‘11..v)1 c0! Kc .o

where B; - conductivity of diode, which can take on the two values 8') and 3":
under the influence of the control signal.

Analogoualy, the conductivity of stub 3 in plane '1‘ with diode lo connected to
its beginning can be written as

11-,$,.,1,cot 'ﬁ'ﬂp (3)

where 32 - conductivity of diode, which can take on the two values 3'; and 3";
under the influence of the control signal;

2: - characteristic impedance of stu) 3;

l; - length of stub 3

The reflecting impedance in the plane 1‘ can be written using the obvious
relationship

1"."1, 5.. . (1.)

Thus, in the proposed construction the value of the reflecting inpedance, which
determines the phase of the reflected signal, depends upon the impedance of the
diodes and the impedance of the loops; consequently, in order to obtain the
needed reflecting impedance values, it is possible to vary both the iupedance
of the diodes, which is inconvenient, as well as the impedance of the stubs,
which depends upon their length and characteristic inpedances.

209

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following formla, which associates the phase shift of the reflected wave
(9) with the value of the reflecting impedance is well known:

tan "1" 1L
' (5)

Combining equations (2), (3), (lo), (5) and keeping in mind the possibility that
the control signal may cause the conductivity of the diodes to take on values

of B';, B"; and 3'2, B";, a system of equations of the following form can be
obtained:

(t‘.~tpotxt,xs;~1 ace: «9:. ‘

,~ ' co W‘s-ct 1

(6)

«so'
(ﬁ'ﬂcot‘k‘ "1"sCOt“1n° t . )3
ﬂaw

«314.com»?Iatot‘m’“ .
. oycot .t‘lgcot" a

q 1.
0.210. (g)
.tm \ ’2 s

where K - 21mg
¢o — initial phase.

Given the initial phase on. choice of conductivities B", 8";, B';, B";, of

characteristic stub impedance Z1 and 23, and of stub lengths l; and 12, the
equations in system (6) can be satisfied.

The values of conductivities 3'1, 3"1. 3'1, a", are a function of the parameters
of the diodes used and the method by which they are connected to the transmission
line. In the construction shown in the drawing, diodes lo and 5 are soldered
between the inductive protrusion in the waveguide.

Patent Clails
A waveguide reflecting phase inverter containing a waveguide aegunt and pin diodes
located in shorted stubs, distinguished by the fact that in order to reduce size

the stubs, which are an extension of the waveguide, are located above one another

and connected to the wide wall, and the pin diodes are connected to the input of
each stub.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Information Sources
Used 11: Evaluation

» 3678284, clue 333-98, 1969.
. 1325381, class B 1 w, 1973.

 
 
      
   
 

// /,,,-/,,.z z,’ ,, WWII/.1!”

,/ H
. ; v11!- 0
I J ’

P13. 2

211
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.396.677: 621.332 (088.8)

SOLID-STATE PHASE INVERTER CONTROL DEVICE
Moscow OPISANIYB IZOBRBTENIYA 750586 in Russian 25 Jul 80

[Description of USSR Patent No 750586 by V.A. Vinogradov and M.L. Slutskiy,
filed 26 Dec 77. published 25 Jul 80, class K 01 6 3/26]

[Text] This invention is in the area of radio communication and can be used in
antenna array control devices.

There exists a device for controlling solid-state phase inverters which contains for-
ward and backward bias sources. in which the collector of the reverse bias source
switching transistor is connected through a resistance which limits current in
eaergency conditions to the reverse voltage source in order to protect

the elements and the reverse bias source switching circuits from short circuiting

of the pin-diode or phase inverter coupling line; a powerful current pulse used to
dissipate the body charge of the pin-diode at the moment of switching is created

by connecting an inductance coil to the collector circuits of this transistor [1].

A shortcoming of this device is the loss of power and ispoesibility of micro-
miniaturization.

The technical treatment which is closest to the present invention is a device
which contains a forward bias source switching transistor, reverse bias source
switching transistor with collector connected directly or through a current-limit-
ing resistor to the reverse bias source, and emitter or collector of forward bias
source switrhing transistor connected directly or also through a current-limiting
resistor, .o the forward bias source [2].

The lscL of protection of elements in the reverse bias source switching circuit
from line or pin-diode short circuits reduces the reliability of this device.

The purpose of the invention is to improve reliability. The solid-state phase
inverter control device. containing forward and reverse bias sources, forward and
reverse bias transistors connected to an inverting amplifier, to the forward bias
source and to the solid-state phase inverters, achieves this goal by using series-
connected pulse shaper and switching transistor, the collector of which is con-
nected through a resistor through the collector of the reverse bias switching
transistor, while the emitter is connected to the reverse bias voltage source and.
also. through a limiting resistor, to an inverting amplifier and to the base of

212

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the reverse bias transistor.

The drawing shows the circuit of this device for controlling solid-state phase
inverters.

The device contains forward bias source switching transistor 1, reverse bias source
switching transistor 2, inverting amplifier transistor 3, current-uniting resis-
tor 4, switching transistor 5 with base connected to switching pulse shaper 6,
matching resistors 7 and 8, and pin-diodes 9 and 10 (solid—state phase inverters).

The solid-state phase inverter controlling device is part of a device for control-
ling a phased antenna array. The control signal applied to one of the control
inputs sets the forward or reverse bias node of pin-diode pair 9 and 10 of one bit
of the phase inverter. The amber of control inputs is equal to the product of the
nmnber of phase inverters and the word length of one phase inverter.

The device operates as follows.

Control signals for pin-diodes 9 and 10 in the form of “high" and "low" voltage
levels are applied to the base of forward bias source switching transistor 1 and
inverting amplifier transistor 3 from the phase distribution sensory register of the
antenna array (not shown in drawing). The forward bias condition of pin-diodes

9 and 10 corresponds to the "low" voltage level (diodes 9 and 10 are open, and
current from forward bias source +311, flows through then). The reverse bias
condition corresponds to the "high" voltage level at the input (pin-diodes 9 and

10 are closed by voltage from reverse bias source 3,5).

In the forward bias condition, forward bias source switching transistor 1 is set-
urated, and reverse bias source switching transistor 2 is cut off; the forward bias
source is connected to pin-diodes 9 and 10 through the collector-emitter junction
of forward bias source switching transistor 1 and natching resistors 7 and 8.

Regardless of the forward or reverse bias condition of pin-diodes 9 and 10, the
collector of reverse bias source switching transistor 2 is connected periodically
to the reverse bias source through the collector-emitter junction of switching
transistor 5 while switching pulses are applied to its base.

In the reverse bias mode of pin-diodes 9 and 10, forward bias source switching
transistor 1 and inverting anplifier transistor 3 are closed; negative potential
is established on the base of reverse bias source switching transistor 2 with
respect to the emitter and the haee-enitter junction is open, and cutoff voltage
.from the reverse bias source is applied to pin-diodes 9 and 10.

In order to accelerate dispersion of the body charge of pin-diodes 9 and 10 when

switching from the forward to the reverse bias condition, the collector of
reverse bias source switching transistor 2 is connected to the reverse bias

source for a time equal to the length of the switching pulses.

213

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The switching pulses are for-ed by switching pulse shaper 6.

If pin-diodes 9 or 10 or the connecting line are short circuited, current with

a value close to the maximum dissipating current flows through current-limiting
resistor to, reverse bias source switching transistor 2 and matching resistors 7 and
8 for an amount of time equal to the length of the switching pulse; when there is
no switching pulse current flows from the reverse bias source through the collector
load of inverting amplifier transistor 3, the base-emitter junction of reverse

bias source switching transistor 2, and matching transistors 7 and 8. These
currents are ssall and present no hazard for the circuit cosponents.

This invention improves the reliability of the device.
Patent Claims

A device for controlling solid-state phase inverters containing forward and
reverse bias sources, forward and reverse bias transistors connected to an
inverting amplifier, to the forward bias source and to the solid-state inverters,
distinguished by the fact that in order to improve reliability additional series-
connected pulse shaper and switching transistor are used, with the collector of
the switching transistor connected through a resistor to the collector of the
reverse bias transistor, the enitter connected to the reverse bias voltage source
and to the inverting amplifier and the base of the reverse bias transistor
through a limiting resistor.

Information Sources
Used in Evaluation

1. US Patent No 3708697, class 343-851., 1973. .
2. Georgopulos, 101.. "Proyektirovaniye modulyatorov dlya uprsvleniys pin-diodami"

[Designing Modulators for Controlling Pin-Diodes], translated from English, 1972,
0-628“), figure 2 (prototype).

214

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INSTRUMENTS, MEASURING DEVICES
AND TESTERS. METHODS OF MEASURING,
GENERAL mm TBGNIQUES

UDC 535.856(088.8)

PRLCISIW DIGITAL INFRARED PHASE mm 9111! FREQUENCY (INVERSION 0F LASER
RADIATION

Hoscw PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA BKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 6. Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 13 Jan 78, after revision 4 Feb 00) pp 203-205

[Paper by V.A. Pedoseyev, VJ]. Kalendin, v.1. Kukhtsvich and V.Ya. Sup'yan, A11-
Union Scientific Research Institute of Physical Optics Measurements, Moscow]

[Text] The OTaF-Z precision digital infrared 9 to 11 um phase
meter, designed using a variant of s Mach-Zender interferometer
configuration using a homodyne technique with double frequency
conversion of laser radiation is described. The phase meter
serves for the measurement of constant and slowly changing phase
shifts in a range of 0 to 360' with an error of _<_ 0.06' and a
measurement time of 0.72 sec.

High phase shift measurement precision is achieved in the visible and 11! hands
when homodyne (with frequency conversion of the optical carrier) or modulation-
compensation phase measurement methods are employed [1, 2]. An IR band (9 to '

11 um) conpensation phase meter was described in paper [3] for the measurement of
constant and slowly changing phase shifts with an error of _<_ 1". The long measure-
ment time (about one minute) and the use of an insufficiently stable mechanical
phase compensator are to be numbered among the drawbacks of this phase meter.

The OTsF-Z precision optical digital phase meter, which is intended for the measure-
ment of constant and slowly changing phase shifts in the 13 hand, is described in
this paper. Homodyne conversion of the laser radiation frequency is 'ussd in the

instrument .

A block diagrsn of the phase meter is shown in Figure 1. Double frequency con-
version of the laser radiation directly in the optical portion of the instruaent
is used in the phase meter [4]. The optical scheme of the instrument takes the
form of a dual beam modified Mach-lender interferometer. where there are acousti- .

cal-optical single band shift modulators. 8 and 13, in the reference and signal
channels of the interferometer. The phase object under investigation 3 (for example,
an'electromagnetic acoustical-optical modulator, optical delay line, etc.) is located
in the signal channel.‘ The output of a 002 laser is fed through the input

window 1 of the optical unit to the light splitting plate 2 and routed into the
reference and signal channels of the interferometer. The portion of the radiation

216

mommtustomy
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(the reference channel) reflected from plate 2 impinges on mirror 6

and is focused by lens 7 onto the active Ge element of acoustic shift

modulator 8 with a LiNb03 converter. The IR radiation impinges

on the acoustical-optical modulator at the Bragg angle (=I 66°) [5]. The acousti-
cal-optical modulator shifts the frequency of the optical carrier by 80 Mlle. The
high frequency component of this frequency is fed to the modulator from a stabil-
ized crystal oscillator 61 with an output power of about 6 W. The C02 laser radi-
ation which is shifted in frequency 80 m: and deflected by twice the Bragg angle
(a 90°) is shaped by lens 9 into a parallel beam and then goes to the mixer plate
5. The refracted portion of the radiation passes through the phase object being
studied 3 (the signal channel, and in being reflected from mirror lo, is directed
to the second acoustical-optical single band shift modulator 13 with the focusing
16 and shaping 15 lenses and is then fed to mixer plate 5 where it is combined with
the reference beam. Generator (:2 with an output power of about lo watts powers
modulator 13 at a frequency of 80.050 Hit. The combined signal and reference
beams are directed by reflector 10 and lens 11 to photodetector 12 with a detecting
element based on the ternary compound cdxlig1_x)Te, cooled with liquid nitrogen.
Photodetector lS converts the spatially combined optical signals at frequencies

of wo + 80 MHz and «:0 + 80,050 MHz (where (no is the optical carrier frequency) to
an electrical difference frequency of n - 50 1011, which is fed to the signal input
of a digital display unit (BT91). A reference signal at the same frequency,

50 ﬂu. is fed to the second input of the digital display unit, where this fre- --
quency is generated in the internal mixer, $11, from the two high frequency voltages
at 80,000 and 80,050 all: incoming from generators G1 and 62. Both generators are
stabilized by frequency-phase regulation using an automatic frequency and phase
control system (ChPAPCh) [PLL frequency and phase control], which provides for a
constant frequency and phase of the intermediate frequency signals at 50 KB: fed
to the input of the digital display unit.

The digital display unit, which takes the form of a digital radio frequency phase
meter, serves for the measurement of phase difference in a range of 0 to 360'
between sinusoidal signals at a frequency of 50 KB; and levels of 300 uv to to
0.4 volts with an error of g 0.05'. The phase difference is displayed on the
digital panel of the frequency meter. The digital display unit consists of the
indicator unit (Bl), the quantization pulse generator (cm), the clock oscillator
(V26) and a Ch3-35 digital frequency meter. The display unit 81 generates a train
of rectangular pulses, the width of which is proportional to the phase difference
in the 50 KB: signals fed to its input. These square wave pulses are filled in
with pulses at a frequency of 50 MHz, generated by the quantization pulse generator,
and are fed to input A of the (2113-35 frequency meter. The clock pulses are fed
to input 3 of the frequency meter from the clock oscillator, the V26. The
measurement time is specified by a frequency divider which divides the 5 m: by
360, which is housed in the clock oscillator unit. The frequency meter operates
by measuring the ratio of the frequencies IPA/P3, and the measurement results is
displayed in angular degrees on the digital display of the ch3-35 frequency meter
for measurement time of 72 usec to 0.72 sec with a resolution of i0.01°.

The analog output of the instrument driving an autorecorder can be used when meas-
uring slowly changing phase shifts. The square wave pulses, the width of which is

217

FOIOFFICIALWEONLY
POI 0mm. LBS ONLY

__--------.'----------J

 

Figure 1. Block diagram of the phase meter.

Key : A. Generator unit;
3. Automatic frequency control unit;
C. Generators 1 and 2;
D. Internal mixer;
3. Automatic frequency and phase control system;
P. Quantization pulse generator;
G. Clock oscillator;
H. Display unit;
I. Direct current amplifier;
J. Digital display unit;
K. Ch3-3S frequency meter.

proportional to the phase shift, are fed through integrating circuits to a nc
amplifier (DPT). The DC voltage at the input to the Dc amplifier is proportional
to the phase shift between the signals in the optical channels of the interfer-
ometer.

To improve the sensitivity and stability of the phase shifts being measured, the
optical elements of the instrument are rigidly fastened to a massive plate, placed
inside a thermostatically controlled multilayer housing. The housing serves to
reduce the impact of acoustic interference and to maintain the temperature stabi-
lity of the phase meter. The absolute error in the radio frequency phase meter
measurements was determined by means of comparison vith standard phase shift
meters at a frequency of 50 10!: [6] and was 0.05' over a measurement time of 0.72

sec .

The O‘l‘sF-Z phase meter sakes it possible to measure phase shifts in a range of 0
to 360'. The region of instrument insensitivity (the so-called dead zone) when

218

MWMOMY
FOIIOFTWC1A1.USE(MVLY

measuring shifts close to 0° (or 360°) does not exceed 32°. There is an input for
a supplmental phase shift of 180° to bring the instrument out of the "dead zone".

There is an output in the instrument for a digital printer using a binary-decimal

1-2-4-8 code to record the phase values.

To estimate the noise immunity and sensitivity of the OTsF-Z phase meter when
measuring slowly changing phase shifts, multiple recordings were made of the
drift and fluctuations in the phase difference of C02 laser radiation (Figure 2).
The internal "zero" phase drift of the 0TsP-2 phase meter is about 0.01°/sec.

The phase shift measurement error is shown below as a function of the measurement

time.

Measurement time, sec 0.72 0.072 0.0072 0.00072
Mean square error of ten
measurements. degrees 0.02 0.03 0.08 0.2

Mean square error of a

single measurement,
degrees 0.06 0.13 0.32 0.8

- - r ‘

The use of frequency conversion by means of two acoustical optical modulators
[4] in the optical phase meter made it possible to measure phase shifts at the
low intermediate frequency 50 KHz. eliminate the impact of high frequency coherent
interference and parasitic coupling between the instrument channels as well as
reduce phase mismatching in the arms of the interferometer and achieve a high pre-

cision in the phase measurements.

 
 

Figure 2. The typical signal drift
at the output of the 0TsF-2
phase meter.

    

The OTsP-2 phase meter measures phase shifts when coherent radiation is fed to
its input at a wavelength of 9 to 11 um having a power of 10"2 - 10 u. a diverg-
ence of 10'2 — 10" radians and a radiation beam diameter of 1 to 10 mm. It must
be underscored that the high precision of the phase shift measurements imposes
definite requirements on the parameters on the lasers employed. The radiation
source should be single mode, single frequency and frequency stabilized to no
worse than 10"7 and stabilize with respect to power at g 1-3 percent over a

measurement time of one second.

219

FORiOFFKJAl.US£(NVLY
RDI(NHWCJA1.USE(NULY

The OTsP-Z instrument consists of three units: the optical, electronic-phase
metering and the Ch3-35 frequency meter. The dimensions are: optical unit,
500 x 586 x 338 mm3; the electronic phase metering unit, 690 x 170 x 488 nn3; the

Height of the instrument is = 40 kg.

2.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

. Kammshov A.I.,EtsinN.Sh,USPEKBI PIZ. NAUK.[PROGRESS IN THE PHYSICAL SCIERCES],

1972, Vol 106, No 4, p 689.

Kalendin V.V., Kukhtevich V.I.. Mukhmsrov R.I., "Tr. VNII fiziko-tekhn. 1 radio-
tekhn. iznereniy. Metrologicheskoye obespecheniye izmereniy optiko-fizicheskikh
parametrov izlucheniya ORG" ("Proceedings of the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute for Applied Physics and Radio Engineering Measurements. Metrologicsl
Support for Measurements of the Optical Physics Parameters of Laser Radiation"],
Moscow, 1976. p 6.

Artemov V.M., Zhelkobayev Zh., Kalendin V.V., et s1., PTE [EXPERIMENTAL
ENGINEERlMG AND INSTRUMENTS]. 1976. No 2. p 188.

Zhelkovayev Zh., Kalendin V.V.. Kukhtevich V.I., et a1., Patent No. 506755,
Published in Bulletin; No. 10. 1976, p 97.

. Mustel' Ye.R., Parygin V.N., "Metody sodulyatsii i skanirovaniya sveta"

“Light Modulation and Scanning Techniques"], Moscow. Msuks Publishers, 1970.

Calakhova 0.P.. Koltik Ye.D., Kravchenko S.A., "Osnovy fazometrii"
(“Fundamentals of Phase Metering"). Leningrad, Bnergiys Publishers, 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nsuka", "Pribory i tekhniks eksperinenta", 1981

8225
C50: 8104/0178

220

FOI‘OIIICIAl.lEIE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.317.3101 (088.8)
PANORAHIC MEASURING DEVICE FOR COMPLEX PARAMETERS O? MICROWAVE DEVICES
Moscow OPISANIYB IZODRETENIYA 765755 in Russian 23 Sep 80

[Description of USSR Patent No. 765755 by 0.1. Agafoniyeva, A.P. Daklykov, I.K.
Bondarenko, Yu.3. Gimpilevich, B.A. Prigoda and A.l. Soboleva, filed 1 Jul 76,
class G 01 R 27/28, G 01 R 27/06]

[Text] This invention is in the area of microwave instrumentation and can be used
for measuring and monitoring the complex parameters of microwave devices.

There exists a measuring device for complex microwave device parameters which con-
sists of a sweep generator, polarization converter. secondary circular waveguide
and detector head, during the rotation of which the complex parameters of microwave
devices are measured [1]. The presence of rotating parts, vibration and lag are
shortcomings of this device.

There also exists a panoramic device for measuring the complex parameters of micro—
wave devices consisting of a sweep generator, polarization converter, circular
waveguide, capacitive probes placed inside a circular waveguide every 65° within the
plane of the polarization ellipse, detector heads, each connected to its own probe,
and a panoramic display [2]. Shortcomings of this device include the errors caused
by the different amplitude-frequency characteristics of the detectors and their
temperature and temporal instability, as well as polarization distortions intro-
duced by the probes located on the side wall of the circular waveguide.

The purpose of the invention is to improve measurement accuracy while eliminating
polarization distortions.

This is achieved by making the capacitive probes with gaps which contains switching
diodes, e.g.. pin-diodes which are joined to the control unit and connected to a
common detector head which is co-axial with the circular waveguide; furthermore.
all of the probes and the conneccing rod of the detector head are connected at the
center of the circular waveguide.

Figure 1 shows the functional diagram of the proposed instrument; figure 2 shows
two views of the microwave section of the instrument in sections A-A and 3-3.

The instrument contains sweep generator 1 and polarization converter 2. Pour
capacitive probes 6-7, connected via switching diodes 8-11 (e.g., pin-diodes) by
means of rod 12 to detector head 13, are placed 45° apart in the plane of

221

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR¢NNWC1AL.USE4)NLY

the polarization ellipse inside circular waveguide 3. Switching diodes 8-11
are controlled by control section 14, which is connected between detector head
13 and display 15, which is made up of readout devices 16 and 17 and cathode-ray
tube 18; the microwave power passes through polarization converter 2 to load 19,
hte parameters of which are being measured.

The instrument operates as follows.

The microwave oscillations pass from sweep generator 1 to polarization converter
2, which converts a type B}; waveguide wave or a type TEN coaxial wave to an ellip-
tically polarized “1] wave of a generally unmatched load. This wave propagates
through circular waveguide 3. Control section 14 sequentially enables probes
4-7 by applying voltage to switching diodes 8-11. which are installed in the
gaps of these probes; the activated diode then has current applied, while
the disabled diodes have slight negative bias. This makes it possible to
achieve transient attenuation of 40 db. Detector head 13 sequentially outputs
voltages defined by the expressions

U. ' Kl! - s’ ' .‘mowl.

”I '“1"ﬂ" W."

U. ' Kl! 0 s’ :sms'l.

U. - Kll ' 0’ ions].
where Un - U; are the detector head output voltages obtained from probes 4-7,
respectively; K is the coefficient of proportionality, p is the absolute value of
the coefficient of reflection; W is the phase of the coefficient of reflection.

Switching section 16 switches the output of detector head 13 to the inputs of
panoramic display 15 in synchronization with the switching of probes 4-7 such

that voltages U. and 07 are applied to the corresponding inputs of readout device
16, and voltages U» and Us are applied to the inputs of readout device 17.Voltages

0.. “0""! ' ll'nuv.
u.. - alum; - l'am

are output by the readout devices.

These voltages are applied to the vertical and horizontal plates of the cathode-

ray tube, which displays the panoramic characteristic of the complex coefficient
of reflection.

Because a single detector head is used, the device does not require calibration
and is simple to operate. The electronic switching system which connects the

probes makes it possible to automate the measurement of complex parameters of
microwave devices.

Patent Claims

A panoramic instrument for measuring complex parameters of microwave devices,
containing a sweep generator, polarization converter, circular waveguide con-
taining capacitive probes. detector head and display distinguished by the fact
that in order to improve measurement accuracy while eliminating polarization
distortions the capacitive probes contain gaps in which switching diodes are

222

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

placed. which are connected with an additional control section; furthemore, these
capacitive probes are joined at the center of the circular waveguide and connected

to a cannon detector head which is located coaxially on the circular wayeguide.

Information Sources
Used in Evaluation

1. Bondarenko, 1.1L, Deynega. G.A. and Magrachev. Z.V. "Avtomatizatsiya izmereniy
paranetrov SVCh-traktov." [Automation of Microwave Circuit Parameter Measurement].

Moscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1969, pp 19-21.

2. US Patent No. 2818566, class 324-58, published 31 Dec 57 (prototype).

 

223

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

   

   

  

   
  

' [I’ll/I. I : I III/[I’I‘
\

\\\\\\\\\\‘\\\\
ill/I’ll,
I
5
ﬂ
““““‘ \“““

4

   

’llllllll’lllll’llIIIII’I/llll’lIIIIt,

5
5
I

    
  

"-.'—\

g ““1 \‘\\‘

~_~.‘

    

226

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!!0FFHJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC 621.317.382/3842621.375.826
HIDEBAND INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DIGITAL POWER METER FOR LASER RADIATION

Hoscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No A, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 25 Apr 80) pp 197-199

[Paper by A.I. Kirillov, v.1. Kishko and V.P. Morskov]

[Text] A digital integrated circuit laser ower meter is
described having a measurement range of 10‘ - 10’2 W.

The analog converter nonlinearity is :_5 percent, the
digitization error of the digital converter is g 2 percent.
The spectral sensitivity region is 0.6 to 1.2 micrometers.
The temperature instability of the meter in a temperature
range of -10 to +40 °c is no more than 6 pencent.

Series produced laser power meters have a measurement range of 10'6 - 10'3 w [1].

A power meter was described in [2] for an ﬂe+Ne laser with a measurement range of
10-7-40"6 H and a threshold sensitivity of 10'8 (for a signal to noise ratio of 1).
which employs a mechanical modulator and a FD-7K silicon photo diode, operating as
a detector. The dynarnc range of this meter is limited by the fact that the volt-
ampere characteristic of the photo diode operating as a detector is nonlinear with
a high impedance load [3]. For this reason, it is necessary to have calibrated
attenuators for measurements in a range of 10'6 to 10"2 H.

The meter considered here operates on the well known principle of autocompensation
of the source current (a photo diode in our case) [4] with the subsequent convers-
ion of the autocompensator output voltage to frequency. Operating the photo diode
as a rectifier makes it possible to realize a high sensitivity, and automatic
compensation of the current, because of the 100 percent negative feedback, assures
an almost zero load on the photodiodes, which is defined by the expression [5]:

R10“ a nth/K, (1)

where be is the resistance of the feedback resistor; K is the gain of the opera-
tinal amplifier. In our case, when be - 470 Kohm and K - S - 104 (a typical value
for a KShAUDlA), Rload . 10 ohms. With such a load, the volt/ampere characteristic
of the photo diode is has good linearity [5]. The dynamic range of the power being
measured is extended up to 10'2 W by reducing the value of the feedback resistor.

225

FOI‘OFFNJAI.U§E(NYLY
The analog converter (Figure 1) contains an autocompensator for the photo diode
turrent designed around operational amplifier H1 (KSthDlA), the input current of
which is 5.0.1 pA, and a voltage to frequency converter. Switch 31 serves for
manually selecting the measurement range in,a range of 10'“ to 10"2 H. The voltage
to frequency converter (v.f.c.), which employs a voltage prOportional to the radia-
tion power, is similar to that described in [6] and for the selected nominal values
of the components has a conversion factor of 100 lulu“ in a range of 10"8 to 10'“ w,
10 and 1 Help" in a range of 10'“ to 10'3 and 10‘3 to 10‘2 respectively; the con-
version nonlinearity is g 0.02 percent, the temperature coefficient is :_0.025 1°C.

The meter is zeroed with potentiometer 81.

The output frequency of the v.f.c.. which varies from 1 to 105 he, is measured by

a low frequency digital frequency meter using counters, in which the period is
measured, while the value of the frequency is determined as the inverse of the
period [7]. The measurement time in this case does not exceed two periods. The
frequency meter configuration using counters [7] is simpler than the well-known ones
of [8], since it can be designed using standard digital integrated circuits. A
functional block diagram of the frequency meter, designed around series K155 inte-
grated circuits, is shown in Figure 2. The frequency being measured, fx, which is
proportional to the laser radiation power, is fed to the driver F2 for the period
'l‘x and then to an» gate I3. to the second input of which one of the sample fre-
quencies is fed. The result of measuring the period, NT, is stored by counter

Sch2. With the signal for the end of the measurement period, a sample time interval
To which turns on AND gate 11 for the sample frequency pulses to is produced from

driver F3 at the output of P1. From the point in time of triggering the driver for

To, the number No, set by counter Schl, is compared by means of the code comparator
(USr) with the number NT, which is set in counter Sch2. At the moment the codes

  

Figure 1. basic schematic of the_snslog converter. H1 - usaausia; M2. H3 -
- KlSSUDlA; TIKT3IZB; D1 'FD-7K,Dz-Dy, 99-013 - KDSOSB;
Ds - DSlBYe.

226

liﬂl‘lﬂﬂClAl.lEIi(HﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Block diagram of the frequency meter. GOCh is the master reference
frequency generator.
Key: . GOCh I master frequency generator;

DCh I frequency divider;

. P1 I driver 1;

Il ' AND gate 1;

Schl I counter 1;

UV? I measurement range selector;

92 I driver 2;

P3 I driver 3;

12 I AND gate 2;

. USr I code comparator;

. SchZ I counter 3;

. Sch 3 I counter 3.

e e e s

e

s-os-Is-I
NﬂOODNOM§HNH

are equal, a comparison pulse is generated which sets counter Schl to zero and feeds
the measurement results Nf to the input of counter 8ch3. Thus, a number Nf propor-
tional to the frequency being measured f,, will be set in counter Sch3 after a time

of To.

The frequency meter circuitry is supplemented with a measurement range selector

(UVP) which connects one of the sample frequencies fo/lOn (n I 0 -- 3) generated by
the frequency divider (DCh) to counter Sch2. With each overflow of counter Schz.

the AND gate 12 generates a pulse which is used at the same time for switching the
aubband of the measurement range selector and writing the number "1/10 into the
counter Sch? [number illegible]. The presence of the measurement selector makes it
possible to extend the dynamic range of the frequency meter up to four decades with-
out increasing the number of digits in counters Schl and 8ch2 or the code comparator.

227

FOR OITHCJAl.llii(ﬂVLY
INDI1OFFICJAI.IISIZCﬂVLY

A He + Ne Lc-16 laser and a standard IMO-2-2 laser power meter were used to cali-
brate the meter at a wavelength of 1 I 0.63 u; in this case, the graduation error
did not exceed 3 percent. In a measurement range of 10-8 - 10“ H, the meter has
a sensitivity of 0.1 V/uw, and in ranges of 10 - 10-3 and 10‘3 - 10‘2 U, it has
a sensitivity of 0.01 and 0.001 V/uﬂ respectively. The temperature instability
does not exceed 6 percent in a temperature range of -10 to +40 ’0.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Anikina L., Vanyukov 6.. "Internetsionno-spravochnyy listok” ["Reference Data
Sheet"], Moscow, VIHI. 1971, No 001563.

2. Plotnikov V.A., Chastukhina L.N., PTE [EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT AND ENGINEERING],
1971. No 6, p 189.

3. Soboleva N.A., Helsnid A.Ye., "Fotoelektronnyye pribory" ["Photoelectronic
Devices"], Moscow, Vysshaya shkols publishers, 1976.

4. Aleksandrov V.S., Pryanishnikov V.A., "Pribory dlys iznereniy uslykh napryazheniy
i tokov" ["Instruuents for Measuring Low Voltages and Currents"], Leningrad,
Energiya Publishers, 1971.

5. Vendlend, ELEKTRONIKA, 1971, No 11, p 30.

6. Tychino K.K., "Preobrazovateli nspryazheniys v chastotu" ["Voltage to Frequency
Converters"), Moscow, Energiya Publishers, 1972.

7. Yermolov 8.5.. "Tsifrovyye chastotouery" ("Digital Frequency Meters"), Leningrad,
Energiya Publishers, 1973.

8. Inozemtsev Ye.K., Babayevs 0.8., PTE, 1979. No S, p 156.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8225
C80: 8164/0178

228

IOI'OFFKJAI.U§E(IVLY
FOIHOFIICJAI.lﬂﬂE(MﬁLY

UDC 621.373.826:621.317

SUBNANOSECOND PYROELECTRIC INFRARED RADIATION DETECTOR

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPBRIHENTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 10 Dec 79) pp 205-207

[Paper by V.P. Kuleshov and D.D. Malyuta]

[Text] Results of testing a lithium netaniobate LiNb03
pyroelectric detector are given for the recording of

short €02 laser pulses. The response lag of the detector

is less than 1 nanosecond and the sensitivity is about 0.15 VIM".

Detectors which have a high operational speed, wide dynanic range and which are
not destroyed by irradiation are needed for recording the radiation power ofnpulsed
co; lasers. The sensitivity of the detectors can be comparatively low because of
the high radiation power. At the present time, detectors are used for these pur-4
poses which are based on the effect of entrainment of free charge carriers in the
conductors [l], as well as detectors using u-conductivity semiconductors [2],
cooled semiconductor photoresistors [3] and pyroelectric detectors [4, 5].

Figure 1. Structural design of a detector
with edge electrodes.

Key: 1. Pyroelectric crystal;
2. SR-50-73F high frequency
connector;
3. Brass housing with cap.

      

gg§§§§§RE§3§§§§B§\

[Ill

Pyroelectric detectors receive radiation in a range from the microwave to the
ultraviolet wavelength, have a time resolution of < 0.1 naec and a wide dynamic

229

FOI(HHHCIAI.USE(INLY
FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

rungv. Pyrueluctrlc detectors operate at room temperature and are easy to fabri-
cate and operate. Ferroelcctric crystals with good pyroelectric properties are
usually employed as the material for such detectors: T63. SBN. LiTa03, LiNb03,
etc.

When pyroelectrics in the form of rectangular parallelepipeds are used with the
electrodes placed on the opposing end faces, two ways of orienting them are pos-
sible: the electrodes arranged in planes perpendicular to the beam (a frontal
detector) or parallel to it (a detector with edge electrodes). In the absence
of thermal losses to radiation and heat transfer. the volt-watt sensitivity of
detectors with frontal and edge electrodes is defined by the following expres-
sions:

$1 - toy/50v; $2 - bslla; 1 > 30

where C is the detector capacitance; 1 is the time resolution; ois the coefficient
or radiation absorption by the detector material; y is the pyroelectric coeffic-
ient; c is the dielectric permittivity and CV is the bulk thermal capacity of the
pyroelectric material; a and b are the dimensions of the crystal along and trans-
verse to the beam; R is the detector load resistance.

The condition 1 > RC can be rewritten as
follows for the two cases under consider-
ation here: A1/a1 < 1/eR; A2/a2 < (r/cR)-
-(b2/a2)2 (A is the detector area). It
can be seen that the condition in the
second case is substantially less stringent
than in the first.

The structural design of the detector with
edge electrodes which we used is depicted
in Figure l. The LiNb03 detector crystal
had dimensions of 5 x 3 x 1.5 In3 and an
inherent capacitance of about 2 de. The
electrodes were applied by means of con-
ducting glue based on silver. The elec-
trical contact between the detector and
the high frequency connector was made us—
ing this same glue. The long cable which
connects the detector to the oscilloscope
was loaded into a resistance equal to the characteristic impedance (50 ohms). For
this reason, the electrical time constant of the detector did not exceed 0.1 nsec.

 

Figure 2. (a) The FP-l detector
signal; (b) LiNb03 pyro-
electric detector signals.

Key: 1. Master laser stage;

2. Following the amplifier.

The waveform of the radiation signal of a master laser stage obtained with the
detector using the entrainment effect of a FP-l is shown in Figure 2, while the
signals from the master stage as well as after the amplifier. obtained with the
pyroelectric detector, are shown in Figure 2b. They were recorded with an oscil-
loscope having a bandwidth of 500 ““2. It can be seen that the waveform of the
laser master stage radiation signals. obtained by different detectors, is practi-
cally the same. As was to be expected. the signal waveform changed following ampli-
fication: the slope of the leading edge and the decay time increased.

230

FOIiOFFKJAI.lﬂiI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tests of a LiTa03 detector with frontal electrodes (without a substrate) 30 um
thick and an electrode area of about 3 m2 and a capacitance of 20 de showed
(Figure 3) that it is sensitive to ultrasonic oscillations (which circulate be-
tween the faces of the crystal), the direction of propagation of which coincides
with the spontaneous polarization vector [6].

.IMIIIIII
small-ll.
unsununu_

Figure 3. Signal from a LiTa03 detector with frontal
electrodes.

    
     

A detector with edge electrodes made of industrial TsTS-l9 ceramic (5 x 7 x 0.8
m3; C - 10 de) had a high sensitivity, but unfortunately, the pulse decay was
markedly protracted.

The signal rise time for all of the pyroelectric detectors we tested was governed
by the electrical tine constant of the detector and the oscilloscope bandwidth.
The minimua rise time of about 0.7 nsec was obtained when LiNb03 was employed.
This tine corresponds to the oscilloscope pasaband and is evidence of the high
speed of the detector and the short leading edge of the radiation pulse at the
output of the laser aaplifier.

The comparatively high signal voltage (about 7 volts for a LiNb03 detector) makes
it possible to use a "Lotos" oscilloscope with a bandwidth of up to 7 GB: for the
recording.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Agafonov V.G., Volkov P.H., Ryvkin 8.8., Yaroshetskiy I.D., FIZ. I TEKHN.
POLUPROVODNIKOV [SEMICONDUCTOR PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING], 1973, Vol 7, No 12,
p 2316.

2. Beregulin Ye.V., Valov P.M., Ryvkin S.M., et 31., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA
[QUANTUM ELECTRONICS], 1978, Vol 5, No 6, p 1386.

3. Butkevich V.G., Trishenkov H.A., Collected Papers, "Spravochnik po lazeram"
("Laser Handbook"], Edited by Prokhorov A.M., Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio
Publishers, 1979.

4. Novik V.K., Gavrilova N.D., Fel'dman N.B., "Piroelektricheskiye preobrazo-

vateli" ["Pyroelectric Transducers"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers,
1979.

231

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI<0FFKJA1.U§E(NVLY

S. Voronov V.V., Karlov N.V., Kuz'nin G.P., et 31., KNANTOVAYA BLBKTRONIKA, 1977,
Vol. 4, No. 9. p 1903.

6. Roundy S.V., Byer R.L., APPL. PHYS. LETT.. 1972, Vol. 21, No. 10, p 512.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory 1 tekhnika eksperinenta“, 1981

8225
CSO: 8165/0178

232

FOR OFIICJAl.lEl£(ﬂULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unq&1.332. $6.28]: 537.32
INTERA’I‘ED momma: W308 USING 83100! DIOR ”RICE
hoscow PRIBORY I SISTEM! UPRAVLDIIYA in Russian No 9. Sep 81 pp 29-30
[Article by engineers u. n. Gadshiyev. R. A. Gadahiyev and Yu. B. Leshchinskiy]

[Text] In semiconductor theraometry. when designing diode sensors. the tenperature
relationship between the forward VOltage drop "tr across the pn Junction of the

semiconductor at a constant value of forward current.If is usually used. The basic

shortcoming of such sensors -- the sun value of the temperature coefficient of
voltage (rm) and the large spread of the sensor paraseters tron saaple to saaple
-- say be eliainated by using int ted technology. The value of TD! for silicon
pn Junctions is about 2 aillivoltﬂ. but when they are used as sensors. their

now may be increased by series connection of several diodes. i.e.. using integrated
diode mtrices. Because of the use of special technological methods in manufactur-
ing integrated diode ntricee. a considerable reduction in the spread of forward
voltage drops between the diode asselblies within one lot became possible and
greatly isproves the reproducibility characteristics.

It was established experimentally that the greater the m. the sullen: the value
of forward current If which say be seen tron Pig. 1. In thermometry. it is eases-

tial that the no: be practically independent of the tssperature. i.e.. the slopes of
the forward Uf=f('l‘) at all current values are constant in the entire teaperaturs

range. It is precisely this fact that ukes it valuable to use the diodes as ten-
parature sensors.

The mufactured aatrice represents a diode asseably consisting of 6 to 12 series
connected diodes. The base material here has an epitaxial structure
10~Ka‘F-{0.2 to 0.2!

300 xna-to

in which the pn junction region was created by diffusing a boron inpurity in accord-
ance with a planar-diffusion technology. The sins of the sensor crystal is

0.7 x 0.? ”2. According to Fig. i. to obtain the eaxilsua temperature sensitivity
and reduce the effect of self-heating on the sensor paranters, a region of snail
currents. such as 11.3100 to 200 aicroaaperes. was selected as the working region.

In t i , -
min: 33:: .32‘.3:§£:‘.¥~:&25.2%a‘&133.:7?- "WW" 1‘ "m1 “I“ W

233

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1. Relationship between the m of a silicon pn Junction and the passed
current.
1. m. nillivolts/°C 2. If. nillialperes

 

'50 .6070 0 ENWWNWMIML'C

Fig. 2. Output characteristics of the tespsrsture sensor (shaded region of spread
within one production lot).

1" Uoutput. volts.

Fig. 2 shows the curves of the relationships betwen the value of U! ("output) and

the tesperature for ntricss consisting of six (curves 1) and twelve (curves 2)
diodes. The observed spread of values tron salple to couple applies to 50 satrices
taken fro- one production lot. The curves substantiate the presence of a linear
relationship in the entire tenpereturs range (from -60 to+ 120°C). The sensors
represent silicon crystals with diode asseeblies mounted on the base of the T05
body. .

Special leasures [i] were taken to reduce the A I!f spread between diodes in

ease-bling which ads it possible to isprove the reproducibility of the sensor
characteristics. In Fig. 2 (curves 3) are shown characteristics of 50 diode assen-
bliss senufactured on chips. rejected due to the aicroscopic nonuniforsity of the

236

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

specific resistance and which were subjected to preliminary annealing to equalize
the nonuniforsitiss with respect to the concentration of ilpurities in the initial
material. It say be seen fros the Figure that the spread sons for these assemblies
is considerably sullen it does not exceed 3 0.12 volts at 113100 aicroaaperes.

which is confirsed by histogram.

The advantages of the developed sensors are their high reproducibility of character-
istics. fairly high values of the output signal and call size.

Basic sensor specifications

ﬂuaber of diodes 12

Sensitivity in aillivolts/°C 20-25

Tile constant in seconds 20-30

Disension in an disaster 1. 5. l=2
Nonlinearity in S 0.1

Range of measured temperatures in 0c ~60 to 120

The sensors passed tests in industrial equipsent and were recon-ended for series
production.

The six-diode sensor in particular was used for the accurate aeasureaent of the
tesperature of the surface of the-hulls body under clinical conditions. To reduce

the tine constant of the sensor the atria: is sounted directly on the end of a

shielded cable 1 an in diaseter. is soldered to its lead-outs and is protected by
an epoxy tar with a quarts sand filler. Its tine constant was 20-30 seconds. The
sensor. fed free a current oscillator with If=100 licroalperes. was connected

through a scaling typo 701111.19 operational amplifier to the input of a “(7-16
digital voltaeter so that 0-! volt voltseter scale corresponded to a teaperature
of 0-10006. The calibration was ads at two points (0 and 100°C).

The subsequent check of interssdiate tesperature values on the 'i‘S-i6 ultratherno-
stat indicated that the sensor Iakee it possible to aeasure teaperature in this
range to an accuracy not worse that 0.100.

COPYRIGRI': Isdatel'stvo 'l'aahinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sieteny upravleniya",
i981

2291
0301 1860/75

235

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! 05!!CIAI.\£§E.€NNLY

MICROBLBCTKONICS

000 621.382

PROSPECTS OF USING MEDIA WITH RIGRBR DIELECTRIC CONSTANT IN MICROWAVE GIS TECB-
NOIDGY

Moscow HIKROBLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 10, No S, Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript received
13 Her 80) pp 533-439

[Article by Yu. A. Lifshits and R. P. Seysyan]

[Text] At the present time, microstrip microwave G18 [hybrid integrated circuits]
are usually made on substrates with a dielectric constant (DP) of £r¢5 10. This
value of DP is satisfactory in many respects [1]: it is possible to produce micro-
strip lines (HYL) with wave impedances in the range of 20 é- 200 ohms: the quality
factor of microstrip (HP) resonators is sufficient for many applications in circuit
engineering, radiation from HPL into the substrate and the surrounding space is not
high. However, the relatively small value of the wavelength shortening factor

729=2§ ( 8e -- effective DP [2]) is responsible for the considerable (on the
microelectronic scale) dimensions of the elements of microwave GIS (quarter-wave
stub in the lO-centimeter range has a length of about 10 sub. As a result of this,
one or, less frequently, several identical circuits are arranged on the substrate.
The "piece-by-piece" fabrication of microwave HP 618 plates which is done by perform-
ing technological operations characteristic for thin-film microelectronics (vacuum
application of conducting and resistive layers, precision photolithography, galvanoo
stegy) contradicts the group-integration principles of microelectronics. This work
examines the possibilities of overcoming this contradiction by using substrates with

g 710.

A substantial characteristic of microelectronic technology is its group-integration
nature which provides for successive performance of all operationsofthe process of
the fabrication of a microcircuit plate over the substrate divided upon the comple-
tion of the cycle into N identical plates. Realization of this principle ensures
the technical and economic effect of microelectronics. The greater the number n of
usable plates is obtained from one substrate, the greater is the effect. The yield
factor of usable 11v n!" is determined by the concentration and distribution by the
dimensions of critical defects and by topological patterns of the circuit. The val-
ue of 11 is a composite function of the topological dimensions and, in some in-
stances, can even grow with the growth of N, particularly for this case of a rela-
tively large-scale topological pattern.

The cost (C) of an IS [integrated circuit] plate (without external elements) is al-
most proportionsl to the HP area of the circuit S III , practically does not depend
on the complexity of the circuit [3] and can be determined from the relation
FIHICIWHCIAI.USEIDNLN

u
Ci'hch u (l)

c.-—_;TpV-—_'='J§E£(z;f3-r€h)ﬁ".

where So -- substrate area, Ck -- expenses on conducting the k-th of the total num-
ber H of technological operations of manufacturing a "passive" plate, co -- the cost
of the substrate.

It follows from (1) that, at a fixed level of technology ( 7\- const), the expenses
can be reduced by increasing the value of N, which is achieved by reducing the di-
mensions of the circuit.

The geometrical length l of NFL sections forming the HP circuit is determined by
the necessary electrical length 6' , while bio/2:7; , where K is the wave-
length in the free space.

Consequently, when th£_DP of the substrate changes, the geometric length l changes
in proportion to 1/ V2,. If the circuit is a cascade connection of NFL sections
oriented along one of the sides of the substrate, then the second dimension of the
plate is determined by the considerations of reducing the parasitic connections be-
tween paralell HPL and it depends weekly on DP. The decrease of the q.“ area
with the increase of DP is approximately proportional to l/1fif .

Iabl l
Radioceramic Materials with_§igh DP for the Microwave Range

 

T-ZSO

Key: 1. Trademark
2. f I 10 GHz, not over
3., IKE [tempera zre coefficient of capacitance]
'106, degrt‘s'1

If the circuit contains parallel stubs or circular (for example, bridge) elements,
i.e., if it is oriented by two coordinates of the substrate, then the area of
the plate 8 In changes approximately as 1/8” '

In real circuits, both configuration cases occur, and the area of the plate is con-
nected with the relative DP by the relation of the following type:

sue -d3.t (2)

237

POI‘OFFIJA1.UBB<0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where a is the area of the circuit et € 0 1, 1/2 S 0‘ < 1. Then the number of
the circuits on the substrate is N - So t‘la.

It follows from (1) and (2) that when substrates with DP 81 and 52 are used, the
equality 01/62 . (ﬁg/E1)“ is fulfilled for the cost of the plates.

With regard to the costs of the substrates 001 and Coz, as well as the coefficients
of the yield of suitable 111 and "12, it is assumed that: 001 - C02, 11 1 I ".2;
indexes l and 2 refer to the substrates with DP £1 and 32, respectively.

Thus, an increase in DP, for example, from 10 to 50 ensures a two five-fold decrease
in the cost of the (:18 plate. Moreover, along with the lowering the production
costs, it is possible to ensure the improvement of the weight and the dimensional
characteristics of microwave (:18, as well to shift the boundary of the application
of the devices with distributed parameters into the area of lower frequencies.

At the present time, ceramic materials have been developed [lo-7] which are relative-
ly "transparent" for microwaves “35$ 20-10" on frequencies f4 10 (ms) with org
250 (see Table l) and are suitable for manufacturing microwave GIS substrates.

It should be taken into consideration that materials with DP $100 are characterised
by high values of “We [temperature coefficient of capacitance] (Me 6 450-10“6
degrees’l). Nevertheless, the possibility of achieving a noticeable technical and
economic effect makes their study in this aspect justifiable, particularly in con-
nection with the fact that the active semiconductor part of the circuit quite free
quently requires effective heat removal or thermostatic control.

Let us evaluate the HPL parameters on substrates made of ceramic materials with a
high DP. Figure 1 gives the necessary designations and shows the dependence of the
wavelength shortening factor a and the wave impedance Z on the width of the
“PI. conductor w/h normalized to the height of the substrate which was obtained for
three values of DP (10, SO and 100) in accordance with the relations [2]:

s._-(s+i)12+ [(e-i)/2] n +iO/(u/h) l". (3)
ZVs.-59.9521n (8/(w/h)+(w/h)/6), w/h<i. (4a)

2112-119.9owuw/A)+2,42-o.44ww)+(1-u/wm. mm. («5)

assuming that there is no dispersion in m: dstm—Q

It follows from Figure 1 that the increase of DP from 10 to 100 reduces the length
of MP elements to one third. At the same time, the range of the "accessible" wave
impedances decreases, which can sometimes limit the circuit engineering possibili-
ties and serves as a source of metrological difficulties. However, the limitation
of the values of wave impedances of the channel is not an obstacle for creating the
majority of the devices, and in a number of cases the possibility of realising low-
resistance m could be an advantage of the substrates in question.

The relations (3), (la), (4b) make it possible to find maximum relative errors in
the shortening factor and the wave impedance due to errors of A 5/5 , Ali/h and

A w/w:
238

MOMUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

., 2,... 0;... z/zm/nﬂ.

 

a go 0,: 1,1 1.6 all»

 

    

Fla 1
M 35 db
‘IW‘: U ‘1',“
1,; 0,1
1,2
I.» M
0,0 I
2\ ”I M
9,:
0.2 0.1 .
nuuililI/h .auuwum-
m3 Pact

Figure 1. Dependence of the wavelength ahortening factor (solid line)
and wave impedance (interrupted lines) of “PI. on the normalized width

of the conductor at 8 I10 (l,l'), 50 (2,2'), 100 (3,3').

Figure 2. Dependence of relative errora in the shortening factor and
the wave impedance of NFL on the normalized width of the conductor;
6 - 10 (1,1') 50 (2,2'), 100 (l',2'); Au - 10 um, h . 0.5 nu,
48/8 - 21, A h/h - 1.1.

Figure 3. Dependence of attenuation in HPL on the normalized width
of the conductor (1 -- attenuation computed for the wavelength: 2, 3,
lo -- linear attenuation at 8 - lO (2), 50 (3), 100 (lo); f - 10 Gila,
h - 0.5 m, p .-. 2.5.10' ohm'cm.

Figure lo. Dependence of attenuation calculated for the wavelength on
the wave impedance of UPI. at 5 a 10 (l), 50 (2), 100 (3).

(Ak/khu-(Aﬁ— e.)-.-('I.) {lIAeIIeIIIH'ﬂ/o)[(A-i)l(A+-i)ll+

+5(|Ah|/h+ | Awl/w)/((w/h) +10) [[(e+i)/(c-i) ]A+j]) (5

239

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE10NLY

Here A -V1+10/ (ta/h).

(AZ/2)....-(M's'./s.)....+l’(gn/h) (IAhl/HlAwl/w), (s)
1 (why — 32
lln [3 + (wIKFllﬂv/K) WI ' Wk < 1:
(an/h) + (1571104).“ + 6 (1 _. WWW)
(W, )+ , — , (Iw)+( —(Illw) p Vlh>t

F (ID/h) -

It follows from the examination of these relations (Figure 2) that the increase of
the DP of the substrates does not make it necessary to increase accuracy requirements
for preserving the values of relative errors.

It is assumed in calculations by (S) and (6) that the sources of errors are identi-

cal for all values of DP and are: [Aw] - 10 pm, [Ael / E - 21, A h/h-lol at
h-0.S m and tom pm, where t is the thickness of "PL conductors.

The linear attenuation in “Pl. conductors (Figure 3) computed by. the simplified for-
mula

a . d3
4-545.412??? (7)

where f -- frequency (68:), p -- specific resistance of m conductors (Ohm-n) in-
creases with the growth of DP, and attentuation calculated for the wavelength in HM.

MAM-Mn" does not depend on DP. The values of A 7&8 found for the values of
DP under consideration at a given value of z are shown in Figure lo.

Figure lo indicates the necessity of lowering 2 in order to preserve a constant value
of A 18 as the DP of the substrate increases without changing its thickness.

The intrinsic quality factor (20 of an MP resonator is defined by the AA; product:
Qt‘”u3/Alc. (3)
therefore, Qo depends only on the value of the parameter w/h.

Attenuation in the NFL caused by dielectric losses in the substrate calculated for
the wavelength in the NFL

AMZ‘Mfs/s. ‘8 61840 tg 6 £3 (9)

practically does not depend on DP and w/h. The relation Ad/A (Figure 5) does not
exceed 251 in the entire range of changes of w/h being examined: the "dielectric"
losses in the "Pl. are small for real values of tg5 .

Nonuniformitiee in HP devices (an open end of “PL, a gap in the conductor, a bend,
T-coupling, etc) could excite surface waves in the substrate causing spurious coup-
lings in the circuit. The cutoff frequency of the lowest mode of the H-vave

2100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE!DNLN

sf:

    

  

'A‘IAH/o M ---—\-\‘;----‘,
\
so
20 u \
\\
as
10 ‘ \z
0.2 2’
1'
.,,...,.,,..,.
' 0,0 0.0 1.2 it oh 0 2 l n :1 ma Gila

Pic 5 Pic 0

Figure 5. Dependence of the ratio of dielectric losses to ohmic losses on

the normaliszd width of the m conductor: f a 10 Gila. p - 2.5010'6 Ohn'cm,
:86 - 5'10' .

Figure 6. Dependence of phase velocity on frequency (1, 2, 3 .. lowest
surface B-vave, l’, 2', 3' -- quasi-Tovave in m) at 5 - 10 (1,1') 50
(2, 2’), 100 (3,3'); v/h - 0.1.

In“75]h..'8-'i.r135
(10)

is shown in Table 2 for the case of h u 0.5 In.

Table 2
Cutoff Frequency of Surface ll-Haves

s to I. _ _ 1“
Is “130 Ga! 50 3L4 ill

The lowest node of the E-vave has the cutoff frequency f; o 0. The conditions of
the excitation of a surface vave by the field of e quasi-T-vave of HM. become more
favorable as the velocities of the surface end quasi-‘r-vave come closer together.
Figure 6 shows the dependence of phase velocity normalised to the speed of light

v/c of the lowest E-vave on the frequency (curves 1-3) found by solving the appro-
priate dispersion equation [8].

In the case of e quasi-T-vave propagating without dispersion in m, the normalized
phase velocity is determined by the value of 5.

mule-1N: ( ll)

(curves 1', 2', and 3‘ in l’igure 6). It can be seen from Figure 6 that the phase
velocity of the surface B-vave is close to VHPI. on frequencies above fa (Table 2).
This determines the upper operating frequency of m.

2101

”WWW!”
roe orncuu. use ONLY

Studies of the m parameters on substrates with 8 - 35 + 90 showed, for example,
that the extrapolation of the measured values of E, to the value of 89(f-0)
yields a result which differs from the result calculated by (3) by not more than 11.
changes of the value of T5,, in a frequency range of 0.001 3'- 10 cu: constitute
"V 51. Attenuation in MPI. coincides qualitatively with that calculated by (7). It

can be asserted that a quasi-T-wave propagates in HP]. in the above DP and frequency
interval, which facilitates the creation of a broad class of HP devices.

Along with studies on the PM. parameters, plates of individual functional HP assem-
blies were designed and manufactured on substrates with a high DP, including cells
of a three-discharge phase shifter, balanced mixer, Gunn-effect oscillator, detector,
and others (Figure 7, not included in the translation). Studies of HP assemblies
showed the possibility of obtaining parameters which are at least not any worse

than those achieved at the present time for 618 on substrates with c R'- 10, but
with smallc' limensions and the use of integrated group methods of production.

Separation of the plate of a complex (:15 into simpler ones ensures the possibility
of functional control and sufficiently high values of N I 1.0 7'- 100 without prevent-
ing the creation of complex (:18, because the joining of individual plates does not
cause any substantial difficulties and the joints do not serve as sources of any
noticeable nonuniformities.

Along with MPL, other types of transmission lines (LP) find applications in creating
618 of the microwave range, for exalple, slotted lines, coplanar waveguides, and
others. Conductors in these LP are arranged in one plane, due to which the influence
of the scattering fields increases. The use of substrates with a high DP makes it
possible to increase the field concentration in the dielectric substrates. Just as
in the case of “PL, the selection of DP must be dictated by the compromise between
the values of the shortening factor and the wave impedance.

Increasing the DP of substrates is promising also in creating a "microwaveguide"
which is an “PL in which an lilo-type wave is excited instead of a quasi-‘r-wave.

Conc lu s ions

1. By increasing the DP of substrates, it is possible to reduce the dimensions of
HP elements, which opens up the way for using integrated group methods of techno-
logy, as well as makes it possible to create 613 with distributed parameters in the
low-frequency part of the range where circuits on substrates with 95.310 are not
realizable.

2. Reduction of the dimensions of the Plates of microwave 615 by increasing the DP
can, as a rule,be ensured with preserving the parameters achieved in the designs of
MP devices on substrates with g 5:: 10. In this case it is necessary to use cir-
cuit engineering solutions which take into consideration the specific characteris-
tics of Mn. on the substrates used.

3. It has been established experimentally that a quasi-T-wave propagates in HPI. on
substrates with E, - 35-90 at 0.1 S (w/h) 6 2 and f {'7 10 GHs. HPI. parameters

can be determined with a sufficient degree of accuracy by the methods developed for
the case of 8 1:510.

2102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bibliogrephy

Heloretskiy, L. G. 'Mikrouinietyurisetsiye elementov i ustroystv SVCh" [Micro-
minieturieetion of Hicroveve Bleeents end Devices], Hoecov, Sovetskoye radio,
1976, 96 pages.

Gsnston, H. A. R. "Sprovochnik po volnovyn soprotivleniyem fidernykh liniy SVCh“
[Eendbook on View Inpedences of Hicroveve Feeder Lines], Moscow, Svyee', 1976.

Gus'kov, G. Ys., Yegorov, Ye. 11., end Sslgus, K. K. WWYA MIA
[Electronic Engineering], Series 10, Microelectronic Devices, 1977, No 6, p 25.

"Heteriely keremicheskiye rediotekhnicheskiye oosr 5458-75" [Radio Engineering
Ceremic Heteriels 608‘! 5658-75], Moscow, Ied stendertov, 1978.

Iseysv, V. P., Lifshits, Yu. A., Fridberg, I. 1)., end Cherkudinov, A. S.
"Vysokotenpereturneye khiniye siliketov i okislov" [lligh-‘Ieupereture Chemistry
of Silicetes end Oxides], Lsningred, “suite, 1972, p 112.

Verfoloaeyev, I. IL, Dnitriyev, S. D., end Penin, V. 1'. WOW“ 112m-
NIKA, Series 10, Microelectronic Devices, 1977, No 5, p 106.

Nerytnik, 1'. N., Voytenko, A. 6., lotenberg, B. A., Mudrolyubove, 1.. P. end
Lister, It. Ye. WAYA MIRA, Series 1, Microwave Electronics, 1978,
No 10, p 102.

Vol'nsn, V. I., end Phenov, Yu. V. "Tekhnicheskeys elektrodineeike"
[‘l'eclmicel Electrodynenics], Moscow, Svyez', 1971, p 286.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Neuh", "Hikroelektronike", 1981

10,233

680:

1860/63

243

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAL.USEGDNLN

UDC 62l.382.001.2

PROBLEMS OF MODELING EISHBNTS OP LARGE-SCALE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS HITH SUBHICRONIC
DIMENSIONS

Moscow HIKROELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 10, No 5. Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript received
17 Jan 80) pp 387—b06

[Article by K. 0. Petrosyants and L. S. Khodosh]

[Text] The latest achievements in semiconductor technology connected primarily with
the improvement of the methods of alloying, lithography and etching [1-4] will make
it possible in the next five years to assimilate and develop mass production of large-
scale and superlarge-scale integrated circuits (BIS and superBIS) containing hundreds
of thousands of elements with micronic and submicronic dimensions. First such cir-
cuits have already been developed. They are for example dynamic ZU [master devices]
with random-access and with a capacity of 6& kilobits and a static capacity of 16
kilobits [5]. Analysis of the present level and tendencies in the development of
semiconductor technology indicates that in a few years the active and passive ele-
ments of BIS and superBIs will have the following minimum geometrical parameters:
topological dimensions of individual areas of the structure -- up to 1 pm, thickness
and depth of diffused and ion-implanted layers -- up to 0.05 ... 0.1 pm, thickness

of dielectric, metal and polysilicon films -- up to 0.025...0.05 pm. BIS and super-
:15 will, evidently, work at lower supply and signal voltages -- of the order of l...
3 V. These parameters are close to those limit minimum values at which subminiature
semiconductor devices and circuits using them can still operate normally [6-9].

The role of automated (machine) designing as a whole and the modeling of BIS and
superBIs elements, both of bipolar and MD? [metal-insulator-semiconductor] devices
in particular,becomes extremely important at all stages of the designing of these
supercomplex circuits [l, 3]. This work examines the modern state of studies in the
area of modeling subminiature elements of modern BIS and superals, evaluates the po-
tentialities of the existing models and analyses the problems and ways of further

development and improvement of the system of modeling the elements of bipolar and
MD? BIS and superBIS.

Bipolar Elements

Substantial reduction of the dimentions of BIS elements and the use of functionally
integrated elements make it necessary to give up the methodology of the analysis of
elements as devices with lumped parameters and to examine whole ensembles of elements
as a system with distributed constants. This requires solution of fundamental equa-
tions of the physics of semiconductors in the ;orm of a system of partial differen-
tial equations, which is the basis of physicotechnological modeling [10, ll].

266

FOI>OFIWC1AI.USE¢DNIN
POI OMCIAL USE ONLY

The following physical effectsau determining for BIS and superBIS elements: tvo-di-
mensional, in some instances three-dimensional, nature of the processes of current
flow and distribution of potentials: distributed nature of the instrument's struc-
ture; joint effect of electrical and thermal fields; possibility of the appearance
of a disruptive discharge due to the puncturing of the base and through depletion;
the effect of the natural delay of the transistor switching in the nanosecond and
picosecond ranges; recombination of the carriers on the 31-3102 interface on the
boundaries with highly allayed regions of the n+ and p+ types, in passive areas of
the instrument; influence of spurious effects and coupling.

 

guns

Figure 1. Cross section -- a and the resulting impurity
profile -- b of an n-p-n-transistor.
Key: 1. xepj,
2- Hcrystal

For elements with submicronic dimensions, all these effects are of the same impor-
tance and are manifested jointly. As a result of this, it is necessary to consider
them in an integrated way, which greatly complicates their modeling.

The elements of bipolar BIS and superBIS are multidopant semiconductor structures
which are described mathemst icelly by a three-dimensional system of current trans-
port, continuity, and Poisson equations. It is impossible to solve a three-dimen-
sional problem in the general form due to the limited speed and memory resources of
modern computers. As a rule, it is possible to simplify the probles correctly using
either a two-dimensional or a quasi-three-dimensional approximation taking into con-
sideration physical effects which are important for the BIS elements. This does not
at all exclude the use of models based on s one-dimensional approrisation in calcu-
lating BIS elements. For example, programs of unidilensional calculation of diffused
distribution of impurities [13, 14] and static, transient, frequency characteristics
of transistor structures are used effectively [IS-l7].

Work [18] is an example of correct use of a unidimensional system in application to
the analysis of elements with small dimensions.

Two-dimensional models examine the instrument in the cross section plane (Figure l)
and make it possible to take into consideration the distributed nature of the struc-
ture and the natural inertness of the instrument at high frequencies, current

2105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OMCIAI. USE ONLY

displacement toward the boundariee of the emitter, lateral injection of p-n-junctions,
and the effect of passive regions of the base and the collector.

The fundamental system of equations describing a nonsteady-state distribution of the
concentrations of n(x, y, t), p(x, y, t) and the electrostatic potential Q(x,y,t)
in a semiconductor structure is a system of partial differential equation

v'¢--(q/o)[p'—n+n7j.'¥-N.l. (1)
v1,-q(c-R)--qaplat. (2)
VI.+q(G—R)-qanlai (,3)
and aux il iery equet ions
1,-9u.p(-V9+VDEV/q)-qD.Vp. (4)
I.- an.» (- th— VDBC/q) +qD.V n, (5)
Iu--w(v@)/a‘u (8)
R-(pn—nu')/[r.(p+nu)+t.(n+n«.) l+(pln,+nln.). (7)
G--nu.¢.V9-pu,¢,Vv. (3)
n.'-n.' exp (AEJH'). (9)

Equations (lo-(6) describe the phenomena of current transport under the effect of
drift, diffusion and electric displacement. Displacement current must be taken into
consideration in modeling superfast devices working in the ps range.

The electric field intensity in these equations includes the classical electrostatic
component V (P and an additional (quasi-electric) component DEV (DBc)/q which ap-

pears due to the dependence of the width of the forbidden zone B on the space coor-
dinates in a highly alloyed material [19, 20]. Specifically, in the neutral regions
of a semiconductor under the condition of a low level of injection (l/q)DEV(DEC)I,:5

sz/G'Vnu'hlu. , where n, is the effective intrinsic carrier concentra-
tion.

The decrease of 3 depending on the impurity concentration is described by the empir-
ical formula [20-22]

AE,-9-iO"{ln(N/10" u-')+([1n(N/16" 01"”) wok-)1) .3, “of

where N «- NA for p-type silicon and N - "A for the n-type.

Expression (7) describes the recombination of the carriers under the effect of the
Shockley-Read-Ball and Auger mechanisms. The lifetime of the minority carriers de-
pends on the impurity concentration [22]

2106

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

r,(N.) -1,J(i+N.I7.i-10" cu"). r.-r..l (1+N‘l7,i-10" an") (ii)
TA.(Ns)-‘ICA,NA'. “IA-(NA)- ‘lcha'. (12)

where cAP' CA“ are the Auger coefficients [23].

In highly alloyed regions, for example, emitters and hidden n*~layers of transistors,
‘TIAE cﬁuld be smaller than ’tp, i.e., the Auger recombination mechanism will pre-
vail 24 .

In small-dimension structures, the high-alloyaga effect plays an important role,
causing degradation of practically all parameters of the device: current transmis-
sion coefficient, frequency fr, emitter p-n-junction capacitance, and temperature
dependence. Numerical evaluations of this effect confirmed experimentally on tran-
sistors with a base thickness of 0.04-0.2 pm show that its inclusion in the model
reduces the value of the coefficient [30 by one-two orders and the limit frequency
ET by 50-4001 [25].

Expression (8) describes the generation of carriers under the effect of avalanche
multiplication in a strong electric field. The ionization coefficients for holes
and electrons are the functions of the intensity of the electric field E I -Vﬂp[2s]

«.-3,8.1o'up(—1,75-1w|s|).
¢,-2,25-1o' sxp(—3,2-iO'/|BI).

. (13)

The bounds conditions for modeling the structure of Figure l are described in de-
tail in [l;¥. 0n the contacts, we have neutrality of the charge (p-n4NA “NA - 0)
and thermodynamic equilibrium (pn - n12). However, the last formula,for devices
with small dimensions operating at high levels of injection,should be used somewhat
carefully. With consideration for the "splitting" of the Fermi quasi-levels for
holes and electrons and the Fermi-Dirac statistics, the condition of the thermodyna-
mic equilibrium on the contact assumes the following form [27]:

IN!" ("3’ v. (z)/OXP(Z) )OXPI (Bu-En) [WI].

where IEfn-Ef | is the difference in the position of the Fermi quasi-levels for
electrons and holes; F1/2(Z) is the Fermi integral of the order of 1/2; 2 a (Bfn -
Bc)/kr, Bc is the energy of the bottom of the conductivity zone; y'w F1/2(Z)/exp
(Z) is the degeneration factor which indicates how many'timesthe concentration of

the electrons differs from its value calculated by the Maxwell-Boltzmann law. For
silicon at room temperature, 1’;:; l with accuracy of :55 22, if n {3 1.5-1018
cm'3, p 5; 5.5-1017 cm-3.

The initial conditions for the currents and voltages on the contacts are given, as a
rule, as zeros.

In the structures of modern fast BIS, metal-semiconductor planar rectifying contacts
(Schottky barrier) are used widely. The formulation of the boundary conditions for
contacts of this type is examined in [28, 29].

207

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEIIVLY
INUR OI"NC1AI.I£§E oanv

0n surfaces covered with a layer of 8102 oxide, the normal components of current den-
sities are determined by the speed of surface recombination, and the normal component
of the electric field is determined by the density of the surface charge 0...

The above equations and boundary conditions are true for semiconductor devices with
dimensions of their diffusion regions not less than 0.03-0.05 pm, gradients of the
concentrations of alloying impurities not over 1024 cm", current densities of not
over 106 A/cmz, electricaJ fields not over 106 V/cm, and on frequencies not exceed-
ing 1012 Hz [18, 30, 31]. Therefore, equations (l)-(9) can be used as a basis for
calculating the elements of BIS and superBlS with minimal topological dimensions to
1 pm, though with inclusion of necessary modifications in highly alloyed regions
and the Fermi statistics in degenerated regions (20).

Equations (l)-(9) with appropriate boundary and initial conditions are represented
in the finite-difference form and then are solved by numerical methods on a computer
[32, 33]. As a result of the solution, functions p(x,y,t), n(x,y,t), ¢?(x,y,t) are
determined and used for computing currents or voltages on the contacts, p-n junction
capacitance, amplification cutoff frequencies, and other parameters.

The construction of two-dimensional models even on a very fast computer is very time-
consuming, and takes minutes or even hours [35,35]. Therefore, the development of
effective algorithms for solving the fundamental system of equations (l)-(9) is a
very urgent problem [36-38].

With the aid of two-dimensional models, it is possible to study the characteristics
of devices with a concrete structure without resorting to the manufacturing and ex-
perimental studies of experimental prototypes. Let us give a few examples in appli-
cation to small-sire devices. In [39], a model was used successfully to establish
the necessary connections between the parameters of the physical structure and the
electrical characteristics of an element of the injection-field logic (Figure 2) --
a new promising direction in the creation of superBIS with a superlow consumption.
An analogous problem was solved for field-effect transistors with the Schottky bar-
rier gate which are used widely in the solid-state integrated microwave electron-
ics [£0]. The work [31] is of great interest. It gives prognoses of critical elec-
trical characteristics of bipolar transistors in which the thicknesses of the emitv
ter and base regions were reduced from 0.4 pm to 0.03 pm. Calculations showed that
for a transistor with the dimensions of the emitter 1x1 ymz, emitter thickness of
0.03 pm, base thickness of 0.03 pm, the critical frequency of single amplification
is f1 - 89 GB: and the current transmission coefficient is [3“ I 105 at 1k - 0.73
mA,puncture voltage is ng ‘1 2 V; the corresponding parameters for a device with
an emitter of 1x1 pmz, thicknesses of the emitter and the base of 0.1 pm each have
the following values: :1. - 16.8 on: and 15“ - 53 u 1,, - 0.38 mA, Um: y 2 v.

It can be seen from the above examples that programsconstructing two-dimensional mo-
dels are beginning to be used effectively by designers for calculating BIS elements.
However, all programs have discrepancies between the accurate models of electrical
modes of instruments and greatly simplified mode of two-dimensional impurity pro-
files which are used as initial information for these programs.

As the level of the integration of circuits grows steadily, such parameters, which
are derivatives of the inpurtiy profile,as the thickness of the Oxide, width of

248

FOR‘OF'ICLAI.USIJONLN
FIIIIMWWCIAI.IENE(MULY

 

Figure 2. Distribution of the space charge layer (interrupted
line) in a field-effect transistor of the element of injection-
field logic with parameters sap, - 2.101“ CII'3; “‘E - 5-1018 cm'3;
Ngn+ - 5.1020 cm' and applied voltages "an - 0 V; U cu - 0 V
-- 1 and 0.9 v -- 2 [27].
Key: 1. brain
2. p-gate
3. Source

depleted regions and lateral dimensions of p-n-junction, are becoming increasingly
important factors determining both the electrical modes of devices, and their maxi-
mum permissible geometrical dimensions. It is necessary to develop programs model-
ing tvo-dimensional distributions of the impurity concentration of a multistage tech-
nological process which includes the operations of ion implantation, diffusion, oxi-
dation, epitaxy, and etching [bl-45]. Moreover, it is necessary to take into con-
sideration the concentration relations of the diffusion coefficients of various im-
purities, the effect of the oxidizing medium, orientation of the substrate, inter-
action of several impurities during their simultaneous diffusion, and a number of
other important effects [66-48]. For micronic and submicronic structures, programs
modeling impurity distribution profiles are integral para of the mathematical means
for predicting and computing their electrical characteristics.

Let us examine a number of still unsolved problems of modeling BIS and superBIs ele-
ments and map out the ways of their solution.

1. "Instrument self-heating" at high current densities, in essence limits the in-
crease of the degree of integration of the elements on the crystal [49]. The steady-
state temperature distribution T(x,y) in a two-dimensional structure of Figure 1

can be determined by solving the following equation of thermal conduction jointly
with equations (l)-(9) with a sero right part in (2), (3) and (6);

V (1V1) +P-0, (M)

where A (x,y,T) -- thermal conduction coefficient; P(.r, y, T)-([,+].)Vq -- density of
power released in the structure.

The boundary condition for equation (15) are established on the assumption that the
heat transfer from the surface of the crystal into the surrounding medium is absent,
and the temperature on the lower surface of the substrate is equal to the prescribed
temperature.

249

FOI‘OIIICIAI.USE(MVLY
FOI10FFKJAL.U§E(N‘LY

The expanded system of equations (l)-(9) and (14) with corresponding boundary condi-
tions is rendered discrete on a two-dimensional difference network and is solved
with the aid of the same numerical methods which were used for solving a usual two-
dimensional problem [26, 50].

Let us evaluate the influence of thermal effects on an example of a transistor with
the dimensions of the emitter of 1:1 pmz, thicknesses of the meter and base regions
of 0.03 pm working in an active mode with displacements of U 33 - 0.9 V and 0 Rs -
2 V. The work [31] gives calculation for such a structure: collector current 1k .
2.3 mA, field intensities in the emitter and collector junctions are approximately
the same and are equal to E =5 105 V/cm, the dimensions of the depleted regions are
13X v 0.03 pm and lixjk - 0.3 . Assuming that temperature changes under
the lfgect of power dissipation occur c iefly in the depleted layers of p-n-junctions,
we shall obtain from the solutions of the thermal conduction equation (lb) at a nor-
mal temperature on the substrate that the temperature in this structure increases by
n.8°C, and the maximum value of the temperature gradient in p-n-junctions is equal
to rv 5°105 degrees/cm. There occur electron and hole currents in the semiconductor
due to this gradient

I’m-—k (2+In pln.) V 7pm. (15)
[.m- — I:(2 + In Mn.) VT Ml.- (1°)

Key: 1. Thermal

Therefore, strictly speaking, (4) and (S) are incomplete [51]. Let us evaluate the
contribution which can be made by the component JPtherm and jntherm to the density

of currents of the holes (6) and electrons (S). For the temperature gradient 5.105
degrees/cm and concentrations of free electrons 1017-1020 cm'3, the maximum value of
intherm is "'10% of the value of Jnﬁ3- The contribution of j therm is considerably
smaller. Thus, for instruments with topological dimensions ;> pm, thicknesses of
the regions of the emitter and base ;> 0.03 pm, it is possible to disregard thermal
currents of the holes and electrons and to consider only the release of the Joule
heat described by equation (14).

2. Electric breakdown is a fundamental reason limiting the minimum dimensions of the
device at a prescribed supply voltage. The width of the depletion region of the p-n-
gunction corresponding to the value of the voltage "bregkdovn, at which avalanche
breakdown occurs determines the minimum values of all remaining dimensions of the de-
vice. The value of "breakdown depends on the level of alloying and the profile shape
of the impurity of the p-n-junction, particularly its lateral regions, as well as on
the value of the local charge 0.. on the Si-SiOz interface. Approaimate models of
the breakdown mechanism using spherical or cylindrical approximation of the lateral
part of the p-n-junction under the oxide are not suitable for elements with submi-
cronic dimensions. Quantitative evaluation of ”breakdown must be done by using a
two-dimensional model with the impurity profile exactly prescribed [bl-4h].

Let us write the conditions of avalanche breakdown for electrons and holes

250

I‘II(NHNC1AI.USE¢IULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.. h
5a.exp[—§(a,—a,)dl]dL=-i, .
L: L ' (i7

£n,exp [— {(g— a,)dl]dL-= i.

where 0kn(8), (19(3) -- ionisation coefficients depending on the field intensity
by formulas (13).

    

   
        
   
   

I
‘V
‘\\\\\\\\\\\\‘\‘

t \N)‘

Figure 3. Formation of the avalanche breakdown in a two-dimensional
structure of a back-biased planar p-n-junction.

The problem is solved in the following sequence. Various values of the voltage on
the p-n-junction being given, we solve the Poisson equation (1) on the assumption
that the charge of the mobile carriers is equal to zero. As a result of its solu-
tion, we determine the distribution of the potential (P(x,y) and gradient B(x,y).
Taking this into consideration, we establish the boundaries of the depleted region
of the p-n-junction P 1 and P . we select the points with the maximum values of
the electric field from the two- imensional block 8(x1, y1). These points form the
path of the maximum multiplication of the carriers L (see Figure 3) along which the
avalanche breakdovn develops. we calculate the multiplication integrals (17) along
the curve L and check the fulfillment of the breakdown conditions. The voltage at
which these conditions are fulfilled will be "breakdown-

Studies have shown that, for structures with base thicknesses of 0.03-0.15 pm and
impurity concentrations in the base of 1017-1018 cm'3, avalanche breakdown occurs at
field intensities in the collector p-n-junction of Ebreakdown - 105-106 V/cm; this
corresponds to a back bias of 1.5-2.0 V [8, 31].

The main application area of two-dimensional models is the analysis of the effects
of impurity profiles, electrophysical parameters of the semiconductor and the sur-

face, effects of lateral injection of p-n-junctions on the electrical characteristics
of instruments.

251

FOI‘OFFKIAI.UBE(NNLV
FOI‘OIIHCJAI.llIE(lVLV

The drawback of the examined two-dimensional models is their weak connection with
the topology of the instrument.

Quasi-three-dimensional models examine the instrument in the plane of the crystal
and make it possible to take into consideration not only the process of the transfer
of the carriers deep into the crystal, but also the real topography of the instru-
ment, which is extremely important in designing 318.

The main assumption on which quasi-three-dimensional models are constructed is that,
for modern bipolar instrument-manufactured by the methods of planar technology, the
dimensions in the topology plane Ly, I: are much greater than the dimensions along
the depth of the structure bx. According to the principle of proportional minia-
turizstion, approximately the same relations will continue to be maintained between
the dimensions of the instrum.ats. For example, for transistors with the dimensions
of the emitter window 1x1 pmz, the thicknesses of the regions of the emitter and the
base will be 0.05-0.l pm.

The model uses the discription of the processes of current spreading of the majority
carriers in diffusion regions of the base and the collector

vro.vu.]-I.(U.. (Iowa/ac. (18)
woman-MU. (mun/at, ~ (19)

where V-allavHi/az. ”I“. t. 0. Us“. 8. 9) and 0-01. 9. Us“. 1) . -- potentials and
conductances of the base and collector regions;.is(Us. Us. 0. 13(1),, U... i) and q.(U., U... r)

and au(Ui.Ul.0 -- densities of currents and charges in the base and collector
regions.

The densities of the current and the charge include several components which account
for various physical mechanisms of recombination and accumulation of the carriers
(see Figure 6) in the volume of the neutral region of the base, in the emitter and
the collector, on the epitaxial film -- n+-hidden layer interface. in the space-
charge layers of the emitter and the collector, on the Si-SiOz interface, on the
ohmic contact, leakage through the lateral surface of the base.

In the general case, the densities of these currents and charges are determined from
the solution of a fundamental system of equations of the semiconductor physics one-
dimensional along the axis x [52, 53]. simpler, but at the same time acceptably
accurate, expressions connecting the components of the base and collector currents
and charges with the voltages on the p-n-junctions, parameters of the impurity pro-
file and electrophysical constants can be obtained by dividing the structure along
the coordinate x into space-charge regions of p-n-junctions and quasi-neutral re-
gions of the emitter, the base, and the collector [56-56].

The Debye concept of length L.-(w~s79nJ‘ characterising the penetration of the
field into the depth of the semiconductor is used as a criterion of the validity of
the division of the transistor structure into such regions. At a normal temperature,

252

INMI(IHHC1AI.USEIINLY
ROI OlﬂﬂCJAL UGIICMULY

LD 5:9 0.005 pm. If the width of the transistor base is much greater than Ln, then
the base can be considered as a quasi-neutral region, since the electric field caused
by charges concentrated in the regions of the junctions decreases substantially at

a distance of (1-2) Ln from the boundaries of the p-n-junctions. Thus, the princi-
ple of the division of the instrument structure into space-charge and quasi-neutral

regions remains true also for instruments with submicronic dimensions and a thin
base of the order of 0.1 pm.

 

Figure 4. Components of the base current in the
structure of an integrated transistor.

The boundary and initial conditions for the system of equations (18), (19) are dis-
cussed in detail in [12]. The following is an effective numerical method for solv-
ing equations (18)- (19) with the aid ofa acomputer. Raving defined the operator ‘7

discretely by the spatial variables y and z, the system (18)- (19) can be represented
in the following form

C(U)dU/dt-F'(U)+F‘(U)+I(U. t). (20)

U; Us
uhere ”=(Un)' C=qudU, l'—'(1K) F'(U).F‘(U) -- discretely represented

parts of the operator V7 corresponding to the coordinates y and s. The system (20)
is solved by the method of generalized splitting [57]. At each subsequent moment of
time tn+1. the value of the vector U is calculated by the formula

UNI —U-+h[C'—0,5h (aﬁ"/all+0.501/6U) ] "C" [C'—0.5h (dF‘ldU-i-
+0.501laU)]“[F’(U)+F’(U)+I(U. 1)] (21)

where k is the step of integration by time. The volume of computations by formula
(21) and the memory expenditures at each time step are directly preportional to

the number of points of the difference network, which ensures the maximum economy of
computat ion oxpendit ures .

To date, many programs using the quasi-three-dimensional approach in the static mode
have been developed and experience has been accumulated in using these programs for
solving the problem of designing the topology of various IS and BIS elements [58-60].

253

FOI¢NHHCJAI.USI(HQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. a -- Distribution of electric potentials in the base
region of a lo-collector IZL-gat with the parameters ".5136 pm;
mpg-64015 cm'3; n“, - 2.5.101 cm‘3; n“ - 4.1020 cn' ; Hg -
0.65 pm. I -- base contact, II -- base, III -- collectors (n --
nuaber of collectors), IV -- injector. l -- 625 IN: 2 -- 623 W;
3 -- 622 IIIV; lo -- 621 av; S -- 618 w; b -- current transmission
coefficients of individual collectors of the transistor with topol-
ogy A; c -- topological variants of IZL-gate.

Table l
Amplification Coefficients of Various Collectors for Topological
Variants of Figure Sc with Specific Resistance of the Base Layers
gs ct . 30 kohn/ﬂ ,5 1m - 17o Ohms/D
(calculat one were done at I 5 u 30 M and Ill . pa)

          

'1 dr‘ﬂs

I 'IIQal-l. (1)

   
 

a '25 1': z. 1 so
3 1.1 u 01‘ 32; 3;
r 7 0.3 8.8 11,7 53
A 4U 5.4 0.0 u 51

Key: 1. Maximum
2. Minimum
3. Variant of topology of Figure 5 c

As an exauple, let us examine the result of the calculation of a typical cell of an
121. 313 obtained with the program described in [60]. Figure 5a shows the distribution

25!.

MMWONLY
FOH,0FTWC]Al.USEi)NLY

of electric potentials in the base area of a four-collector n-p-n-n+-transistor.
Figure Sb shows the results of the modeling (circles) of the effect of the decrease
of the current transmission coefficient of individual collectors as they get farther
away from the base contact in the structure of Figure 5a, which is important for 12L-
transistors; the triangles designate the experimental data. Comparison of various
topological variants of the IZL-gate of Figure 5c is given in Table 1. It can be
seen that preference should be given to variants A, B , B, in which the base con-
tact and the injector are spaced, and the injector compensates the spurious incidence
of voltage on the resistance of the base layer. In topologies P and ﬂ , the posi-
tive effect of the injector is "screened" by the base contact. Such evaluations ac-
quire especially important significance in further reduction of the geometry and
changeover to micronic dimensions, since the spurious effect of the resistivity of
the regions is one of the main factors limiting the improvement of the characteris-
tics of bipolar instruments.

Let us examine two urgent problems of the modeling of 318 elements which fit well in-
to the limits of the quasi-three-dimensional approach.

The problem of combined modeling of electrical and thermal fields in BIS elements
has not yet been solved. Let us formulate it with the following correct prerequi-
sites: -- heat transfer is accomplished only due to thermal conduction, while radia-
tion and convection are disregarded; -- heat sources are located in a narrow layer
with thickness Xjk 4; “crystal near the surface of the crystal (see Figure la); --
the upper surface of the crystal is adiabatic, i.e., BT/dn - 0, and the lower sur-
face is isothermal T(y,7) - TA.

Then the following thermal conduction equation must be solved jointly with equations
(18) and (19): 22
Vl7t(T)VT(y.z)I=-Q(u.z.T)-1(T)(T-TA)’”:E7;" ( ’

Kw:l.Cwual

"he" 001.3.T)-(i/ll..m)lla(u.z.1')Un(y.z. T)+Iu(y.x. T)Usu(y.z._1_')! -- density of

the power released by p-n-junctions in a layer with thickness xjk'

In expressions (18) and (19), it is necessary to introduce the dependence of the con-
ductions and densities of currents on the temperature.

In order to solve equations (18), (19) and (22), it is expedient to use the method
of finite differences in combination with the procedure of quasi-linearization and
the PVR block method.

Modeling of BIS Fragments. Let us extend the examined three-dimensional approach to
the case of modeling electrical characteristics of whole BIS fragments containing
vertical and horizontal transistor p-n-p-structurea combined on the crystal. The
elements interact with one another through a common epitaxial layer of the n-type
and through lateral injection of the p-regions.

255

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The electrical coupling of the elements through the cannon epitaxial n-layer is des-
cribed by equation (19). Equation (18) is solved for each of the p-regions with con-
sideration for the interaction of neighboring p-regions with it.

For the boundary points of each i, j-pair of neighboring p-regions (see Figure 6),
it is necessary to solve the following system of equations:

v [Jaw -1.(v.. u). v level-Mm. w). ' (23)
with the conditions ~0‘a¢./an-1,m (1”)— [‘mwl), oﬁhldn— 1’m(¢‘)__ I," (’01)- (2‘)

where MW. Va)- Mﬁ. 0;) -- current densities in the boundary points of pig-region
and pj-region, respectively; human). 15mm) -- linear densities of currents

injected by p1 and pj-regions into the n-regions; I," (#1) I," (9.) -- linear

densities of currents collected by the pig-region from pj-region and vice versa (see
Figure 6).

 

Figure 6. Boundary conditions for describing electric inter-
action of two p-regions.
Key: 1. collector

Expressions connectin the densities of the currents in (23) and (24) with the po-
tentials vi and 5' parameters of the inpurity profile, and electrical charac-
teristics of the semiconductor are shown in [61].

The system (23) is solved by the same method as the system (18)-(19), only the po-
tentiala ‘91 and $1 appear as unknown.

256

FOR OFFICIAL” USE ONLY
FtHI(JFI1(IAl.l£§EICNVLY

l—-—-—-—-—--.

(2) I

I’".—'_——_——

 
 

a“:§‘f‘$‘d“:§‘€‘dh an

 

Figure 7. Structure, topology -- a and logical circuit -- b

of a BIS fragment using elements with current interception
(wept - 6-10 5 cm'3, N", - 5.1018 cm'3).

Key: 1. pm
2- Iinput
3' Ioutput

0n the baaia of the proposed approach, a program uaa constructed whose potentialities
are illustrated on an example of the modeling of a fragment of integrated logic with
current interception. The calculation of the fragment of Figure 7a consisting of
27 p-regiona on a network of 80XSO pointa took 16 minutes on an Yes-1022 computer.

The results of the current computation for one of the logical atatea of gate 1 are
shown in Table 2.

257

FOI‘OIWHCIAI.USE!ONIN
FINICNWNCJAI.USE(NNLY

Table 2

Illustration of the Effectiveness of Current Transmission in a PTL-Element
U.. z ‘_.

  

Key: 1. Iinputo pA
2. Ioutput. PA

According to our evaluations, the calculation of a BIS fragment containing one hun-
dred p-regions on a c uter vith an immediate-access memory of 256-512 Kbytes and
effective speed of 6°10 op/s will take rv 30 minutes.

Consideration of the real topology of elements and the possibility of modeling func-
tionally integrated fragments containing dozens of transistors make quasi-three-di-
mensional models very promising in designing 318 and superBlS.

Evaluating the prospects of using two-dimensional and quasi-three-dimensional physico-
topological models for describing instruments with dimensions less than 1 pm, it is
possible to conclude the following. Down to the minimum topological dimensions of
active elements of the order of 0.25 pm, the fundamental equations (l)-(9) and/or
(18)-(l9) will be acceptable for their modeling, however, as this limit is approached,
it will be necessary to make substantial modifications in these equations connected
with the consideration of the quantum-dimensional effects [8, 62]. Beyond this limit,
both the operating principles and the structure of active elements, as well as the
fundamental equations necessary for their modeling, must be fundamentally different.

Moreover, the problem of the possibilit of creating practical instruments with such
small dimensions remains to be open [63 .

"DP-Elements

Just as for bipolar transistors, the best results from the viewpoint of accuracy of
description and the range of applications are yielded by using two-dimensional num-
erical models of HDP-transistors based on direct solution of the fundamental system
of Poisson equations of continuity and transfer for the longitudinal section of the
instrument [33]. These models make it possible to take into account the exact de-
pendence of mobility on the field, impurity concentration and temperature and prac-
tically any distribution of impurities in the substrate (which is particularly impor-
tant for modern structures with ionic-alloyed channels). with the aid of such models,
it is possible to ”predict" accurately the voltoampere characteristics of the instru-
ments being developed and their most important electrical parameters (threshold vol-
tage, specific transconductance, through-depletion voltage) as a function of the
physicotopological parameters, to develop and correct ”working" models for machine

calculation of electrical circuits of 318 and superBIS, and to solve many other pro-
blems. I

At the present time, in connection with the development of the production of superBIS
with microminiature active and passive elements, the importance of two-dimensional
models as a means for calculating "DP-instruments has increased greatly. This is

258

FIHICMHNIJAL.USE40NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

connected with the growth of the "two-dimensionality" of the behavior of "DP-instru-
ments as their geometrical dimensions decrease and with the ever increasing complex-
ity and length of experimental studies and adjustment of new technology.

Theoretical studies [62, 63] show that two-dimensionsl models of the type described
in [33] will be generally applicable for describing and studying planar HDP-tran-
sistors down to the minimum channel length of about 0.25 pm, i.e., for three or four
more generations of integrated circuits. This indicates the necessity of further
improvement of such models both with respect to a more accurate description of the
physical relations used in then, and with respect to increasing the effectiveness of
the algorithms of numerical solutions of the equations of models.

   
        

02926 {44.31.3444 {61s.
.———

 

 

Figure 8. Illustration of the effects of a short -- a and a
narrow -- b channel and the appropriate geometrical approaiaa-
tions used for calculating the effective charge of the sub-
strate Q3: 1 —- gate; 2 -- oxide; 3 -- substrate.

The model constructed in the HINIHOS program [64] can serve as an exasple of a mo-
dern numerical two-dimensional model of an “DP-transistor. This program performs
a numerical solution of the fundamental system for majority carriers with the use of
more accurate models of mobility. Provisions are made in it for several methods of
describing the impurity profile of the substrate, including the use of the results
of calculations of the impurity profile with the aid of the program for modeling
technological processes SUPREH [(02], which makes this model essentially physicotech-
nological. This model was used successfully for analysing “DP-transistors with the
length of the gate electrode of 1 pm and with various impurity profiles of the chan-
nel obtained with the aid of ion implantation.

In practice, at the present time, simpler quasi-two-dimensional models of EDP-ele-
ments based on a smooth approximation of the Shockley channel are used more widely
[12. 65-68, and others]. This is explained by the high complexity of two-dimension-
al models and the corresponding mathematical means, by high expenditures of the ma-
chine time, as well as by the relative (in comparison with bipolar elements) simpli-
city of the operating principle of the planar MDP-transistor. Quasi-two-disensional
models ensure a very adequate accuracy of the modeling of EDP-transistors in the pro-
grams of circuit analysis and in many instances are suitable for calculating and op-
timiration of the instruments themselves down to the minimum topological dimensions
of the order of 1.5...2 pm [69].

259

FOIOI‘FIClAl-USEONLY
FINIOFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

In quasi-two-dimensional models, the channel is characterised by the specific sur-
face charge of mobile carriers Qn (for the sake of definiteness, we shall be examin-
ing an n-channel transistor everywhere), defined unambiguously for any cross section
of the channel by the one-dimensional Gauss equation. For this reason, the charge
Qn depends only on the gate-substrate voltage U3 and the channel-substrate voltage

0k, i.e., ._
Q.-Q.(U.. 0.). (25)

In turn, the channel current for the steep region of the characteristics of the in-
strument is found from the solution of an ordinary differential equation with separa-
ble variables of the following type [76]:

I-Wu.to.au.lau+wxo./dy1-Wu.to.+w.do.ldnw./du. ' (as)

where pn -- mobility of the carriers depending on the longitudinal By and transverse
Ex electric field, temperature, and impurity concentration, w -- channel width, (P1
-- temperature potential. The adopted system of coordinates is shown in Figure 8.

Practically all the existing quasi-two-dimensional models differ from one another in
the steep region of the characteristics in the approximations of the relations Qu-
Qn(U3, Uk) and pn - pn(8x, By) and by the inclusion or noninclusion of the diffusion
component of the current (second addend in equation (26)), and in the flat region of
the characteristics (when smooth approximation of the channel is partially disturbed)
-- in the mathematical description of the channel region near the drain.

The physical sense of smooth approximation of the channel is that, for an ordinary
planar HDP- transistor. the following inequalities are fulfilled along the major
part of the channel length L:

spa, dEJd.>dB,/d.. (27)

and, therefore, the distribution of charges in any section of the channel is defined
very precisely by the one-dimensional Gauss equation, and the boundaries and charges
of depleted regions -- by one-dimensional Poisson equation.

The condition of the applicability of smooth approximation of the channel for planar
HDP-transistors has the following form [67]:

lJzﬁ>30, (28)

where x8 is the thickness of the gate oxide.

For the HDP-elements of modern series-produced BIS, L ;> 3 pm and ‘8 g; 0.1 pm,
therefore, the condition (-8) for them is fulfilled, and quasi-twoadimensional mo-
dels operate normally. The changeover to MDP-elementa with channel lengths ‘1 3 pm
is done in accordance with the principle of proportional miniaturization [70] which
provides for simultaneous proportional reduction of all geometrical dimensions of
the structure, including the oxide thickness. As a result of this, the principle of
proportional miniaturizationI which guarantees the preservation of the working abil-
ity of EDP-elements of small dimensions, at the same time ensures the fulfillment of
the condition (28), which makes it possible to use modernised quasi-two-dimensional
models of the type described in [65-68] with a channel length of at least up to 1 pm.

260

FOI¢0FINCLAI.USE1MULY
FOR‘OF'UCJAI.USE¢NVLY

Theoretical analysis and experimental data indicate that the influence of all effects
determining the behavior of “DP-instruments with moderately small (1. 7/ 3 pm) chan-
nel lengths is fully preserved in subminiature HDP-instruments. These effects in-
clude [12]: influence of the substrate charge; mobility modulation of the carriers

by the transverse and the longitudinal (drift velocity saturation effect) fields and
its dependence on the impurity concentration and temperature; finite drain conduc-
tion in saturation (in the flat region of the characteristics); self-capacitance non-
linearity of the EDP-instrument (gate-drain, gate-source, gate-substrate)and capaci-
tance nonlinearity of drain-substrate and source-substrate.

All these effects are taken into consideration in the majorit of the models of sub-
miniature HDP-transistors developed to date [65-68 and othersi. It should be men-
tioned that, down to the channel dimensions L, 9 ‘Url pm, fully acceptable and ac-
curate results are achieved by using a simple seniempirical description of mobility
of the type

p.-p..(l+EJB-)"(1+u-08Jvua)-" (29)'

where Pno -- surface mobility at Ex, By‘ﬁ? 0 determined by the average impurity con-
centration and temperature, ka -- characteristic transverse field, V11“ -- limit
drift velocity of the carriers. By using the relation (29) in the integration of

the current equation (26), it is possible, as a rule, to obtain equations of the
volt-ampere characteristics in quasi-two-dimensional models in the form of explicit
analytical expressions.

however, for HDP-instruments with small (L, w {E 3 pm) dimensions, a number of addi-
tional physical effects are added, which substantially modifies their behavior.

 

Figure 9. Schematic impurity distribution in the transverse
section of the channel for two types of ionic-alloyed MD?-
transistors: depleted with a builtin channel -- a and enriched
with an "alloyed" channel -- b.

Firstly, even if the principle of porportional miniaturization is observed, the di-
mensions of the depleted drain-substrate, source-substrate and channel-substrate re-
gions decrease considerably slower than the goemetrical dimensions of the instruments,
due to which there form regions at the edges of the channel in which the one-dimen-
sional nature of the distribution of charges is greatly disturbed (effects of a short
[71, 72] and a narrow [72-73] channel, see Figure 8).

0n the basis of the geometrical approximation shown in Figure 8, the correcting fac-
tors k is calculated for the effective charge of the substrate Q3, which appears in

261

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.US€‘0NLY

equations (25), (26). This factor allows for the changes in the effective charge of
the substrate under the effect of the edge effects (for the effect of a short chan-
nel k <1 1, for the effect of a narrow channel k ;> 1). Experimental checking of
the appropriate models showed that, if the condition (28) is observed, they ensure
a sufficient degree of accuracy in the range 1., w? 1 pm [76]. If necessary, the
modeling of these effects can be done with the aid of two-dimensional models with
subsequent approximation of the obtained relations for quasi-two-dimensional "elec-

trical" models [75, 76].

Secondly, with the miniaturization of the EDP-elements, their working voltages will
be decreasing simultaneously, and will be 1.5...3 V for digital “DP-circuits at L,
H a: l m. Moreover, it will be required to have an accurate modeling of the behav-
ior of P-elements (particularly for dynamic 318) in the near-threshold region (in
the mode of “weak inversion"), which is N 0‘ 4’5 v in terms of the voltage on
the gate. Here, 1 <1 c1 ‘1 1.2, Cpf - 0.25...0.3S V is the Fermi level in the
substrate. Quasi-two-dimensionsl models for describing the current of an HDP-tran-
sistor in the mode of weak inversion exist already [77, 78 and others], however,
they are not coupled with quasi-two-dimensional models for the active mode (mode of
"strong inversion" and require relatively high computation expenditures.

Thirdly, digital MD? of 315 and superBIS use widely “DP-elements with ionic-alloyed
(IL) channels -- depleted HDP-transistors with builtin channels (alloyed with an op-
posite type of impurity) and enriched with an induced channel (alloyed with the same
type of impurity), Figure 9. The modeling of the volt-ampere characteristics of
such instruments, even with the quasi-two-dimensional approach, requires, in the gen-
eral case, to consider the nonlinear real distribution of the impurity, i.e., to per-
form a numerical calculation of the relation Qn(03, uh) from the one-dimensional
Poisson equation with subsequent numerical integration of the current equation (26)
[79]. Such quasi-two-dimensional numerical models approach the models of the

type described in [33] with respect to their complexity and computation expenditures
and can be used only for calculating the EDP-elements as such.

For these reasons, models of MDP-transistors with IL-channels intended for circuit
designing,and even for calculating transistors themselves, are constructed more fre-
quently on the basis of step-by-step approximation of the impurity profile of the
channel (interrupted line in Figure 9). These approximations make it possible, in
both cases, to obtain the function Qn(03, 0k) in the form of an integrable expression
and, due to this, to obtain explicit analytical solutions of the equation (26) for
the cursent of the channel [79-81]. It is also possible to consider the effect of
the le?gt3 and width of the channel on the threshold voltage by relatively simple me-
thods 82 .

Both for instruments with ionic-alloyed channels, and for instruments with reduced
geometrical dimensions of the channels, an important role is played by mathematical
models of threshold voltage as such [68, 71, 73-76, 79-82]. These models, both num-
erical and simpler analytical, are used more and more widely at the present time in
the computation and optimisation of the technological design parameters of “DP-ele-
ments [69, 83]. They are constructed by finding the voltage on the gate V3 which
reduces the specific density of the charge Qn(03, Up) to sero.

262

INDI‘OFFICIAL lﬂﬂEINULY
roe omcm. use ONLY

The basic characteristics of the modeling of "DP-elements on sapphire (insulating)
substrates include the consideration for the floating mode of the substrate and
avalanche multiplication in the drain junction and a specific mode of operation of
n-channel instrument (deep depletion mode) [86-86].

When developing any quasi-two-dimensional models of “DP-elements for technical cir-
cuit computations, special attention must be given to the reduction of computation
expenditures and smoothness of all functions describing the model [87]. In all pos-
sible cases, it is necessary to avoid the use of transcendental functions and inter-
nal iterative processes, replacing them by simple approximating expressions (see,
fcr example, [67, 75, 88]). In subsystems of technical circuit designing of HDP of
BIS, it is necessary to have a complete set of models -- from the most accurate of
the type described in [65-68] to the simplest -- and units of automatic coupling of
simpler models with more complicated models [88]. An analogous approach (automatic
coupling of simple electrical models with complex physicotopological models) will
also be[ne§essary in constructing and using macromodels of EDP-gates and fragments
of BIS 89 .

Conclusions

1. The modern system of multidimensional modeling of bipolar and EDP-transistors
will make it possible to solve successfully the basic problems of modeling and compu-
tation of the elements and functionally integrated fragments of BIS and superBIS with
minimal topological dimensions up to 0.25...0.3 pm and minimal thicknesses of the
layers of structures to 0.01...0.02 um if the numerical methods of solving fundamen-
tal equations of the physics of semiconductors are improved further and the descrip-
tions of physical effects used in the models are refined.

2. For solving the problems of modeling and calculation of the elements of BIS and
superBIS with submicronic dimensions, it will be necessary to develop effective algo-
rithms and programs for modeling multidimensional distribution of impurities for
multistage technological processes including a set of operations of ion implantation,
thermal diffusion, oxidation, and epitaxy.

3. When developing both multidimensional and simpler quasi-multidimensional and one-
dimensional models, it is necessary to take all possible measures for reducing com-
putation expenditures -- to use various approximations and effective initial approx-
imationsin iterations and other computation methods.

6. Precise modeling of subminiature bipolar and “DP-elements of BIS and superBIs in
programs of technical circuit designing will require a considerable modernization of
the existing models: for example. for bipolar instruments, it will be necessary to
consider natural inertness ofthetransistors and the specific characteristics of func-
tionally integrated n-p-n and p-n-p-structures; and for HDP-instruments -- the ef-
fects of a short and a narrow channel, the mode of weak inversion. and nonlinear dis-
tribution of the impurity along the depth of the channel.

5. Systems of the parameters of models of bipolar and EDP-elements for technical
circuit designing must include not only the parameters defined or refined with the

aid of electrical measurements, but also the basic physicotopological parameters
characterizing the structure of the elements.

263

FO.<0FFKJAJ.U§E(MVLY
10.

ll.

12.

130

la.

15.

l6.

17.

18.

FOI‘OFINCIAI.UGIZ(MVLY

Bibliography
Keypie. BLEKTROMIKA, 1978, Vol 51, No 24, p 29.
Leynen. BLEKIRONIKA, 1979, Vol 52, Mo 8, p 26.
Yeu, M. N. et a1. IKE! ?rens on 3d, 1979, v 80-26, No 4, p 318.
Leymen. ELBRIRONIKA, 1980, Vol 53, No 14, p 26.
Pose, D., and Allen, R. ELEKIRONIKA, 1980, Vol 53, No h, p 42.
Moeneisen, B,m Mead, C. A. SOL-ST ELECTR, 1972, v 15, No 7, p 819.
Hoeneieen, 3., Mend, C. A. SOL-ST ELECTR, 1972, v 15, No 8, p 891.
Kiiz. TIIER, 1975, Vol 63, No 5, p 5.

"Technology", in the book: Elektronike: proehloye, neetoyeehcheye, buduehcheye"
[Electronics: Pest, Present and Future], Moscow, Mir, 1980, p 268.

Vasenkov, A. A. ELEKTROMNYA TBKHNIKA, Series 3, Microelectronics, 1978, No 6
(78).? 3.

Valiyev, K. A., et el. In the book: "Mikroelektronike i poluprovodnikovyye
pribory" [Microelectronics and Semiconductor Devices], edited by A. A. Veoenkov
and Ye. A. Pedotov, No 1, Moscow, Sov Radio, 1976, p 6.

Nosov, Yu. 3., Petroeyente, K. 0., end Shilin, V. A. "Matineticheekiye uodeli
elementov integrel'noy elektroniki" [Motheneticel Models of Integrated Electro-
nice], Moecov, Sovetokoye radio, 1976.

Cheboteyev, Ye. V., Rudenko, A. A., end Kokine, G. Ye. In the book: "Mikroelek-
tronike [Microelectronics], edited by A. A. Veeenkov, No 9, Moscow, Sovetekoye
radio, 1976, p 47.

Ovenov, N. M., and Novikov, V. I. In the book: "Meteneticheakoye uodeliroveniye"
[Methemeticel Modeling], Inga, mu, 1978, p 92.

Khetchel, Drhoy, end Kuli. In the book: "Avtonetizeteiye v proyektirovenii"
[Automation in Designing], edited by D. Kelekhen et el, Moscow, Mir, 1972.

Petrooyente, K. 0. ELEKTRONNAYA TBKHNIKA, Series 2, Seuiconductor Devices, 1975,
Mo 1(93), 9 43.

Petrosyente, K. 0. BLEKTPONNAYA TEKHNIKA, Serieo 2, Semiconductor Devices,
1976, No 3(105), p 11.

“art P., Ven't “of T., Kleeeeen F. IEBE JOURN SOL-ST CIRCUITS, 1979, v 86-16,
No 2, p 343.

26k

FOR‘OFFKJAI.05810NLY
190

20.
21.
22.
23.

24 0

25.
26.
27'

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.
38.
39.

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

Vsn Overetraeten, 8., De Man, ﬂ., Hertene, k. I!!! TEARS ON 80, 1973, v 30-20,
No 3, p 290.

Lundatrom, H., Schwarts, 3., Gray, J. SOL-ST BLECTR, 1981, v 24, No 3, p 195.
Layou, H., Tuft, R. IRES TRANS ON 30, 1979, v 30-26, No 7, p 1014.

ching Yusu Ru. SOL-ST ELECTR, 1980, v 23, No 12, p 1215.

Dsievior, J., Schmid, H. APPL PHYS LETT, 1977, v 31, p 346.

Shibib, H., Lindholn, P., Possum, J. 1383 TRANS ON 80, 1979, v 30-26, No 7, p
1104.

Tang, D. 183! TRANS 0" ED, 1980, v 80-27, No 3, p 563.
Gsur, 5. IBM JOUR st DEVELOP, 1977, v 21, No 2, p 306.
Harehak, A., Van v11.c, K. SOL-ST 218618, 1980, v 23, No 12, p 1223.

Hikhaylov, G. 8., and Rudenko, A. A. BLEKIRONNAYA TERENIIA. Series 3, Micro-
electronics. 1979, No 4(82), 9 88.

Veliyev, K. A.: Pashintsev, Yu. 1.; and Petrov, G. V. "Priueneniye kontekta
metal-poluprovodnik v elektronike" [Applications of Hetal-Seniconductor Contacte
in Electronics], Moscow, Radio 1 svyaz', 1981.

Gavrilov, 0. T., and Tikhodeyev, Yu. S. ELEKIRONMAYA TBRHNIKA, Series 2,
Semiconductor Devices, 1973, No 1(73), p 3.

Gaur, S. 1338 JOUR SOL-ST CIRCUITS, 1979, v 86-14, No 2, p 337.

Yeliseyev, V. 5.; Hirgorodskiy, Yu. N.; and Rudenko, A. A. In the book: "Hikro-
elektronika" edited by A. A. Vaeenko, No 8, Hoacov, Sovetekoye radio, 1975,

p 352.

Afontsev, S. A.. et a1. ZARUBBZHNAYA RADIOELEKIRONIKA, 1975, No 8, p 64.

Pol'skiy, 8. 5., and Pokhvalina, L. S. IZV AN LATVIYSKOY 888, Series of Physi-
cel end Technical Sciences, 1977, No 4, p 59.

Rudenko, A. A. BLBKTRONNAYA TBKHNIKA, Series 3. Microelectronics, 1978, No 6(78)
9 32.

Adschi, 1., Yoshii, A., Sudo, T. 1882 TRANS ON 80, 1979, v 30-26, No 7, p 1026.
Buturla, 3., Cottrell, P. SOL-ST BLECTR, 1980, v 23, No 4, p 331.

Adler, u. son-31 BLECTR, 1980, v 23, No 8, p 845.

Betalov, B. V.; Krenlev, V. Ya.; and D'yakonov, V. H. HIKROBLEKIRONIKA, 1979,
Vol 8, No 1, p 34.

265

FOI!OFFIJAI.UGE(N9LY
60.

(.10

62.
63.
66.

65.

a6.

67.

68.

69.

51.

52.

53.

55.

S6.

S7.

FOI‘0FFKJAL.USE(NHLY

Afontsev, s. A., et .1. HIKROELBKTRONIKA, 1977, Vol 6, No 2, p 179.

Rudenko, A. A., end Cheboteyev, Ye. v. BLBKTRONNAYA Pnouvsalnunosr', 1979,
No 6(76), 9 23.

Antoniedis, 0., 0utton, R. 1382 TRANS ON 20, 1979, v 30-26, No 6, p 690.
Hornet, 0., Hilson, C. BSTJ, 1980, v 59, No 1, p 1.
Tielert, R. ICES TRANS ON 80, 1980, v 80-27, No 8, p 1679.

Russel, H., Heberger, R., Hoffman, K., Prinke, 6., Dumcker, R., Sechs, A.
1883 TRANS ON ED, 1980, v 80-27, No 8, p 1686.

Antoniedis, 0., Rodonl, H., Dutton R. J BLECTR SOC SOL-ST SCI AND TBCHNOL, 1979,
v 126, No 11, p 1939.

Lee, H., Dutton, R., Antoniedis, 0. J BLECTR SOC SOL-ST SCI AND TECHNOL, 1979,
v 126, No 11, p 2001.

Antoniedie, 0., Goneeles, A., button, R. J ELECTR SOC SOL-ST SCI AND TBCHNOL,
1978, v 125, No S, p 813.

Peysuleyev, B. N., end Pervov, A. C. In the book: “Hikroelektronike i polupro-
vodnikovyye pribory", edited by A. A. Vesenkov and Yu. A. Fedotov, Moscow,

Sov Radio, 1979, No 6, p 169.

Ceur, 8., Nevon, 0. ICE! TRANS ON 80, 1976, v 30-23, No 1, p 50.

Chryssefis, A., Love, U. SOL-ST BLECTR, 1979, v 22, No 3, p 269.

Nosov, Yu. R., end Petrosyents, K. 0. In the book: "Poluprovodnik e pribory
i ikh primeneniye" [Semiconductor Instruments and Their Applicetionsi, edited
by Ye. A. Pedotov, No 28, Moscow, Sov radio, 1975.

Petrosyents, K. O. BLBKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA, Ser 3, Microelectronics, 1975, Ho 2
(56).

Rofeil, 3., E1mesry, H., Heeeell, S. 1338 TRANS ON 80, 1977, v 80-26, No 3,
p 236.

Hendrickson, T., Hueng, J. IBBB JOURN SOL-ST CIRCUITS, 1977, v sc-12, No 2,
p 171.

Petroeyents, K. 0. Proc SUMMER SYMPOSIUM ON CIRCUIT THEORY. SHORT CONTRIBUTIONS.
Presue, Czechoslovekie, Sept 1977, p 677.

Niehin, A. A. Reports of the All-Union Seminar: "Sensitivity of Electronics
and Electromechanicsl Devices end Systems, Moscow, 1979.

266

FOI4OIFKJA1.US£4ONL¥
58.

59.

60.

61.
62.
63.

66.

65.

66.

67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
7h.
75.
76.

77.

78.

FOI:OITWCJAI.IEEE(HNLY

Kazenkov, G. 6., Mayorov, S. A.. and Rudenko, A. A. ELEKTRONNAYA TERRNIRA,
Ser 3, Microelectronics, 1978, No 6(78), p 17.

Avdeyev, Ye. U., and 2verev, S. A. ELEKTRONNAYA TEKRNIKA, Ser 3, Microelectro-
nics, 1978, No 6(78), 9 23.

Petrosyanta, K. 0., and Ryabov, N. N. 12V VUZOV SSSR. RADIOELEKTRONIKA, 1980,
Vol 13, No 6, p 50.

Berger, N., Dreckmnnn, U. IEEE TRANS ON E0, 1979, v E0-26, No 7, p 1038.
Barker, J. R., Perry, 0. K. SOL-ST ELECTR, 1980, v 23, No 6, p 519.
Barker, J. R., Perry, 0. K. SOL-ST ELECTR,1980, v 23, No 6. p 531.

Selberherr, S., Schﬁtz, A., Pﬁtzl, R. H. IEEE TRANS ON ED, 1980, v 80-27, No
8, p 1540.

Conpeers, 3., De Man, R. 6., Sancen, N. M. C. 1833 TRANS ON ED, 1977, v 30'24,
No 6, p 739.

Hoeffingcr, 0., Sibbert, R., Zlmncr, 6. IEEE TRANS 0N ED, 1979, v E0-26, No 4,
p 513.

Dang, L. M. IEEE TRANS ON E0, 1979, v 80-26, No 6, p 636.

Taylor, G. H. SOL-ST ELECTR, 1979, v 22, No 8, p 701.

Malta, R. F. et :1 IEEE TRANS ON E0, 1980, v E0-27, No 8, p 1559.

Dennard, R. R. at :1. IEEE JOURN SOL-8T CIRCUITS, 1974, v 80-9, No 5, p 256.
Yau, L. 0. SOL-ST ELECTR, 1976, v 17, No 10, p 1059.

Vang, P. P. IEER TRANS ON 20, 1978, v E0-25, No 7, p 779.

Jeppsan, K. 0. ELECTR LETTERS, 1975, v 11, No 16, p 297.

Herckel, G. SOL-ST ELECTR, 1980, v 23, No 12, p 1207.

Toyabe, T., Aunt, S. IEEE TRANS 0N ED, 1979, v 30-26, No 6, p 653.

Kroell, K. 8., Ackernnnn, G. K. SOL-ST ELECTR, 1976, v 19, No 1, p 77.

Nashuhcrc, T., Etoh J., Naglta, N. IEEE TRANS 0N E0, 1976, v E0-21, No 6, p
363.

Scott, D. 3., Chamberlain s. 0. 131m 301m: SOL-ST cmcurrs, 1979, v sc-la, No
3, p 633.

267

FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
79.

80.
81.

82.

83.

84.
85.
86.

87.

88.

89.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Blyunkin, 1.. IL, Lynkhov, H. N., Khodooh, L. 8., end Simonorv, V. A. m0!!-
NAYA PROMYSRLBNMST', 1971., no 12, p 23.

Nosov, Yu. R., and Khodoeh, 1.. S. MIRROBLEHRONIKA, 1973, Vol 2, No S, p 395.
Wang, P. P. 1388 TRANS 0N ED, 1977, v 30-26, No 3, p 196.

Kodosh, 1.. S. BLERTRONNAYA TBRHNIRA, Set 2, Semiconductor Instruments, 1980,
No 7(42), 9 71.

Yokoyeme, K., Yoshi, A., Roriguchl, 3. Im TRANS 0N ED, 1980, v 80-27, No 8,
p 1509.

Eaton, S. S., Lavellc, 8. 1883 TRANS ON 80, 1978, v BD-ZS, No 8, p 907.
Jerdonek, R. ‘1'., Bondy, w. R. I!!! TRANS ON 3!), 1978, v 20-25, No 8, p 899.

Jerdonek, R. T., Bondy, H. R., Btmbnum, J. In! TRANS ON 80, 1980, v 30-27,
No 8, p 1566.

Fraser, D. 1..., Director, 5. H. ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS AND SYSTWS, 1978, V 2,
No 2, p 39.

Khodosh, 1.. 8., and Sh111n, V. A. In the book: "Avtountiutetye ptoektirovaniyn
v elektronike" [Autonatton of Designing in Electronics], Kiev, Tekhnlka, 1972,
No 6.

Rabbac, N. 8., Ryan, H. D., Roeeein, S. In: TRANS 0N ED, 1975, v BD-ZZ, No 8,
p 523.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'etvo "ll-uh", 'Mlkroelektronike", 1981

10,233
cso: 1860/63

268

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINIiHWﬂCJAl.lEHE(NELY

SELECTED ABSTRACTS 0? ARTICLES FROM JOURNAL 'HICROELECTRONICS',
SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1981

hoscow HIKROELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 10, No 5, Sap-Oct 81 pp 478-480

“00 539.2
STATIONARY AND TRAVELING DISSIPATIVE STRUCTURES IN ACTIVE KINETIC MEDIA
[Abstract of article by Kerner, B. S. and Osipov, V. V.]

[Text] The authors studied the properties of homogeneous active distributed media
which are promising for creating fundamentally new functional microelectronic devices.
On the basis of the theory of such media developed earlier by the authors, they ana-
lysed in detail the simplest one, two, and three-dimensional spatially inhomogeneous
states in the form of a single strata, a spot, or a drop which can be written in some
stability regions of a homogeneous state of the medium. They analysed the type of
more complex stable spatially inhomogeneous states. Analysis of stable inhomogeneous
states traveling without attenuation is given in order to reveal the possibility of
reading inhomogeneous structures recorded earlier. Some other functional possibil-
ties of the media in question are discussed. Figures -- 8, bibliography -- 35 items.

UDC 621.382
A DEVICE RITE CHARGE COUPLING AND AR OUTPUT UNIT BASED ON AN AVALANCHE DIODE
[Abstract of article by Trishenkov, H. A. and Eskin, Yu. H.]
[Text] The authors examine the possibilities of using the avalanche multiplication
effect in the output assembly of a charge-coupled device. It is shown that this ef~
feet can increase the ability of such a device to register weak information charges.

Examples of the designs of such output assembly are given. Figures -- 3, biblio-
graphy -- 10 items.

UDC 539.2

DISPERSION OF SURFACE MAGNETOSTATIC NAMES IN THE PRESENCE OF A TRAVELING HAVE 0?
ELASTIC DEPORHATION

[Abstract of article by Popkov, A. P.]

[Text] 0n the basis of magnetostatics equations and equations of motion of the mag-
netic moment and with consideration for magnetostriction, the author studied the

269

lill‘ﬂllltlAl.ll§ll(lﬂLY
FOR OIVNCJAI.USE(NNLY

characteristics of the propagation of surface nagnetostatic waves (PHV) in the pre-
sence of a traveling acoustic wave in the area of stable interaction. Using the
method of the theory of singular perturbations, he derived equations describing
the interaction of forward and backward magnetostatic waves moving parallel to the
acoustic wave. The value is found of the frequency splitting of the dispersive
branch of PHV under the conditions of its nonelastic Bragg scattering on a wave of
elastic deformation. Evaluations indicate that a surface acoustic wave of l I“ cre-
ates a nontrsnsmission band in the first Brillouin zone A (ad/u) f“ 10'3 in an
ytterium ferrite -- garnet plate 10 ym thick located on a 0.5 cm wide substrate un-
limited with respect to thickness. In the first order of the theory of perturbation,
it is shown that, due to the nonlinearity of the dispersion relation a)(k) of PHV,
it is possible to have the interaction of two forward waves having a shift with re-
spect to the wave number and frequency along with the interaction of forward and
backward waves. Figures -- 3, bibliography -- 25 items.

“30 535.8:535.241.13
DYNAMICS OF OPTICAL RECORDING 0F IN?0RHATION IN HDPDH-STKUCTURES
[Abstract of article by Klimova, N. v.]

[Text] Numerical methods are used to study unsteady processes in HDPDH [metal-di-
electric-semiconductor-dielectric-metal] structures during optical recording of in-
formation with consideration for a self-consistent field. The drift and diffusion
of the carriers are considered, as well as their capture on the surface states of
the semiconductor-dielectric interfaces and volume traps. It is shown that the dis-
tribution of the electric field intensity is essentially nonuniform over the thick-
ness of the specimen. when there is a great difference in the mobility of the car-
riers, the sign of the full space charge corresponds to the sign of less mobile car-
riers. It is shown that the presence of recombination traps increases somewhat the
recording time, but improves the conditions of storing the recorded information,
preventing its erasing. Figures -- 3, bibliography -- 5 items.

UDC S35.8:53S.241.13
BISTABLE PRpPERTIBs OF A SPACE MODULATOR HITH INTERNAL FEEDBACK
[Abstract of article by Kompanets, I. N., Parfenov. A. V. and Popov, Yu. H.]

[Text] The authors studied a nonlinear optical device whose bistable properties are
ensured by internal photoelectric feedback between the light-modulating and a photo-
sensitive layers. The light-modulating medium was a liquid crystal alloyed with a
dye which changes its absorption when an electrical field is applied. The switching
li ht energy is ’v 1613 J/element at a density of the resolvable image elements of
l cm-2. The cycle time is 100 ms and can be improved by two orders. Figures --
2, bibliography -- 6 items.

270

IIHICHHNCJAI.USE(NNLY
roe omcm. use ONLY

UDC 535.8:535.241.l3
ELECTRIC ABSORPTION IN SMOOTH NETEROJUNCTIONS Al-SiOz-nGaAs-n‘GaAsxPl-x-n*GaP

[Abstract of article by Morosov, S. P., Blagodarov, A. N., Vigdorovich, Ye. N.,
Gorshkov, Yu. A., Kunin, V. Ya. and Sveshnikov, Yu. N.]

[Text] The authors examined the characteristics of electric absorption in MD? [meo
tal-dielectric-aemiconductor]-heterostructurea Al-SiOz-ncaAa-n*GaAs,P1-;-n‘GaP with
a transitional layer GaAsxP1.x of a variable composition matching Ca? and GaAs lat-
tices. They analysed the kinetics of electric absorption under the effect of voltage
pulses of various polarities and lengths; optical memory was revealed in recording
by an enriching pulse due to electron capture on the Si02-GaAs interface. They mea-
sured spectral and field dependence of the absorption coefficient (1 GaAs; an em-
pirical relation vas obtained for OK as a function of the energy of light quanta
and the intensity of the electric field. It was concluded that it is promising to
use smooth heterojunctions GaAa-GaAsgP1-,-GaP in optical electronics. Figures --2,
bibliography -- 6 items.

UDC 621.382.3

SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF PHOTOEMISSION IN MDP-STRUCTURES NITB CONSIDERATION FOR
A CHARGE LOCALIZED IN THE DIELECTRIC

street 0 art 0 e by a arov, B. ., m rnova, . . an ar , V. .
[Ab i ll Skh u st on dcol'dfb A]

[Text] The authors studied the effects of a charge localised in a dielectric on the
nature of the :hanges in the boundary potential barriers during changes in the ap-
plied voltage uith consideration for the intensity of the mirror image. They ex-
amined the dependence of this effect on the values, the sign and the forms of dis-
tribution of the charge. It is shown that a positive charge in a dielectric in the
vicinity of the emitting boundary reduces the degree of the lowering of the height
of the potential barrier as the external shift for the injected electrons increases,
and increases it for the holes. This makes it possible to determine the emitting
boundary of the photoemission current. In this case, the form of the charge distri-
bution shows itself substantially only in the case of the fields of external dis-
placement and charge directed in the opposite direction in dielectrics. Figures --
3, bibliography -- 7 items.

UDC 621.382

MEASUREMENT OF THE BULK LIFETIME OE MINORITY CARRIERS FROM THE ANALYSIS OF THEIR
RECOMBINATION IN A SUBSTRATE OP HEP-STRUCTURES

[Abstraccof article by Kata, Ya. L., Klyaus, Rh. 1., Li, I. I. and Cherepov, Ye. 1.]
[Text] This is a theoretical and experimental examination of the process consisting
of the injection and recollection of minority carriers of the charge in the inver-

sion layer of the MD? volume. It is shown that the time characteristics of this pro-

cess depend weekly on the length of the injecting pulse, the type of the conductiv-
ity, the degree of alloying, the amplitude of the applied voltage and the capacitance

271

FOI‘OFTICIAI.lﬂﬂE(ﬂNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the dielectric layer of the MD? structure. This method makes it possible to de-
termine the lifetime of the minority carriers of the charge from the analysis of the

time characteristics of the process. Figures -- 2, bibliography -- 7 items.

UDC 621.315.592

CREATION OF LOW-RESISTANCE REGIOSS ON THE SURFACE OF GERMANIUH BY THE METHOD OF
IONIC ALLOYING

[Abstract of article by Godskov, S. 5., Klyukvin, A. B. and Hikhaylutsa, Ye. V.]

[Text] The authors studied the possibility of creating low-resistance regions on
the surface of Ge by irradiating it vith ions of phosphorus with an energy of s-ao
keV. They showed the practicality of using short pulses of laser radiation for an-
nealing the forming radiation defects. By measuring the depth distribution profiles
of phosphorus in unannealed specimens by the method of mass spectrometry of secon-
dary ions, it was shown that there occurs redistribution of the impurity even in the
process of ion irradiation due to the formation of a large amount of radiation de-
fects. It was found that the acceleration of diffusion is observed both in the re-
gion where the formation of defects occurs and beyond its limits. Figures -- 2,
bibliography -- 5 items.

006 539.217.l
AN OBJECTIVE QUANTITATIVE CRITERION 0? POROSITY 0P THIN FILMS
[Abstract of article by Aranovich, G. L. and Kusnetov, G. D.]
[Text] The authors proposed a new quantitative criterion of porosity of thin layers
which does not depend on the pore registration mode. It makes it possible to com-
pare the results of monitoring porosity (continuity) performed by various methods
for various films. The obtained results can be used as a basis in standardizing

the requirements for the porosity of thin films. Figures -- 1, table -- 1, biblio-
graphy -- 2 items.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Hikroelektronika", 1981

10,233
050: 1860/63

272

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(IULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OSCILLATORS, MDUIATORS, GENERATORS

one 621.317.765
TWOLGHCAL m. 1550 (mam momma

Host-ow PRIBORY I SISTER! UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 9. Sep 81 p 32

[Article by A. A. Hel'nikov. candidate of technical eciencea. N. A. Yeraolayev.
I. A. Yemsov. and A. N. Shesternin, engineers]

[Text] The “1‘31 550 oscillator ia designed for the excitation of watch crystal
resonators (KR) at the frequency of aequential resonance and for leasuring the
dynaaic iapedance of reeonatore with a noraalised (taking into account the capaci-
tance of the winding) capacitance of the load. as well aa without it. In a set
with a type Griz-316 frequency later, it aeaeuree frequency or the oscillation period
of the oscillator. A possibility is provided in the device for regulating the
excitation level of the aonitored XR. as well as for Ieaauring the voltage aapli-
tude on the resonator in digital tors. The oecillator take it possible to deter-

aine the dynaaic inductance. capacitance. the Q-i‘actor and the capacitive coef-
ficient of the KB.

Specifications

Range of reproduced frequencies (period) in

us (nicroeeconds) 320500'33Im0 (30303-30369)
Reproducibility of the reeonance -6
frequency (period) at a Q-factor a; 5000 :- (1.uo. «0.5 x 10 )

Lead capacitance in picofarada 5| 12.5: 35

Mr in setting load capacitance in S :2

Measurement range of dynaaic resistance ﬁx
in kohle 1-150

Error in Ieaauring resistance ﬁx in 5

at < 10 kohm i [5+3(1°/EK'1)]
at > 10 knams + “*5 RK/ISO)
Range of voltage amplitude change on K3
in nillivolta 30-200
273

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

error in neaeuring voltage alplitude

on KR in 5. not greater than 110
Power dieeipated in the KR in watts, not -6
greater than 5 x 10

Oscillator productivity in reeonatore in houre.
not less than 600-720

The basic of the device in the eelf-eatcited oscillator aethod for aeaauring the
equivalent electrical parameters of the KR by inserting the tested reeohator
in the correeponding circuit.

Structurally the oscillator consists of a haunting and controlling unit with a
four-character digital indicator and a self-excited oscillator proper with a con-
tacting device in which is installed the KR being Ionitored.

The oscillator is mde of series K1100. K153. 1155 and W nicrocircuite. The
power ie eupplied from a 220-volt. 80 H5 AC network; power coueuaed ie 25 volt-
anperee. The dineneione are: self-excited oecillator -- 80x120x90 up Ieeeuring
and controlling unit -- 185x2‘60x310 an.

The equip-ant nae developed by the Penn affiliate of the VIIIITI pribor [All-Union
Scientific Research Technological Institute or Inetrunent ﬂaking].

copmmm'. Indetel'etvo "hahinoetroyeniye". ‘Pribory 1 mtg-y upravleniya',
1981

2291
use: 1860/75

274

MR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS, INCLUDING
COLLECTIONS OP ABSTRACTS

ABSTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 'KBTROIDCY', SEPTEMBER 1981

Moscow METROLOGIYA (YEalDfESYACﬂmYE PRILOMIYE K NAUCHRO-TEKHNICHBSKW
ZHURNALU "IZHERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA") in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 62-64

000 621.396.96 :621.391.833
SELECTION OF PULSE-PHASE DISCRIMINATOR PARAMETERS

[Abstract of article by Hitsenko, I.D., and Galun, V.B., published in
HETROLOGIYA, No 9, 1981. p 3]

[Text] The influence of the parameters of a pulse-phase discriminator on the
accuracy with which the time position of a pulse is registered is examined. An
‘optimal estimate of its parameters, responding to the requirement of minimal error

under given signal detection conditions. is given. 2 illustrations, 6 bibliographic
references.

UDC 681.3.004.16:519.2
REAL-TIME PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING WENT INFORMATION

[Abstract of article by Krivotsyuk, V.I.. Kreshuk, V.V. and Hatveyev, A.A.
published in HE'FROLOGIYA. No 9, 1981, p 10]

[Text] A procedure is proposed for real-time processing of measurement information.

An example is given and comparability in terms of computational costs is estimated.
8 bibliographic references.

UDC 681.3: 621.317.7
LINGUISTIC APPROACR IN MODELING COMPLEX INFORMATION-MEASURING SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by Fedotov, 3.6., published in HETROLOGIYA. No 9. 1981, p 161

[Text] An approach is proposed for modeling complex information measuring systems
based on fuzzy set theory. 3 illustrations. 3 bibliographic references.

275

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.833.002.56: 006.354.065
MONITORING MOVING GEAR WHEELS IN MULTISECTIONAL GEARED TRANSMISSIONS

[Abstract of article by Idelvich, A.Ya., published in MBTROLOGIYA, No 9, 1981, p 22]

[Text] Methods and devices for monitoring moving gear wheels in geared transmissions
are described. 2 illustrations. six bibliographic references.

UDC 621.375.826

MEASUREMENT OF SPATIAL INTENSITY DISTRIBUTION IN IR-BAND BEAMS OF POWERFUL QUASI-
CONTINUOUS LASERS

[Abstract of article by Vavilov, V.P., Moroaov, P.A., Tanaseychuk, S.Yu., Morozovs,
S.P.. and Mslysheva, T.P., published in METROLOGIYA, No. 9, 1981, p 27]

[Text] Numerical estimates are obtained for the correspondence between the spatial

distribution of the power density of laser radiation and the temperature field on
a metal target. 6 illustrations, 6 bibliographic references.

UDC 634.8-6/.8

MEASUREMENT OF SPATIALLY MUTUAL SPECTRUM OP TURBULENT PRESSURE PULSATIONS AGAINST '
BACKGROUND OF ACOUSTIC NOISE

[Abstract of article by Kszimorov, Yu.A.. and Msrkin, V.I., published in
METROLOGIYA, No 9. 1981, p 31]

[Text] A method is described for determining the spatially mutual spectrum of
turbulent pressure pulsations against the background of acoustic noise based on

measurements of turbulent pressure pulsations at three points. 1 illustration,
4 bibliographic references.

UDC 531.768.068.9

INFLUENCE OF VIBRATION 0N PRECISItN OF ACCELEROMETER UITH VOLTAGE-DIGITAL CODE
CONVERTER

[Abstract of article by Konovslov, S.F., published in HETROLOGIYA, No 9, 1981, p 36]

[Text]. The influence of harmonic and random vibration on the accuracy of digital
accelerometers with various types of voltage-digital code converters is examined.
2 illustrations, a bibliographic references.

UDC 621.316.925.66
ANALYSIS OF DEAD ZONES OP LIQUID-FILLED MANOMETRIC TEMPERATURE SENSOR-RELAYS

[Abstract of article by Khludeyev, A.F., published in METROLOGIYA. no 9, 1981. p 36]

276

INDR OFIWCLAL USEICU'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Text] A method for analyzing the dead zone of liquid-filled manometric tempera-
ture sensor-relays is given. An evaluation of the analysis formula is presented.
1 bibliographic reference.

UDC 621.316.99

DEFINITION OF ISOLATION PARAMETERS 0E INDIVIDUAL PHASES WITH RESPECT TO GROUND
IN NETHORK WITH ISOLATED NEUTRAL

[Abstract of article by Tsapenko, Ye.F. and Sluchevskiy, Yu.N., published ir
HBTROLOGIYA, No 9, 1981, p 66]

[Text] A familiar method of determining the isolation resistances and equal-
valued capacitances of individual phases with respect to ground in a network

with isolated neutral is characterized briefly, and a method is proposed which
allows for unequal capacitances. An example of analysis is given. 1 illustration,
1 bibliographic reference.

UDC 621.376.23
RESQUTION 0F DIODE METERS FOR LOW-INDEX AMPLITUDE MODULATION
[Article by Nevolin, V.V., published in NETROLOGIYA, No 9, 1981, p 50]

[Text] A method is proposed for defining the internal noise diode detectors
used to determine the resolution of low-index modulation meters. 1 illustration,

6 bibliographic references.
UDC 531.733: 532.539.S

DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF CHARACTERISTICS OF HIGH-FREQUENCY RESONANT PRIMARY
TRANSDUCERS OP GAS CONTENT OF NONPOLAR MEDIA

[Abstract of article by Hayorov, V.A., and Kupriyanov, A.S., published in
HETROLOGIYA, No 9, 1981, p 55]

[Text] Formulas are derived for calculating the nominal statistical characteristics

of high-frequency resonant primary transducers for gas content of non-polar media
for pipelines with inside diameters between 20 and 124 mm. 1 table, 1 illustra-

tion, 3 bibliographic references.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO STANDARTOV, 1981

6900
CS (1 1860/62

277

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFFKJAI.USEI)NLN

UDC 53l.719.2.082.4
ACOUSTICAL DISTANCE MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL METHODS

Moscow AKUSTICHESKIYB HBTODY IZHBBENIYA RASSTOYANIY I UPRAVLENIYA in Russian
1981 (signed to press 8 Apr 81) pp 2-5, 206-207

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book “Acoustical Distance
Measurement and Control Methods", by Aleksey Alekaeyevicb Gorbatov and
German Yevgen'yevich Rudashevskiy, Energoizdat, 5000 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] Annotation

In contrast to the first edition published in 1973, the present book contains
a more complete and systematized exposition of new methods and means of remote
contsctless measurement of distances in a gaseous (sir) medium which have been
put to industrial use. The physical foundations of measurements using elastic
waves, methods of modulating and converting signals, and devices for remote
control of the operation of electrical devices are examined.

The book is intended for engineering-technical and scientific workers in the
area of automation and monitoring-instrumentation technology.

[The book was reviewed by A. V. Purduyev.]

Foreword

The present book. which was written five years after the first edition [1] was
published, was conceived as a systematized exposition of the theoretical and
experimental foundations of echo ranging and acoustical control, which now com-
prise a division of technical acoustics. The authors' task was to produce a
work which would be identically suitable for studying the theoretical and ex-
perimental foundations of echo ranging and acoustical control, and for developing
corresponding devices having a wide range of capabilities. Because of its limited
size, this book was not able to touch upon a number of important methodical
questions of the optimal circuit design for echo ranging devices, and did not
have a section on acoustical control. In addition, new strictural and circuit
treatments have recently appeared, electroscoustic converters have been developed
with improved characteristics for operation in gaseous media, and the area of
application of echo ranging meters has expanded.

278

FOIIOFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The rapid development of echo ranging technology has resulted from the increased
demands of many branches of the economy for new means of measuring the relative
spatial position of machine components. the dimensions of production output,
liquid levels in bunkers, monitoring the surface profile of a deformed construc-
tion, etc., as well as the significantly improved capabilities of electronics

which have made it possible to create compact, reliable and economical signal
conversion and processing devices.

The need for rapid, precise echo ranging in the 0.1-10 meter range is dictated

by a number of practical tasks. Even though they can be solved using radar and
optical methods (including television), acoustic echo ranging, based on_using
acoustic waves primarily in the ultrasonic frequency range, has a number of
advantages. These include relative simplicity of emission and reception of
oscillations. compactness of transceiving elements in equipment, high resistance

to chemical and optical pollution of the environment, capability of operating

in aggressive media under high pressures, capability of remoting the secondary
equipment far from the site of the measurements, long service life, lack of

moving parts, simplicity of servicing, relatively low cost, practically instantane-

ous readiness to operate when power is turned on, insensitivity to electromagnetic
interference, high reliability and many others.

Nontheless, the perceptible relationship between the propagation velocity of
elastic oscillations in gaseous media and temperature, humidity, as well as the
possible influence of external acoustic interference, require that correcting

and stabilizing modules be used in these devices. For these reasons, modern
precision sound ranging equipment represents devices with highly developed elec-
tronics. It is appropriate to mention the fact here that the first laboratory
models of sound ranging devices did not appear until after the war, although the
principle of measuring distances by the propagation time of artificial radiation
has been known for a long time, and was first expressed in the scientific litera-

ture by the Russian scientist academician Zakharov in 1804 after his balloon
flights.

As a means for transmitting information for wireless remote control, ultrasound
began to attract the attention of developers in the late 1960s. Acoustic remote
control is based on transmitting instructions in the form of directional ultra-
sonic waves, with a distinguishing feature-the oscillation frequency--correspond-
ing to each instruction. The advantage of such devices is primarily the lack

of radio emission; they are compact, simple, and relatively inexpensive. Acoustic
control devices are now used in industrial and domestic automation for transmit-
ting instructions over distances of up to 30 meters.

He should remind the reader of yet another important advantage of ultrasound in
automatic fire hazard warning systems, anu in systems for detecting foreign
moving bodies in closed spaces. These systems are based on the occurrence of
Doppler frequency shift in the sonic field when local regions of the medium
(for example, heated air currents) or other sound-reflecting objects move in it.
Although these systems are somewhat complex, they have a number of undisputable
advantages: high sensitivity (they are triggered long before the appearance of
an open flame and at low movement velocities of foreign bodies), require no

279

FINItMﬁﬂCIAI.UBEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

illumination. are insensitive to acoustic interference. and permit monitoring of
the situation even when the geometry of the internal space is complex.

These examples provide clear evidence that short-wave aeroacoustics is now being
used in various areas of the economy. As this technology is assimilated and

put into industrial production, its range of utilization will undoubtedly
expand.

One particular specific point in planning echo ranging and acoustical control
devices should be pointed out. The group of problems facing the developers of
such equipment is quite varied. These include primarily problems of construct-
ing a common structure for an electroacoustic device or system, allowing for the
required meteorological and operating characteristics, estimating the possibili-
ties of practical implementation, choosing the type of transceiving elements and
the method for modulating the oscillations, the circuit design in consideration
of the available hardware base, formation and display of the set of measured
parameters, plus many others. Success in solving each of these problems leaves
its imprint on the meteorological and operating qualities of a future system and,
in the final analysis, determine the success of the development as a whole. The
present book touches upon all of the aforementioned problems to some degree.

and systematizes the basic scientific-technical treatments which are now known
in this area.

It is the authors' pleasant duty to express their gratitude to N. I. Brazhnikov
for his thorough analysis of the manuscript and his advice on improving individual
chapters of the book.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Introduction 6
1.1. The nature of ultrasound. Problems of echo-ranging and

acoustical control 6
1.2. Development of echo ranging methods and devices 11
1.3. Structures for echo ranging devices, threshold recorders and

remote control instruments 15
Chapter 2. Elastic wave propagation in gaseous medium 21

2.1. Properties of elastic medium. Plane sonic wave. Parameters

of sonic field 21
2.2. Directional wave emission 31
2.3. Sound absorption in gases 39
Chapter 3. Modulation of emitted oscillations 46
3.1. Classification of echo locators by type of emission 45
3.2. Pulsed emission without carrier frequency 69
3.3. Pulsed emission at carrier frequency 56

280

FIN!(NHH(1A1.USE¢NNLY
3 4. Continuous emission with frequency modulation

3.5. Continuous emission with amplitude modulation

3 6. Influence of frequency dependence of absorption on signal
transmission

Chapter 6. Power relationships in echo location

6.1. Sound reflection from obstacles
6.2. Reception and detection of oscillations
6.3. Power relationships

Chapter 5. Error sources

5 1. Hethodical error factors
5.2. Speed of sound in gases
5 3

. Influence of movement of medium on measurement accuracy

0

Chapter 6. Methods for improving accuracy

6.1. General evaluation of task
6.2. Thermal compensation
6.3. Autocorrection

Chapter 7. Interference and interference control

7.1. Reverberation. Influence of nonuniformity of medium
7.2. Electrical and mechanical interference
7.3. Repeated sound reflection

7.b. Industrial acoustic noise
Chapter 8. Electroacoustic converters

8.1. Acoustic and electrical parameters of converters
8.2. Elements of ultrasonic oscillating systems

8.3. Blectrodynamic converters

8.4. Magnetostriction converters

8.5. Piezoceramic converters

8.6. Condensor (capacitive) converters

Chapter 9. Dynamic properties of echo location circuits

9.1. Spectrum of pulse-width modulated signal and dynamic error
9.2. Interpolation

9.3. Reduction of dynamic error, expansion of bandwidth

9.4. Speed and error during echo ranging in the air
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020034-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 10. Ultraaonic remote control and warning

10.1. Renate control devices
10.2. Warning devices

Appendix
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

6900
080: 1860/ ’08

282

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020034-7
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

000 621.316.6:621.386.65.

CASCADE GENERATORS

Moscow KASKADNYYB GENERATOR! in Russian 1980 (signed to press 15 Jul 80)
pp 2-3, 196-197

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents iron book "Cascade Generators",
by Boris Iosifovich Al'bertinskiy and Mikhail Pavlovich Svin'in, Atoeizdat,
1550 copies, 197 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book is devoted to the theory, dev~lopment and design of cascade generators,
which are now one of the nest widely used high- and superhigh- direct voltage
sources. The developmental trends of cascade generators implemented using tradi-
tional capacitor-gate schemes, as uell as inductive coupling schemes which have
recently come into use. 're examined. Engineering calculation sethods are cited
and information is given on existing doaestic and foreign installations of
various types, as well as their components, construction materials and supply
systems.

The book is intended for engineering-technical workers at scientific-research
institutes, design bureaus and industrial enterprises involved in the development
and operation of cascade generators and devices based on same. The book nay
also be useful to senior students specializing in high voltage technology and

electrical physics.

One hundred and thirty-nine figures. 10 tables, 73 bibliographic references.
Foreword

This book explains questions of the theory, development and design of cascade

generators, which are now one of the most widely used types of high and super-

high direct voltage sources.

The traditional area of application of cascade generators is in electrophysicsl

equipment, prisarily highmvoltags accelerators of various types intended for
applications and basic research vhich are distinguished by compactness and a

283

IKHICHﬂﬂCJAl.lEﬂECNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high average power level, providing accelerating voltage instability of up to
10'5 - 10' relative units with significant bean currents. Cascade generators
are also used successfully for powering other electrophysical and electro-
technical devices: electrostatic lenses, deflectors, energy analyzers,

X-ray equipment, electrostatic painting installations, for testing high
voltage dc equipment, etc.

The recent expansion of the area of application of cascade generators has raised
interest in questions of their calculation, design and operation, nany of which
up to the present have been touched upon only in the periodic literature. The
book uses naterials tron donestic and foreign monographs, publications in the
periodic literature and original work of the authors, which provide a fairly
complete picture of the status of this subject.

Sections 1.3-1.5, 2.4, 3.1, 3.3, 3.4, 3.7, 4.1 and 4.2 were written by

B. I. Al'bertinskiy, while H. P. Svin'in wrote the Introduction, sections 1.1,
1.2, 1.6, 2.1-2.3, 3.2, 3.5, 3.6, and 4.3-4.6, chapter 5 and the Conclusion.
The authors express their gratitude to V. V. Akulov, A. S. Ivanov, C. I. Razin,
H. 1‘. Fedotov and V. I. Chuyko for their helpful discussions and assistance in
selecting material and preparing the manuscript.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Introduction 4
Chapter 1. Theory of circuits with series cascade feed 14

1.1. Basic processes in cascade generator schene with capacitiw

cascade coupling 14
1.2. Cascade generator with capacitive coupling in free-running node 18
1.3. Cascade generator with capacitive coupling in stationary load

node 22
1.4. Design calculation of capacitively coupled cascade generators 30
1.5. Emergency nodes in capacitively coupled cascade generators 33
1.6. Cascade generators with inductively coupled cascades 44
Chapter 2. Theory of circuits with parallel cascade feed 53
2.1. Some formulas for single-phase rectifier circuits with

capacitive filter 53
2.2. Cascade generators with capacitive cascade coupling 62
2.3. Cascade generators with inductive cascade coupling 68
2.4. features of emergency nodes of inductively coupled cascade

generators 70

Chapter 3. Construction elements of cascade generators and calculation
of nonstandard elements 73

3.1. Characteristics of basic construction naterials and
insulating media 73

284

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.2.

3.3.
3.4.
3.5.
3.6.
3.7.

Characteristics of standard cascade generator circuit
elenents

high voltage valves

Condenser columns and protective resistances

Cores

Hindings of inductive elements

Electrostatic fields in pri-ary insulating intervals

Chapter 4. Calculation and design of cascade generators.

I O U
Omahwnw
. . .

b53~53~0~
O

s
a

Calculation examples

Half-wave generator with capacitive cascade coupling
Balanced generator with capacitive cascade coupling
Capacitively coupled generators with parallel cascade feed
Cascade connection of isolation transformers

Cascade generators with sectioned core

Cascade generators with closed core

Chapter 5. Cascade generator voltage supply and

so
so

s
e

U'UIMMV'U'U
a

wanna-unp—
a

stabilization systems

Singularities of sons regulators

Rectifiers

Frequency converters

Hatching transformers and coapensating reactive elements
Measuring dividers and sensors in feedback devices
Feedback devices

Voltage supply in stabilization systens of sale cascade
generators

Conclusion

COPYRIGHT: Atonizdat, 1980

6900
CSO:

1860/57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.382.233.0ll.222.072
CLASSIFICATION OF THYRISTORS

Moscow ELEMENT! RADIOELEKTRONNOY APPARAIURY, VYPUSK 60: TIRISTORY in Russian
1980 (signed to press 3 Oct 80) pp 2-3, 65

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents of book "Radio Electronics
Equipment Parts: Thyristors", by Vladimir Yakovlevich Zamyatin and

Boris Vladimirovich Kondrat'yev, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 60,000 copies,
65 pages]

[Text] A classification of thyristors is given with respect to the principles

of control, form of the volt-ampere characteristic, average current and basic
function. Their design. basic parameters. most important characteristics and
their dependence on operating mode and temperature are examined. Examples of .
the design of several thyristor circuits employed in radio engineering, converter
techniques and electronics. Basic rules for the operation and selection of
thyristors are formulated.

For a broad circle of readers connected with the operation and repair of
electronics and radio engineering equipment.

a tables, 68 illus., biblio. of 23 titles.

Reviewed by Doctor of Technical Sciences Yu. I. Konev and Candidate of Technical
Sciences A. N. Dumanevich.

The creation of a wide range of functional assemblies and devices for the varied
types of electronics and radio engineering equipment would currently be unthink-
able without thyristors. The growing demand for thyristors is explained by the
advantages which are inherent in these items from the semiconductor instrument
building sector, namely: small dimensions and weight (per unit of power),
extremely high allowable voltages and currents. high efficiency, long service
life, instantaneous readiness for operation, high mechanical strength, etc.
Thyristors are advantageously distinguished from transistors by significantly
greater allowable voltages and currents and the smaller power required for con-
trol, because a control current is only required to switch on a thyristor. They
compete successfully with several types of gas discharge and electric vacuum
devices.

286

FOR‘OFIWCJAI.USB(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thyristors are semiconductor devices based on a multilayered p-n-p-n structure.
They are used as the active eleaents in many electronics equipment circuits, and
they have found broad application. A large number of forms and types of
thyristors for various purposes are currently produced. Devices have been
created with currents of from 1 to hundreds of amperes and voltages of from

10s to several kilovolts.

Silicon is the basic material for creating thyristors. In the last 2-3 years,
both here and abroad, research has been underway on the possibility of creating
thyristors based on other semiconductor materials: gallium arsenide, silicon
carbide, etc. The experimental results make it possible to assume a significant
improvement in the characteristics of such thyristors as compared with the
silicon ones.

The process of thyristor development is still far from complete. A further
increase is expected in the level of power (current and voltage) and switching
(current and voltage build-up rates) characteristics.

CONTENTS

Introduction 3
1. Operating principles and classification of thyristors 4
Operating principles of thyristors 4
Methods of switching thyristors on and controlling them 10
Typical thyristor circuit and control diagrams 13
Methods for tripping thyristors 14
Typical thyristor tripping circuits l6
Thyristor classification 17

II. Basic thyristor parameters 19
Parameters of the device 20
Maximally allowable parameters of the operating mode 24

III. Thyristor design 30
IV. Modern thyristor nomenclature 33
V. Thyristor reliability 40
Reliability indicators 40
Basic types of failure 41

Ways to increase reliability 43

VI. Main areas of thyristor application 45
Static two~way a.c. and d.c. switches 46
Circuits with phase control ‘ 49

287

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020034-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Inverters
Frequency converters (cycloinverters)
Pulse nodulators
Automation circuitry
' VII. Recomendations on the selection and application of thyristors
VIII. Testing the electrical nodes of thyristors in equipment

Measurement of basic circuit parameters
Heasurenent of control circuit parameters

List of Literature
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1980

9191.
C50: 1860/9

288

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500020034-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.314.27-51
CONTROL SYSTEHS FOR THYRISTOR FREQUENCY CONVERTERS

Moscow SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA TIRISTORNYHI PREOBBAZOVATBLYAHI CHASTOTY in Russian
1981 (signed to press 2 Mar 81) pp 2-3, 166

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Control Systems for
Thyristor Frequency Converters", by Valeriy Aleksandrovich Bizikov,
Vladimir Nikolayevich Hironov, Stanislav Grigor'yavich Obukhov and
Ravil' Nazimovich Shamgunov, Energoizdat, 10,000 copies, 164 pages]

[Text] Annotation

Problems of the development of modules and construction of systems for controlling
valve-type frequency converters are examined, as are problems of converter con-
trol of autonomous and slave networks, methods of voltage formation and voltage
parameter regulation. Examples are given of circuits for controlling autonomous
voltage inverters and directly coupled frequency converters. The development

of logic circuits is presented using the simulation apparatus of finite automata.

The book is intended for engineers working in the area of converter technology,
as well as graduate students in the industrial electronics specialty.

[This book was reviewed by G. G. 2hemerov.]
Foreword

The technical improvement of valve-type frequency converters is moving in two
basic directions: optimization of the converter power circuit and optimization
of switching element control. The capabilities in the first direction have
been discovered, and are utilized fairly fully, while only the first steps have
so far been taken in the second direction. Improvement of the hardware base
was a prerequisite for control optimization. The use of power thyristors with
high dynamic indicators, two-operation thyristors, power transistors in the power
section of a converting system and integrated microcircaits in the information
part of the system makes it possible, by improving the control algorithms, to
achieve better quality indicators of the energy before and after conversion.
Work in this direction has recently appeared frequently in the Soviet and
foreign press.

289

FI”!CNﬂﬂC1A1.USE¢NVLY
F0! OFFﬂﬂAl.US£4JNLN

The authors have attempted, on the basis of classifying algorithms for control-
ling valves and valve groups, to compile general functional diagrams, isolate
common information units and provide a methodology for the development. The
book presents a large number of circuits for pulsed generators with adjustable
frequency, adjustable delay circuits, and sinusoidal voltage generators with
adjustable frequency in amplitude. The logic units in the control systems

have been synthesized on the basis of standard integrated logic microcircuits.
In order to use the calculation relationships. the brief theoretical considera-
tions which are the prerequisite for synthesiiing the logic units are sufficient.
In addition, the book contains a large number of practical circuits with recom-
mendations for their application.

The authors express their gratitude to reviewer G. G. Zhemerov and editor
Ye. Ye. Chaplygin, who helped to improve the quality of the book.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Valve-type converter control 4
1.1 Voltage formation methods using thyristor frequency converters . 4
1.2. Controlling autonomous voltage inverters 8
1.3. Regulation of autonomous inverter output voltage 17
1.4. Singularities of controlling thyristor autonomous voltage

inverters with forced switching modules 23
1.5. Controlling network-driven converters 25
1.6. Functional diagrams of control systems 29
Chapter 2. Modulators and master oscillators 32
2.1. Adjustable timing oscillators 32
2.2. Delay and pulse shaping modules 41
2.3. Choice of lead signal shape 48
2.4. Circuits of oscillators with step signal formation 55
2.5. Modulators - 64
2.6. Phase reversal 74
Chapter 3. Control system logic modules 78
3.1. Logical functions of control systems 78
3.2. Typical control system logic modules 79
3.3. Synthesis of control system logic modules 92
3.4. Examples of logic modules 103
3.5. Rays of improving noise tolerance of frequency converter

control systems 117

290

FOR OPINCJAI.UEI2(HVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020034-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter lo. Output units of control systems

6 1. Requirements for output units of control ayatelu
5.2. Circuits of output units
lo 3. Use of photon-coupled pairs in output units

- Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981 -

6900
050: 1860/ 106

.I

291

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020034-7
FIHICMﬂﬁCb\L|£SEIDNLY

UDC 621.397.2

DIGITAL ENCODING 0F TELEVISION IMAGES

Moscow TSIPROVOYE KODIROVANIYE TELEVIZIONNYKH IZOBRAZHENIY in Russian 1981
(signed to press 13 Jan 81) pp 2-3, 238-239

(Annotation. foreword and table of contents from book "Digital Encoding of
Television Images", by Il'ya Ioannovich Tsukkerman, Boris Moiseyevich Kate,
Dmitriy Savel'yevich Lebedev, et al., Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyas'“,

8030 copies. 240 pages)

[Text] Annotation

The principles, problems and prospects for application of digital image coding
methods in television are examined. In addition to a theoretical analysis of
image coding, examples of computer modeling and experimental findings from
existing devices are given. Methods for effective image coding are analysed
on the basis of data on the statistics of images and their psychophysiological
redundancy.

The book is intended for engineering and technical workers specializing in the
area of television. '

[This book was reviewed by H. I. Krivosheyev. Yu. H. Braude-Zolotarev and
L. s. Vilenchik.]

Foreword

Modern television technology primarily uses analog methods for representing and
transmitting images. There are few examples of applied television systems

using digital image conversion. Broadcast television, in spite of the appearance
of individual digital devices, remains essentially analog.

The capabilities of analog methods in television have apparently nearly reached
their limit. In order to improve picture quality further, reduce losses during
repeated rerecording and transmission over long-distance communication links. as
well as to improve the reliability of television equipment and to prefect and
automate broadcast technology, digital television must be used. The coding of tele-
vision images occupies a central place in this multifaceted problem.

292

F0!(HHHC1ALIEE:0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Questions of digital image coding are thoroughly represented in the scientific-
technical literature. Computer-based image conversion operations are studied
in particular detail.

A new scientific area has arisen which is called digital image processing in
English (which translates [to Russian] approximately as tsifrovaya obrabotka
izobrazheniy), or more briefly, iconics [ikonika in Russian]. Digital image
processing methods are becoming increasingly important for solving problems of
data analysis in medicine, biology, high-energy physics, astronomy, material
science, geology and soil science, in studying natural resources, in automatic
control of technological processes, and in many other areas of science and
technology. Several monographs have recently been published which touch upon
these matters to some extent (for example. cf. [88, 92, 10k, 1A7, 261, 253]).
However, none of these books discusses thoroughly enough the problem of real-
time image coding, which is characteristic for digital television. The
monograph Televideniye i teoriza informatsii (Television and Inforlation Theory)
[61], published in 1965, was written as a theoretical introduction to this
problem; however, at that time the necessary technical methods and facilities
for practical implementation of such coding did not exist. Digital coding is
considered briefly in the recently published item [131] and the popular scienti-
fic brochure [137], both of which touch upon many other problems of digital
television.

The purpose of the present book is to expand upon the current status of work on
digital coding in television on the basis of studying image statistics and the
properties of visual perception. Together with materials in the scientific-
technical literature, the book explains to a significant degree research work
done by the authors in the area of digital television. Image coding algorithms
were verified by simulation on computers equipped with image input-output de-
vices and with the help of television devices operating in real time. when we
speak of digital coding of television images, we mean primarily the problems of
developing professional devices for digital television broadcasts. Successful
solution of these problems is also very important for the introduction of digital
methods to applications television, including the creation of digital systems
for automatic image analysis and recognition of visual patterns. The intro-
duction and chapter 1 and 2 were written by I. I. Tsukkerman, chapter 3 by

I. I. Tsukkerman and N. N. Shotatskiy, chapter 6 by B. H. Rats and S. V. Sardyko,
chapter 5 by all four authors jointly, chapter 6 by S. V. Sardyko and

I. I. Tsukkerman, chapter 7 by D. S. Lebedev, chapter 8 by Ye. Z. Sorokaya and

V. A. Khleborodov, chapter 9 by V. G. Hakoveyev (V. V. Bykov participated in
writing 59.1 and 9.2). The bibliography was assembled by B. H. Kata.

The authors' collective expresses their deep thanks to Professor H. I. Krivosheyev
and Professor 8. V. Novakovskiy for their helpful counsel and remarks during
duscussiona of the material in the book.

‘

293

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR 0FF1CLAL1USIZCMVLY

Table of Contents

Po:euord 3
Introduction 6
Chapter 1. Statistics of television images 10
1.1. Statistical characteristics of images 10
1.2. Spatial frequency spectrum 16
1.3. Typical configurations 19
1.6. Color statistics 22
Chapter 2. Singularities of visual perception and coding of
television images 25

2.1. Visual thresholds and image quantization 26
2.2. Linear approximation to image filtering in the visual system 28
2.3. Group image coding in the visual system 36
2.6. Limitations of color vision 36
2.5. Subjective evaluation of image quality in color television 61
Chapter 3. Image digitization during digital coding 62
3.1. Some concepts of the theory of digitization of multidimensional

messages 63
3.2. Orthogonal digitization structure in interlaced scanning 53
3.3. Checkerboard structure of sample arrangements in frame 63
3.6. Checkerboard structure of sample arrangement in field 75
3.5. Diagonal structure of saLgle arrangement in frame BL
3.6. Time digitization of images ' 88
Chapter 6. Analog-digital and digital-analog conversion 89
6.1. Structures of television analog-digital converters 90
6.2. Digital-analog converters 103
6.3. Precision characteristics of analog-digital and digital-

analog conversion 107
Chapter 5. Predictive coding of television images 116
5.1. Linear prediction in television 111
5.2. Quantization of prediction error signals 120
5.3. Linear-prediction image Coding algorithms 123
5.6. Noise tolerance of dual PC" systems 130

296

FOI10FFKJALI£NEONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Group coding of television images

6.1. Coding with conversion
6.2. Adaptive group coding

Chapter 7. Digital methods for image correction

. Linear filtering of images
Optimal filtering

Drop-out correction

. Recovery of distorted images

NNNN
o o
O‘UNH
s 0

Chapter 8. Coding of complete color television signal

8.1. Complete color television signal spectra

8.2. Digitization of complete color television signals

8.3. Coding of complete color television signals using dual
PCH methods

Chapter 9. Digital coding of images in television broadcast

9.1. The problem of digital video recording

9.2. Devices for signal processing in television broadcast based
on digital memory

9.3. Directions of development of digital broadcast television

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981.

6900
080: 1860/65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRICAL AND OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS

Hakhachkals ELEKTRICEESKIYE I OPTICHBSKIYB SVOYSTVA POLUPRDVODNIKOV in Russian
1980 pp 2-6

[Annotation and table of contents of book "Electrical and Optical Properties of
Semiconductors.” edited by Rh. 1. Amirkhanov, D. Rh. Anirkhanova, R. l. Bashirov,
A. Z. Gadzhiyev, V. I. Hartovitskiy and V. A. Yelizarov (responsible secretary),
Dagestanskiy filial AN SSSR, Institut fiziki]

[Text] The collection contains the results of research on the equilibrium and
non-equilibrium states of the electron gas in the technically most important
semiconductors.

Works on optical phenomena in A B type wide band semiconductors and on certain
vitrious systems are also incluseg in the collection.

The works presented in the collection will be of use to specialists in semi-
conductors semiconductor equipment engineers.

CONTENTS

Kh. I. Amirkhsnov, Dzh. Kh. Anirkhsnova. P. P. Khokhlacbev,
R. S. Zubayruyev. 0n the question of the applicability of the

Hideman-Pranz law in slitless crystals based on telluride of mercury 5

Kb. 1. Amirkhanov, R. I. Bashirov, Sh. G. Suleymanov. Gallium

arsenide magnetic diodes 12

Kb. 1. Amirkhanov. B. I. Klyukvin, N. H. Anspol'skiy. Cyclotron

resonance in the valence zone of germaniun given uniexial tension 18

H. R. lsayev. B. G. Aliyev. Current instability in silicon

p+-p--n+ structures in transposed electrical and magnetic fields 25

K. H. Aliyev. Comparative volt-ampere characteristics of short

and long gerannium double injection p-i-n structures 30
296

FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(N¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. Z. Zhokhov, A. A. Stepurenko, V. I. Pustovoyt, H. H. Hazur.
Influence of a magnetic field on current instability in tellurium

h. N. Liberman. Accustoelectrical current instability in
tellurium along the Z axis

M~R. A. Magomedov. S-type volt-ampere characteristics in
monocrystalline selenium film

R. H. Gadzhiyeva, Dzh. Kh. Amirkhanova. Galvanomagnetic properties
of Cd‘ngl_‘Te crystals at low temperatures

M. I. Daunov. A. B. Hagomedov, A. B. Ramazanova. Magnetoresistance
in hole (conductivity) CdSnAsz

R. I. Bashirov, V. A. Yelizarov. Tape recorder oscillations of

transverse magnetic resistance on heated eleczrons in indium
antimonide

A. Yu. Hollayev, s. M. Salikhov. The effect of electron gas
heat-up on negative magnetic resistance in n-InP

M. A. Aliyev. The effect of dislocation on the specific electrical
resistance of plastically deformed germanium

T. A. Shakhnazarov. The effect of intarzonal screening on electron
mobility in anng1_‘Te

G. G. Gadzhiyev, A. A. Kamarzin, B. N. hagdiyev, Yu. N. Halovitskiy.
Electrical properties of lanthanium sulfides

Ar. A. Abdullayev. On ruptured bonds and the coefficient of
overstress in atomic semiconductors

R. R. Bashirov. A spin analogy method in semiconductor theory

A. Z. Gadzhiyev. IR transmission and reflection spectra of vitrious
chalccgenid semiconductors of the GeSenle system and their
structural peculiarities

A. A. Babayev. Photoluminescence in vitrious Gezs3 and 6e28e3

B. H. Atayev. D. A. Shaikhov. Exciton luminescence of epitaxial
zinc oxide layers as a function of precipitation conditions and
electrical properties

A. D. Adukov, R. A. Rabadanov. 2:3 plasmas and liquid in
epitaxial zinc oxide layers

297

FIHICMHNCJAI.USE(MHLY

35

62

67

52

58

65

73

79

83

87

90

95

101
107

114

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

H. A. Riz'akhanov, F. S. Gabibov, A. A. Abdullayev. The effect
of stationary excitation on the spectral distribution of the
effects of an extrinsic photocurrent in Ods < A; > crystals

H. A. Abdullayev, R. P. Seysyan. The levels and series of s
dinagnetic exciton in the reciprocal nagnetic bearing spectra (0“?)
of gallium srsenide

A. Kh. Abduyev, A. M. Bagmdovs, 1.. 1.. Aksenovs. Photoelectrieal
properties of ZnO-Zns syste-

A. Z. Gsdzhiyev. M. H. Gsfurov. Teapersture-phase changes in the
IR absorption spectra of the crystalline and molten nitrates of
alkaline metals

N. H. Anapol'skiy, B. I. Klyukvin. An 8m radiospectroneter for
studying cyclotron resonance in nonoaxial stressed semiconductors

COPYRIGBT: Unknown

9195
CSO: 1860/ 7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 621.385.6
ELECTRONIC MICROHAVE DEVICES

Moscow ELBKTRONNYYB SVCh PRIBORY in Russian 1981 (signed to press 6 Feb 81)
pp Zué, 7-14, 370-271

[Annotation, foreword, introduction and table of contents of book "Electronic
Microwave Devices" by Sergey Vladimirovich Kukarin, Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'",

8000 copies, 272 pages]
[Text] Annotation

The technical operating specifications and areas of application of modern elec-
tronic devices, including triodes and tetrodes, magnetron-type devices, klyatrons,
traveling- and backward-wave tubes, hybrid devices, semiconductor diodes and
transistors, as well as oscillators and amplifiers based on them, are presented.

The book is intended for specialists interested in microwave devices and their
areas of application. It may also be helpful to graduate school teachers and
students.

[This book was reviewed by Doctor of Technical Sciences Professor V.N. Sretenskiy
and Doctor of Technical Sciences V.P. Saranov.)

Foreword

This is tne second edition of the book published by Irdatel'atvo "Sovetskoye radio”
in 1962 under the title "Sovremennoye sostoyaniye i tendentsii razvitiya priborov
SVCh (Current Status and Developmental Trends of Microwave Devices)". The
contents of the book have been completely revised and expanded, since significant
changes have occurred in this dynamically developing area of electronic technology
in the intervening years. These changes involve the further development of
vacuum-type microwave devices. as well as the appearance and intensive develop-
ment of a new class of electronic microwave instruments and devices based on the
use of semiconductor diodes and transistors.

Microwave electronics has achieved major successes in this country, as is indicated
in the reviews by N.D. Devyatkov [l] on vacuum microwave devices, and by A.S.

Tager [3] on solid-state devices. Many of the achievements of Soviet scientists
and engineers have preceded, and technically exceeded, the best results obtained
by foreign firms. This is the case within a broad area of microwave electronics,

299

FOR‘OFIICIAL USEICNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from superminiature vacuum and solid-state devices up to powerful and superpowerful
microwave devices [1-25]. The Soviet reader is thoroughly familiar with the tech-
nical specifications of domestic microwave devices from the handbooks and brochures
in the series "Radio Electronic Equipment Elements” published by Izdatel'stvo
"Sovetskoye radio" [26-38). Questions of the application of these devices are
examined in detail in [19,20].

A wide range of microwave devices is also produced by numerous companies in Amer-
ica, Europe and Asia both to satisfy domestic requirements and for sale on the
world market.

The status and developmental trends of this area of electronic technology are con-
sidered in the present book using primarily examples of foreign microwave devices
about which information is of interest for a broad group of readers. The reviews
of the status and developmental trends of foreign microwave devices published by
the "Elektronika" Central Scientific Research Institute [39 - 65], as well .
as a great deal of material. handbooks and advertising information published in
the foreign literature [67,264] were used in the preparation of the manuscript.

A great deal of assistance in selecting the necessary materials and illustrations,
and in discussing individual sections of a manuscript, was provided by V.H.
Lomakin, I.P. Bludov, P.R. Kalish, v.1. Hints, V.D. Mel'nikov, v.6. Zaytseva

and L.A. Sokolova, to whom the author expresses his gratitude. The author was
grateful to receive and make use of the comments of reviewers V.N. Sretenskiy

and V.P. Sazonov.

It was difficult to avoid certain shortcomings and inaccuracies in working with
such a large amount of material; therefore, any remarks or suggestions of readers,
which should be addressed to the publisher, will be gratefully received.

Introduction

The development of radar, radio-relay and space couunications, television, radio
navigation, industrial and domestic electronics, radio astronomy, radio spectros-
copy, nuclear physics, medicine and many other branches of science and technology
is inseparably involved with the extensive utilization of microwave frequencies
(0.3-3000 Gas). Depending upon the wavelength of the electromagnetic oscillations,
microwave frequencies are divided into the following bands: decimeter (0.3-3 Gﬂz),
centimeter (3-30 Gﬂz), millimeter (30-300 63:) and submillimetar (300-300 Gﬂs) [19].

The decimeter and centimeter wavebands have been assimilated to the greatest
degree, and are used extensively in practice. However, there has been increased
recent interest in the utilization of millimeter waves in high-resolution radar
systems, radio relay communications links, secure spacecraft communications
systems, radio astronomy and radio spectroscopy. It has become possible to use

the microwave band in these areas thanks to the creation and production of all

of the necessary electronic devices which support the generation of oscillation,
signal amplification and conversion, and receive-transmit circuit switching in this

range [5].

300

FINICMHWCJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-l ONLY

In connection with the wide variety of functions handled, the varying requirements
for technical specifications of devices and the limited working frequency range
of each instruent, coverage of the entire microwave band has required a long list
of electornic microwave devices. In addition, because of competition between
manufacturers and individual directions in microwave electronics, many devices
have been created for the same purpose which have parameter values and technical
specifications which are close to one another.

in order to systematize examination of the status and analysis of the developmental
trends of microwave devices, it is useful to divide the entire field into four
groups of instruments which differ in the physical principles used:

--group I - vacuum-type microwave devices based on the phenomena of current trans-
mission through a vacuum;

--group II - solid-state instruments and microwave devices based on utilizing

the propries of semiconductor devices and ferrites;

--group III - plasma (gas-discharge) microwave devices based on utilizing the
phenomena of current transmission through gases;

--group IV - hybrid microwave devices which combine several physical principles

in a single device.

This system of classification reflects the most significant differences between
devices, emphasizes specific design features and fabrication techniques, and does
not contradict the existing traditional division of instruments into classes,
forms and twes.

I. Vacuum-type microwave devices represent the largest group. including
devices using electrostatic (network) and electrodynamic control.

I. I5~9th°3tﬂt1¢dily controlled devices include metal-ceramic triodes and
tetrodes and devices with brake fields. These devices are used extensively in

the microwave range thanks to the creation of special designs which reduce the
harmful influence of electron flight time on the operation of the instruments [1,
26]. Regardless of the long history of existence and development of these devices,
they continue to be improved in the areas of increased efficiency and operating
reliability, increased output power, assimilation of the short-wave portion of

the centimeter waveband, and in the area of creating sealed multifunctional
modules.

2. Electrodynamics! Iv controlled devices include magnetron-type devices,
traveling- and backward-wave tubes, klystrons, and cyclotron resonance masers
(gyrotrons).

?.l. Magnetron-tyne devices Include autn— oscillators and amplifiers which
operate in hybrid electrical and magnetic fields.

AuLu-uscillntnrs Include urdhmry magnetrons, coaxial—cylinder magnetrons.
inverted coaxial-cylinder magnetrons, magnetrons with electronic frequency tuning,
magnetron-type backward-wave tubes and stabilizer diodes (platinotrons in self-

301

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

excited oscillation mode). These types of devices, in turn, are divided in

terms of operating mode into pulsed and continuous, and in terms of power level
into superhigh and high power, medium power and low power. of these, the most
widely used are ordinary magnetrons operating in either pulsed or continuous modes.
in addition, in the past 10 years a great deal of attention has been devoted to

the development of coaxial-cylinder magnetrons, which are being used increasingly
instead of ordinary magnetrons.

Magnetron-type amplifiers include amplitrons (platinotrons in amplification mods),
direct-wave electron injection devices (magnetron-type traveling-wave tubes,
beamatrons) and backward-wave devices (magnetron-type backward-wave tubes), as
well as forward-wave devices with open electron flux (dematrons). Magnetron
amplifiers, like self-excited oscillators, are divided in terms of Operating modes
into pulsed and continuous, and in terms of power level into superhigh- and high-
power, medium- and low—power.

2.2. O-type traveling-wave tubes (with longitudinal electrical and magnetic
fields) also comprise a broad group of electrodynamically controlled vacuum-type
microwave devices. This group includes amplifying traveling-wave tubes (TNT)
with various output power levels and low~noise amplifier TNT. In terms of output
power, amplifier TWTs are divided into super—high and high-power, medium-power
and low-power. Super-high and high-power TUT are also divided into pulsed and
continuous.

Considerable attention has recently been devoted to the creation of wideband and
two-mode TNT, miniature THT, including those using printed-circuit delay systems
for phased antenna arrays and medium-power THT for spacecraft.

2.3. O-type backwardewave tubes comprise a relatively small class of microwave
devices. These devices are used as microwave oscillators with electronic frequency
tuning in the range extending from decimeter to submillimeter waves exclusively

in the continuous operating mode. In terms of power, these are divided into high-
power and low-power backward-wave tubes.

2.4. Klystrons comprise a broad group of microwave devices, and are divided in
terms of operating principle into drift-tube klystrons and reflex klystrons.
Drift-tube klystrons include amplifying multi-resonator klystrons and oscillator
klystrons with a small number of resonators. These devices have been developed
for both pulsed and continuous operation. Hulti-resonator amplifying klystrons
are divided into super-high and high-power. Oscillator klystrons include two-
and three-resonator klystrons, as well as distributed interaction klystrons.
These klystrons are medium— and low-power devices. Reflex klystrons have been
developed for utilization as low-power continuous-mode microwave oscillators.

2.5. Cyclotron resonance masers are a new developing class of microwave devices
in which the operating principle is based on relativistic electron flux. Bunches
of electrons are obtained in these devices by grouping of electrons, which is done
by using the relativistic relationship between cyclotron frequency and electron
energy. This principle has been used to create oscillators and amplifiers which

302

FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operate in hybrid electrical and magnetic fields with electrons spinning in a
longitudinal magnetic field. In terms of operating mode, these are divided into
pulsed and continuous.

2.6. Hybrid microwave devices now comprise a small but successfully developing
class of vacuum-type microwave devices. These are based on using different classes
of components in a unified construction. A typical example of this type of

hybrid device is the twistron, which successfully combines multi-resonator
klystrons and broadband TNT elements in a single device.

11. Solid-state devices and microwave devises represent a new broad group of
microwave devices whose development has recently received a very great deal of
attention. The heightened interest in these instruments and devices is due mainly
to their major potential capabilities for aucessfully solving problems involved

in the integrated miniaturization of radio electronic equipment.

This group includes active and passive instruments and microwave devices, as well
as hybrid integrated microwave circuits.

1. Solid-state active instruments and microwave devices include oscillators and
amplifiers using semi-conductor microwave diodes and transistors. These devices
have the same function as low-power vacuum-type microwave devices, and have been
developed to replace the latter.

1.]. Solid-state microwave oscillators are based on tunnel and transit-time aval-
anche diodes, Gunn diodes and field-effect and bipolar transistors. These oscil-
lators provide both pulsed and continuous microwave oscillation, and are divided
into low- and high-power. Further development of solid-state microwave oscilla-
tors involves their use as the basis for integrated devices including an oscilla-
tor, frequency control circuit, power supply, etc.

1.2. Solid-state microwave amplifiers are based on tunnel, varactor and transit-
time avalanche diodes, Gunn diodes, bipolar and field-effect transistors. These
are divided into low-noise amplifiers and power amplifiers. Solid-state microwave
amplifiers, like oscillators, are often produced together with power supplies.

2. Passive microwave devices consist of various microwave elements which detect,
convert and multiply frequency, change the phase of microwave oscillations, de-
couple and switch channels, and limit microwave output power. These devices
include detectors and mixers, frequency multipliers and phase inverters, power
switches and limiters, gates and circulators. They are based on the use of semi-
conductor microwave diodes (detector, mixer, tunnel, multipuer and switching) and
ferrites. Passive microwave devices are used and produced as individual discrete
devices, or as component parts of integrated microwave devices.

3. Hybrid integrated microwave circuits represent a new and rapidly developing
class of microwave devices based on the use of microminiaturized active and
passive solid-state microwave devices and microelectronic technology.

303

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to single-function oscillator, amplifier and other circuits,

these devices also include integrated multifunctional circuits used in trans-
mitting, receiving and transceiving sections of radioelectronic equipment, in-
cluding phased antenna arrays.

III. Plasma (gas—discharge) migggggxg ggyiggg include both active and passive
devices.

1. Passive gas-discharge microwave devices include gas-filled switching tubes
which use gas-discharge under the influence of high-power microwave pulses to

turn off the microwave section while the pulses are present. In terms of function,
these are divided into preliminary spark-gap, spark-gap transmit-receive tubes

and spark-gap anti-transmit-receive tubes [12].

2. Active plasma microwave devices have not been developed or studied thoroughly
enough as yet. Individual experimental models of plasma microwave oscillators
have recently appeared which differ from vacuum devices in that the electron beam
passes through a plasma in which the electron density is higher than that of the
beam. Since the maximum currents of the beams propagating in the plasma signifi-
cantly exceed the maximum currents in vacuum devices, it becomes possible to
achieve high output power.

IV. Hybrid microwave devices represent a new developing group of microwave devices.
This group includes devices with various purposes, including vacuum-semiconductor
amplifiers, hybrid spark-gap devices, indicating instruments, etc. [58, S9].
Vacuum-semiconductor microwave amplifiers are based on the interaction between an
electron beam and a semiconductor target, while hybrid spark-gap devices represent
a gas-filled switching tube together with a solid-state power limiter. These
examples do not exhaust all of the possibilities of hybrid devices which may
appear in the near future.

The above groups and classes of microwave devices are characterised by differing
levels of development. Industrial production of vacuum-type and solid-state
microwave devices has been mastered to the greatest degree. The data in the table
below [not included -- Tr] provide evidence of the level of industrial production
of these devices. The table does not include information on all groups and
classes of devices. For example, there is no information about the sales volume
of'microwave triodes and tetrodes, which is difficult to isolate from the overall
sales of electrostatically controlled devices. Neither is there any information
about gas-discharge and hybrid microwave devices. As the table shows, the world
market for microwave devices continues to increase. Vacuum-type devices hold the
lead in the overall sales of microwave devices (701 in 1976 and 651 in 1980).

The production and sales of high-power vacuum-type microwave instruments which
have no solid-state competitors continue to increase.

In addition, the sales of O-type backward-wave tubes and reflex klystrons, which
are gradually being replaced by solid—state microwave oscillators, are dropping

off. Low-power and low-noise traveling-wave tubes are also being replaced success-
fully by solid-state amplifiers using semiconductor diodes and transistors. It

304

FOR OFFICIAL us; ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is also apparent from the table that the sales of solid-state microwave devices
increased by a factor of 1.5 between 1976 and 1980, while the sales of vacuum-
type devices increased by only a factor of 1.27.

The status and developmental trends of all basic groups and classes of micro-
wave devices are examined in the present book on the basis of analyzing and
generalizing the voluminous periodic domestic and foreign technical literature.
Presented as illustrations are generalized data on the level of characteristics
achieved for instruments, tables of the basic parameters of the best or typical
industrial models, and figures which characterize the design and appearance of
the microwave devices in question. i

I
Nhile not exhaustive. the author feels that the data presented can be used to
achieve a sufficiently thorough presentation of the current level of devenopment
of electronic microwave devices. Because of its limited size, the book omits
certain classes of instruments, including brake-field devices, cyclotron-reson-
ance maser oscillators and amplifiers, masers, plasma devices, gas-filled kwitch-
ing tubes, semiconductor and ferrite passive devices, and acoustoelectronih
devices: analysis of the status and developmental trends of these can be the
subject of special work. ‘

Table of Contents

'Page
Foreword 3
Conventional notation E 5
Introduction 7
Part 1. Microwave Vacuum Devices
Chapter 1. Electrostatically controlled devices 3 15
1.1. Triodcs 16
1.2. Tetrodes 22
1.3. Triode and tetrode modules 24
Chapter 2. Magnetron-type devices 26
2.1. Ordinary pulsed magnetrons 25
2.2. Coaxial-cylinder nagnetrons 35
2.3. Continuous magnetrons 41
2.4. Voltage-tunable mngnetrona h6
2.5. M-type backward-wave tubes 51
2.6. Magnetron type amplifiers 54
Chapter 3. Traveling—wave tubes 66
3.1. Pulsed TNT 67
3.2. High-power continuous TNT 76
3.3. Two-mode TNT 80
3.4. Spacecraft TNT 84

305

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500020034-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Mini-THT

6. Printed-circuit TNT

7. Low-noise and lovaower TNT
8. THT modules

Chapter 4. Clystrons
l. Pulsed amplifier klystrons
2. Continuous amplifier klystrons
.3. Oscillator klystrons
a Reflex klystrons
Chapter 5. O-type backward-wave tubes
Chapter 6. ﬂybrid microwave devices
. . Nistrons

6 1
6.2. Electron-seciconductor devices
6.3. ﬂybrid spark-gap devices

Part 2. Solid-State Microwave Devices

Chapter 7. Semiconductor microwave diodes and transistors

7.1. Detector diodes

7.2. Mixer diodes

7.3. Tunnel diodes

7.é. Avalanche transit-time diodes
7.5. Gunn diodes

7.6. Microwave transistors

7.7. Microwave field-effect tetrodes

Chapter 8. Solid-state microwave oscillators

8.1. Oscillators using avalanche transit time diodes
8.2. Oscillators using Gunn diodes

8.3. Transistored oscillators

Chapter 9. Solid-state microwave amplifiers

9.1. Tunnel-diode amplifiers

9.2. Avalanche transit—time diode amplifiers
9.3. Gunn—diode amplifiers

9.4. Parametric amplifiers

9.5. lrsnsistorized amplifiers

Conclusion

Bibliography

Subject index
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'”, 1981

6900
050: 1860/60 306

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02~00050R000600020034-7
FOﬂlOFFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY

UDC: 568.28

INDUSTRIAL TELEPHONE COHHDNICAIION, ELECTRICAL SIGNALING AND INSTALLATION OF
ELECTRIC CLOCKS

Moscow PEDIZVODSTVBNNAYA TELBPONNAYA SVYAZ', BLEKTRICBBSKAIA SIGNALIZATSIYA
I BLEKTROCEASOFIKATSIYA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 23 Dec 80) pp 2,
231-232

[Annotation and table of contents froI book "Industrial Telephone Connunication,
Electrical Signaling and Installation of Electric Clocks" by

Aleksandr Nikolayevich Volotskoy, Isdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 20,000 copies,
232 pages]

[Text] Annotation

The principles of organizing industrial telephone connunication-dispatcher,
director, operational and public-address--are explained. Basic types of equip-
nent used, their operating principle and operating features are described.
Information is given about electrical signaling devices (security and fire), as
well as the installation of electric clocks.

The book is intended for technical school students in the specialty "Autonatic
Electrical Co-nunication".

[This book was reviewed by S. V. Koshelev and V. N. Nazarov.]

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Singularities of industrial coununication 4
1.1. Modern industrial enterprises and nethods for controlling the- 4
1.2. Industrial coanunication and its inportance in the production
control process 6
1.3. Types of industrial con-unication, their singularities and
areas of application 7
307

FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Operational communication

2.1. Basic requirements for operational cmunication
2.2. Singularities of operational con-unication
General infatuation

Singularities of public-address couunication
Singularities of circular communication
Construction of operational telephone cot-amication
Operational communication facilities

General information

Conversation devices

Amplifiers

Switches

Conunication panels

Conversation documentation devices

Specialized automatic telephone exchanges

NM
. .
#u
.

Chapter 3. Operational communication devices

3.1. Operational comunication switches
General infornation
Type KD switches
“Kristen" type device
hype SOS-3014 device
3.2. Mobile operational telephone conunication equipment
Selective col-unication
Conference cousunicstion
[Railroad] switch co-unication svitchboards
3.3. Type EMS-66 operational power system comaication equipment

Chapter 4. Public-address communication

.1. Singularities and types of public-address couunication
2. PCS circular and selective systems

PGS-71 equipment

"Radius" PGS equipment
4.3. RPS administrative-locator conunication
6.4. Loudspeaker coverage of areas at production enterprises
6.5. Co-unication with mobile facilities

Chapter 5. Administrative-management telephone co-unication

5.1. Singularities of administrative-management telephone
co-unication .

5.2. Construction of administrative-management telephone
col-unication network

5 3. Type umrs-momoo telephone exchanges

5 lo. Automatic Al‘s K-lOO/ZOOO telephone exchanges

5.5. Automatic ATS K-SO/ZOCK telephone exchanges

5 6. Type OATS-69 sutoaatic telephone exchanges
5.7. Quasi-electronic autonatic telephone exchanges
5.8. Special-purpose telephone devices

Chapter 6. Electrical signaling

6.1. Purpose of electrical signaling

. Types of electrical signaling and their basic requirements
Security alarms

Reception of signals from alarns

. Type TOL-lOIlOO fire signaling installation

e

C‘GO‘O
e

ubun
.

Chapter 7.' Installation of electric clocks

7.1. Purpose of installation of electric clocks and concept of
unified tile systen

7.2. Master electric clocks
7.3. Slave electric clocks
7.4. Electric clock installations and boards

List of abbreviations
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svysz'", 1981

6900
C80: 1860/40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.311:681.586
MEASUREMENT ELEMENTS IN POWER SYSTEM EMERGENCY AUTOMATIC EQUIPMENT

Moscow IZKERITEL'NYYE ORGANY PROTIVOAVARIYNOY AVTOHATIKI ENERGOSISTEH in Russian
1981 (signed to press 24 Mar 81) pp 2-4, 158-159

[Annotation. foreword and table of contents from book "Heasurement Elements

in Power System Emergency Automatic Equipment", by Peliks Hikhaylovich Roienblyum,
Energoizdst. 9000 copies. 160 pages] '

[Text] Annotation

This book examines new principles for making transducers for active power,
frequency, phase difference, rate of frequency variation and slip ratio. The
design of active power relays, relays for phase angle, frequency. derivatives of
these quantities, as well as combination relays which respond simultaneously to
the absolute values of quantities and their derivatives are given. The circuits
used in panels containing automatic equipment measurement elements are examined,
as are questions of improving operating reliability of the equipment and utilizing
continuous and periodic testing devices.

The book is intended for engineers involved in designing and operating power
system emergency automation equipment, and also may be useful for graduate students
in the corresponding specialties.

Foreword

The automated dispatcher control and emergency automatic equipment system play a
major role in solving problems of the development of inter-system connections
which support reliable, stable operation of the power systems in the USSR Unified
Power System. The basic devices in the emergency automation system are measurement
elements, the accuracy and reliability of which determine the high operating effi-
ciency of the entire emergency automation system. Meeting the requirements of
high precision of automation measuring elements makes it possible to utilize the
throughput capacity of power transmission lines fully. A great deal of work has
been devoted to analyzing the operation of emergency automation devices, require-
ments for measurement elements and problems of analysing actuation parameters.
However, previously published work fails to encompass a large number of high-
precision measurement elements which have developed in recent years.

310

FOIIOFFNJAL.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

In the present book the author attempted, in a systematic fashion, to examine
various principles of executing measurement elements for recording the values and
rate of change of active power, frequency, and phase difference of voltages in
different parts of a power system, as well as their slip ratio. The appearance

of a new component base - integrated microcircuits - has made it possible to create
reliable measurement elements using digital and digital-analog principles which
provide high accuracy in measuring the mode parameters of the power system being
monitored.

The book examines problems of increasing the reliability of measurement elements
using devices for continuous and periodic testing, and describes a number of
devices intended for adjusting the actuation parameters of elements which measure
rate of frequency change.

The methodology given for adjusting the required actuation parameters of various
combined measuring elements and of elements which react to a single power system
mode parameter is needed for correct design and operation of these devices in
power systems. A systematized exposition of these questions, with application
to devices used in power system emergency automation equipment, is given first.

The author is grateful to high co-workers at the VNIIR [expansion unknown] who
worked with him in developing and testing a number of measurement elements built
on the basis of new principles. The-author is also deeply grateful to 3.1.
Iof'yev for his helpful advice and remarks made while editing the manuscript, and
to c.L. Brukhis for his extensive editing work.

. Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Active-Power Measurement Elements 5
1. Basic types and function of active-power measurement elements 5
2. Principles of implementing active-power relays 6
3. Comparative analysis of principles of implementing power

transducers 9
4. Analysis of square-law generator power transducer circuits 14
5. Accounting for influence of transient processes on operation

of power transducers with filters 23
6. Analysis of influence of saturation of intermediate current

transformer during short-circuiting on output signal of

power transducer 33
7. Measurement elements of current and previous active power 37
8. Principles of implementing elements for measuring discharge

(surge) and rate of variation of active power 39
9. Analysis of dynamic characteristics of elements for measuring

power discharge 52
10. Recommendations for adjustment of characteristics of elements

for measuring power discharge S9

311

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Frequency and Rate-of-Change Measurement Elements

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Function of elements which record frequency variation
Principles of implementing frequency elements

Principles of implementing frequency rate-of-change elements
Combined frequency and rata—of—change elements

Digital frequency transducer

Rate-of-frequency-chsnge sensor

Principles of implementing test devices for assigning rate of
frequency change

Chapter 3. Elements for Measuring Phase Difference and Slip Ratio

18. Function of phase difference and slip measurement elements

19. Modeling voltage vector of opposite end of pover transmission line
20. Principles of implementing phase difference sensors

21. Measurement elements for slip

22. Combined phase difference and slip measurement elements

23. Panel of phase difference and slip measurement elements
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdat, 1981

6900

cso: 1860/106

312

INJR‘OIWWCIAI.IJSIZ(NNLY

61

61
62
86
89
9k
101

108
118

118
119
127
160
1&3
167

155
FORIDFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

UDC 621.315.1.027.8.001.2
HECHANICAL SECTION DESIGN FOR OVERHEAD SUPERHIGH VOLTAGE LINES

Moscow PROYBKTIRDVANIYZ HEKHANICHESKOY CHASTI VOZDUSENYKB LINIY SVBRKBVYSOKOGO
NAPRYAZHBNIYE in Russian 1981 (signed to press 26 Hat 81) pp 2-6, 335-336

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Mechanical Design
Section for Overhead Superhigh Voltage Lines", by Abram Sinkhovich Zelichenko
and Boris Ivanovich Smirnnv, Energoizdat, 5000 copies, 336 pages]

[Text] Annotation

Singularities of designing overhead superhigh voltage power transmission lines
are examined. Practical methods are given for solving problems involving the
selection and justification of all elements of overhead lines, as well as methods
for estimating their operating reliability. Technical-economic efficiency
indicators are given for superhigh voltage line structures. This book has been
prepared by leading specialists of Energoset'proyekt [All-Union State Planning,
Surveying and Scientific Research Institute of Power Systems and Electric

Power Networks], who have nany years of experience in planning and operating
power transmission lines.

The book is intended for engineers and technicians involved in planning,
installing and operating power transmission lines.

[This book was reviewed by G. A. Illarionov.]
Foreword

The present development of electrical power engineering is characterized by
an increase of up to £6 million k" and more in therno-electric, hydraulic and

nuclear power plants. Work continues on the creation of the USSR Unified
Power Systen. Hort is simultaneously underway on the creation of the Inter-

national Combined Power System, which includes power organizations in the .
USSR and in the European member countries of the CEHA.

The expanded construction of superhigh voltage lines of 330 kW and greater is
playing the nsin role in creating combined power systems.

313

FINI€NHWCJAI.USEZ(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The world's first 500 kV ac transmission line (1959) and 800 (t 600) kV dc
transmission line (1962) were constructed and put into operation in the USSR.

The USSR has now accumulated a great deal of experience in planning, construct-
ing and operating 330-750 kV power transmission lines; the planning and construc-
tion is underway for the first 1150 RV ac Siberia-Kazakhstan-Ural and 1500 kV dc
Ekibastuz-Center lines.

Major achievements have been reached in tne USSR in the area of creating long-
distance superhigh voltage transmission as a result of the joint work of leading
scientific-research, planning, construction and operating organizations. 0n

the basis of extensive theoretical and experimental research. planning and
design developments, as well as experience in constructing, adjusting and opera-
tion, these organizations have solved all of the basic problems involved in
creating superhigh voltage power transmission lines.

The purpose of the present book is to acquaint the reader with the main problems
of planning overhead superhigh voltage power transmission lines. The second
edition of H. A. Hel'nikov. S. S. Rakotyan and A. N. Sheremtsis' book
Proyektirovanixe Elektricheskoz Chasti Vozdushnzgh Liniz Elektropgredachi
330-500 kV (Planning of Electrical Part of 330-500 kV Overhead Power Transmission
Lines), which presents problems of electrical calculations for superhigh voltage
lines, was published in 1974. In the present book, the authors have made the
first attempt to systenatize problems of planning primarily the mechanical

part of superhigh voltage lines. Electrical parameters are considered only to
the extent needed to provide a foundation and understanding of the design
approaches used for individual line elements.

voltage lines on the environment and to original designs of individual elements
of superhigh voltage lines.

The authors have attempted to omit all questions of designing the mechanical
part of overhead lines which are not specific to superhigh voltage lines, and
have made only the necessary references to unavailable publications.

The authors are deeply grateful to reviewer Candidate of Technical Sciences
G. A. Illarionov for his valuable advice and remarks which were taken into

consideration in the manuscript.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3

Chapter 1. Development of superhigh voltage lines 5

1.1. General information 5

1.2. Experimental bases 11

Chapter 2. General requirements and norms for planning 17

2.1. General normative positions 17
31b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.2. Superhigh voltage overhead lines passing through populated
and unpopulated areas

3 Intersections and convergence with power transmission lines

lo. Intersections and convergence with railroads

5. Intersections and convergence with highways

6. Lines laid along dikes and daas

7 Intersections and convergence with pipelines and traways

8 Normative requirements for individual elements of superhigh

voltage lines

2.9. Order of planning

Chapter 3. Path selection and deteraination of climatic conditions

3.1. Path selection
3.2. Climatic conditions

Chapter 4. Selection of construction of split phase and ground-
wire cables

6.1. Selection of split-phase versions and methods of technical-
econonic comparison of versions
4.2. Singularities of selection of pole construction versions for
dc lines
6.3. Probleas of selecting rational design of conductors and
mechanical design of split-phase conductors
6.6. Span fastening of split-phase conductors, distance bars and
their construction
5. Choice of type and cross-section of ground-wire cables
6. Features of choosing type and construction of conductors
and large connector adapters
4.7. Dysnaics of conductors and cables

Chapter 5. Choice of insulator string and cable fasteners

1. Selection of insulator type and construction

2. Justification of choice of support clamp type

3. Configuration and construction of support and tension
insulator strings

5.4. Construction of cable fasteners and insulator inserts in

spans for joining cables
5.5. Protective intervals on supporting and tension insulator
strings and on insulated cable fastenings

Chapter 6. Determination of external loads on supports and
support dimensions

6.1. Calculation conditions for various types of supports

6.2. Technical-economic calculations for selecting economical
height and construction of supports .

6.3 Deteraining wind and ice load on conductors. cables and

support elements

315

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02l09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020034-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. 6.10. Deviations of conductors, cables and insulator strings for
calculating support dimensions
6.5. Loop bypass schemes on anchor and transposition supports

Chapter 7. Support and foundation constructions

7.1. Types of supports and foundations used for superhigh voltage
warhead lines and their singularities

7.2. Construction of long-span supports and their foundations

7.3. Area of application of various types of supports (free-
standing, guyed)

Chapter 8. Lightning protection and ground devices

- 8.1. Lightning overvoltage protection devices. Optimal angles
of cable lightning protection angles
8.2. Cable gounding schemes and selection of spark gaps
8.3. Constructions and selection of support grounding

Chapter 9. Some problems of power transmission line operating
reliability

Problem of superhigh voltage overhead line reliability
Generalization of operating experience

Line operating reliability under ice and wind loads
Line strength under longitudinal loads

. Estimation of line reliability

00090
a

UIJ-‘UNH
a

Chapter 10. Influence on environamt

10.1. General assuuptions

10.2. Land allocation

10.3. Aesthetic effect of lines

10.4. Effect of electrical field

10.5. Acoustic noise and radio interference
10.6. Elimination of ozone and nitrous oxides
Chapter 11. Technical-economic indicators
11.1. Basic specific indicators

11.2. Consumption of materials and equipnent
11.3. Construction cost

References

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

- 6900
080: 1860/ (do

316

F0! OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600020034-7
I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.001.6/.57

MODELING AND TESTING OF RADIO EQUIPMENT

Leningrad MODELIROVANIYB I ISPYTANIYA RADIOOBORUDOVANIYA in Russian 1981
(signed to press 5 Feb 81) pp 2, 5-6, 303-300

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Modeling and Testing

of Radio Equipment" by Pavel Pavlovich Beskid, Yevgeniy Hikhsylovich Vinogradov,
Viktor Ivanovich Vinokurov, Yevgeniy Germanovich Pashchenko,

Aleksandr Valdimirovich Smol'yaninov and Igor' Pavlovich Kharchenko,
Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1900 copies, 306 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book touches upon a broad group of problems involving the modeling and
testing of radio electronic systems at various stages of their development

and operation. General principles are explained for the construction of models
and their application to problems of estimating the effective scattering area
of complex targets, antenna directivity patterns, complex-structure fields
within the area of a ship or other object, the electromagnetic compatibility

of various systems (radar, communication, etc.) and the construction of simu-
latora and trainers. Methods are considered for experiment planning during
modeling and full-scale trials, as well as the methodology for processing the
findings. One chapter is devoted to the automation of computer modeling.

The book is of interest for specialists involved with developing, producing and
operating radioelectronic systems of various types, as well as technical school
students specializing in the area of radio electronics.'

[This book was reviewed by Doctor of Technical Sciences G. I. Novikov and
Candidate of Technical Sciences Ye. A. Shtager. The scientific editor was
Doctor of Technical Sciences V. I. Vinokurov.)

Simulation has been used for many years in engineering practice during the
development of systems and devices. Successes in cybernetics and computer
technology have led to significant achievements in the area of simulation,

as a result of which it has become one of the main methods used in investigating
complex processes and systems.

317

Ft"!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The present book covers problems of the application of simulation (mathematical
and physical) in creating various types of radioelectronic systems and the
radioelectronic equipment used with complex objects (ships, aircraft, etc.).

Research on the following is of the greatest interest for this category of
problems:

-processes occurring in devices and systems:

--the operation of a group of systems for the purpose of ensuring their
coordinated functioning (integration) and electromagnetic compatibility;

--the influence of propagation paths, scattering singularities and wave
radiation on system characteristics;

--the influence of the environment (including superstructures and construction
components of the carrier) on the characteristics of equipment and systems
operating in various wavebands;

-determination of the intensity and distortions of the field created in the
vicinity of the platform (ship, aircraft) by various types of radio technical
fccilities;

--reliability and efficiency characteristics;

-—methods of planning tests which provide needed information about the object
under investigation.

Host of these questions are considered in the present book.

This book does nOt touch upon such important problems as system simulation,

reliability and efficiency analysis and certain others. In the author's

opinion, these have been treated sufficiently in the literature. There are

also certain aspects which are of a controversial nature.

The book is intended for a broad group of engineering-technical and scientific

workers involved in developing, producing and operating various types of

radioeleetronic systems, as well as graduate students.

Participants in the preparation of this book included Candidate of Technical

Sciences Yu. A. Gustov (section 6.5). V. N. Chekin (section 2.3) and

G. I. Semenov (section 5.6). Chapter 3 makes use of work carried out by

Ye. G. Pashchenko in conjunction with V. V. Dobryanskiy and V. P. Kozlovskiy.
Table of Contents

List of abbreviations and notation 3

Foreword 5

318

FOR¢NHHTJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 1. Principles of model construction

.1. Methods and singularities of simulation

2. Stages of construction and implementation of model

3. Elements of the theory of dimensionality and similarity
.4. Physical simulation

5. Features of mathematical modeling

Chapter 2. Simulation of high frequency fields

2.1. Tasks and features of simulation

2.2. Mathematical computer modeling of effective scattering area
pattern of complex bodies

2.3. Simulation of directivity characteristics of radiator array
using analog computer

2.4. Optical modeling of high-frequency fields

Chapter 3. Simulation of low-frequency electromagnetic fields
and fields uith complex structure

3.1. Tasks and features of simulation

3.2. Method for simulating field on ground

3.3. Simulating reradiation from metal structures in local
electromagnetic field

3.4. Construction of benches for simulating low-frequency fields

and fields with complex structure
3.5. Investigating characteristics of radioelectronic devices in
field of local structure

Chapter 4. Models of combined operation of a group of
radioelectronic devices

4.1. Tasks and features of simulation
4.2. Physical modeling of electromagnetic compatibility
4 3. Mathematical modeling

Chapter 5. Computer automation of mathematical modeling

5.1. Tasks and means of automation using digital computers

5.2. Methods for automatic digital computer model construction

5.3. System for automating simulation of radio circuits in order
to investigate noise tolerance and electromagnetic
compatibility

5.4. TRAKT--source language of simulation system

Chapter 6. Simulators and trainers
6.1. Principles of constructing simulators and training

equipment
6.2. Simulators of radar echos from objects at sea
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDPBZ-00850R000500020034-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Simulators of echo signals from ocean surface and shore
Analog-digital modules in simulators and trainers
Construction principles of spin-echo simulators

Application of echo signal trainers and simulators

“Mb/s)
0

0

U‘O‘O‘O‘
.

Chapter 7. Experimental design in simulation and testing stages

1. Classification of tests and their organization

2. Models of extremal experiments

3. Clarification of mathematical model using test results
4. Special types of experimental design

Chapter 8. Processing testing and simulation results

. Tasks and stages of processing

Estimation of parameters

Hypothesis verification

Construction and analysis of empirical models
. Discovery of regular components

0
o

aoooococo
.

MbuNH
.

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Sudoatroyeniye", 1981

6900
C80: 1860/47

320

FOR/OFEKJA1.USB(H%LY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020034-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 62.52:621.397.621

MODERN METHODS AND DEVICES FOR DATA DISPLAY

Moscow SOVREHBNNYYB HETODY I USTROYSTVA OTOBBAZEINIYA INFDRHAISII in Russian
1981 (signed to press 23 Apr 81) pp 2-4, 216-216

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Modern Methods and
Devices for Date Display", edited by H. I. Krivosheyev and A. Ya. Breytbart,
Izdstel'stvo "Radio 1 svysz"§ 20,000 copies. 216 pages]

[Text] Annotation

The design fundamentals and construction methods of modern data display syste-s
are given. The construction features of displays and display systems, as well
as achievements in the development of the hardware base and of devices for

information display systems are presented. The use of data display facilities
in the national economy is examined.

The book is intended for specialists involved in developing, engineering and

operating modern data display facilities; it may also be useful for automatic
control system design specialists and graduate students in corresponding
specialties.

[This book was reviewed by A. Ya. Breytbart.]
Foreword

The appearance of more sophisticated electronic computers makes it possible to
apply automated control systems (A38) in widely varying areas of science,
technology and the national economy. for example, in radar, in controlling

space flights, in rail and air transport, nuclear power plants, aviation

training equipment, in centralized control of industrial enterprises, in the
surface and submarine fleet, in centralized goods delivery and wsrehouse
accounting systens, in telephone and telegraph communication systems, in
medicine, and in systems for modeling and processing scientific-research findings.

Data display facilities (DDP), which act as the comnunication link in man-
machine systems, form one of the basic branches of automated control systems.

321

FOR‘OFFKJAI,USE(NWLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY

The DD? used in early automated control systems were cathode-ray television

tubes. However, the increasingly complex requirements set for automated
control systems, and particularly for display facilities, have required the
development of other effective means for solving this problem.

The development of microelectronics has made it possible to develop such dis-
crete display devices as electroluminescent and liquid crystal matrix indica-
tors, gas-discharge displays, and various projection devices having the required
parameters. The present book describes display devices which are now in use.

A great deal of attention is devoted to the principles and methods by which

they are designed and constructed, as well as their application.

The book is divided into six chapters.

Chapter 1 examines the fundamentals and problems of designing DDP, methods for
calculating the characteristics of readout devices and methods for optimizing
the selection of DB? type and parameters.

Chapter 2 is devoted to methods and principles of designing DDT. as well as
questions of improving their efficiency and reliability.

Chapter 3 describes displays and display systems. Particular attention is
devoted to color display systems.

Chapter 6 contains a description of DDT components and devices, including
cathode-ray devices, character synthesizing displays, gas-discharge displays,
liquid-crystal displays, and various types of electroluminescent indicators.

Chapter 5 describes special-purpose television devices for displaying information.
Methods of constructing graphic and three-dimensional images are examined.

Chapter 6 is devoted to the application of methods and devices for displaying
information in the national economy, including use in automated dispatcher
control systems, in the monitoring the diagnostic systems of cmmnunication
equipment, in telephony and telegraphy. A brief description of television
video games is given.

This book was written by a broad group of specialists involved in DD? development.
It is intended for engineering and technical workers involved in developing,
designing and operating modern data display facilities, and may also be useful

for specialists involved in automated control system planning as well as graduate
students in corresponding specialties.

The book chapters were edited as follows: chapters 1 and 2 by I. I. Litvak and
V. K. Samsonov; chapter 3 by N. A. Oahchepkov and I. Ye. Soloveychik;

chapter 4 by I. I. Litvik; chapter 5 by I. N. Gulin; and chapter 6 by

A. Ya. Breytbart. Overall editing of the book was done by H. I. Krivosheyev

and A. Ya. Breytbart.

322

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents
Foreword
Chapter 1. Design fundamentals of modern data display systems

Litvak, I. I.
1.1. Problems of development of general method for designing data
display systems

Lazarev, Ye. M., Pokrovskaya, M. Ye.
1.2. Method for calculating characteristics of readout devices
during design and evaluation of data display apparatus

Gavrich, A. V.
1.3. Allowance for relationship between characteristics of data
display facilities during their classification and evaluation

Litvak, I. 1., Pokrovakaya, M. Ye.
1.4. Method for optimizing selection of type and parameters of data
display systems

Chapter 2. Methods and principles of constructing data display
systems

Ageykin, D. 1., Knopov, Yu. T. [deceased], Yemal'yanov, V. S.
2.1. Operator data display in sporadic monitoring systems

Smolyarov, A. M.
2.2. Effectiveness of matrix readout

Litvak, I. 1., Severinovskiy, N. S.
2.3. Toward the possibility of improving flexibility of
character-synthesis display apparatus

Ivanov, Ye. L., Litvak, I. 1., Melikov, G. G., Surkov, A. V.
2.4. Analysis of data conversion in dynamically controlled display
devices

Melikov, G. G.
2.5. Influence of input data stream on regeneration in display
device

Gustyakov, M. D.. Lazarev, Ye. M., Molotova, A. Yu.

2.6. Possibilities for improving efficiency of utilization of
digital character-synthesis indicators

Smolyarov, A. M., Shesterkin, A. N.

2.7. Methods for improving reliability of data reproduction on
gas-discharge displays

323

IN)! OﬁﬂﬂCJAl.l!ﬂB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Displays and display systems

Grishin, V. G., Starodubtsev. V. P.
3.1. Hmlti-gradation readout of large data files on color relief
display

Valikhmetov, B. A., Nikolayev, Yu. N., Pilipchatin, Ye. N.,
Postevka, D. P.
3.2. Color graphics terminal

Repinskiy. A. H., Soloveychik, I. Ye.
3.3. CRT-based graphics display with color coding of data

Gurvich, G. A., Lenchuk, V. 8., Pogrebinskiy, S. B.
3.4. Control of peripheral equipment systems in color-coded
display systems

Todoroy, D. N., Peretyatkov, S. H.
3.5. Color-coded graphics display software

Artamonov, A. 6., Bolotnikov, V. N., D'yachkova, G. P.,
Churakova, V. G.
3.6. Hieroprocessor applications in display systems

Gurvich, G. A., Lenchuk, V. 5., Pogrebinskiy, S. B.
3.7. Data documentation in color-coded display systems

Haydel'man, I. N., Hironov, V. A., Oshchepkov. N. A., Revenko, A. N.
3.8. Toward the problem of creating intelligent displays

Chapter 4. Elements and devices in data display systems

Vinevich, s. V. [deceased]
4.1. Cathode-ray devices for data display and their prospects for
development

Gorfinkel', B. l., Abalduyev, B. V., Korovkin, A. 1.. Hedvedev, R. 8.,
Hikhaylov. A. N.
4.2. Character-synthesizing indicators based on low-voltage

cathode luminescence effect

Barenboym, A. H., Mblotovs, A. Yu.

4.3. Alternating-current gas-discharge display with planar
electrode positioning

Voroncheva, V. R., Gel'shteyn, H. I.
4.4. Digital gas-discharge display with low-voltage grid control

Hurtazina, N. V., Petrenko, z. 6., Sukhenko, Ye. P.
4.5. Liquid-crystal light modulators and color-beam polarization
modulators

324

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

51

60

64

67

70

72

77

82

89

98

100

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bobylev, Yu. P., Peterimov, S. V., Shoshin, V. M.
6.6. Multiplexed control of liquid crystal displays

Avetisova, M. 6., Lyamichev, 1. Ya.
6.7. Electroluminescent mimic panels and areas of application

Antipov, B. L., Kul'kov, V. P., Markov, P. A., Savel'yev, G. A.
6.8. Matrix-controlled dot-matrix electroluminescent storage
screen

Ivanov, Ye. L., 11'inskiy, V. 1., Melikov, G. 6., Netedov, B. M.
6.9. Modules for constructing common-user electroluminescent
character displays

Ovchinnikov, V. 1.
6.10. Capability of automating design and fabrication of
electroluminescent mimic panels

Ayramenko, P. P., Inozemtseva, Yu. 1., Lazarev, Ye. M.,

Lyubarskaya, M. G.

6.11. High-contrast electroluminescent indicators in data display
devices

Il'inskiy, V. 1., 0vchinnikov, V. 1., Shvartsberg. V. R.,

Shipilova, N. Ya., Shuvalov, N. N.

6.12. Microassembly-type contro1 circuit for electroluminescent
indicators

Shvartsberg, V. R.
6.13. Vacuum-luminescent, light-diode and gas-discharge indicator
micro-assemblies for data display devices

Morozov, B. 8., Pribytkov, V. Ya.
6.16. Device for measuring operating parameters of character-
synthesis indicators

Bogdanov, B. A., Boguslnvskiy, R. Ye., Severinovakiy, N. S.
6.15. 5760-e1ement electroluminescent dot-matrix screen

Chapter 5. Television methods and devices for data display

Guglin, I. N.
5.1. Television-screen data display

Konov, K. 1., Vasileva, Ts. Ts. (Bulgaria)
5.2. Use of read-only memory in television character generators

Yegorova, S. D., Zapalatovskiy, A. V., Kolesnik, V. A.,

Sidorov, V. 1.

5.3. Fragment coding method in automating graphic image input
to TV displays
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kosnikov, Yu. 11., Sergeyev, N. P.

5.4. Application of binary multiplier in basic image formation
devices

Avgustov, Ye. F.
5.5. Formation of image of three-dimensional object on TV
screen illuminating invisible lines

Ul'yanov, V. N.
5.6. Formation of characters on TV screen using Halal: functions

Chapter 6. Application of data display methods and devices in the
national economy

Gribanov, L. 14., Razin. A. I., Samsonov, V. K.
6.1. Color television data display system

Gribanov, L. 11., Hakiyevskiy, V. A., Khodak, V. A.
6.2. Television data display system for transaitting graphic
and printed aaterials

Guglin, I. 11., Hayzul's, R. A.
6.3. Special-purpose data display devices

Ovlasyuk, I. Ya.
6.6. Television-type display equipment for load-dispatching centers

Gol'dbam, I. Ya., Loginov, V. A., Saloltish, K. A.
6.5. Utilization of TV displays in automatic channel switching
systens

Filiaonov, A. A.. Shlyapoberskiy, V. I.
6.6. Use of "AGAT-ZOOOM" display in col-unication equipment
monitoring and diagnostic system

Zhuravlev, V. A., Shcherbakov, V. G.
6.7. Features of application of display facilities in data
systems based on "MEAT-2000" display system

Vasil'yev, S. 11., Soloveychik, I. Ye., Churakova, V. G.
6.8. Utilization of liquid-crystal indicators in telephony

Gavrish, A. V., Sevunyan, Yu. R.
6.9. "Rubin" display modules and their industrial application

326

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

169

155

158

162

166

171

177

183

187

190

194

197
Volotnikov, V. N., Kenigfeat, L. A., Repinakiy. A. H.,
Yarnatkin, K. K.

6.10. Display-type telegraph terlinal

Guglin, I. N.
6.11. Peaturea of data display in television video games

List of abbreviations
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio i avyaz'", 1981

6900
080: 1860/56
FOR (DH-1C 'IAI. USE ONLY

000 621.374
PULSE RADAR CIRCUITS

Moscow IMPUL'SNYYE SKHKHY RLS in Russian 1981 (signed to press 26 Mar 81)
pp 2-3, 222-223

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Pulsed Radar Circuits",
by Vladilen Grigor'yevich Grigor'yants, Voyenizdat, 17,000 copies, 226 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book exaaines the physical processes in pulse circuits of modern radards,
and describes the properties and characteristic features of widely used circuits
and the action of basic adjustments. A special chapter is devoted to nodular
microcircuits.

The book is intended for engineering and technical staffs which operate radars,
students and auditors st military academies, as well as a wide group of readers
interested in problems of pulsed technology.

Foreword

The present book is intended for engineering and technical personnel exploiting
radar equip-ant. The purpose of the book is to help the reader who is familiar
with the fundamentals of radio technology and radar to clarify the design and
functioning principles of pulse radar devices, thus preparing him for independent
reading (analysis) of the schematic diagrams of such devices. The latter is
necessary for high quality preventive maintenance, and rapid detection and repair
of nalfunctions. The main attention in the book is devoted to examining physical
processes in typical pulse circuits which are widely used in operational radar
equipment, the characteristic features and properties of such circuits, the'dif-
ferent versions which are in practical use, and the influence of basic parameter:
and adjustments. Modern trends in the construction of pulse devices were taken
into consideration in preparing the material. Because the schematic diagrams
used in existing radars were generally executed according to earlier GOSTs, the
author considered it advisable to use some of the same graphic notations in the
diagrams and alphanumeric designations for elements as were used in the first

328

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

edition of the book. The new graphic designations used in the diagrams are
given in COST 2.730-73, 2.755-76, etc.. and the alphanumeric designations can
be found in COST 2.710-75.

Some of the material was written by A. V. Ruznetsov (’3, Chapter II; £5, 6,
Chapter III; Chapter IV; §3, Chapter IV) and I. Ye. Golubev (Chapter VII).

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Simple shaping circuits ‘ . lo
’1. Basic types of RC and R1. circuits -
1. Effect of square pulse on RC circuit. Basic types of
RC circuits -
2. Effects of square pulse on R]. circuit. Basic types of
RI. circuits 7
§2. Practical application of integrating RC circuits 8
l. Obtaining linearly varying voltage -
2. Stretching pulse edges 9
3. Obtaining time delay 11
6. Converting pulse width modulation to pulse amplitude
modulation ll.
5. Smoothing filters. Extraction of constant component -
6. Integrating-differentiating filter 17
7. Influence of parasitic parameters 18
§3. Practical application of differentiating RC circuits l9
1. Shortening (sharpening) of pulses -
2. Influence of parasitic para-eters 20
3. High frequency correction of voltage divider 22
“0. RC crossover circuits - 2b
1. Pulse transmission through RC crossover circuit -
2. Level. hold circuits. Recovery of constant component 29
f5. Sho:k-excitation tuned circuit 32
i6. Frequency correction elements in pulse amplifiers 37
Chapter 2. Pulse limiters ' 66
$1. Diode limiters -
1. General information about limiters -
2. Serial diode limiters 1.7
3. Parallel diode limiters 50
lo. Influence of parasitic parameters 53
52. Linitera using multielectrode tubes 56
1. Grid limiters -
2. Anode limiters with bottom anode current cutoff S9
3. Anode limiters with top anode current cutoff 60
lo. IVs-way limiters using nultielectrode tubes 61
329

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020034-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’3. Transistors in limiter and switching circuits
1. Transistorized limiters
2. Transient processes in transistor switching circuit

Chapter 3. Two-stage square pulse generators

51. General information
52. Electron-tube flip-flops
1. Balanced flip-flops
' 2. Flip-flop resolution tile
3. Balanced flip-flop triggering circuits
4. Cathode-coupled flip-flop
’3. Electron-tube one-shot nultivibrators
l. Cathode-coupled one-shot nultivibrator
2. Cathode-coupled positive-grid one-shot nultivibrator
3. Triggering and forced interruption of one-shot
nultivibrators
§h. Hultivibrators using electron tubes in self-excited
oscillation node
1. Basic uultivibrator circuit
2. Improved versions of basic nultivibrator circuit
55. Transistorized flip-flop
l. External-bias flip-flop
2. Automatic bias flip-flop
3. Emitter-coupled flip-flop
§6. Transistorized nultivibrators
l. Multivibrator using transistors in self-excited
oscillation node
2. Transistorized one-shot nultivibrators

Chapter A. Blocking oscillators

51. General characteristics of blocking oscillators
52. Physical processes in electron-tube blocking oscillator
1. Basic and equivalent circuits of blocking oscillators
in triggered node
2. Pulse triggering and edge shaping
3. Pulse top shaping
4. Pulse cutoff shaping and resetting circuit to initial
state
53. Alternate tube-type circuits for blocking oscillators
l. Blocking oscillator operating in self-excited
oscillation node
2. Blocking oscillator with tuned circuit in grid circuit
3. Blocking oscillator with delay line in grid circuit
55. Transistorized blocking oscillator

330

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00860R000600020034-7
FOR ()l-‘I-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

Chapter 5. Synchronization of pulse generators. Pulsed

[1.
53.

5?:

frequency dividers

Principles of synchronization and frequency division
Synchronization of blocking oscillators and aultivibrators
Frequency division using triggered blocking oscillators in
aultivibrators

Frequency division and pulse counting using flip-flops
So-e conplex frequency divider circuits

1. Feedback dividers

2. Dividers with reference pulse train gating

Chapter 6. Sawtooth voltage generators

51.
52.

53.

Parameters and principles of obtaining sawtooth voltages

Electron-tube sawtooth voltage generators

1. Exponential voltage generators with integrating RC-circuit

2. Sawtooth voltage generators with current-stabilizing
one-port network

3. Sawtooth voltage generators with conpenaating positive
voltage feedback

6. Sawtooth voltage generators with compensating negative
voltage feedback. Phantastrons.

Transistorized sawtooth voltage generators

1. Exponential voltage generator with integrating RC circuit

2. Sawtooth voltage generator with positive voltage feedback

Chapter 7. Integrated circuits for pulsed devices

51.

52.

General information on integrated nicrocircuits. Functioning
principles, notation system and operating characteristics of
integrated logic nicrocircuits.

Potential-type integrated logic nicrocircuits

1. Single-stage logic integrated logic circuits

2. Two-stage logic integrated logic circuits

3. Integrated-circuit flip-flops

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981 s izneneniyani

6900
CSO:

1860/53

331

FOR OFFKJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 658.58:62-5

PROBLEMS OF OPTIMAL DETECTION AND LOCALIZATION 0P HALFUNCTIONS IN'RADIOBLECTRONIC
EQUIPMENT

Moscow ZADACHI OPTIMAL'NOGO OBNARUZHENIYA I POISKA OTKAZOV V REA in Russian 1981
(signed to press 27 Mar 81) pp 2, 279-280

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Problems of Optimal Detection and
Localization of Malfunctions in Radioelectronic Equipment", by Gennadiy Sergeyevich

Pashkovskiy, Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 8000 copies. 280 pages)
[Text] Annotation

Mathematical models of problems of optimal detection and location of malfunctions
in radioelectronic equipment are examined. Algorithms are given for writing
optimal programs for various optimality criteria. For the first time, solutions
to these problems are reduced to engineering design methodologies which are
convenient for manual computation as'vell as machine implementation.

The book is intended for specialists involved in designing and operating radio-
electronic equipment. It is also useful for mathematicians interested in problems
of combinatory optimization.

[This book was reviewed byCandidates ofTechnical Sciences v.n. Kudritskiy and
M.V. Zhukov.)

Table of Contents

Editor's foreword 3

Chapter 1. Mathematical Models and Methods for Optimizing Malfunction
Detection and Localization 8

1.1. Mathematical models of tested devices and malfunction search

processes 8
1.2. Statistical optimization of sequential testing programs of high-
reliability systems 16
1.3. Statistical optimization of sequential test programs of systems
with arbitrary element reliability 24
1.6. Monitoring opernbility and diagnosis with minimnx criteria 32
332

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I.5. Models ‘nd methods of optimizing combination search

1.6. Decisionamaking regarding recovery of object of control using
incomplete data

1.7. Problems of combinatory optimization and characterization of
solution methods

1.8. Informal description of recursive method

Chapter 2. Optimal Methods of Testing and Diagnosing High Reliability
Systems

2.1. Statement of the problem

2.2. Substantive description of solution method

2.3. Optimal diagnostic algorithm

2.4. Approximate diagnostic algorithms

2.5. Monitoring operability of high reliability systems

Chapter 3. Optimal Methods of Testing Systems with Arbitrary Element
Reliability

3.1. .Optimal algorithm for finding malfunctions and affecting repair
3.2. Approximate search algorithms with subsequent repair

3.3. Special cases of malfunction location problems followed by repair
3.4. Optimal algorithm for identifying status

3.5. Construction of quasi-optimal identification programs

3.6. Testing operability of systems with arbitrary element reliability

Chapter 4. Optimization of Test Programs without Reliability
Information

4.1. Algorithms for writing optimal diagnostic programs using minimax
criterion

4.2. Approximate algorithms for diagnosing systems with single
malfunction

4.3. Programs for finding malfunctions with subsequent repair using
minimax criterion

4.4. Algorithms for writing quasi-optimal programs for finding
malfunctions with subsequent repair

4.5. Monitoring opernbility of systems without reliability information

4.6. Minimax repair strategies

Chapter 5. Methods of Synthesizing Optimal ASK Structures

5.1. Combination search model

5.2. Optimal synthesis of ASK for diagnosing systems with single
malfunction

5.3. Approximate algorithms for synthesizing ASK for systems with

single malfunction
5.4. Synthesis of optimal structures for ASK for finding malfunctions

and replacing faulty elements

333

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

36
41

44
46

51
56
69
78
85
85
103
112
118

129
133

141

141
149
155
164
171
176
180
180
182
200

212
5.5.

5.6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Approximate algorithsn for synthesizing test systens for finding
malfunctions and repairing test objects .
Optimal synthesis of structures of ASK for testing operability

Chapter 6. Choosing Anong Decisions Under Asbiguous Conditions and
Optimal Test Planning

6.1.

Model of test planning and decisionqlaking under ambiguous
conditions

Locally optilal plans in terms of sininul average total
expenditure criterion

Statistically optinal planning of tasting and decision-making
Locally optisal nininax plans

Globally optimal nininax plans

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 avyas'", 1981

6900

030: 1860/68
F03!0FFNJAI.USEINVLY

UDC 621.311.001(S7+24):681.142
METHODS OF OPTIMIZATION IN CONTROLLING ELECTRICAL POWER SYSTEMS

Novosibirsk HETODY OPTIMIZATSII PR1 UPRAVLENII ELEKTROBNERGETICEBSKIHI SISTEHAHI
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 2‘ Oct 80) PD 2, 256-257

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Methods of Optimization in Controlling

Electrical Power Systems", by Lembit Arsen'yevich Krumm. Izdatel'atvo "Nauka",
1250 copies, 257 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This monograph systematizes and generalizes the basic methodological principles
and ideas of optimization in controlling steady-state modes of complex electrical
power systems (CBPS). An analysis is given from a historical stance, primarily
from the viewpoint of allowing for electrical system limitations. Both classical
and integrated approaches, as well as various combinations thereof, are examined.

The prospects of development of optimization methods in controlling CEPS are
shown.

The book is of interest for workers at scientific and research, design and operat-

ing organizations involved with problems of developing and utilizing automated

control system software in power engineering, as well as for graduate students.
Table of Contents

Note from the author 3

Introduction 4

chapter 1. Development of Methods for Optimi'ing Instantaneous Node
of cars 9

Preliminary remarks -

§l. Classical optimization methods (1919-1957) 10
52. Appearance of integrated optimization methods (1957-1960) 26
§3. Development of integrated optimization methods since 1960 33
56. Combination of optimization methods in classical approach
(beginning in 1960) 4b
335

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Classical conditions of mode optimality and methods of defining
various dependent mode parameters

2. Methods of allowing for limitations during optimization of
generator active power

3. Methods of allowing for limitations during optimization of
generator reactive power

Conclusions

Chapter II. Development of Methods of Realizing Implicit Functions in

Controlling Steady-State SBS Modes

Preliminary remarks

§l. Methods for defining steady-state 838 nodes (linear approach)
prior to 1932

52. Interative methods for defining steady-state SBS modes (nonlinear
approach) (1932-1957)

53. Methods for realizing theory of implicit functions defined by
equations for self-adjusting SBS modes (1932-1957)

54. Methods of allowing for topological features of equations of
steady-state SES modes (1932-1957) in phase II

§5. Development of methods under conditions of integrated optimization
(beginning in 1957)

§6. Investigation of self-adjusting 338 nodes (beginning in 1957)

Conclusions

Chapter III. Development of Methods for Optimizing Mode and Conplement

of Operating Equipment in Cycles of Short-Term and On-
Line Control

Preliminary remarks

§l. Classical optimization methods (1940-1961)

52. Switch from classical methods to integrated optimization methods
(1958-1961)

53. Features of development of various methods (1961-1965)

54. $51 [Siberian Power Institute] and All-Union Scientific Research
Insi;zg;e of Electric Power Engineering methodologies (beginning
in

55. Characterization of other research (beginning in 1965)

Conclusions

-Chapter IV. Development of Methods for Optimizing Processes in

Electric Power Systems Considering Incomplete Initial
Information, and its Prospects

Preliminary remarks

51.

Methods of allowing for incomplete initial information in
optimizing instantaneous and short-term modes in BPS under
normal operating conditions during 1964-1974

336

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

45
52
64
73

80

84
87
91
116

120

_ 140

149

158

165
168

172
185
195

204

209
2. General conception of development of methods for integrated
optimization of processes in BPS (beginning in 1974)
3. Methods of optimizing modes allowing for incomplete initial
information (beginning in 1976)
Conclusions

Conclusion

List of abbreviations

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nnuka", 1981.

6900
680: 1860/71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.3:629.12"313"
PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPMENT FOR MARITIME ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

Leningrad PERSPEKTIVY RAZVITIYA SUDOVOY BLEKTROTEKHNIKI in Russian 1981 (signed
to press 27 Nov 80) pp 4-8, 187

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Prospects for Development
for Maritime Electrical Engineering", by Georgiy Ivanovich Kitayenko, Yuriy
Paviovich Kos'kin. Yuriy Alekseyevich Svetlikov (deceased) and Venianin Frantsevich
Samoseyko, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1970 copies. 188 pages]

[Text] Annotation

Based on analysis of the status of maritime electrical engineering, the book pre-
dicts the development of parameters of electric power systems, protective devices,
drives, start-control equipment, power converters, etc. A great deal of attention
is devoted to questions of creating new types of power sources, deep-water elec—
trical engineering, electromagnetic hydroreactive motors, cryogenic technology

and superconducting equipment.

The book is intended for engineering-technical and scientific workers involved in
research and designing maritime electrical equipment. It may also be of interest
for teachers and students of senior courses at technical institutions of higher
learning.

[This book was reviewed by A.Ye. Vorontsov.]
Foreword

During this period of accelerated scientific-technical progress, in which science
has become a determining factor in the economic and social development of society,
it has become extremely important to make the correct choice of directions of
development of science and technology so as to permit concentrating the efforts

of the country's engineering-technical personnel on solving problems with the
greatest long-range significance. It is now difficult to find technical solutions
which can provide a noticeable immediate economic effect. Further advancement
requires substantial long-range programs designed for large collectives at
scientific research institutes. We know that scientific research represents an
extremely profitable area of investment which promises the greatest profit;
however, increasing expenditures are required for implementing programs of research.

338

FOR 0FFﬂJAl.USEG)NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For precisely this reason, attempts have recently been made here and abroad to
predict the development of branches of the national economy and of individual types
of technology.

A great number of articles and books have been devoted to predicting the develop-
ment of ship building and maritime transport. Item [16] contains a quite complete
bibliography on this matter (cf. bibliography to chapter 1).

The amount of electric power equipment installed aboard vessels depends to a
significant degree upon the capacity of the power installations Ne, which is in-
fluenced by the vessel cargo capacity, speed, automation and signaling. He can
track the increase in the values of "e using the example containerships. In 1975
the worldwide fleet included 65 such vessels with speeds of 25-30 knots and
power plant capacity of over 50,000 h.p. Of these. 29 had "e > 80,000 h.p.;

and in 8 USvessels Ne - 120,000 h.p. Plans are now being developed for container
vessels with Ne - 200.000 h.p. and more. A plan is being drawn up for a ship in
England capable of carrying 5,000 containers at a speed of 30 knots with Ne -
210,000 h.p. In Japan, a 3500-container vessel will have a speed of 35 knots
and Ne - 250,000 h.p. According to predictions of US specialists, the interna-
tional fleet will have 160 vessels with power exceeding 100,000 h.p. in 1980,
and 500 such vessels in 1990. Similar prospects are foreseen for other types

of vessels as well (Chapter 1 [16]).

The power plant is the most complicated system aboard a vessel; its development

is determined to a significant extent by changes in the basic parameters of the
vessel. 0n the other hand, new achievements in electrical engineering, electrical
equipment development and power engineering make it possible to create vessels
based on new technical principles, e.g., ships using electromagnetic hydroreactive
engines. The prediction of the development of maritime electrical engineering must
allow for achievement in shipbuilding and the electrical engineering industry
(chapter 1 [27]).

The book develops two approaches to predicting the development of maritime elec-
tricni engineering. One of them involves developing methods and models of pre-
diction, while the other is a descriptive method involving expertise. Both of
these approaches complement one another. Prediction methods and models provide
an apparatus for quantitative estimation of the future development of maritime
electrical engineering. The methodology involved, especially the analytical
algorithms, can be used in studying a broad class of problems in the area of
maritime electrical engineering, both those which are being solved at present
as well as those which may arise in the future.

in contrast to the first approach, with which it is now impossible, for the
reasons indicated below, to make specific numerical calculations for all tasks

involved in predicting the development of maritime electrical engineering, an
attempt is made using the descriptive-expert panel approach to answer all
basic problems which arise during the practical solutiOn of prediction problems.

Here are two facts which are involved in using the first prediction approach:
first of all. the extrapolation models which are most widely used in prediction
theory require as initial information a precise and rather full retrospective

339

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USI-I ONLY

series of values which characterize the predicted process. A special infor-
mation service must be created to obtain this information. which forms a data bank
in support of the methodology in question. The organization of such a service will
make it possible, over time, to have sufficiently complete and valid information
for solving practical prediction problems. Secondly, many important problems

(in particular, prediction of the appearance of new types of maritime electrical
equipment) does not involve the examination of extrapolation models. No effective
or workable models have yet been developed for such problems. We may hope that
objective quantitative methods of evaluating the future status of maritime
electrical engineering will be used increasingly as the problem of insufficient
information is overcome by gradually accumulating source data and creating new
prediction methods.

When predicting ..- development of technology, authors generally make note of the
risk involved in solving the type of problem involved. The predictions made in
the present work can be considered as an expert estimate of the prospects of
development of maritime electrical engineering provided by the authors of the
book. It is not impossible that another group of experts would have a different
opinion from that presented in this book. In making their predictions, the authors
take a conservative approach when necessary. For example. the section on expert
panel-descriptive prediction is given without allowing for the time factor of

the development of individual areas of maritime electrical engineering. This
prediction is necessary in order to form the goals of development of the branch
of technology. In those cases in which the authors have sufficient source infor-
mation, prediction is done on the basis of developed models.

The book makes use of works published by the authors, domestic and foreign monographs
and articles, as well as reviews on maritime electrical engineering contained in

the collections "Sudostroyeniye za rubezhom" (Shipbuilding Abroad). Chapter 1

was written by Doctor of Technical Sciences Yu.A. Svetlikov and Candidate of
Technical Sciences V.F. Samoseyko, chapter 2 by Doctor of Technical Sciences

6.1. Kitayenko and Doctor of Technical Sciences Yu.P. Kos'kin.

A number of the positions put forth in the book were discussed with specialists
of the shipbuilding and electrical engineering industries. The authors are deeply
grateful to all comrades who participated in discussing the materials in the book,
especially 1.1. Adrianov, D.A. Gidsspov, A.N. Kaganovich and P.G. Heshcheryakov.

The authors express their gratitude to N.V. Belousova, R.1. Gladkikh and L.S.
Kos'kina for their great assistance in making calculations, as well as selecting
and processing the literature. '

All critical remarks and suggestions should be addressed to 191065, Leningrad,
ul. Gogolya, 8, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye".

Table of Contents

Foreword 5

3‘0

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI". ONLY

Chapter 1. Methods of Investigating Regularities in the Development of

Maritime Electrical Engineering 9

1.1. Methodological principles -
1.2. Information support for research models 18
1.3. Investigation of developmental trends of determining parameters

of maritime electric power systems 37
1.4. Methods of measuring maritime electric power systems as

function of parameters of future vessels 60
1.5. Analysis of structured problems of development of maritime

electrical engineering 81
References to chapter 1 103

Chapter 2. Problems of Development of Maritime Electrical Engineering 105

2.1. Modern maritime electrical engineering and its problems -
2.2. Electric energy parameters 113‘
2.3. Deep-water electrical engineering 125
2.0. New electric power sources 133
2.5. Electromagnetic hydroreactive engines 167
2.6. Cryogenic technology and superconducting electrical equipment 150
2.7. Trends of development of maritime electrical engineering 174
References to chapter 2 182
Conclusion 185

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1981

6900
cso: 1860/105

361

FINI(NHHC]AI.USE1DNLN
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.96.001(07)

RADAR DATA PROCESSING AGAINST INTERFERENCE BACKGROUND

Moscow TEORIYA I TEKHNIKA OBRABOTKI RADIOLOKATSIONHOY INFORMATSII NA FORE PM“!
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 20 Apr 81) pp 2-3, l.10-1016

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from book "Theory and Practice of
Radar Data Processing Against an Interference Background", by Yakov Davidovich
Shirman and Vladimir Nikolayevich HanzhOs, reviewed by «"ctors of the engineer-
ing sciences and professors V.Ye. Dulevich and “.8. Sverdlik, Izdatel'stvo
"Radio 1 "V88”, 10,000 copies, 416 pages]

[Text] Questions of optimizing mltichannel and single channel detection systems
as well as radar signal measurement and resolution are generalized.

Primary attention is devoted to design principles and questions of the engineering
realization of various analog and digital detectors and signal parameter meters

for signals against a backgrOund of correlated nonsteady-state interference as well
as questions of adaptation to conditions of apriori antiguity. etc. A large nunber
of illustrative exanples is cited.

The book is intended for specialists engaged with the theory, design and operation
of radio electronic hardware and systas.

Foreword

1he rapid development of radio electronics, and radar processing engineering theory
in particular, takes it difficult to generalize the multifarious publications in
this field. Nonetheless, there is the insistent need for generalizing publications
which encompass the state of the art of the theory and the prospects for implement-
ing its conclusions.

An urgent but difficult task is therefore the theoretical generalization of new
questions and "those which have arisen" concerning radar processing against a
background of interference from unified, sufficiently general procedural stand-
points. For exasple. the refinement of the component base has expanded the pos-
sibility for multichannel reception. Signals and interference are described by a
set of time functions or by time and coordinate functions in this case. The object
of the optimization becomes the space-time processing of the signals against a
background of interference, which provides for effective interference suppression
in many situations (not just in radar). The generalization of the new problems of
the indicated processing comprises a weighty portion of the problem posed above.

362

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This buck is an attempt to solve this problem to some extent. The courses of
lectures on radar theory are taken as its basis: for engineers comleting their
training; for graduate students and degree candidates preparing to meet the candi-
data minimum. Special attention has been devoted to questdons which are not always
accessible or fully treated in the literature: the theory of primary space-time
processing of radar data against a background of correlated interference, which
provides not only for the accumulation of the useful signals, but also for the can-
cellation of interfering ones; the theory of measurements of timewlse constant and
changing signal parameters against a background of interference during primary and
secondary processing; adaptation theory; adaptive antennas and moving target indi-
cation systems; new techniques of coherent processing of simple and complex space-
time signals: digital, optical and spin methods.

Serious attention has been devoted to the compactness, generality and accessibility
of the presentation of the comparatively complex theoretical mterial. Many years
of teaching experience and personal research in the field treated hereare reflected
in the book. A large number of samples is given. The book can prove useful not
only to engineers and graduate students. but also to students in the higher educa-
tional institutes. That which yesterday was the prerogative of a narrow group of
researchers is today becoming public property.

The authors would like to express their gratitude for the useful consents of V.Ye.
Dulevich, D.I. Lekhovitskiy and NJ. Sverdlik.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3

1. General Information on Radar Data and its Processing
I. Fundamentals of Multichannel Radar Signal Detection Theory

2. The Formulation of Optimization Problems for Signal Detection and
Techniques of Solving Them

2.1. The formulation of problems of signal detection optimization 7
2.2. The main indicators for two and three alternative detection efficiency 9
2.3. Detection optimality criteria 10
2.4. Optimizing solutions in the case of two alternative detection 11
2.5. Optimizing solutions in the case of three alternative detection 1!»

3. Optimal Detection of a Time Digitized Signal with Known Parameters
Against a Background of Correlated Gaussian Interference

3.]. The formulation of the problem. Signal and interference models 17
3.2. Optimal detection algorithms for a time digitized signal with known
parameters 2].
3.3. The quality indicators and parameter of two alternative detection of
a digitized signal sample 24

3.10. Accumulation, compensation and interelement normalization with
respect to the interference level as component parts of optimal
weighted processing (the example of a two element sample) 25

343

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Optimal Multichannel Detection of a CH Signal with Known Parameters Against
a Background of Correlated Gaussian Interference

so
so

b§b
UNH

4.1..
6.5.

lc.6.

The transition from digitized realizations to continuous ones

The integral matrix equation of a weighting vector

The major results of Imiltichannel detection theory for CH signals
and examples of its application

Brief information from the theory of linear filters for CH signals
with constant parameters

Hatched filtration as a detection operation against a background of
steady-state white noise

Optimal filtration as a detection operation against a background of
steady-state nonwhite noise

5. Specific features of the Multichannel Detection of High Frequency

Signals

5.1. The complex notation for narrow band high-frequency oscillations

5.2. The approximation of integrals from the products of narrow band high
frequencies

5.3. The calculation of cross-correlation functions of random narrow band
ugly-frequency oscillations, H[a(t)b(s)], in linear systems with
constant parameters

5.4. Complex notation for received oscillations,the useful signal oscil-
lation and the interference oscillations. The complex correlation
matrix of interference

5.5. Complex notation for the main relationships of the detection theory
for CH signals with known parameters

5.6. A model of white noise for the narrow band description of high
frequencies

5.7. Examples of multichannel detector synthesis using complex notation
of high-frequency oscillations

5.8. Complex notation of filtration equations of high-frequency oscillations

6. Specific Features of Multichannel Detection of Coherent Signals with

6.1.
6.2.
6-3.

6.6.

6.5.

7.

7.1.

Random Noninformational Parameters

A procedure to account for noninformational signal parameters and its

application to detection against a background of gaussian interference
The likelihood ratio and optiml detection algorithm for a signal with

a random initial phase

The likelihood ratio and optimal detection algorithm for a signal with

random initial phases and amplitudes

Structural configurations of detectors for signals with a random
initial phase and a with a random mlituds and initial phase
Quality indicators for a two alternative optimal detector of coherent
signals with random parameters

Optimal Detection of the Simplest Incoherent Signals in Gaussian
Interference in the Case of Multichannel Reception

General information on incoherent signals

3106

FOR OFFICIAL I55 ONLY

27
29

30
36
38
41

62

43

44

45
106
69

53

SI;
56
57
61
62

65
ltll¢ﬂﬂﬂCJAI.USE(MVLY

7.2. Optimal incoherent signal detection algorithms for the simplest

incoherency models 66
7.3. Methods of calculating the efficiency of post detector incoherent

signal storage 70
7.6. Examples of calculating the statisticr” characteristics of the output

voltages and efficiency indicators for post detector storage devices 73
7.5. Incoherent signal detection quality indicators in the case of a fixed

sample volume 76
7.6. Incoherent signal sequential detection quality indicators 78
7.7. Quasi-optimal procedures of binary and multilevel digital incoherent

storage 81

8. Specific Design Features of Detectors of Random Gaussian Signals against
a Background of Gaussian Interference

8.1. The general problem of detecting a discrete gaussian random process

against a background of discrete gaussian interference 83
8.2. Auxiliary mathematical propositions 84
8.3. Expressions for the logarithm of the likelihood ratio for digitized

and CH signals 87
8.5. Example of synthesis of optimal detectors for coherent gaussian signals 39
8.5. Example of synthesis of optimal detectors for incoherent gaussian signals 91
8.6. Example of synthesis of optimal detectors for partially coherent

gaussian signals 97

II. Radar Signals and Modern Techniques of Processing Them

9. Mismatch and Resolution Functions of Coherent Space-Time Signals.
Signals without Intrapulse Modulation and Methods of Processing Them.

9.1. General relationships for coherent signal mismatch functions 103
9.2. Spatial (angular) mismatch functions 104
9.3. Tine-frequency mismatch functions 105
9.6 Mismatch functions and the ambiguity solid for single radar pulses

without intrapulse modulation 108
9.5. Processing techniques for single radar pulses without intrapulse

modulation 111
-9.6. Mismatch functions and processing techniques for coherent radar pulse

trains ,‘ 112
9.7. Principles of correlation filter processing and specific features of

its use in the case of quasi-continuous signals 117
9.8. Specific feature. of matched and optimal resolution 119
9.9. Weighted processing of coherent radar pulse trains 122

10. Frequency Modulated Signals and Methods of Processing Them

10.1. Mismatch functions for linearly frequency modulated radar pulses 123

10.2. Compression of LFM radar pulses in matched filters 127

10.3. Correlation filter processing with generalized heterodyning 131
365

FOI.OIFIC1AI.USEIMNLY
11.

11.1.
11.2.
11.3.
11.4.
11.5.

12.

12.1.
12.2.
12.3.
12.4.
12.5.
12.6.
12.7.
12.8.

12.9.

FOI‘OFIWCIAI.1EHECNNL¥

Phase Keyed Signals and Methods of Processing Them

Signals based on Barker codes and multiphase codes
Signals based on linear recurrent digital sequences
Continuous 0, I signals,keyed M-sequences
Continuous 0, o signals. keyed M-sequences

Pulsed 0, I signals. keyed M-sequences

New Digital and Analog Coherent Processing Techniques

Specific features of digital coherent processing

Discrete (digital) processing in the time domain

Digital filtering in the frequency domain

The fast Fourier transform

The realization and utilization of a fast Fourier transform

The Walsh transform as a possible digital processing technique
Numerical transformations as a possible digital processing technique
New analog processing techniques. The dual pulse processing method
using spin echo

A three pulse processing method using spin echo

12.10. The possibilities of using spin waves
12.11. Optical processing methods
12.12. Matched coherent optical processing in side—looking synthesized

III.
13.
13.1.
13.2.
13.3.
13.4.
13.5.

13.6.
13.7.

13.8.

14.

14.1.
14.2.

aperture radars

Fundamentals of Multichannel Radar Measurement Theory

The Formulation and Procedure in the Solution of the Optimal Measurement
of Radar Signal Parameters. Basic Laws Governing a Regular Measurement

The formulation of optimal measurement problems

The post-test probability density in Bayes estimation theory
Optimizing estimates based on a minimum average risk criterion.
Estimates of the post-test probability density maximum and the greatest
likelihood

The post-test probability density and correlation matrix of vector
parameter regular measurement errors in the absence of apriori data
The multidimensional error ellipsoid for a regular measurement in the
absence of apriori data

Very simple examples of point and interval regular Bayes estimation
The post-test probability density and correlation matrix for vector
parameter regular measurement errors where apriori data are present
Discriminator methods of optimal measurement

t

Specific Features of the Optimal Measurement -. Timewise Constant
Parameters of Coherent Signals against a Background of White Noise

The varieties of measurable parameters and the initial relationships
Likelihood equations and inverse regular measurement error correlation
matrices for the nonpower parameters of coherent signals where their

initial phase is random and apriori data are lacking

346

INHICHHNCJAI.USEtohﬂMV

135
138
142
144
145

146
149
152
156
159
160
164

166
171
173
175

180

183
185
186
190

192
193

195
197

200

201
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

14.3. Equations of generalized discriminators of nonpower parameters of
coherent signals where their initial phase is random

14.4. Examples of optimal nontracking delay time and frequency meters

14.5. The potential accuracy of the separate measurement of delay time and
frequency

14.6. The potential accuracy of the combined measurement of delay time and
frequency

14.7. Time discriminators

14.8. Frequency and time-frequency discriminators

14.9. The potential accuracy of angular coordinate measurement

14.10. Examples of dual channel phase angle meters

14.11. An example of a multichannel phase angle meter designed around a

receiving antenna array
14.12. An example of an amplitude angle meter
14.13. Specific features of coherent signal power parameter measurements

15. Specific Features of the Optimal Measurement of Timewise Constant
Parameters of Incoherent Signals against a Background of White Noise

15.1. General features of the measurement of timewise constant nonpower
parameters of incoherent signals

15.2. Specific features of the utilization of a model for a rapidly
fluctuating incoherent signal in measurement theory

15.3. A calculation procedure for the potential precision of the regular
measurement of nonpover scalar parameters of incoherent signals against
a background of white noise

15.4. Calculation of the potential precision of delay time and frequency
measurements of rapidly fluctuating signals

15.5. Specific features of time and frequency measurements using incoherent

signals

15.6. An example of an angle of arrival meter for spatially incoherent
oscillations

15.7. An example of an angle of arrival meter for timewise incoherent
oscillations

15.8. An example of a noise signal delay time difference meter
15.9. An example of an angular velocity meter for the motion of a rapidly
fluctuating signal source

16. Optimal Heasurement of Parameters which Vary Discretely with Time.
Specific Features of Indirect Measurement

16.1. Models of the timewise change in signal parameters

16.2. A Gaussian-Markov model for a discrete change in a parameter

16.3. Possibilities of accounting for the time interrelationship of the
random elements of a real time maneuver

16.4. Examples of modeling changes in parameters

16.5. A variant of a model for a discrete change in a parameter as applied
to the case of indirect measurement. The concepts of filtration.
prediction and smoothing estimates

16.6. Linearized equations and structural configurations for the filtration
of discrete estimates in the case of direct measurement

16.7. Linearized equations and structural configurations for the filtration
of discrete estimates in the case of indirect measurement

347

FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY

203
203

205
207
209
212
214
216
220

221
223

225

227

230
233

237

239

241
243

247

248
249

250
251
253
255

257
16.8.

16.9.

FIIICIﬂHCJAI.lEﬂE(NVLY

Examples of the synthesis and analysis of meters for discretely
timewise changing parameters

Cumulative optimal smoothing of estimates of s discretely changing
parameter

16.10. The general case of optimal measurement of a discretely changing

17.

17.1.
17.2.
17.3.
17.4.
17.5.

17.6.

IV.
18.
18.1.
18.2.
18.3.

18.4.
18.5.

19.

19.1.
19.2.

19.3.

19.4.
19.5.

19.6.

19.7.
19.8.
19.9.

markov parameter

Optimal Measurement of Parameters which Change Continuously with Time

A model of a continuous change in a parameter

The characteristics of a model of a continuous change in a parameter
Equations and structural configurations for filtration in the case
of continuous estimation

Examples of the synthesis and.ana1ysis of meters for continuously
timevise changing parameters

Cumulative optimal smoothing and interpolation of estimates of a
continuously changing parameter

The inadequacy of models and the divergence of estimates of measured
parameters

Detection-Measurement. Adaptation and Related Questions

Detection-Measurements and Its Anomalies

General considerations regarding detection-measurement
Detection-measurement during secondary processing of information
Detection-measurement when combining information from several
different sources. The principle of equality.
Detection-measurement and measurement anomalies

Anomalies in estimating the dispersion and espectation value for
samples from a normal set with a small number of elements in the
samples

Various Rays of Taking Noninformational Parameters of Signal and
Interference into Account. Adaptation. Nonparametric Detection.

Various ways of taking noninformational parameters into account under

apriori unknown conditions
Introducing and accounting for noninformationsl parameters under

conditions of apriori ambiguity
Examples of accounting for noninformational parameters

Adaptation

The synthesis of automatic noise gain control

The simplest ways of taking the nongaussian nature of interference
into account

Nonparametric sign detectors

Nonparametric rank detectors

The nature of nonlinear transformations when using ranking algorithms

348

llﬂltlﬂﬂtlAl.llﬂE(l'LY
It”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.USEioNLN

20. Specific Features of Parametric Signal Detection and Measurement against
a Background of Interference with Known and Unknown Spatial Correlations

20.1. Models of signals and interference. The formulation of the problem
20.2. The inversion of a special kind of correlation matrices with large
dimensions
20.3. The inversion of any kind of correlation matrices with large dimensions
20.4. Variants of space-time coherent processing against a background of cor-
related interference with known correlation matrices
20.5. Weighting vectors and directionality characteristics
20.6. Gain and energy utilization factors
20.7. Specific features of space-time processing in broadband systems
20.8. Principles of estimating complex correlation matrices for spatially
correlated interference
20.9. Discrete estimation of a correlation matrix for interference which
changes with time
20.10. Continuous estimation of a correlation matrix for interference which
changes with time
20.11. Estimation of a changing inverse correlation interference matrix
20.12. Estimation of a weighting vector. The use of correlation feedback in
processors.
20.13. Analog processors with correlation feedback loops
20.14. Transient processes during adaptation
20.15. Adaptation in the case of a high intensity useful signal
20.16. Specific features of optimal measurement of signal parameters against
a background of correlated interference
20.17. Examples of optimal measurement against a background of correlated
interference

21. Specific Features of the Detection and Measurement of Signal Parameters
against a Background of Interference with Known and Unknown Time
Correlations

21.1. Models of interference with a known correlation. The formulation of
the problem

21.2. Variants of models of passive interference with known parameters

21.3. Specific features of the utilization of a model for steady-state
nonwhite noise in velocity gating designs

21.4. The possibilities for using a steady-state nonwhite noise model in
spatial gating

21.5. Specific features of gating in the case of unmodulated CH and
quasicontinuous transmissions

21.6. Velocity gating in pulsed radars with unambiguous range measurement
in each pulse train period

21.7. Design examples of the simplest compensation devices applied to various
models of passive interference for the case of unique range measurement

21.8. The velocity characteristics of the compensation circuitry for moving
target indication

21.9. The coefficients of energy utilization, gain and subnoise visibility
of coherent signals against a background of time correlated interference

349

ETHICHHICIAI.USE(NULY

327

328
330

332
336
340
342
344
345

348
350

352
356
360
363
365

366

368
370

376
379
381
381
384
387

388
FOIIOFFHJAL.USE(NVLY

21.10. The simplest methods of adapting HT! to individual unknown
interference characteristics

21.11. The possibilities of designing adaptive HTI circuits with the
estimation of the direct and inverse correlation matrices or the
optimal weighting vector

Appendices

Main Symbols Used
Bibliography
Subject Index

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981

8225
080: 1860/8

350

FOR OFFICIAl.lEII(MﬂLY
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

000 621.396.664(026)
RADIO MEASUREMENTS
Moscow RADIOIZMERENIYA in Russian 1980 (signed to press 18 Nov 80) pp 2, 238-260
[Annotation and table of contents from book "Radio Measurements" by Aleksandr
Nikolayevich Pashkov, Nikolay Vasil'yevich Avenirov, Aleksandr Vasil'yevich
Kiailev and Valentin Ivanovich Akimov, Voyenizdat, 16,000 copies, 260 pages]
[Text] Annotation
The increase in the nunber and types of radio measurement instruments makes it
necessary to use a variety of methods to test them. This book describes the
design principles of radio measurement instruments. rules for testing various
groups of instruments. techniques and singularities of use. as well as the
methodology for selecting test devices.

The book is intended for a broad group of readers interested in metrology, and
can be used to train and update specialists at testing organizations.

Table of Contents

Introduction 3
Chapter 1. General Information on Radiotechnical Measurement Devices 5
1.1. Classification of radiotechnical measurement devices 5
1.2. Metrological characteristics of radiotechnical measurement

devices 18
Chapter 2. General Problems of Testing Radio Measurement Instruments 22
2.1. Basic concepts and definitions 22
2.2. Testing conditions 25
2.3. Documents regulating measurement device testing 25
2.4. Selection of standard measurement devices for making tests 26
2.5. How to prepare and conduct testing of a radio measurement

instrument 28
Chapter 3. Instrumentation Oscillators and Their Testing 31
3.1. Design principles of instrumentation oscillators 31

351

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Function and classification 31
2. Functional elements of instrumentation oscillators 33
3. Technique of application of instrumentation oscillators 35
3.2. Low frequency instrumentation oscillators 37
1. General information ' 37
2. Features of functional sections of low-frequency instrumentation
oscillators 39
3. Metrological characteristics of low-frequency oscillators
and basic testing rules 45
3.3. High-frequency instrumentation oscillators 47
1. General information 47

2. Features of functional sections of high-frequency oscillators 53
3. Metrological characteristics of high-frequency oscillators

and basic testing rules 58
3.4. Pulse generators 66
1. General information 66
2. Features of functional sections of pulse generators 68
3. Metrological characteristics of pulse generators and basic
testing rules 75
Chapter 4. Instruments for Measuring Voltage and Current and Their
Testing 79
4.1. General information 79
4.2. Functional diagrams of voltmeters. Measurement of alternating
voltage 81
4.3. Digital voltmeters 87
4.4. Voltage measurement technique 91
4.5. Metrological characteristics of voltmeters and basic testing
information 92
4.6. Ammeter design principles 94
Chapter 5. Instruments for Power Measurement and Their Testing ' 96
5.1. Design principles of low- and high-frequency power meters 96
5.2. Features of microwave power meters 98
5.3. Absorption-type watt meters 100
l. Calorimetric method of power measurement 100
2. Thermoresistor method of power measurement 102
5.4. Measurement of transmitted power 107
5.5. Measurement of pulsed power 109
5.6. Metrological characteristics of power meters and basic testing
information 110
Chapter 6. Instruments for Measuring Intensity of Electrical and
Magnetic Fields and Their Testing 112
6.1. Design principles of radio wave field intensity meters 112
6.2. Field intensity meter antennas 119
352

F13R10F11C1AL.USEZ(MMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.3. Instrumentation receivers
6.4. Metrological characteristics of field intensity meters and
basic testing information

Chapter 7. Instruments for Investigating Have Form and Their Testing

Design principles of electronic oscillographs

Features of functional sections of vertical beam dsfkntion channel
Horizontal beam deflection channel. Types of scan and scan voltages
Oscillograph measuring instruments

Oscillogrsphic measurement technique

Methodological characteristics of electronic oscillographs and
besic testing information

see
on

NNNNNN
a
OUFUNH

Chapter 8. Instruments for Measuring Frequency and Time Intervals
and Their Testing

8.1. Design principles of instruments for measuring frequency and
time intervals

8.2. Resonant frequency meters

8.3. Heterodyne frequency meters

8.4. Counting electronic frequency and time interval meters

8.5. Standard-frequency reproduction devices

8.6. Metrological characteristics of frequency and time interval
meters and basic testing rules

Chapter 9. Instruments for Measuring Phase Shift and Their Testing

9.1. Design principles of phase shift meters

9.2. Functional diagrams of needle and digital phase meters

9.3. Metrological characteristics of phase meters and basic testing
information

Chapter 10. Instruments for Measuring Signal Spectrum Parameters and
Their Testing

10.1. Design principles of instruments for spectrum analysis and
evaluation of spectral composition of oscillations

10.2. Spectrum analyzers

10.3. Nonlinear distortion meters

10.4. Amplitude modulation percentage meters

10.5. Frequency deviation meters

10.6. Metrological characteristics of spectrum analyzer and basic
testing rules

10.7. Metrological characteristics of nonlinear distortion meters
and basic testing information

10.8. Metrological characteristics of amplitude modulation percentage
characteristics and basic testing rules

10.9. Metrological characteristics of frequency deviation meters and
basic testing information

353

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

121

123
124
124
126
127
131
132

134

136

136
138
138
141
147

149
155

155
158

166

169

169
175
179
181
183
184
188
189

192
l-‘UIl OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 11. Devices for Measuring Passive Circuit Parameters and

Their Testing

11.1. Measurement of lumped-constant circuit parameters
1. Design principles of instruments for measuring parameters of
circuits with lumped constants
2. Instruments using voltmeter-smmeter principle
3. Bridge—type instruments
4. Resonant instruments. Q-meters
5. Metrological characteristics of instruments for measuring
parameters of lumped-constant circuits and basic testing
information
11.2. Measuring parameters of distributed-constant circuits
1. Design principles of instruments for measuring parameters
of circuits with distributed constants
2. Instrumentation lines and their testing
3. Impedance meters and their testing
b. Automation of measurement of parameters of circuits with
distributed constants
11.3. Measurement of Absolute Value of Gain (Attenuation). Attenuators
1. Attenuator design principles
2. Methods for measuring absolute value of gain (attenuation)
3. Devices for attenuation measurement
a. Metrological characteristics of attenuators and basic
testing information
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Voyenisdat, 1980

6900

080: 1860/99

356

FORiOFFKJAl.USEIONLY

193
193

193
195
196
198

203
203

203
205
217

222
227
227
231
233

235
237
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 537.312.62:621.372.834
SUPERCONDUCTING ACCELERATING MICROHAVE STRUCTURES

Moscow SVERKHPROVODYASHCHIYB USKORYAYUSHCBIYB SVCh-STRUKIURY in Russian 1981
(signed to press 3 Feb 81) pp 2-4, 208

[Annotation. foreword and table of contents from book "Superconducting Accelerating
Microwave Structures“. by Andrey hikolayavich Didenko. Larisa Mikhaylovna Sevryukova

and Al'bert Aleksandrovich Yatis, Energoizdst. 1150 copies. 208 pages]

[Text] Annotation

Superconducting microwave strucures are now used extensively in linear and cyclic
accelerators, as well as high-energy particle separators.

The goal of this book is to provide a presentation of the current status of the
problem of utilizing superconducting microwave structures in accelerator technology
and nuclear physics. Problems of developing methods for obtaining super-pure
metals and alloys for fabricating microwave structures are illuminated, and Iodern
methods for technological processing of the working surface of accelerating
structures are described in detail. A great deal of attention is devoted to atomic
and nuclear-physical analysis methods and their utilization in superconductor
technology.

Results obtained by the authors, as well as the achievements of Soviet and foreign
scientists in the area of microwave structure theory. technology and application,
are presented.

The book is intended for scientific workers and graduate students working in the
area of accelerated technology and applied superconductivity, and for students in
senior physics courses.

37 tables, 90 illustrations, £23 bibliographic references.
Foreword

Superconductivity is one of the most interesting physical phenomena. Superconduct-
ing magnets are in extensive use. However, superconducting microwave structures

are used to a significantly smaller degree. even though they are of great interest for
many branches of science and technology, primarily accelerator technology and

nuclear physics. This is mainly because the tremendous capabilities which such
systems have are poorly understood. To a certain degree, this is explained by

355 b

FORGDFFKJAI.USEIMVLY
I'UI Vl'l'ltlﬂlo Us’l. UI‘LI

the scattered nature of available publications and the lack of sufficient books

on this topic. Only two books have been published to present. A.N. Didenko's
monograph'Svarkhprovodyashchiye volnovody i rezonatory'(Superconducting Waveguides
and Resonators) (Moscow. Izdatsl'stvo Sovetskoye radio, 1973), is devoted to super-
conducting waveguides and resonators in general. P.P. Hende, I.N. Bondarenko,

and A.V. Trubitsin's book "Sverkhprovodyatsiye i okhlazhdayemye rezonansnye sistemy
(Superconducting and Cooled Resonant Systems) (Kiev. Izdatel'stvo Nlukova Dumka
1976) examines low-power microwave systems. for example, high-stability micro-
wave oscillators, gravimeters, etc.

The goal of the present book is to provide a presentation of the current status
of the utilization of superconducting microwave structures in accelerator
technology.

Chapter 1 studies the fundamentals of hf superconductivity. Types of losses of
electrical energy in microwave structures which cause the occurrence of residual
resistance are examined. Technological and design methods for reducing losses
are explained in detail.

Chapter 2 describes electrophysical and thorns-physical characteristics of
suprconducting low- and high-power microwave structures. Problems occurring

in the creation of microwave structures for accelerator technology (thermal
instability, secondary electron effect, electron mechanical instability) are
consideroL as is the relationship between the surface impedance of resonant
systems, as well as Q-factor, and the level of microwave power input. Special
attention is devoted to eliminating the multiplicatory effect in microwave
structures. General requirements for the atagblity of parameters of superconduct-
ing microwave systems and instrumentation are given.

Chapter 3 presents methods of volumetric and surface analysis as applied to
superconducting niobium and niobium-alloy materials. Methods of neutron and
charged-particle activation analysis are studied. The most complete presentation
is that of the method for instantaneous analysis of near-surface layers of
superconducting materials based on Coulomb ion scattering, the use of nuclear
reactions, flourescent analysis spectroscopy, Auger electrons, secondary ion
spectroscopy, etc.

Chapter 6 examines methods for obtaining super-pure metals and alloys for making
superconducting sections of linear and cyclic accelerators. The possibility of
preparing superconducting resonators and waveguides of monocrystals, as well

as the prospects for utilizing such new materials as nitrides and carbides,

are discussed. Electrical instability in an electrochemical system is examined
for the first time with application to the electromechanical processing of ac
and dc microwave structures. A description is given of equipment for high tem-
perature annealing in ultrahigh vacuum and for electromechanical processing of
superconducting structures.

Problems of removing heavy element impurities electrochemically from near-surface
layers of niobium and niobium-based alloys and of applying protective coatings

356
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with good electrophysical properties on the surface of structures are examined.
Information is given on the condition of the surface of superconducting materials
during different stages of surface processing: this information was obtained by
Soviet and foreign scientists using methods of nuclear-physical analysis of
elementary composition.

Chapter 5 analyzes the application of superconducting microwave structures in
accelerator technology and nuclear physics. Questions of using hf-superconduct-
ing devices in linear electron, proton and heavy ion accelerators and in super-
conducting cyclic accelerators. as well as the possibility of using superconduct-
ing microwave systems as the basis for creating electron aicroscopes, are dis-
cussed. A great deal of attention is devoted to the use of superconducting micro~
wave structures in high-energy particle separators.

Materials from foreign and Soviet scientists which were discussed at conferences
and meetings on applied superconductivity and charged-particle accelerators over
the past five years which were published in the proceedings from these conferences
and various journals were used in writing the book, as were original findings
obtained at the Scientific Research Institute for Nuclear Physics at the Tomsk
Polytechnicsl Institute.

Chapters 1 and 2 were written jointly by A.N. Didenko and L.H. Sevryukova,
chapter 3 by A.A. Yatis. chapter I. by L.H. Sevryukova, and chapter 5 by A.N.
Didenko.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Fundamentals of High-Frequency Superconductivity 5
1.1. Surface resistance of superconducting materials at microwave
frequencies
1.2. bosses of microwave energy caused by impurities and defects in
crystal structure 12
1.3. Dielectric losses in films and impurities 17
1.4. Energy losses caused by generation of sound waves by incident
electromagnetic radiation 21
1.5. Additional losses in superconducting microwave structures under
influence of magnetic fields 28

Chapter 2. Electrophysical Characteristics of Superconducting
Microwave Structures 35

2.1. Electrophysical parameters of superconducting waveguides and

resonators 35
2.2. Critical magnetic hf fields. Basic thermophyaical characteristics
of superconducting microwave structures 1.5
357

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.3.

2.4.

H»! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Emission effect in superconducting microwave structures and electrical

field gradients

General requirements for stability of parameters of superconducting

microwave systems

Chapter 3. Methods of Analyzing Superconducting Materials

.0.
.0.

o
NOMwaH
0

Basic information

Volumetric activation analysis
Instantaneous nuclear analysis methods
Mass-spectrometric analysis

Low-«erg electron spectroscopy

X-ray analysis methods

Comparative characterization

chapter 4. Superconducting Materials and Technology of Superconducting

4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
4.4.
4.5.

4.6.

Microwave Structures

Fabrication of superconducting microwave structures from lead
and niobium

Electrochemical polishing of working surface of superconducting
resonators and structures -

High temperature annealing of niobium superconducting resonators
and waveguides in high vacuum

Anode oxidation and its use for protecting and cleaning

surface layer

Technology for obtaining superconducting alloy-based microwave
structure coating

Prospects for utilization of monocrystala, nitrides and carbides
for fabricating microwave structures

Chapter 5. Application of Superconducting Microwave Structures in

Accelerator Technology and Nuclear Physics

5.1. Superconducting linear accelerators

5.2. Utilization of superconducting accelerating systems in cyclic
accelerators

5.3. Superconducting separators for high-energy charged particles

5.4. Creation of electron microscopes based on superconducting
accelerating systems

Conclusion

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

6900

C80: 1860/104 - gun -

358

FOR OFFNJAJ.USEIDNLY

53
62
76
70
73
83
95
99

104
109

116

116
124
134
144
156
172

176
176

181
188

192
196

197