FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10368

4 March 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 4/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLNIDE REPORT

TELECOMMUNICAnous POLICY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(P0110 4/32)

CONTENTS

ASIA

:iefs
N'l'r Policy on Satellites

SUB-SW AFRICA
EGAN AFFAIRS

'TU Favors APSA'I Satellite for 1985-1994
(Pierre unset-aux; AIR ET cosms. 16 Jan 82)...............

rie fa
Agreemnt With Burundi

:iefa
Cooperation With Romanian News Agency

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"881' EUROPE

ITALY

Microprocessor Applications in Transmission System
()1. Calabnse. et a1.; 313mm 3 mummcutm.

NOV-’mc 81)....oooooococooooooboouoooavnooooooolootoonvoooooooo 9

Digital Radio—Relay System at 19 (a: 111 um Ann
(P. Auden, er. a1.; zumtm E 'ELEWICAZIM.

NOV-’uc 81)....no...to.ooooooo-oooooocoo-aooo-oooococooooo-oooo 21

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

BRIEFS

NTT POLICY ON SATELLITES--Tokyo, 16 Feb (JIJI Press)~-‘Ihe qmsi-governmental
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corp. (MT) has fixed its policy of
orbiting its large-capacity communications satellites using the space shuttle

of the u.s. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Japan's communi-
cations satellites for practical use have hitherto been launched using domesti-
cally-produced rockets. N'I‘T. the nation's telecommications monopoly, will seek
approval of the Space Development Council before making a final decision on this
score. Under N‘l'r's plans revealed so far, it will blast off a one-ton commits-
tions satellite with a capacity of 25,000 telephone circuits in fiscal 1988 and

a four-ton satellite with a capacity of 100,000 circuits around fiscal 1992.
Japan's fiscal year starts in April. N'l'l‘ also plans to link via these satellites
telephone stations exclusively for long-distance calls to be set up in each
prefecture by putting up antennas of four meters in diameter on the roofs of
these stations. Another factor behind N'I‘T's emerging policy of launching large-
capacity comunications satellites is its strong wish to advance into data

comunications business. [Text] [om61451 Tokyo JIJI in English 1436 cm
16 Feb 82]

C50: 5500/212 3

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFFKJA1.USEIDNLN

INTERPAFEICAN AFFAIRS

APTU FAVORS AFSAT SATELLITE FOR 1985-1994

Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 16 Jan 82 pp 34-36

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "For a Regional Telecommunications Satellite in Af-
rica--The Countries of the APTU (African Postsi and Telecommunications Union) in

Favor of an 'AFSAT' Satellite tor 1985-1994"!

[Text] The study carried out. under the aegis of the Eurospace group. by a Euro-
pean consultant group cowrising Satel-Conseil. the 1114 [Modern Industries and
Techniques] cowany md the Bureau Yves Houssin. concerning "the telecommications
.andradio-television needs of the 13 Francophone nember countries of the APT'U1 and
A neighboring countries2 capable of being fulfilled by a satellite during the
period 1985-1996," has shown that a regional telecomications satellite could be
effectively useful to a good number of countries of the APTU.

 

 

The situation of the 17 African countries concerned by the study (as well as that
of the other countries of Africa, for that matter) is characterized by two dominant
traits: low GNP per inhabitant (Pr 1,000 to 2,400), and disturbing undurequipment.
According to Hamadou Simpore, secretary general of the APTU, "for more than 50 mil-
lion inhabitants (including Chad) of the APTU member countries. there uere in 1980
only 110,000 direct-exchange telephone lines, or about 1 line per 500 population!"
Moreover, this insufficiency reflects some striking inequalities. As regards the
APTU, nearly 80 percent of telephone subscribers are in the capitals, with the rest
distributed among a few large cities; but there are practically no telecunmunica-
tions facilities in the rural localities and even fewer in the surrounding country-
side. In addition, the existing lines are subject to a variable, but always high,
rate of unavailability.

The satellite nay obviously appear ambitious, even extravagant, in such a context.
Actually, it is not so at all, Hamadou Simpore states, for three principal reasons:
the satellite is the only feasible means of transmission in Africa, it is less ex-
pensive than the other transmission means, and it can only have a considerable ef-
fect on the underequipnent situation of the African continent.

l. Benin. Central African Republic, Comoros, Congo, Ivory Coast, Djibouti, Upper
Volta, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal and Togo. chad, a member of
the Ann, did not participate in the study.

2. Zaire, Ghana, Kenya and Sierra Leone.

2
FOR<0FFKJAI.USE¢HRLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Study of Needs

The Eurospace study, carried out in close coordination with the APTU secretariat
and the African national administrations in the AFSAT group, began with a broad
study of the needs of the countries concerned and the development they have
planned. Thus, the consultants evaluated the entirety of the telecommunications
and radio-television needs of each country. and then they estimated the prcportion
of service that could reasonably necessitate a satellite rather than conventional
telecommunications means (radio waves, cables, etc).

The needs were divided into three categories: international and national (inter-
urban) public telecmmmuﬁcations, audio and video broadcasting, and telecommunica-
tions in the rural environment--these last being distinguished from interurban
telecommunications for functional reasons. '

The domestic situation of the countries was evaluated in terms of four equipment
levels: good, poor. or nonexistent network connection, or no network (the most com-
mon situation). The first two cases relate to national interurban connections, and
the third and fourth, to rural connections.

For international telecOmmunicstions, the calculation of the traffic and the number
of international circuits took account of all the APTU member countries as well as
Cameroon. Canon and Zaire. The assumptions made are an average annual increase for
the whole of the countries' internationalconnections, but varying with the period
considered (15 percent from 1979 to 1990 and 12.5 percent thereafter). Particular
stimuli toaard modifications of routing, transmission and general operation were
also envisioned. Finally, for distribution of traffic as between earth and space
facilities, the study adopted the following criteria: routing of traffic to region-
al satellite on demand assignment, and loo-percent direct point~to-point connec-
tions via satellite when the existing infrastructure is weak, or only 25-percent by
such connections when there is radio or underwater cables.

For national telecommunications (not including rural), calculation of the circuit
needs was based on a spatial-temporal estimate of the subscriber demand and on
traffic forecasts, and a proposal for a distribution between satellite and earth
facilities resulted. All localities that have telephone service or are to have it
between now and 1985 were taken into consideration. For the period 1985-1995,
there was close coordination with the national administrations as regards the rates
of growth considered in order to adapt them to each country, sometimes with growth
rate differentiated as between the capital and the provinces. The number of tele-
phone circuits anticipated for needs other than telephony were estimated at an
overall 5 percent of the number of channels expected for public service. These
circuits will be for telegraphy, leased circuits, new services (telecopying, data-
transmission, etc) and for replacement of certain private networks that have now
reached saturation.

An estimate of traffic distribution was made in function of distances, with the ex-
isting facilities taken into account. When there are modern facilities (cables.
radio) between two localities, it was supposed that 75 percent of the circuits
would go by satellite beyond a distance of 500 km; 50 percent for distances of 100
to 500 km; and that below 100 km. there w0uld be no circuits via satellite. 0n the
other hand, when there are no modern facilities, all circuits would go via satel-

FOR OFFHJA1.USElN¥LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lite--in all countriea--beyond a distance of 100 km. Another hypothesis grouped
the countries into three categories for the distribution as between earth and Space
facilities, with a heavier weighting than before as regards the criteria other than
economic. This leads in particular to s more precise assignment of the distribu-
tions in terms of the distances.

For telecommunications in the rural environment (defined as the regions not pres-
ently served by the national telecommunications network), two types of installation
are envisioned: in a locality for public service, and providing service to all the
inhabitants; or in the countryside, mainly for the benefit of the farmers. The in-
stallation strategy is the planned to have two phases: first of all, installation
of network access points consisting of a "rural communications office" equipped
with a telex and telephone, and possibly a community TV center; and next. extension
of service to subscribers who might increase the profitability of the system, with
more rural offices added, creation of small local networks, and installation of
networks in the countryside. The total operation (the two phases) would be over a
period of 5 to 7 years.

The forecasting or rural telephone traffic was done by two methods. The basic hy-
pothesis considers maximum geographical service at the lowest cost, the objective
for 1994 being the serving of 1 percent of the rural population residing in the lo-
calities concerned, with doubling of use over a 10-year period (1985-1994). Com-
plementarily, a survey was made of the needs for the entirety of the rural zones of
each APTU country as of 199k.

Total APTU Half-Duplex and Via-Satellite Circuit Needs

 

Telephone 1985 1996
Half-Duplex Via Via
Circuits Total Satellite Total Satellite
international 600 400 1,300 1,000
lnterurban* 9.600 4,200 19,999 8,400
Rural 5,200 1,900 31,000 11,000
Totals 15,500 6,500 51,300 20,400

__.__________________________________________________________
Radio-Television 2 to 8 TV programs

10 to 20 FM-rsdio programs

Special service channels

———_._—__—_.———————-———

* [Sourci gives no note relating to this note reference.]

__—___—.—.—_——————

It is proposed to meet the rural telecommunications and television needs manly by
satellite, ex ept in the small-size countries. This would lead, as from 1985, to a
cousnunity telecomunications and TV service, in the proximity ofa station installed
an each locality. and in 1995, to a distribution of the preceding service to the
other subscribers of the locality (by wire) and to those located outside (by radio-
telephone).

For audio and video broadcasting, the estimation is more difficult to make. The
countries were divided into two categories. Those that hav: already chosen to
transmit radio-TV programs via satellite-~by means of a lensed repeater on an In-

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

telsar satellite--are obviously in a very good position for extension of coverage
by way of an African regional satellite. For the large countries that donot pres-
ently have a sizable radio-beam infrastructure, the satellite represents the most
effective means (in terms of cost and speed of service) for providing coverage of
the country. But this assumes a complementary equipment effort (earth transmitting
staticn, receiving stations, TV-FM transmitters, community receivers, etc) in order
to make the space investment a profitable one. For the countries that already have
a radio-beam network that is dense or developing, the satellite obviously seems

less attractive. As for other c0untries of small territory, use of the satellite
does not seem justified.

Conclusions in Favor of the Satellite

The study thus concludes that for the 13 countries of the APTU, the interurban
half-duplex-circuitneedscome to 9,600 in 1985 and 19,000 in l994--a 7-percent rate
of growth. If Zaire is added, these figures are 11,600 and 23,000 half-duplex
circuits, respectively.

The eventual use of a regional satellite for the international traffic among the 17
countries studies (the 13 APTU countries and the a neighboring ones) corresponds to
a capacity of #00 half-duplex circuits in 1985 and 988 in 1994. As regards nation-
al (interurban) traffic, the initial estimates indicate about 4,200 half-duplex
circuits in 1985 and 5,900 in 1994, including Zaire. In the case of hypotheses
that further favor the ground-based systems, the total number of half-duplex cir-
cuits still comes to 2,700.

Concerning rural telecommunications, the total half-duplex-circuit needs of the 13
countries of the APTU was estimated at 5,200 in 1985 and 31,000 in 1994. Including
Zaire, these figures are 6,300 and 49,200 half-duplex circuits, respectively.

Among these needs, the proportion of rural telecommunications that could go via
satellite was estimated at 1,900 half-duplex circuits in 1985 and 11,000 in l99h,
which represents an average annual rate of growth of 19 percent. With Zaire, these
needs reach 2,500 and 15,700 half-duplex circuits, respectively. This 19-percent
growth rate, which may seem high in comparison with the other categories of tele-
communications, actually follows from the tremendous rural-telecommunications lag
in Africa. The secretary general of the APTU recognizes, in fact, that a start has
to be made from nothing in order to try to reach an "acceptable" situation around
l994--one which would still be only a l-percent telephone density in certain local-
ities and even just 0.5 percent in others!

In the area of radio-television, where extreme infrastructural weakness is also
noted, the equipment effort to be made is considerable. But it is presently imped-
ed by the lack of equipment, qualified personnel and financial means. The APTU
study concludes that "six countries of Africa--the Central African Republic, Upper
Volta, Mauritania, Mali, Niger and Senegal--present very favorable characteristics
for use of the satellite for meeting their radio-TV needs, and that two other coun-
tries--Congo and Ivory Coast--despite the present or future large size of their
radio-beam network, could find use of a satellite an attractive alternative for de-
velopment of their TV-FH radio network." On the other hand, the APTU study re-
cognizes that the other five countries--Benin, Comores, Djibouti, Rwanda and Togo--
could solve their radio-TV network problems without .ecourse to the satellite.

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such are the results of the study approved by the Council of the APTU at Lome in
August 1981 and presented publicly for the first time at the recent Eurospace ln-
ternational Conference by Hamadou Simpore. secretary general of the APTU.

These data now constitute the basis for new complementary studies recently ordered
from Eurospace, both by the APTU and by the Pan-African Telecommunications Union
(PATU). in liaison with the African National Radio-Television Union (URTNA). One
of the studies. for which a contract of Pr 2 million has been made, is an extension
to the scale of the PATU--which incorporates all the countries of Africa (including
those of the APTU)--of the telecommunications-needs study previously carried out by
Eurospace. The other is a parametric study concerning the feasibility of an AFSAT
satellite system covering the needs of the APTU and eventaully those of the PATU
also. This second study is presently financed to the extent of Pr 3 million by the
European Development Fund (EDP), but supplementary financing is expectedfromFrance,
Italy and Great Britain, to reach the Fr 8 million needed for carrying out the
work. These new studies will be conducted under the direction of the European
EurOSpace group. with the participation of the European Space Agency (BSA), the lTM
company and the French National Center for Telecommunications Studies (CNET), as
well as with the GTS (Crest Britain) and Consultel (Italy) companies.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

ll267
CSO: 5500/5665

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

BRIEFS

AGREEMENT WITH BURUNDI-Jain] Burundi agreement on telecommunications. The govern-
ment of the Republic of Burundi and the Executive Council of the Republic of Zaire
signed a formal agreement on telecomunications at Bujumbura on 11 December. The

purpose of the agreement is to set up and operate a direct telecomunications link
between the two countries for telegraphic services, telex, rented circuits, fac-

simile, data transmission and radiophototelegrams using available and future tech-
nology. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1886,
1 Jan 82 p 39] ICOPYRIGH‘I‘: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 9855

C50: 5500/5658

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZIMBABWE

BRIEFS

COOPERATION urm ROMANIAN NEHS AGENCY-~Salisbury, 25 Feb (PU—Representatives
from the News Agencies of Zimbabwe (ZIANA) and Romanian (AGERPRESS) signed in
this capital an agreement for the exchange of information. The agreement was
signed by the chairman of the amalgamated mass media of Zimbabwe Davison Sadza
and the Romanian ambassador to this country Petre Blajovici. Sadza said he hoped
the signing of the agreement would go a long way to improve the relationship
between the two countries. In reply Ambassador Blajovici said the signing was

a new step forward to improve cooperation between the two countries. [Text]
[PA242130 Havana PRELA in English 2020 GMT 21. Feb 82]

C30: 5500/5693

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11CJAL USIZCNHLY

ITALY

MICROPROCESSOR APPLICATIONS IN TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS
Turin ELETTRONICA E TELECOMUNICAZIONI in Italian Nov-Dec 81 hp 2&1-246

[Article by H. Calabrese, M. De Bortoli, G. Panarotto, c. Rocca and E. Thomas*[

[Text] Summary--Microprocessor applications in transmission systems. This paper
illustrates the reasons in favor of the use of microprocessors in telecommunica-
tions transmission systems. After an overview of the possible fields of applica-
tion of these devices, together with the advantages and the compromises for a pro-

fitable insertion within the complete system, some applications in experimental
plants are described. In a modem for digital transmission at 150 Hbit/s rate, the

microprocessor controls several fundamental parameters; in another application it
implements a new equalization algorithm and in a field trial (COS 3/FOSTER) it col-
lects the significant link parameters and processes them for the overall system be-
havior monitoring. A forecast is also presented on future developments of these

applications.
1. Introduction

Many applications have been found for microprocessors in the telecommunications
field, especially within the framework of switching installations.

Their introduction into transmission systems has been less immediate, though, main-
ly for two reasons: the analog nature of the signal to be treated, and the high

frequencies involved.

The digital transmission systems offer greater possibilities for insertion of mi-
croprocessor devices, since treatment of the signal is required at discrete in
stants--that is. the instants at which the decision is made.

* Dr of Engineering Hario Calabreaes, p.i. [expansion unknown] Marco De Bortoli,
Dr of Engineering Gianfranco Panarotto, p.i. Giovanni Rocca, p.i. Ernesto Thomas,
of the CSELT (Telecommunications Research and Study Center), Turin.

Typescript received 23 July 1981.

This paper was presented to the annual Congress of the AICA [Italian Association
for Automatic Calculation] at Pavia, 23-25 September 1981.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI,OFTHCJAI.USE(MVLY

within this framework, two types of application have been individuated, distin-
guished essentially by the different ratio between the processing speed of the mi-
croprocessor used and the speed of transmission of the symbols:

1) processing of the signal in real time, for transmission systems of sufficiently
low.spced;

2) management of the equipment through processing of statistical magnitudes and of
significant signalsat low speed, both through control of algorithms and through
monitoring of the system’s performance characteristics.

These two aspects are dicussed in detail in this paper. Several sets of equipment
built in the CSELT are described. For each of them, the purpose and the type of
processing done on the signals are presented.

From the applications described, the advantages that can be obtained through this
type of approach are obvious, especially for experimental projects: for example,

the considerable flexibility in the various tests, because of the possibility of

doing things through mere changes of the software.

2. General Considerations on the Use of Microprocessors in Transmission Equipment

The use of microprocessors in transmission equipment, in place of analog circuits
or the traditional logical circuits, is justified when onetafthe following condi-
tions occurs:

a) real-time processing of the signal is very complex and must be done with a low-
speed data flow. In this case, use of a microprocessor considerably simplifies the
hardware of the equipment, requiring from the software a part of the functnions
that have to be carried out;

b) the problem arises of monitoring functional blocks of the transmission equip-
ment, through deveIOpment of algorithms on low-speed signals. or of keeping the
performance characteristics of such apparatuses under control. In such case, in
addition to the advantages cited in paragraph a), use of the microprocessor gives
the control or management structure considerable flexibility, this being an especi-
ally useful characteristic when experimental equipment is developed.

Attention is now drawn to the two peculiar characteristics of microprocessor archi-
tecture: modularity of the hardware and flexibility of the software.

Current technology makes available a considerable number of components, capable of
carrying out complex and specialized optrations that can be inserted into micro-
processor systems as peripheral equipment on the system buses.

Several components of special importance in transmission systems can be taken as
examples. Analog-digital (A/D) and digital-analog (D/A) converters, which make it
possible to digitalize analog signals and restore the processing results in analog
form, are the necessary interfaces between the microprocessor and the system.

In addition, if the processings are rather complex from the mathematical point of
view, it is possible to insert into the system a multiplier or arithmetical pro-
cessing unit capable of carrying out the fundamental arithmetical operations auto-
nomously, even on numbers expressed in floating point, and of doing the conversions
between that format and the entire format.

JO

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE!ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A single well-organized system is therefore easily expandable, from the hardware
point of view, to meet the individual requirements and adapt the structure to new
situations that may arise from time to time in the experimentation.

As for the software, its task is to receive the signals and process them. Through
program changes, it is possible to modify the algorithms, while by modifying the
data it is possible to vary the static parameters of the problem, thus adapting the
program to the specific application in the best way.

In cases in which the processing of the signal has to be especially fast, it is ad-
visable to use bipolar microprocessors of the bit-slice type instead of the more
usual microprocessors built with HOS [Metal-Oxide Semiconductor] technologies.

This choice has an effect on both the hardware and the software. The user does in

fact have to construct both the central unit on the basis of the individual compo-

nents and the set of instructions most appropriate for the application on the basis
of the elementary operations of logical-arithmetic type defined within the individ-
ual components (microinstructions). The set of instructions is defined by the us-

er by accurate analysis of the algorithm to be developed and isolation of the most

elementary and repetitive steps.

This approach may prove considerably burdensom in cases where support instruments
are lacking, both for development of the software and for the checking-out of the
system; nevertheless, the advantages obtained in terms of processing speed are
notable.

2.1. Processing of the Signal

Some of the main considerations relating to transmission of the signals are digital
filtering, adaptive equalization, the algorithms for extraction of the synchron-
isms, estimation of channels not known beforehand, and coding and decoding opera-
tions.

These functions, usually carried out in analog mode or with dedicated logic, are
carried out by means of logical and mathematical operations done on the flow of the
signal samples taken at the symbol-transmission speed.

One therefore thinks immediately of the possibility of doing these operations with
microprocessors. There is, however, a limitation in their use for these purposes,
due essentially to the reduced processing speed as compared with the transmission
speeds usually used. The basic cause of this limitation lies in the complexity of
the algorithms and in the mass of data to be treated, which necessitate use of mi-

croprocessors for processing signals whose transmission speed does not exceed some
10 kHz.

In order to partly overcome that limit, it is possible to construct microprocessor
architectures in which each processor is dedicated to the carrying-out of a single
function, with considerable advantages in overall processing speed and therefore
with the possibility of application to systems of higher transmission speed.

In Chapter 4, there is described in detail, as an example of real-time processing
of the signal, a nonlinear eQuslizer of the "Decision Feedback and Feedforward"
type (Bibliography 2).

11

51)R 0W1UCJAI.IEHE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The high number of processings to be done, which is connected with the necessity of
a certain speed of the data-flow to be treated, required the use of a microprocess-
of the bit-slice type.

It is interesting to note that this arrangement fully met the expectations as re-
gards the flexibility of its use: it was in fact possible. solely with modifica-
tions of the software, to test the algorithm in various conditions of number of
cells and parameter values. It was also possible--azain, solely with variations of
the software--to achieve a transverse linear equalizer for the purpose of comparins
the performance characteristics of the two equalizers.

2.2. Management and Control of the Systems

A different class of microprocessor applications is the processing of the statisti-
cal parameters connected with the information signal. Examples of these statisti-
cal magnitudes, which were used in the svstems illustrated later, are the mean

quadratic error and the average of the absolute values of the error encountered in
the decision-making organ.

Bv optimizins these magnitudes,.it is possible to control several parameters of
fundamental importance in the system, such as the coefficients of the adaptive
equalizer, the optimal phase for signal-sampling, the phase of the demodulator--for
example. in AH-SSB (Amplitude Modulation - single Side-Ban) systems that require
coherent demodulation.

The statistical magnitudes referred to above can be obtained with dedicated cir-
cuits or by making use of the microprocessor's processing capacities.

In the former case, the magnitudes are calculated by the external circuitsusingthe
in-line signals and are transferred to the microprocessor at lower speed. In the
latter case, they are generally determined by using a data flow obtained by sub—
sampling of the in-line signal.

The experimentation done demonstrates that statistical magnitudes calculated in
this way are equally significant for controlling the system's parameters, provided
that the time interval of their integration is suitably chosen.

In both cases indicated above, the microprocessor is asked to perform the task of
minimizing the statistical function. in accordance with the optimization algorithms
best-adapted to the situation in question, of establishing the values of the para-
meters under control, and as the case may require, of furnishing indications of
correct system functioning to a local operator.

In Chapter 3 is presented a transmission system, at the rate of 140 Hbit/S. thit
uses the microprocessor for management of the receiving terminal. The microproces-
sor is used for control of the process of adaptation of the coefficients of the
transverse equalizer that has to compensate for the cable distortions, for control-
ling the decision thresholds and for recovery of the optimal sampling instant.

Use of the microprocessor has proved especially advantageous because it has given

the designers considerable experience on the validity and the limits of all the al-
ternatives examined, testing them directly in the installations in real conditions
and not only by computer simulation of than.

12

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A final field of use of this type of device is general monitoring of the correct
functioning of the system and of its performance characteristics. For such pur-
poses, the microprocessor does not have to have special speed characteristics but
only suitable peripheral equipment capable of collecting the magnitudes to be ex-
amined and providing them to the user in the most appropriate form, and, as the
case may call for, transmitting them to collection and supervision centers, as in
the remote monitoring systems. for example.

Microprocessors offer the advantage of being able to coordinate collection of the
most significant data on the proper functioning of the system and do the process-
ing of them, thus furnishing a complete and organic picture of the parameters to be
monitored and facilitating recognition of causes of malfunction.

This methodology is especially useful in the perfecting of experimental systems and
in characterization of them.

In Chapter 5 is presented, as an example of this approach, the system for acquisi-
tion and processing of the measurement data of the experimental optical-fiber
transmission installation COS JIFOSTER. In this system, which has the task of re—
lating deterioration of transmission quality to the performance characteristics of
components of fundamental importance, it has been possible to distribute the pro-
cessing capacity to the individual terminals that are geographically dispersed,
thus decentralizing the monitoring and treatment of the magnitudes measured and re-
serving to the centralized control unit the job of gathering and correlating the
data.

3. Microprocessor Inserted into the Hybrid-Type 140 Hbit/s Digital Transmission
System

3.1. Objectives of the Application

The microprocessor application concerns adaptive control of the multilevel receiv-
ing terminal of the "hybrid"-type 1&0 Hbit/s digital transmission system developed
in the CSELT (Bibliography 1).

This system provides for the insertion, between two digital regenerators, of a num-
ber of analog repeaters that only make it possible to recover the attenuation in-
troduced by the cable into the useful signal band (Figure l): the effects of dis-
eoualization of the signal and of the related variations accumulate along the n
sections of analog repetition falling between two digital terminals.

It is therefore necessary to provide, for a high number of sections, an adaptive-
control device that makes it possible to recover the variations of the system's
characteristics in time, maintaining satisfactory and constant transmission qual-
ity.

For this purose, the microprocessor device inserted into the receiving terminal
(Figure 2) examines the signal received, taking a sample out of every 1,000, and
calculates an error function (£F)*, by minimizing which it controls:

N
s The E? is defined thus: -%— -£1|1i - lril' in which li is the level of the sym-
l-

bol received, 1,1 is the relative reference level, and N is the base of integra-
tion of the error function.

13
FOR OFT“C1A1.USE!MNLY
FOR OF11CJA1.USE|DNLN

l) the phase of sampling instant O1;
2) the values of the decision thresholds;
3) the coefficients of the adaptive transverse equalizer (ETA).

(l)

( 3 ) sum on max-out manta

 

Figure 1. Block diagram of the hybrid transmission system
Key:
1. Digital repeater 2. Analog repeaters 3. Digital regeneration section

"sauna 90
W0

(13)

 

Figure 2. Block diagram of the receiving terminal of the 1&0 Hbit/s system
Key:

1. Data flow from line 8. ETA coefficient

2. Reception filter 9. Phase-hookup ring

3. Adder lO. Microprocessor

4. Transverse equalizer 11. signal subsampled

5. Sampler 12. Variable phase-shifter
6. Decider 13. Sampling frequency

7. Data flow decided on 14. Decision thresholds

 

3.2. Reasons for Adoption of a Microprocessor

The device for control of the receiving terminal must carry out logical and arith-
metic functions of a certain magnitude, in accordance with algorithms that are
computer-simulated, only on the basis of simplified and therefore limiting working
hypotheses.

16

FOR»0FFKJAI.USE!DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the development phase, it is therefore indispensable to be able to make use of a
device inserted into the real terminal and making it possible to modify easily both
the test algorithms and the parameters relative to them.

A device built with a microprocessor meets these requirements, inasmuch as the
hardwarestructureremains unchanged, while the behavior of the device depends on
the ccntent of the program memories (algorithms) and data (parameters). In addi-
tion, the various buses (addresses, data, control) existing in the microprocessing
structure permit easy connection of the most diverse peripheral equipment, which
makes possible rapid execution of measurements, recording, processing and presenta-
tion of the data of preeminent interest.

with the algorithms and the relative parameters defined, a simplified device is in-
serted on the terminal; this device too is built with a microprocessor, both for
easy transposition of the original device and because the complexity of the cir-
cui:, dimensions, construction time, power consumption and coats are decidedly com-
petitive with those of the alternative analog device built with traditional-logic
circuits.

A. Microprocessor for Development of a Nonlinear Equalizer

The application consists in the construction, by means of a microprocessor, of a
type of nonlinear equalizer recently designed in the CSELT (Bibliography 2).

This type of equalizer* unites with the principle of backward reaction of the deci-
sions decided on (decision feedback) the forward reaction of the same symbols (de-
cision feedforward), thus permitting nearly total cancellation of the interfering
signals, even in the presence of strongly distorted channels.

The equalizer can be inserted into the receiving terminal of a digital transmission
system in accordance with the block diagram of Figure 3.

( 7) INNWA on WINIO

 

Figure 3. Block diagram of receiving terminal of a digital transmission system
with insertion of a nonlinear filter

Key:
1. Signal from line 5. Decider
2. Reception filter 6. Symbols decided on
3. Sampler 7. Sampling frequency
4. Nonlinear filter

——___—____——.—_———————-—

 

 

* Patents filed.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICHNHCJA1.USIZ(NQLY

The equalizer considered, the block diagram of which is given in Figure 4, presents
two parallel paths: the upper one has the purpose of correcting the precursor of
the input wave form, and the lower one, the relative tails.

 

Figure 4. Block diagram of the nonlinear equalizer

 

Figure 5. Diagram of the wave forms sampled at the various points of the equalizer

The SFl filter is a transverse filter with eight coefficients; it makes it possible
to force to zero the interfering signals that are different from the precursor,
which will be cancelled by the following cells with decision feedforward. and by
the first tail.

The addition of an ever greater number of cells of the decision-feedforward type in
cascade ensures a gradually decreasing error probability at the output of the upper
branch, since, in the event of a mistaken decision in a cell, the error can be rem-
edied in the succeeding cells. At the output of the upper path (point B). the sig-
nal is affected by the residue of the first tail not completely cancelled by SFI.

The SFZ filter too is a transverse filter with eight coefficients and has a role
analogous to that of SPI; the residual tail is cancelled by a cell of the decision-
feedback type. and the signal at point C will therefore be affected by a distortion
due to the residue of the precursor.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE2(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The signals coming from the two routes flow together into an adder and from there
into a double cell with feedforward and feedback reactions that provides for elim-
ination of the precursor signal and the residues tail.

The diagrams of the wave forms sampled at points A, B, C and D are given in Fig-
ure 5.

The type of algorithm used and the type of signal worked on lend themselves very
well to an arrangement using a microprocessor in which, by exploiting the flexibil-
ity of the software prepared, it has been possible to develop the various internal
functions of the equalizer and investigate various construction schemes and their
relative performance characteristics.

In particular. it has been possible to make a comparison between the performance
characteristics of the nonlinear equalizer of Figure 6 (with N I 3) and those of
the eight-coefficient transverse equalizer of "zero-forcing" type--that is, of com-
plexity equal to that of each of the two shaping filters SF1 and SFZ.

From the curves of Figure 6, which indicate how the error rate at the decision
point varies with the variance of the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio at the input of
the equalizing structure, it can be noted that the performance characteristics are
better in the case of the nonlinear equalizer.

I I‘ILMONONLMAII
2 turbo rmVIRSAtI

 

Figure 6. Curves comparing the performance characteristics of the nonlinear equal-
izer and the transverse equalizer
Key:
1. Nonlinear filter 2. Transverse filter 3. Error rate

 

S. Microprocessor Inserted into a System for Acquisition and Processing of the
Measurement Data of the Experimental COS 3/FOSTER Installation

The application consists in the construction of a microprocessor device whose task
is to:

I) take the measurement data relative to the significant magnitudes of one or more
transmission systems (up to a maximum of eight);

2) do several processing operations on them;

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) transmit to a (remote) centralized organ the information put into memory;

a) present this information in visual form for local monitoring.

      
 

“MIMI
"In!”

  

Figure 7. Block diagram of the measurement-data acquisition and processing system
of the COS 3/FOSTER experimental installation

Key:
1. Microprocessor device 6. EUR center
2. Optical-fiber transmission system 7. Rome-South center
3. Santa Maria in Via center 8. 5 RS-232 interfaces
4. Avention center 9. Centralized processing organ
5. Dedicated line 10. Colombo center

 

The device in question is inserted into a measurement-data acquisition and process-
ing system, the block diagram of which is given in Figure 7 and that has the pur-
pose of monitoring the performance characteristics of the C08 3/FOSTER experimental
digital-transmission systems installed on optical cable between the Sanata Maria in
Via and Rome-South exchanges, in Rome (Bibliography 3, 6, 5).

Because of the experimental aspect of the installation, it is necessary to relate
the deterioration of transmission quality to the course of the performance charac-
teristics of the principal system components to be monitored.

It is therefore necessary for the microprocessor to take. at regular time inter-
vals, a certain number of digital and analog magnitudes that characterize the sys-
tems' transmission and reception terminals and store them in memory.

The magnitudes to be memorized for each transmission system are the following:

1) number of erroneous bits within a suitable time window;

2) alarms of the receiving and transmitting terminal and power-supply alarms;

3) pilot current of the LED (Light-Emitting Diode) in the transmission terminal;
a) temperature of the LED container in the transmission terminal;

5) current of the ACC (Automatic Gain Control) reaction ring in the reception ter-

minal;

18

F03¢0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6) polarization voltage of the APD (Avalanche Photodiode) in the reception ter-
minal.

The microprocessor assigns a sequential number to each data block, consisting of
the abovementioned magnitudes relative to all the systems monitored, and in addi—
tion, calculates for each system the EFT*--a magnitude very significant for estab-
lishing, together with the error rate,** the quality of the transmission.

All these parameters characterize, for the time-interval considered, the state of
the transmission systems being monitored, and they constitute the data block that
will be sent to the centralized processing organ on its request.

The centralized processing organ synchronizes the individual microprocessors and
periodically issues to them the order to send the last block memorized. In this
way, it is capable of deducing the cause of any deterioration of transmission qual-
ity.

The error rate is checked as follows: when the centralized processing organ per-

ceives that it has gone beyond preestablished thresholds, it memorizes on magnetic
support the "history“ of the transmission system whose quality has deteriorated.

These measurement data are printed out and can be processed off-line to determine
any eventual functions of statistical distribution of the errors.

The measurement-data acquisition and processing system described is thus a typical
example of a distributed-intelligence system; indeed, some of the functions to be
performed have been assigned to the peripheral microprocessors. In this way, the
following advantages over a completely centralized structure were obtained:

a) greater processing speed;
b) greater flexibility of the structure;

c) increase in overall reliability of the system.

The microprocessor also performs the function of local monitoring of transmission
systems: all the magnitudes stored in memory can in fact be visualized on a screen
and the local operator is therefore enabled to perceive any malfunctions of the
systems being monitored or deterioration of transmission quality.

6. Outlooks and Conclusions

The continual technological evolution in the field of integrated circuits opens up
new prospects for the users of these devices. There are essentially two lines of
approach identifiable in the construction of microprocessors apparatuses for trans-
mission systems:

a) In the cases in which these apparatuses have to process the signal in real time,
the approach is to individuate very specific functions of the transmission system

 

* EFT . minutes without error

minutes Of OSBeerthﬂ

number of erroneous bits

** error f.te I _——_————

number of bits received

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(for example: filtering, coding) and develop them with microprocessors specialized

for

such applications, which make possible a speed of treatment of the input sym-

bols of some 10's of kHz.

If i
the
choi
the

t is necessary to increase the input-symbol processing speed beyond that limit,
approach expected is to design ad-hoc (custom) integrated circuits. Such a

ce entails an integration of the tasks of the custom-circuit designer and of
person who defines the architecture of the system to be integrated.

b) In those cases in which the microproaessor apparatuses are intended to have sys-
tem management or control functions, the approach is to use "single chips" in the
minimal applications and 16-bit microprocessors when the data-processing problem is
complex. In both cases, the approach is to distribute the processing capacity in

peri

pheral equipment, when the action of the control or management system has to

extend over a broad territory.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Fabbri, 8., Sacchi, L., Tosco, P. and Veglio, 6., "Hybrid-Type lbO-Mbit/s Digi-
tal Transmission System on Coaxial Cable," CSELT Technical Reports, Vol III,
No 1, April 1975, pp 3-18. ELETTRONICA E TELECOMUNICAZIONI, XXV, 1976, p 135.

Tamburelli, 0., "Digital Receiver with Distributed and Integrated Decision
Feedback and Feedforvard (to Overcome the Nyquist Barrier),“ CSELT Technical
Reports, Vol IV, No a, December 1976, pp 199-209.

Bonaventura, 0., Costa, 3., Cottatellucci, 0., Daino, 8., Esposto, F. and Lom-
bardo, F., "COS 3/FOSTER Field Trial with an Optical Cable in Rome," paper pre-
sented to the Sixth European Conference on Optical Communication, York, Septem-
ber 1980.

Bonaventure, 6., Catania, 8., Gagliardi, 0., Paladin, G. and Tosco, F.,

"COS 3/FOSTER: First Optical Fibre System for Operational Service in Italy,"
paper presented to the International Conference on Communications, Denver,
June 1981.

Esposto, F., Lombardi, F. and Paladin, 6., "Results and Evaluations of the
COS 3/FOSTER Optical-Fiber Experimental‘Installation," ELETTRONICA E TELECOHUN-
ICAZIONI, xxx, 1981, pp 79-85.

COPYRIGHT: 1976 by ERI-EDIZIONI KAI RADIOTELEVISIONE ITALIANA

11267

CSO:

5500/2098

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

DIGITAL RADIO-RELAY SYSTEMS AT 19 CH2 IN URBAN AREAS
Turin ELETTRUNICA E TELECOHFNICAZIONI in Italian Nov-Dec Bl pp 247-252
[Article by P. Amadesi, R. Failli, G. Masone and L. Moreno*l

[Text] Summary--Digital radio-relay systems operating at 19 G“: for metropolitan
areas. In the near future. digital radio-relay links should connect telephone ex-
changes in metropolitan areas. The main problems related to the design and devel—
opment of such systems are considered and some proposed solutions are discussed.
First. the general system characteristics are dealt with and the choice of the 17.7
to 19.7 CH: band is justified. taking into account the expected hop length, link
capacity. availability required, etc. The criteria for an efficient spectrum util-
ization are next examined. The four-phase PSK seems to be the most feasible be-
cause it represents the best compromise between bandwidth occupancy and interfer-
ence sensitivity in a multiple interference environment. Moreover, an effective
procedure for automatic carrier frequency assignment has been adopted in order to
minimize the number of radio channels required. Finally the compatibility with
satellite systems sharing the same frequency band is discussed and some preliminary
results on coordination procedures are presented.

1. Introduction

The link network that connects urban telephone exchanges has until now used almost
exclusively paired cables installed in conduit.

In recent years. though. digital systems on cable have been introduced especially
for the longer links, where they offer the greatest advantages from the technical
and economic point of view. The introduction of digital-type exchanges will broad-
en the field of application of such systems, while in the future. optical-fiber
cables will also be used in the same type of network.

The digital radio—relay systems are a valid alternative or a complementary means in
this field of application, and they offer the following advantages:

 

 

* Lngineer Paolo Amadesi, Engineer Luigi Moreno of the CSELT (Telecommunications
Research and Study Center), Turin; Engineer Renzo Failli, Engineer Giorgio Hasone
cf the SIP [Italian Telephone Company], General Administration, Rome.

Typescript received 29 July 1981.

This paper was presented to the International Conference on Communications, 1981.

21

FINRCNﬂHCJAl.USEIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-"possibility of improving network availability by adopting diversified means of
transmission (cable and radio) that are subject to breakdowns that have practic-
ally no correlation with one another;

--possibility of making inexpensive relay links in areas of difficult topography;

--possibility of making urgent connections in a short time.

Furthermore. cost comparisons have shown that medium- and high-capacity radio sys-
tems are suitable, as against coaxial-cable systems, for connections longer than
about 2 km (Bibliography 1).

The introduction of radio-relay systems into this new field requires a detailed ex-
amination of variOus questions.

The purpose of the present paper is to provide a concise description of the main
problems to be tackled in the design and development of the new radio systems to be
used in urban relay networks, illustrating also the principal solutions adopted.

Section 2, in particular. presents the characteristics of the system anticipated
for the 17.7-19.7 GHz band. In section 3 are discussed the criteria for efficient
utilization of the spectrum within the urban environment, and an automatic proce-
dure for assignment of frequencies in a close-mesh radio network is cited. Section
A examines the problem of the sharing of the 17.7-19.7 GHz band as between radio
relays on land and fixed services via satellite.

2. characteristics of the System

In order to define the principal characteristics of the radio equipment to be used
in the urban environment, and in particular the frequency band, the modulation
method and the capacity per carrier, it is necessary to determine sufficiently
closely the network configuration, the distribution of the hop lengths and the num-
ber of circuits to be transmitted on each run.

As the first step, the visibility conditions between the urban telephone exchanges
in the nmior Italian cities, both with a direct connection and through intermediate
centers. including the existing radio stations, were checked. The height of the
trestivwork possibly necessary for achieving the visibility conditions was assumed
to be limited to reasonable values, in order to respect the cities' environmental
and esthetic requirement‘

Next. the complete configurations of the networks were determined, taking into ac-
LOU"! both the visibility conditions and the preliminary assumptions relative to
the breakdown. as between cable systems and radio systems, of the digital relay
>)stvms anticipated in the next 20 years. In particular, it was assumed that the
minimum run length would be limited to 1.5 km and that connections would not be
made with more than 4 runs.

As an example, Figure I shows the network configuration planned in the metropolitan
area of Rome; for each run, the capacity, expressed in number of 35.368-Hbit/s sys-
lvms (the third level of the European digital hierarchy), is indicated.

The final configuration of each urban network will necessarily depend on more pre-
:ise technical and economic considerations, including overall network availability,

22

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FDR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lhat will be possible only after an adequate period of experience with systems in
use. Nevertheless. the preliminary results already obtained are Sufficient for op-
timizing the principal characteristics of the system.

 

Figure 1. Digital radio-relay network at 19 GHz planned in the area of the city of
Rome for the year 2000. The number marked on each run is the number of
3k-Mbit/s groups required for the run.

 

38

,\
..
PtmxnniitOU4tInMnt

 

(2)UUI3£lﬂ|0£uJ nuuwa (ha)
Figure 2. Distribution of the run lengths

I. Percentage of the runs 2. Length of run (km)

 

First of all, two radio-channel capacity values were chosen: 34 Hbit/s and

1&0 Nbit/s. It should be kept in mind that in the network planned for the urban
area of Rome. which will certainly be one of the biggest ones, the number of
34-Mbit/s systems required for each run is between 1 and 11, and the percentage of
runs that require at least eight Jh-Mbit/s systems, which would justify a digit
speed of 280 Hbit/s, is very low.

23

F1)R‘0F11C1AL.USEI(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2 presents a histogram of the distribution of the run lengths; it can be
noted that the maximum length is approximately 10.5 km and that most of the runs
are shorter than 6 km.

In order to keep the unavailability times due to rain below reasonable limits (10

to 20 prime minutes per year) for each of the runs, using normal fading margins on
the order of 00 dB, it emerges that Italy's climatic conditions do not permit the

use of bands higher than about 20 GHz (Bibliography 2). 0n the other hand, it is

not suitable to use frequencies lower than 13 She, which would make it possible to
have longer run lengths, since they are already assigned and used for medium- and

long-distance connections.

A further requirement of the systems under consideration is that a rather high to-
tal radio band be available in order to meet the capacity requirements of the nodes
in which many runs converge. The 17.7-19.7 Ch: band therefore appears the most
suitable for this type of application.

The ICCR [International Consultative Connittee on Radiotelegriphy] recently ap-
proved the provisional text of a new recommendation relative to the plans for chan-
nelization of this frequency band for radio-relay systems with capacity of about
280 Mbit/s, 160 Hbit/s and 34 Hbit/a (Bibliography 3). The plans recommended for
the configuration with cochannel reuse of frequencies for the capacities of

150 Hbit/s and 34 Mbit/s are shown in Figure 3.

As regards the modulation techniques, the considerations set out in section 3 in
relation to dense radio networks indicate that four-phase PSK [expansion unknown]
is the most suitable technique for the application examined in this paper.

The radio-relay systems that operate at lower frequencies generally adopt some form
of protection (for example, difference of frequency or of spacing) in order to re-
duce the effects of the phenomena due to propagation and to improve the availabil-
ity of the system as regards equipment breakdowns also. In the 17.7-19.7 CH: band,
attenuation from rain is the dominant effect of propagation because of the limited
lengths of the runs, and therefore it is not possible to improve the system's
availability due to the propagation factors except by careful choice of the run
lengths and of the fading margins.

For these reasons, use of protection systems of the l + I type or the multiple-beam
type could only improve availability as regards equipment breakdowns.

In applications in urban areas where there is generally a diversified transmission
medium, such as a cable network, it appears more appropriate to use unprotected
systems, with consequent economic and spectrum-use advantages. The equipment must,
of course, be protected with sufficient reliability to obtain availability of the
connections similar to that of the cable systems.

Table l presents the typical values of the parameters relative to the equipment and

the radio runs. In runs longer than 6 km, antennas of greater diameter (1.5 m)
will be used in order to augment the fading margin available.

24 .
FOR 0FTTC]AI.USE10NLY
34 Hbit/
+ 16 dBm

or probability . 10'3 - 79 dBm

l m)
and of antenna

_—____—_———-——-———

the Spectrum

type proposed in the preceding paragrap
e one common in conventional systems (10

.tion of the spectrum, intensive frequenc
interferences on each connection (Biblic
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lation procedures have been developed for fast and accurate evaluation of the de—
teriorations of PSK signals in a multiple-interference environment (Bibliography 7).

In the preliminary phase of system definition, it was sought to evaluate the influ-
ence of various design parameters on utilization of the spectrum, by means of a
generalized model based on the criteria and fundamental definitions of spectral ef-
ficiency (Bibliography 8).

The basic concept is that each radio connection, operated on a given frequency.
prevents other connections from operating on that same frequency within a given re-
gion, which depends on the transmitting power, the antenna patterns, the propaga-
tion characteristics, the demodulator's sensitivity to interferences, etc.

Taking into account the fact that the radio spectrum can be defined in the three
dimensions of frequencies, physical space and time (Bibliography 8), one can evalu-
ate the "quantity of spectrum (band X area X time) used" by any connection of the
network. Finally, the efficiency of utilization of the spectrum can be expressed
as the ratio between the quantity of information transmitted on a given connection
and the spectrum used by that connection.

in a previous article (Bibliography 9), a detailed description was given of the
model adopted. Below, several results are presented relative to the choice of mod-
ulation method in digital radio-relay networks at 19 GHz.

3.]. Examination of Modulation Methods

The analysis model for utilization of the spectrum was applied vis-a-vis coherent
PSK modulation systems with H phases. It is know that with the increase of H, the
band occupied reduces, at equal transmission speed in terms of bit/s; nevertheless,
with increase of H a more limited number of frequency reuses is acceptable, since
sensitivity to interferences rises.

so”.

6

A
I:
trntutuza serum: (ws bu)

 

0 1 2 J 4
(2) sir/rum o'oom

Figure A. Efficiency of utilization of spectrum in a radio network with PSK modu-
lation with H phases. 0n the abscissa is the number of bits associated

Kc“. with each wave form.

I. Spectral efficiency (bit/s - Hz) 2. Bit/wave-form

Figure 6 presents, for various values of H, spectral efficiency E, which is equiva-
lent to the traffic capacity per band unit (bit/s’Hz) in a region of area equal to

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the mean quadratic value of the run length. Reference is also made to a parameter
y, which is indicative of the network density and is defined as follows:

Y _ 9N Mean quadratic value of run length
' Total area covered by radio network

in which R is the number of radio centers in the network.

Analysis of several actual cases has shown that Y I 2 and Y I a can be taken as re-
presentative values for urban networks of medium and high density, respectively.

The results of Figure 4 are based on the following hypotheses:

Transmission power equal on all runs
Performance-characteristics threshold error probability I 10'3 with 40 dB
fading margin
Antenna pattern (diameter of paraboloid lCCR mask (Report 614) with gain of
= l m) 42.5 dB
Performance-characteristics deterioration
from total of interference 3 dB
( X I 1.6 PSK 2 and h phases
Standardized channelization pitch ( X I 2.0 PSK 8 phases
( X I 2.3 PSK 16 phases
( frequential iso PSK 2 and 4 phases

Frequency reuse on cross-polarization ( interstitial* PSK 8 and 16 phases

Parameter of density Y = 2 and Y ' 4

Various other calculations were carried out, with different sets of parameters, in
order to check, in the various cases. the best compromises for optimal use of the
spectrum. In any case, Figure 4 can be considered quite significant It shows
that a- -phase PSK modulation can be advised in this kind of application inasmuch as
it achieves the best compromise between band occupation and sensitivity to inter-
ferences. in a broad range of real situations.

0n the other hand. 2-phase PSK is the most efficient in very crowded networks
and/or with antenna patterns that are not very directional. Eight-phase PSK, or
other multilevel modulations of high order, may be preferable when limited band oc-
cupation becomes the dominant factor of spectral efficiency--that is, in low-dens-
ity networks, such as the long-range ones.

3.2. Assignment of Transmission Frequencies

In the designing of a specific radio network. spectral efficiency can be optimized
by careful coordination of the interferences. Since the number of connections may
be very high, it is advisable for the assignment of the transmission frequencies
to each run to be done by means of an automatic procedure.

The procedure described in Bibliography 10 meets this requirement. assigning the
frequencies with the restriction of not exceeding a maximum level of interfering

 

* 1n the case of frequency reuse with interstitial method, it is intended that the
carrier frequencies on horizontal and vertical polarization be staggered by one-
half a channelization pitch.

.27, .

FOR‘OFFICLALIXSE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

power in each receiver and with the objective of minimizing the total number 0!
carrier frequencies necessary in the entire network. The main advantage of this
procedure is represented by the possibility of easily imposing various restrictions
and of handling connections both of 34 Hbit/s and of [40 Mbit/s.

In the system-definition phase also, this procedure can be useful for analyzing the
influence that various parameters (transmission power, antenna patterns, fading
margins) have on the number of carrier frequencies required.

Several preliminary tests of this procedure were carried out, using a network with
topological characteristics similar to those expected in the major Italian cities
(see section 2). These tests have confirmed the validity of the frequency-assign-
ment procedure and the possibility of intensive frequency resue.

It was also verified that the number of carrier frequencies required depends con-
siderably on the choice of the transmission powers and the fading margins. Consid-
er, for example, the two cases presented in Table 2. In the first case, it is as-
sumed that the power transmitted and the fading margin are fixed independently of
the run length, while in the second, the power transmitted in the shorter connec-
tions (under 4 km) is considered reduced by 6 dB, so as to reduce overal interfer-
ence. In the shorter connections, it is also assumed thatchere is a reduced fading
margin, but nevertheless one that is sufficient to ensure the availability required
(Bibliography 2).

Table 2--Parameters Adopted for Automatic Assignment of Carrier Frequencies

 

Hypothesis A Hypothesis 8

Digit _____‘_

Frequency Transmitted Fading Run Transmitted Fading

Power Margin Length Power Margin
_____________________________________________________________________

. < A km 10 dBm 35 d8

31- Nblt/S 16 (lbs: 100 dB ;- 10 km 16 dBm (.0 dB

. < lo km 16 dBm 35 dB

“00 .‘lblt/B 22 d3 (00 dB ; I. km 22 d3!!! (.0 d3

 

In the second case, it emerges that the necessary number of carrier frequencies is
IS-perccnt less than in the first case. At present, other possible choices of
transmitted power are being considered, keeping in mind the restrictions imposed by
the simplicity required for the operations of tuning and maintaining the equipment.

The abovementioned calculations were done with adoption of the antenna-directional-
ity mask proposed in ICCR Report 614 and assuming a l-meter diameter of the parabo-
lid antenna. This mask was used merely as the first point of reference, while fur-
ther calculations are planned that will use the radiation patterns of antennas de-

signed for these applications.

4. Sharing of Frequencies with Fixed Services via Satellite

The possible presence of fixed services via satellite that share the entire 17.7-
I9.7 GHz band, or part of it, with the fixed services on land, with primary-level
allocation, is a fundamental problem to be examined for correct planning of a
radio-relay network in an urban area.

28

FOI!0FFNJA[.USE(MVLY
FOR OFF1C1AI.USE(NQLY

In the first place. the antennas' transmissions adhere to appropriate restrictions
in ICCR Recoanwndations 358-2 and 606-4, so as to limit direct interference from
space transmitters in the ground receivers and from ground transmitters in the
space receivers.

Furthermore, the possible coex1stence of radio-relay systems and earth stations re-
ceiving or transmitting from a satellite in a common geographical area requires

that the mutual interferences be analyzed carefully, for correct coordination of
the services.

We illustrate several preliminary results relative to this question, obtained from
from the case of two satellite systems that are being planned in Italy.

a) The first problem examined concerns the earthward connection of a national sat-
ellite for telephonic communication with spot-beam coverages (Bibliography ll,

13) of the nation's major cities. The connection planned for the satellite-to-
earth run uses the 17.7-20.2 on: bond and transports high-capacity channels. The
earth stations receiving from the satellite must necessarily be situated within the
metropolitan areas or in the immediate vicinity in order to be connected easily
with the principal telephone-traffic switching centers. Consequently, all the ra-
dio channels via satellite that are not comprised within the 19. 7- 20. 2 CH2 part of
the band (which are assigned exclusively to service via satellite) undergo the in-
terferences caused by the urban radio relays.

For an initial quantitative evaluation of this interference, we established con-
servative hypotheses, assigning to the various parameters the numerical values giv-
en in Bibliography 11, considering the antenna radiation pattern of ICCR Report
390- -3 for the earth-station antennas and examining the radio channels interfered
wity in the most unfavorable way.

The calculation results relative to the interference of a single transmitter of the
radio-relay network in an earth station receiving from satellite are presented in
Figure 5 in the form of "interference contours“ on a topographical map. Each con-
tour is characterized by a constant value of the gain OR of the radio- relay antenna
in the direction of the earth station (ES) and represents the total of the minimum
distances around the E5 in which a network transmitter with antenna gain “R can be
sitod in such a way that the Cl! ratio at the earth-receiver input is equal to35 dB.

Cl! is the ratio between the powers of the useful signal caming from the satellite
in she severe fading conditions that cause the threshold condition of error rate of
and the power of the nonfaded network interfering signal.

The 35-du value of Oil is rather protective in a case in which there is only one
interfering signal, and proves not very severe even if the radio network is dense;
for example, 10 interfering signals with [equal frequency] and with Cl! ' 35 dB
each cause a total 6/! ratio of 25 63, which is therefore responsible for a consid-
erable deterioration of the receiver's performance characteristics.

Figure 5 shows that the distance required for limiting the interference from a
single transmitter is a notable function of antenna gain GR and unfortunately can

have values of several 10' s of kilometers. Consequently, when the number of inter-
fering transmitters of the network is high, the possible inclusion of stations re-

29

FOR‘OFFICJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ceiving from the satellite to earth in an urban area of medium extent appears
rather critical.

 

Figure 5. Sharing of frequency with the downward run of a national satellite for
digital fixed services. Contours of interference in the case of a re-
ceiving earth station (ES) and an earth radio-relay transmitter with an-
tenna gain GR in the ES direction. CI! = 35 dB. The satellite's angle
of elevation is 40°, a value typical for Italy.

V

1. Satellite

 

A

w

 

Figure 6. Sharing of frequency with the upward connection of a television-broad-
casting satellite. Contours of interference in the case of a transmit-
ting earth station (ES) and an earth radio-relay receiver with antenna
gain GR in the ES direction. C/l . 25 dB. The television satellite's
angle of elevation is 30°. a value typical for Italy.

Key:

l. Satellite

 

Assignment of the largest possible number of separate carrier frequencies to the
two services therefore appears to be a requirement for reducing the complexity of
coordination of the services.

30
IWJRlOFFICJAl.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b) The second problem concerns the earth-satellite connection (feeder link) for
direct broadcasting of television signals that could operate in the 17.3-18.1 UHz

band and therefore share the spectrum portion between 17.7 and 18.1 OH: with the
other fixed services.

In the Italian case. the five channels assigned to Italy and to the Vatican will
probably fall within the sharing band (Bibliography 12), so that the power emitted
from the transmitting earth station will cause interference in every earth receiver
operating on those frequencies.

The possibility of siting the earth transmitting station within the metropolitan
area has been examined with the aid of the interference contours of Figure 6. ob-
tained in a manner analogous to those for Figure 5.

It was assumed that the EIRP (Effective Isotropic Radiated Power) of the earth sta-
tion in the direction of the satellite is equal to 65 dBw and that the transmitting
antenna has a diameter of 5 m radiation pattern in conformity with the ICCR charac-
teristic (Report 390-3); the curves relate to the moat severe interferential situa-

tion caused by the TV/FM channel most unfavorably positioned in relation to a
34-Mbit/s digital channel.

In Figure 6 there is only one source of interference--that is. the earth transmit-
ting station--and the 6/1 ratio is therefore fixed at the critical value of 25 dB.

The situation certainly appears more severe than in the preceding case of Figure 5,
and topological coordination of the two services proves quite complex in those
cases in which the metropolitan network is rather dense.

Coordination of the ground services and those via satellite therefore constitutes
an open problem that calls for further investigation in depth. More detailed and
closer analysis of the interferences examined in this section was subsequently un-
dertaken and is reported in Bibliography 14.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Mr L. Bassis and ﬁr H. Ercolin for their effective cooperation in
carrying-out of this work.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. "Digital Radio Relays for Urban Areas in the l9-Gﬂz band." SIP Internal Re-
port. May I980.

2. Colavito. C., "New Systems in Radio Networks," Conference on Radio Relays.
L'Aquila. Hay I979.

3. ICCR. Study Group 9, "RadioFrequencyChanneI Arrangements for Digital Radio-
Relay Systems in the 17.7-19.7 CH2 Frequency Band," Proposal for New Recommend-
ation, Doc 9/209, Interim Meeting. Geneva. October 1980.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

ll.

12.

13.

(IOI'YR

11267
USO:

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Colavito, C. and Sant'Agostino, M.. "Binary and Quaternary PSK Radio Systems in
a Multiple Interference Environment," IEBB TRANS. COMMUNICATIONS, Vol COM-Zl,
September [973, pp 1056-1067.

Ruthroff. C.L., Tillotson, L.C. and Prabhu, V.K., "Efficient Use of the Radio
Spectrum and Bandwidth Expansion," PROC. IEEE, Vol 61, April 1973, ppbbS-QSZ.

Masone, c. and Moreno, L., "Optimal Use of Digital Radio Relays in Big Urban
Areas," 22nd International Conference on Communications, Genoa, October 1976.

Amadesi, P., "A Fast Evaluation of the Error Rate in CPSK Systems with Inter-
symbol and Multiple Cochannel lnterferences by Means of Local Approximations
of the Error Function," International Symposium on Information Theory, Santa

Monica, Calif, February 1981. and CSELT TECHNICAL REPORTS, Vol 8, June 1981,
pp 199-206.

Berry, L.A., “Spectrum Metrics and Spectrum Efficiency: Proposed Definitons,"
IEEE TRANS. ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY, Vol ENC-l9, August 1977, pp254-260.

Moreno, L., "Spectrum Utilization in a Digital Radio-Relay Network," to be
published in IEEE TRANS. ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY.

Barberis, C. and Zingarelli, V., "Application of Network Optimization Algo-
rithms to the Radio Frequency Assignment Problems." International Conference
on Communications. Denver. June 1981.

Tirro, S. and Drioli, B., "Possibilities Offered by Artificial Satellites for
National Communications in a Large European Country," TELECOM '79, Geneva.

Tomati, L., "Planning of a Television-Broadcasting System from Satellite."
ELETTRONICA E TELECOMUNICAZIONI, September 1977, pp 182-l9b.

Berretta. G. and Tirro, 5., "New Telecommunications Systems at 20/30 GHz."
International Conference on Communications, Seattle, June 1980.

Amadesi, P. and Failli, R.. "Criteria for Sharing of Frequencies by Radio Re-
lays and Earth Stations for Telecommunications via Satellite in a Large Urban
Area," 29th International Conference on Communications, Genoa, October 1981.

IGMT: 1976 by ERI-EDIZIONI RA! RADIOTELEVISIONB ITALIANA

5 500/2099 END

32.

FOR OFTWCJAI.USEIDNLY