FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10255
13 January 1982

Woridwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

[FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS LI]

1 3 Janue

WORLDWIDE REPORT
TELEcomumcnIous POLICY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(rouo 1/82)

Cou'rems

USSR

Progress in Electrical Communications Throughout Ukrainian SSR
(c. 2. Sinchenko; ELEKTROSVYAZ', Aug 81) .................

Noise Immunity of Radio Relay Antennas and Sane Ways of
Improving It
(A. A. Timofeyevn, V. G. Yampol'akiy; ELEKTROSVYAZ',

Aug 8'.) as.scale.canoe-Coal...Illooaaoaoaaaaaoa-oaoooleaoo

Office Automation Equipment at Specialized 'Sistemotekhnika-SO'
International Exposition
(N. A. Hatyukhina, A. L. Raykhtsaum; PRIBORY I
SISTEHY "PRAVLEHIYA, Sep 81) .............................

Summary of Eighth Plenary Session of Central Board of the
Scientific-Technical Society for Radio Engineering and
Electrical Communications Imeni A. s. Popov

(M. Ya. Shebaldina; ELEKTROSVYAZ', Aug 81) ...............

Briefs
Data Communications Conference
Power Supplies for Communications
FOR "Fl-"1 ‘IAI. llSl-Z ONLY

USSR

PROGRESS IN ELECTRICAL COMMUNICATIONS THROUGHOUT UKRAINIAN SSR
Moscow ELEKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 8,Aug 81 pp 1-5

[Article by 6.2. Sinchenko, Ukrainian SSR Minister of Communications: "Creative
Contribution of Ukrainian Connunicators")

in his Report to the 26th CPSU Congress, CC CPSU Secretary General and President of
tne Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR Comrade L.l. Brezhnev summarized
the development of our economy and the increase in workers' welfare for the 10th
Five-Year Plan and the past 10 years. It was noted that the economy of the USSR
developed as a unified national economic complex in which the economic potential
of each republic increased significantly.

Thanks to intensive creative labor, the communicators of the Soviet Union, includ-
ing those in the Ukraine. also contributed to achieving overall high national
economic results. Let us look at some typical numbers and examples which illus-
trates the results of the labor of communicators in the Ukraine during the 19703.

Communications managment in the Republic was raised to a new level over the past
IO years. For example. the volume of production increased by a factor of 1.9,
tariff revenues by more than a factor of 2, profit by more than a factor of 1.6
and available capital by a factor of over 2.3. Labor productivity increased by a
factor of 1.6. Over one billion rubles have been invested in the development of

the branch for the Republic budget alone.

Long distance telephone and telegraph communications developed most rapidly.
During the past 10 years. the length of long-distance cable lines increased by a
factor of 2.8. This made it possible to provide long distance communications via
cable. and via radio relay on a number of links, for all rayon centers and cities
of oblast subordination in the Republic.

The branching network of cable and radio relay links which has been created in the
"blasts nr the Ukraine has made it possible to increase the length of long distance
telephone channels by a factor of 2.76 and to create large groups of channels be-
tween «luv. the capital of the Republic, and the oblast centers, between oblast
ccntcrs and rayon centers. and to begin widespread introduction of automated long

distance connections.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

while automatic long distance telephone exchanges were in operation in only four
oblast centers in the Ukraine by the early 19703, and these were low-capacity in-
stallations; during the intervening period, high-capacity type ANTS-1H, ANTS-3
and ARM—20 auannLlc long distance telephone exchanges have been constructed and
put into operation in 2i oblast centers, as well as the cities of Yalta, Krivoy
Rog and Sevastopol'. Small AVTS automatic exchanges are now used widely for
intro-oblast long distance telephone communications. These have been installed
in nearly all rayon centers (500 of them) and cities of oblast subordination.

The increase in long distance telephone capacity has combined harmoniously with
the development of creative activity of engineers and technicians in this sub-
branch. which has made it possible to accelerate the development of automated
long distance connections, to make a number of improvements and to expand the
limits of automation which ordinary ANTS-1H and AVTS exchanges do not have.

One valuable rationallzer's suggestion is the "tariff zone finder" developed by
Ziitomir and Rovenskiye [possibly Rovno -- Tr.] engineer-rationalizers: this
device make: it possible to organize fully automatic telephone communications
within a zone (oblast) (figure 1), and is used extensively in the oblasta of the
Republic. These tariff romputers are in use at AVTS exchanges in more than 400
rayon centers and cities of oblast subordination. Subscribers in these rayon
cenrers and cities which are connected to the AVTS within their own oblast can
call one another automatically without operator intervention at either end of the
channel. Figure 2 shows a schematic diagram of the organization of intra-zone
automatic long distance telephone communications.

 

m"—-"'

Figure l

Communicators at lvano-Frankovsk and Zaporozh'ye made a valuable rationalizers'
suggestion. its introduction allows a group of supervisors of oblast party,
council and management organs at oblast centers with ANTS-1M or ANTS-3 stations
with no AON [expansion unknown] equipment at the city telephone exchange to call
subscribers at rayon centers and cities connected to these exchanges without
dialing their own number (so-called "simplified dialing"). Figure 3 shows a

schematic diagram or the organization of simplified dialing of rayon center sub-
srrlhers from an oblast center.

Besides introducing technical innovations to the existing connection automation

technology, each city and rayon communications center publishes advertisements
inoxrating the city codes and explaining how to make calls using automatic long

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘Fif 1M. USE ONLY

    

hi)Phﬁwuoﬁ urnmw :(h)ﬁuuwumu gamut
01’ (c) : ‘
' (k)- -(n)(
im mum” mm ,"gum
: (1) __.11_p_1_rII-4""”"’”N
(f) i ””fhti) “'

Figure 2

Additional devices to the standard circuits in figures 2 and 3 are shown by the
dark boxes.

Key:

(n) Rayon centcr (8) counter (l) Incl-2 [expansion unknown]
(b) Oblast center (h) GI [expansion unknown] I (m) city telephone exchange

(c) tariff zone finder (i) IKA [expansion unknown] (n) AIU [expansion unknown]

(d) puiser (i) VKA [expansion unknown] (0) IKTN [expansion unknown]

(e) Pl [expansion unknown] (k) semiautomatic trunk (p) to other rayon centers

if) subscriber latching system (q) IIIHGI-b [expansion unknown]

distance calling. These advertisements are colorful. and are distributed free to
subscribers. Oblaat, city and rayon newspapers regularly contain advertising-type
announcements two or thf8< times each year concerning changes at long distance
telephone exchanges or the appearance of new capabilities for utilizing automatic
long distance communications.

of course. the question arises of what has resulted from all of these efforts aimed
at accelerating long distance exchange automation. expanding the zone of long
distance communications automation and simplifying its operation. Let us look at
some specific numbers.

In i980. 3.7 times as many long distance telephone conversations were ordered

than in I970. 0f the total outgoing paid traffic input to long distance exchanges
in the Ukraine during 1980, 692 of the conversations were held over automated
channels. while the nationwide average index is 60-62%. If this entire increase
in the number of conversations were to be processed manually at exchanges in the
Rupahiic. it would be necessary to increase the telephone operator staff by at
lvnsl [000.

The nviwurk of long distance coin-operated telephones has developed extensively
with.n lhv Republic. This has been accompanied by continuing improvement in coin-
upcratcd telephone circuits and their connection to the long distance telephone
nviwnrk, which is described in detail in "Elektrosvyaz'". No. 10, 1979, as well

as an improvement in the technology of servicing and monitoring the technical

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tenement use ONLY

   

   

{___(_g?___‘l ['76— 7717437: _____ “l

l ”Mg, JMm-z -

l@ A] |]nnop. I lei—9

‘ (a) | I Imu-

L ______ J |

L ____________ J
———— (s)---------

g‘ ”6

I (h)

1 my 1m '

‘ A

g % rat-mom)
Figure 3 l 01

L. ________ (i) _____
l’ey:
(a) subscriber (f) IKTN [expansion unknown]
(b) city telephone exchange (g) LI [expansion unknown]
(c) group equipment (h) GI [expansion unknown]
(d) automatic long distance exchange (1) counter
(e) [MCI-2 [expansion unknown] (j) 10 [expansion unknown]

(k) automatic long distance telephone
exchange RSL [expansion unknown,
possibly connecting lines relay -oTr.]

condition of coin-operated telephones. Their operating reliability has been im-
proved, their accessibility to the long distance telephone network is high, and
the efficiency of utilization of long distance telephone channels has been in-
creased accordingly.

The coin-operated telephone network is highly popular in the Republic, especially
in resort areas. For example. in the Yalta ares conversations from long distance
coin—operated telephones made up 7l2 of the total outgoing long distance traffic.
To use the order system of handlfng this number of calls, the Yalta long distance
telephone exchange would have to more than double the number of long distance
telephone channels and add at least 100 operators.

In [he future. until the communications network of the Republic has enough standard
nutomntlc long distance telephone exchanges with zone organization of long distance
communications, the creative initiative of engineers and operating technicians

will be aimed at improving the automation of long distance connections.

Fu“ther developed within the Republic was telegraph communications. which during
the 19703. especially during the 10th nge-yeag plan, was completely restructured

FOI'OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
I-‘Oli (WI-"K'IM. IISF. ONLY

Inr lhv main purpose nl erealing a Republic high-speed data transmission network
as a component branch of the nationwide data transmission network. This problem
was solved using AT-PS-PD. PTSK and ATA-HK crossbar telegraph exchanges, mostly
domestic but partially imported, and by the extensive introduction of type TT-68
channel formation equipment for long distance communications and TVU-12 and
DATA-6 for city networks.

The capacity of the channel switching exchanges within the nationwide data transmis-
sion network of the Republic comprises tens of thousands of numbers. Common-user
data transmission locations have been created in each oblast center, and TAP-2
telegraph equipment has been installed at organizations and enterprises within
cities which allow data to be transmitted over the data transmission network at

200 baud. The nationwide data transmission network is growing rapidly.

1he network of channels and stations for photofacsimile reception of central news-
paper columns from Moscow has been further developed within the Republic. Work
is underway to prepare production areas and communications channels to organize

paints in Kiev for transmitting and receiving Republic newspaper columns to and
from nhlast centers in the Ukraine.

Many valuable rationalizers' suggestions were made by city and rural telephone
communications specialists which made it possible to overfulfill the annual assign-
ments for city telephone and urban telephone exchange development with the 10th Five
Year Plan extremely limited funds for automatic telephone exchange equipment and
cable production.

Because of insufficient city automatic telephone exchange equipment, it was neces-
sary to use ATSK-lOO/ZOOO exchanges in many large rayon centers and oblast-sub-
ordinate cities with population between 30 and 60 thousand. In order to increase
the number capacity of these exchanges to 4000. it is necessary to pair two
AfSF-iOO/ZOOO exchanges, even though this increases the consumption of TSV [expan-
sion unknown] cable. However. there is now no other way, and we must accept this
solution.

A capacity of 4000 numbers is not enough for cities with populations between 40 and
00 thousand. and there are quite a few such cities, some of which are rayon centers.
in the Ukraine. What can we do when not enough city-type ATSK eqipment can be
obtained? A partial solution to this problem was found by rationalizer specialists
in the Zaporozhskuya oblast, who adapted SUS-54 equipment for installation at
ATSK-ihO/ZOOO eXchanues. expanding their capacity to 5000 numbers. Specialists at
the Ynlta city telephone exchange developed a scheme of interfacing three ATSK-
IUD/2(MN) stations. increasing the capacity of one automatic exchange using this
equipment to 6000 numbers.

Sprrialisls at city telephone network laboratories are now working on the problem
nl utilizing [\th [expansion unknown] at paired ATSK-lOO/ZOOO exchanges. using
SUS—Sa equipment simultaneously in order for these automatic exchanges to respond
fully in the requirements of the Unified Automatic Communications System.

The rrrnlivv Initiative of rationallzers in the Kievskaya. Zaporozhskaya. Chernovit-
skaya. cherniguvskaya, Khmel'nitskaya and other oblnsts in developing diode

.a

D
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

separators instead of blockers for pairing rural subscriber telephones. The advan-
tage of the development is that diode separators are installed in the line plug

of the telephone set. while blockers are installed on poles and operate unstably
when the weather changes.

The Laboratory of the Kiev city telephone exchange, with the participations of
specialists from city telephone exchanges in the Kiev, Vinnitskaya and Chernigovskaya
oblasts. has developed a device which makes it possible to increase the capacity of
a 50-number block in the rural ASTK-SO/ZOO by 20 numbers, simultaneously doubling

the number of paired rural subscriber telephone sets. A model of this device is
being tested at a rural telephone exchange in the Kiev oblast. The results are
satisfactory, but it is still a rather complicated matter to use this version.
Specialists are now working to simplify the proposed circuit.

City and rural telephone exchange rationalizers are faced with the task of rework-
ing the circuit of the DAVU-lo device, which makes it possible to connect 10 sub-
Srrlbers using two pairs without degrading communications quality in order to util-
ize the devices on rural exchange subscriber lines. When this is done, all of the
subscribers retain the quality of having a private line. Economic efficiency will
be increased sharply when this device is introduced, and the rates of development
of the rural telephone subscriber network will increase.

'A great deal of work was done during the 10th Five-Year Plan to further develop the
material-technical base for radio broadcast and television. The five-year assign-
ment of these subbranches was overfulfilled. thanks to a great extent to the
creative scientific-teehnjcal initiative of specialists at RURT /Regional Radio-
Television Administratiog/ enterprises in the Ukraine. -

Here are some examples: there are more than 130 type TRSA-lOO, TRSA-lZ/IZ and
TRSA-Sé television relays in operation within the Ukraine which were developed to
transmit only black and white television. Replacement of the pool of existing

TV relays with more modern equipment will require major material expenditures.
Therefore. modernizing them in order to allow them to be used in the future to
transmit color television programs is an extremely urgent task.

Specialists of the RURT of the Ukrainian SSR Ministry of Communications have
vrculvd a nmduiatlon rolor transistorized device (HCTD) installed in a removable
chassis which is part of the TRSA equipment. when these relays operate using the
MCTD, a color image can be transmitted with quality indicators corresponding to
the standard for color television.

RPTDA derimeter-band TV relays have recently gone into production in the Soviet
Union. There are already significant numbers of these transmitters in the

Ukraine. However, these can only operate by receiving-programs directly from the
air, and are usually installed at intermediate or junction stations of existing
radio relay links. in order for these relays to receive a program from radio relay
link equipment, RURT rationalizer-engineers have developed a scheme for modulating
the radio signal instead of using an intermediate-frequency relay. This develop-
ment has been introduced at 18 relays, and produced very good results. It is

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1(1Al. USE ONLY

continuing to be put into operation.

In addition, during 1976-1980, RURT laboratories invested a great deal of effort in
modernizing obsolescent television transmitters. An example is the changeover of
type "iakor'" transmitters to a grounded-grid circuit at 10 television relay stations.
"Len“ and “Uragan” transmitters have been modified in like fashion at eight large
Republic television relay stations.

RURT specialists have created a transistorized video-correction device for obsoles-
cent "lgla" and Yakor'" TV transmitters. It has made it possible to obtain quality
indicators corresponding to current technical specifications. The device not only
has provided reliable and stable operation of obsolescent transmitters, but has
made them suitable for transmitting color programs. These video-correction devices
have been installed on 12 TV transmitters in the Republic.

A substantial amount of work has been done during the 10th five-year plan at the
Republic radio-television transmission center. Video-correction devices have been
created and fabricated for trunk lines up to 8 km in length: their introduction

has resulted in the elimination of two equipment rooms, an unattended repeater

point. and ASL [expansion unknown] equipment with a total cost of 200,000 rubles.

A device has been developed and fabricated with local efforts which allows the

duty shift chief to control (and monitor) four TV transmitters and three ultra-
short wave PM transmitters simultaneously from the same KUK [expansion unknown] room.

In order to improve the transmission quality of stereophonic broadcast programs,
the ARS-3 rack has been introduced: this device has a wideband exciter and was
created and fabricated by specialists of the RURT laboratory.

As a result of the equipment modernization which has been done, four TV programs
and three PM broadcast programs can be controlled at the Republic television relay
station by the duty officer of a shift comprised of a total of seven people.

The Ukraine RURT. in cooperation with the Scientific Research Institute of Radio,
created a system of equipment during 1979-1980 for a new Republic long distance
television equipment room which is of extreme significance in the widely branching
Republic lung-distance television network, which consists of several thousand
kilomelerx oi radio-relay links which transmit center. republic and local TV
programs in 47 high-power and 230 low-power TV stations.

one or the projects of the Republic RURT television laboratory which was completed
in I980 makes it possible to solve the problem of complete automation cf control
and monitoring of type TRSA relays. An experimental model of this device is based
nu nuiumniir logic circuits implemented on a modern component base without the

"He of electromechanical relays. etc. One such relay is already in operation in

L'vuvsknyn Ohlast. and experience in operating it is producing positive results.
ibis deVeIupmcnt. when introduced widely throuout the network of low-power relays,
will make it possible to reduce sharply the number of technical personnel servicing

the network.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFFNJAl.USE13NLY

During the ioﬂurive-Year Plan, installation of wired radio units at all populated
points was nearly completed in the Ukraine. A great deal of attention was devoted
to the current development of the network of radio points and the introduction of
three-program broadcast. There are now more than 35 wired-radio outlets per l00
residents, including 24 three-program outlets.

The main efforts of radio relay network specialists were directed toward improving
the profitability of subbranch management and improving the quality of network oper-
ation, which Iainly is the result of introducing devices for remote automatic
control of rural radio junctions from the central rayon center radio junction and
from ultrashort wave radio stations. The technology which permits remote control
of rural radio junctions from the rayon center is now new, and is produced by the
CUP? Industry of the USSR Ministry of Communications. However, these funds are
limited; if only they were to be used, it would take at least 10 years to complete
the aulumntlon. Speeinlist-rationaiizers from Republic radio relay networks have
also rendered assistance here. The wired-radio installers in the Kiev oblast have
developed their own device, organized its fabrication in the oblast ccnmuunications
laboratory and completed automation of controlling rural radio centers in all 26
rayon» of the oblnst by the end of the five-year plan. The experience of the

Kiev radio installers is being introduced in all oblasts of the Republic, and in
198i there will be remote control of radio centers in villages, city-type settle-
ments and cities of rayon subordination in all rayons of the Republic.

The rationalizers of the radio relay networks in the Ukraine have the task of creat-
ing a remote control system for all radio centers in the oblast, both rural and
rayon, directly from the main radio junction at the oblast center. The purpose of
this development is to both activate and shut down radio centers. transmit urgent
messages via the oblast radio network at any time of the day from the center, and
measure the basic electrical parameters of trunk and distribution feeders.

1he Kiev radio installers have made a significant contribution to the development

of three—program wire broadcast. Because of available funds for three-program
broadcast transmitters. the specialists have used TU-IOO amplifiers as the basis

Ior developing and manufacturing transmitters in the oblsat laboratory for the
second and third broadcast programs. These transmitters have already been installed
at IS rayon centers. As a result. the Kiev oblast has become the first in the
Republic to introduce three-program broadcasting at all rayon centers: in 1981

this type of broadcasting should be introduced in the rural radio relay networks of
seven rayons in the oblast.

1hese are examples or the modest contribution made by specialists of Ukrainian coup
muoieaiions enterprisrs to the scientific-technical progress of the branch. The
creative initiative of Republic communicators will be aimed atfurther technical
improvement of electrical lommunications, radio broadcast and television facilities
in Ihe Ukraine, and improving the economic efficiency of production and quality of
communications survives provided for the population and the national economy.

COPYRIGHT: izdatei'sivo "Radio i svyaz'", "Blektrosvyaz'". 1981

6900
csu: 5500/I0i0

IN)! OIIICIAI.IEHE(H‘LY
FOR (WHOM. “SI-Z ONLY

USSR

UDC 621.396.677

NOISE IMMUNITY 0P RADIO RELAY ANTENNAS AND SOME HAYS 0F IMPROVING IT

Moscow ELEKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 8. Aug 81 (manuscript received 20 Hay 1980)
pp 1.5-1.8

[Article by A.A. Timofeyeva and v.0. Yanpol'skiy]

chxtl intrgggggign. As the network of radio relay links develops. the requirements

for both the economic indicators and electrical parameters of radio relay link (RRL)
antennas increase.

The basic economic indicators are the following: antenna cost. which is determined
by their size. weight, required accuracy of fabrication, technology and design

complexity; and operating expenses. which are determined by their reliability,
simplicity and convenience of operation.

The basic electrical parameters which characterize the performance of line-of-sight
RRL antennas are the following: utilization factor of antenna aperture surface
(UFA). antenna-feeder matching and noise immunity. The UFA is often not a decisive
factor in choosing the antenna type. since the required gain can be obtained by
increasing the size of the antenna aperture, which causes an insignificant increase
in cost. Matching requirements depend upon specific conditions. and can vary over
wide limits. Further. the matching of most antennas used on RRL usually satisfies
the requirements imposed (SHR < 1.04 é 1.1).

The noise immunity of antennas not only characterizes the performance of a given
link, hut also influences the performance of other radio systems; therefore, as the

network of radio relay and satellite coununications links expands. this parameter
l-IKL‘P; on int-reusing importance.

The noise immunity of antennas can be improved in various ways -- either by using
some method to eliminate noise signals. or reducing the fringe radiation of the
antenna. The first way is useful for improving the noise situation on existing
links using existing antennas. while the second. which is more radical and long
range. is suitable for newly constructed and rehabilitated radio relay links, and
requires the creation of a new generation of antennas having improved noise immunity.

Until recently. increased requirements for limiting the fringe radiation level of
RRL anicnnns referred primarily lo the horizontal plane, which was dictated by the
rapid expansion of the terrestrial RRL network. However. as the satellite communica-

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-1'10“]. USE ONLY

tions network expands, the requirements for antenna lateral radiation at angles to
the horizon of other than zero are increasing.

Estimatingitmumnity. One of the methods for estimating noise immunity is to
compare the directivity patterns of Riil. antennas with the 60111 reference patterns

[1]

cm - 52-10 log? -25 log¢ as with @t < t < 02

6(4)) = 0 - for average quality antennas

} With ¢ 3 ¢z
(:(tp) - -20 dB - for high quality antennas

where C(dl) is the antenna gain in an arbitrary direction with respect to an isotro-
pit: radiator; D is the antenna aperture diameteaé )l - wavelength; (b - the angle,
in degrees, measured from the main lobe; 45. - m is the angle corresponding to

first side lobe; in is the angle beyond which it can be assumed that G(¢) - coast.

Figure 1 shows the CCIR reference patterns for average (curves 1 and la) and high
(1 anti lb) quality antennas, and the directivity patterns, referred to the isotro-
pic radiator level, of various types of antennas having approximately equal gain:
2,3,1: — guaranteed directivity patterns of single-reflector axial symmetric anten-
nas with respective gain of 39.2 dB ( Comelit Company), 39.5 dB (NBC Company),

38.8 dB (Andrew Company); 5 - guaranteed directivity pattern in horizontal plane of
horn parabolic antenna (iiPA) with conical horn, gain of 38.7 dB (Comelit Company);
6 - envelope of directivi ty pattern in horizontal plane with horizontal polariza—
tion of domestic RPA—ZP-Z antenna with pyramidal horn, gain of 39.5 dB; 7 - approx-
imule envelope of directivity pattern of type ADE axial symetric two-reflector
antenna with displaced vocal axis, with gain of 39 dB.

It l'oilown from comparing the directivity patterns cited in figure 1 as well as the
patterns of various types of antennas produced by leading foreign companies that:

i. In the front half—space. the fringe radiation level of most axial symetric
Nit!)',i(‘-l'crli‘l‘i‘nr antennas (figure 2a) does not correspond completely to the CCIR
patterns even for average quality antennas. The only exceptions are the ultrahigh
performance antennas produced by the Andrew Company. which use special screens
with an absorbing material. The axial synnetric two-reflector antennas with dis-
plaeed vocal axis used on RRl. in this country (figure 2b) have activity patterns
which slightly more than satisfy (except for the sector of the first sidelobes)
the 0(le pattern requirements for medium-performance antennas, but do not satisfy
the (ICIR patterns for high performance antennas. Non-axial symetric antennas -
lmth "PA and antennas with remote radiator (figure 2c, d) - have a fringe radiation
it'Vt‘l in the horizontal plane which is far below the required CCIR directivity
pattern for high performance antennas.

2. In the bark half-spare. the CC"! directivity patterns for medium performance
antennas are satisfied by practically all axial symetric as well as non-axial

10
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘UR ()l-‘I-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

  
    

a :———i—- —:

 

7.--“, .

Figure 1

symmetric antennas. with most of these having a fringe radiation level corresponding
to the CClR directivjty pattern for high-performance antennas. This is explained

by the fact that there have long been increased requirements for the directivity
pattern of RRL antennas in the back half-space in connection with the so—called
two-frequency plan used on RRL. Therefore, various shields have been developed

and are in use (disc-type, shields with dephasing edge, cylindrical shields with-
out absorbing material) [h]. which significantly reduce the fringe radiation level

in the hack half-space.
F) ' " Rays of increasing noise immunity. This
comparison shows that axial symmetric
antennas are significantly less noise

immune in the front half-space than HBA

and antennas with reawte radiator which,

at least in the horizontal plane, have
directivity patterns agreeing with or
exceeding the CCIR patterns for high per-
formance antennas. The basic shortcomings
of practically all non-axial symmetric
antennas are their large dimensions,

weight and cost. For example, HPA having
the same aperture area as axial synnetric
antennas have greater depth and significant-
ly larger (by approximately a factor of 2)
vertical plane dimensions, and the weight

of these antennas ordinarily exceed that

of axial symmetric antennas by a factor

      

Figure 2

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

of between 2 and A. Antennas with remote radiator are more compact, but their
weight is still greater than that of axial symmetric antennas.

Consequently, it is necessary to develop non-axial symmetric antennas which, with
simple construction and size, weight and cost comparable to axial symmetric an-
tennas, would have a fringe radiation level comparable to that of the best non-
axiai symmetric antennas in both the front and back half-space. Such antennas
can be developed using a remote-radiator scheme. This scheme is more flexible
than "PA. since the radiator together with the antenna do not represent a unified
monolothic construction. it is significantly easier to use a special radiator

to create field amplitude distribution in the antenna aperture which is optimal
in terms of noise immunity. Because of this, and because of the absence of
aperture shadowing. the fringe radiation level in the front half-space is reduced
significantly (as compared with axial symmetric antennas).

Resuarrh in this direction has shown that when high performance radiators, e.g..
those in [5,6], and a protective shield with a particular configuration is used,

a single-reflector antenna using a remote radiator which is simple in design can
have high noise immunity with size and weight comparable with axial symmetric
antennas [7]. The fringe radiation level of such antennas (figure 3,6; solid

line indicates directlvity patterns in plane of vector E; dotted line in plane of
vector H) with gain of about 38 dB in the horizontal plane (figure 3) is below

that of the required CCIR directivity patterns for both medium performance antennas
(curve 1 and la) as well as high performance antennas (curve 1 and lb).

 

Figure 3

12
FORIOFFIJAI.USI(MNLY
lﬂllilﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NNLY

mmﬁ‘

Illi'illl‘i'ilMi‘l

 

Figure 4

in the vertical plane, the fringe radiation level is below the required CCIR
directivity pattern for medium performance antennas and, except for some
small sectors. corresponds to the CCIR patterns for high performance anten-
nas (figure 4). In addition. this antenna has a high UPA (3 0.7) and good
natural matching (SHR < 1.04). One important shortcoming of the antenna

is the crass-polarization maximum level, which is higher than that of axial
symmetric antennas hut comparable with “FA. According to available data in
the literature [8,9]. this can he reduced significantly by using the special
"marched" radiator.

The noise immunity data presented here do not represent the limit. Research
has shown that reducing the UFA to 0.5, i.e., to the value of the UPA of
most existing antennas. will make it possible to reduce the fringe radiation
lvvvl by S-iO dB. while installing absorbing material on the radiator alone
will lead to an additional reduction in the aide lobe level determined by
horn re-radiation. It is also possible to place a coating of absorbent
material on the protective shield. which will increase the antenna noise
immunity further, especially in the sector of the distant side lobes.

Conclusion. Since the fringe radiation level of most axial symmetric reflector

antennas which are most widely used on RRL do not correspond to the CCIR dir-

ectivlty patterns even for medium performance antennas, one promising direction
should be considered the creation of a new generation of antennas with improved

noise immunity.

Thv new generation antennas can be implemented in a scheme with a remote radia-

tor. which wiii make it possible to combine high economic and electrical
indicators for various types of antennas.

13
FOR‘O'IICIAI.IIH£(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

B [BLIOGRAPIIY
l. CCIR XIV Plenary Assembly, Kyoto, 1978, Geneva, 1978, vol. Ix.

2. Timofeyevn, A.A.. Timnfeyev, V.V., "Basic Parameters of Production Non-

nxial Symmetric Reflector Antennas for Direct Line-of-Sight Radio Relay Communica-
tions Links." In "Sb. Eksprcss-informatsiya. Zarubezhnaya tekhnika svyazi.
Radiosvynz', radloveshchnniye, televideniye." [Express Information Collection.
Foreign Communications Technology. Radio Communications, Radio Broadcast,
Television]. Vol. 3. Moscow. 1978.

3. Timofuyeva, A.A.. Timofcycv, V.V., "Basic Parameters of Production Axial
Symmetric Reflector Antennas for Direct Llne—of—Sight Radio Relay Communications
Links." ”with, N0 l2. Mus-mm. I977.

4. Ayzcnhcrg, 6.2. Yampul'skly. V.6., Tereshin, 0.N. "Antenny UKV." [Ultrsshort
Have Antennas].. Mosvnw. lzdalel'stvo "Svyaz"\ 1977.

5. TIMufcyova. A.A. "Determination of Geometric Dimensions of Horn Radiators
with Near—Optimal Dirontivity Pattern." ELEKTROSVYAZ', No 5, 1977.

0. Yorukhimovich, Yu.A., Timorcycva, A.A. "Combination Horn Radiators for
Ruflcvtor-Typc Antennas." TRUDY NllR, 1979, No l.

7. Timnfeycva. A.A. "Antenna Hith Remote Radiator." ELEKTROSVYAZ', No 6, 1980.

8. nudge, A.H.. Adatla. N.A., New Class of Primary-Feed Antennas for Use With
Offset Parabolic-Reflector Antennas. Electronics Letters, 1975, Vol. 11, No 24.

9. Rudge, A.H., Adatia, N.A., Primary Feeds for Boreeight-Jitter Compensation
uf offset-Reflector Radar Antennas. Rude--l7 Int. Conf. London, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: izdatel’atvn "Radio i nvyaz'", "Elektrosvysz'", 1981

(3900
650: 5500/10l0

INNRCHNHCIAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

UDC 658.28.002.56.061.6

OFFICE AUTOMATION EQUIPMENT AT SPECIALIZED 'SISTEHDTEKBNIKA-SO' INTERNATIONAL
EXPOSITION

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 65-66

[Article by Candidate in Philosophical Sciences N.A. Katyukhina and Candidate in
Natural Sciences Al” Raykhtsaum]

[Text] “Sistemotekhnika-80", a specialized international exposition of facilities
for nechanizing and automating engineering-technical and management work, was

held in Leningrad in late I980. The exposition was organized by the well-known
Dusseldorf Novea Exposition Company (PEG) in conjunction with the All-Union
"Ekspotsentr" Association of the USSR chamber of Commerce and Industry. More

than 50 companies specializing in office automation production and support from

l3 countries - Austria. Belgium, Great Britain, Denmark, Italy, Liechtenstein,
Norway, USA, Finland, France, PRC, Switzerland and Japan - demonstrated their
products in the two pavilions of the exposition complex on Vasil'yevskoye Island.

The well-known companies present included Rex-Rotary (Denmark), Rank Xerox
(Great Britain), the Nashua Company (USA), Kalle Niederlasaung der Hoechst AG
and Triumph-Adler (PRC), H. Koreska (Austria) and many others.

Telephone systems and dictaphones, microfilm equipment and systems, accounting
machines, archive and computing equipment, etc., - over 500 exhibits - were
presented at the exposition.

The present article examines the office automation facilities exhibited in the
sections on "Text processing facilities", "dictaphone techaclogy" and "document-
retrieval, storage and transportation facilities".

Text documentation and text processing facilities occupied one of the leading
places. However, while a wide range of these devices was exhibited by a limited
number of companies. there were no exhibits from such companies as Olivetti
(itnly). IBM (USA), Vydec (USA). Brother (Japan) and others. In addition, the
FRc Olympia and Triumph-Adler companies presented a full set of the latest
models of typewriters and word processing systems. The Olympia Company
demonstrated the SKM and 56-3 mechanical typewriters, which are already

familiar and popular with users. For machines in their class, they have the

entire range of functional capabilities needed, aesthetic indicators as well
as medium weight (up to 16 kc).

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The UIYIpln models HS-IOO, HS-lOl and 38-105 are members of the new class of
electronic typewriters. These three models are modifications of the basic
Olympia electronic typewriter. The 25-100 has a 96-character page printer and
an 8-character buffer. The features of the 85-100 typewriter include automatic
paper feed, error correction and selectable pitch. The 38-101 differs from

the basic model in that it has a 32-position decimal tab and enough memory to
store the last line typed. The ES-lOS has a 1,000—character memory.

The Olympia exhibit also contained familiar basic automatic typewriters which
are similar in functional capabilities and appearance to electronic typewriters
or typewriters with memory (according to the company's own classification). The
model 6010, which opened this series, has a memory which uses a magnetic sleeve
with 50 4,000-character tracks. One track provides random-access memory, which
permits text editing from a special keyboard. Automatic underline, centering,
tabulation. numbering and right-justification are possible.

The memory in the model 6020 uses mini-discs with 70,000-character capacity.
The availability of this much memory makes editing possible. The model 6020 has
a 20-character line display, and provides the same functions as the basic model.

The 6110 text processing system allows long-term storage of recorded information
and provides a large random-access memory (8,000 characters). The model 6110
uses magnetic-card memory.

Triumph-Adler presented a wide range of typewriters. The portable models
exhibited included the "Tessy", "Tessy de Luxe", "abntessa de Luxe", "Junior 10/12",
and the "Tippa". All of these are mechanical, light in weight (up to 5 kc),

and provide the necessary functional keys and a 5- or 6-column tsbulator. The
"Junior 10/12" model has an additional automatic space bar. The "Hatura 300/500"
is a mechanical office typewriter with various carriage widths available, and a
9-digit decimal tabulator. The weight with the smallest carriage is 16.8 kilograms.

The "Gabrielle 5000” model is an example of an electromechanical portable typewriter.

The following models of electromechanical office machines were presented:
"Electric ﬁx" with half-space key for correcting errors and five functional repeat
keys. The "Gabrielle 5000" and "Electric HR" typewriters each weigh 11 k6. The
model CE I000 CD uses a spherical typing head and prints at 20 characters per
second. This model has a quick-change ribbon cassette, fast automatic paper feed
device and automatic correcting key.

The Triumph-Adler Company demonstrated an electronic typewriter with a daisy wheel.
A i32-character memory nukes it possible to correct, transpose or move a word or
character. The electronics control such functions as line pitch. line spacing,
field setting, sub- and superscripting, half-spacing. etc. From among their

text processing systems, the Triumph-Adler company demonstrated two elementary
automatic typing systems: the SE 2000 and "TA-20 Compact". Distinctive features
of the SE 2000 include visual and audible signaling accompanying the printing

and correction processes. The random-access memory capacity is #000 characters.

16
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Peripheral memory uses mini-discs with capacity of 64,000 characters (approxi-
mately 32 pages using A6 format). The typing ball permits printing speeds of up
to 20 characters per second. The functional capabilities of the device correspond
completely to that class of machine. The "TA-20 Compact" typing machine is recom-
mended for composition purposes. However, the availability of an 8,000—character
magnetic sleeve memory and special arithmetic device which can execute four
arithmetic operations puts this system in one of the leading positions in its
class.

The Juki (bmpany (Japan) exhibited a new electromechanical typewriter - the 3300 -
which uses a spherical typing element, two-key rollover protection device, impact
adjustment device, and quick-change ribbon cassette. The machine weighs 8 k6.

The Siemens Company (PRC) presented the new "Siemens 580" word processing system
which is intended for preparation, processing and output of prepared text as

well as computational operations. The availability of remote data transmission

devices and the computational device expands the functional capabilities of the

system.

Analyzing these exhibits at the exposition, the following basic trends in the
development of the market for text composition and processing facilities can be
discerned: typewriters are developing in the direction of miniaturization and
major utilization of electronic components; the increased numbers of electronic
typewriters is erasing the line between traditional office typewriters and ele-
mentary word processors: text processing systems are developing in the direction
of expanded functional capabilities by equipping processors with auxiliary devices
(remote data transmission devices, additional memory modules, displays, high-
speed printers, arithmetic devices).

Dictaphone technology was represented by equipment from the Stenocord Electronic
Cab“ Company (FRO).

The company presented a wide selection of familiar individual and common-user
dictaphonea (dictation systems). Individual dictaphones include models 78, 79,
9|. 178. 179 and others. Their characteristic features include the use of multi-
functional switches, automatic record level regulation, end-of-tape indicator,
built-in speakers and LED signal.

Some of the technical Specifications of this equipmentaregiven below.

 

 

Indicator Model ______
91 178 179 370
Igmcnslons, ;_._____ _' 163x60x29 barium-1.6.5 300x105x260
weight, kc 0.315 1.2 2.9
Record speed, cm/scc 1. lo -
l7

INJR¢0F11C1AL USEiNNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sound recording medium used is either a sleeve (12- or 24- minute capacity, or
5-10 typewritten pages), mini-cassettes (up to 30 minutes capacity, or 12 pages

of typewriten text) and compact cassettes l2x30 or 2x60 minutes recording capacity
(6-60 or 6120 cassettes, respectively)l.

The company demonstrated the world's smallest dictaphone, the model 291,which
has a microphone and electronic display. A mini-cassette provides One-hour re-
cording, and the nine-volt battery has enough capacity for 25 hours of recording.
The dimensions of this machine is 102x52x21 mm, with weight of 190 g.

The "Stenocord 653" system for central dictation was presented: this system has
electronic listening interkmk. which makes it possible for several talkers, one
at a time, to almost fully utilize the recording sleeves. This system is already
in use in the Soviet Union.

Document retrieval. storage and transportation facilities were exhibited by Finnish
companies.

The desktop card files produced by the Economic Kaluste-OY Company are used to store
cards with A5 and A6 formats. The card file has longitudinal, transverse and

angled dividers, which makes it possible to form files of cards within the boxes

in different directions. The boxes has removable walls fastened in special

grooves for this purpose. The maximum capacity of these files is up to 1600 A5-
format cards.

The same company presented a number of document sto. age shelves. The MK 1 and

MK 2 shelves are designed for storing documents, including those bound in folders.
The height, depth and width of MK 1 and MK 2 shelves are 66x45x110 and 115x45x110
cm, respectively, with the shelves spaced 7. 2 cm apart.

The tops of the shelves are made of metal or oak. There is an insert for suspended
files with removable divisions for blanks which moves on ball bearings.

The model RIKA 2, RIKA 3, and RIKA 6 cabinets are recommended for suspended file
storage. Their respective dimensions (height by depth by width) are 76x77xb3.3,
104.5x77x43.3 and 133.5x77x43.3 cm; there are two, three or four drawers.

The same company has modular shelves for archive storage. For example, using
removable rails the model PKH-S can be used to obtain seven different arrangements
of type LK—a, LK-S and LK-o drawers. Each of these drawers can store suspended
files. cards, punch cards or separate documents by means of dividers by means of
removable internal boxes. The cabinet has an interknk system which prevents open-
lng more than one drawer at once.

Another series of cabinets for archive storage uses the same principles: the PK—Z.
PK-3, PK-h and PKH-Z. Thanks to modular construction (7.2 cm drawer module), a
number of different cabinet versions can be made up. The technical specifications
of these models are given below.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indicator

 

Height, cm
Depth, cm
Width, cm

Number of modules

 

The Kago Company (Finland) produces general-purpose office cabinets for storing
archive documents, folders (including suspended), cards, technical data media,
etc. These cabinets are made of cold-rolled sheet steel, and will preserve
materials in the case of fire, destruction of premises. etc. The cabinets can
stand free. or can be installed on supports, on top of one another, or lined up,
thus forming specialized working areas. Depending upon the size and number of
shelves. the weight of these cabinets varies between 120 and 295 RC.

Shelves for document storage were presented by the Finnish Economic Kaluste OY

and Blectrolux Kshete Companies. The Economic Kaluste OY Company presented
stationary metal shelves for storing files, registries, folders, etc. The

frame of the shelves is made of aluminum sections, with support battens or panels
in the back; bottom cabinets with hinged doors are available. The size of the
model M“ and MMA shelves (width by height by depth) is, respectively, 86xl96(160)x
34; 80.6x160(140)x36.8 cm. The file size is 80130 cm, with shelf spacing of

7.2 cm. . -

The Electrolux Kahete Company presented the "Concentra 80" movable shelves with
special attachments for storing various types of date (for example. magnetic

tapes. punch cards, etc.), rear panels, central interlocking device and lockable
doors. These shelves are equipped with both manual and electrical drive. The
height of the shelves is 204 cm, with depth of up to 45 cm. The use of such equip-
mcnt makes it possible to save up to half of the working space set aside for
document storage when stationary shelves are used.

The "Telellft" document transportation system was presented by the Translift Gesell-
schaft F. Hebe-und Foenderanlagen HBH Company (FRO). This system uses several box-
transporters to move documents, and has previously been demonstrated in the Soviet
Union.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Hnshinostroyeniye" "deory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

6900
650: 5500/1012

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu (ll-F“ IAI. USE ONLY

USSR

SUMMARY OF EIGNTH PLENARY SESSION OF CENTRAL BOARD OF THE SCIENTIFIC-TECHNICAL
SOCIETY FOR RADIO ENGINEERING AND ELECTRICAL COMMUNICATIONS IHENI A.S. POPOV

Moscow ELE'CTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 54, 6d

{thicle by M.Ya. Shohaldina7

[Text] The eighth Plenum Session of the Central Board of the Scientific-
Technical Society for Radio Engineering and Electrical Communications imeni A.S.'
Popov held during April 1981 in Moscow was devoted to strengthening the role of
that organization in Improving production in light of the resolutions of the

26th JPSU Congress. The main address was delivered by v.1. Siforov, chairman of
tae Central Board of the NTORES and corresponding member of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. He emphasized that the main task of the NTORES today is to cooperate
with enterprises and organizations in the early implementation of the achievements
of science and technology within the national economy. One of the forms of this
cooperation is the All-Union Public Inspection of the plan for introducing the
achievements of science and technology into the national economy which is con-
ducted jointly with the branch ministries and the central committees of the
professional unions. The scope and effectiveness of all-union inspections is
increasing yearly. in 1980, about 3200 primary organizations participated in

the inspection, 23% more than in the previous year. The annual savings expected
from implementing the suggestions which were made amount to more than 700 million
rubles. v.1. Siforov noted that in the 11th Five'Year Plan, each board must

take an active part in the All-Union Inspection.

In order to speed the transmission of economics along the path of intensive dev-
elopment, the development and implementation of integrated programs for scientific-
technicai progress and goal-directed programs to solve the most urgent scientific-
Ivchnlcal problems must he supported. The Presidium of the Central Board made
plans to create a coordinating council to render assistance in fulfilling the
integrated programs which is to develop a plan for measures to be carried out.
l.c., a five-year program for conducting conferences and meetings and organizing
inspections and competitions for successful fulfillment of the phases of the

program.

In response to the call of the 26th CPSU Congress to increase technical equipping
of labor. to take all steps to introduce integrated mechanization and automation
of production processes and to continue to reduce the number of workers involved

20
FOR Old-N11“. "SI-Z ONLY
“DR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in manual labor in all branches, a new section has been created within the

Central Board on "Automation and Hechanization of Production". In early 1981,

the Presidium of the Central Board considered problems of mechanization and automa-
tion of loading-unloading and transportation-warehouse operations within the branche
These problems are at the center of attention of most primary organizations and
local boards. For example, in 4.5 years of the 10th Five-Year Plan. enterprises

in Zaporozhskaya Oblast have put seven integrated mechanized lines into production,
and more than 600 pieces of high-output equipment, including both automatic

and semiautomatic. Thanks to the participation of the primary organizations of

the Scientific-Technical Society, most of the equipment was introduced ahead of
schedule. This made it possible to free 858 workers, to mechanize labor of 1757
individuals, and to obtain savings of 1,662,000 rubles.

The public verification of the completion of organizational-technical measures to
mechanize difficult and laborious production processes and organizations in Kiev
indicated that eight integrated mechanized sectors, 19 mechanized assembly and
conveyor lines, 77 pieces of machinery for loading-unloading and transportation-
wnrehnusing operations were implemented, and 89 pieces of equipment modernized,
at six industrial enterprises alone. As a result, 1068 workers were freed of
manual labor. The savings amounted to 3,200,000 rubles.

This work has been especially well-organized in the Tul'sk, Ivano-Frankovsk,
Gomel', Sverdlovsk, Kuybyshev and Chelyabinsk oblast boards. Participants of the
All-Union Conference on ”Developing Means of Hechanization and Automation of
Postal Communications" held by the Central Board of the NTORES in October 1980
became acquainted with past experience: this conference was devoted to questions
of the participation of the scientific-technical community in implementing the
Decrees of the Central Committee of the CPSU and USSR Council of Ministers of

la July 1978 "On Measures for Further Improvement of Postal Communications in
Support of the Population and the National Economy."

For the 1980 All-Union Competition, the Central Board received 120 scientific-
technical and planning-development projects for mechanizing and automating labor-
intensive processes. The expected savings amount to 196 million rubles.

An important task is to ensure an overall increase in the volume of production
through increased labor productivity without increasing the number of workers.

The NTORES Central Board is aiming local boards and primary organizations toward
saving metal. power, fuel and metals. This is the first order of attention in
organizing competitions of personal and integrated creative plans. Fulfilling
creative plans in 1980 saved 7,000 tons of ferrous and 950 tons of nonferrous
metals. The implementation of technological processes which are new in principle
and new treatments, especially the use of fiber-optic communication links, will
make it possible to save tons of valuable copper in the future.

1pc "Basic niroaticuuzlor Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-
l985 and up to l990" poses the task of improving the quality of all types of
production. Scientists and engineers who are members of the NTORES imeni A.S.
Pnpnv continue to develop and improve the integrated communications quality

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR {WI-1‘ 'IAI. Insl-Z ONLY

control system based on developing and implementing automated methods of using them
to increase the efficiency and quality of production, as well as widespread intro-
duction of modern microelectronics.

The Central Board has proposed to hold a conference on "Hetrological Problems of
Microelectronics" in the spring of 1981, with plans to consider problems of the
quality of modern microequipment and netrological support for production; there
are future plans to hold an all-union conference devoted to questions of the
quality of radio equipment which is in production.

In conclusion, v.1. Siforov turned to questions of increasing the qualifications
of scientists, engineers and technicians and of disseminating the achievements of
science, technology and leading experience. The NTORES Central Board and local
boards organize courses, seminars, schools of advanced experience, lectures and
reports annually. The Central Board considers the people's universities to be an
effective form for increasing qualifications and disseminating knowledge.

In order to disseminate the achievements of science, technology and experience,
v.1. Sirnrov noted that local boards must make wider use of the branch journals
RADIOTEKHNIKA, BLBKTROSVYAZ', and VESTNIK SVYAZI, as well as popular newspapers,
radio and television.

The eighth Plenum Session of the Central Board of the NTORBS imeni A.S. Popov
assured the Central Committee of the CPSU the All-Union Central Council of
Professional Unions and the All-Union Council of Scientific-Technical Societies
that the scientists, engineers and production leaders belonging to the Society

of Radio Engineering, Electronics and Communications will lend their efforts,
knowledge and experience for the successful fulfillment of the historical resolu-
tions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Elektrosvyaz‘", 1981

6900
680: 5500/1010

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

BRIEFS

DATA COMMUNICATIONS CONFERENCE-#1 meeting was held of the Scientific-Technical Coun—
c_il of the USSR Ministry of Communications in February 1981 where the MIR
/5cientific Research ins titute of Radio/ report on 'Prospects for development of
radio relay systems for transmitting digital information' was discussed. The report
examined the singularities of constructing digitial radio relay line circuits, basic
digital signal transmission methods. methods for organizing analog radio relay links
for transmitting digital signals, methods for organizing radio relay link control
systems, problems of the electromagnetic capatibility of digital relay links with
themselves and with analog radio relay links. The main directions in the creation
of equipment for digital radio relay systems were defined. along with those questions
of utilizing various digital radio relay system equipment in networks of the Unified
Automated Communications System which need further development. The scientific-
technical council adopted the basic points of the report and noted the importance
and urgency at creating equipment for digital radio relay systems. An article on
the construction principles, singularities and prospects for development of digital
radio relay links will be published in an upcoming issue of the journal
ELEKTROSWAZ'. which will be devoted to problems of the development of radio relay
cormunicat ions. /'l‘ext/ [Moscow BLBKTROSWAZ' in Russian No 8, Aug 81 p 29/ 6900

POWER SUPPLIES FOR COWNICATIONs-modern comnications equipment must provide
continuous transmission of widely varying information. Along with other necessary
conditions, this is achieved through the availability of a guaranteed failsafe

I‘M‘I SUPNY system. The Central Design Bureau of the USSR Ministry of Colmnunications
has submitted a report on "New developments of the Central Design Bureau for power
supply devices" for consideration by the Scientific-Technical Council (reported by
M.v. urodskiy). The composition and amount of equipment used on new and rehabili-
tated Ministry of Communications enterprises has changed sharply in recent years.
New types or equipment impose new requirements on power supplies. The increased
amount of new equipment causes an increase in power consumption. which cannot be
satisfied in the near future simply by increasing power. It is. therefore, necessary
to implemnt solutions which are new in principle. The power supply devices which
are beinq developed at the Central Design Bureau can be divided conditionally into
two cu'nups: power supply devices intended for use in existing or newly introduced
power supply systems and devices which can provide the basis for developing or
introducing power supply systems which have not been used at connunications enter-

WHO-- PFOViOUBIY. The first g_roup includes thyristor rectifiers. which should
replace the widely used VUK /expansien unknown/ rectifiers. 'l'hyristor rectifiers
.un designed to he used in block- ~buft'er systems as buffer and charge-buffer

23

l-‘OROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rectifiers. A significant amount of the copper and steel used in making windings
is saved in manufacturing the new generation of thyristor type rectifiers. This
group also includes various AKAB storage battery switching devices, a new modifica-
tion of_the Wis-3. radio relay link equipment power supplies. URN [expansion
unknown/ voltage testing devices and 011‘ [expansion unknown/ current indicators.
The second group of devices includes booster converters, converters for obtaining
additional voltage values or voltages with reversed polarity and devices for
guaranteed failsafe supply of stabilized AC voltages. The Scientific-Technical
Council, discussing the report of the Central Design Bureau. adopted the basic
directions of the development of power supply devices and reconmended the following:
that the Central Scientific-Research Institute of Commnications consider the
possibility of creating a power supply system using booster converters and voltage
Converters considering the data available at the Central Design Bureau: that the
Central Design Bureau accelerate and finish by 1982 the development of converters
and devices [or Eailsafe AC power supply, paying special attention to reducing
start-up time and reducing the internal resistance of converters; that the possi-
bility of reducing the internal resistance of thyristor rectifiers be looked into
and that requirements be defined for the power of the IDES standby automatic diesel
power plant; that suggestions he prepared for the implementation of possible changes

and updates in the technical task for thyristor rectifiersi and that the problem

of unifying the power supply equipment and systems used in wire and radio cot-noni-
cations equipment be worked out. it was recoumended that the question of creating
a purposeful integrated five-year program for the development and creation of new
power supply equipment for communications be_exagineg and. if necessary, that a
design hoard be created for this program. [i'exs/ [Moscow BLBKTROSVYAZ' in Russian
No 8. Aug 81 p 59/ 6900

COPRIGHT: izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz", Elektrosvyaz" 1981

cso: 5500/1010 END

2h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY