POI OFPK‘IAI. t8}! ONLY

JPRS L/10210
23 December 1981

Translation

SYNCHRONIZATION 0F PRECISION TIME

AND FREQUENCY STANDARDS

By

Gleb Nikolayevich Paliy and Yelena Vitol’dovna Attem'yeva

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language

sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
“)3 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/10210

23 December 1981

SYNCHRONIZAIION 0F PRECISION TIME AND FREQUENCY STANDARDS

Moscow SINKRRONIZATSIYA WSOROTOCHN‘.’KB HER VRBMBNI I CHABTOTY in
Russian 1976 (signed to press 21 Jun 76) pp 2-39, 60-153, 164-168

[Annotation, introduction, chapters 1-3. 5-1, references and table of
contents from book “Synchronization of Precision Time and Frequency

Standards”, by Gleb Nikolayevich Paliy and Yelena Vitol'dovne
Artem'yeva, Izdatel'stvo stendsrtov. 5,000 copies, 168 pages]

Couteuts

mounonssossee.ossssessssessoocossoeso.oosseeoosooos-Ioossslsssossossoss 1

IntroducuOnOIOol.000.000.00.00....0OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOIOO J

Chapter 1. Precision Frequency and Tim Saharan...".................. b

1.1. mtrobual mr‘cumua.OOOOOOOOOOOCOO0.0000000000IOOOOIO ‘

1.2. stmctum of mﬂ-Pucum smamOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOUOOOOOO 9
Owner 2. types of Synchronization of Precision Frequency did u.

sunaraoiOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOO...OOOOOOOOOOOO0.0000000000COOOO‘O 19

2010 Inducad synd‘miutm...Ones0.0000000000000000...00000000000 20
2.2. sell-Autumn swarmiumnsso.sssoesoosooeoeosoesoossssee 23
203. “mm“ synchmniudonsssooocsssoosossosoesosssoosososse-o 25

Gupta: 3. kthods of Determining Frequency Difference of Synchroniud
nd synchrmtzms stmuraOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOCOOOCUOOOOOIOOOO 26

3.1. lhthod Based on Results of liter-min; the Bffsctive

Frequency of the Standard To Be Synchmniud.................. 26
3.2. Ibthod Bssed on monuments of (lungs in Phase Difference

of Heveforss of Synchronizing snd Synchronized smdsrds......

Gupta: 5. Signal Transmission Methods Using VLF hdio (hsnnds...........

30

30

Solo 1WI1tdn8 huntiuosoooooscssessooosseooeooosooeosoeossss w
502. ”mod. Of at 819.1 km.m.1mooonosososssoonessoosssssss 32
I'VA 00".th U§D 'A‘bl

5.3. Elements of the ‘lheory of VLF Propagation in the Spherical
Earth-Ionoaphere Havaguida.....................................

5.1.. Daily Variationa of Phase and hplituda of Signal at
hapttm PomtOOOOOIIIOOOOOOO0.0.0.00.COOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIO

5.5. liethod of Calculating Phase and Amplitude of a Signal..........
5.6. Error of Calculating Propagation um..........................

Chapter 6. lbthods of Synchronizing Spatially Separated Frequency
ad line Standards in the I!!! and Microwave Banda...............

m1“: kflectmu m. ““0! MhOOOOODOOODOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOIO
Us. of nhmion Game”.0..0....0.0.0....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI.
thins Artifici.1 sawiu.00009'000000......00.000000000000000
Using the Orbits Reception-Point System for Global
swamizauon of n” s“1e..000000.0...DOOOOOCOOOOCDOOIOOOOO
. Synchronization Error due to Inconstancy of Radio Rave

Pmpautioneooosoooeosooeosooooosaooooooeoosooososooooooooooooo

G090
0

U' 5UNH
e

0‘
0

Chapter 7. hconendations on Synchronizing Tin and hequency

stmurdSoeooeosaasscoot-slosoooosas00.00000oooooseesssoaonaooo.

synd‘rmiutmn Pacintie'OOOOOOOOOOO0.000000000000000000000000
synchroniutmn kmObOOOOIO0.0...OOOOOUOOOOOOOuVOIOOOIIO'0...
Synchronizing Frequency Standards..............................
swchroniution of ﬂu smhtaOOOOOO0.0000000000000000000IOO
bthods of Processing Results of )baaurenents has by the
mase awed.‘0O0.07..0.....0.00......OOOOOOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOODOO
Constructing ﬁapemids of Gnangas in 'p Pro- Malta

Of the Differential *“mgnt “130$...".u_..ouo.........

o
a

o
Uit‘wNH
o s

\l
a
O
o

Feferences.................no.”nun...”.o....o.o..uuouuou.nno...

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL ISB WU!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annotation

with error of l as or less. A brief description is given of the corresponding
measurement facilities. their basic metrological characteristics are indicated.
and an examination is made of possible regimes of synchronization of frequency
and time acgndggda. Methods are described for synchronizing frequency and time

ard VLF bands, methods and means of synchronization in the VB! and microwave bands.
Recommendations are mrde on determining the irradiance of the transmission path.

and on measuring signal delay in receiving and recording equipment. methods of
processing meaiurement results and determining the principal astrological character-
istics of measurement facilities. Some information is given on national time ser-
vices. and on the nev UTC [universal coordinated time] system.

The book is intended for scientific workers of the appropriate profile. engineering
and technical personnel of various time and frequency services. and may also be
of use to undergraduate and graduate students of institutions of higher education.

Tables 12. figures 56, references 51.

Introduction

The unit of time. the second. is one of the principal physical quantities in all
systems of units._inc1uding $1. The unit of frequency. the hertz. is a derivative
unit that corresponds to the frequency of a periodic process such that one cycle
of this process occurs in one second.

Until the mid twentieth century. local time was determined with respect to the
position of a given point of the earth relative to the sun and stare. it being
FonflﬂﬂClALIIHEONLY

originally assumed that rotation of the planet takes place uniformly. The period

of rotation of the earth relative to its axis was taken as a natural time standard,
the mean solar day. and the second was defined as 1/86400 of a mean solar day. As
measurement technology developed and the requirements for accuracy of measurements
increased. the definition of the second underwent considerable changes. Even pendu-
lum clocks showed a systematic slowing down of the diurnal rotation of the earth.

To improve accuracy of reproduction of the unit of time. it was redefined in 1960
with reference to the motion of the earth around the sun based on the astronomical
definition of universal ephemeris time. The second was calculated as 1/3155925.9747
of the tropical year (time between two vernal equinoxes) for January 0 of the year

1900 at 12 hours ephemeris time. This improved the accuracy of time reproduction
by nearly two orders of magnitude.

However. the realization of such accuracy required acct-elation of results of astro-
nomical observations over a period of one or two years. Besides, it was established
by quartz clocks that even with consideration of the regular slowing down of diurnal
rotation of the earth the duration of a day was still inconstant, i. e. the very
period of revolution of the earth around the sun is subject to irregular fluctua-
tions. The creation of quantum-mechanical sources of electromagnetic waveforms
(these sources are based on the capacity of atoms and molecules to emit and absorb
energy with transition from one energy state to another) enabled introduction of

the concept of the physical or atomic second in 1967. This was defined as the
interval of time required for 9192631770 oscillations corresponding to the rnsunant
frequency of the energy transition between levels of the hyperfine Structure of

the ground state of an atom of cesium-133 in the absence of perturbations by ex-
ternal fields.

The development of masers enabled refinement of the numerical values of the uniform
rotation of the earth. It was established that the secular deceleration of the
rotation of the earth due to tidal friction over a century leads to.a change in

the duration of the day by 0.0016 s. Seasonal nonuniformities in rotation of the
earth over half a year cause changes in the duration of a day by :1 ms (with respect
to frequency this amounts to ~l-10'°).

But even with acceptance of the atomic second. the astronomical system of time
measurement has not been displaced. The two scales mutually complement one another.
The time scale based on the atomic second reproduces an abstract uniform time.

It is not associated with the position of the earth relative to the sun or other
heavenly bodies, and reproduces a unit of time intervals with temporal zero position
that is arbitrary. just as the phase of any waveforms is arbitrary. The scale

of ephemeris time reproduces elapsed time with respect to the position of the earth
in cosmic space. fixes its position. and changes along with a change in the rate

of motion of the earth. The scale of ephemeris time reproduces both an interval
and an instant of time. The scale of atomic time reproduces a time interval and
stores the instant transferred to it by the ephemeris second.

Units of time and frequency are reproduced by time and frequency standards. The
purpose of the frequency standard is to reproduce waveforms with a given value
of frequency and predetermined eetrological characteristics. The purpose of the
time standard is to reproduce a time scale. 1. e. a sequence of time intervals
with set temporal position of the beginning of the interval (instant of time).

FOIIOI’ ’
FOI‘0511C1AI.USE1DNIN

The assurance of unity of measurements of time and frequency is not merely the
reproduction of units of these quantities with minimum errors relative to the State
time and frequency standard [Gosudarstvennyy etalon vrameni i chastoty; GEVCh];
assurance of unity of measurements is inseparably tied up with the availability

of correspondingly accurate means of synchronization and methods of transmitting
time and frequency signals. To ensure unity of time measurements it is necessary
not only to synchronize time intervals. but also to correlate the signals of the
time scale with the GEVCh scale. The signals from the reference standard that

are used to bring the time scales into coincidence do not arrive instantaneously.
but over a certain time. and consequently a correction for this time must be intro-
duced into the time scale being synchronized.

The synchronization method is dictated by the method of determining the difference
of frequencies or phasesof the signals of the synchronizing and synchronized stan-
dards in combination with different signal transmission channels. This combination
depends on the required precision. the errors of the standards. and their relative
location. Analysis of these and many other technical factors in application to
specific conditions enables determination of the most effective methods and means.

The main facilities for synchronizing frequency and time standards are radio sta-
tions operating in various bands. They transmit information on instants and inter-
vals of time:

by pulse signals. each having a characteristic point that coincides with the instant
of onset of some event that determines the beginning of readout of the time standard
to be synchronized (pulse systems);

by continuous harmonic oscillations. or waveforms with frequencies that periodically
alter phase relations (phase systems); '

by pulse signals in which the phase of one of the periods of the carrier frequency
is combined with the epoch of the time standard to be synchronized (pulse-phase
systems).

As a rule. frequency standards are synchronized with respect to the high-precision
carrier frequencies of these radio stations.

It becomes possible to use precise time and standard frequency signals transmitted
via radio stations to make an exact check on measurement fecilitiesnot onlysuith
respect to frequency and time. but also with respect to voltage. power and so on.

At the same time. this method does not completely meet the demands of a large

range of users with regard to accuracy and reliability. The error of synchroniz-
ing frequency and time standards by these signals is due to many factors. primarily
instability of the characteristics of transmitting and receiving equipment and

the inconstancy of conditions of radio wave propagation. These components will
have various weights for different wave bands.

In the very-low frequency band. the radio wave propagation channel can transmit
instants of time signals with a small error of the order of 10 us. but the time-
inconstnncy of characteristics of the transmitting and receiving equipment and

the passband (159—600 Hz) considerably increases the overall synchronization error.
lNll‘OFiﬂClAl.llﬂl¢ﬂNLY

The influence of these errors is reduced by increasing the collation time and by
using a phase method of tie-in with resolution of ambiguity to the period of the

carrier frequency. Besides, VLF radio stations are quite large, expensive to make
and costly to operate.

The channel of long-wave radio stations provides precision time and frequency signal
transmission with small errors. of the order of a few microseconds. but signal
transmission can be accomplished to distances of up to 1200-1800 km. and a network
of long-wave stations is needed to cover large territories. and these are also
cumbersome and expensive.

Transmitting and receiving equipment for the short-wave band has a relatively wide
passband and more stable characteristics. However, due to multibeam signal propa-
gation and shifting of the reflecting layers of the ionosphere. there are consider-
able losses of precision. Only by using special methods of reception. registration
and calculation of the tine of signal transmission can the synchronization error

be reduced to sc-zoo us.

At the present time. considerable theoretical and experimental research is being
done to appreciable improve the accuracy of transmitting the dimension of units

of time and frequency. mainly by using wide-broadcast television channels, meteoric
communication. artificial satellites. and also natural sources of radiation of
periodic electromagnetic oscillations from outer space.

This book describes the most typical methods of synchronizing time and frequency
standards with consideration of accuracy requirements. Analysis of these methods
may be useful in developing more improved methods and means of synchronization.

The authors are sincerely grateful to Candidate of Technical Sciences V. I. Sachkov
for constructive comments made during review of the manuscript, Candidate of Tech-
nical Sciences V. G. Il'in and D. Yu. Eelotserkovskiy. and also Candidate of Tech-
nical Sciences Yu. A. Pedorov, Engineer Yu. D. lvanova and A. G. Halov for assis-
tance in preparing the manuscript for publication.

CHAPTER 1: PRECISION FREQUENCY AND TIME STANDARDS
1.1. Metrological Characteristics

of primary significance for frequency standards are metrological characteristics

of frequency of the generated waveforms; by the same token. the most important

for time standards are metrological characteristics of the reproduced time intervals
and instants.

As is true of all other quantities. frequency may have systematic and random patterns
of change. To evaluate these, it is necessary to know some frequencies during time
intervals ‘dis over which it is required to establish the changes that occur.

The frequency of the oscillations at time t (the instantaneous frequency) is the
derivative of phase with respect to time

._17., ' (1.1)

INDR‘OIIICIAI.IISEICH§LY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If on the extent of some time interval there is little variation in phase and ampli-
tude of the oscillations. then the instantaneous frequency is the frequency of
harmonic oscillations in this time interval.

Measurement of the frequency of oscillations. like any physical quantity. requires
a time over vhich the measured quantity is averaged. The frequency is taken as
the mean value for the time-averaging interval 1,. and it is the integral of the
instantaneous frequency f on this interval (Pig. 1)

(1.2)

 

Fig. 1. Frequency averaging in the
interval t','- ti

where ti. t? are the instants bounding ry. and are symmetrically situated relative
to instant t1; Ty' tY- ti. Bach frequency is obtained as the mean value over the
sane averaging intervals. The averaging interval may be equal to the interval

of discreteness--the interval over which the astrological characteristics of the
frequency standard are determined (Pig. 2).

 

Pig. 2. Discrete series of
average frequencies

He can take 1 (tdis under condition that the frequency in the time interval between
measurements {ti- tT, t5- t9 and so on) varies linearly.

The mean value of the frequency over rx can be found either by continuous measure-
1

ment over time Tn"1y. or by repeated screte measurement each tine over a period
rn<1y.

FOR<0¥1WCIALIJ§I¢NULY
FINICHNHCJAI.IEIE(”ULY

In continuous frequency measurement by the method of direct estimation with the
use of a counting-type frequency meter. its reading is the mean frequency over
the measurement time equal to the time of averaging (ﬁn' 1y).

In direct frequency measurement by a differential method. and in direct measurement
of the difference frequency P. the mean frequency is obtained as a result of the
calculation

f-fn+P. (103)
:here fn is the nominal frequency.

In discrete measurement. the mean frequency in time I, is calculated as the arithme-
tic average of the resultant values

0
Eh (1.6)

7-2—}.

Continuous frequency measurement can be replaced by discrete measurement in time
intervals during which the frequency changes linearly.

The metrological characteristics of the frequency standard are:

nominal frequency fa.

effective frequency fe.

frequency error--error of the standard 1.

error of effective frequency Sf.

systematic regular change in frequency in time u.
variation. random changes of frequency. a.

The nominal frequency is the value that is to he reproduced by the frequency stan-
dard; it is the nameplate value.

The effective frequency fe (or simply f) is determined by comparing the given stan-
dard with one of greater precision. During utilization of the standard. the fre-
quency of the generated saveforna varies. and hence f. differs from in.

The frequency of the oscillations is a function of time. and at time t
I. -=f:.+v(l—I.):¢:a. (1.5)
where t--to is expressed in intervals of diacretenees time Idle.

1n precision frequency standards the time dependence of v can be observed only

over long time intervals. and the frequency variation can be described by a second-
degree polynomial in which E is taken as a linear component of the systematic change
in frequency in interval t-to. and the quadratic component q of this change is
negative. Then

I,ul._-I-E(I-!.) HU-h)‘ La. ' (1.6)

Hence the relative error of the standard is

6

FOR OIIICIAI.UBI1DNlJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.,=1.,.+E,(l—f.)+¢.(l—l.)‘1-0.. (1.7)

where

For small time intervals (of measurement and discretenese). E is taken as constant.
q-O. and all supplementary measurements are evaluated as random.

The effective frequency is the average value for the time of measurement. If the
frequency is measured by the method of direct estimation using a counting-type

frequency meter. the averaging is done directly by the frequency meter. end the
error of the resultant value is equal to that of the meter. If a differential
method is used in which the measured frequency is compared with a calibrated value
fcal’ the averaging time shall not be less than one period of their difference
frequency P. and the measurement result is the number of periods n of the difference
frequency over the measurement time

fe ' fear??? (1-3)

The error of the resultant value is

sot-10%;. . (1.9)

where Ar is the error of measurement of time 1..

.1.
Yo fe.

In determining fe as a result of discrete measurements by the method of direct
estimation or by the differential method, the measurement is made over the extent
of 1'. through equal intervals of time I. Determined at each measurement is the
unit value of ft. the average over rm, and the sritlmetic average is taken from

values obtained over time ry-nr [see formula (1.6)].

The error Sf is the mean square error of the result

I
S n - %'(h-I)' (1.10)
I

tun—l) '

In doing this. the systematic change in frequency over 1, can be disregarded. or
rather 1 must be selected so that the systematic change in frequency over this

time vil be small compared with random changes.

The error of the standard is determined for time intervals during which. the changes
of frequency are less than the error of measurement of the effective frequency.

FOROFFICIALUEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The error of the standard can be either determined from the effective frequency,

or measured directly (although the measurement of an error sounds sonewhat paradoxi-
cal). For example if the differential nethod of comparing the frequency of the
standard with a calibrated frequency is used. the difference between the effective
and nominal values is measured directly. 1. e. the frequency error (if the error

of the calibrated frequency can be disregarded).

The effective frequency can be determined by a phase mathed—measurenent of the
time interval r. during which the phase difference between oscillations has changed
by 2:. Then

re- fc.1+-l-. (1.11)
tI1

To measure or check the numerical values of changes of frequency of precision stan-
dards. discrete noasurementa are taken of the frequency of the standard over some
sample time interval r.. by analogy with sampling ncnitoring. the sample tine
interval should be such that it can be assuned with a sufficient degree of proba-
bility that values of metrological characteristics determined over this time will
be retained by the standard until the next check or certification. The tines be-
tween intervals are established by regulations for different types of standards.
and times between certifications are established by the rules of certification

of precision frequency standards.

Based on a number of values of frequency obtained in intervals r, through prede-
ternined tines ‘dis’ the average values of frequency changes over this time interval
are calculated.

Precision frequency standards have a systematic variation that is constant over
cooperatively short intervals 1:3, that is time-independent. and that can be easily
calculated fron the formula

5 ._afﬂ-_fl_’
° fn(t'to)

where f" is the effective frequency at the last n-th measurement; f; is the same
at the first measurmnt. n is the number of measurements. t- to-r. (expressed

in 1d 18) .

(1.12)

Random changes of frequency are evaluated by the mean square value of the frequency
variation

{1 _ _
a.___'_. EIUHI In) a. (1.13)
n I n—l
n

The average values of the astrological characteristics of the standard as determined
with finite n will be the more exact the greater the n. At n- 10. the deviations
of the resultant manerical values of these characteristics from the true values

do not exceed 502 (Ref. 1]. Therefore in calculating mean values it is,necessary

to have at least ten independent measurement results.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0510“. USE ONLY

Frequency instability is the term used for the degree of variability of the fre-
quency of the continuously operating standard. As we can see. this is the sun

of systematic and random changes. Until recently, the principal characteristic

of higher-class frequency standards was constancy. frequency stability mnerically
characterized by the value of its instability. After quantus frequency standards
had been introduced into the tins and frequency service. the accuracy of the fre-
quency of reproduced oscillations as characterised by the error of the effective
value cans to be just as iaportant an indicator. Therefore it would now be sore
correct to call higher-class frequency standards "high-precision" rather than "high-
stability."

Precision tine standards (clocks) are based on a. precision frequency standard,
and therefore the error of the tine intervals that they reproduce and their insta-
bility are in a one-to-one relationship with the analogous characteristics of the
precision frequency standard.

The tenporal position of the beginning of a tins interval (instant of tins) is
described by the expression

J
T :1 T + (s
. . 'I 1.4 (1.14)
where To is the temporal position of the beginning of the interval at sole instant

to. and Y0 is the relative error in tine interval t— to.

The constant value of the error of the frequency standard in interval t- to leads
to a linear rise in the correction of the tine standard

U.-1.(!---!.) (1.15)
and to a constant rate of going of the frequency standard (clock rate)

K=Ul—”'. > (1.16)

l —I. ""

 

The systesatic frequency change described by a second-degree polynomial produces
corresponding changes in the correction and rate of going of the tine standard.
For example the correction at time t is

U. = 1.“ — I.) + -;- E." —- h)” -I- -;-q.(t-' 0'. (1. 11)
and the rate of the time standard in the interval t-to is
a n1..+ 3LE.(l-I.) -1-%¢.(t-—t.)'. (1.1s)

Different combinations of values of Yo. £0 and qo lead to different changes in
the errors of the frequency standard and the assent of signals of the tine standard.

1.2. Structure of High-Precision Standards

A quartz oscillator is a low-noise generator of stable electric waveform in which
the tank circuit is a quartz crystal that has piezoelectric properties. The

FOIOFFICIALUSBONLY
FORIOFFICIAI.USBlﬂVLY

combination of the large piezoelectric effect of quartz with high homogeneity of
crystals. and low dependence of its physical parameters on external conditions
ensures high frequency stability of the generated waveforms.

Quartz oscillators are used as precision frequency standards in a variety of elec-
tronic measurement systems. and up until quantum frequency standards appeared.
groups of quartz oscillators were used as frequency standards.

Frequency instability of the signals of a quartz oscillator is caused by inconstancy
of the parameters of the quartz resonator and the excitation circuit arising as

a result of internal changes in the oscillatory system, variations in the working
conditions and in the oscillator load. Frequency changes can be calculated for
different oscillator circuits as a function of the change in individual circuit
parameters. variation of interelectrode capscitsnces and the transconductance of

the tube or transistor. or the change in active losses in the circuit Inst. 2].

The total effect of all factors that influence frequency causes systematic and
random frequency variations. Systematic changes occur mainly due to aging of the
quartz resonators. and immediately after manufacture may reach 10'7-10'° per day.
gradually decreasing to (l-2)-10‘ per month.

In one of the radio centers of the State Time and Frequency Service. the reference
frequency standard is a quartz oscillator in a silicon transistor circuit with
x-cut quartz-crystal resonator. The influence of external temperature variation

on the frequency of the oscillator is eliminated by using double thermostatting.

the AT of the inner thermostat being <lo"°c-1. Reliable isolation of the excita-
tion circuit from the external load is accomplished by using common-base amplifiers.
and the Output stages are accommodated together with the circuit of the next-to-last
stage in a separate shield. Each stage of the circuit has a separate supply stabi-
lizer, and in addition there is a common stabilizer for the input supply voltage.
As a result of prolonged use it has been established that the mean square deviation
of frequency is a0310'12. and the systematic diurnal variation of frequency is

ﬁo= (ya-10"” (Ref. 3].

By now the theory of the quartz oscillator and methods of constructing it have
been fairly well worked out [Ref. 4-6]. so that the capabilities of the quartz
oscillator with respect to getting high-stability waveforms have been nearly ex-
hsusted.

Fundamentally new methods of high—precision reproduction of electromagnetic oscil-
lations have been suggested by radiospectroscopy and quantum electronics [Ref. 7].
Microsystemn of atoms and molecules emit or absorb electromagnetic oscillations

with frequency depending nearly exclusively on the structure of the microparticle.
and therefore being nearly absolutely constant. Hicrosystems are made up of a
comparatively small number of elementary particles (electrons. protons and neutrons),
and therefore removal of any of them appreciably changes the properties of the
microsystem. The continuous changes of properties inherent in macrosystems are
impossible in microsystems.

One of the major properties of a nicrosystem is the discrete set of values of its

internal energy E. In a microsystem isolated from external factors, the energy
spectrum always remains invariant. Interaction of atoms and molecules with an

10
FEHICIHWCIA1.USE(XSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electromagnetic field may cause a change in the internal energy as a result of
transition of the microsystem from one energy state to another by amomts described
by the well-known formula

1..., -‘E,_E,. (1.19)

where h is Planck's constant. “n1: is the frequency of emission or absorption. 2.,
and Bk are energy levels between which the transition has taken place.

Transitions from one level to another can occur spontaneously. independently of
external actions on the microparticles. or can be induced by external radiation.
Spontaneous transitions are random. Their principal characteristic is the average
time during which the transition occurs. amounting to about 10" s. The overall
spontaneous emission is incoherent. i. e. non-unidirectional and non-unnochromstic.
In a stimulated transition. when an atom transfers energy to the electromagnetic
field. which is intensified as a consequence. the frequency of the induced radiation
coincides exactly with that of the stimulating emission. Induced transitions are
the basis for operation of quantum generators of monochromatic coherent radiation.

If an active substance with population of an upper level 82 greater than that of
a lower level 8} is acted on by an electromagnetic field with frequency

v _ B; - Bl '
h
the number of induced transitions from E: to B; will exceed the amber of absorp-
tions with transitions from E; to 82. and as a result the field will be intensified
by the internal energy of the atoms. Placement of the active substance in a cavity

resonator with large Q tuned to the frequency of the transition Br’h brings about
conditions for generation of oscillations.

However. under conditions of thermodynmsic equilibrium between the substance and

the ambient medium, Boltzmann's law states that lower energy levels are more densely
populated than upper levels. Therefore ordinary matter absorbs the energy of the
stimulating electromagnetic field rather than amplifying it. '

Several methods can be used to upset the equilibrium state and setup population
inversion.

The first method is spatial separation of atoms that are on different energy levels.
A beam of noninteracting atoms is passed through an inlnmogeneous electric or_ mag-
netic field. The effect of such a field on an atom depends on energy: with an
increase in a continuous field. the energy of the lower level decreases. while

that of the upper level increases. As atoms ;ass through an inhomogeneous field
they will tend to approach the region where the resultant potential energy will

be minimum. Consequently. the atoms that are on the upper energy level will go
toward the weaker field, while atoms on the lower level will go toward the strong
field region.

The second method is to disrupt thermal equilibriu by using auxiliary emission
(method of pumping). A three-level system (31. B; and 33) is subjected-to the
action of an auxiliary field whose frequency is equal to that of the transition

11

momaatussonur'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between levels B; and £2. and as a result the population of 3; increases. Inverse
population of levels 2;. B, is set up, enabling amplification or stimu‘ated emission
of waveforms in such a substance.

Bach atom has its own inherent set of spectral lines on definite frr. encies with
different natural widths and shapes. Corresponding to the tip of the spectral

line is some resonant frequency that is a reference frequency. Measurement of

the frequency of the tip of the spectral line is the besic'job of a device designed

for operation as a precision frequency standard. called the quanti- frequency stan-
dard (ops).

Since the reference frequencies of spectral lines expressed in SI units have values
that are inconvenient for practical use. the QPS is based on the principle of sta-
bilizing the frequency of the output of the quartz oscillator with respect to the
frequency of electromagnetic radiation upon transition of atoms of a substance
from one state to another.

There are several types of QPS that differ with respect to methods of fixing the
tip of the spectral lines and arrangements for automatic frequency control of the
quartz oscillator.

The active QFS is an arrangement with a mass: whose output signal controls the fre-
quency of a quartz oscillator via a phase AFC system. The passive Ql's arrangement
contains a quantum discriminator whose signals are used to control the quartz oscil-
lator frequency by means of a frequency AFC system.

Most completely developed at present are QFS's based on cesium-133. atomic hydrogen
and rubidius-87.

Cesium Frequency Standard

The cesium frequency standard is a passive Q“. The tip of the spectral line is
fixed by determining the hunter of atoms that have undergone a quanta transition
[Ref. 8].

The quantum discriminator or atomic-bean tube (ABT) was developed as a result of
perfecting the radiospectroscope. Cesium-133 atoms are used as the working sub-
stance.

The energy of interaction between magnetic moments of electrons and nucleus appears
as one of the components in the overall energy of the cesium atom. As a consequence

of the interaction, a hyperfine structure is formed. and the increment of energy
of the ground level E.) is

46. = «if» -;’-IF(F + m— "(I + n—Ju + In. (1.20)

where a is the hyperfine splitting constant. 1- 7/2 is the quantum number of the
spin moment of the nucleus 1 J_- 1/2 is the quantum number of the angular moment
of the electron shell .1. F- +3 is the quantun nuber of the total moment of mo-
menttn of the atom. Depending on the mutual orientation of moments, 1’ may take
on values of I+J- lo and l- J- 3. and as a consequence the ground level is split
into two hfs levels.

12

FOR OFFICIAL 0E ONLY
FOI:0F1IC1A1.IENE(IHLY

[n the presence of an external magnetic field. the magnetic moments of the nucleus
and electron shell interact with this field. and each hfs level is split into

2F4-1 sublevels corresponding to certain states of the atom, and characterized

by quanta: numbers P and mp that take on values of 0. :1. The upper level (P- 6)
is split into 2“» l- 9 sublevels. and the lower level (3- 3) is split into 2P+l- 7
sublevels. In the case of electromagnetic field action, there may he transitions
between the hfs levels.

The cesiun ors uses the transition between levels r- lo; .y-otr- 3; ar-o, the
frequency of which in Rs is

i-9l92ml770+267-10‘H.‘, (1.21)
where H0 is the intensity of the external magnetic field in Aim.
The atomic-beam tube is a radiospectroscopic vacuum device (Fig. 3). The atoaic
beam is shaped by collimator l of the beam source, and enters an inhomogeneous

magnetic field set up by permanent magnets 2 of a certain shape-stronger at the
north pole, and weaker at the south pole.

.—JJ—n ‘

2
N

   
 

Pig. 3. Atomic-beam tube

Cesium atoms have a magnetic moment. and therefore in a magnetic field they experi-
ence the action of a force with direction that depends on the energy state of the
atoms.

Fig. 3 shows t‘o rays I and II that bound the atomic beam. There are atoms on

two energy levels in both rays. Upon arrival in the inhomogeneous field. the atoms
of ray I that are in upper energy state 82 move toward the weaker- field. changing
their trajectory and approaching the axis. while atoms on level E; move into the
stronger field region. deviating further from the axis.

Atoms of ray II experience an analogous effect of the field. resulting in deflec-
tion of atoms on level 32 away from the axis. while atoms on level I; approach
the axis.

Thus after magnet 2, atoms on level 8; remain in ray I, and atoms on level 8; re-
main in ray II. The second magnetic field of magnet b is identical to the first.
and therefore as the two rays of the sorted atoms arrive in this field they would
diverge away from the axis. But placed between the magnets is cavity resonator

3 in which a constant uniform magnetic field is set up together with a microwave
electromagnetic field with frequency equal to that of the quantum transition between
levels 82 and B1. The cesium atoms. entering the resonator after magnet 2. undergo
quantum transitions resulting in the appearance of atoms with level Blinrey I,

I3

INDR OFFICIAI.IEII(HULY
ﬂOlfNﬂﬂKlAL.USlloNLY

while atone with level 32 appear in ray II. As these atoms enter the field of
magnet 6. they will be deflected toward the axis. Consequently receiver-detector

5 placed on the axis will register a current proportional to the number of atoms
that have undergone a quantum transition in the cavity resonator. This nunber

of atoms depends on the detuning of the microwave field frequency relative to the
frequency of the atosic transition. and therefore the dependence of receiver current
on microwave field frequency has the shape of a spectral line.

A simplified diagram of the Chl-az frequency standard is shown in fig. k [Ref. 2].

 

Fig. A. Simplified block diagram of cesium frequency standard:

l--frequency divider, 2--A3T; 3-amplifier; b-—waveguide input;

5--quertz oscillator; 6-frequency synthesizer; 7-mu1tiplier;
8--low-frequency oscillator (80 Is); 9u-phase detector

The frequency of quartz oscillator 5 is adjusted by a synthesizer and frequency
multiplier to the frequency of the atomic transition f-I9l9263l770 Is. and the
electromagnetic field on this frequency is sent to the cavity of the ant. Under
the action of this field. the cesium atoms undergo transitions, and the signal

at the output of the ABT taken from the detector determines the deviation of the
microwave field frequency from the transition frequency. To determine the direction
of the deviation, the voltage from the quartz oscillator is frequency-modulated

on a low frequency by voltage fron oscillator 8. If the frequency of the microwave
field is lower than the transition frequency, the phase of the signal at the output
of the ABT coincides with the phase of the modulating voltage. and if the microwave
field frequency is higher than the transition frequency, the ABT signal is 180'

out of phase.

A constant voltage with magnitude determined by the frequency difference and polarity
determined by the sign of the difference is formed on phase detector 9 as a result

of adding the voltages from the output of the AB! and the modulating oscillator.
This voltage, called the error signal, synchronizes the frequency of the quartz
oscillator.

lb

FOIIOFFHJAI.USE(HVLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mean square hourly frequency variation of the Chi-52 is 540‘“. and the daily
variation is 240'“. .

hydrogen Frequency Standard

The hydrogen frequency standard is an active (:33 that contains a hydrogen maser.
a phase AFC system and a tunable quartz oscillator [Ref. 9].

As in the ART on atoms of 1”Cs. the hydrogen maser also uses energy transitions

between hfs levels. for hydrogen atoms Ivan JI-éa and therefore P-%-%-.0. or
1 l

P'3+7- l. The level P-O is not split in the external magnetic field. and level

P- l is split into 217+ l - 3 sublevels. Levels with mP-O are less dependent than
other levels on the external aagnetic field. and therefore they are also need in

the QI-‘s. Transition between these levels P-O. ap-ozr- 1. mp- 0 corresponds
to the frequency

f - 142040575145 32+ 172040" a: .

The construction of the hydrogen asset is diagramed on Fig. 5.

Pig. 5. Construction of hydrogen maser:
l—atomic bean source; 2—magnets; 3--accuaulator flask;
Aucavity resonator

Hydrogen in nature exists in the form of molecules. and therefore as it enters
atomic beam scurce 1 it is subjected to the action of a high-frequency electric
iischarge to dissociate the molecules. The hydrogen atoms streaming Out in a paral-
lel bean are incident on the inhomogeneous field of magnet 2. which is weakest

on the axis of motion of the atomic beam. and increases with distance from the
axis. Due to the presence of a magnetic moment. the hydrogen atoms that are on
the upper energy level (P- l. mp-O) will approach the axis as they enter such

a magnetic field. while those on the lower energy level (9-0. lap-0) will be de-
flected away from the axis. The excited atoms are focused on the input to cavity
resonator lo. tuned to a frequency of approximately 1520.605 MHz. In the cavity
the excited atoms undergo an induced transition to the lower energy level. result-‘-
ing in amplification of the electromagnetic field in the cavity. so that newly
arriving atone interact with the amplified field. In this way a feedback is set
up between the atoms entering the cavity. which may lead to stimulated emission

of electromagnetic oscillations under certain conditions when the Q of the cavity
is sufficient. However. since the energy radiated by even the most intense beam
of hydrogen atoms is very small. it is impossible to bring hydrogen atoms to a
state of stimulated emission by using resonators alone. even with the highest Q.

15

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
FOI10FNK1AI.USI(N'LY

To increase the number of radiative transitions. a quartz accuulator flask 3 with
very small input opening is placed in the cavity. Upon entering the flask. a hydro-
gen atom may undergo several tens of thousands of collisions with the teflon-covered
walls of the flask before a quantum transition occurs, 1. e. the atom may interact
with the resonator field for several seconds. In this case the probability of

a stimulated transition is considerably increased.

To ensure prolonged stay of hydrogen atoms in the accumulator flask. there is a
considerable increase in vacuum requirements in the vicinity of this flask-
(1-S)v10" Pa. Since the pressure may be appreciably higher in other parts of

the hydrogen maser, the vacuum system of the device is two- or three-chambered
with a separate evacuation chamber.

The duration of interaction of atoms with the resonator field makes the spectral
line quite narrow (0.5-0.3 Hz). The Q of the line is Qz-Ilo’. However. due to

the Doppler effect. chaotic move-eat of the hydrogen atoms in the accunulator flask
may cause appreciable line broadening. This broadening is eliminated by appropriate
choice of the flask diameter: the distance between its walls should be less than

a wavelength of the stimulated emission.

The Chi-46 hydrogen standard is series produced. A simplified block diagram of
the device is shown in Pig. 6 [Ref. 2].

 

Fig. 6. Simplified block diagram of the Chl-bb hydrogen frequency
standard:
1. 4-ferrite diode; 2, 3--hydrogen maser; S--i-f amplifier
(20.605 MHz); 6. 12--mixer; 7-qmultiplier by 280; B-quartz oscil-
later (5 MHz); 9--dividers by 5 and 10; 10--divider by 5; 11-
multiplirr by a; l3--i-f amplifier (405751.6 Hz); lb-—phese de-
tector; lS-frequency synthesizer '

The vacuum space 0f each hydrogen maser consists of two chambers. The pressure

in the first is maintained at (4-6).10'“. while that in the second is held at
4-[0-5 Pa. The beam of atoms is shaped by a collimator consisting of 300 channels.
each 500 an in diameter. Sorting is done by a six-pole magnet 80 mm long with
distance of 3.2 mm between poles. Diameter of the accumulator flask is 150 mm,
diameter of the input channel is 6.5 nm. and its length is 65 mm. The resonator

16

FIﬂICMWWCIAl.USB(N‘LY
/
ma omc/‘m. USE ONLY

is placed in a thermostat, where a Ionstant temperature is maintained with deviation
of 20.03°c. The frequency of the 'usrts oscillator is controlled by a phase arc
system. ’

The output signal of hydrogen naser 3 with frequency of 1620.5057516 m: is sequen-
tially converted to intermediate-frequency signals on 20.4057516 HE: and 605.7516

kHz by airing (heterodyning) with quartz-oscillator heterodyne signals on 1400

and 20 MHz. Arriving at phase detector 16 are the converted signal from the hydrogen
mascr with frequency of 40531.6 as. and the signal from the quartz oscillator
converted by synthesizer 15 to the same frequency. At the output of the phase
detector an error signal is produced that tunes the frequency of the quartz oscil-
lator to that of the hydrogen aaser.

Mean square hourly and daily frequency variations are (2-S)-10'”.
Rubidiun Frequency Standard

The method of optical pumping [Ref. 10] is used to set up population inversion
of energy levels. In rubidiun atoms. three energy levels are used with two tran-

sitions, the frequency of one f2; lying in the optical band. while that of the
other f” is in the r-f region.

The rubidiua vapor is exposed to intense light with frequency corresponding to
transition 32*83, causing the population of level 23 to rise, and the system is
brought to equalization of populations on levels 82 and E; (the rubidilil vapor
becoming transparent). Then the same working substance. rubidiun vapor. is exposed
to an electromagnetic microwave field with frequency equal to that of the transition
81+Bz. Absorbing the energy of the field. the rubidium atoms make the transition
from level E. to 2;. increasing the population of E; at the expense of 31. A dif-
ference in populations of B; and B; arises once more. and the transparency of the
substance decreases in proportion to the number of atoms making the transition

from level E; to 82. This nuaber is maxi-u- when the frequency of the microwave
field coincides with that of transition £12. The curve showing the dependence

of optical transparency as a function of microwave field frequency takes the form
of the spectral line of rubidiul atoms with peak at frequency £12.

The series-produced Chl-lo3 instrument uses atonic transition P- 2. mP-OzP-l ml,- 0
in the hyperfine structure of the ground state of the rubidium—87 atom on frequency
of 6884.682614 MHz.

In a spectral lamp filled with "Rb a high-frequency oscillator sets up a discharge
and the frequency spectrus emitted by the lamp contains a frequency equal to that
of the microwave transition. The light from the lamp, passing through optical

and thermal filters (the former suppresses the line corresponding to the frequency
of transition 31+ E), and the latter obstructs the path of the heat flux from the
lat-P). enters an absorption cell. excites the rubidiu atoms. .raiaing men to the
upper level. and is incident on a photodiode.

The absorbing cell is a glass flask with flat end faces filled with rubidium vapor.
It is placed in a cylindrical resonator with grating and faces for transmitting
pumping light; this cavity is tuned to the nicrowave transition frequency.

17

NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINR(MWHCJA1.USEGDNLY

As a result of chaotic motion of the rubidium atoms in the absorbing cell, just
as in the accumulator flask of the hydrogen maser. considerable broadening of the
spectral line takes place as a consequence of the Doppler effect. But since the
electron shell of the rubidium atom is more complicated than for hydrogen. the
Doppler effect cannot be suppressed merely by proper choice of the dimensions of
the flask. And the rubidium atoms in the cell are doped with inert gases. the
rubidium atoms having less sensitivity to collisions with these inert gas atoms
than to collisions with the walls of the flask. A simplified block diagram of
the Chl-43 rubidium standard is shown in Pig. 7 (Ref. 2].

 

Fig. 7. Simplified block diagram of chl-43 rubidium frequency
standard:

l--exciter of spectral lamp; 2--lamp thermostat; 3--spectral

lamp; 6-thermal filter; 5-optical filter; 6-thermostat; 7-

absorption cell; 8-resonator; 9--photodiode; 10--amplifier;

ll--phase detector; 12--low-frequency oscillator; l3-4multiplier;

14--quartz oscillator; 15. l6--divider; l7-frequency synthesizer

The frequency of quartz oscillator 12 is brought by multiplier 10 and synthesizer
17 to the transition frequency. is modulated by the voltage of low-frequency oscil-
lator 12. and is coupled by a loop into cavity resonator 8. The absorption of
light by rubidium vapor in cell 7 depends on deviation of the frequency of the
microwave signal from the transition frequency. And since the microwave signal

is frequency-modulated. the light beam passing through the cell from light source

3 is also modulated by this frequency. The light beam acts on photodiode 9. and
an error signal is produced at the output of this photodiode with the frequency

of the modulating signal cophased with the modulation frequency if the microwave
field frequency-is less than that of the transition. and 180° out of phase if the
microwave field has a frequency higher than that of the transition. The signal
from the output of the photodiode passes through amplifier 10 and is summed in
phase detector 11 with the signal of the modulating oscillator, forming a constant
voltage at the output proportional the the frequency difference of the microwave
field and the quantum transition; the polarity determines the sign of this difference.
The voltage regulates the frequency of the quartz oscillator with respect to the

quantum transition frequency.

The mean square hourly variation of the frequency of the Chi-43 is 5°10'11.

[8

FOR10FFHJAL.USEIMVLY
FOI‘OI11C1AI.USECINLY

CHAPTER 2: TYPES OF SYNCHRONIZATION OP PRECISION IRBQUENCY AND TIME STAEDARDS

Synchronization is what we call adjustment of the period of synchronized oscil-
lations to the period of synchronizing signals. Synchronization of a frequency
standard ueans adjustment of the frequency fc of the oscillations that it reproduces
to the value f associated with the frequency of the synchronizing standard assigned
an integral vaiue n that may be nultidigital. Consequently. in synchronization

it is necessary to satisfy the equality

ni.—I.-o or I.—I.=o." (2.1-)

For practical purposes. these equalities are not equal to zero, and their value
is the synchronization errcr

Illa—’ﬁ'h 0;? ’c‘h’ﬁ- (2.2)
The frequency errors of both the synchronized and synchronizing standards,are in-

constant in time. If it is assuned that at the point of collation they are respec-
tively described by the relations

In: - lea + ‘oxu _ Is) 1' he '(2 .3)
and
10.0 ”is... + ”ms“ — (a) 3‘: art—'4'... (2 ,5)

then the relative synchronization error is

*0, " (7a.: -’ Tale)! 3" (Tow ‘_ ha». ‘i‘ ('e.c “was“! “10): I 0:»: + 0:3. (2'5)

Synchronization of tine standards means coincidence or nutual tie-in of the time
scales that they reproduce (a sequence of tine-coincident signals). 1. e. satis-
faction of the equality

7".-'T.=-0. (2.6)

If it is assused that the time standards are based on frequency standards described
by expressions (2.3) and (2.6). then the temporal positions of the time scales
that they reproduce will be described by the expressions

7. - ,r‘ + 1»..(!- t.)+ —;—~...U—r-)’ (2.7)
and ‘
'r. m I. + 1...(!-_-!.)+7v...(1--I.)'- (2.8)

The error of synchronization or error of tie-in of such tine standards is

*I‘U'c -' To): " (Tc - To». + (70.: "' 1...)(l- l.) + % (“or — 's.s)(“— (0).: (2' 9)

The process of synchronization of tine standards includes synchronization of the
oscillators (frequency standards) and adjustment of the phase of the synchronized
signals.

19

FOIIOFFHJAI.USIINVLY
F0I10FEKJAI.USE(NVLY

The synchronization system contains: 1) a mixer that suns the waveforms and pro-
duces a synchro-information signal functionally related to the frequency difference
of the embed waveforms or to the phase difference; 2) a controlling element or
controlling circuit for regulating the frequency and phase of the standard to be
synchronized by the mixer output (synchro-information signal); 3) channels for
signal transmission from the synchronizing and synchronised standards to the mixer

(Fig. 8). Depending on the synchronization conditions. the elements of the system
can be made with a variety of hardware.

 

Fig. 8. Block diagram of the synchronization system:
l--synchronizing standard; 2. 6--transmission channels; 3-
mixer; S-synchronized standard; 6-controlling element

Let us consider three methods of synchronization: 1) induced synchronization where
the synchro—information acts continuously on the standard to be synchronized; 2)
semi-autonomous. where the s"nchro-information acts periodically on the standard

to be synchronized; 3) autonomous. where there is no synchro-information.

The first method is used if the error of the standard being synchronized is greater
than the error introduced by the signal transmission channels, which is negligibly
small compared with the error of the synchronizing standard. Such conditions are

encountered nearly exclusively in the circuits of oscillators that are frequency-
stabilized. '

The second method is used in stabilizing standards that have comensurate errors

but are territorially separated. In this case. special channels are used for signal
transmission, and the influence of the channel parameters on the transmitted signals
cannot be disregarded. That is why the synchro-information is used to correct

the standard being synchronized over definite time intervals rather than continu-
ously.

The third method can be used if the errors of the synchronized and synchronizing

standards are of the same order of magnitude. and neither standard is associated
with the other by synchro-information during operation.

2.1. Induced Synchronization
Induced frequency synchronization is based on a closed automatic control system.

where compensation of the deviation of the controlled quantity from a set value

takes place with respect to the difference between these values as deternined by
the method of comparison (Ref. 11].

20

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An automti': frequency control (AFC) system is used in cases where the error intro-
duced by the transmission channels can be disregarded. This is feasible if the
synchronizing and synchronized standards are situated in direct proximity to one
another (1. e. they make up a single unit), or if the time of automatic synchroni-
zation is such that the error introduced by the transmission channel is negligible.
or finally. if the given error can be automatically compensated.

In the case considered here. the synchronization circuit is nade up of the mixer

proper. and the controlling elenent. A block diagram of such a system is shown
in Fig. 9.

 

Pig. 9. Block diagram of AFC:
lusynchronizing standard; 2—mixer; 3-synchronized standard;
‘ b—controlling element

The output (synchronized) frequency fc has a predetermined functional relation
to the input (conventional standard) frequency f 9 at an invariable or constant
value of the latter. The frequency to be synchronized is sent through the feed-
back circuit to the mixer together with the standard frequency. A control signal
is produced at the mixer output with amplitude determined by the nisnatch—the _
difference between frequencies fc and f,.

The change in phase of the oscillations A0 is unambiguously related to‘the change
in frequency of these oscillations Am. Therefore the change in both frequency
and phase can be used to produce a control signal at the output of the nisnatch
sensor. That is. autonstic frequency control is possible with two kinds of mis-
natch sensors: a phase detector with tuning to a definite phase. and a frequency
detector-discriminator with tuning to a definite frequency. In accordance with
this, two AFC groups are foraed: phase APC and frequency AFC.

The result of action of either scheme is the sue: the frequency of the standard
to be synchronized is regulated with respect to the source of synchronizing wave-
foras. But the phase and frequency AFC systems themselves are different both with
respect to the circuit design and with respect to their regulating action. The
phase AFC system is in a state of stable equilibriul only when the controlling
factor is constant. while the voltage at the output of the phase detector remains
constant only when the phases of the voltages being compared are invariable. which
necessitates equality of frequencies. In the frequency AFC system in the steady
state. the controlling factor can be constant only when the frequency difference
is constant. Consequently in the frequency APC systen there is always a difference
between the frequencies of the synchronized and synchronizing waveforne‘

21

POI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
' ms omcut use ONLY

In the frequency control process. this difference must be adjusted to the discrimi-
nator tuning frequency

’a-IO—Iso (2010)
where f. is the value of the frequency to which the standard is to be synchronized.

The voltage appearing across the mixer load has the difference frequency of the
standard, fc or f,. This voltage acts on the discriminator. which is located at
the output of the nixer. A controlling voltage is formed at the discriminator
output. when fc- fo, this voltage is equal to zero and the frequency AFC system
does not operate.

The process of frequency establishment when the frequency AFC system is connected
to the oscillator being stabilized begins «t the time when the difference is equal

to some beginning mismtach fc- fo- Afbeg. Under the action of the voltage coming
from the discriminator output. the controlling element changes the frequency of

the oscillator being synchronized toward the side opposite (in sign) to the initial
mismatch. resulting in reduction of the difference.

The phase difference of two waveforms can remain constant in tine only in the case
where the frequencies of these two waveforms are the same. If the frequencies

of the waveforms are unequal. but differ by a constant value. the phase difference
is

T. = (a, — ,)t-I- ?.-A~l'+ 9.. (2.11)

where 60 is the initial phase difference. wt and w, are the frequencies of the syn-
chronized and synchronizing oscillators respectively.

If the frequency difference is not constant in time. the instantaneous phase dif-
ference is

? 'Idodl, (2.12)
and hence
.. .42.
A. d!’_ (2.13)

The constancy of the phase difference guarantees equality of the frequencies of
two waveforms; this is the design basis of the phase AFC systen.

The structural difference of block diagrams of frequency and phase AFC systens
dictates the different physical processes that take place in these systems.

In phase AFC systems a variable-frequency voltage appears at the output of the
phase detector that is tranmitted to the controlling element of the oscillator
to be synchronized.

The beginning mismatch Ambeg of the oscillator being synchronized should not exceed
the stopband for efficient operation of the systen. In this case a constant phase

22

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL LS! ONLY

difference is set up in the system. i. e. equality of frequencies we and to, is
assured. hence the stopband also determines the locking-in bend, the maxim-1 mis-

match of the oscillator to be synchronized at which phase AFC will accomplish syn-
chronization.

Phase shifts in the automatic control channel cause delay of the controlling signal.

The voltage across the output of the phase detector is determined by the phase

difference of the signals being compared. Therefore when the frequencies of these
signals are equal. the voltage across the output of the phase detector is constant.
0n the other hand. if the frequencies are not equal. the change in phase difference

is determined by expression (2.12), and the voltage across the output of'the phase
detector is a function of time.

It is not only the useful driving waveforms that act on an actual AFC system. but
also interference. Interference causes changes in the frequency of the synchronized
oscillator relative to the average value of the frequency in the steady state,

and this change is equal to the mean square error.

Additional elements must be introduced into the circuit in order for the AFC system
to track the useful signal with the greatest possible accuracy and not react to
interference.

Hasers are systems with phase AFC. The converted signal from the quartz oscillator
is added to the signal from the meser in the mixer. The difference-frequency signal
that arises at the output of the mixer acts on the phase detector simultaneously
with the converted signal of the quartz oscillator; an error signal is produced
that is used to adjust the quartz oscillator frequency to the maser frequency.

In frequency standards with quantum discriminator, the quartz oscillator is synchro-
nized by a frequency AFC system.

2 . 2 . Semi-Autonomous Synchronization

when the oscillators are spatially separated. and the signals are transmitted from
the synchronizing oscillator by different channels (cable lines. radio channels

of all waves bands. television channels, satellites. meteoric channels and so on).
since no methods for automatic elimination or compensation of errors have as yet
been found on the present stage of investigation of destablizing factors introduced
due to the inconstancy of parameters of such channels. automatic induced synchro-
nization of precision frequency measures is impossible. Therefore semi-autonomous
synchronization is used, necessarily with the participation of a ham operator
who analyzes the results of comparison of the synchronizing and synchronised fre-
quency standards and introduces needed corrections.

In the general case. the block diagram of synchronization of spatially separated
frequency and time standards takes the form shown in Fig. 10. The two standards

I and 2 are connected by a channel. The mixer-receivers are devices that pick

up the signals simultaneously from the two standards and produce a signal in which
one of the parameters is related in a definite way to the difference of_the fre-
quencies or phases of the received signals. Such devices say be standard radio

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and television receivers. standard'oscilloscopes. and also special receivers-
phase comparators and frequency comparators.

 

Fig. 10. Block diagram of synchronization of specially separated
frequency standards:
Instandard to be synchronised; 2--synchronizing standard; 3-
converter; lo--comparator; 5--display

Cable lines are used in synchronization by a tins and frequency calibrated reference
for laboratory standards intended for radio transmission of exact tins and reference
frequency signals. and in synchronisation of precision standards situated at stall
distances from each other within the confines of a single institution. or a single
time and frequency service.

A cable line is equivalent to a two-terminal pair network vith distributed param-
eters R. L. c and g.

Inconstancy of these parameters causes a change in frequency of the transmitted
signals and their transnission time.

In practice. signals can be transmitted over cable lines to distances of 10-100 in
with frequency variation of (1-2)-10" and variation of tranmission tins of
(1-2) 10'

Radio conununication ch-.nnels are used in synchronising time and frequency standards
separated by distances of from 50-100 to 10,000-15,000 in or more. Depending on
the distance between the standards and the required synchronisation accuracy. dif-
ferent radio wave bands and correspondingly different methods of transmission are

used.

Signals iron the synchronizing standard are sent over one of the transmission chan-
nels and arrive at the comparator-receiver. where the difference of frequencies

or phases of the signals of the synchronizing and synchronized standards is da-
ternined. If the synchronizing signals are transnitted over cable lines. they

go directly to the comparator after amplification. On the other hand. if transmis-
sion is by radio communication channels. the signals go to the reception device.
with circuit determined by the radio band of the received signals, and from there
to the comparator.

In semi-autonomous synchronization. signals from the synchronizing standard are
periodically received at the point of location of the standard being synchronized.
The time between receptions (discreteness tine) is established depending on the

210

FOIOWICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

required synchronization accuracy. the ratio between the astrological characteristics
of the two standards, and the signal transmission error.

The metrological characteristics of the standard to be synchronized must be calcu-
lated on the basis of certain measured effective frequencies. Therefore the time
between signal receptions must not exceed the time during which the 'metrological
characteristics of the standard are determined. The error of the effective fre—
quency is made up of the error of frequency comparison and the error introduced
by the transmission channel. Systematic errors introduced by the transmission

channel are eliminated by making appropriate corrections. and random errors are
added in with the comparison errors.

For example with error Sof of determination of the effective frequency, and error
5.; introduced by the transmission channel. the total error is

8.. a; V3“; +Tgl. (2.14)

If the effective frequency is determined by the differential method. the necessary
aeasurement time with consideration of 8.; is calculated by formula

Q
Vs:, 4?,

If the effective frequency is determined as a result of discrete measurements.
the necessary nmber of measurements n is established from the relation

3:"?-

 

(2. 15)

_ = .L lib—“Lat (2.16)
n(n l) h: ”—3.
or. assming n>l.

I
l . 2““ “I.”
l

. __ (2. 17)
I. s: --s:, '

ll

 

The overall error should be 3-10 times smaller than the permissible synchronization
error.

When metrological characteristics are already known. measurements can be done after
still greater time intervals. In this case the measurements can be considered
control measurements. and the method of semi-autonomous synchronization becomes

a method of autonomous synchronization.

2. 3. Autonomous Synchronization

If the synchronizing and synchronized standards have identical metrological char-
acteristics and their laws of time variation are also identical. then a single
determination of the phase difference of the generated signals is sufficient in
principle to synchronize such standards.

Host closely approaching such conditions in practice is the ors. although this
device also has small but systematic frequency variations. At the present stage.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lﬂ‘!‘ﬂ!¥‘f‘k|.\lﬁl€(ﬂﬂl~

the instability of the QPS is much less than the error of determination of param-
eters of signal transmission channels and their inconstancy. Therefore a method

of autononous synchronization is used to synchronize frequency standards based

on the QPS: the standards are not connected by transmission channels. and the
frequencies of the waveforms that they generate remain invariable over a permissible
range. For control purposes. the frequency must be periodically compared with

that of the synchronizing standard (the period is determined by the reliability

of retention of the metrological characteristics of the standard to be synchronized).
Synchronization of time standards based on the qrs also necessitates periodic con-
trol measurements of the tenporal position of the signals. Besides. the measurements
must be made after each cutoff of the standard. even briefly.

With consideration of the fact that the standard being synchronized must copy all
changes in the characteristics of the synchronizing standard. both standards must
be periodically combined in some way during autonomous synchronization as well.

It is east effective to use portable time and frequency standards for this regis-
tration. Such a frequency standard based on the QPS-atomichron or rubidium clock-
is synchronized to the synchronizing standard, and then transported by air to the
point of location of the standard to be synchronized. where this synchronization

is carried out [Ref. 12].

CHAPTER 3: METHODS OF DETBRHINING FREQUENCY DIFFERENCE 0F SYNCERONIZBD AND SYNCHRD-
NIZING STANDARDS

3.1. HethodBasedon Results of Determining the Effective Frequency of the Standard
to be Synchronized

The effective frequency fn can be determined by the method of direct evaluation
using a frequency meter. or by a differential method by comparing the frequenices
of the synchronized and synchronizing standards (GOST 13628-68 "High-Stability
Oscillators. Methods and Means of Checking the Frequency of Electric Signals").
The former method is the simplest; a counting-type frequency meter is used for
measurement with an external source. which may be the synchronizing standard.

In this case the error of determination of the frequency of the synchronized stan-
dard is only the error of diacreteness of the frequency meter.

l
It‘s .

If a frequency meter without external source is used for measurement. the error
due to discreteness is combined with the error of the reference oscillator of the
frequency meter

 

5",... (3.1)

8 1‘7; .'_
O, o.r+ I“. - (3.2)
The accuracy of determining fn of the synchronized standard is increased by doing
n repeated measurements in time 1y. during which variation of measurement conditions
can be disregarded. The error in this case is reduced by a factor of J32

when the differential eethod is used, it is necessary that the summation of the

waveforms of the synchronized and synchronizing standards produce beats; the beat
frequency is then measured and used to determine the frequency difference of the

tuo standards.

26

lNMlCIﬂﬂKJAI.USE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is known that when scalar oscillations v1-V1 c0821f1t and vz-Vz cos Zsfzt are
added. the resultant waveform is

:- .. v cos(2*h! 49), (3. 3)

V=Vx VT+§7acos§x0u-7u)l+ll'z (3")
, ”WM. (3.5)

1‘?th (In -11) f.

where

These formulas are valid for any f1 and f3. but if fl-fg<f1, the resultant wa‘ieforn
is perceived as alternations of waveforms of the same frequency with mplitude
varying periodically 0n the difference frequency. Such signals ere conventionally
called beats. Beats nay also be produced by combining waveforms with frequencies

that are appreciably different. For exalple the sun of two mutually perpendicular
vector waveforms

'0, n V: cm 23].! and 3: ‘T'scos 2‘,“-

whose frequencies are f; - Zfo+A1. f; -kfo+Az. where l and I: are integers. and
A1< f1, A: < f2. are described by the equation

('m (I: mccos 33'- ‘- I arccos 7:?) ”cos 2: (M. — (AN. (3 . 6)
I

For each instant of time t. this equation describes some figure on plane 3137;.

If km- 262. the figure is invariant. If My} lag. the figure is deforned with
period

FI-——- L-

M. - .m. th—II.‘ (3'7)

 

If P-%- (kf, - lf2)<f1 or £2. the resultant waveforms are perceived as beats.

Beats of two electric signals are produced by mixers. which any be an electric
circuit that alters the spectra: of signals acting on it. and isolates the component
of the difference frequency from this spectrum. or a cathode-ray tube that does

not change the spectra: of the su-ed waveforms. but enables observation of beats.

If the frequencies of the synchronised and synchronizing standards lie in a range
of 100 32-1 Hit. the difference frequency can be measured with an electronic oscil-

loscope (from Lissa jou figures or from a circular scan; in the latter case an elec-
tronic oscilloscope with radial scale on the screen is used).

By this means. frequency differences of less than 2-3 ll: can be determined by mea-

suring the time of part of a period or of an integral amber of periods of the
difference-frequency waveforms.

Measurements by Lissajou figures are possible at a ratio of nominal values of the
frequencies of the synchronized and synchronising standards up to 1:10;.measurement
time cannot be less than the period of the beats.

27

MOMMIBIONLY
tillfﬂﬂﬂC1A|.lNNI(NULY

The rate of periodic change in the Liseajou figure is proportional to the'frequency
difference being measured. The beginning of the period is taken as the instant
when the Lissajou figure becomes a single line. The timer is energized at this
instant. The timer is disconnected when the Lissajou figure again becomes a line

oriented in the same way as the initial line. The time indicated by the tiler
determines the beat period. '

It is not possible to determine the sign of frequency deviation of the synchronized
standard directly fron measurements. It is determined either by changing the fre-

quency of the synchronized standard in a known direction, or by using an auxiliary
oscillator.

Measurements with respect to a circular scan are possible at a ratio of the nominal
frequencies of the synchronized and synchronising standards up to 1:100; measurement
time may be less than the period of the beats.

When voltages are applied to the circular beam scan and to the brightness modulator
with corresponding regulation of their levels and the brightness of the electron
beam. one (when the nominal values of fc.u-f,.u) or m bright points (when

fc "/fs' -u0 are formed on the screen that love in a circle with a velocity pro-
portionaf to the beat frequency. The instant of readout is taken as the time when
a point crosses any marker of a scale on the screen. At this instant a tiner is
energized. and it is switched off when the point crosses the same marker of the
scale if the tine of a whole period of beats is being measured. or any other marker
of the scale if the time of a part of the beat period is being measured.

The sign of frequency deviation of the synchronized standard is determined directly
during the measurement from the direction of motion of the points around the circle.

The beat frequency is calculated free the formula

1.3-. f (3.8)

where n is the part of a period or whole number of periods of the beats in time I".

When tc."- f,." and fc.“- 1:3,", the frequency error of the synchronised standard
is equal to the beat frequency.

1.: F. (3.9)

when kfc.“- f,_“, the error is determined from the formula

1. T' (3.10)

If the synchronized and synchronizing frequencies lie in a range of 100 kHz-30 Hﬂz.
the difference frequency can be measured by a heterodyne method, using a nonlinear

frequency mixer (see Fig. 10).

Measurements by the heterodyne method are possible at a ratio of nominal frequencies
up to 1:200; measurement time cannot be less than the period of oscillations of the
difference frequency.

28

lNJI:(Iﬂﬂ(JAI.lEﬂI(H¢LV
FOR OFFIGAL [BE ONLY

This method enables isolation and measurement of the difference frequency both
directly between the fundamental frequencies of the synchronized and synchronising
standards. and between the frequencies of their harmonics.

A special mixer or all-wave radio receiver is used for the measurements; in the
case of harmonics. distorters of the waveshape of their oscillations are used.

When signals on close frequencies are sent simultaneously to the input of the miner.
a voltage modulated by the difference frequency appears at its output. Depending
on the magnitude of the difference frequency, it is measured either by counting

the number of periods of beats over a time determined by a timer, or by a counting-
type frequency meter.

The error of the synchronized frequency is calculated by the formula

I. ile_-;_'I- .. § (3.11)
where k. 1 are the nunbers of the utilized harmonics of the synchronized and syn-
chronizing frequencies respectively.

The error of the differential method of measurement is due chiefly to the error

of measurement of the difference frequency. In direct measurement of the beat
frequency 1". the error is determined by the error of the frequency meter AF/P.

In indirect measurement. the error is due to imprecision of time measurement (A11)
and imprecision of registration of the nuber of beats (An); for the calculations we
use the law of summation of the mean errors:

3, .. r 1/ (“ﬁt (95?- (3.12)

In practice, it is difficult to separate errors AT; and An, and therefore the over-
all error of time measurement is estimated

 

As — 3 A2,; 4- Ag':

where At: -9F£. and the error is calculated by the formula
. . A . F A
a,” r .2 o. .s.,- _ . _*—. (3.13)

Values of A1 lie in a range of 0.3-0.5 s for different beat frequencies (0.3-5 3;).

If the frequency difference is less than 0.01 as. the comparator may be a phase
discriminator with registration of periods of the difference frequency on a chart
recorder. The electric circuit of this method can provide a linear rise in amplitude
of the difference frequency over the entire period with an abrupt drop at the end

of the period (Fig. 11). Therefore. to determine the frequency error of the stan-
dard that is being synchronized. the time of the periods is read out from the output
of the chart recorder. and the difference frequency is calculated. 0n Fig. 11.

1‘1 - 1'2 - 1'3- Tt-T; N- lo; tn- m- 6-21600- 86600 a. If fc- 100 has. the -relative
error of the synchronized standard is vow-6.640-”.

29

MOMMUSEONLY
FOIIMﬂﬂCJAL.USI(NVLY

 

Hours of the day

Fig. 11. Change in amplitude of difference frequency at phase
discriminator output

3.2. Method Based on Heasurenents of Change in Phase Difference of Waveforns of
Synchronizing and Synchronized Standards

In the phase method of determining the error of the standard being synchronized,
exact tine signals produced by the synchronizing standard are used. An oscillo-
scope or counting-type frequency neter is used to observe the phase difference
of oscillations of the synchronized and synchronising standards.

Determination of the error of the synchronized frequency fron exact tine signals
consists in fixing instants T1 and T; of signals of exact tine relative to signals
of the standard to be synchronized after time intervalr. Todo this, an image of
the signal is produced on the oscilloscope screen by scanning it with the signal
of the standard being synchronized. and using a phase shifter to achieve registra-
tion between the beginning of the signal of the synchronizing standard and the
beginning of the scan. noting the respective positionslh_and D5 of the phase
shifter.

The relative error of the standard being synchronized is calculated by the fornula

. a 151-. ... i'::’_"_ (3.11.)

Ina ‘ ‘

The error of establishment of tine interval t and the error of registration of
signal tines cause errors in determination of the effective frequency of the stan-
dard being synchronized in accordance with formula (3.13).

CHAPTER 5‘: SIGNAL TRANSMISSION METHODS USING VLF RADIO CHANNELS
5.1. Transmitting Facilities

By convention, nyriametric radio waves are those with wavelengths of 10-30 km.
which corresponds to radio signal frequencies of 10-30 the. These limits are not
rigorous. as radio waves in a frequency band of 6-60 kn: propagate by a similar
mechanism.

 

*Chapter 5 was written by Candidate of Technical Sciences M. V. Bolotnikov.

30

FOR‘OITHC1A1.lEﬂE(HﬂLY
me omnal. I“ ONIN

It is known from the routes of propagation of radin waves that when a signal propa-
gates in non-ideal media or close to their boundaries. attenuation decreases with
increasing wavelength. Because of this, VLF radio channels are used to synchronize
frequency and tine standards separated by distances of sore than 10.000 km.

However, in transmission of long-wave signals of the order of kilometers or more,
considerable difficulties arise. The nonograph by s. I. Nadenenko (Ref. 20] points
out that the radiation impedance of a trannitting antenna that characterizes its
efficiency decreases rapidly with decreasing ratio of antenna height 1; to the
wavelength of the emitted signal

,-...

5:. IGOs‘II—:_ (5-2)

Formula (5.1) is more conveniently represented as

R: =3 Nine/ti

c‘ '
where the speed of light c- 340' sale.

The height of antenna towers of the largest VLF stations is no more than 500 m.

i. o. no more than 51 of the wavelength. To ensure efficient radiation. such anten-
nas are "capacitance top-loaded" (Ref. 20]. Here the capacitance is a system of
horizontal wires stretched between the central tower and somewhat shorter peripheral
towers. The total capacitance c of a multiple-tower VLF antenna with developed
system of horizontal wires may reach 0.1 111'. The combination of inductance of

the wires with the capacitance of the horizontal web forms a parallel oscillatory
tank with distributed paraseters. During transmission. this tank is tuned to reso-
nance with the excltsr signal by special large-scale tuning coils. The wave in-
pcdance p of the antenna under these conditions is determined by its total capaci-
tance C.

I
= 273. (S .2)
and the Q of the antenna tank
, a 2.14 . to“

Q”7:' mwnc ’1 We
is inversely proportional to the cube of the frequency of the transmitted signal.
The passband of the antenna is

name}: :-4.62 . lO-“I'l.’C. (5.3)
Taking 7.- 500 Is. for a frequency of f - 20 kiln we get 17-200 Hz. and for f- 10 has
it 18 I2.S Hz.

The main purpose of VLF radio stations is long-range radio coalsunications. Time
signals are transmitted by these radio stations during specially selected broad-
casting sessions or in a combined schedule. Because of the very high cost of VL?
transmitters. and especially antennas. a rather limited number of VLF stations
of comparatively low power have been built specifically for synchronisation.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)I‘OF1NC1A1.\EﬂB(H“LY

5.2. Methods of Time Signal Transmission

Two principal methods are used for transmitting exact time signals in the VLF range:
pulse modulation and sequential transmission of coherent carrier frequencies.

In time signal transmission by the former method (in mode A-l) synchronization
accuracy is influenced by the narrow-band nature of the antenna systems and by
the quite considerable level of natural interference. As shown by calculations
(see Section 5.1), the risetime r of the signal radiated from the antenna on a
frequency of 20 kHz will be 3-5 ms. and on a frequency of 10 kHz 1- 50-100 ma.
Natural interference in the VLF band is mainly due to lightning discharges and

is markedly pulsed. The average level of interference at the latitude of Moscow
is of the order of 0.5-! mV/m in the 1 kn: band. As will be shown below. the
field strength of VLF radio signals from most transmitters in this band at a dis-
tance of 3,000-6,000 km is 0.5-1.5 mV/m. For a receiver pass band of 1 kHz. the
signal-to-noiseratuaat its output is 1-3. and the accuracy of registration of
the instant of pulse arrival at the reception antenna can be estimated by the for-
mula [Ref. 20]

o,‘:;%; 5,)! ms. (5.4)
By observing the received signal on the screen of an oscilloscope with afterglow.
an experienced operator can determine the position of the received pulse relative
to the local time scale with error of the order of 200-300 us. Errors that arise
due to inexact knowledge and delay instability in the receiver can be eliminated
with fair accuracy if this delay is measured by using a special simulator of re-
ceived signals before the synchronization sequence starts.

In virtue of simplicity of the reception equipment. the pulse method of synchroni-
zation in the VLT band is being extensively used in complexes and systems where
the permissible synchronization error is 0.5 ms or more.

The method of sequential transmission of coherent carrier frequencies improves
synchronization accuracy by more than an order of magnitude, but involves con-
siderable complications of transmitting and reception equipment. The method was
originally developed and implemented in application to problems of the Omega VLF
radionavigation system for the U. 5. Navy [Bef. 22]. To explain the working prin-
ciple, let us consider a hypothetical system that sequentially transmits coherent
monochromatic signals with frequency of 12.5, 12.6. 13 and IS kHz. In the shaper
of the transmitter. these signals are phased in such a way that they simultaneously
pass through zero 100 times per second. and once per second this coincides synchro-
nously with the second pulse of the master clock at the station. Let there be

some time storage device at the reception point with scale that lags behind that

of the master clock by To. and let an analogous time grid be formed from its signals
as well. The time of signal propagation from the transmitter to the receiver on
all frequencies will be taken as identical and equal to 1p.

The phase difference of the received and local signals with frequency £1 at the
reception point is

32

FOR‘OFIICIAI.IH§E(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where T1 is the period of signal with frequency f1. n- entier (r/‘rp is the whole
number of periods of 1‘: contained in time interval r-r.+:p. Let us note that
here and below for purposes of greater coupactness in writing them out. the values

of the phases and phase differences are expressed in fractions of the period of
the corresponding signal.

The difference of phase shifts for two different frequencies is

“51:?! -' h" (I! ‘IﬂT—("I —_"I)
or

where 1‘1 is the period of the effective difference frequency 1’13. and nij-n1- n3
is the w le nunber of such periods in interval 1' - 'l'.+rp.

'l‘hus knowledge of the phase shift 7 on some carrier frequency ft or of the dif-
ference of such shifts v13 enables determination of the corresponding shift of
time scales with an uncertainty that is a multiple of 1'1 or 1'13. Hith a reduction
in frequency difference. the hand of unambiguous readOut of the measured interval

increases, but there is s sinultaneous increase in the error of measurement of
this interval

 

I
2 3 - 1 —.
°u "' V°e, '- °vl f"

To resolve the uncertainty. it is necessary to determine the number of periods

n1. Let us asst-e that the measured shift of the local scale and the received
signals T- Toﬁp is less than the period of the least of the difference frequencies
12;. Then from the corresponding difference of the phase readouta Y2; we can un-
ambiguously find the measured shift ‘1'- Yu‘l'n. Hence the masher of periods of

the next difference frequency ‘1‘” in the ueasured interval is

11,. — entlcr "r”. (5.5)
1”

 

in this case. the measured interval
T: (”at + $107.“

can be determined with accuracy corresponding to the higher difference frequency
F31. Performance of these calculations is in no way limited by the fact that
physically the difference frequencies P1 are not formed in the receiver, and the
phase readouts 1'11 are calculated from t results of measurements made on the
corresponding carrier-frequencies f1 and f5. In the general case

mu... = enuerg'ﬂi, (5.6)
I+l.l

Calculations by formula (5.6) are done until transition to readout on carrier fre-
quency f1. Ultimately

. r .
T "' E ’"IITII ‘1' (m; + h) T). (5. 7)

IHJ
33

FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
FIIICNNNCJA1.lEﬂE(MULV

where p is the number of sequentially transmitted carrier frequencies. m; is the
number of periods of the carrier frequent; as calculated for the msxhaum difference
frequency Ppl, I31 is the quantity previously denoted in formula (3.5) as 03;.

Formula (5.6) has a serious flaw: if readout on a greater difference frequency
P1+1 1 is close to unity. it is quite possible as a consequence of unavoidable
measurement errors that the whole number m1+1 1 will be incorrectly determined.
More stable with respect to errors of this kind is the relation

”ll-NJ - N [ix—TI: —- V1,}... ]' (5.8)

where N is the operation of determining the nearest whole number. Regardless of
the specific values of 711 and Y1+1,1.

VT"

1 (5-9)
l-HJ 'l-f-l. I

will be a whole number in the absence of measurement errors. In practice. this
quantity differs from a whole number increasingly with increasing error of mea-
surement of the phases of the carrier frequencies.

Ambiguity is correctly resolved if the error of determination of I‘(denoted by

6,.) for the given measurement series satisfies the inequality 6,<0.5. Physically.
this means that the error of readout on frequency F1,1 assumed in the time expres-
sion must not exceed k the period of the next higher difference frequency P1+1,1.

From formula (5.9) we get the following relation between 6, and the errors of phase
measurement of the carrier frequencies

a" ; —l—'(39‘— B'.)- '9“; “-390 a: ‘(891 _‘h) —'(a?l+. —3'.).

Taking the errors of phase measurement on sequentially transmitted carrier frequen-
cies as mutually independent and equal in mean-square value. we get

..,..--..v§.,l/n _L__'- (5.10)

n 1’

where °¢' or are the mean square errors of measurement of phases and of determining
F respectively. Assuming that these errors are distributed according to normal
law. we can determine the probability of correct resolution of ambiguity for one
transition between readings on adjacent difference frequencies by the formula

p-095). (5.11)

where 0(x) is the probability integral. The ratio "LH"."h1ch to a great extent
l+ll

determines the probability of correct resolution of ambiguity, is called the coef-
ficient of transition. or the scale ratio.

36

INDR40FIICIAI.1EHEIMVLY
FOB OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

‘

Let us consider a practical example.

Let the measured phase shifts be ”-0.65.
‘2'o.56. .J-Oellg .h-Oegge

Data processing is done in the following order.

1. Phase shifts on effective difference frequencies are determined by the formula

Vln=?:-‘PI(+ 1).

here the phase of the lower-frequency signal is subtracted from that of the higher-
frequency signal. If the phase difference is negative, unity is added.

In, - 0.56—0.65 - — o,09(+1)- 0,91;
~v,,=-o,u—o.65-—'o,54(+ ”-0.46; . ,
7.. -o.99-o.es- 0.34; ""‘I
‘l'u - 9, - 0.55. 4.;-

2. The whole numbers of periods of the difference frequencies contained in the
measured displacement of time scales are determined

mar-N(0,9l = '%:—0.46) - N(4,09)- 4;

a... - N(o,46= l3" 0,34) - N (l,96) = 2;

”I" -- In. P. N (0, =1 ‘-%)— 0.“) - N(I.%)- I.

where the nunbers 10.000. 2,000. 400. 80 are the periods of the difference frequen-

cies and the first carrier frequency expressed in microseconds. For our exmaple
K - S.

3. The time interval to be measured is calculated

7—1-2000 l-2-m-l-(l -l-0.65)-80==8m2 Us.

The error of the reception equipsent when using the nultiscale synchronisation
method (usually digital phase meters) is made up of the error caused by noises

and the discreteness error. The first of these can be calculated from the relation

O.n—— _

2R m. .

where q¢ is the signal-to-noiae ratio with respect to field strength in the band
of the phase meter [see formula (5.3)]. The effective pasaband of the digital

phase meter is deternined in turn by the duration fa of signal transmission on
the given carrier frequency

 

I
II... " 2:1,, '

Let tn- 300 a. Then even at a signal-to-noise ratio of 0.05 in a 1 kn: band.

q-i ‘1 qua/V2: “m1“?!

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[subscript lxl‘u-l kHz] in the phase meter passband which corresponds to error
due to noises that is equal to 0.003 period, or expressed in rink-0.026 us.

A euch greater error is associated with determining the exact time of propagation
on the carrier frequencies. This error can be conventionally divided into two
components: randoa o and systematic 5,.11' random error is understood to be
that due to chaotic cﬂanges in the phase of the arriving signal under fixed con-
ditions on the path from the transaitter to the receiver. As implied by data of
years of observations. such changes. and consequently op , fluctuate from 1.5 (day-
time. smer). to 4 us (nighttine. winter) Inf. 23]. The systentic error in
determination of phase velocity on tran-itted frequencies is fundamental, and
under unfavorable conditions may reach 11-50 as on paths up to 6000 h long.

If 6 is the same on all frequencies. it has no effect on the probability of correct

resolution of ambiguity. In this case the o. appearing in fonula (5.10) can be
defined as

°. l/ (2,1)‘14: + 42. (5.12)

where d is the discreteness of phase readout by a digital phase peter.

Using formulas (5.”) and (5.12) we evaluate the probability of correct resolution
of ambiguity for one transition in the hypothetical system we are considering.
Setting d-0.01. oP-Z us (0.0250 period on frequency of 12.5 kHz), we get

o soms P-«p(0 °;;—'—5)=o(2,34)>o..99
So correspondingly for 01,- lo us we get P~0.9.

From a formal standpoint. the result should nave been raised to a power equal to

the number of transitions (four in our case). However. on low difference frequen-
cies the correlation of neasurenent errors is so strong that the corresponding
transitions are always made unambiguously. The loss of this unambiguous property
can occur only with transition fron the greatest difference frequency to the carrier
frequency. Such an occurrence gives rise to a neasurement error equal to the period
of the carrier frequency (in our case 80 us).

The existence of two fundamentally different methods of time signal trmsnission
in the VLF band necessitates two approaches to the problem of calculating the time
of propagation of transmitted signals. To determine corrections for delay in the
propagation channel with the purpose of refining phase readings. it is necessary
to know the phase velocity VP, which enables us to find the total phase shift of
the signal that has covered a distance Z fron receiver to transmitter.

n, s 7,» + 0,, - "L h. (5.13)
9
Formula (5.13) is also frequently written as

I
?;p '3 Z kilo

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

where k,- v -—'-2r1' - f:- is the eo-csllevl prOPnsttion constant. or wave umber.
I P

For free space, this syubol will be used without a subscript.

To deternine the pulse signal delay. its group velocity v3 should be known, 1. e.
the velocity of displacement of energy from the transmitting to the receiving an-_

tenna. In this case. r',= -’—.

i"
If the phase velocity of the signal is independent of its frequency. the group
velocity is exactly equal to the phase velocity. If such a dependence does hold
between then. then there is a difference that is the stronger the greater the rate
of change in VP as frequency changes

. 1
MA!) u ,(I)+'.”'—‘—”I (5-10,...
3' -'._:--l
or as signal wavelength changes in free space

0"_..(U

u 1.: p 0-H or

0—;

 

From the relations given in Section 5.3 it follows that K <3-lo4, in virtue

of which the group velocity of pulsed VLF signals can be taken as equal to the
speed of light in the case of an error in signal registration.

Thus we nus: have an opportunity to determine v, to solve the problem of determining
propagation tine in the VLF band.

5.3. Elements of the Theory of VLF Propagation in the Spherical Barth-Ionosphere
Waveguide

VLF radio waves propagate in the concentric earth and ionosphere that are walls.
as it were. of a spherical waveguide. A strict asthenaticsl description of the
signal with the ionosphere with actual consideration of its properties does not
permit us to find an analytical solution for signal paraneters even when the char-
acteristics of the propagation channel are known. Unfortunately. information that
is currently available relative to the region of the ionosphere of significance
for the propagation of VLF waves. ionisation layers at an altitude of 50-100 Ian.
does not enable a sufficiently exact description of the physical processes that
take place therein.

The lower ionisphere. closed off as it is fron the principal sources of ionization
by upper layers. is less subject to the influence of a change in ionising factors.
and consequently is more stable than the upper ionosphere. The altitude dependence
of electron concentration Ne for typical daytime conditions is shown in Fig. 20a.
and for nighttime conditions—in Fig. 20h (Ref. 26]. The field of the VLF radio
signal for the actual profile of the ionosphere can be calculated only by nunerical
methods. using a computer.

The waveguide nature of VLF radio signal propagation causes aiaultaneous‘ excitation
of several wave nodes near the antenna that differ with respect to the altitude

37

MOFIIOALISEMLY
MWLMMY

     

M
B a $'
3 a
2 r
a
8 - 8
"‘ u
8 3.,
'3' - g
, e
20 aid
2
"m 1.! xr 537).»: :5 m :25 am
a b

Fig. 20. Altitude dependence of electron concentration in the
lower ionosphere for typical daytime (a) and nighttime (b) con-
ditions

dependence of the corresponding components of field intensity. The lower the node
number n. the less the fluctuations observed in this dependence. Bach mode is
characterized by a nodulus An and a phase “n of the coefficient of excitation.

a phase velocity Va and an attenuation an. The dependence of the field strength

9
vector [in on distance to the tranaitter is

 

 

liar-«m ” ”5.4 A'.e""~- ‘5'”)
Iain“ "
where
I5.(l) - M (5.16)

I

is the field strength that would have been set up by a transmitter of power P
under an infinitely conductive unbounded plane [in formula (5.16) Bo is expressed
in nV/n, P in kw and Z in loll. 0 is the ratio of the distance 1 from the transmitter
in proportion to the radius of the earth R3. h is the effective altitude of the
ionosphere.

11,. A344; «,2, - 0,125+"; + ft (5.17)
l

are respectively the relative amplitude and phase of the given mode. The amplitude
A and phase 9 of the resultant field are determined from the relations

0 V1773

 

 

 

l
A =- but) _ -l(2‘.A. cos2m)‘ +(2A. sln 2“, H7 (5.18)
VINO—F
24. sln 20,.
-v . I (5.19)
39 M15 fdnmwm
38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus to determine the phase and amplitude of the field at the reception point it

is necessary to determine the parameters of the most intense modes and to perform
vector summation of the fields that they produce in accordance with formulas (5.18)
and (5.19). In view of the considerable difficulty of general solution of such

a problem, idealized models of the channel with different degrees of complexity
are used for approximate evaluation of the parameters of the modes.

A model with ideally reflective earth and ionosphere enables estimation of the
phase velocities of the modes only. In this case. the strict solution for
f< 16 kHz corresponds most nearly to the relation

{we 1 +19%": -%' (5.20)

h being the only parameter of the model.

In practice, instead of the absolute value of the phase velocity ya. we often use
its difference from the speed of light expressed relatively. In this case

"- (RIP—IF” h—A

a" - T H ——-—:m' — 3_ (5.21)
From formulas (5.20), (5.21) we see that at comparatively lower altitudes of the
ionosphere the phase velocities of some modes may be greater than the speed of
light. This does not in any way contradict the famous assumption of relatively
theory since the value of vn only describes the spatial distribution of the phase
of the field at a certain instant, and is not the velocity of propagation of any
physical object. Any signal that is a change in phase or amplitude of the field

near an antenna will lead to a reception point with group velocity that is always
less than the speed of light.

A model with a sharply hounded ionospherethat accounts for nonideality of reflection
from the walls of the equivalent waveguide permits evaluation of all four parameters
of each mode. but in the general case requires numerical solution of_the problem

on a computer. The parameters of the model are: altitude h of the ionosphere.
conductivity of the earth 03, and conductivity of the ionosphere o1. Instead of

01. the literature conventionally uses the so-called characteristic frequency of
the ionosphere

where to --JL-. 10" F/m is the dielectric constant of free space.
36!

Since losses are small in practice in the earth and ionosphere. we can get approxi-

mate formulas for estimating mode parameters. In doing this. it is permissible
to use the representation

a.” a..+Au(ou)+Aa(m,), (5.22)
ﬂ.=9(°3)+li(«,). ‘ (5.23)
39

i“)!!0i1ﬂ(1Al.lElE(lVLY
me OII‘O-‘ICIAI. 08¢ ONLY

1. e. the influence of earth and ionosphere on the characteristics of node prepaga-

tion shows up independently in the first approximation. we give the corresponding
for-ulna without derivation

 

Astra) =. _o,2s k V's—l ; (5.26)
was):- 0.046% V -£-. (5.25)

Let us note that the values of “(03) and 8(03) are the ease for all nodes of the
radio signal.

A¢(~,)- —0.10-10—’(2n--|)’3(VT.———' ); (5.25)
PWTT
p(.,)z-- oonmL’LL'L'g(,/7:__|__). , (5.27)
l L
I I 321:0 a,
"he“ “' (7:) I” «zmmﬂ‘ "' m-

In formulas (S. 25). (5. 27), the altitude of the ionosphere and signal wavelength

are expressed in km, conductivity in ms/n. signal frequency in kHz. and attenuation
in dB/los. To evaluate the modulus and phase of the coefficients of excitation
we can use the relations

 

_ 40!“! I"
" (2..- 1)! :377' (5.28)
v , ‘-‘- '- *- gm (5.29)

Analysis of these formulas shows that the attenuations of nodes increase rapidly
with increasing mode nulhers. Because of this. at sufficiently great distances
from the transmitter the phase and amplitude of the field are deternined by the
one or two most intense nodes. This circumstance. which appreciably simplifies
the Summation of nodes according to formulae (5.18). (5.19). is used in presen-
tation of the method of calculating the V1.1? tranaaission path (see Section 5.6).

A three-parameter model {11.03. mg} with proper selection of parameters enables
calculation of the phase velocities of modes and the total phase delay of a signal
with relative error of no more than (3-5)-"10 for paths 1) 2000 In. Since it

is practically impossible to measure h. 03 and w;- independently. their values are
estimated from measured parameters of the field at the reception point. At the
present tine it is usually assued that h- 70 In for day and 90 In for night. and
wr- 2.105. The conductivity of the earth in S/I. depending on the type of underly-
ing surface. is:

sea...........8

prairie. vet ground. . . 5-10"
prairie. dry gromd. . . lolO"-2-10'~
fresh water. . . . . . . 1'10"

60

FOR OFFICIAL [.85 ONLY
ma 05‘8“)“. at NY

”atoms-see eeelﬂlo ~“310-. ’
permafrost . . . . . . . 3-5 10“
permanent ice. . . . . . less than 1 107’

TABLE!

Phase velocities of first three nodes without consideration of losses
in the walls of the equivalent spherical waveguide

‘ For day (5-7013) - I ‘ m- c (h-sob)

  

TABLE 2

Corrections to values of phase veloc.ty with consideration of
nonideality of reflection free the ionosphere

for day For

 

Knowing the parameters of the propagation channel, we can readily calculate the
components of An(o3 ) and 8(03 ) fron formulae (5. 21.), (5. 25). Tables 1-6 smarize

the values of an. . 3Aa(mr) and 8(0):): which are nore difficult to calculate. .It
was pointed out above that foreula (5. 21) gives fairly accurate values of «no for

41

mammouiv
INDR‘OFF1C1AI.IISI:CNULV

IABLE h

Coefficient of excitation of the first mode* and its phase

 

 

I ‘l-“
1’. kn: __ ____._

daytime Light:
lo _.2.09
I5 -4.74
20 —8.I6 ,
25 -'|3.37 -—27.2
m --m.|3

 

 

*Por nodes with other numbera An and ¢An can
be calculated from the formulas

A A. . ?‘.
"mu—I)" " (en—n"

 

 

f<16 kHz. For the frequency range of 20-25 Illa. the values of on. are understated
by (0.6-0.7)010”.

5.4. Daily Variations of Phase and Amplitude of signal at Reception Point

The principal conclusions and relations of Section 5.3 have been derived on the
basis of the assumption that either daytime or nighttime conditions obtain on the
entire path from the transmitting to the reception point.‘ Such routes are called
equiluminant. They correspond to values of phase and amplitude that are nearly
invariant in time. In reality. the path between transmitter and receiver crosses
the line between night and day (terminator) twice daily. Exceptions are paths

with one end lying in the polar region. which dictates anomalous conditions of
illuminance (absence of total day or total night. continual day or continual night).

The period of crossing the line between day and night is called the transition
period. and transmission paths at this time are non-equiluminant. During the transi-
tion period. the phase and amplitude of the field change rather rapidly. passing
from the daytime to the nighttime value and vice versa. At sufficiently great
distances from the transmitter. where the interference of terms of the mode series
has no effect. these variations are trapezoidal. P. Ye. Krasnuahkin. who was the
first to observe the curve of diurnal phase variation and to give it an interpre-
tation based on the mode approach [Ref. 25]. called it the phase trapezoid.

In daylight the phase velocity as a rule is greater than at night. while the signal
phase at the reception point is greater in the nighttime than during the day. The

peak—to-eak diurnal fluctuations of the phase-the amplitude of the phase trapezoid
--at a distance can be defined as

A‘ n ":- (ﬂgu '" “-1): (+01” - um). (5' 3°)

[subscripts nu. uou denote "day" and "night" respectively] where VA". Vuom are
the phase velocities of leading modes for daytime and nighttime conditions.

‘2

FOR(NHNCUHLUSE(MNLY
908 Olﬂﬂf‘kl.|ﬂlifﬂNlN

Let distance I be great enough that the first mode is the leading mode both during
the day and at night. Then on the basis of for-ula (5.21) we get

a .. .2 ._._.. '; "5.1;...-
325. h 2&1 '

 

 

(5.31)

“as "' “an

where h'is the aaan altitude of the ionosphere. equal to 80 he. Substituting nueeri-
cal values of paraneters in formula (5.31), we get

.., _...,. 0,244 . lo-w + 1.57 . ‘04.

Host points on the territory of the USSRgetreliable reception of signals from

a VLF radio station in Great Britain situated about 100 km to the north of London.
and operating with call letters 633 on a carrier frequency of 16 the. Since this
frequency corresponds to a wavelength of 18.75 he. with consideration of formula
(5.31) we get Ar- 8.11 us (distance I is expressed in thousands of km). The dis-
tance from station GER to Moscow is about 2550 km, which should correspond to an
,amplitude of the phase trapezoid of the order of 21 us. The resultant value agrees
well with experieental data of the authors for this route. Analogously, for the
(BR-Irkutsk route we get A‘I-BJ 5.220-62.3 us; in Ref. 26. diurnal phase varia-
tions of the order of 37-é5 us were detereined for this longer route.

In cases where different nodes predominate during the day and at night. the data
of tables 1 and 2 should he used for calculating the diurnal phase variation.

5.5. Method of Calculating Phase and Amplitude of a Signal (Correlation of Mode
and Ray Approaches and Their Limits of Applicability)

The nethod of calculating the field of a VLF radio signal must include the following
principal stages:

1) determination of mode paraneters;

2) determination of ratios of levels of the terns of the mode series at the recep-
tion point;

3) selection of the leading node or making a decision on the necessity of adding
several terns of the mode series; '

4) calculating the phase and aeplitude of the signal with respect to the leading
node or by using a relation that accounts for several modes. '

In calculating the phase it is usually considered that the phase velocities of
the east significant nodes as a rule differ from the speed of light in free space
by no more than (S—7)-10". This enables us to express the total phase delay or
its corresponding apparent tine of propagation as

1* == —:-(I +s) ==IT.-{' T"; Q” ‘¥‘(l +‘)- 'h'!‘ 9am. (5.32)

[subscript non-ladditionall To. 00 are calculated with respect to the speed of
light, and the corrections to these values are called the additional phase advance
and additional propagation tine respectively. Based on the feasibility of repre-
sentation of expressions (5.32). it is advisable to calculate the phase in three
stages:

63

FOI1OFFKJA1.U§EII‘LY
3'0! onmt W “V

calculation of the tine of propagation to the reception point "at the speed of
light";

deter-ination of the additional propagation tine with respect to the leading node
or by emotion of several nodes;

calculation of the total phase of the field.

we will give a detailed exposition of the method based on an example of calculation
of a specific transmission path.

Initial data: transmitter is the can radio station; reception point in the vicinity
of Moscow; radiation power of the transnitter 60 3"; signal frequency 16 1:32; the
route passes alnost entirely over dry land. plains without nountaine or pernafrost;
path length 2610 km; reception tine 15"00" Moscow tine ,in June.

Paraseters of the equivalent waveguide: the nonogran of Fig. 36 shows us that

the entire trans-lesion path is conpletely illuminated during- the reception period.
and therefore 11- 70 In. In accordance with the data on pp 60-61. 03-5 nsln for
the given type of terrain. Based on reco-endations in the literature. we take
the characteristic frequency of the ionosphere as cor-240‘ a".

Let us determine the paraaeters of nodes.

1. Auxiliary parameters associated with signal frequency:
r-¥- 62.5 us. “3-29- 18.75 to. u-6.283f- nos-10’ a“.
2. Phase velocities of the first three nodes without consideration of losses

(Vn' c(l+an)). Since the signal frequency f lies between the two tabulated values
ft. n+5. we use linear interpolation:

a-.(I) .. mm) + ’ls’l mm s) —a._ (Ir)I. (5.33)

For the first mode we get
MIG) 4.351- -,',-(—?,so.|- 1351. 10-39..“ l,65 - I04,

for the second (uh-47.0140". and for the third a..--sa.sa-lo".
3. Attenuationa of nodes:

components of attenutation that are due to the finite conductivity of the earth.

. I ,
“(03)., 0,0465; I" {Tau 1.47 . l0“ dB/kn;

the conponent of attenuation due to nonideality of reflection free the ionosphere

is found by interpolating the data of Table 3 using a formula analogous to (5.33).
After interpolation we get '

Mo

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”OFFICIALUSEONLY

mug-2.54.10" «Is/u. sump-6.3240“ (ll/b.
83(0)!) . l3.89°10- “lbs

4. Coefficients of excitation of nodes:

A, m—s,45.10-'-‘:1 — —s,45.10-a’%°-—5,35. an;

in accordance with Table I.
A2--0.6 d3; A;--0.2 d3.
5. Relative levels of nodes at the reception point:
in accordance with formulas (5.23) and (5.16) for the first node

p. = ( I." + 2.54) . 10-3 - 4,01 . 10-4 am;
.4, u — 5,35— 4.01 - 10-3 . m0 - — 5,35—10,47-—ls,aa as;

for the second
p, - ( 1,47 4- 6,32) - 10'4- 7,79 .104 dB/ln; ..
A; = — 0,6- 7,79 ° '0” ° 2610 I —20,83 a;
for the third

0, .. ( L47 + 13,09). 10—3 -15.:5- 10-~J «3/5;
A, a — 0,2 — 15,30 . 10-3 - 2610 - — 37.29 713';

6. Error of calculating the phase of the field with consideration of only the
first (leading) node:

 

l ._, ‘_|_, s.omo., ' = 7 .
“<21; l0 «4 um 10-- 1.0-6.” 0m cycle

7. Corrections to the phase velocity for the leading node. In accordance with
formula (5.210)

0.25 ,I' 1 , -
A'I(o:.)rv-—-1—o-- . IEQ—o.§ ‘0 ’-

Interpolation of data of Table 2 gives Armor) --0.l$'10".
8. Final value of the phase velocity of the leading'node:
a. - 7|, I Adda-I Aa.(~,)-—(l.$+0.35 +0.15) - l0 “=r —-2,IS. IO".
9. Phase of the coefficient of excitation of the leading node:
according to formula (5.29). M:- 3' 80.01 cycle. which corresponds to 0.6 us.

10. Additional propagation tine

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOFF'ICIALIJSEONLY

I... - “0,125 + 7,.) + a. 1’. a (0,0: + 0,125)_.'6_233r_’—"§‘::—'wl‘i - 28,8

11. Total apparent tine of propagation

5: .— rm+ .L "1,. + 0430 + 0.7.104)4'28.§-F'8165,1— s‘iaéb us...
C .
12. Conplete phase of the field
7,: - rJT-e- 87333162,!) - 139,74 cycles.
[3. Correction for phase delay of signal during propagation
1-,. - '5'», - cntlcr ( v.) = 139,74 139 - 0,74.

The resultant number is the sought correction for signal propagation in the earth-
ionosphere waveguide.

14. Signal anplitude is determined by using the results already found. First

the constant factor is found that depends on transmitter power P. wavelength A and
altitude of the ionosphere h

son/7'1

l!--——

hl/R_3.

 

For our case

 

/
u .. sooi‘i‘“—_E_-J‘— =13: nV/n.
70V 6373

Then the factor that depends only on the distance from the translitter is deternined

I l

”(1): _._.._._. .9: —_
’ 26H)
~ln -- _
1/ R3 am 6178

The field strength of the signal at the reception point is

- 1.33.

 

Iz'(l)- lit/(l) . mm".
In accordance vith point 5. A--15.82 d3. Finally

15(1) a 1m. 1,31 - l0-°-7" - 2,95]6,20=-0.475 nv/a.

This example demonstrates an important advantage of the node approach at suffi-
ciently great distances fron the transnitter: it has the capability of accounting
for one node alone. and thus makes it comparatively ainple to calculate the sapli-
tude and phase of the field at the reception antenna. At short distances. where
it is necessary to account for several terns of the node series. this advantage
disappears. The difficulty of the node approach is inversely proportional to the
length of the transmission path. which is opposite to the situation for-the ray
nethod considered in Chapter lo.

66

POROMCIALUSEONLY
ma OFFICIAL use WY

Let us recall that the ray method at distances of the order of 500-1000 in permits
consideration of only one or two rays that have arrived at the reception point
with different embers of reflections (Ref. 27). On short routes the ray approach
can be successfully used instead of the mode approach or on an equal basis with
it. As the distance from the transmitter increases. there is a sharp increase

in the nunber of rays with approximately equal amplitudes that are incident on

the reception antenna. Besides. at a considerable distance from the transmitter.
the fundamental limitations of the ray nethod also begin to sake thauelvee felt.
When it is used in implicit form, it is seemed that the signal travlea in an fini-
tesimally thin ray. and after colliding with the walls of the equivalent waveguide
it changes direction of propagation in accordance with the law of mirror reflection.
However. in reality. even in free space. the signal travels to the reception point
as if through eons channel that narrows at the transmitting and receiving antennae
and widens out on the middle distances between them.

The maximn width of the channel dm nay be taken as equal to the dineter of
the so-called first Fresnel zone (Ref. 28],

d... .. _"_.

The width of the channel can be disregarded. and it can be considered a ray only
in the case where it is less than the height of the equivalent waveguide

/
dimer " Li << ’3. (5-36)

Prom expression (5.26) we get a formula for the radius of the sons of applicability
of the ray approach:

1.5; 1-1". (5.35)

Calculations by formula (5.35) show that in the VLF range. the ray approach can
be used in pure fora only at distances up to about 500 ha in daytime and 1000 km
at night [Ref. 27 (this paper gives a detailed description of the ray method as
applied to the VLF band)]. .

with transition to higher-frequency bands the radius of the zone of applicability
of the ray approach increases. Hode damping practically ceases to grow as mode
nunber increases. and there is an increase in the amber of propagating modes.

In comparison all this negates the noted principal advantage of the mode approach.

Thus the mode and ray approaches mutually compluant one another. enabling compara-
tively simple engineering calculation of transmission paths over a wide range of
frequencies and distances free the transmitting antenna.

5.6. Error of Calculating Propagation Time

The error of calculating the phase and group velocities of VLF radio signals is

dictated mainly by two factors: inadequacy of the model of the propagation channel.
and inexactitude of knowledge of its parameters. '

67

FOR OHIO“. "8' ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tion from the walls; As, is the correction sequentially introduced in accounting

for the actual properties of the propagation channel. Series (5.36) slowly converges
to the value corresponding to the actual behavior of the field of a VLF radio signal.
The number of terms is large (in principle it is infinite); however. each specific
model has a corresponding sun of a finite nusber of terms of the series. The sun

of the dropped terns. or the approximate value of the first of these is the error
due to inadequacy of the model. Thus Ad; is the error due to nonequivalsnce of

the planar ideal waveguide to a spherical waveguide; As; is the error of the spheri-
cal waveguide with ideal reflection as compared with a model that accounts for

losses in the earth and ionosphere. and so on. The next step in refinement of

the model is transition from a stepwise approximation of the ionosphere to consider-
ation of the actual behavior of the altitude dependence of the concentration of
charged particles and the frequency of collisions (correction Aug).

An important factor is consideration of the horizontal component of the earth's
magnetic field 8;. This disrupts azimuthal symmetry of the model. so that the
corresponding correction do. will depend on the direction of the path. Attempts

have also been made to account for deep layers of the earth. terrain relief, vege-
tation on the transmission path and so on.

The rough values of the corrections due to non-equivalence (inadequacy) for fI-ZO
kilohertz are: Ao‘I-S-IO". dog-41.340". Aug-10.25010", Aa.-I:o.s.lo-’.

It must be borne in mind that the actual parameters of the channel are in one-
to-one correspondence only with the parameters of a nonexistent ideal model that
accounts for all terms of series (5.36). The parameters of all existing models

are effective. and have a certain dependence on signal frequency. As a rule. these
parameters are not determined by direct measurement. but are rather chosen in accor-
dance with the principle of boat conformity of the field anplitude and phase calcu-
lated with their use to the values observed in reality. Such an approach is called
the "inverse problem method" [nef. 25]. This is the way in particular that we

have found the daytime and nighttime altitudes of the ionosphere frequently quoted
in this chapter (70 and 90 km) for the model with stepwise approximation of the
behavior of electron concentration-the nodal with a sharply bounded ionosphere.

Thc more perfect the model. the wider will be the range of frequencies. and the
more accurate will be the correspondence of predicted results to experimental data
of investigation of the signal field on different transmission paths. However,
refinement of the model requires more and more information on the parameters of
the actual path of propagation-in particular on the ionosphere. The possibility
of getting information on the lower ionosphere without analyzing the results of
amplitude and phase measurements in the VLF band is quite limited, and boils down
to point probing with geophysical rockets at a few scattered points [Ref. 25).

b8

FOIiﬂfiﬂﬂAi.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because of this. a reasonable compronise is needed batsmen complexity and accuracy
of the model. If the error of calculation of phase velocities of the modes is

to be of the order of (0.5-l)-10". it would be advisable to stop at the threes-
parameter model (h. 03. or} discussed in this chapter with sharply bounded iono-
sphere. Hhen parameters have been appropriately chosen. the model enables calcu-
lation of time of propagation with error of the order of 1-3 as on a 1000 km trans-
mission path in daytime conditions. At nighttime and in the transition period.
model (h. 03, or} and others that have been studied are less exact than under day-
time conditions (for example, the error of the model that we have selected may
reach 5-6 us over 1000 km). Nonethelss, the good agreement between the calculations
of Section 5.5 and experimentally measured amplitudes of the phase trapezoid is
evidence that the given rough value is the upper limit of the computational error.

The additional error of calculation due to inexact knowledge of the parameters

of the model can be estimated by standard methods of error theory. which we leave
to the reader. Most appreciable in practice is the error due to inexact knowledge
of the altitutde of the ionosphere AhR(Ah). The formula for calculating this ad-
ditional error takes the form

A' M M
Al,(M)= .677- -'-R—. (5.37)

Formula (5.31) implies that in the middle part of the VLF band. Aa1(Ah)/Ah is of
the order of c 1.10-3 km".

Since such error components as instruaent error, and the error due to statistical
fluctuations of the phase at the reception point count to a few microseconds and
are weakly dependent on distance [Rah 29], the cited error (1-3 ueper 1000 km)
is what determines the realistically attainable accuracy of synchronization with
the use of VLF radio channels. For typical transmission paths (1- 3000-6000 km)
the error of synchronization in the VLF hand may reach 10-15 us.

All the given values of synchronization error apply to the case of determination
of the position of the time scale of the reception point relative to the scale

of the transmitting point. The error of mutual tie-in of the scales of two recep-
tion points for which the mutual distance I.“ is much less than the distance to
the transmitter is much lower because of the compensation of comon systematic
components. For a rough estimate of this effect we can use the semi-empirical
formula

5mut/5rec ' 'zmut7 1' ' (5-38)
where 6.“t is the error of mutual synchronization of the scales of the reception
points; one is the error of synchronization of each of the reception points with
respect to signals of the tranmaitting station. Thus for a typical case (tun/ls
0.25). we get 5mut/5rec30-5-

CHAPTER 6: METHODS OF SYNCIIRONIZING SPATIALLY SEPARATE!) FREQUENCY AND THE STAN-
DARDS IN THE UHF AND MICROHAVB BANDS

Regular transmissions of television broadcasts and communication in thete bands
rely on radio relay lines, intercity cable lines and artificial satellites.

69

”OFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Propagation of radio waves in these bands is within the limits of direct visibility
for surface radio relay channels (within a range of 50-450 km). and practically
unlimited when three artificial satellites are used. In long-range transmissions
over surface channels in these bands. intermediate relay broadcast stations are
used that extend the lines between two points on the surface of the earth.

These existing channels of television broadcasting and communications are used
likewise for synchronizing and transmitting time and frequency units to users.

Radio communications regulations have set aside three frequency bands for these
systems: 8-th (30-300 3012), 9-th (300-3000 MHz) and lO-th (3000-30000 MHz). -
Radio wave propagation in these bands is influenced by atmospheric inhomogeneities.
turbulence. inconstancy of the parameters of atmospheric waveguides and also the
sporadic E, layer. As will be shown below. when using radio relay lines the in-
fluence of these parameters produces an error of 0.1 us or less. When using atri-
ficial satellites. the effect of the ionosphere will show up in l’araday rotation
of the plane of polarization. In the 9-th band, the coefficient of refraction
will also depend on hmidity. temperature and pressure. which differ in different
regions. and at different times and seasons.

6.1. Using Reflections Prom Meteor Trails

For purposes of synchronization by reflection from meteor trails, frequencies of
40-100 H“: are used in the 8-th band. Meteor trails that can reflect radio waves
are formed at an altitude of 50-100 in due to the fact that the.earth's atmosphere
is continually penetrated by tens of billions of solid particles with mass of
0.01-0.001 mg from outer space moving at a velocity 'of 12-70 Isa/s relative to the
earth. As they penetrate the earth's atmosphere, the meteoric particles are heated
by repeated collisions with molecules of air. Atoms are removed from the surface
of the particles and undergo collisions with molecules of air. resulting in heating
of the ambient medium and ionization of atoms. As a consequence of ionization
where a meteor has passed. a trail is formed that contains free electrons that

over a time of 0.01-l.5 s can reflect radio waves of the 8-th band.

It can be assumed in a first approximation that the number of particles penetrating
the atmosphere in a unit of time is related to their mass; n-k/m. where e is the
mass of a particle; n is the nuuber of particles with mass greater than n; k is

a coefficient that depends on time of day, season of the year and other factors.

The average number of trails nu- crossing l mzls is calculated by the formula
“tr“ l60/Ne, where Ne is the number of electrons per meter (10"-10").

The meteor trail has a number of specific properties that must be taken into consider-
ation when using it to synchronize time and frequency standards:

the meteor trail has a limited lifetime (a few second or less);

The occurrence of meteor trails is random over the course of a day. and their dis-
tribution is determined by solar activity;

the energy flux of radio waves reflected from a meteor trail is sharply directional.
During its lifetime. the trail takes a sinuous configuration due to wind action. and

\

50

'0' OFFIGAL IS! ONLY
FOR Oﬂ-‘IGAL USE ONLY

the reflected beam in some cases of coherent scattering of radio waves by an under-
compacted trail (electron density q<<10n electrons per cm of trail length) is

dispersed.

In the case of such a mechanisa of scattering. the following may be possible causes
of phase instability:

diffraction effects associated both with the process of trail fonation due to
the finite velocity of meteors. and with the process of trail destruction under
the action of diffusion;

displacement of the reflecting region under the action of winds in the atmosphere.

Ionized meteor trails reflect signals almost specularly. the reflected signal being
characterized by an initial surge of amplitude. and rapid decay in accordance with
an exponential function. This type of signal makes up about “I of the total number
of reflections. Upon reflection from overcoupactsd trails. the falling part of

the amplitude of the reflected signal shows peaks and valleys due to the action

of high-altitude stratospheric winds. Besides this. the reflections from over-
cospacted trails (¢:1>101 electrons per cm of trail length) last for long times--
up to several seconds--and during this time the turbulent wind twists and breaks

the ionized colum. resulting in anltibeaa propagation.

The number of aeteoric reflections during signal tranuaissions depends on the extent
of the path. the time of day and the season of the year (Fig. 21) Inf. 3)].

Ii“ .nu

EaIIIIIII‘; '
I.
.5

  
     

     

Fig. 21., Population of meteoric reflections as a function of ‘
altitude (a) and time of day (b) Inst. 30]

51

MOWUSQONIX
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

The number of single sessions of synchronization by nu- varies depending on the
time of day (Fig. 21b) and the orientation of antenna systems (Pig. 21a). The
data of Fig. 21 apply to deflection of the antenna 22' toward the north. When
the antenna is turned 22' toward the south. there is a noticeable increase in “tr
in the period from 12“ to 18“. The observed diurnal variations of at, confirm

the advisability of reorienting antennas with a change from nighttime to daytime
measurements.

0n Fig. 21a. curve 1 shows the calculation. and curve 2 shows the experimental
behavior of the number of meteoric reflections as a function of range (altitude)
for the main lobe of the antenna radiation pattern.

Studies of Ref. 31-33 showed that the channel of meteoric conunication has a rela-
tively broad passband (0.2-0.8 MHz). high security of transmission. and is not
overly subject to the influence of ionospheric perturbations thanks to the direc-
tional properties of antennas and the simplicity of sending and receiving equipment.
These advantages allow this system to be successfully used for synchronizing time
and frequency standards at a distance of up to 1200-le km.

The point of occurrence of a meteor trail is random and not subject to prediction.
and therefore the path and time of signal tranmnission is determined only experimen-
tally by using simultaneous opposed transmissions and receptions of signals (methods
of two-, three- and four-bean transmissions). During a synchronization session.

the transmitters are practically in a state of radiation. and the reception devices
I“ ix the occurrence of a meteor trail on the tranmaission path with unilateral and
bilateral passage of time signals.

The first experimental transmissions were done on a frequency of 73 lﬁlz with a
transmitter having 80 RH pulse power and directional antennas: four seven-elaent
cophased arrays of the wave channel type. The transmitted time sipsls were pulses
from a master timer with pulse recurrence rate of 100 Hz and duration of 10 us.
Variation in altitude of reflection from the meteor trail was 86-105 km. The field
strength at the reception point was of the order of 10 uV/m. '

In this research. clock synchronization was by a method of simultaneous trsnasission
and registration of time signals (two-beam method). A disadvantage of the method

is the necessity of exchanging results of registration over an additional communi-
cation channel.

Subsequently. duplex synchronization methods with unilateral or bilateral rebroad-
casting were used for such systems in synchronization of time standards. Fig. 22
shows a system for synchronizing the time scale of point 8 by using reflection
from meteor trails. Time signals from a clock at point A are transmitted after
reflection from the meteor trail to point 8 and returned to point A together with
time signals tranmitted from point B. Simultaneously with emission of the time
signal from point A. a reversible counter is triggered there that operates in the
addition mode (forward count). The time signal from point B switches the counter
at point A to the subtraction mode. and the time signal transmitted from point A.
after it has been rebroadcast from point 3. stops the pulse count of the counter.
Half the difference of the count gives the discrepancy of the time scales reproduced
at points A and S.

52

FORWCIALISEONLY
“VI «man. I“ ONLY

 

.' sta'rt ' .,. I
I. ' 5 reverse I; stop
I 1.. / I / '
I I ' s x /r / I
l [4| n-"\ I"| // I
a -” ‘\ ., a ' |
4’ 'count AI count
'4’“. -—-u-~- — -----—----o‘o— -

 

Fig. 22. Systen for synchronizing tine scales using reflection
Eran neteor trails:
a—block diagram of reception and trsnniasion equipment; b—
diagrass of signal transmission; lureceiver; 2--antenna co-u-
tator; 3-4131? transmitter; buncdulator; S—sublodulator; 6-
matching device; 7-synchronising standard; 8--reversible counting-
type frequency neter (in the node of tine interval usasureeent);
9winterference-killing and conutation equipnent; lO—tine stan-
dard to be synchronized

Thus clock synchronization is done automatically vithoat additional exchange of
information between points. In addition. such a nethod enables verification of
the correctness of the setting of the synchronizing clock at the point being syn-
chronized, which in this case nay be unattended.

with identical equipment at both points. the nethod gives high precision of clock
synchronization.

Experimental work on Moscow-Gor'kiy and Hoscw-lhar'kov transnission paths [Ref. 36]
has shown that clocks can be synchronized with an error of less than 1 us when
meteor trails are used. -

6.2. Use of Television Channels

Intercity cable and radio relay lines are characterised by a broad passband. a
signal-to-noise ratio of 50 dB. high stability of the para-eters of equip-eat and

53

FOROFFIOALIBEONLY
FOR1OFFHJAI.USE(MVLY

transmission channel (which in turn ensures high constancy of the time of passage
of exact time signals over long distances). and by the capability of direct measure-
ment of the time of signal transmission.

Thanks to the wide passband. the risetime of the transmitted pulses at the reception
point is of the order of 0.2 as or less.

Bandwidth is determined by the ratio of the message spectrum AF and the signal
spectrum H. The latter in turn is determined by the selected type of modulation
and signal duration T. For narrou~band systems

AF-" and APT-W31.

I

while for wide-band systems
H>>AP and HT: 100-1000.

Frame and line synchronization signals and signals of other types are transmitted
together with the picture signals to stabilize the image on television screens.

As they are introduced into the makeup of the television signals. they can he used
to transmit information on the instants of exact time signals in a variety of tele-
vision systems differing chiefly in the order and rate of analysis and synthesis

of image elements.

The following image-scanning techniques are known: linear (sequential). inter-
laced. diagonal and spiral.

I

h,

 

3
I» \\
\
2-;
z
i
a

Fig. 23. Image scanning

ln sequential scanning (Fig. 23s). the elements are analyzed by continuous tracing
of the transmitted image in sequence along each line. The number of lines in a
frame may be constant, in which case

+11 . (6.1)

where z is the number of lines of the scan.

56

FOR OFIICIAI.lEi!(ﬂﬂLY
NI omcul. use ONLY

In the case of interlaced scanning (Pig. 23b) there is no such relation between
scanning frequencies. and

—!'— =m(a+b), (6.2)

where n is the scanning multiplicity. and a is an integer; b is any nunber.

In a television broadcast system it is assumed that n-Z. b-0.5. a- 312. i. e.
in each image field there are 312.5 lines, and as a result during frane scanning

the lines of both fields of one franc are automatically shifted.

Interlaced scanning is used in the Soviet Union. Pig. 2!. shows signals of the
first and second fields of a television inege.

 
  
 
       

   

i 2 J
I «I
a ﬁg
"m‘ufm’ml f; e (5 ‘1?
2-nd fungal? -st field I
V
|
I rm ' -1
I?
J _ x4;
\
"m‘m‘mk h s s h h E

 

Fig. 24. Complete television signal at the beginning of each
first (a) and second (b) field: -

I--white level; ll--b1ack level; lllnblanking level; IV—synchro-
nizing pulse level; l--line signal; 2--tine signal; 3--line blank-
ing pulse; bufrane blanking pulse; S--line synchronising pulse;
6—leveling pulse; 7--frane synchronizing pulse; 8—pulse shaped
fron cutoff of franc synchropulse; 9-local clock seconds pulse;
10--beginning of line; llnbeginning of field; a--duration of

line quenching pulse 12: 0.3 us; nulerals indicate franc line

nulhera

SS

“WWW!”
FIHICMNHCIAl.lEﬂECNVLY

The duration of the entire frame quenching pulse is 258-25-66 as (where E is the
duration of a line). In interlaced scanning. the frames of the television image
alternate at a repetition rate of 25 frames per second. The line scanning frequency
is f,- 15625 3:. Nominal field scanning corresponds to the ratio ffield"2fg/625'
-50 Hz.

The following lines are set aside for service use:

16 and 329--idsntification signals;

17. 18. 330 and 33l-test line signals;

19. 20. 21. 332-333 and 336--signals for in-house use;

7. 8. 9. 10. ll. 12. 13. 14 and 15 (in the first field). 320. 321. 322. 323. 324.
325. 326. 327 and 328 (in the second field of a frame)-color synchronization sig-
nals. Chrominance signals are a aubcarrier modulated by two color-difference sig-
nals that alternate from line to line. The subcarrier frequencies used in different
systems are: 6.429687 HR: (NTSC). 6.63361875 Hm: (PAL). and the SBCAM-3 system

has two zero subcarriers (4.25 and 6.50625 MHz) located alternately on the trailing
flats of the line quenching pulses.

Test signals are used to monitor the white level by means of square pulses. and
to evaluate: .

the amplitude-frequency response of the video channel by means of a signal with
six bursts of sinusoidal waveforms situated sequentially in order of increasing
frequencies along the line (0.5. 1.5. 3.0. 6.5. 5.0 and 6.0 MHz); .

the transient response of the video channel in the video frequency range by means
of sine-square pulses with duration of 0.16 us;

nonlinearity of the amplitude response of the video channel by means of a sawtooth
signal with superposed sinusoical vaveforn on a frequency of 1.2 His.

The television program is radiated by the telecenter on fixed carrier frequencies
individually for the image and sound in separate radio channels. For the Moscow
Television Technical Center (TTC). the l—st. 3-rd. 8-th and ll-th television broad-
cast channels are assigned. The nominal values of carrier frequencies for image
and sound are summarized in Table 5.

Existing systems for transmitting dimensions of time and frequency units over tele-
vision broadcast channels are differentiated into passive and active systems de-
pending on the method of coding infornation on the moment of time [Ref. 35. 36].

In passive systems. characteristic television synchropulses or special marking
pulses transmitted as part of the television signal are used as auxiliary signals
that are simultaneously registered at the synchronization points. Information

on measurement results is exchanged over an auxiliary communication channel. or
else the information on measurement results is transmitted from one point to the
other by a special code that is part of the television signal.

In active systems. characteristic television synchropulses (most frequently used
is the trailing edge of the first frame synchronizing pulse during frame quenching)

56

FINICHNIC!AI.UEI§(H€LY
FOIOFFICIALIBIONLY

TABLES

Noninal values of carrier frequencies

 

Channel Carrier fre uenc m
Channel I". q y,

 

 

 

quency band. ‘—

Sound
1 as. 5-56. 5 49.75 56.25
2 53.0—66.0 59.25 (5.75
3 7r. Ho—sq 0 77.25 as 75
4. ea. ’0—92 0 05.25 97.75
s 92 .o—Iolm 95.25 9! 75
o m .o_m.o 175.25 I8! .75
7 wen—mos 733.25 m .75
a neon-493.0 Isms 797' 75
9 tom-205.0 199.25 205. 75
lo man-214.0 207.25 213 15
u Slim—222.0 215.25 22:.75
'2 mil—ﬂop 221.25 229.75

or seconds-marking pulses transmitted as part of the television signal carry direct
infornation on the instant of ties in the unified system of the State Time and Pre-
quency Standard [GBVCh]. Registration of these signals at the reception point

by an oscilloscope with driven sweep or s tine-interval indicator sakes it possible
to superinpose the the instant of output of the second-narking pulses of the local
clock with the second-marking pulses of the GEVCh clock (with consideration of

the time for the signals to travel over tLe radio relay line or intercity cable
line) without any auxiliary infornstion.

The error of tie-in" of tine scales reproduced st spatially separated points has

the same order of nagnitude with use of either systen since it is determined nainly
by inconstancy of the time of signal travel over the radio relay or intercity cable
lines.

0n the other hand. the systens differ in effectiveness free the standpoint of re-
liability of the results. sinplicity of measurements. cost. flexibility. working
reliability and so on. The active system is preferable.

The method of synchronizing tine and frequency standards over television channels

is realized by the State Tine and Frequency Service [Gosudarstvennaya slushba
vreneni i chastoty; CSVCh] of the USSR [Ref. 37]. An active systen has been set

up at the Moscow 'l'rc based on a precision tins and frequency reference standard

that ensures constancy of instants of output of tine signals and frame synchropulses
from the television transmitter antenna in the unified system of GBVCh. A block
diagran of transmission of highly stable synchronization signals from synchrogener-
store at the rrc and incorporation of time signals into the television signal is
shown on Fig. 25.

The following methods can be used to control Operation of the synchrogenerators
at the rrc from tine and frequency reference standards:

57

MWMWLY
sne<nrsrcsat.tslttnitv

 

Fig. 25. Synchronization by television:

l--GEVCh; 2-transmitting correcting device; 3--reception cor-

recting device; 6--reference frequency standard; S-central

equipment room; 6-Ostsnkino radio transmitter; 7-radio relay

line; 8--terminsl radio relay station; 9-loca1 telecenter; 10-

PShT-IP recording receiver; ll-selector for isolating first

cut-in of the frame synchropulse and time signals; 12--tine-
interval measuring device; l3-digital printer

I) a voltage from the reference standard is sent to the synchrogsnaretor instead
of the internal generator voltage;

2) synchrogenerstor is changed to the driven mode from simplified synchronization

signals (58 or SSTs [expansions not given]) formed from a voltage with frequency
of 100 khz from the reference standard.

These signals are used simultaneously for internal synchronization of all equipment
of the television center. The 85 signal is a mixture of line synchropulses with
duration of 2 us (fzu-15625 as) and frame synchropulses with duration of 28 us
(fx- 50 Hz). In addition to these pulses. the SSTs signal also contains pulses

of 28 us duration (feig' 12.5 Hz) intended for chrominance synchronization of the
telecenter equipment. .

The second method of controlling operation of the synchrogenerator not only synchro-
nizes and cophases the line synchropulses. but also maintains the temporal position
of the synchropulses and the field pulses of the television signal. The method
used at the TTC for centralized synchronization of all equipment at the center

keeps the instant of output of the frame synchropulses from the television transmit-
ter antenna in register with the signals fron the time and frequency reference
standard regardless of the nature of formation of television transmissions (direct
transmission from a studio. motion picture film. magnetic tape). The automatic
control system used in present-day bleck-and-ehite video tape recorders sets the
phase of synchropulses reproduced from magnetic tape relative to the phase of the
signal from the reference standard with an error of 30.2 us. and in color video

tape recorders-with an error of :30 ns [Ref. 38. 39, and also State Standard
COST 7845-72].

In future, with full implementation of centralized synchronization of all image
sources in the telecenter. time signals introduced into line amplifiers of TTC

central equipment must be present in the television signal throughout the working
time of the telecenter.

58

FOR!0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI‘0f31CIAI.llﬂl(NQlV

Time signals and bursts of reference carrier frequencies transmitted as part of
television signals of reverse polarity to synchropulaes are pulses of 2 us duration
with recurrence rate of 25 Hz. the pulses arriving at the beginning of each second
being prolonged to 10 us. The time signals are accommodated in the central part
of the sixth line of the first field of the television signal (see Fig. 24). the
second-marking time signals follow 326 as later than the cutoffs of the frame syn-
chropulses; this tine can be different. and is established depending on the point
of insertion of the second-marking signal. The set delay remains constant during
all transmissions. and is determined by the GSVCh.

Choice of Synchronization Method

Selection of the method depends on the type of registration of signals at the syn-
chronization point. and on the method of information coding. In the case of an
active synchronization method. a procedure can be used that is based on recording
either time signals transmitted as part of the television signal. or the first
cutoff. the pulses being transmitted from a scale synchronised with the GBVCh.

In the first variant of the method. the discrepancy of the local time scale repro-
duced at a point to which a Soviet-wide television program is transmitted over
radio relay lines and intercity cable lines relative to the GBVCh scale is deter-
mined from the expression

AT','=*.—(—'-+‘Tc+‘u+"i) +3. (6.3)

v"

where r“ is the time interval neaaured at the synchronization point betveen the
secondamarking pulse of the local clock and the second-marking pulse differenti-

ated from the television signal;-£-- r" is the signal travel time over a radio

Vc
relay line or intercity cable line gramP the Hoscov TIC to the terminal radio relay
station; 13C is the signal travel time from the terminal radio relay station to
the antenna of the transmitting station of the local telecenter; r; is signal travel
time from the antenna of the local telecenter to the antenna of the synchronization
point (see Fig. 25); r, is the delay time of the recording receiver at the synchro-
nization point; 6 is the error of establishing the instant of output of signals
from the transmitting antenna at the Detankino station.

For points located in the zone of direct reception of television programs transé

nitted by 0stankino. the discrepancy of scales of time standards can be determined
from the formula

A1:- v. “_ (‘:I + 1’) i 8, (6.5)

where 131 is signal travel time from the Oscankino antenna to the reception antenna
at the synchronization point.

When using the second variant of the method. to eliminate ambiguity of readout

with discreteness of 20 ms on the one-second interval. it is necessary to pre-

synchronize the time scale vith respect to signals transmitted by short-wave. long"
wave and VLF radio stations with an error of 1-5 as.

59

FilltﬂﬂﬂClAl.lEl!(ﬂVlY
FIHICMNHCIAI.USE‘0NLY

In the case of the passive method. a procedure is used in which synchropulees are
recorded at two points. where these pulses have not been synchronized and are not
tied in to the GBVCh. and the instant of output of frame synchropulaes from the
transmitting antenna of the radio station varies by a random law. Time scales

for points situated within the range of action of a local telecenter or for remote
points to which a television program is transmitted over radio relay lines or inter-
city cable lines can be synchronized under condition that the same frame synchro-
pulses are recorded at both points. In this case. the inequality

Aﬂ+(*;+1:+*,‘l'¢+*.)<—?- ... (6.5)
must be satisfied. where AT; is the error of presynchronization of the time standard

The discrepancy of the scale of the local time standard relative to the GBVCh scale
is determined from formula (6.3) at I“. rﬁ- to. where To is the time interval mea-
sured in Moscow.

In all transmissions, the temporal position of the cutoff of the first frame syn-
chropulse with respect to the GBVCh scale remains constant. The user gets the
values of rﬂ. r. and 6 by request according to the procedure outlined in the Trans-
mission Schedule.

In mutual synchronization of time standards, when the standard to be synchronized
is any reference standard. and characteristic synchropulsee are simultaneously
registered at the point of location of the time standards. the discrepancy of the
time scales is determined from the formula

A ,5

T; _ r9 .. (2-,? — 2.15) + "

 

’+(‘ ._,- .:_,.). (645)

”I
where {Ignand trig is the overall delay of frame synchronization in the transmitting

l’I
and rebroadcasting equipment between points A and B; r:ﬁ is the difference

of travel time of signals from the transmitting telecenter to the points where
the synchronizing and synchronized time standards are located; v; is the group
velocity of radio wave propagation; 1:. .,-t” , is the difference of delays in the
recording receivers of points A and 5.

 

Synchronization Error

The synchronization accuracy in such a method is considerably dependent on the
operation of the selector and the circuit for gating the frame synchronization
pulses. and on the resolution of the time-interval measuring device.

The error of tie-in of time scales with the use of active and passive methods is
of the same order of magnitude [Ref. 50]. This can be attributed to the fact that
the principal errors arise due to inaccuracy of determining the signal travel time
on the transmission path from Moscow to the local telecenter. and from the tele-
center to the tie-in point, and due to delay in the equipment of the telecenter
and the tie-in point, which is equally detrimental to the results of calculation
of the discrepancy of time scales relative to the GEVCh scale.

FORIOFFKJA1.USE(NWLY
FIII()FI1C1A1.1EI!(H'LY

Error of synchronizing scales of time standards

MT, - n+3 0L, his. (6.7)
¢

M.’ - 1/ (w + [‘(i-Jl' + 365?. (6.8)

where 61 is the registration error, 61 is the error of determining the distance
between Moscow TTC and the tie-in point. dvcp is the error of determining the mean
group velocity of radio wave propagation. 61, is the error due to instability of
signal delay time at the telecenter. in intermediate relay stations and in the
recording receiver.

Overall error

To determine the possible error of synchronisation of time standards when using
television signals. it is necessary to evaluate the influence of all destabilizing
factors of the tranSmission channel. The principal ones are the following:

1. Error of registration 6; or measurement of time intervals between the signal

of the local time standard and the received signal. This error is determined by
the error of the measurement method and the resolution of the time-interval measur-
ing device.

2. Instability of reception equipment of the reception points 63.

3. Error of determining the signal travel time from the antennas of television
transmitters to antennas of the reception points 6, and 6..

a. Change in temporal position of signals during travel through the channels of
radio relay lines 65.

5. Instability of delay of equipment at the television centers 65 and 67.

Let us consider quantitative evaluation of the enumerated major components of
errors of synchronization of time standards last. 61-06].

1. In practice. 61.can be reduced to 0.02 us. considering that a counting-type
frequency meter with high counting rate is used as the time-interval measuring
device. If the count rate is 1 MHz. resolution will be 0.01 us. The second compo-
nent of 61 will be determined by the rise time or fall time of the signals trans-
mitted through television channels. and by the signal-to-noise ratio.

The mean square error is
To

a", at ——-

vyﬁs.

where T¢ is the rise time of the signal. q is the signal-to-noiae ratio; and n
is the number of signals used for the measurement.

6!

FUII(JFI1C1A1.IIIE(IVLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For a rise tine of 0.3 us. n-1 and q- 10. error awe 0.02 us.

2. Error 6;-0.06 us.

3. Errors 6, and 6. can be deternined from the following considerations.
The value of 33 is deter-ined either by calculation or-experinentally.

1n calculation. vcp is taken as equal to the speed of light. and Z is found from
the coordinates of the reception point.

This method is noet frequently used only for cases of intracity synchronization

when 1'3 is established with direct trans-ission through the ether from the tele-
center to the antenna of the reception point without relays. In intrecity broadcast-
ing. t3 can also be deternined by using laser range finders or by measuring with

the parallax method. For Hoscow points the parallax angles are differences of

zenith distances measured froa the synchronization point to three tiers of the

116 television tower. The mean square errors of the average values of the zenith
distances of one of the points as calculated from internal convergence of neasure-
nent results in receptions and sen-receptions are: for tier I A- $2.6; II A- 33.1;
Ill d- 22.9. The distance Z fro: the GBVCh to the television tower was obtained

twice from the values of reference bases (Fig. 26): with respect to basis 1-111
of 260 ls. l'- 32681 n; and for basis 11-11! 178.5 I. "II 32756 n. The final value

is taken as the weighted average between these two results (the weights are inversely
proportional to the lengths of the bases). 1- 32712 I.

'l - my: UH

 

Fig. 26. Parallax nethod of distance measurement

62

me OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A "5
7“- “ ::::._::
start stop 79:
n .
tll. start
rm I: -:~—:_ :zzmzrzl
9: stop
b
etsrt
4
a .

 

stop C

Fig. 27. Diagram of determination of signal travel the over
min television channels:
l--pulse generator; 2. 3~relsy stetions; lo-ocounting-type fre-
quency neter; 5. 6--precision tine standard

For remote synchronization points to which television progress are sent via relay
rebroadcast lines or intercity cable lines. the loop nethodisused (Pig. 27a) cou-
prising forward and reverse television channels. 1. e.

'0. + ‘n =- AT:

. .. or:
when 35"» 'p' 3 '

(6.9)

 

In the presence of a purely physical pair. where r;. okra. additional muurenents
are trade by the arrengesent of Fig. 27b, whence

 

‘..- a, - mg. (6.10)
Sinultaneous solution of equations (6.9) and (6.10) gives
arm-er"
q. - -¢-,—‘; (6.11)
Aura—A72
q. .. 2 , (6.12)

In the presence of a single duplex channel. the msurenents are done in the follow-
ing order: s loop is set up to determine the vslue of MA at point B. and the
value of ATE at point A. In addition, alternate seesurenents are node at points

6 and A by the arrengeuent of Fig. 27c. using synchronized precision tine standards
at point A (5) and point B (6) with registration of the received signal on the
local clock. Pros measurements

7': + n. " M'ﬁ- (6.13)
Tﬁ + a, , AT‘» ’ (6. u.)
63

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

fron measurements by the loop

71+ 1'. + r“ - AT}, - (6.15)
r;;:+ 3+3. -A1‘g~ (6.16)

After solving equations (6.16)-(6.16)

1;“- AT; -— ATﬁ. (6. 17)
g. .. AT: — AT}. (6. la)

The error of measuring signal travel time in radio relay lines. as in the preceding
cases. is determined mainly by the error of registration. or by the instruental

error of the recording device. which amounts to 0.01 us (for counting-type frequency
meter 1. at a counting frequency of 100 ms).

1.. Error 65 is due mainly to instability of signal delay time upon passage through
radio relay stations; 65- 0.5/3. where n is the mater of relay points of a radio
relay line.

5. Error 65-6710Jo us.

If we assume that all the factors determining the temporal position of television
synchropulaes as they are recorded at time standard synchronization points have
a mutually independent random influence. the total synchronization error using
nonspecialized equipment is

.==VW—o.lsr 1 +5.97}. (6.19)

A change in residual attenuation of radio relay line channels. deviation of upli-
rude-frequency and phase-frequency responses from monotonic. and say-attic limita-
tion of the spectrum of amplitude-modulated signals (6;) occur fairly slowly compared
with the duration of a session of time and frequency standard synchronisation. In
this connection there is a possibility of reducing the synchronization error. par-
ticularly on transmission paths of 2000-3000 In. by measuring the signal tranmnis-
sion time through the radio relay line inediately during or after the synchronisa-
tion session.

m the case of intracity synchronization. the error is about 0.01 us.

Signal Reception and Recording Equipment

Fairly simple recording receivers are used in all methods of synchronising time

and frequency standards. The principal components of this equipment are a standard-
television set. a counting-type frequency meter and a selector for isolating the
required signal fron television synchropulses.

Let us consider the PSh‘r-IH recording receiver. This instrulent can synchronize

time and frequency standards from reception, isolation and recording of time sig-
nals (l and 25 as) transmitted as part of a television signal;

66

POIOFl-‘IGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from reception. isolation and registration of the cutoff of television franc syn-
chronizing pulses;

from collating the frequency of a precision standard vith the GEVCh scale. using
television synchropulses or time signals or sine-usve signals, using the differen-
tial method of collation. For an averaging tine interval of 20 nimtes on a fre-
quency of 1 run. the error of the collation nethod is (3-10)-10-“.

I w.

 

l--Video amplifier of Yunost'-603 television; 2--differential
anplifier; 3-coincidence stage; é—gating pulse generator;
5--kipp oscillator; 6, 10. llo—uignal amlifiers; 7—integrat-
ing circuit; 8—digital printer; 9--e1eetronic clock; ll—shaper
stage; 12. 20--Scbitt trigger; l3-differentiating nplifier;
lS--signal stop stage; 16, 21. 25--frequency dividers; 17-19—
frequency multipliers by 2.8 and lo; 22—phase detector; 23-
tine and frequency standard to be synchronized; 24--oscilloscope;
26--phase shifter; 27—chert recorder

A block diagram of the PSh'r-lti is shown in Fig. 28. A Yumst'-603 standard series-
produced television set is used as the receiver.

Pros a control point of the video uplifier with positive polarity and saplitude
of at least 1 V, the complete television signal goes to switch 11;. After aplifi-
cation. this signal is sent to stage 11 in which the level of the synchronizing
pulses is fixed with limitation on the quenching level. This ensures unchanged
amplitude of the signals from the output of 11 when there are fluctuations in the
amplitude cf the output signals. the signals are then sent to Schnitt trigger

12 to make the synchronizing pulse edges steeper. After the Schitt trigger. the
cutoffs of the frame synchronising pulses are isolated fros the television synchro-
mixture by differentiating amplifier 13. The tine constant of the differentiating
circuit of the uplifier is selected so that line synchronisation pulses with dura-
tion of 5 us pass through it without distortion. while frsse synchronising pulses
with duration of 30 us are differentiated, and stop signals are formed from their
cutoffs by amplifier ll; working in the limiting node. '

65

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under all working conditions. stage 15 is triggered from a seconds-marking pulse

of the local clock. These pulses come from frequency divider 16. the stop pulses
being sent to the input of this divider.

To get reference frequencies of 10 Idle and 1 ﬁlls. the device incorporates a system
of multipliers that convert the line frequency (15625 is) to 1 Mlle, and a frequency
divider 21. A distinguishing feature of multiplier systems is that the first stage
has a quartz filter for frequency 2fz- 31250 Is. and sipsls of the complete synchro-
aixture are sent to the input of this filter after differentiating amplifier 13.
Differentiation of the synchromixture is necessary to protect the frequency multi-
plier from the influence of the pulses that take care of conversion from frmae
synchronizing pulses to trailing controlling pulses.

Reference frequencies frcm the output of the instruent can be used to check vari-
ous precision frequency-measuring equipment and for prolonged collation of the

frequency of the standard (for example by phase detector 22 and chart recorder
27 or by oscilloscope. using Lissajou figures).

To collate the frequencies of high-stability frequency standards. it is sufficient
to take a few readings of the temporal position of ﬁne synchropulses or time
signals relative to pulses of the local time and frequency standard through set
time intervals (in the active method). or to register the position of the frame
synchropulsea for standard time intervals (in the passive method).

Synchronization by Television Channels Outside the 0883

In the United States. specialists at the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) since
1969 have used a method of simultaneous registration of characteristic synchropulses
with subsequent exchange of information on the measurement results for synchronizing
radio stations that transmit exact time signals and reference frequencies. Outside
the USSR, television signals were first used for comparing remote clocks in 1965

by specialists of Czechoslovakia (Prague) and East Germany (Potsdam) [Rah 37].

In transmissions. television channels of three firms are used: ABC. CBS and NBC.
The method that is used does not require that the transmitting television station
be informed of its participation in the measurements [Bef. 65].'

In 1970 the N88 worked out a method of introducing code information into a tele-
vision signel on time and frequency by binary phase modulation of e 2 HI: subcarrier
stabilized by a cesiun standard for a passive system of clock collation. 0n the
seventeenth line of the first and third frame quenching pulses after the' beginning
of each second. a 1-2-6-8 binary-decimal code containing 32 binary digits transmits
the hours, minutes and seconds of universal time. On the I7-th line of the second
frame quenching pulse a six-bit code is transmitted‘ that corresponds to the washer
of microseconds from the beginning of the preceding second to the beginning of

the code. On all remaining l7-th lines, sine-wave signals are transmitted on a
frequency of 2 MHz for phase synchronization of the quartz oscillator at the recep-
tion point. The synchronization error with use of this method did not exceed

0.1 Us on a 65-h transmission path.

In 1972. the N38 did a series of experimental transmissions of "active'fsignals
in coded form over 11.3. television comaunication lines. Running time information

66

FOR omml. US ONLY
FKIRCMNNCIALIJSEiﬂﬂlv

is coded into a binary-decimal signal and transmitted in the second half of the

first line. A sine-wave signal with frequency of 1 his is transmitted in the first
half of this line that is coherent in phase with the standard frequency signal

of the N38 and is used to get information on exact time and frequency. In the
broadcast studio of the television network. an atomic frequency standard is installed
to synchronize the television synchrogenerator and the generator of coded time
signals.

6.3. Using Artificial Satellites
Some Information on Artificial Satellites

Artificial satellites of various types--communications. television. meteorological.
navigational, geodetic--can be successfully used for synchronising precision time
and frequency standards separated by great distances and situated in inaccessible
northern and mountainous regions or on ships. .

Exact time and frequency signals can be transmitted directly from the satellite
if it carries precision time and frequency standards (this kind of satellite is
called "active"), or reflected from the satellite. which in this case acts as a
passive or active reflector (relay). An example of a passive satellite is the
Echo-l launched in 1960 in the United States--an inflated balloon with aluminum
coating to ensure high reflectivity of radio signals. An example of an active
satellite is the Anna-18 launched in the United States in 1962 for mutual tie-in
of ground-based points (light beacon). Relay satellites such as Holniya (USSR.
1965). Relay and Telstar (United States) operate on the relay station principle.
rebroadcasting signals transmitted from the ground.

Depending on their purpose. artificial satellites move around the earth in different
orbits distinguished by the following parameters:

inclination of the plane of the orbit to the plans of the earth's equator (at an
angle of 90° the orbit is polar);

shape of orbit (circular or elliptical);
altitude of orbit above the earth's surface.

The shape of the orbit is determined by the velocity at which the satellite is
injected into a near-earth orbit. At orbital velocity (7912 m/s) a rocket becomes
a satellite and will move along an arc of an ellipse with eccentricity e<Il. or

of a circle when cI-O. In the latter event. both foci of the ellipse coincide,

and are situated at the earth's center of gravitation. According to Kepler's first
law. one of the foci of an ellipse must be located at the earth's center of gravi-
tation (0 in Fig. 29). The second focus 0' is accordingly located at the same
distance from the apogee of the satellite orbit as the center 0 is from the perigee.

The equation of the ellipse on the plane in polar coordinates is

 

" (' '.‘_")_ .
I + Nos 0,. ' (6.20)
67

IIIICIHHC1A1.USEINNLY
POIOFHGALISEONLY

 

Fig. 29. Satellite orbit

,

where a is the seninajor axis of the ellipse: Q... is true annealy' of notion; the
eccentricity of the ellipse is
(‘2; l/I . Pf— rs M
a: 2n '

where b is the senininor axis of the ellipse; a and an are the respective distances
from the apogee and perigee to the earth's center of gravitation.

 

As the initial velocity of injecting the satellite into orbit increases. the par-:-
eters of the ellipse change. and the second focus of the ellipse 0' approaches

the center of gravitation of the earth, at a certain velocity coinciding in the
center of the earth with focus 0, which transforms the ellipse into a circle. This
is determined by Kepler's second law. the law of areas enables us to calculate
how satellite velocity will vary over its entire path. and states that the radius
vector of the satellite sweeps out equal areas in equal tine intervals (shaded
areas on Fig. 29).

In undisturbed notion of a satellite revolving in a circular orbit of radius r.
using equilibriue of forces of gravitation and centrifugal force

we find the circular velocity of notion of the satellite in cn/e.
F...
""1 A‘, (6.21)

where k- 6. 67 10" an-‘Kg 32) is the constant of gravitation. 24-5. 976-10" g is '
the mass of the earth. and n is the uses of the satellite in g.

68

MWUSEONLY
POI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

The velocity of a hypothetical satellite noving in a circular orbit with radius
equal to the equatorial radius of the earth 83-6.37l°10‘ on would be 7.9lzolos calls.

The period of revolution of a satellite moving in a circular orbit of radius r.
T=-—- ' (6.22)

for our inaginary satellite. 'r- 86.68 sinutas.

The velocity of notion of 'a satellite in an elliptical orbit is

.—.-... .'—‘*---——”.‘:‘,3*" . ' (6-23)

“9..

l' u
of radius r equal to the seni-ajor axis of the elliptical orbit; Q is the angle
between directions f roan the center of the earth to the perigee of the orbit and
to the point where satellite velocity is to be datenined.

where 1‘. ,,-= is the velocity of satellite notion in Ina/s in a circular orbit

Since Qa' -l . while cos Qn' l. [subscript a- apogee. n-perigse] the velocity .at

 

 

0'“ 39°99 1° tar-1'” [/13 and at the perigee it is 11,-0... :+: and the

ratio of these velocities is inversely proportional to the ratio of the distances

0. ﬂ. '

_ =,. _ (6.26)

9, II. '

i. e. the velocity of the satellite at apogee will be lowest. and at perigee will
be naxinln.

According to Kepler's third law. the squares of the tine of revolution of satellites
are proportional to the cubes of the aaninajor axes of their orbits

5'. =. .21, (6.25)
re 1;;

since we always have s>R3.we have 1'9) 1'. as well.

At a given gravitational constant. it is only the seeinajor axis of the ellipse
that influences the change in period of revolution of a satellite.

The flight velocity at which a rocket begins to nova circunferentially over the
earth's surface is called the orbital velocity. "ith increasing altitude. circular
velocity decreases. at first sharply. and then nore slowly. For exuple. at an
altitude of 200 Ian it is 7791 n/s. and at an altitude of 2000 I:- it is 6903 Ills.
with a further increase in initial velocity. eccentricity increases. At e- l.

the orbit of rocket notion becomes a parabola with focus coinciding with the center
of gravitation of the earth. At e) l the orbit becoees a hyperbola.

69

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0'31CIAI.IENZCI'LY

At an altitude of 36.000 kn above the the level of the earth. when the plane of
the orbit coincides with the equatorial plane of the earth. a satellite remains

suspended over a definite spot on the surface of the earth; such a satellite is
called stationary. Its period of revolution is 26 hours.

When escape velocity is reached (11.2 kn/s) the rocket becones an artificial solar
satellite.

The accuracy of synchronization of frequency and time standards is considerably
influenced by the orbit of the satellite. its position relative to the location
of the points of synchronization. and its velocity of displacement in orbit. Most

favorable are satellites that have high-altitude elliptical orbit or with a sta-
tionary orbit.

L. thous. kn r3. ms

 

Satellite altitude. thous. kn

Fig. 30. Dependence of satellite position on distance between
standards being synchronised (l) and signal travel time (2)

Fig. 30 shows the dependence of satellite altitude on the distance between the
points of synchronization and on the travel tine of signals relayed by the satellite.

Ref. 65 gives the results of exparinental synchronization of precision rubidium
clocks via geostationary satellite ATS-l and ATS-3 between NASA tracking stations
at Rossman North Carolina and Mojave California in 1971. The nethod of simultaneous

transmission and reception of tine signals (two-been method) was used in synchroni-
zation. A frequency of 4119 HR: was used for transmission fron point A to the

satellites. and frequency of 6301 Mas-for rebroadcast via the satellite. Bandwidth

was 30 MHz. A check by transported clocks showed that synchronization error was
50 ns.

Molniya Satellites

In the Soviet Union, the Holniya-l and Holniya-Z relay satellites are extensively
used for transmitting television programs and for communications. Transmission
of time signals via such satellites enables synchronization of time and.frequency
standards at a maxinun distance between them of 15.000-16.000 kn.

70

FORiOFFKJAl.USB(MVLY
Pig. 3!. Satellite orbit in Mercator projection

Fig. 31 shows the orbit of a Holniya-l satellite in Mercator projection on a nap

of the earth (Ref. 46]. Even and odd turns of the satellite are shown with ascend-
ins nodes of 60' east long. and 120' west long. The period of each turn is about

12 hours. The point of intersection of the equator by the projection of the odd
turn is denoted by 0 (60' east long.). The parasetere of the orbit are B.-§0.000
In in the northern henisphere and ﬂn-SOO In in the southern hemisphere. The nap
also shows satellite altitudes of about 6.000 It: (points 1 and 5), 10.000 kn (points
2. 4). 15.000 km and higher (between points 2 and 6 and at point 3). Free 0 to 60’
east long.. mutual visibility of the satellite between Moscow and Vladivostok lasted
7-10 hoarse

With use of Holniya-l satellites as relays over the territory of the USSR. a network
of Orbits reception points operates for reception of television prograla from the
satellites and transmission through local telecenters and radio relay lines.

The energy characteristics. of the line can be calculated from the following formulas.

Power of ground-based transmitter

. p, .L'r‘fﬂL' (6.26)
awn-“Mm
where PC is the sensitivity of the receiver. L-l. is the product of losses

in the troposphere (LT). ionosphere (1.") and onphase luctuations (L0).

[7- ”Hanna: 2.2 in the product of losses due to nonuniformity of the antenna radia-
tion pattern (17"), inaccuracy of self-aiming (17”) and polarization losses (17“).
cnep is antenna gain. "nep is the efficiency of the antenna. Anep is the effective
area of the antenna.

71

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFFNJA1.USB(HVLY

Sensitivity of the ground-based receiver

”nonwhs‘ne
P'— Wu (6.27)

[subscript np'lreceiver]. It is realised in prticuler by using psranetric alpli-
fiers and anplifying the signal on an internediate frequency of 70 MHz.

The ground-based station is equipped with a reflecting parabolic antenna installed
in rotating supports.

6.6. Using the Orbits Reception-Point Systen for Global Synchronization of Tine
Scales

By using television channels via Holniys-l or Molniya-Z relay satellites and Orbits
reception-point systems. tine and frequency standards are synchronised with the

use of a complete duplex satellite television trunk and two-bean or three-bean
tie-in methods.

In this case. operation between points P and 5 is possible under condition that
there is a transnitter at point r and right of access to the satellite (Fig. 32).
n r

    

A ‘ [A tranuiteer If 'f I

Fig. 32. Block diagram of synchronization over channels of the Orbits reception-
point systen

l--GEVCh; 2--trsnsmitting correcting device; 3-reception correcting device; 6--
reference frequency standard; 5--central equipment roon; 6--connecting radio relay
line; 7--transnitting antenna; 8--Molniye satellite; 9-reception antenna; 10-
local telecenter; ll--television receiver; 12-selector for isolating cut-in of
franc synchropulses and,tine signals; l3--tine interval neesureeent device; 16-
local tine and frequency store; lS--digitsl printer; l6-electronic clock

72

FOIIOIIIC1A1.USIINNLY ‘
INJI 0+11CIAI.IISI2(MVLY

Time and frequency standards are synchronized in the period of transmission of
a conventional television program at any point on the territory of the USSR and
other nations covered by the Orbits reception-point system. In 1975 there were
more than 60 such points analogous to point r.

Also used is a system that differs in principle from the time-scale synchronization
system with respect to ground-based television channels. In this'case a line oper-
ates on segment sr with considerable continuous variation of signal travel time.
which must be taken into consideration during the synchronization session. On
other segments. signal travel time always remains constant.

Transmission time is chosen in such a way that the television synchropulses and
time signal: of l and 25 Hz are formed from the reference standard of the TTC
synchronized with the GBVCh. and are transmitted as part of the television signal.

When satellites are used. the signal travel time 13 to the reception point may
be calculated or determined experimentally.

ln calculation. we first determine the path of signal travel between transmission
and reception points from ballistic data of the satellite orbit during registration.
and the coordinates of the reception points. after which we calculate

.ur- '_"C + .3. (6.28)

p 0'

where Z is the length of the path of signal travel. vp is the velocity of signal
propagation. 13 is delay time in the equipment on the satellite.

The error of determining :fy‘1n this case is due mainly to the error of the ballistic
data (since the orbital parameters of the satellite vary during satellite motion

as a consequence of the influence of various perturbations). and also to a change'
in signal travel velocity thrOugh the ionosphere depending on the state of this
medium. ~

The experimental time ‘P of signal travel is determined by the method of bilateral
transmissions and receptions using a complete television trunk [Ref. #7].

According 2% the results of simultaneous registration of received signals at points
P

 

8 and r. T is calculated from the formula
:M.Vﬂm.rknlru_ﬁp+(ﬂg_ﬁl ($2”
I' I. 2 —'— .

Formula (6.29) ﬁi‘val for the case where the relay unit is nearly inglgIQe (at
apogee). i.e. rp - p . If these paths are not equal. the value of rp must

be additionally estimated. To do this. consider the segment of satellite motion
in its orbit at the instant of synchronization (Fig. 33a). Since the distance

from points 8 and r to the satellite is not the same. the signals will be relayed
at different instants (positions p' and p"). which results in inequality of times
53. erand rrB. 1BP. The calculation can be done with adequate accuracy by the

T
gPaphig-analygicalpmethod of Ref. #7. In doing this. we first determine the velocity

of satellite displacement for discrete values of angle Q (Pig. 33b)

73

FOI‘OFFIJA1.USEINULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

a b

Fig. 33. Graphic-analytical method of detemining synchroniza-
tion error:
ausegnent of satellite notion in orbit; b—pointa of determining
velocity of satellite notion in orbit

u HI/FuﬁH-zrméHL—m' . (5.30)
"" ' 0(1-0')
”a 'l' ”n+2, .

“- ——————

2
II. -- II"
23

 

an

[subscript ucs - satellite]

For each of the discrete positions of the satellite (value of Q discrete), Pig. 33b
is used for graphically determining the minus difference of distances between
the satellite and points of the earth's surface Ar. which corresponds to the differ-
ence of distances from the satellite to the earth along the unreal and along the

tangent to the earth's surface (for example. for point B, Ar-BB- I'D). The signal
travel time over distance Ar is At- Ar/c (c- 3010 his). and distance A! traversed

by the satellite in tine At is AH-Atv.

Distance AH is laid off to scale along the tangent to the orbit at the point of
observation of the satellite. and the difference of the paths of signal travel
to either side is graphically determined.

All’ a All cos a. + A” cosy.

where an and a; are the angles between the tangent and directions of the' satellite
to points on the earth. ‘

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then the tie-in error due to inequality of paths with trensnission to one side
or the other will be

4*, ‘°'",j"°"" . (6.31)

Table 6 smarizes results of calculation for an orbit with permaeters ll.— b0.000 Ina
and Hn- 550 ha and for the nest unfavorable location of points at different angles Q.

TABLE 6
Synchronization error using bilateral method

 

 

 

 

o m. M. u. an. ' Al". I “9'

_.- . . _!.|/_3. .. h '8 I ' ._...&__
90 9.4 4300 ”.3 I36 910 0.35
IIO 7.4 mo ".3 I28 215 0.3
m 5.6 an) “3.7 I06 168 0.28
mo 3.7 woo 20.0 1‘ HS ms
no 2,: (.200 20.6 43 as 0.06

Thus the maxi-u error Ar upon emission of signals at the seas instants does not
exceed 0.6 us. and when t apogee segment of the orbit is used (in a range of
0- 150-210°), it does not exceed 0.2 us.

In the case of nonsimultaneous emission of signals by driving and driven points,

an additional error “non arises that depends not only on the coordinates of the
ground points and the satellite. but also on the nisnatch of the driving and driven
clocks. When the mismatch is less than 10 us. At on does not exceed 0.25 us even
in the most unfavorable cases. Therefore tie-in ghould be done in two stages:
preliminary tie-in with error of no more than 5 ms, and final tie-in when the error
nay be of the order of 0.1-0.2 us.

In synchronizing time and frequency standards over channels of the Orbits reception-
point system. it is necessary to distinguish channels with constant signal delay

in the equipment and radio relay line (as and m). and variable delay (mr) during
signal travel from the trannitting point to the antenna of the Orbits reception
point (see Fig. 32).

The discrepancy of the time scale at point 11 with registration of the seconds-
aarking signal trnnmitted as part of the television signal will be detereined
by the expression -

”an" (‘51-...«g-m+<;+‘:). (6.32)

where r“ is the discrepancy of the seconds-narking signal of the local scale of
point 1] relative to the signal received in the Orbits network. 13"": is the time
of signal travel from the antenna of an Orbits reception station to the antenna
of the local teleccnter.

The user determines the value of 1"} at the point of the standard to be synchronized,
and the total travel time of of signals 1’". 1?. 13"": is given to the coast-er
by request at the recouended synchronize ion time.

75

MOMIJSEONLY
“ll omtut US: ONLY

Recommended recording sessions lost generally correspond to a satellite position
close to apogee. since in this case there is an imporvenent in accuracy of deteuin-
ing the position of the satellite in orbit, and a reduction in requiresents for
accurate determination of the tine of registration of the received signal relative
to the local scale.

 

muonlzunusnsu
boursoftheday

Fig. 3b. Range difference from satellite to synchronization point

Fig. 34 slwws range differences Zn-Zu (satellite-Moscow) - (satellite-Irkutsk);

lM-l“ (satellite-Moscov)- (satellite-Novosibirsk); 13-1,. (satellite-Novosibirsk)

- (satellite-Irkutsk) as a function of time of 10cation of the satellite near apogee.
As we can see from Fig. 34, over a two-hour period. 13-1." changes by 9 In. which
amounts to 27 us. Consequently. mutual synchronization of two points under these
conditions can be done with high precision.

Signal travel time on section Bl‘ (rﬁr) is computer-calculated for the reconsnded
synchronization tune in accordance with data of a network of precision ‘i'V orbit
monitoring [Prom and regularly reported to the user. Users for whom the error
must not exceed ten microseconds are provided with nonograns and periodically given
necessary initial data. '

PSh‘r-m and PSh‘r-ZH equipment can be used for recording instants of tine signals
or synchropulses transmitted through the Orbits reception-point network. In con-
trast to equipment used for recording the instants of tine signals or synchropulses
transmitted over channels of radio relay lines and intercity cable lines. reception
of tine signals with variable delay necessitates exact (with deviation in a range
of 0.1-1.0 ns) narking of the tine of signal registration. Therefore the PSh'r-ZH
equipment is provided with an electronic clock (see Fig. 32).

6.5. Synchronization Error due to Inconstancy of Radio Have Propagation

In determining 15" it is necessary to evaluate the influence of ionized layers,
since signals will travel through these layers at different angles for different
synchronization points. and the signal travel time in the ionosphere as a result
of reduction and variation of group velocity will change as compared with the speed
of light; this time can be written as follows: '

76

summers“
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A3." .4... __ :gr .3 1}; (LH’A (94% h." + h,], (6. 33)

where f", is the critical frequency for the ionosphere. f is the carrier frequency
of the radio station. b.“ is the half-thickness of the layer in the parabolic
approximation. he is the constant of neasurement of electron density above the
naximum The coefficient Me) shows by how nany tines the equivalent distance
traversed by the radio wave changes with oblique incidence as compared with vertical

M9)==———'R—“__): . 6.36
V mm—kgmm ( )

where R(h) -R3+h is the altitude of the point in the ionosphere.

Values of MD) in the range of altitudes where the influence of the ionosphere
is appreciable are:

Angleof elevation ... 0‘ 10° 15’ 30' 65’ 60° 75’ 90°
A ... 3.00 2.57 2.40 1.75 1.100 l.l3 1.03 1.00

Analysis shows that signal delay on frequencies of ZOO-”0 HE: with passage through
the ionosphere may be 15-30 us. and on frequencies higher than 10 GE: nay be 1 us
and be detereined with an error of 0.1 us.

As the carrier frequency of the transmitter increases. fluctuations decrease in
proportion to the square of the frequency. The delay of time signals in the ionos-
phere on frequencies below the Uh! band reaches appreciable values that are diffi-
cult to take into consideration because the distribution of electron concentration
above the naxim- has not yet been adequately studied.

According to CCIR doctments. carrier frequencies of more than I. GR: are now being
used for satellite relay broadcasters.

CHAPTER 7: RWENDATIONS ON SYNCIIROIIIZING TIME AND FREQUENCY STANDARDS
7.1. Synchronization Facilities

The choice of the neans (as well as the nethod) of synchronization dependr on the
predetermined accuracy of synchronization. the relative location of the synchronized
and synchronizing standards. the conditions of operation of the synchronized stan-
dard and the makeup of auxiliary equipment.

Frequency standards can be synchronized by the carrier frequencies of Soviet short-
wave stations (with cell letters RUM. RAT. RTA. ma, RID, ecu. Rm), long-wave
stations (RBU, RTZ. kit-166). by television channels. and by signals transmitted

by Soviet and non—Soviet radio stations in different radio wave bands. The times
and programs of transmissions by these stations ere published by the Interagency

Unified Time Service Couittee in "Schedules of Exact Tine and Reference Frequency
Signal Broadcasts." -

77

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
F1MR(HHNCIAI.US€1MﬂtY

Time scales can be synchronized by time signals transmitted by the same stations.
and also over wire channels. ground-based television channels. satellites and nete-
oric communication.

For purposes of automatic synchronization. use can be made of carrier frequencies
and time signals transmitted in the long-wave. VLF and 03? bands with an error
that is determined by the station.

Time standards can also be automatically or manually synchronized with error of
10-100 ms (depending on the point of location of the standard to be synchronized)

by using time-check signals (six points) transmitted via wide-broadcast stations

in the same TUC system as the exact time signals. The beginning of the last (sixth)
signal corresponds to 00 min 00.00 s-the beginning of the hour. In contrast to
exact time signals. time-check signals are transmitted without consideration of
their travel time from the supply scale to the radio broadcast stations. These
signals can be received by using standard recording receivers.

It is also possible to indicate running time to 0.1 s in a current-time code trans-
mitted as part of the time signals of some radio stations. or as part of television
signals.

Table 7 shows comparative characteristics of major transmission facilities for
synchronizing time and frequency standards that are in use and under development.

As can be seen from the Table. the highest accuracy can be achieved by using:

a) wide-band systems (in virtue of constancy of the characteristics of the trans-
mission channel, the steepness of the leading edge of the pulse signal at the recep-
tion point and high signal-to-noise ratio); b) stable narrow-band systems with
registration of the phase of transmitted sinusoidal signals.

"hen standards are located at a distance of up to about 30 km. synchronization
should be done by signals from the synchronizing standard that are transmitted

via ground-based television channels. wide-band wire lines and radio stations in
the long-wave and VLF bands (for short-wave radio stations. it is recommended that
frequencies below 2.5 Hﬂz be used).

when standards are located at a distance of 300~3000 km. it is more advisable to
use signals from the synchronizing standard that are transmitted over ground-based
television channels. and radio stations in the short-wave. long-wave and VLF hands.

At distances of 3000—6000 km transmission should be by radio stations in the short-
wave and VLF bands and via satellite with operation in the UH? and microwave bands.

At distances of more than 6000 km, signals are used that are transmitted via short-
wave radio stations snd satellites (active and relay) in the UHF and microwave
bands.

In general form, the transmission channel consists of transmitting devices. antennas.
the medium between antennas and the recording reception equipment.

Auxiliary facilities include radio receivers for various bands. television receivers
with special attachment for isolating time signals from the synchromixture. counting-
type frequency meters (in the case of pulsed signals) or phase meters and phase

78

FOR OIINCIAI.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nuunuo

was a<MDV
Sou-ho nun-o

3333-03
auciuuoa

mo oaouuou
uuououuuu
5 A38
acowuuuu
onuauoa
onousu

no Inca»
I‘d Q=O#H¢>

3.8:

on» 350.3
60.332...
5 3033-
on 322

9550 can
<3 J—mmD

muduanuucu
cowonaauaauu

undo: coauuz

«unavamua zocuaaouu veg

 

  

Conn. low
Icing a: and
Conu- own-l
laughs a: N .
+ B— 83 as 3: n.—
uon a: u .393 cum :3» =3
O>.’
Aubuv ooau oouuuso
£53 a: u mo 8— 83 .2 nu~.o
6—
ovuOoOOOMOMI .0508u nun 3! N
uo anon nun» anon 1:; on
3330 l— .305
:83- . «0 319
33133.5 can» 30.— 3: Sun
vcou¢.ouuwﬂ
a mo 9:83
no .330 05
mo 3.0vo
ecuuoaoaauu
mo 502503
no cadence I I
boson
:MHHHMM: nouuﬂa
“whys Ionsuchn lacuna
down «aﬁcauH =o¢3uoa
oucauaua

3.3.33 sauna-3:55

an oooucoﬁ was on-~.o~
an» «a

can» o-oa an: cannon
an: nua.o nus oonuon

niacin ﬁnal Ontnd

       

vans
zocoaroum

    

zuvdlvﬂon

    
    

no 330333

 

and:
Ina. dawn no

unannoua saw)
wanna-«won

33.— “ mucosa
noum noun»:
”53358.

maniac

noun your:
up voaauu
mouaan uuosa
2.33.353.

OUUdD

328.."-
5:33am
03380» was
i!» 338
maﬁa-.333

.83.an
183 33.3

cacao!
:oauuuaaanuu

Hacuum

 

. 25.33.
02..» mg

«sumac H2835
LEE: 26:93

uneduCul
o." 1-... 2,2793.—

uncanny.
canon o>¢aluuonm

noun—Educ
mono—Goya can
05» I553
«Snub—canes;

>U«H%0¢u
couaauaacauh

053 «53:932.? new «33:83 conga—Ban: no 33333330 $332.33

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
38 8::
Huuuoauuomnu

ouuun

«a:
van dumb nu
ououuﬁlaqcuu
gonadauuomuu

<m= and damn

acouuau
and! 6% won:

4m: van “mm:

auwuuuwoou
cowonuancau

maﬁa: aouua.

ovuoouoouowa n3 coo.o~
mo onus away one;
nvnooouonoaa
no «:08 Manama
uncoououual
a no aaowu
Ionuu can as coo.o~
unaccououous can» once
snouuoc DH
no couuou
mo econ
uncoouoououx easy“:
vacuoaonoda
0 ac onouu
Icahn was as occ—
wvaooowouuwx can» amoa
oucwom
:Oauauua
co «Momma: Ion—.053
« u I :uoSUoA
aucauuuo

 

Nae Ole ouuqn

coaunooou
Honouaaaaa

Acuuoauuov
3 out” an: n uw.o use on”
naounoaiauauu
Hauouaaaa:
van cocoano

anIUuohn o>«u

Iuav ”Inau-
>9 «0 yuan an
nuanuuo one»
wauuuwauaana

Angus? 2.59
loamy «Hauuua
>8 mo momnaa

ouuwunou
Ioauoso unaoa

Avﬂoanaov

3 onla an! ano “:0 Old

ms:

33 oonlca an! o

nauoploouSu
can auonloan
acouonuaacnuu
vowomno

mount ca
32 oomno~ sax coo—nOON

an: canoe

     

   
 
    

   
 

nosbn can:
hang“: suvuscaun accosuoum cosuoa
nacauh acummaaucuuu

aunaaoau acumeEmcwuu chwam

mo wuouoauuam

navacaucooV n unn<8

oouuuuouoa
auacouuouaooo

uncuu vuqoplao

5? 83:33

dowouuuuu<

Aahaaouv
nouuuaouno
Hauouuwuud

Ouuwn

«sausage
unauvwoun
cownu>onoa

uuuouu Maduoi

noun coauQOnuou

new»: aaoumzm

auudwuau
cowmmu nun-Qua.

an
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conparators (in the case of a sine wave). synthesizers. chart recorders. tiners and
other indicator devices.

During signal travel. electronagnetic waveform undergo changes in .plitude and
phase. The function with signal transmission through a channel made up of n links
is equal to the product of the transfer functions of the links. 1. s.

R .-.. mu. ... k, .—.. (km. ... k.)e""-""~+- - -+'-' = Ice n.

where k1. k2. k3...” kn are the moduli of the transmission coefficients; .1, oz,
.... On are the corresponding phases.

In a system with distributed parameters. instead of the phase 0]: we have the phase
constant “k nultiplied by the length of the k-th link of the line lg or by the
product vkrk. where vk and ‘k are the velocity and time of signal travel in the
given link. Then at the end of the channel

. ~ ~.
__ I (“'4' ‘3 'YI‘I f-"ﬂml
8,, =1 5.6 ' - ,

where s. is the signal at the channel input. £9. is the total change in phase
col
due to the lmped constants of the channel. and the Bll imam is the sane quantity
I-II
due to the distributed constants of the channel.

In transmitting high-stability frequencies and time intervals. the constant phase
shift due to lusped and distributed constants of all elenents of the channel does
not cause any change in the transnitted high-stability frequency only if all param-
eters are stable thorughout the measurement period. When transmitting time signals.
there is a change of signal times due to phase shifts in circuits with ltnped con-
stants, and as a consequence of the finite value of the radio wave propagation
velocity.

All these changes during synchronization of frequency standards or time standards
nust be strictly accounted for. and their resultant effect responsible for-the
synchronization error nust not exceed a predetermined value.

7.2. Synchronizet ion Hethods

The choice of synchronization method depends in great measure on the working con-
ditions of the standard to be synchronized. and the capabilities for receiving
signals from the synchronizing standard. For example if the standard to be synchro-
nized operates periodically. and synchronization is required each tine it is ener-
gized, The method must ensure one-tine synchronisation with error no greater than
the permissible error. On the other hand. if the standard to be synchronized oper-
ates continuously. synchronization with the permissible error can be achieved by
averaging the results of repeated sequential comparisons of the frequency of the
standard to be synchronized with the signals of the synchronizing standard.

The requirements placed on the channel for synchronization of frequency ,standards
are not the same as those for time standards. when synchronising frequency standards

81

l-‘OROI-‘FICIALUSEONIN
INDI‘OW71CJAI.INSEZCHVLY

it is necessary to take consideration of the inconstancy of lusped and distributed
constants of all elements of the channel only for the time interval of synchro-
nization. In synchronizing time standards. consideration must also be taken of
the constant phase shift caused by systematic and random-changes in the parameters

of the channel from the instant of establishing the signal travel time in the trans-
mission channel. '

Synchronization of time standards (or tie-in of time scales) must be distinguished
from tie-in of the instants of time signals. Tie-in of time scales includes two
operations: synchronizing the frequency of electric oscillations or time intervals.
and tie-in of the instants of time scale signals. Tie-in of the instant of the
time signal amounts to one-time phasing of the signal of the standard to be synchro-
nized without synchronizing the time-scale intervals. After one-time tie-in. the
instants of the time signals will be continuously shifted relative to the instants

of synchronization by Ao-‘yo (the relative error of the frequency of the synchroniz-
ing measure). 1. e.

Ina. - [-3 '|' IIJACO (7 s1)

where t”.°5 is the interval between time signals emitted from the radio transmitter
antenna from the reference standard. tu,c is the interval between time signals
of the standard to be synchronized. -

Synchronization of frequency standards or tine-scale intervals is done by a method
of direct measurement of the frequency of the standard to be synchronized or by
the method of frequency comparison using counting-type frequency meters. the hetero-
dyna or phase method in transmissions of sine waves or time signals from the syn-
chronizing standard; synchronization of time standardsis done mainly by the phase
method. using special synchronization signals or time signals.

7.3. Synchronizing Frequency Standards

Order and Conditions of Synchronization

Frequency standards are synchronized in the following order:

a) the optimum method and means of synchronization are selected from among those
summarized in Table 7. depending on the metrological characteristics of the fre-
quency standard to be synchronized. the makeup of the recording receiver equipment
and the location of the frequency standard;

b) the time for synchronization is selected with consideration of the maximum con-
stancy of parameters of the transmission channel;

c) the necessary time interval of frequency comparison is determined (see Table
8 or 9);

d) the error of the recording receiver is determined;

e) frequencies are compared. and the principal metrological characteristics of
the standard are determined under selected measurement conditions;

82

INDR10FFIC1A1.lEﬂE(NNLY
FOI:0FIICLALIJBI1NNLY

f) the frequency is corrected by a regulating element or a special frequency ad-
justment nodule.

Synchronization Error

In synchronizing frequency standards. errors should be accounted for and-inimired
that are due to: change in the state of the ionosphere during the synchronization
interval; the synchronization facilities that are used; the method of reception
and registration; the error of the frequency standard to be synchronized; the se-
lected time for synchronization.

The error of synchronizing the frequency standard is determined by errors of the
transmission channel (Self). the synchronizing standard with consideration of trans-
mitting equipment (602E). the standard to be synchronized (Gosf). the method of
synchronization and the receiving recording equipment (5..s) and frequency regu-
lation of the standard being synchronized (Gosf). Since these errors are indepen-
dent of one another. and each of them is random. the relative synchronization error

 

“’u' I". 33., l 33., I- 83., + 33,145., (7.2)

The transmission error due to inconstancy of the characteristics of time and fre-
quency signals in different radio wave bands. as has been shown above. is due in
large measure to the state of the atmosphere surrounding the earth. including the
ionosphere. to the conductivity of the underlying surface. the geographic location
of the transmission path. time of day. season of the year. solar activity. magnetic
storms in progress and other factors that influence conditions of radio wave propa-
gation in various bands.

Approximate values of errors of the transmission channel self for different bands:

Equiluminant Non-equiluminant
path path
Short-wave . . . . . . 0-50-10" memo"
Long-wave . . . . . . (1-5),10-11 (1-10)°10"1
m . . . . . . . . . (am-10'“ (Hm-10'“-
unr . . . . . . . . . (l-lO)-10‘” (Hm-10'"

The values for the longuwave range are cited for a surface wave when the duration
of the measurement time interval is in accord with the data of tables 8 and 9 (see
below); the values for the VLF range are cited for transmission paths of 1000-
3000 km.

Fig. 35 shove an exaaple of the results of daily comparison of the frequency of

a standard being synchronized with the carrier frequency of short-wave radio stations
on 10 and 15 MHz situated at a distance of 2000 km from the reception point. Con-
sidering that the instability of the carrier frequency on the antenna of the radio
station is of the order of 10“£ we can statethatthe given curves characterize
mainly the inconstancy of conditions of radio wave propagation. As we can see

from the graphs. during the period when the transmission path is totally illuainated
or totally in darkness. the difference of frequencies being compared reaches
(1-5)-1o- . while this difference is (1-smo" when the path is unevenly lighted.

83

FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FilltlﬂﬂClA1.UBEIMVLY

 

Fig. 35. ?requency comparisons with respect to a short-enve
radio station (carrier frequency 10 MHz) on Hoseau-ﬂovosibrsk
transmission path (June):

l--calcu1ated date; 2-experimenta1 data

In Novosibirsk, Sverdlovsk sndTbilisiduring a solar eclipse when the complete
shadow of the noon crossed over the territory of the USSR. measurements were made
of the changes in the carrier frequency of radio station RUM (15 MHz). The maximum
change in frequency was noted for the Moscow-Tbilisi route (6. 7- 10' '). and for

Moscow-Novosibirsk the change was 5 3- 10"

To synchronize frequency standards. a radio station is used that ensures prede-
termined accuracy. and provides sufficient field strength at the reception point
for reliable synchronization. For the VL? band. the field strength must be at
least 300 uV/n in the receiver bend of 500-1000 Hz. and 20-50 uV/n in the band

of 20-50 Hz; for frequencies of the long-wave band (50. 662/3 and 200 kHz)--at
least 100 uV/m in the band of 100-500 Hz. and at least 50 uv/e in the band of
10-100 Hz; for frequencies of 2.5, 5. 20. 15 and 20 an; and those displaced from
the nominal frequency by :4 kHz--at least 2-10 uV/m. depending on the interference

level.

If frequency reception is impeded by the presence of interference, special devices
are used: quartz bandpass filters. external or loop antennas. shielded antenna

housings.

The time of day that is suitable for radio signal reception when the path of radio
wave propagation does not cross the terminator (the boundary between the daytime
and nighttime sides of the earth) can be determined by a sonogram (see Fig. 36)
Since the terminator line is a fairly broad twilight zone, the boundaries of the
favorable part of the day are to some extent uncertain. resulting in an error of

the order of 3(20-30) minutes.

the error of the synchronizing frequency standard Gogf is determined by the error
of the frequency standard set up at the transmitting point (radio station). and the

86

FINI(HHHCIAI.IEI£(N§LY
FOIOFFICIALUSBONLY

TABLES

Minimum tine intervals for comparing frequency standards
(values of r" are approxinate)

    
 
       
     
 

Relative error of
standard being
synchronized

Tine interval r": a for band

     

short-slave long-wave

  

 
  

10" 1 - 86.400 '

10‘1 ° - 36.000 --
10-: " 3.500

10' - 000

10" 20 120

10" 10 60

10" s 30

10'“ 2 20

TABLB9

Minimum tine intervals for comparing frequency standards
with respect to exact tine signals
(values of r" are approxi-ate)

 
    
   

  

Relative error of
standard being
synchronized

Time interval 1", s

   
      

  

short-wave long-wave VLF

  

instability of paraseters of the radio transmitter and antenna. To reduce these
cosponents. devices are used at the transmitting station that stabilise the phase
of the signal on the antenna. The overall error 602: is usually indicated in
"Schedules of Exact Tine and Reference Frequency Broadcasts."

The error of the synchronized standard Mat is indicated in nameplate data.

Error 63.: is deter-ined by the equipment used. and the error of time of registra-
tion and synchronization.

The error of frequency regulation of the synchronised standard 6.5: is determinined
by the resolution of the tuning element in annual alignment. and by the stopband
in automatic alignsent.

85

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

«nun.— uouoodlhauuu vandal—H.250 no 053 maﬁa-uncanny nan 5.508:
0‘ ‘§ 9“ 0‘ VDQ o: 3.. 0‘ 3.. 0‘ . . ta. .
at.~a§§§i§aﬁit.agitata

angiugvouao . ..\>

.on .u:

 

    

  

  

   

 

 

ti: .3. . 523 um

5:. 0.5 no. 0.50..— 5 32:6
B-3~s§§ene§-&.§

 

EHHI‘IV‘S‘N

 

again”- ﬁll/Igiila“!!! I s
s ahl'Wr/Hzﬂ..§\ , W.

35 Ck f.‘ :M tea. 3% '05.. 0?. § Gm (W

  

. aaQEII/f/I‘L ‘ .

5......us u.~..s~m......5

man. 0.: no 959— 5 09:55
9.3 .m. . .33 .3

tr. Q.“ Q.“ t” IN uN a.

 

g\.l”’i‘ a:

     

  

2'4“.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! 0!?NCIAI.I£SE:CNULY

Synchronization of frequency standards with error from 10“ to 10" is done with
respect to carrier frequencies of short-wave. long-wave and VL? radio stations.

In the case of short-wave radio stations. a heterodyne method is used for comparing
the reference frequency with the frequency of the standard to be synchronised or

with its harmonics; when long-wave or VLF stations are used. frequencies are compared
by a heterodyne or differential method.

Synchronization of frequency standards with error from 10" to 10‘1° is done with
respect to the carrier frequencies of long-wave and VLF stations. using phase.

differential or heterodyne methods of comparison. Use of the first method is pref-
erable.

Synchronization of frequency standards with an error of 10”° and less can be
achieved only with strict accOunting for destabilizing factors of the transmission

channel. the error of the phase method of comparison. registration and processing
of the results of comparisons.

The tine intervals for comparing frequencies to be synchronized when using reference
frequencies transmitted via radio stations in the short-wave. long-wave and VLF
bands are established by Table 8 with consideration of the fact that the total

error of the synchronising standard and the synchronization method must be at least
three times lower than the error of the standard to be synchronized.

Table 8 gives data with consideration of inconstancy of conditions of radio wave
propagation for an equiluninant transnission path and recording error.

The time interval for comparison when using time signals as dependent on the rela-
tive error of the frequency standard to be wynchronized is established by Table 9.

The data in Table 9 are given with consideration of inconstancy of the conditions
of radio wave propagation for equiluninant paths or in the course of a day (86.400
seconds). The error of signal registration: for the short-wave band 60 us. for
the long-wave band 20 us. for VLF 100 us. for TV channels 0.1 us.

The actual value of the frequency of the standard being synchronised is calculated
from the following formulas.

when using a counting-type frequency ester in the frequency-eeaauring mode

I." anc .l: hm. (7 ~3)

where f .qgc is the reading of the frequency neter in Hz. and sqgc is the error
of the frequency meter in 3:.

"hen the differential or heterodyne method of measurements is used

’a '1,- 'l'Ci*h (70‘)

where f" is the nominal frequency of the standard being synchronized in is. c-‘-A
is the correction to the frequency of this standard in Hz. equal in magnitude and
opposite in sign to the difference between the nominal and actual frequencies;

87

FOI‘OFUKJA1.USE(HNLY
FOI‘OFHKJAI.U8810NLN

The quantity A may have either a positive or negative sign; 0c is the error of the
method in Hz.

When using the phase method of measurements
I.-=I..(| + -"—~ way...“ (7.5)
‘e

where t“ is the interval of measurement time in s, 60 is the discrepancy of signal
phases in us over the interval of time measurement.

when using a counting-type frequency meter in the mode of measurements of time

intervals between pulses of the synchronised and synchronizing frequency standards.
or measurements with respect to time signals

Ia"= ,- (‘ +% 13’0- (7.6)

where 61 is the change in the time interval between signals over time t". s.

The relative error of synchronization vo.c"Oc/fn; it must he an order of magnitude
less. or at least three times less. than the relative error of the frequency of
electric oscillations of the standard to he synchronized. i. e.

1"” < 7',- 10'

Formulas (7.5) and (7.6) are used for calculations of the actual value of the fre-
quency of the standard to be verified over the time measurement interval. while
the averaged actual frequency over the course of a day is determined from the formula

[.=i.(l + 0% . 10-"), (1.7)

where 6¢c is the phase discrepancy of the signals in us over a day.

When the phase discrepancy is measured in degrees.

I.-I.+ 7.3: (7.8)

The method of processing the results of comparison by the phase technique is ex-‘
plained in Section 7.5.

Determining the Time of the Equiluminant Transmission Path

To determine the time of the equiluminant path it is necessary to know the hours

of sunrise and sunset. which depend on the season of the year. and on the coordi-
nates of the points where the transmitting radio station and the standard to be
synchronized are located [Ref. 68].

To plot the nomogrem (Pig. 36). a BBSH-b computer is used to calculate times of
sunrise and sunset for latitudes from +65‘ to -85’ with a step of 5' for the middle

FOI.0I1WC1AI.UBI10NIN
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of each month by the following approximate formulas of spherical astronomy:

lgh—lgcslnqz
l. - srccos(—- lg pig 8.); (7-9)
T. = 1.: T‘-2‘._t..

where no. 6. are the tine of right ascension and declination of the sun. cl 23°.4
is the tilt of the ecliptic to the equator. o is the geographic latitutde. to is
the hour angle of the sun at sunrise. 1.. T, are times of sunrise and sunset.

The values of no were calculated from the formula for mean right ascension. To
calculate values close to the middles of the nonths. the formula was transformd
to the approximation

o. - 17",6 + 2"m,

where m is the ordinal nunber of the month. The error of the resultant value of
so does not exceed 17 min.

The curves of the nomogran plotted by using the values calculated from formulas
(7.9) are graphs of the tines of sunrise (sunset) as a function of latitude with
respect to the local mean time scale. ‘l‘o con. art to miversal (61 enrich) tine.
it is necessary to consider the longitude of the point (subtract ‘ value of east
longitude or add the value of west longitude). This operation 1 . accomplished

by using the upper and lower longitude scales. 'i‘hechange in times of sunrise and
sunset from nonth to month increases with increasing latitude. And at the same
time. there is an increase in the twilight period at higher latitudes. Therefore.
considering the physics of the phenomenon. it makes no sense to interpolate between
curves of two successive months. and it is sufficient to take the curve relating
to the middle of a given month.

Work with the nomogran should he done in the following order:

find the point of intersection of the horizontal line corresponding to one of the
points (for ex-ple the transmitting point) with the curved line that corresponds
to the given month;

go up or down from this point to the midline of the nomogram 0”. i. a. find the
projection of this point;

join the projection point to the point of the upper scale of the nomogramthat cor-
responds to the longitude of the site. and beneath this point read out the time
of sunrise T3,; join the same point of the projection to the [appropriate] point
of the lower scale of longitudes. and read out the ties of sunset In above this
point. ‘

The time of sunrise and sunset ft: the other point ('1'.2 and 1'32) is determined
in exactly the sure way.

89

FOIOFFICIALIBEONLY
NI OFFICIAL IRE ONLY

To determine the part of the day that is favorable for measurement (equiluainant
path). it is necessary to construct a cyclic diagram of order of succession of
sunrises and sunsets at the two points [see example to the right on the nomogrn].

If the sunrises and sunsets succeed one another in the order "rise-rise-aet-set".
the equiluminant path will lie between times Tn-T, and 13-1,. If the order of
succession of sunrises and sunset; is "rise-set-rise-set . the equilusinant path
will lie in intervals ‘1' 1-7,: see TI 41', or 132-1.. and Tart”. i. e. between
neighboring sunrises a sunsets at the different points.

The following must be taken into consideration.

1. The nomogram gives universal (Greenwich) time, and 3 h must be added to convert
to Moscow time.

2. If the horizontal scale corresponding to the latitude of the site does not
intersect the curve of the corresponding month, this means that it is polar day
or polar night at the given point at this time of year (in accordance with the
inscription on the nomogram). In this case. the only favorable interval for mea-
surements is the part of the day when it is daytime or nighttime respectively

at the other point.

3. Measurement conditions are unfavorable during twilight, and therefore the period
of the equiluaina;.t path should be somewhat shortened on both ends.

7.6. Synchronization of Time Standards (Time Scales) v

Order and Conditions of Synchronization

Tine standards are synchronized in the following order:

a) depending on the metrological characteristics of the time standards. the askeup
of the recording reception equipment and the location of the standard to be synchro-
nized. the optimum method and means of synchronization are chosen from among those
cited in Table 7;

b) the time of synchronization is selected with consideration of maximu- constancy
of the parameters of the transaission channel;

c) in accordance with tables 8 and 9. the necessary time inteual is determined
for synchronizationof the frequency standard that is the basis for setting up the
time scale;

(1) the error of the recording reception equipment is deterained;

e) the signal delay is determined in the recording reception equipment;

f) the signal travel time from the antenna of the transaitting station to the an-
tenna of the locationof- the. standard to be synchronized is calculated or experi-
mentally determined;

3) the frequencies are compared, and the principal astrological characteristics
of the standard are deterain-ed under selected measurement conditions;

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJAL.U§E(NILY

h) the instants of the signals of the tine scale are brought together with the
signal transmitted from the synchronizing standard;

1) corrections with respect to the frequency and instants of the time signals are
calculated and introduced by means of regulating elements (frequency control.
phase shifter or discrete delay nodule);

j) synchronization of the tine standard is checked by one or two other radio sta-
tions;

k) synchronization results are Iarked on a graph.
Synchronization Error

In synchronizing tine standards. it is necessary to account for and aininize errors
due to: change in state of the ionosphere on the transmission path during the
interval of signal registration at the reception point; selection of the tile and
tine interval of synchronization; error of determining the signal travel tile in
the transaission channel and its change during synchronization; the error of de-
ternining the time of signal delay in the receiving and recording equipaent; the
error of the method of coaparing. recording and processing measurement results;

the error of the time standard being synchronized and the periodicity of synchro-
nization; the error of regulating the intervals and instants of the signals of

the time scale to be synchronized.

The error of synchronization of tine standards is deterained by errors of synchro-
nization of the tine-scale interval or the frequency of the reference standard

for formation of the time scale (see Section 7.3)-oof; of determining the tins

of signal travel from the antenna of the synchronizing standard to the antenna

of the synchronized standard-6.¢1; of the synchronizing standard-5.t;; of the
standard being aynchronizad-6o;3; of recording the instants of tine signals-

5ots; of deternining travel tine delay of the tine signals in the recording receiver
equipment--Got5; of deteraining and asking the correction to instants of signals

of the tine scale to he synchronized-6.t;:

________________._
+~ a Van-8:. + 3a..+%:..+ 3&.+ 635+?"- (no)

In selecting the radio station, consideration is taken of the fact that the tine
signals from this station must be clearly audible. the leading edge of the signals
should not be distorted by interference and aultiheam propagation of radio waves.
and the transaission path should he equilaninant.

Time standards with error of 10-100 as can be synchronized with respect to signals
of civil tine (six points) transnitted by radio broadcast stations; with error

of 100-300 us--with respect to tine signals of short-wave radio stations on the
territory of the USSR and the neighboring seas; with error of 60-70 us-vith re-
spect to tine signals of long-wave radio stations 312 and 330 (radius up to 1200-
1500 km from Moscow and Irkutsk) and other non-Soviet long-wave and VL? stations.
including the Loren—C long-save and the anga VLF navigation systems; with error
of 0.5-2 us--with respect to TV and satellite channels. Tine-scale intervals or
frequency of the reference standard are synchronized in the order given in Section

91

FOR OIIHCJAl.lEﬂE(ﬂULY
FOIlOIlIC1A1.lEﬂ!(IVLY

7.3. and the instants of signals of the time scale being synchronized are normalized
with respect to exact time signals. or with respect to the phase of the carrier
frequency marked to resolve ambiguity.

In some cases. where high precision of synchronization is not required or where

a single tie-in of the scale is to be done (in the case of a periodically energized
time scale). the operations of synchronising time intervals and normalizing the
instants of local tine-scale signals are coabined by repeated sequential regis-
trations of the instants of received time signals with the signals of the time
scale to be synchronized. Each time after determining the deviation. corrections
are made by correcting elements without correcting the frequency of the reference
standard.

The error of travel time of the signals 50:: is determined with consideration of

all destabilizing factors (see chapters 6-6). or is evaluated from experimental
data. For the short-wave, long-wave and VLF ranges the most appreciable influence
is from illumination of the transaiasion path. As an ample. Fig. 37 shows the
change in signal travel tine of signals during the course of a day on a transmission
path from Moscow to Rugby (U.K.) in the sun-er (radio station can. frequency

16 kHz). The greatest change in signal travel time between day and night is

45 us.

 

Fig. 37. Change in signal travel time on Rugby-Moscow
transaission path

The travel time of time signals can be approximately determined for the short-
wave band from Fig. 38a. and for the long-wave band—fro- Pig. 38b. The curves
are plotted from experimental data. The error of determining 1") by using Pig. 38a

is 3150 us. and for 38b--350 us.

Error do“ of the synchronizing time standard is determined by the error of the
time standard set up at the transmitting point and by the instability of delay
of signal travel time'in the transmitting equipment with consideration of a special

stabilizing device. The total error is usually indicated in "Schedules of Exact
Tine and Reference Frequency Signal Transmissions."
Error 60;, of the standard being synchronised is indicated in the nameplate data.

The recording error dots is determined by the resolution of the recording device.
the method of comparing time scales. the shape of the leading edge of the signal
and the signal-to-noise ratio at the reception site.

92

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOROFII‘ICIALUSEONLY

 

Fig. 38. Signal travel tine as a function of distance between
antennas of synchronized and synchronizing standards on an equi-
luainant transmission path:
l--daytine; Z—nighttina

For short-wave radio stations. this shape will vary because of aultibeal propagation
of radio waves. Fig. 39 shows the shapes of tine signal pulses at the reception
point. In recording tine (Fig. 39s) the recording error may reach 50-80 us. and

in recording the signal (Fig. 39h)--300 as or more. For practical purposes. a
signal of this shape is not race-ended for synchronization.

 

a h

Fig. 39. Shape of leading edge of signals at the reception point
with transmission by short-wave radio stations

Fig. 60 shows the leading edge of a signal in the long-wave range at the antenna
of radio stations RES-do kHz (1) and muss‘l, a: (2).

In the case of interference with ratio of 5:! end realistic phase fluctuation at
the reception site. the recording error is 30-50 us at a distance of up to 1200 in.

If the exact tine signals being used to synchronize the tine standard have some
spread at the reception site characterized by variance 0%. reliable determination
of the instant of the received signal necessitates averaging the instants over as

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.US€(NVLY

'3

i

I I
' I
I l

s c

   

Relative amplitude
of envelope
13 ﬁ

§

w M ”01’s“!

Fig. 40. Leading edge of tine signal on antenna of longdvave
radio stations

long a time interval as possible. consistent with a: and depending on reception
conditions. interference level and the fluctuations of the leading edge of the
signal.

If a tine scale is to be synchronized for a tine during which the instants of sig-
nals of the scale being synchronized aust not deviate free the instants of exact
tine signals by a predeternined value of a2 c' an interval can he established during
which it is advisable to carry out averaging and synchronization of instants of
the time scale signals.

If the error of synchronization of tine signals is preassigned. the average time
during which it is advisable to carry out tie-in after the (2n-l)-th received
tine signal to the average value of the instant of these signals is

7-"!

B ‘I

I‘ I
'cp = a " Lian/(I

 

 

            

I
2"__‘ . (7.11)
where n is the number of recorded instants of tine signals; E1 is the fluctuation

of tine signals at the reception site; tc,. is the interval between tins signals
radiated from the transmitter antenna.

But tc n6°3f(n- l)+-to is the correction at the a-th instant. and consequently

is the more exact the greater the n. since its variance is equal to o;/(2n~ 1).

If we displace the instants of the tine—scale signals by t after the (2n- l)-th
signal, then the interval between the new position 12n_‘m°5 Tin-l will be equal to
-—-};fh-- |lrJL"(u--ll The spread of values of this interval obtained from the
possible values of £1 and deaf is what determines the accuracy of synchronization.
Then the recording error due to averaging of the fluctuation of instants of the

signals at the reception site is

 

o - 'ﬁTI—l": °ml(”_')' (7.12)

94

FIHICHHHCJAI.USEGUNLY
FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It can be seen from formula (7.12) that there is an optimum value “opt that ensures
maximum recording accuracy with averaging of the recording results.

One of the appreciable components of the synchronization error is the error of
determining the signal travel time in the radio reception equipment Goes. Which
depends mainly on the width of the passband, and can be determined for each specific
receiver. Fig. bl shows r,.n,-¢(AF) for the 3-250 M radio receiver.

Tamp. “9

 

Z s I l ﬁAF. kHz

Fig. bl. Typical behavior of signal delay time in receiver for
different paasbands

Signal delay time in the receiver equipment is

‘t "'0 B {.4 l A". (7.13)

where r,_c. A13 are the systematic and random components of delay time of the phase
or envelope of the signal

The time 11 of travel of a sine-wave signal through the circuit corresponds to
the phase angle d-«nt. If r is constant in the frequency band, the phase shift
in the circuit in this band varies linearly as a function of frequency. Deviation
of the phase shift wt3.c from linearity is comprised of the systematic and random

changes of 13.

When a pulse signal is being transmitted. 1, must be constant for frequencies in
the passband for retention of pulse shape in the phase relations. Otherwise it
is difficult to determine signal delay time due to distortion of the envelope.

During signal transmission. the signal envelope depends on the steepness of the
phase characteristics of the transmission channel; the average phase delay is usually

determined from the relation 1,,cp-o/m. and the signal envelope delay ("signal
delay time" or "group signal travel time") is defined as

d!
‘K,_‘.’u% nt‘p-fa 7:7. (7.14)

i. e. the delay of the envelope is equal to the phase delay on the fundhmental
frequency plus a term that accounts for the change in delay in the frequency paseband

95

roe own use ONLY
FOR1OFHKJAI.USB(MVLY

and that is determined by the passbsnd of the channel. the accuracy of tuning to
the carrier frequency. and to a lesser extent by signal amplitude and shape.

The foregoing arguments show how difficult it is to exactly measure the delay time
of the signal envelope.

It would be possible to get the most exact results in measuring the phase shift
with respect to points in a predetermined frequency band and plotting a graph of
the delay characteristic. But this is a very laborious process.

He give below a block diagram of practical measurements of the time delay of a

time signal in radio reception deviceseitheradmn a low-frequency voltage arrives
directly at the radio receiver input from an oscillator (voltage keyed by square
pulses). or when antennas are used for radiation and reception through the ether.

 

Fig. 42. Diagram of measurement of signal delay time in radio
receivers:

l--standard signal generator; 2--time signal simulator; 3-antennas;
b--receiver; 5-oscilloscope with external triggering; 6-device
with variable delay; 7-pulse generator

In the former case. a signal from a simulator (Pig. #2) may be sent directly to
the receiver input. all switches [ﬂ7-ﬂU] being set in position I. In the latter
case. the switches are set in position II.

 

Fig. 43. Schematic diagram of time signal simulator

Fig. 63 shows a schematic diagram of a time signal simulator. Time frequency gener-
ators are provided by an rf-oscillator operating in the band of the radio stations.

or tclevisiun broadcast channels. The time signal simulator is an electronic switch
based on a semiconductor diode. In the initial state, the transistor is closed. and

96

INDR OEWICIAI.IISIICHVLY
FORlofFKJAl.USEINQLY

the negative potential from its collector load is fed through resistor BA (10 in)
to the cathode of the_diode. when a negative pulse arrives at the base of the
transistor. it is opened. and the blocking voltage is removed from the diode. The
high-frequency voltage from the rf-oscillator passes to the output plug of the
simulator. The duration of the output radio signal of the simulator is determined
by the duration of the input pulse.

Signals from the simulator output are fed to the antenna input of the receiver
being studied. The delay time of the receiver is measured by an oscilloscope with
calibrated scan. Signals from the output of the intermediate-frequency amplifier
of the receiver are fed to the vertical amplifier input of the oscilloscope. The
oscilloscope is triggered by the seconds-marking pulses of the local clock. The
zero-amplitude point of the signal is shifted away from the reference line on the
oscilloscope screen. and the time s, is read out with respect to the calibrated
scan of the oscilloscope.

When more accurate mensurements are needed in the recording receiver. the signals
from the simulator are sent to the antenna of the receiver. The measurements them-
selves are made in the same order as in the first case.

When determining signal delay time in equipment, repeated measurements must be
made. and each time the receiver must be tuned and the amplitude at the input must
be regulated. The arithmetic mean of th( group delay time is

 

{.
: nﬁl‘lJl (7.15)
'IJ n ' .
and the error of determining r: is ‘
2, -
_ ‘2’, (‘1.rl—‘O.f). (7.16)

 

~
It!" :-.- .——.- ___.

n—l

As we can see from Fig. bl. for the frequency band from 4 to 12 kHz 1, is nearly
constant. and it increases sharply for the frequency band below 3 kHz. Therefore
when signals are being received in the frequency band below 3 kHz. r,.r must be
accounted for and precisely monitored since it will have an appreciable effect

on the overall error of time-scale tie-in.

The error of determining and making the correction to the instants of the time
scale 60:; is determined by phasing and precision of registration of the instants
of signals of the synchronizing end synchronized time standards. and by the-defi-
nition of the correction.

The instants of the time signals are considered simultaneous when the instants
of signals of the local time scale lead the received time signal by the signal
travel time from the reference time standards (radio stations) to the standards
being synchronized.

A time standard will be synchronized if the following equation is satisfied and
all components of the total synchronization error have been minimized:

ﬂunk...» + ‘1')“ AT: 5 0. (7.17)

97
F0!‘0FF1C]AI.lEﬂE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

wlwrc Km is the discrepancy of instants of tine-scale signals.

To increase accuracy. all synchronization operations out be repeated 10 times.
and the average should be determined

 

‘§ AT.
ﬁ; _ 73': ' (7. 18)

II

If exact tine signals transaitted by two or more stations that are equivalent in
accuracy can be received at the site of the reception point at a given tine. and
the leading edge of such signals is of the sans quality (signal-to-noise ratio
more than 5:1). then tie-in should be done with respect to two or three stations
for greater reliability. For this purpose: ‘

a) the beginning of the received signals must be combined 10 tines with the signals
of the tine standard to be synchronized with respect to the first and second sta-

tions. the readings recorded. and AT; and AT; must be calculated;

b) if these values do not differ by nore than 101. the aritluetic lean should be
calculated:

 

{17-1-57
m1..." "2 ": (7.19)

 

on the other hand. if the lean values with respect to the two stations differ by
more than 10:. all synchronization operations should be repeated.

 

After determining A711” or A1";| m a phase shifter or discrete delay should be
used to change the instants of the tine-scale signals by the resultant amount
taken with the reverse sign.

When using the phnse method of tine scale synchronization. only one station should

be used. and to improve the accuracy and reliability of the results of the neasure-
ments. the synchronization time interval nuat be increased.

 

Fig. 64. Block diagran of equipment for synchronising tine standards with respect
to tine signals: .
l--radio receiver; 2--i-f or low-frequency amplifier; 3--s1ave-sweep oscilloscope;
Ion-discrete delay device; Sntine-acele shaper; 6—frequency standard; 7—two-beaa
electronic oscilloscope; B—counting-type frequency meter

98
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORloFFKJAl.USEZONLN

Fig. 44 shows block diagrams of equipment for synchronizing time standards with
respect to exact time signals. Let us consider the one that uses devices with
discrete delay (Fig. 44a).

The voltage of the received time signal goes from the output of i-f or low-frequency
amplifier 2 to single-beam oscilloscope 3 with slaved sweep. Signals from the

time scale to be synchronized with recurrence rate of l or 10 Hz, depending on

the repetition rate of the received signalare sent through device a with discrete
delay (type Ch6-37) to the trigger terminal of the oscilloscope (slave sweep mode).
By varying t.-e delay with which the b'eginnin'g' of' the rise in the leading edge
of the signal is fed to the beginning of the scan, we determine the discrepancy

of the instants of time signals of the standard to be synchronized relative to

the instants of the received time signals.

Fig. 44b shows a block diagram using a counting-type frequency meter in the mode

of measurement of time intervals with different received waveforms. In the presence
of two—beam oscilloscope 7 and a second divider channel with phase-shifting device.
synchronization is done in the following order. The received time signal is sent
to two-beam oscilloscope 7 with slaved sweep. To synchronize the oscilloscope.

a seconds-marking pulse is sent from the time scale to be synchronized. which is
simultaneously the start signal for counting-type frequency meter 8. Time signals
(reference mark) from the output of the additional divider channel are sent to

the second beam of the oscilloscope and to the frequency meter (stop). By rotation
of the phase shifter. the seconds-marking signal (reference mark) is fed to the
beginning of the rise in the leading edge of the received time signal. The value
of T" is determined from the readings of frequency meter 8 in the mode of time
interval measurement.

7.5. Methods of Processing Results of Measurements Made by the Phase Method

When the phase method of synchronization is used, the phase difference of signals
of the synchronizing and synchronized standards is registered by conventional phase
meters. The measurements are taken over standard time intervals re.

The average frequency of the standard to be synchronized is
’a

'—.‘._'- '
, ,s w- m
a
The principal advantage of this method is in continuous averaging of the phase
of the frequency standard.

if time standards are synchronized discretely rather than continuously. the mea-
sured real value nf the frequency is determined as a function of phase dispersion
at the reception site and the preset accuracy of synchronization.

The averaged real value of the frequency over standard time intervals normalized
to the middle of n measurement time interval of N days is determined as follows.

The established measurement time interval !£”“-lg”* is broken down into n identical

intervals litm- - I;-\'- . where i- 0. 1-. 2,. . ., (n - l) .

At time tgu), a measurement (in us) is made of the phase difference between the
reference frequency and the frequency of the standard to be synchronized (the phase
time lead is determined) ¢{N).

99
FIN!(HNHCJAI.USB¢DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘rhen A.= I'LL,"- on intervals 1m ~15"? will be defined as

 

9 -9“"’
m a _H.' ' ,
4,, 1:11-42” “H. (7 21)

the average value of this quantity on the interval 1:”! —-th normalized to the mid-
dle of this interval is

_ ’ n—I 0%..
AW: 1 m. 9?" 10-6. (7.22)

n In!) (m ".1,”

H days after these measurements. a standard measurement interval QNH" ---l},”+“’ is

selected that is equal to the 8-day measurement interval and is situated at the
same place of the time scale. 1. e. 19’1"” —!g"'+"’-11M wry" where QM") - (3").

Then analogous measurements are made and used in the calculation of

-u an_ H!)
ATE-Iii —, .1. . 1‘ M'— 10“. (7023)
n n g: “-03 "ISM
Knowing the quantities defined by formulas (7.22) and (7.23) at the same instant

on different days. we can calculate the relative diurnal systematic frequency
variation

,3» _ W #[W. (7.24)
and the change in the relative diurnal systematic frequency variation
“0 a) .
‘s “o
(A!) — —————--
2v. M_' . (7.25)
at M- 2 (a '
_ )
qu- ‘0 '3 , (7.26)

If the time interval is expressed in days. and the phase advance in microseconds.
the averaged relative 24-hour change in frequency is

_ 1(0—19—0 I n,
A. 0.0“ 0’ . (7.27)
when the phase advance is measured in degrees
- 1_U)'-.LL___- “4) (7.28)
A. More '

By determining the values of A0 over equal time intervals (210 hours) in a set period.
we can calculate all principal metrological characteristics of the frequency standard
by the formulas, using one of the methods of frequency measurements.

Experience has shown that the methods of mathematical statistics provide the best
means of determining metrological characteristics of time and frequency standards.

100

FOR OFFIOAI. US ONLY
INDR 0‘1ﬂCJAI.lﬂﬂE(ﬂVLY

Practical formulas are given below for calculating the metrological characteristics
of frequency standards from the results of continuous testing over several days.

In processing experimental data with a considerable inherent random spread. the
best result is attained by constructing a line of regression (Ref. 49] using the
method of least squares. The specific nature of frequency standards is such that
the systematic change in their frequency with time as a rule is very well described
by a linear law. or at least by a square law. Besides. in prolonged testing of
frequency standards, measurements are usually made every day at the same time.

so that a standard measurement interval can be introduced.

Let us select some standard interval of measurement 1 (e. g. 2‘ hours) that takes
integral values 1- l. 2, 3..... n (usually n- 15 days).

Let A...- .l"."'..'l£.’..-.,.. ”#2;- ' be experimental values of the relative deviation of the

effective frequency f" of the standard away from the nominal value f" at points 1.
Then the linear regression

 

 

Ml)-A.+v.1 (7.29)
is determined by parameters no. vo calculated from formulas
n + l
u- "OJ—1|) ('2' (Au— alzlAN). (7.30)
A.- 7.3 AM. "+2' ., (7.31)

‘4

In the case of a square law of systematic change in frequency, the line of regression

 

A.(t)=A.+ v.i+q.1’ (7.32)
is determined by parameters A9, vo. qo that in this case are calculated by formulas
. :n : = .' - \I‘A ‘ 10 3 (7.33)
A. "(M m" 1', (m | in | ”F." 6(2n [- l)‘\|i/\.‘| guts
6 - a a 1
3 "(IF IHM’ -4-)|J("| ”(ll-I ZNZILII ')l2.JAu"
2‘2" I man | ll)2iA..,--| :mnu ngmwl, (7.36)
I
_.m ,
".01.“. -l)(.";- n (n I ”(It I ”gm—muumlmw Gly'pgu] (7.35)

 

As to the dimensionality of the quantities: A. is dimensionless, v. [day-1].
40 [day' I.

For linear regression. the rate of going of the time scale of the investigated
time standard (in microseconds) relative to the reference scale is

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N) -'I'.. | «.64- Io"(A.z l -;-.P). (7.36)

and for square-lav regression
Tm 1.4- 8.64 . Io’°(A.i + g «M- -;-q.v). (7.37)

where To is the instant of the time signal at 1-0. Dileneionality of the quan-
tities Ao [us/day]. vo [us/day’]. so [usiday’].

Let us give s specific example of investigation of s rubidiu frequency standard
over television channels 1300 In from the GBVCh. Measure-eat results and processing
data are emarized in Table 10.

mm 10
Results of measure-eat processing. us

 

 

0 - . .. -.

I --|7.4 .2 6.0 6. l 6.0 6.0 0.0 0.00
2 -—l3.l 3 5.0 l0. 4 ”.0 5.3 —0.3 0.09
3 ~00“. 6 4 ,2 l2.!‘ {I 37.! 4.6 —0.4 0. m
4 6.8 ,7 3.0 12. l6 «.0 4,0 - I .0 I .00
5 -4.‘I I 2.5 l2..' :5 62.5 3.3 .a 0.64
6 ~--3.5 2 IA 8.4 36 60.‘ 2.1 -|.3 kw
7 —2.8 1 0.8 fut 09 33.2 2.l —l,.1 gm
8 - ~2,:| 5 0.6 4, 04 38.‘ I.5 —0.9 0.8I
9 - ‘l .9 .4 3,5 4. III 40.5 |,| —0,6 0,15
I0 . I .6 3 0.3 .1. lm 30.0 0.8 —0,2 0.04
I l I .3 ,3 0,3 3. 12! 36.3 0.2 0.| 0.0I
I? —0.7 G 0.7 8. I“ IMJ —0,2 0.9 0,8l
l3 - ~l .0 ,3 —o.3 —1.' 109 ~50.7 —0.6 0.3 0.09
H -2.3 3 -|,5 ’.' . 196 ~294,0 no.9 ~05 0.3
In 4.0 .3 -- MS 22. 226 —3ﬂ.6 L2 -0.3 0.“.
I“ -5.6 0 --2.3 —IS. 250 “.8 l.6 —o.8 0.66
I? -7.2 6 ---|.B 10. m 420.: l.7 d-0.l 0,0!

For the case of linear dependence, we sue calms lo and 5. and substitute these

suns in expressions (7.30) and (7.31) at n- 17:

A.» 7',“ 17,9. :0 "+9.4,5- I0-"=5.| . lo-u;

. F Lt... -»23,7-lO'"-9-l7,9»10"')- «4.5- I0-'*.
' "-218

u '
Summing calms lo. 5 and 7 for square-law dependence. we get [2.4" =- [394040;
I? _

I
'2:m.,.- -..2..’f7-I0'"; Shun-4.32404, Substituting these values and n- 17 in formulas
I I

In"

(7.33). (7.34). (7.35). we set
. A. ___ 31.1.2091- 5| -|- 2)|1.9.|o-" +2l0.23.1. Io—u—Im- Io-III a 6 . '04.:

l7- l6. I!)

v. ....‘Elil";!______”'-"""-9"°‘"+7°::-;;HUZV-IH—uodnoao-ﬂl_ __ 7.4 , 10;";
. .m

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1-f'1'i""'° I1_.9_I9 L‘I'Nﬂw 10.10 "
11mm ' '

The rate of going of the time scale of the given standard, us.

TU) a. 1'.+ 5,2i— 0,321! 4- 0,0413, (7.38)

from which we see that the daily rate of going of the time scale is equal to +5. 2
ua/day, the change in the diurnal variation is -0. 32 ua/day2 . and the deviation
of the change in the diurnal variation is +0. 004 uslday’ .

To calculate the mean square error, we at- column 10. and then calculate

l/ M =- 73 . 10-”.
Hi

to determine the linear dependence. other values must stand in columns 8-10. These
are calculated by the formula

A.(i) -(SJ --4,51)Io-". (7.39)

The mean square error 0- 8.5.10'“. From a cmpariaon of these two values we see
that the square-1.19 dependence should be given preference.

The netrological characteristics of the frequency standard can be calculated by
a method of graphic interpolation.

If dependence A00.) can be interpolated by a straight line [see formula (7.29)].
then we can write the following two equations for determining parameters A... v.:

Ao+'s‘Ae|

Ari-’"o-Ae. ' (7.60)
and solving these, we get -

A.- "f_—‘I°“. (7.1.1)

. 32.1% (7.62) .

If dependeme “(1) is interploated by a parabola in accordance with expression
(7. 32), then we determine parameters do. w. qo by solving the three equations

As+ '0+ 40““ .
Ao+m’s+”"'ls"Ao-n . (7-43)
6.4- uv.-I- n'q. - A...

_ -:m(n---)A..-n(n-—l)d.. I ”(II—41h
15' (n —m)(n—l)(n-—l) ' (7.“)

v 31-. M" W')Au— n’-—|)A.,+(.I_|)
. ("-~)(~-n(~—I) ' (7.4.5)

B-(_____n-n)d..—§n—llh+(n—l)b~ .
(hr (n—n)(n-—l)(n-—I) (7.-'06)

103

FOROFFICIALMONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In formulas (7.61) and (7.42) we substitute n-l7. dog-6010'", con-4.84041
(see Table [0). and we get

A...“ 11:2.L'°_"1_LL~§:_“11 n .. 5.5 . 10-". .

l6
. ,_. — '-°-"°.".'. '_°_'.'.‘! ”. - -45.). 10""day'1.
" I6

In for-ulas (7.60-0.46) we substitute n- 17. a-9. An-som'“. [an-0.5.1041.
Aon- [.8-10'n (see Table 10). and we get

A, - s1_-9_-8-'.__i-w~" - w-57. 10-",

lQ‘

7,: - ——---- 1024 '—-9,4- l0"" “fl,
.gn mo to-n--ua~o,:.o-,:o n—s. Ls. Io-"___2.5. 10-“ day“.

 

Experimental data show that paraaeters z... w. qo are calculated lore accurately
by the method of least squares than by the nethod of graphic interpolation.

7.6. Constructing Trapezoida of Changes in 11, Fran Results of the Differential
Measurement Method

Synchronous recording of field strength and difference frequency is demonstrated
on the cxeaple of operation of radio station RES in Moscow (100 kHz) and a local
radio station at a reception site in One]: (Fig. 65).

   

    
  
  

      

25 [Z _‘.-' .37

 

'3

l l . . . . .
I? II i0 :9 .76 c." 6'5 :5 .79 .7! a: 0/ 26 2} 22 3:” .‘0 I! .'J l7 .'5 I: -‘v .2! '.’
b tins of day

Fig. 45. Synchronous recording:
a--uf field strength; b-of difference frequency (beat frequency)

106

POROI'IICIALUSIONLY
POI! Oil-10M. USE ONLY

Prue Fly. ’4') we can ace that during the course of a day the field strength at the
rel: option point varies strongly. and that during sunrise, when there is a sharp
increase in field strength. phase slip takes place at the reception site due to
a change in du: ation of the period of the difference frequency.

If the instants of zero amplitude of the difference frequency to. t1. t2...” tn
are recorded. the difference of two displaced instants deter-ines the duration

of the beat period. 1. e. t1- to-T1. fig-€1.13...” tn- tn—1'Tn. Th0 beat fre-
quency is defined as An- III“, or in relative quantities Ann. l/‘l'nfu

The relative error of the averaging frequency over ten best periods (for the case
shown in Pig. (ls—for lb periods) is calculated from the formula

A,“ " =_—L—-I,69oIo-'.

was.” (7.4?)

 

I
In); TI
1-!
The duration of the average period Tc '5916 3 s. and since each of the beat periods
differs by MD from the average periog Tcp . this means that the phase changes by
00- a, - 21:. The total phase change in radians over n periods is

EAT,
'; -‘ 2r .'..'-._._

1.,

For graphic representation of the change in phase on measurement time interval
A'l‘c . a graph is plotted (Fig. 1.6) fron tabulated values of AT n'Tn’ nTc. where
“Y 2, 3..... 11. (Table ll). Plotting is ruled by the formula Arp-AoXT.

“?7%a
III -/ /
I,‘ / n "”/’ l nurs

- TV] [3; II! //V// -"dey
‘1" I r526?
i {,0

I Y”
F'/
I "
I
I

(7.68)

   

-‘z

.[4
”7 Mr //A .714

 

Fig. 1.6. Change in signal travel tine of radio station RES on
Moscow-Omsk transniseion path as a function of the tine of day

Considering the high stability of the standard being synchronized. all changes
in AT“ can be attributed to inconstancy of the conditions of radio wave propagation.

The curve of Fig 46 shows a practical reflection of the way that signal travel
time depends on the tine of day.

105

MMLISBONLY
2.

3.

lo.

5.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 11
Processing leesurenent results

 

.7

 

 

 

 

art... a

 

 

 

A1".-T.- lrﬂ“

 

553

P

uaaeau— I ‘
”g

 

“FENCES

Halikov. H. P., “Osnovy netrologii" [Principles of htrolosy]. Moscow. 1969.
pp 139-149 (Konerpribor).

Gorshkov. A. P.. ed.. "Appsrsturs dlys chastotnykh i vrenennykh imreniy"
[Equipment for Frequency and Tine Hessurenents]. Moscow. "Sow. radio". 1971.

‘rel'pukhovskiy, N. A.. Kuryshevs, L. N.. Yer-olinskiy, S. Ksh.. "Frequency
Stores Based on Quartz Oscillators with Mean Square Frequency Variations of
£10.12" in: "Doklsdy nsuchno-tekhnicheskogo seninsrs 'Hetrologiys v rsdio—
elektronike' (tezisy)" [Reports to Scientific and Technical Seninar on Hetrology
in Electronics (Abstractsn. Part 2. Moscow. 1970 (VNIIPTRI).

Plonskiy. A. F.. "P'yezokverts v tenhniks svyszi" [Piezoqusrtz in Colaunicstions
Engineering]. Moscow. Svysz'izdat. 1951.

Slnirnov, A. N., "Research in the Field of Tine and Frequency Hessurenents"
in: "Trudy Veesoyuznogo nsuctmo-issledovstel'skogo institute fiziko-
tekhnicheskikh i rsdiotekhnicheskikh inereniy" [Proceedings of All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Physicotechnicsl end deiotechnicsl Measure-
mental. No 77 (137). Moscow, 1962.

Paliy. G. N.. "Graphic Method of Finding Optisn- Values of the Psrsneters

of Quartz Oscillator Circuits" in: "Trudy Vsssoyuznogo nauchno-isslsdovatel'skogo
institute fizikotekhnicheskikh i rsdiotekhnicheskikh iznereniy". Moscow,
Stsndsrtgiz, 1958. pp 38-63.

Zhebotinskiy. M. Ya.. ed.. "Kvsntovays elektroniks" [Quantum Electronics].
Moscow, Sovetskeye entsiklopediya. 1969.

Grigoryents, V. V.. Zhsbotinskiy. H. Ye.. Zolin, V. In. "Kventovyye teandsrty
chastoty" [Quantum Frequency Standards}. Moscow. ”Naulu". I968.

Gsygerov. B. A. et sl.. "Quantum Frequency Standard on Hydrogen Maser".
IZMERITBL'NAYA MHNIKA. No 11, 1972, p 29.

106 '

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IO.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Strakhovskiy. G. H.. Uspenskiy. A. V.. ”Osnovy kvantovoy elektroniki" [Principles
of Quantun Electronics]. Moscow. "Vysshaya shhola", 1973.

Kaplsnov. H. R.. Levin. V. A.. "Avtonaticheskaya podstroyka chastoty" [Autonatic
Frequency Control]. Gostekhizdat. 1962.

Jesperscn. Blair. Getterer. "Principles of Exact Tina and Frequency Signal
Transuission". PROC. IEEE. Vol 60. No 5. 1972. pp 37-66.

Kalinin. A. 1.. Chernkova, Ye. I... "Rasprostraneniye radiovoln 1 rsbota radio-
liniy" [Propagation of Radio Haves and Operation of Radio Line ;. Moscow,
"Svyaz'". 1971.

Dolukhanov. H. P.. "Rasprostraneniye radiovoln" [Radio Have Propagation].

9"

Moscow. "Svyaz . 1972.

Al'pert. Ya. L. et a1.. "Sane Results of Deter-ining Electromagnetic Concen-
tration of the Outer Region of the Ionosphere From Observations of Radio Sig-
nals of the First Artificial Satellite of the Earth". USPEKBI PIZICEESKIIH
NAUK. issue 65, No 2. 1958.

Al'pert. Ya. A.. Qinzburg, V. D.. Peynberg. Ye. K., "Rasprostrsneniye radiovoln".
Moscow. Gostekhizdat. 1958.

Arten'yeva. Ye. V., "Determining Changes in Frequency of Electromagnetic
Oscillations Upon Reflection Pro- the Ionosphere" in: "Issledovaniya v oblasti
iznereniye vremeni i chastoty. Trudy Vsesoyuznogo nauchno-iasledovatel'skogo
institute fizikotekhnicheskikh i radiotekhnicheakikh inereniy". No 77: (137).
Moscow, 1962.

Arten'yeva. Ye. V., "Determining Travel Tine of Exact Tile Signals When They
are Transmitted by Short-Have Radio Stations" in: "Issledovaniya v oblasti
iznereniy vremeni i chastoty". TRUDY METROLOGICEESKIKB msn'm'rov 8883.

No 106 (166). Moscow. 1969.

Paliy. G. 11.. "Method of Two-Hay Transaissiona", WRITE'NAYA mm. No 5.
1970. PP 28-31.

Nadenenko. s. 1.. "Antenny" [Antennas]. Hoscov. Svysz'izdat. 1969.

Rosenberg. V. Ys.. "Radiotekhnichesltiye netody inereniys paraletrov protsessov
i sistem" [Radio Engineering Methods of Measuring Parameters of Processes and
Systems]. Moscow. Izd-vo standartov. 1970.

Svenson. E. R.. Kugel. K. P.. "VLF Tran-ission of Exact Tine Signals. Tra-

ditional and Contemporary Methods Using the (begs System" in: "Vrelaya i -
Chastota" [Tine and Frequency]. translated fron English. Moscow. Mir. 1973.

p 91. .

Bolotnikov, H. V.. Klykov. A. 0.. "tying in Tine Scales and Coapsring Frequencies
in the VLF Have Band". IMITBL'NAYA mm. No 11. 1972. p 36.

107

roe OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

21». Hamilton. H. F., Jespersen. J. L., "An Application of VLF to Time Dessenination"
in: "NBS Tech. Note". No 610. 1971.

25. Rrasnushkin. P. You Yablochkin. N. A.. "Teoriya rasprostraneniya sverkhdllnnykh
voln" [Theory of VLF Have Propagation]. Hoscov. Izd-vo AN SSSR. 1963.

26. Stepanov. V. A.. "Changes in Anplitude and Phase of 16 kHz Signal Propagating
Over a 5200 km Path" in: "Issledovaniya v oblasti izmsraniy vrueni i chastoty".
TRUDY SNIIH. No 11. 1971. Novosibirsk. p 66.

27. Hakarov. G. 1.. Novikov. V. V., Orlov. A. 3.. "Propagation of VLF Radio Waves

in the Earth-Ionosphere waveguide". IZVBSTIYA “3831101 osmium! ZAVEDENIY:
RADIOPIZIKA. Vol 13. No 3. 1970. p 9.

28. Chernyy. P. V., "Rasprostraneniye radiovoln". Moscow. “Sov. radio". 1962.

29. Vasin. L. D.. Kiritsev, B. P.. "Equipment for Comparing Frequencies with Re-
spect to Signals of VLP Radio Stations”. IZHERITE'NAYA mm. No 11. 1972.
p 39.

30. Paliy. G. N. et a1.. "tying in Tine Scales by Using Meteor Trails" in: .
"Issledovaniya v oblasti inereniy vraneni i chastoty". TRUDY WICHBSKIKH
INSTITUTOV $588. No 106 (166). MOSCOW. 1969.

31. Sanders, H. R. et al., 1888 TRANS. INSTRUH. HEASURH Vol 15. No lo. Dec 1966.
pp 34-37.

32. Lettorc. V. R.. Jonson. G. I... "1533 Inter. Convention Record". part 6. 1966.
March 23-26.

33. Dudnik. B. s. et a1., "Using Heteoric Radio Have Propagation for Tying in Clocks
of Sites of the Time and Frequency Service", mm'mn 1mm, No 12.
1971. pp 38-42.

34. Minullin. R. c. et a1.. "Tying in Time Scales to the State Standard Using Mete-
oric Reflections". IZHRRITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA. No 1. 1971, pp 22-24.

35. Khouv. D. A.. "Active System for Timing and Using the First Line of a Television
Signal" in: "Vremya i chastota". P300. 1882. translated from English, Vol 60.
No 5. 1972, Moscow. pp 204-209.

36. East German Patent No 56836. Class 21 .“60. 1967.

37. Paliy. G. N. et al.. "Experimental Precision System for Transmitting Dimensions
of Time and Frequency Units Over Television Broadcast Channels". IZHBRITKL'NAYA
1901111101. No 1. 1972. PP 34-37.

38. Krivosheyev. H. 1.. "Perspektivy razvitiya televideniya" [Outlook for Develop--
nent of Television]. Moscow. "Znaniye". 1972.

39. Dzhskopis. V. Ye., "Zapis' televizionnykh iaobrszheniy" [Recording Television
Pictures]. Leningrad. "Energiya", 1972.

108

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.0. Fedorov. Yu. A. et a1.. "System for Automatic Remote Control of the Time of
Television Frame Synchropulses". IZHERITEL'NAYA MIRA, No l, 1973. pp 403-105.

lol. Paliy. G. N., "Experimental Evaluation of the Error of Time-Scale Tie-in With
Respect to Hide-Bend Communication and Television Channels". IZHBRITEL'NAYA
TEKHNIKA. No 5. 1970. PP 28-31.

42. Devis. D. D. et al., "Long-Term Continental U. S. System via Television Net-
works", IEEE SPECTRUM. Vol 8, Aug 1971. pp 61-52.

43. Psljy. C. N., Fedorov. Yu. A., "Investigation of Frans and Line TV Pulses for
Tine-Scale Tie-in" in: "Issledovsniya v oblasti izmereniy vremeni i chastoty",
TRUDY HEIROIDCICHESKIKH INSTITU'IOV SSSR. No 106(166), Moscow, 1969.

44. Varhanskiy. A. H.. ‘Televideniy?’ [Television], Moscow. "Svyaz'". 1973.

1:5. Ramnsastry, J. et al.. "Clock Synchronization Experiments Performed via ATS-1
nnd ATS-3 Satellites". IEEE INSTRUH. MEASUR” Vol JM-ZZ, Hatch 1973, No 1.
pp 9-12.

1.6. Kozlov. V. v.. "Pokazyvayot- Hoskvsnsmotryat Vladivostok" [Moscow Shows Viewed
in Vladivostok]. Moscow. "Wyaz'". 1968.

1.7. Paliy. C. N. et a]., "Time-Scale Tie-in Using Artificial Satellites" in:
"Issledovaniya v oblasti izmereniy vremeni i chastoty", TRUDY HETROLOGICHBSKIIG!
INSTITlrl‘OV SSSR. No 106(166), Moscow. 1969.

108. Kaufman, H. 8.. "Nonogram for Determining Time of Bquilminant Transmission
Path", IZMERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA. No 2, 1974, pp 210-25.

49. Pustyl'nik. Ye. 1., "Statisticheskiye metody snsliza i obrabotki kolebaniy"

[Statistical Methods of Analyzing and Processing Waveforms] . Moscow. "Nauka".
1968.

50. Il'in. V. 0., Sazhin. V. V.. "State Time and Frequency Service". IMITBL'NAYA
THENIKA. No I. 1972, pp 6—8.

51. Belotserkovskiy. D. Yu., Paliy. G. N.. "New System for Exact Time and Reference
Frequency Signal Transmissions". IMITEL'NAYA Imam. No 11. 1971, pp 11-13.

-3“)-

6610
cso: 8:44/0316

109

FORWIBEONLY