FOR Ol-‘FK‘ML USE ONLY

JPRS L/10354
26 February 1982

Jranslotion

PLANNING AND DESIGN

OF AUTOMATIC LONG-DISTANCE TELEPHONE EXCHANGES

By

Fanya Bentsionovna Bakaleyshchik

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate hcw the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10354

26 February 1982

PLANNING AND DESIGN
OF AUTOMATIC LONG-DISTANCE TELEPHONE EXCHANGES

Moscow PROYBKTIROVANIYB AVTOMATICHESKIKH MEZHDUGORODNYKH TBLEPONNYKH
STANTSIY in Russian 1980 (signed to press 5 Mar 1980) pp 1-208

[Book ”Planning and Design of Automatic Long-Distance Telephone Bx-
changes", by Fanya Bentsionovna Bakaleyshchik. Izdatel'stvo 'Svyaz'“,
10,000 copies]

CONTENTS
Annotation 1
ioreuard 2
Introduction 3

Chapter 1. Automated Telephone Service System of the Country

6
1.1. General Remarks 6
. . National Automatically Switched Telephone Network 6
Structure of the Automated Long-Distance Telephone Network 7
Structure of Intrazonal Telephone Networks 9
Structure of City and Rural Telephone Networks

Communications with Departmental Telephone Offices and Mobile Unite 14

o.
co

I—HHHHI—HHH
.

HOQNOVIL‘UN
.

. . Long-Distance Numbering lb
. . Communication with International Offices 17
. . Types of Office and Center Equipment 19
. 0. Methods of Transmitting Line and Control Signals 19

Chapter 2. Planning and Design Procedure. Composition and Content of

Design Materials 21'
2.1. Research
2.2. Feasibility Studies 22
2.3. Composition'and Content of the Design 23
2.6. Lists and Estimates 2‘
Chapter 3. Design Principles of ANIS and OAK Channels and Equipment 26
3.1. General Remarks 26
3.2. Procedure for Calculating the Number of Lonngistance Telephone
Network Channels 26
- a - [I - USSR - G F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.3.

“WU
.

l.
S
.6.

FOR Ol-‘FlCIAL USE ONLY

Initial Principles of Calculating the Number of ZSL and Six of
the Intrazonal Network

Prospective and Installed Capacity of ANTS and UAK
Service Quality Indices
General Principles of Calculating the Volume of AHTS and UAR

Equipment

Chapter 6. Brief Information About the Design of AHTS-l, AHTS-Z and

ANTS-3 Automatic Long-Distance Telephone Offices
General Remarks

ANTS-1H Office
ANTS—2 Office

ANTS-3 Office

Chapter 5. Design of the AHTSvQ and ANTS-4 Type OAK

5.1.

General Remarks

Operating Capabilities of the Office

Structural Diagram of the ANTS-4 and UAK

Setting up Calls

Description of Basic Types of Office Equipment
Calculating the Volume of ANTS-4 Equipment

Purpose and Operating Capabilities of the UAR
Structural Diagram of the UAR and Operation of the
Devices During the Process of Setting up Calls
Calculation of UAK Equipment

Structural Features of ANTS-4 and UAK Equipment.
Placement Principles

Electric Power Supply for the ANTS-6 and UAK

Chapter 6. ARE-20 Type AHTS Design

6.1.

General Information

Operating Capabilities of the Office
Structural Diagram
Setting Up Calls

Paired Operation of Two Offices

Brief Description of Office Equipment
Calculating the Volume of Office Equipment

Structural Features of the Equipment and Its Placement
Electric Power Supply for the Office

Chapter 7. Designing ANTS XE (Kvarts) quasielectronic Automatic

OI.
“NH
.0.

O O I O

NQQNNNNN

s
o

Long-Distance Telephone Offices

General Remarks

Operating Capabilities of the Office

Structural Diagram and Composition of the Office Equipment
Setting Up Calls

Brief Description of Switching System

OKS Common Channel Signal System

Long-Distance Call Charge Coaputing

Telephone Load Computing and Service Quality Control System

- b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F1)R10FF1C1Al.thE*OfiLY

7.9. Order-Circuit ATS
7.10. Monitoring and Testing Equipment KIA

7.11. Initial Principles for Calculating ANTS KB Equipment
7.12. Structural Design of AMIS K2 Equipment and Its Arrangement
7.13. Electric Power Supply for the ANTS KB

Chapter 8. Ruquirements on AHTS and UAK Buildings and Facilities

. General Remarks

1
2 Initial Data for Designing ANTS and UAK Buildings
.3. Climatic Parameters in the Technical Facilities

4 Number of Service Personnel

Chapter 9. Cable Connections at the ANTS and UAK

Appendix 1
Appendix 2
Appendix 3

Bibliography
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A NNOTAT 1 ON

The design principles of automatic long-distance telephone erohanges using

ANTS-3, ANTS-a, ARM-20, ANTS KE equipment and automatic switching centers are
discussed.

The book is designed for engineering and technical workers engaged in the plan-

ning, design, operation and maintenance of automatic long-distance telephone
offices .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)I.OF11CJAL.USEZCNNLY

FOREWORD

Building a national automatically switched telephone network is connected with build—

ing automatic longrdistance telephone offices (ANTS) and automatic switching centers
(UAK). During the development of modern automatic switching hardware, it has

reached higher and higher quality levels,and telephone offices are being built with
new capabilities and new switching and control principles.

The proposed book is the first attempt at a systematic discussion of the design
principles of ANTS [automatic long-distance telephone offices] and UAR [automatic
switching centers] of different types considering their interaction in the network.
In the future, as the lastest equipment is developed and assimilated, appropriate
supplements and improvements in the design procedure can be introduced.

The book is designed for specialists in the design organizations. the engineering
and technical personnel operating the automatic long-distance telephone offices and
also students in the advanced courses at the communications institutes and technical
high schools.

The current instructions, design standards, and procedural developments of the
"Giprosvyaz'" Institute and publications listed in the bibliography appended to this
book were used when preparing the manuscript.

The author expresses his sincere appreciation to the reviewers, I. I. Vasil'yeva,

R. A. Avakov, N. B. Pokrovskiy and V. I. Isayev for valuable suggestions to improve
the contents of the book.

All suggestions with respect to the book should be addressed to: 101000, Moscow,
Chistoprudnyy bul‘var, 2, izdatel'stvo "Svyaz'."

The Author

2

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PORTOFF1C1A1.U$EZCMNLY

INTRODUCTION

Intense development of the national economy of the Soviet Union, the growth cf
science, culture and standard of living of the Soviet people are accompanied by a
significant increase in the volume of transmitted information. New types of infor-
mation sources are appearing. There are higher requirements on speed and validity
of information transmission. Theunified automated communications system of the
country (YeASS) is charged with unifying all information transmission means to
improve the efficiency with which they are used. One of the component parts of the
YeASS is the national automatically switched telephone network which will be built
on the basis ofunifled engineering and operating principles and must provide high-
quality telephone service throughout the entire country and provide for the trans-
mission of digital data, phototelegraph and facimile traffic. This network will be
based on continuously improved automatic switching hardware.

During the years of Soviet power. the telephone switching hardware. just as the
communications branch as a whole. has come a long way in its development.

In prerevolutionary Russia there was no standard switching equipment for long-
distance communications serv ce. It was only in 1912, considering the peculiari-
ties of servicing the zemskiy telephonenetworks, that the L. H. Erikaon plant in

Petersburg began to produce individual switchboards of the H3 system with drop
signaling, the so-called "zemakiy type." These were the only standard switch

boards which were used for a long time even after the revolution not only for small
long distance telephone offices, but also offices in large cities.

During the first years after the October revolution. the switching equipment was
worn out with completely exhausted capacities. The spare parts were exhausted,
because foreign companies did not deliver them any more. The first Soviet long-
distance switching centers were built in 1923 for reconstruction of the Petrograd
HTS [long-distance telephone office]. In 1928 individual long distance switch
boards of two types appeared: the Tab and MB systems. In the 1930's equipment
was developed for the smallecapacity type H¢3 component offices and the medium-
capacity type B and V offices. The indicated switchboards and offices were
designed for the delay—basis service system. However, the development of the long-
distsnce telephone network made it possible to begin the transition to a no-
delay service system. The development of the composite system offices was inter-
rupted by the war, and it continued latcr in the postwar years when the industry

 

iFrom zemstvo (elective district council in pre-revolutionary Russia).

3

F0R40FFHJA1.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

began to produce the 120achannel HRH type offices and the Zéo-channel 00 offices
and also the H949 individual switchboards.

At the beginning of the 1950's, a gradual transition began from manual switching to
automatic. Industry began to build equipment for semiautomatic long-distance ser-
vice with a two—frequency signaling system for the long-line service and simplified
single-frequency equipment for semiautomatic telephone service of the AHSO-60—U

type for the oblast-wide networks. After this, the first automatic long-distance
telephone offices providing for the organization of outgoing automatic long-distance

service on individual routings (ANTS—l) were developed and put into production.
These offices were built on the basis of the two-frequency semiautomatic communi-
cations equipment using selectors of the ten-step system as the switching devices.
Subsequently the ANTS-l offices were modified and became widespread on the long-
distance network of the country.

Further development of switching equipment for the long-distance telephone service
led to the creation of new, improved high-capacity ANTS, the ANTS-2, and medium
capacity ANTS-3 and also application of the ARM-20 type AXIS equipment (of Swedish-
Yugoslavian production) manufactured in accordance with the operating requirements
of the USSR Communications Ministry. Multiple crossbar connectors are used as the
switching equipment in the AHTS-Z, ANTS-3 and ARM-20 offices and relay markers are
used as the control units.

In recent years the automatic switching equipment has undergone significant quali—
tative changes which have been accompanied by the introduction of electronic and
magnetic elements and also computers as the control units. In the 1970's a new

ANTS-4 mechanoelectronic system office was developed, and the production of the
AHTS KB quasielectronic system was assimilated. Equipment has been developed for

electronic type junctions and offices to create an integrated communications net-
work.

Along with the development of switching equipment, the design engineering of long-
distance telephone offices has also developed. The designs for the first large
automatic long—distance telephone offices were developed in the Soviet Union under
the direction of talented specialists M. A. Bednyakov and A. N. Verkhovskiy.
Specialists of the TsNIIS [Central Scientific Research Institute of Communications]

made a significant contribution to the development of the procedural design prin-
ciples.

The expansion and reequipment of the existing long-distance telephone network on a
new technical base require a significant volume of design work. A characteristic

feature of this work is that the process of reconstructing the network under the
conditions of the broad territorial expanses of our country will take place over

a very long period of time while the network will be an inhomogeneous organism
with different levels of development of individual component parts. Therefore

when designing the offices of new systems it is necessary to take into account that
they must be compatible with existing systems.

A modern automatic long-distance telephone office and automatic switching center
are large communications enterprises equipped with a complex system of equipment.
As a rule, special buildings are planned to be built for the ANTS or UAK.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ANTS includes the following shops: automation and semiautomation; switching;
technical servicing of the switching equipment; line equipment shops for local.
long-distance and zone service; electric power supply and equipment and also input
devices to the outside plant;auxiliaryproduction and administrative and general

services.

The composition of the shops and services of the UAR is analogous to that of the
ANTS except that the UAK does not have local service switching and line equipment

shops. The problems of designing the line equipment shops, the electric power
supply shop, the outside plant inpu: devices are not considered in this book.

The buildings designed for the ANTS and UAK must correspond to special requirements
and contain all forms of sanitary engineering and other devices insuring reliable
operation of the equipment and normal working conditions for the service personnel.

When designing the ANTS and the UAR it is necessary to be guided by the official
normative documents in effect while the design work is being done.

FOIIOFFKJAI.USEIMNLY
FOR¢OFFNHAI.USEiDNLY

CHAPTER 1. AUTOHKTED IELEPHONE SERVICE SYSTEﬂ OF THE COUNTRY
1.1. General Remarks

The telephone system is one of the most complex component parts of the Yeass. The
telephone service hardware is undergoing intensive development. Quasielectronic
and electronic systems with programmed control are coming to replace the crossbar
systems with register-marker control. Programmed control using specialized compu-
ters expands the operating capabilities of the offices and centers significantly.
Along with intense development of telephony, digital data transmission systems and
networks and also systems and networks for facsimile and photocelegraph transmis-
sion service are being developed.

Under these conditions the formation of the automated telephone service system of
the country must be in accordance withunificdprinciples providing for efficient
use of the switching systems and high quality of telephone service to the national
economy and population of the country. These principles must he taken into account
when designing the telephone communications facilities.

1.2. National Automatically Switched Telephone Network

The national autonatically switched telephone network built within the country in-
cludes automatic telephone offices, automatic switching centers, telephone channels,
interoffice trunks and telephone sets. The purpose of the network is primarily to
transmit telephone conversations, and on replacement of the telephone sets by
special terminals, to transmit digital data with an average speed of up to 1200

baud, facsimile and phototelegraphic service.

The national automatically switched telephone network permits calls to be

set up between any two subscribers in the country, including from hospital
telephones, PBX [agency telephone exchanges] and also some coin telephones. These
calls must, as a rule, be set up -automstically. Connections giving the

subscribers various services (information calls to obtain the telephone number of
the called subscriber, leaving a message, calling the subscriber to a public call
office, collect calls, and so on) will be set up semiautomatically.

The structure of the automatically switched telephone network and its structural
principles are closely related to theunifiednumbering system. The zone number—
ing principle has been adopted in the USSR. Under this 'aystem the

entire territory of the country is divided into seven-digit numbering zones.
Hithin the sevenrdigit numbering zone are the following:

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Local (city and rural) telephone netv.'ks;

Automatic long-distance telephone office servicing all subscribers in the zone with
both intrszonal and long distance service (with subscribers from other zones);

Intrazonal network connecting the local networks in the zone to the AHTS.

For long-distance service each zone is assigned its own number - the long-distance
zone [area] code. Beginning with the defined number of zones, the long-distance
zone code contains three digits. Thus, the long-distance number of a subscriber
will consist of 10 digits (the three-digit zone code and seven-digit subscriber
number within the zone). and considering the prefix for entering the long-distance
network, the number is made up of 11 digits. (The numbering system and plan are
considered in detail in § 1.7.)

The zone telephone network is part of the national automatically switched telephone
network and is a system of intrazonal and local telephone networks located within
the numbering zone. The intrazonal telephone network is a system of zone telephone
centers and channel groups connecting them to each other and to the local telephone
networks located within the ANTS numbering zone.

All of the AHTS located within the territories of the zonal networks will in the
future he terminal offices of the long-distance telephone network. For tandem
connections on the network. automatic switching centers are created which are not
used for terminal connections. Thus. the longedistance telephone network is de—
signed for service between the ANTS of different zones and includes the system of
AHTS, UAK and channel groups connecting individual ANTS to each other, ANTS to the
AUK and the UAR to each other.

in order to insure high quality of the speaking channel, the national automatically
switched telephone network must beconstructed in such a way that calls between

two subscribers located at any points in this network will pass through no more
than ten tandem switching stations as illustrated in Figure 1.1. This requirement
imposes defined restrictions on the structure of both the long-distance and local
networks. As is obvious from the diagram in Figure 1.1, on the long-distance net-
work a call can pass through no more than four UAK, and a local rural network
must have only a two-link structure (terminal station 08 - junction center US and
central office TaS) or single—link structure (08 —~ Tss) if a zone telephone center

is organized in the zone network.

Let us consider the structural principles of the long-distance, intrazonal and
local networks in more detail.

1.3, Structure of the Automated LongeDiatance Telephone Network

The high cost of the automated longedistance telephone network facilities requires
that the design of these facilities be based on principles permitting achievement
of their highest use with high service quality with minimum possible expenditures.

The structural diagram of the long-distance telephone network is selected beginning

with the statistical properties of the telephone traffic, and the power of the
communication channel groups is calculated as a function of the call demand. The

FIHICHHHCIAI.USE2(HVLV
FOR OFl-‘ICML USE ONLY

(one. (dim éi’f‘“
(b) m :9 ”mam: c' W (b)

wigs—aw WHth- ‘Eﬂ-ﬂﬁﬁ—“aﬂ-‘ﬁ‘l—Wﬂwqﬁﬂﬁ- '1
sassymﬁqr‘nr 4:10;}: Maw-.1 14,-; .1 f: .. x x
1127?:

h MW (1‘) a)”: u; .4:
£913.»??an 1.7: if s

Figure 1.1. Diagram of long-distance automatic

telephone subscriber service with a maxinum number
of switching sections.

Key: a. zone g.(rura1 network) 1. US r. UAK-...
b. local h. (city network) In. RATS 3. INS
c. intrazonal 1. (zone network n. TsS
d. networks with 21w o. 613
e. long—distance j. 05 p. ZTU
f. Ab - subscriber it. PS q. ANTS

statistical structure of the traffic is such that high use of the lines is inversely
proportional to high service quality, that is, the higher the line load in a group,
the greater the losses of calls as a result of a shortage of available lines.

In order to obtain a well-used network and insure high service quality at the same
time it turned out to he expedient to construct networks with organization of di-
rect and bypass or alternative routings. The direct high-use channel groups are orga-
nized between the AMTS which have sufficient uniform gravitation, that is, the

total incoming and outgoing traffic on the channel groups is no less than 8-10
Erlanga. In the general case these channel groups service from 70 to 901 of all
traffic. The "excess" traffic not serviced by the direct groups (10-602) is routed
to the called office over alternative paths through the automatically switched tan-

dem centers. As a rule, it is uneconomical to organize direct channel groups be-
tween ANTS with small uniform gravitation, that is, with a total load of less than
8 Erlangs, and calls between such ANTS are set up only through the UAK.

Two classes of tandem centers are organized: UAK-I and UAK—II. The main centers
are UAK—I which are connected to each other by the "each to each" principle by
channel groups of sufficient capacity (no less than 36-48 channels) on each routing.
Each UAK-I is connected to several OAK-II, and the latter, to the ANTS.

Figure 1.2 illustrates the structural principle of an automatic long distance net-
work with direct and bypass paths. The shortest (direct) path A]? is the basic

path when setting up calls between two ANTS (A and F). All the remaining
paths AEP. ABEP, ABDEP, ABCDBP -- are bypass routings to which the excess traffic

not serviced by the direct path goes. In addition to the basic path up to lo alter-
nate paths are provided. The longest alternative is the last-choice path (ARCDEF),
because it is the last choice if the basic path and all the shorter bypass routings
(with a smaller number of tandem connections) are busy. Calls can be set

up through no more than two centers of one class on the alternative trunking.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.2. Structural principle of the longw
distance telephone network.

Key: a. UAK-... b. AXIS

All the channel groups, except the lastcchoice path, can be calculated for large
losses (P - 0.1 to 0.3) in order to insure high use of these channels. However,
this is not felt in the quality of servicing the subscribers because all of the

calls not set up over the high-use paths will be set up on the last
choice paths which are designed for small losses (P - 0.01). Consequently, with
this structure of the network,high carrying capacity (as a result of the high-use
paths) and high service quality (as a result of the last-choice paths) are insured.

From Figure 1.2 it is obvious that on the long-distance network a call is
Set up through no more than four centers, that is, it goes through no more
than five switching sections. This solution arises from the general requirement

that in the entire switched network of the country a call not consist of more
than 11 switching sections (see Figure 1.1).

During the initial period of creating the national automatically switched telephone
network, the UAKhave still not been built, their functions are left to the ANTS

which will be the terminal-tandem offices.
1.6. Structure of Intrazonal Telephone Networks

Local (city and rural) telephone networks and automatic long-distance telephone
offices servicing all subscribers of the zone with intrazone, long-distance and
also international service are located within the territory of a seven-digit number-
ing zone. The sizes of the zone territories are selected calculating that the
long—distance subscriber numbering will remain unchanged for a sufficiently long
time in the future -v on the order of 50 years. Thus, the total capacity of the
local telephone networks within the territory of a zone should not exceed the
possibilities of the sevenpdigit numbering by the end of the given period.
Beginning with this fact. the maximum prospective capacity of the local zone net-
works is 8 million numbers (two million out of 10 possibilities are dropped from
this capacity as a result of the fact that the first two digits, namely 8 and 0.

of the local number are taken as prefixes to enter the long distance network and
for special services).

Hhen.déflning the zone boundaries, an effort to decrease expenditures required

to organize the zone network was also considered. In this respect it is economi-
cally expedient that a significant part of the traffic in the network be com-

9

FOR¢MHHKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFKHAI.USE(NNLY

pletcdwithin the zone boundaries. Accordingly, in the majority of cases the zone
boundaries match with the administrative oblast, kray and republic (without oblast
division) boundaries where the predominate part of the traffic is communications
between administrative center and the rayon organizations subordinate to it. In
some oblasts, krays and republics, beginning with the prospective telephone
capacity and also considering geographic and other features of the territory, two
zones are organized in each (in individual cases, three).

One or several ANTS are established within the territory of each zone. The first
ANTS is located in the administrative center. The expediency of the presence of
several ANTS in the zone each servicing its own group of local networks is deter-
mined on the basis of feusibility studies of versions of the struct-
ure of the zone network with one or several ANTS. The points at which the ANTS are
located (except one in the administrative center) can be cities having significant
uniform gravitation to other zones.

In the presence of large cities or rayon centers within the territory of a zone
which are independent centers of uniform gravitation of a group of rayons, zone
telephone centers (ZTU) can be organized at these points. The given centers con-

nect the local networks of the zone gravitating to each other and provide for con—
nection of them to the ANTS. The organization of zone telephone centers is econo-

mically expedient only if a significant portion of the traffic (no less than 501) is
completedvdxhin agiven group, which insures significant reduction of the number of
lines directed toward the ANTS. Long—distance service is provided through the zone
centers and ANTS of the zone. The local telephone networks of the rural type in-
cluded in the zone center must have single-stage structure of the OS-TsS type,

which is necessary to satisfy the norm with respect to number of switching sections
in a channel of the long-distance telephone subscriber service. Potentially, each
zone center can be converted to a zone ANTS by connecting long-distance channels

to it and expanding its capacity to the required degree.

The lines (channels) of the intrazone network from local networks to the ANTS are
called recording trunks (ZSL), and in the opposite direction, long—distance trunks
(SLN). Each local rural telephone network is connected by these trunks through the
T55 to the nearest (base) ANTS or ZTU. All forms of service are provided

over the ZSL and SLN: intrazonal, long—distance and also communications with ANTS
services. The structural principle of an automatically switched network within the
territory of a zone is illustrated in Figure 1.3 when there is one ANTS and one

ZTU in the zone.

In the presence of several ANTS in a zone, communications between them are realized
by the "each—to-each" principle. Each TsS (or ZTU) is connected to its base ANTS,
and in the presence of uniform gravitations, to other ANTS and ZTU of the zone.

From the point of view of constructing the long-distance network, all the ANTS
located within a zone are equivalent and are joined to other ANTS in accordance with
the structural principles of the long-distance telephone network. Here it is con—
sidered that only one ANTS of the zone participates in an outgoing long-distance
call The structural principle of the automatically switched telephone net—
work within a zone is illustrated in Figure 1.4 where there are several ANTS in the
zone 0

10

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.3. Structural principle of a zone network
with one ANTS and one ZTUt long-distance net-
work channels; the same. intrazonel telephone
network; .—.. GTS boundary; -'—'- the same. intrazonal
network; -........ the same, zonal network.

 

 

 

Key: a. direct channels to the ANTS of other zones
b. to the UAR

c. uvsu h. MS
a. RATS 1. 281.
e. sm 3. m:
r. UISH k. as
3. 01‘s 1. 0s

 

Figure 1.1.. Structural principle of a zone network
with several ms.

Key: a. to the UAK d. to the ANTS of other
b . AMTS zones
c. TsS

The central offices of local rural telephone networks are located. as a rule,

in the rayon centers where the long—distance offices providing the subscribers of
the rayon with long—distance telephone service are located. The transition to the

11

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

automatic (zone) service means that AIS subscribers in the rayon will be able to

be connected over the ZSL and SLH directly through the ATS T39 and the ANTS, by-
passing the rayon center HTS by dialing the longwdistance number. Accordingly, as
the automatic (zone) communications develop, the functions and, consequently, the
volume of indicated “TS will be reduced to a minimum required for servicing only
the types of calls which cannot be set up automatically.

During the initial period of development of zone telephone networks, the local net-
work automation level will be different in different rayons of one zone. 0n the
fully automated local networks the ATS subscribers are able to have outgoing and
incoming service (long-distance and intrazonal) automatically via TsS and ANTS

over the ZSL and the SLH. 0n partially automated local networks where in addition
to the ATS, there are still manual telephone offices RTS, the ATS subscribers
obtain service automatically, and the RTS subscribers enter the long—distance net-
work by the outgoing semi-automatic service channels through the HTS equipment of
the rayon center. The subscribers of unautomated rural networks receive long—
distance service over the semiautomatic and manual service channels via the switch-
ing equipment of the rayon center HTS.

Automatic outgoing intrazonal and long—distance service are realized via the ICT
subscriber patch cord of the local telephone offices over the ZSL, obtaining a
dial tone after dialing the prefix to enter the ANTS. For incoming service, the
long-distance patch instruments of the local ATS and SLH are used.

For intrazonal, long-distance and international automatic service, the number and
category of the calling subscriber a:e determined automatically. The local networks
must be equipped with equipment for automatic determination of the number and
category of the calling subscriber AON. The organization of automatic service

by the method where the subscriber placing the call dials his own number is per-
mitted temporarily. 0n rural networks only a single method of determining the
number of the calling subscriber should be used both for the T55 subscribers and
for the OS and US subscribers of the given rural network.

Considering that the transition to automatic service in the zone is taking place
gradually, provision is made for the possibility of organizing entry to the ANTS by
the telephone operators of the rayon center HTS both over the common ZSL group with
the subscribers and over a separate long-distance channel group.

Provision is made for links between operators between all the ANTS and UAK of the
long-distance network and also between the ANTS and ZTU of the zone. For this pur—
pose, order—circuit ATS have been installed at all the ANTS, UAR and ZTU. The
connection between the order-circuit ATS entering into the AHTS of different zones
will be realized over ordinary long—distance channels without allocation of special
lines. The subscribers of the order-circuit ATS are the maintenance and engineer~

ins—technical personnel. No provision is made for communications between the public
network subscribers and the order-circuit ATS subscribers.

1.5. Structure of City and Rural Telephone Networks

City telephone networks, depending on their capacity, are divided into the follow»
ing types:

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

l. Nonregionalized telephone networks. These include networks having only one
ATS. The rated capacity of such networks does not exceed 8000 numbers; the sub-
scriber numbering is four-digit.

2. Regionalized telephone networks without junction formation. On these networks
there are several rayon ATS. the total rated capacity of which does not exceed
80.000 numbers. Calls are set up between these ATS by the "each-to-each"
principle. The subscriber numbering is five-digit.

3. The regionalized telephone networks with incoming traffic junctions. These

networks consist of several hundred—thousand junction districts, with a rated ca-
pacity of no more than 80,000 numbers each. The connections between offices
within the junction district are nade by the "eachwto-each“ principle or through a
center, and connections with offi;es of other junction districts, through the in-
coming service centers UVS. The total rated capacity of the network does not
exceed 800,000 numbers. Subscriber numbering is six-digit.

4. The regionalized telephone networks with incoming and outgoing service centers
are being built on the basis of loo—thousand junction districts which are combined
into million groups. The connections between the offices of the different junction
districts of the network are made via the outgoing service center UIS. selecting
the million group, and via the incoming service center, selecting the corresponding
hundred-thousand subscriber group. The total rated capacity of the network does
not exceed 8 million numbers. The subscriber numbering is seven-digit.

For outgoing long-distance service, each rayon ATS of the city telephone network is
connected to AMTS via the ZSL. Depending on the total capacity of the city network
and the territorial location of the rayon ATS, the ZSL can be routed to the ANTS
either by a direct group or via a long-distance outgoing service center UISH. In
the case of direct service, network centers (UZSL) with or without mixing selectors
[hunting switches] can be organized. The choice of the version of organizing the
ZSL is substantiated by engineering economic calculations when designing the net-
works. The incoming long-distance service to city network subscribers is provided
over the SLM via the incoming long distance service centers UVSH.

The primary method of coupling the ATS to the AHTS over the ZSL is coupling without
intermediate senders. The latter are used only for coupling to the ANTS—2 and
ANTS—3 offices.

The telephone networks of nearby suburbs are part of the city networks. The re-
mote suburb networks are also being gradually included in the city telephone net—
works by the principle of rayon or agency networks. For service to remote suburbs
included in the city telephone network, a rural-suburban outgoing and incoming
service center has been organized in the network.

On rural telephone networks (STS) either the radial structure is used by which the
rural terminal telephone offices (OS) are coupled directly to the rayon center
telephone office (Tss) or radial—junction structure by which the OS are coupled to
the junction centers which.in turn, are connected to the Tas of the rayon cen-
ter. The central office of the STS located, as a rule, in the rayon center, is
simultaneously a city telephone office of the rayon center. Depending on the

structure of the STS, the Tss equipment includes trunks from the US or from the
OS.

13

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬁﬂCJAl.UGEZCHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The junction centers US are located in the populated areas of the rural district
which are centers of uniform gravitation of the nearby offices. The US equipment

includes trunks from several 08 joined by this center, and a common SL group to
the T35.

The terminal offices 05 are located in all of the rest of the populated areas in

the rural district. The trunks from the 08, depending on the structure of the
STS network are routed either to the US or to the TsS.

The necessity for organizing junction centers in the STS is substantiated by

feasibility studies when designing the STS. In the STS which are included
in the zone telephone junctions, the structure of the STS can only be single-step
(OS-Tss).

The interoffice trunks of the STS are common to . local and long-distance service.
Both outgoing and incoming long-distance calls are made over these lines. All of
the long-distance calls of STS subscribers are made via the Tss independently
of the method of setting UP the long-distance call (automatic, semiautoma-
tic or manual). In the case of automatic long-distance and intrazonal service.

the corresponding matching systems for connection to the ANTS are installed at the

rayon center Tss. The type of system is determined by the type of line and the
signaling system.

1.6. Communications with Departmental Telephone Offices and Mobile Units

Departmental telephone offices located within cities and rayons are connected to
the local telephone networks by the agency‘s telephone service system. The sub-
scribers of the departmental telephone offices having the authority to enter the
public network, are granted long-distance and intrazonal telephone service just as
ordinary local network subscribers under the condition of installing AON equipment
at these departmental offices. If necessary, some number of departmental office

subscribers can be given priority, that is, priority service on the long-distance

and zonal networks in the case of overloads or other unfavorable situations on the
network.

Departmental telephone networks can be connected to the ANTS with zone privileges
and assignment of the long-distance code ABC or with hundred-thousand center
privileges and assignment' of the intrazone code ab. Calls are set up over

the long-distance channels or over the ZSL and SLM.

Communications with mobile units -- passengers on trains, river and ocean-going
vessels, interurban buses, aircraft. motor vehicles and various moving machinery

used in the national economy - is organized by various radio telephone and switching
equipment Radio telephone service between mobile units and also between mobile

units and public network subscribers is provided using the ABS subscriber radios
and central radios TsRS with switching and radio equipment systems. For individual
mobile service systems, mobile service switching centers UKPS are organized through
which the zonal and long-distance networks are accessed.

1.7. Long—Distance Numbering

In accordance with the numbering rules adopted in the tSSR, the entire country
is divided into seven-digit numbering zones. when setting up calls within

14

FOR OFTNCJAI.USE1NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a zone the subscriber must dial a seven—digit number of the abxxxxx type. In this
number the first two digits (ab) are the intrazonal code which is assigned to the
rural network of the rayon or city network with less than 100,000 subscribers or the
lOO—thousandrayon of larger city telephone networks. The remaining five digits are
the local number of the rural or city network or the loo-thousand rayon of the city
network. Only eight digits out of the possible ten can be used as the first digit
of the seven-digit number (a): "0” and "8" cannot be used for subscriber numbers
because the special services numbers (01. 02, 03. and so on) begin with "0," and

"8" has been selected as the prefix for connection to the'AMTS. Consequently. the
number of subscribers in the zone cannot exceed 8 million numbers.

For long—distance service each zone is assigned a three-digit long-distance area
code of the ABC type. The long-distance number of a subscriber will therefore con—
tain ten numbers: ABCabxxxxx, and considering the prefix for connection to the AHWS
J8," it contains 11 digits. For service within the zone instead of the ABC code,
the prefix ”2" is used. Thus, when setting UP a call to a subscriber in
another zone. the subscriber must dial a number of the type BABCabxxxxx, and for
service with a subscriber in his own zone, a number of the type 82abxxxxx. In this
case, after dialing the prefix "8." the subscriber will hear a buzzing dial tone.

Hhen calling the subscribers of a city telephone network (GTS) of an oblast center
where there are no ANTS, it is temporarily permissible to supplement the local
subscriber number with zeros to make it a seven-digit number. For example, when
calling the subscriber with a five-digit number, the number ABCOOxxxxx is dialed.

The subscriber is connected to the long—distance service telephone operators of the
AMTS in the case of manual and semiautomatic service after dialing the following

digits: 811...818, where ll...18 are the two-digit codes for long distance ser-
vices.

Subscribers of mobile units connected directly to the AMTS are called by dialing
the following numbers: in the case of long-distance service 8A8Cabxxxxx, and in
the case of intrazonal service, 82abxxxxx where the special code “90" is allocated
as the ab. This code denotes access to the mobile service networks.

In the case ofservice traffic between the ANTS and UAK, the subscribers of the
order—circuit ATS dial a number of the type 8ABC0x1xxx where ABC is the [area] code
of the zone within which the called order-circuit ATS is located; x is the order-
circuit ATS code; xxx is the number of the order-circuit ATS subscriber. For

communications with order-circuit ATS subscribers inside the zone, a "1" is
dialed instead of ABC.

In order to obtain automatic international service, the subscriber must dial "810"
and the international subscriber number of the called country. The subscribers are
connected to the service telephone operators of an international office with manual
or semiautomatic service after dialing 819x, where 19 is the prefix accessing the
international service, and x is the prefix accessing a defined language group or
other services. The ABC codes have been assigned to all international offices for
accessing the international offices of a country over the long-distance channels

of the national network.

Special three-digit ABC codes -- 461-444, 440 v- have been allocated for connection u
various types of monitoring and testing devices included in the AHTS and UAK.

15

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USE()NLN

The unified numbering system developed for the entire country imposes defined
requirements on the local telephone network numbering system. Closed numbering of
public telephones must be used in the GTS. The number of digits of the subscriber
numbers will in this case depend on the network capacity, that is, the number of
telephones included in the given network. The GTS capacity is determined by the
number of PBX ATS subscribers (having the privilege of connecrion to the

GTS) and the suburban ATS. The city telephone networks must have large reserves
of numbering capacity because of unavoidable losses in the numbering. The use co-
efficient of the number capacity will be approximately 60 to 701.

In individual cases the number of the city network is selected not only beginning
with the network capacity. but also considering the specific conditions connected
with the network configuration. In such cases the choice of the number of digits
in the number is substantiated by engineering-economic calculations.

In the CTS, each rayon ATS joins a lO-thousand group of subscribers. The subscriber
number is formed from the intrsoffice four-digit number and the rayon ATS code.

The local subscriber number is part of the seven-digit zone number abxxxxx. In the
case of seven-digit local numbering, the local and zone numbers coincide, and the
rayon ATS code will in this case consist of three digits abx. According to the
long-distance numbering plan, each GTS is allocated as many intrazonal codes ab as
full or incomplete loo-thousand groups in the GTS considering its 50-year develop—
ment.

In cities with regionalized telephone network which are simultaneously rayon centers
of rural rayons, rural-suburban GTS centers are organized which also perform the
functions of the rural network Tss. The numbering of the rural subscribers is
included in the GTS numbering. For access to the ANTS. the rural network subscriber
dials the TsS access prefix; then after receiving the dial tone he dials an "8" for
access to the AHTS.

0n the rural telephone networks the numbering must be constructed in such a way that
any connections from the rural rayon Tss to the subscribers of other offices of
their rayon are realized on the basis of information about five digits of the
interoffice number of the called subscriber. This is needed to match the rural
numbering with the zone and long-distance numbering. Any rural network subscriber
must be given the possibility of connection to the special services of the rayon
center and accessing the ANTS over the ZSL. The closed fiveedigit numbering can

be used on networks equipped with ATS K-lOO/ZOOO type rural offices having five-
digit subscriber senders 0n the remaining rural networks open numbering can be
used in which the intraoffice number depends on the capacity of the ATS and can
contain from two to fiVe digits. Interoffice service is realized in this case by
dialing five-digit numbers which are formed by adding the ATS code to the intra-
office number. In all cases the T88 subscribers call any network subscriber by
dialing a five-digit number. The ANTS are accessed by dialing the prefix "8."

Each rural network is assigned an intrazonal code ab which, together with the five-
digit number of the rural network subscriber fo:ms s seven-digit zone number.

To implement the numbering system, a long-distance numbering plan for zone
networks within the territory of the USSR has been adopted. The plan defines the

values of the ABC codes for all zones. The distribution of the ABC codes is made
considering the network development over a 50-year period. Inasmuch as changes in

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

administrative division, telephone gravitation distribution, network capacity. and
so on can occur over this period, sufficient reserves have been left in the ABC
code numbering. Hithin the territory of certain administrative units (oblasts,
krays and republics)where the proposed network capacity will exceed the possibilities
of one zone (or there are other specific conditions). the plan calls for creation

of a second zone in the future, and in individual cases, a third zone. for which

the corresponding ABC codes are reserved.

The long-distance numbering plan is presented in appendix 1.
1.8. Communication with International Offices

The entire territory of the world has been divided into several switching zones -
”telephone continents." At the load center of a "telephone continent," an ST—l
type international telephone office has been installed which is a first category
office and must be provided with all forms of international intercontinental ser-
vice. The range of this international office is the ST-l switching zone.

In the switching zone, in addition to the first category offices there are second
(ST-2) and third (ST-3) category international offices. In contrast to the ST-l.
the ST—Z and ST-3 offices can not have intercontinental types of communications.
The range of the ST-Z can be limited to the territory of one country. in countries
with a very large territory there can be several ST—2 zones. and sometimes the

ST-Z zone joins several countries. As a rule, the range of the ST-J is limited to
the territory of one country.

The ST-l international offices are joined to each other by the “each—to-each"
principle. For coupling the ST—l to the ST—2 and also the ST-Z to all the ST—3 of
its switching zone, the number of channels must insure high service quality, that
is, be designed for low loss level. The number of channels for coupling the ST-l
to the ST-Z of another switching zone must be designed for high use of them.

The boundaries of the switching zones on putting the new international telephone

offices ST-l, ST—2 and ST-3 into operation can vary depending on the nature of the
international exchange traffic distribution.

The International Telephone and Telegraph Consultative Committee (HKKTT) has de—
veloped a world numbering system for a global automatically switched telephone

network. This system takes into account the characteristic features of the long-
discance telephone networks of the various countries and, at the same time. corre-

sponds to the general structural principles of the world network. In order to
assign the various countries an international code, the territory of the world has

been divided into numbering zones. Each of these zones is assigned a single—digit

code: "1" -— North and Central America (without Cuba); "2" -- Africa; "3" and "4"
-- Europe; "5" -- bouth America and Cuba; "6" —- Asia Minor. Australia, Oceania;
"7" -- the USSR; "8" - Central Asia and the Far East; "9“ -- India and the Near
East.

In each of the indicated zones the countries are assigned one, two and three-digit
codes. the first digit of which is a single-digit zone [area] code. Here the num-
ber of digits in the international number must not exceed 11 (in the future. 12).
In accordance with this principle the countries or regions with ten-digit

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

long—distance subscriber number are assigned singlerdisit codes (the USSR —- “7“;
USA, Canada, Mexico -— “1“), the countries with ninevdigit number are assigned two-
digit codes (for example, the majority of countries in Europe), and the countries
with eight-digit numbers, threeuiigit codes.

For outgoing automatic international service the subscriber must dial the ANTS
access prefix "8" and, receiving a dial tone from the ANTS equipment, the prefix
for accessing the automatic international network "10," and then the complete in-
ternational number of the called subscriber. when calling subscribers on the long-
distance network of the USSR. the subscribers of other countries must dial a number
of the type 7ABCabxxxxx.

One ST-l international telephone office, whichis the centerofthe telephone conti-
nent of Eastern Europe. is installed in Moscow. In addition. in the future the
installation of several ST—Z international offices is possible within the national
network of the USSR.

The ST—l international office will be connected by direct paths to all of the TS-l

offices of other telephone continents and all the ST-Z offices of our country and
other countries entering into the telephone continent of Eastern Europe. The ST-Z

offices will be connected with the international ST—l of other telephone continents
and with the ST—Z offices of their own and other telephone continents, to which

there is sufficiently great uniform gravitation. The installation of international
offices ST-3 within the territory of the USSR is not planned.

The territory of the Soviet Union is divided into operating zones of the interna-
tional office. In each such zone an international office ST—l or ST-2 is installed
which is the base office for accessing the international network. In order to in-
sure the required service quality, the number of switchable sections in the inter-
national connection channel to the base international office must not exceed six.
It is proposed that the outgoing ANTS be coupled to the base international office
over direct paths or via automatic switching centers. In this case each interna-
tional office is assigned an international ABC code by the numbering plan.

Information about an international connection (the international number of the
called subscriber and the national number of the calling subscriber -- 22 digits)
will be recorded in the international register of the outgoing ANTS. For analysis
of the long distance code of an international office. the plan calls for using the
register-decoding equipment of the ANTS and UAK for connection with the base inter-
national office. The international number on the national network will be trans-
mitted to the international office without analysis after setting up the

P311 It is proposed that the rate will be set for calls at the outgoing long-
distance office.

The incoming international traffic goes through the international channel network
to the international offices ST-l and ST-Z of the USSR. For incoming automatic and
semiautomatic international service the information about the number of the called
subscriber (the national number of the USSR subscriber consists of ten digits -

ABCabxxxxx) is transmitted to the incoming international sender of the ST-l or ST-2
office. The international office sender together with the decoder, analyzing one,

two, three or five of the first digits of the national number of the called sub-
scriber determines the path over which the call will be routed through the terri—

tory of the country. If the incoming international call has reached the base
18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NQLY

international office, it is routed to the incoming ANTS over direct paths or via
automatic switching centers. If the incoming international call has not reached
the base international office. then it is routed to it over the international
channel network and then to the incoming ANTS.

Special auxiliary equipment will be installed at the AHTS for comunicating with
the international offices.

1.9. Types of Office and Center Equipment

The equipment of the offices and centers in the national automatically switched
telephone network must correspond with respect to its basic operating and technical
capabilities to the basic requirements of the system of this network. In particu-
lar, in the offices and centers of both long-distance and local networks switch-
ing of the telephone channels must be provided not only for transmission of tele-
phone calls, but also digital data, facimile and phototelegraphic service. Long—
distance telephone calls must be set up with priority for subscribers of individual
categories. If the direct service paths are busy. provision must be made for the
possibility of automatic switching of the call to bypass routings. The methods of
transmitting line and control signals and also the switching and control unit sys-
tems of the offices and centers must take into account high quality of the talk
channel and minimum call setup time.

These and other system requirements are satisfied in the equipment of the following
types: ANTS-6 and UAK of the uechanoelectronic system; ARM-20 type AHTS of the
crossbar system; AHTS KB and UAK of the quasielectronic system.

The ANTS-2 and ANTS-3 type offices of the crossbar system are also in operation on
the long-distance network. Although they do not correspond to all the requirements
of the national automatically switched network, they provide for automation of the
long-distance service in its first stages. The initial phase of organization of
automatic long-distance telephone service on individual routings is realized using
the ANTS-1M equipment of the ten-step system which will be replaced later.

All of the indicated types of ANTS and UAK (except the ANTS-1H) will operate on the
network jointly for a long time.

The development of local telephone offices in the near future will take place on
the basis of crossbar equipment -- improved ATS K0 for the city networks and the
K-lOO/ZOOO ATS for the rural networks. A significant number of ten-step ATS are
in operation. The quasielectronic ATS is a prospective system.

1.10. Methods of Transmitting Line and Control Signals

The following procedures are recommended on the long-distance telephone network
for transmitting line signals:

single-frequency on a frequency of 2600 hertz (ANTS-4 and ARH~20);
a common signaling channel 0K5 (ANTS KB);

two-frequency on frequencies of 1200 and 1600 hertz (ANTS—1M), ANTS—2, ANTS—3,
semiautomatic service equipment).

19

FOR OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following methods of transmitting line signals are used on the intrazonal net-
works:

battery (over physical three and four-wire lines);
frequency on a 2600 hertz frequency;

frequency on 3800 hertz over the allocated signal channel;
over a common signaling channel (ATS E).

The following procedures are recommended for transmitting control signals in the
long—distance and zonal networks:

multifrequency on frequencies of 700, 900. 1100, 1300, 1500 and 1700 hertz (ANTS-4,
ARM—20);

over a common signaling channel (ANTS Ke);

ten-step method (for communications with the ANTS-2 and ANTS-3 and for operation
with the ten-step ATS).

Sound signals are transmitted in the form of buzzer signals and recorded voices.

The signal systems are discussed in more detail in [a].

20

FORlDFFNJAl.USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 2. PLANNING AND DESIGN PROCEDURE. COMPOSITION AND CONTENT OF DESIGN
MATERIALS

2.1. Research

The construction of the AHTS (UAK) facilities requires significant capital invest-
ments; therefore the design of the system must be based on feasibility '
studies ‘ confirming the necessity and economic expediency of building a new
ANTS for a given city. The purpose of the feasibility studies

(TED) is also the development of technical designs insuring high quality of service
and the greatest cost benefit from building the office considering the maximum
possible use of existing facilities.

For development of the TEO, research work is done at the construction site for the
proposed ANTS. The purpose of this research is preparation of initial data re—
quired to design the AHTS. A composite group of specialists in different areas
(switching equipment, transmission systems, power supply and electric power, line.
civil construction, and so on), each of which studies and prepares material in his
area. is sent to research the proposed construction site. In particular, the
civil construction specialist studies the problem of the facilities for the future
ANTS —— the possibility of using available facilities or the necessity for building
a new building. In the latter case, the investigator solves the problem of selec—
ting the site for the building and other problems connected with it together with
the local organizations.

when selecting the building site, the primary criterion must be minimum expenditures
on constructing service lines. The best version from this point of view is a site
directly adjacent to the existing HTS building. In this case, technical solutions

using existing equipment for joint operation with the new office become the most
economical also.

The investigation with respect to the switching ' shop has the purpose of prepar-
ing initial materials for calculating the ANTS equipment for the future period and
also for solving the problems of organizing the coupling of the d¢g1gned office to
the local telephone networks and other facilities within its city and zone for the
same period. In addition, during the investigation it is necessary to study and
prepare data for determining the capacity and structure of the designed ANTS for

the period of its introduction into operation considering provision for switching
channels and conversion to the new service system without interfering with existing
service.

21

FOl.0!1ﬂ(1Al.USE‘0NlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The initial materials for calculating the office equipment or the indices character-
izing the longedistance telephone traffic of the given city. The basic statistical
data on the annual traffic on each routing the concentration factor. the

average cell length, the average number of attempts to set up one call are initially
used when calculating the long-distance traffic during development of the master

plans for development of long distance and intrazonal networks. For calculating
the ANTS equipment these data must be supplemented by analysis of the uniform gravi-

tation distribution, that is, the percentage ratio of the traffic flows from differ-
ent sources to different groups of outgoing routings.

The following traffic flows are created at the ANTS:

1) from the CATS subscribers of its city to the STS subscribers of its zone and
other zones;

2) from the STS subscribers (through the TsS) of the rayon of its zone to the sub-
scribers of other rayons of its zone, the GATs and other zones;

3) from the subscribers of other zones to the CATS subscribers, STS subscribers and
subscribers of other zones (tandem calls).

The traffic coming from each of these three source groups is provisionally taken as

100%. On the basis of analyzing statistical data, the proportion of the traffic
falling in each group of outgoing routings is discovered.

In order to develop design solutions with respect to organizing the startup system
of the designed ANTS, the investigation materials must include a list of all rout—
ings of the long-line (long-distance) and intraoblast (intrazonal) service included
in the existing HTS, with indication of the number of channels on each routing and
the method of servicing them and also indication of the amount of immediate develop—
ment for the period before starting up the ANTS. Data on the composition and state
of existing equipment, the system for organizing communications with local telephone
offices and other facilities are needed for the same purpose.

All the documents included in the survey materials are compiled by defined united
forms, and they are checked by responsible workers of the investigated long-distance
office. The detailed composition of the materials, the forms for the documents and
instructions for filling them out are contained in the effective instructions for
performing the investigations and surveys developed by the "61prosvyaz'" Institute.

The survey materials are put together in a separate volume which is stored in the
design organization archive.

2.2. Feasibility Studies

After studying the survey materials and the calculated data of the master plans for
development of the long-distance and intrazonal networks defining the prospective
and installed capacity of the AHTS, the possible versions are investigated with

respect to types of construction: expansion of the office in the existing build-
ing, construction of an annex to the existing building or construction of a new
building for the ANTS. In order to select the optimal version, a comparative
analysis is made of the technical solutions with respect to these versions con-
sidering the prospects for development and also a comparison is made between their

22

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indices. By the comparison results the optimal version is selected and substan-
tiated which insures the best quality of technical solutions and the most effective
economic indices.

With respect to the switching shop, the type of equipment for the designed ANTS is
selected and substantiated on the basis of data on the installed and prospective
capacities of the ANTS. In order to make feasibility comparison of the versions,
preliminary consolidated calculations of the office equipment for installed and
prospective capacity are performed, the list and sizes of the engineering and
production facilities of the switching shop are determined. In order to determine
the total capacity and sizes of the areas for electric power plants, s preliminary
calculation of the current intake to power the office equipment is made.

In the TED [feasibility study] stage, a study is also made of the expediency and
possible versions of using the equipment of the existing HTS either for joint
operation with the new ANTS or for inclusion of the existing equipment (completely
or partially) in the new ANTS. Simultaneously the possible versions of organizing
communications with local telephone networks and other facilities are considered.
As a result of the feasibility comparison of the investigated versions, the optimal
structure of the designed ANTS is selected.

After approval of the TED materials and conclusions by the USSR Ministry of Communi—
cations, they become the initial documents for developing the ANTS design. The
design process can take place either in one phase (contract-detail design) or in

two phases (contract design and detail drawings), depending on the size and complex-
ity of the facility. The staging of the design development is established by the
design assignment.

2.3. Composition and Content of the Design

The purpose of thedesignis a concise discussion and substantiation of the techni-
cal solutions with respect to creating the AHTS (OAK) facilities, definition of
the composition and the quantity of all types of equipment and materials for
ordering from industry, determination of the cost of the facilities and their cost
benefit, development of different diagrams, tables, drawings and other materials
required to perform the construction and installation operations.

The explanatory note to the design includes the following:

the decisions made are briefly formulated with regard to selection of the type of
arms. its prospective capacity, for which the size of the building and installed
capacity are calculated (with a table of the number of channels and traffic on the
routings of the long-distance and intrazonal networks appended), with respect to
the structure of the office, organization of its communications with local city and
rural telephone networks and other facilities (with a structural diagram of the
office and service organizational schematics appended), and with respect to method
of using the equipment of the existing HTS;

results are presented from the complete and precise calculations of the office

equipment (the calculation itself can be not appended to the design but stored in
the design organization archive);

23

FOR(MHHCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

brief explanations are presented on the peculiarities of the arrangement of the
equipment considering prospects for the development of the office (with equipment
placement plans appended);

solutions are formulated with respect to organizing the construction of the startup
system providing for putting the new ANTS into operation without interfering with
existing service (with the switching- diagrams and plans appended);

results are presented from a precise calculation of the current consumption to run

the equipment (on each routing) required to design the electric power plant and
also for calculating the current distribution network of the office;

recommendations are made with respect to organizing the technical maintenance, and
results are presented for calculating the number of technical personnel.

In order to determine the office cable consumption required to install the office
equipment, cable connection tables are compiled on the basis of equipment functional
and wiring diagrams. These tables indicate the laid sections of cables, their
lengths and the locations where the ends are connected. Simultaneously with the
cable tables, circuit diagrams are developed for the cables to equipment of all
types. The arrangment of the cables included in the intermediate distributing
frames IDF, is depicted on the front view drawings of these panels.

A detailed list of design materials and the procedure for filling them out are
regulated by the effective standards developed by the "Ciprosvyaz'" Institute.

When compiling the design materials it is necessary to consider the following fact.
The process of intensive development of switching equipment occuring at the present
time is accompanied by a significant number of new concepts and terms. In order to
avoid different interpretations of the same concepts, special all-union state
standards have been developed for terms and definitions [1, 2]. The technical
terms used when compiling the text and graphic materials of the design must corre-
spond strictly to these all-union state standards. In naming the diagrams it is
necessary to adhere to the classification indicated in All-Union State Standard
2.701-68. In this document it is recommended, for example, that the term "struc-
tural diagram" be used in place of the previously used "block diagram.“

Another reconnended term "func:ional diagram" corresponds to the type of diagram on
which defined processes occurring in individual functional circuits are illustrated
(for example, the relay response circuit connecting two devices together). The

term "general diagram" is used for a simplified representation of the component
parts of the system joined together at the operating location.

2.4. Lists and Estimates

A necessary part of a design is the documents for ordering equipment and the esti-

mates defining the coat of acquiring and installing this equipment. The indicated
documents are filled out in two forms:

the order specifications designed for placing orders for equipment, the manufacture
of which will take a long time;

lists compiled by the consolidated nomenclature for the remaining equipment, includ-
ing general office, imported and nonstandardized devices, fittings, cable and other
products in mass and series production.

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The order specifications and lists are compiled on the basis of calculating the
equipment and cables, and they contain a complete. detailed list of all elements
of the equipment and cables required to put together and install the office. In
these lists and specifications the complete nomenclature of products, the manu-

facturer, the plant or catalog number of the product, the number of units, and so
on are indicated.

The cost of equipment and installation Operations are determined using estimates
compiled on the basis of official documents effective at the time of designing the
office: price lists, special orders of the USSR Communications Ministry, and so
on. The equipment estimate includes all of the equipment elements listed in the
order specifications and lists. and the installation estimate, a complete list of
the installation operations. operations of adjustment and breakin of installed
equipment and also for service switching . and introduction of the office as

a whole into operation. when compiling the equipment estimates, mark—ups are
added for packaging, transport expenses, procurement and warehousing expenses and

so on. When compiling the installation estimates, the corresponding mark-ups are
considered.

The order specifications. lists and estimates are compiledtﬂi defined standard forms
which are presented in the standards for ANTS design.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 3. DESIGN PRINCIPLES OF ANTS AND UAK CHANNELS AND EQUIPMENT

3.1. General Remarks

Teletraffic theory which forms the basis for calculating the number of channels
and switching equipment has been discussed quite completely in numerous published
sources [5. 6, 7, 8]. In this chapter only a brief discussion is presented of the
engineering methods of calculating the number of channels for the long-distance
and intrazonal networks, the service quality characteristics and the general prin-
ciples of calculating the volume of ANTS and UAK equipment.

3.2. Procedure for Calculating the Number of Long-Distance Telephone Network
Channels

The calculation of the number of longedistance telephone network channels is based
on predicting the load for the investigated future. Hhen predicting the load, the
influence of various factors such as the development of the national economy.
population growth, increased telephone density (number-oftelephones per 100 resi-
dents) and the development and improvement of the long—distance telephone service
means on the growth of long-distance traffic is taken into account.

The number of channels on a routing is determined as a function of the traffic on
this routing, the quality norms, service discipline and a number of other factors.
The load on a group of channels on a routing depends. in turn, on the expected
number of long—distance calls on the given routing realized during the peak load
hour (PLH) and the average time the channel is busy for one call.

In order to calculate the number of long—distance calls during the PLH, the annual

long—distance telephone traffic is first determined. that is, the expected number
of long distance calls for the last year of the designed period Qprospective' The

existing long-distance traffic on the given routing (by statistical data for the
last preceding year) Qexist is taken as the initial value for the calculation.

For consideration of all factors influencing the prospective increase in traffic

compared to the existing traffic. the corresponding coefficients are introduced:
knc -— the development of the national economy (growth of national income); kpop
-- the increase in population; ktd -- the increase in telephone density; kqual -
the improvement of long-distance service quality (conversion to a high speed or
direct service system).

26

, l-‘Oll OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The values of the coefficients khc and kpop are determined by the materials from
local planning agencies obtained during the surveys and the coefficient kt , by
the effective telephone density norms for the investigated future. The coefficient

kqual is taken as 1.5 on conversion from the delay-basis to the no-delay service

system, and on conversion from the delay-basis system to high-speed service the
coefficient is l.5°l.5 - 2.25.

Thus, the amount of prospective annual long-distance traffic is determined from the

expression Q I Q calls/year.

prospective existknckpopktquual

In order to find the amount of traffic in the PLH, the annual traffic is recalcun
lated to the average diurnal traffic. Here nonuniform traffic distribution by
seasons of the year is taken into account, for which Qprospective is divided not by

365 days but provisionally by 300 days. Then the average diurnal traffic is recal-
culated by the concentration factor kP to get the PLH traffic. The value of the
concentration factor is determined by statistical materials in the survey process.
In the majority of cases kPLH - 0.1.

When determining the average time the long-distance channel is busy for one call
TP. it is necessary to consider the presence of repeated calls. for they increase

the load on the network. The appearance of repeated calls is explained by the fact
that in any phase of setting up a call (Arsout-AMTsout-UAK-Aﬂrsin'ATsin) it can be

lost either as a result of the absence of free connecting paths in the initial and
intermediate links of the system or as a result of the called subscriber's being
busy or not answering in the last link. The lost call in the majority of cases
will lead to repeated calls which increases the total time the long-distance channel
is busy to complete one call.

The influence of repeated calls depends to a significant degree on the size of the
losses assumed in the calculation. Considering that the number of channel- ;" the
last choice path must provide for (by the standards) a loss probability of no more
than 0.01. the influence of repeated calls will be correspondingly small in the
first links of the long-distance call channel. However, in the last phase --
the ATS on the incoming end where the call losses as a result of the called sub—
scriber's being busy or not answering or for any other reason cannot be regulated
and are purely random - the number of repeated calls can turn out to be signifi—

cant. The time spent on each repeated call is equal to the time of setting up a
call on the corresponding network links.

Thus. when determining the total busy time of the long—distance channel for one call
it is necessary, in addition to the duration of the call itself, to consider the
total time spent on all repeated calls preceding the completed call.

If we designate the average talk time of a call T9, the call setup time T and

the average number of calls (attempts) for one comple ed call ﬂ. theaveragebusy

time of the long distance channelper call Tp - TH + To.

As the statistical data of long-range observations indicate, the averagetnlk
time of a longwdistance call with automatic hOOk'UP will be T - 6 minutes, and

the number of attempts per call completed will be on the averageoﬂ - 2.5. The
27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1NC1A1.USWE(NQLY

call setup time which is insured by the automatic switching systems used on the
long distance network is on the average equal to T - 0.5 minute. Beginning with
this fact, the average busy time of the longvdistance channel per call with auto-
matic connection is defined as: TD 3 I 4.0 + 0.5~2.S - 5.25 minutes.

The load during the FL“ is calculated by the formula, Erlsngs:

YPLH - QprospectivekPLHFp/soo'6°)‘ (3'1)

The number of long—distance channels, depending on the load, is determined consi-
dering the organization of direct and bypass paths in accordance with the structural
principles of the automatically switched long—distance telephone network. As was
pointed out earlier. the direct channel groups are organized only between the AMTS

where the amount of traffic in the forward and return directions is no less than 8
to 10 erlangs. The direct cha'nel groups are designed for high use, and the un-

serviced load with respect to the direct channels is routed over the bypass paths
via the UAR. 0n routings with small amount of traffic requiring less than six

long—distance channels, it is uneconomical to organize direct groups; therefore the
load on these routings is routed directly to the UAK. The number of channels on

the UAK routing is calculated for high service quality. that is, small losses (P -
0.01).

The number of channels routed to the UAR for servicing the excess load and the load
of the lightly loaded routings not having direct channels is calculated by the
"equivalent substitution" method which takes into account the increased fluctuation
(dispersion) of the excess load by comparison with the simplest.

0n the whole, the method of calculating the number of channels on the direct and
bypass routings consists in the following. For each routing, formula (3.1) is used
to calculate the magnitude of the incoming load Y . The number of channels n in
the direct group of each routing is determined as a function of the load Y and the
distance to the opposing ANTS (by arguments of economic expediency). In order to
select the capacity of the direct group considering its extent, the "Ciprosvyaz'“
Institute tables are used, one of which is presented in appendix 2. As is obvious
from the table, the number of channels in the direct group of the outgoing routing
is a multiple of six, which permits the use of whole 12wchannel groups of high

frequency transmission equipment for both directions (outgoing and incoming) of the
direct group.

The average values of the excess load R are indicated in the same table for each in-
coming group of direct channels. ‘The value of R is equal to the product of the

incoming load Y times the magnitude of the losses En(Y) defined by the first Erlang
formula for systems with explicit losses:

Y".'n ! ,

n I R=)’Enu/).
ZYH'! (3.2)
0

E10,) :3

 

The values of En(Y) for any n are available in the loss probability tables for the
fully accessible group of lines of c. P. Basharin I9].

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to the average excess load| the excess traffic is characterized by
load dispersion, that is, the measure of its deviation from the average value.
The load dispersion D is calculated by the formula

D-R(l—R—Y.'(n+l-I-R—Y)). (3.3)

Figure 3.1a shows c routings with n1, n2, ..., nc direct channels per

routing. The load Y (the simplest flow) goes on the ith routing serviced by n
channels. The exceed load from this routing with the parameters R1 and D1 togeéher
with the excess load from other routings goes to N channels of the bypass routing
which is common to all c direct routings.

The total number c of routings includes the routings on which direct groups are or-
ganized and also a small number of lightly loaded routings on which use of direct
groups is uneconomical. The channels of the lightly loaded routings service the
load of only the simplest flow having comparatively insignificant fluctuations
which can be neglected. Therefore the load dispersion on these routings is taken
equal to zero.

 

 

 

' 5 . . -. -
""s that! 9‘ I n, :4 l ‘ n M
I"! A 5-1:, .
i" 1" .—
'Y' !Y
. ”T Q I
c} . 0

Figure 3.1. Calculation principle of the number

of long-distance channels by the "equivalent
substitution" method.

Key: 1. Yloss

After determining the excess load and the dispersion for each routing, the total

excess load is calculated (together with the load of the lightly loaded routings)
coming to N channels of the bypass routing, and the total dispersion is also cal-
culated:

‘ ‘
k=ZR‘ :b-ZD‘.
(-l [-1

(3.6)

29

FOR‘DFFKJALIEEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The total load parameter E on the channel group of the bypass routing is the

probability of losses which can be expressed by the ratio of the lost traffic
Y1”s to the total!

/R. (3.5)

Pbypass Yloss
Let us provisionally replace the sum of the direct channels by one fully available
group containing 5 channels for which an excess load with the parameters i and D is
formed on arrival of the equivalent load A.

Knowing R and D, it is possible to find the values of A and S by the curves in Fig-
ure 3.2. Then the sum of the direct channels depicted in Figure 3.1 is replaced

by one fully available group of S + N outgoing lines to which the equivalent load
A comes (see Figure 3.1b). The excess load of the given fictitious group, the
parameter of which is Yloss’ is approximately equal to the desired excess load with

the parameter Yloss of the diagram depicted in Figure 3.1a.

Using the curves in Figure 3.2, the total number of channels S + N - m is determined
by the values found for the equivalent load A and Y1 . The number of channels on
bypass routing will be defined as N - m - S. 038

The magnitude of the lost traffic Yloss on N lines of the bypass routing is calcu-

l - -
ated by the formula Yloss Pbypass‘ where the loss probability norm Pbypass 0.01.

The long-distance telephone channels connecting the designed office at the other
ANTS and UAR of the long-distance network of the country are a component part of

the given network, and therefore the number of them cannot be determined in isola-
tion. The number of longvdistance channels for the entire network as a whole (in
accordance with the general principles of network construction) is calculated during
the process of development of the masterplans for development of the long-distance
telephone network of the country for each five—year period. From the general re—
sults of the calculations, data are selected on the number of channels on the
routings included in the designed office.

3.3. Initial Principles of Calculating the Number of ZSL and SLM of the Intrazonal
Network

For the int azonal network the number of channels -- 25L and SLH —— between the
ANTS and the TsS of their zone is calculated beginning with the prospective traffic
created by the subscribers on the local zone networks.

When calculating the ZSL, the average number of long-distance calls per day for one
subscriber to the local telephone network (ca b) and the total number of subscribers
of this network (Nsub) calculated for the leaf year of the designed period (by the

telephone density norms) are taken as the initial values.

Considering that the value of c is most influenced by the servicing quality,
that is, the transition to an EBBroved operating system, the prospective value of

csub.prospective is determined from the expression

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.proapective -

caub.exiathual‘

ve traffic between the rayon subscriber serviced by the

prospective ' N

sub.prospectivecsub.prospective'
e traffic on the ZSL n the PLH In erlanga is determined
sy time of the ZSL for one long-dist:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the presence of repeated calls, The average number of repeated attempts per com-
pleted call is 2.5 attempts, and the call setup time is on the average 0.5 minutes.
As for the average net call time, according to the observation statistical data
with intrazonal service this time is 3 minutes. Thus, the average busy time of an
outgoing channel for intrazonal service (SLN) per call T S - 2.5'0.S + 3.0 -
4.25 min. For the ZSL the given time is increased by apgfo§¥hately 201 as a re—
sult of the waiting time and the call setup time at the input of the system (this
percentage fluctuates depending on the type of ANTS in the presence of AON).
Therefore the average busy time of the ZSL of an intrazonal network per long-
distance call Tp(ZSL) . A.25-l.2 - 5.1 minutes.

The number of ZSL from each TsS to the ANTS is defined as a function of the load

YZSL for a service quality norm P - 0.01. For calculation of the number of ZSL,

the methods and calculation tables pertaining to the type of ATS equipment which
is installed at the given Tss are used.

The number of SLN from the ANTS to the T85 is calculated beginning with the size of
the load coming to the subscribers of a given rayon from other ANTS over the in-
coming long-distance channels and also from the local network subscribers of their
zone through the TsS. In accordance with the seven-digit numbering system in the
zone, as a rule one loo—thousand group of numbers was set aside for each rayon
serviced by one TsS. In individual rayons or isolated cities of the zone with
prospective capacity greater than 100,000, several loo-thousand groups are allocated
respectively. A separate SLH group, th: number of channels in which is calculated
as a function of the traffic on a given routing with service norm P - 0.01 is
routed from the ANTS to every loo-thousand group of numbers of the city and rural
telephone networks.

The results of calculating the number of ZSL and SLH are used when developing the
master plans for development of the intrazonal network for the selection of the
optimal version of construction of the primary and switched networks of the zone.
Depending on the selective structure of the switched network (purely radial or with
the organization of zone telephone junctions) the ZSL and SLN groups are produced
which are included in the ANTS.

The calculated data for the number of channels and size of loads on each routing
for long-distance and intrazonal service for the designed office are written in
the form of a table, the results of which determine the total capacity of the
ANTS and total office traffic at PLH.

3.4. Prospective and Installed Capacity of ANTS and UAK

By the capacity of the ANTS we mean the total number of channels of the long-

distance telephone network, ZSL and SLN of the intrazonal network. the ZSL and
SLM for coupling to the GATS, the interoffice lines and long-distance channels of

the intrazonal routings with manual and semiautomatic means of setting up calls.
The capacity of the UAR is the total number of incoming and outgoing long-distance

channels included in the switching equipment for tandem connections.
When designing new buildings for the ANTS with UAK, the prospective capacity of the

office and the installed capacity of the equipment are calculated. The prospective
capacity of the office determines the volume of the designed building and it is

32

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculated for a development period of 15v20 years after putting the office into
operation. The magnitude of the prospective capacity of the office can be deter-
mined beginning with the maximum technical capacity of the selected type of equip-
ment or consolidated, from calculating the total expected increase in number of
channels of the long—distance and intrazonal networks for the design period. The
installed office.capacity determines the volume of equipment designed for in—
stallation considering the development of the office (without installation of
additional equipment) for five years after putting it into operation. The neces—
sity for creating this equipment reserve arises from the fact that the structure
of the ANTS does not permit frequent changes in the number of instruments. The
principle that the installed capacity of the ANTS must correspond to the number of
channels of the long-distance and intrazonal networks which is planned by the
master plans for the last year of the five—year operating period is fixed in the
production design norms [3].

In addition to the prospective and installed capacities when designing the ANTS,

the office capacity for the startup period must be determined. The calculation of
the startup capacity is specific for each specific office and must consider a num-
ber of factors such as the existing number of channels on each routing and methods

of servicing them, specific plans for development of service in the near future at
the time of startup, the state and degree of automation of local telephone networks

and other factors characterizing the startup period. Determination of the startup
capacity of the office permits provision for the composition and amount of equip-

ment which are required for smooth transition from the existing office to the new

ANTS without interrupting service.

3.5. Service Quality Indices

Optimal quality index norms for the operation of the instruments are established for
every type of ANTS on the basis of data on the instrument service system. The
general quality of servicing of the office depends on the service quality indices

in the individual stages of setting up the call.

There are basically two service systems:.

1. The system with losses -- characterized by the fact that the calls coming to
the switching system at a time when there are no free path; on the required
routing are lost, and the subscriber receives a "busy“ signal. The servicing
quality in the systems with losses is characteristized by probability of a reject
as a result of busy instruments or lines.

2. A system with waiting is characterized by the fact that the calls coming when
there are no free connecting devices are placed in a queue for waiting and are
serviced on release of one of the connecting devices. The busy time of the devices
for setting up a 0011 is made up of the constant value -— the time
directly spent on performing the operating -. and the variable determined by the
waiting for release of the next instruments (internal waiting). The busy time of
an instrument can be considered constant if the busy time for all calls is the

same and if the instrument need not wait for release of other of the system instru-
ments.

The total time spent on one call is made up of three components: external waiting,
the actual servicing time and internal waiting.

33

FOR OFFICIAL LEHECMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

External waiting is the time during which the call is forced to wait before it is
received by~the system. that is, the waiting time before arriving at the system.
The waiting time ends at the beginning of servicing.

The actual servicing time is a constant component equal to the minimum call setup
time and there is no waiting.

The internal waiting is the total waiting time for release of subsequent instruments
in the call setup channel. \

The basic service quality indices in systems with waiting are the waiting probabil—
ity p(Y > 0), the waiting time distribution function P(Y > t) and the average wait-
ing time. The lower the probability of losses and the average waiting time, the

higher the service quality. However. extraordinary reduction in the quality in-

dices implies a significant increase in the amount of office and line equipment and
excess expenditures, respectively. In addition, the minimum losses and waiting time
must be insured only for the peak load hour. and for the rest of the time the actual

service quality will be higher.

when determining the admissible norms for the quality indices, the following argu-
ments are considered:

for a system with losses the loss norm must be such that the subscribers do not
get the impression of unsatisfactory operation of the office and that with load
fluctuations the subscriber service quality will not drop below the admissible limit;

for a system with waiting, the average waiting time on the ANTS instruments must
be such that uncertainty of correct operation of the office is not generated in the
subscribers and uncertainty of correctness of the action taken by the subscriber
himself is not generated (for example, doubt as to whether the called subscriber
has been fully dialed). The internal waiting must not lead to a noticeable reduc-
tion in carrying capacity of the instrument.

In the connecting channel the general service quality is determined by the loss
probability when setting up a call between the calling and called subscribers.

It consists of individual quality indices in various sections of the switching
equipment system. The overall losses are approximately equal to the total losses
of the successive sections of the connection channel. The optimal distribution

of the total losses with respect to sections of the system presupposes that the
greater part of the losses can be penmitted on devices which require the highest
expenditures. Since the cost of the line facilities (especially long distance) is
generally higher than the cost of the office equipment, it is more economical to
provide relatively low service quality (that is, higher losses) on the line facili-
ties. Beginning with this fact. the following service quality indices for calcula-
ting the number of lines in the channels and instruments are recommended for dif-
ferent sections of the automated network of the country:

1) on the zone network for outgoing calls over the ZSL the total losses from a
subscriberinthecity in which the ANTS is located to the ANTS should not exceed 0.01,
including the section from 161 to the ANTS, 0.005. Por incoming calls over the SLN,
the total losses should not exceed 0.005, including the section from the ANTS to

the UVS or from the ANTS to the ATS. 0.002. The number of ZSLz and SLNz between

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the ANTS and the T35 of the rural network and also between the ANTS and the tele-
phone network of RGIECted cities in which there are no AHTS is calculated with
losses of 0.01;

2) on the long-distance network the service quality is determined by the service
quality indices on the last-choice path. The number of channels for one section of
the last choice path is calculated for a loss probability of 0.01;

3) at the ANTS and UAK the callsare serviced on certain instruments with losses and
on others with waiting.

For the ANTS-4 and the UAR of the AHTSoA type with automatic long-distancescrv-

ice the loss probability norm in the switching system is 0.003. The average wait—
ing time for connection of a marker for any call should not exceed 30 milliseconds.
Beginning with this fact, the carrying capacity of the marker is determined ——
70,000 calls with a load of no more than 0.6 to 0.65 Erlangs. It is recommended
that the number of registers be determined for P(Y > 0)_§ 0.01.

In the ARM-20 type offices the loss probability norm for calculating the switching
system and senders is taken as 0.002,and for calculation of the code receivers

and code transmitters. 0.001. At the ANTS KB for calculating group receivers and
transmitters the loss probability norm of 0.001 is used.

3.6. General Principles of Calculating the Volume of ANTS and UAK Equipment

The number of devices of each type is determined as a function of the load in the
PLH subject to servicing by a group of instruments when observing the quality in-
dex norms for operation of the office. The instruments of the connecting and con—
trol units receive and service all calls coming to the office independently of
whether the calls are completed or not. Only one group of instruments - the
equipment for automaticcalculation of charges-- services only the completed calls.

The number of completed calls in the PLn (c) is found when calculating the channels
and can be expressed by the ratio C - Y/Tp, where Y is the load of the channels of
the long-distance or intrazonal network in the PL“, and TP is the average busy time
of the corresponding channel for one call (considering repeated attempts).

The number of calls coming to an office includes. in addition to the primary calls,
also all repeated attempts occurring as a result of loss of the primary call. In

accordance with the operating indices adopted when calculating the channels, the
average number of attempts per completed call is about 2.5. Beginning with this

fact, the number of attempted calls (B) can be defined from the expression 8 - 2.5C.

The total call flows reaching the ANTS from different sources, depending on the
address information are distributed with respect to different groups of outgoing
routings. The percentage distribution of the call flows depends on the distribution
of the telephone gravitations and is determined for each specific city on the basis
of statistical observations during the process of survey work.

Using the data on the percentage call flow distribution, the loads created by these
flows on the different routings are determined. For each type of instrument the
load is determined by the number of attempted calls subject to servicing by the
given group of instruments and the average busy time of an instrument for servicing

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFKJAL.USE(NNLY

one attempted call‘ The busy tine of an instrument for servicing one call depends

on the type of office equipment and the servicing systen,of the given group of
instruments.

The number of AHTS instruments is calculated on the basis of teletraffic theory.
The calculation methods depend on the type of office equipment and must take into
account all the basic characteristics of the system: the structure of the office,

the type of switching devices, the types of switching systems and the route forma-
tion, the type of control units, and so on. With respect to structure the ANTS
are basically divided into two groups:

1) offices which consist of several switching stages (ANTS—l, ANTS-2, ANTS-3).;
2) offices containing one switching system ANTS—6, ARM-20, ANTS KB).

In the first group of offices the switching stages are separated with respect to
functions as follows:

the incoming group hunting stage (VGI or 1161) receives the calls from the local
telephone network subscribers and distributes them on the outgoing routings;

the long-distance connection stage (MS or MCI) sets up the outgoing, incoming and
tandem long-distance connections;

the outgoing communications stage with local telephone networks (GIN) receives the
incoming long-distance and intrazonal calls and directs them to the local network
subscribers of the given city and zone.

At the ARTS-2, in addition to these stages there is another RVK stage for call dis-
tribution by cordless type switchboards. The problems of designing equipment for
any type of office reduce to the fact that the number of instruments of all types
correspond strictly to their carrying capacity, insuring satisfaction of the quslo
ity index norms. For example, when determining the number of switching modules

and control units it is necessary to begin not only with the number of lines sub—
ject to connection at the input of the system, but also the number of calls which
this system must service considering the carrying capacity of the control units.

The designs of equipment for various types of offices are discussed in more detail
in subsequent chapters.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 4. BRIEF INFORMATION ABOUT THE DESIGN OF ANTS-1, ARTS-2 AND ANTS-3 AUTO-
HATIC LONG—DISTANCE TELEPHONE OFFICES

4.1. General Remarks

At the present time ANTS-1H equipment is being widely used on the long-distance
telephone network of the country. As new ms are built, it will be reduced corre-
spondingly. However, in the near future in certain parts of the country the instal-
lation of this equipment for temporary use is still required.

Considering that the design of the ANTS—1M has been simplified significantly as a
result of sectional assembly of the equipment by the plant and also the fact that
sufficient experience in its application locally has been accumulated. a brief de-
scription of the equipment and general design recouendations are presented in this
chapter. The equipment and its design are described in more detail in [10].

The ANTS—2 type offices are installed in several cities of the country. However,
further production of this equipment has been curtailed and will be limited only

to the necessary equipment to expand the existing offices. Therefore only brief
information will be given in this chapter on this office, and some general recom-
mendations will be made for designing the expansion of it.

At the present time Mfrs-3 type offices are being used for installation in the
medium oblast centers of the country. The use of this equipment will be continued

until mass output of a new type office has been tooled up for. Inasmuch as the
problems of designing ANTS—3 offices have been quite fully discussed in [10], only
brief information will be presented here on this office and its design.

4.2. ANTS-1M Office

The ANTS-1M office contains ten-step equipment. It is constructed on the basis of
the semiautomatic long-distance telephone service equipment of the tum-frequency
signal system and it is supplemented by equipment providing the possibility of
setting up outgoing long-distance calls automatically.

Additional equipment is used to record the long-distance number of the called sub-
scriber and control the operation of the MCI stages and also for automatic calcula—

tion of the charges for the calls. The maximum capacity of the ANTS-1H is 180 to
200 long-distance channels (for automatically setup outgoing calls). The maximum

number of routings for the automatic outgoing long-distance telephone service is 1.0.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The talk channel in the ANTS-1H is twvaire. The outgoing automatic service from
ATS subscribers is realized over the 28L. After dialing the long-distance number
of the called subscriber the subscriber must dial his own number (to pay for the
call). The SLH channel is used to see that‘the subscriber has dialed his own
number correctly .

The structural diagram of the auxiliary equipment for the ANTS-1H automatic service
is presented in Figure 5.1.

(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f)
m

 

Figure 4.1. Structural diagram of the ANTS-1H.

Key: a. subscriber g. ACh m. IHGI(3) a. CATS
b. PI h. RKM n. IIHGI(3) t. L1H
c. 161 1. S o. RSLA-HIR u. IVGIH
d. ZSL j. PF p. IRKSh v. IIIGIH
e. IIGI k. UKP q. ANTS-1M w. IIGIH
f. PECh 1. TRF r. I/IGIM x. SLH

In order to setup an outgoing call automatically, the calling subscriber must dial
a defined two-digit number in which the first digit ("8") holds the ZSL to the ANTS,
and the second digit (as a rule, a "9”)hooksthe IIGI of the ANTS to a free output
to the RSLA-HIR system.

The RSLA-MIR realizes exchange of signals between the CATS and ANTS, it performs
the functions of an outgoing sender for automatic long-distance service and the
device for primary recording of the data needed for automatic calculation of the
charge for the calls. Inasmuch as the RSLA-HIR system is held for the interseries
time, transmission of a dial tone that it is ready to receive the long-distance
number is not required.

After dialing the first two digits, the long—distance number of the called sub-
scriber is dialed. It consists of a three-digit code of the required city and the
seven-digit subscriber number. If the called subscriber number contains less than
seven digits, then zeros are dialed in place of the missing digits before the num-
ber. This ten—digit number is recorded at the RSLA-HIR. After completion of dial-
ing of the ten-digit long-distance number the calling subscriber, also without hear-

ing a further dial tone, dials his own number which is recorded in the RSLA-MIR.
The calling subscriber's own number which he has dialed is simultaneously trans—

mitted to the instruments of the long-distance patch cord of the CATS (GIN-LIN).
when the subscriber is finished dialing his own number, the connection of the

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subscriber line to the RSLAFHIR is set up over two paths: the ZSL via the 161 and
1161 and the SLH via the GIMeLIH.

The correctness of the number of the calling subscriber is checked by the office
checking circuit OPU which is connected to the RSLA-HIR through the connector c
when the calling subscriber has finished dialing his own number. The OPU checks
for the presence of a closed circuit through the instruments of the local (28L)

and long distance cords (SLH) of the ATS by transmitting an audio frequency current.

The outgoing register IRKSh receives three digits of the long-distance code from
the RSLA-HIR and then transmits them to the decoder P. From the code the decoder
determines the information -- the digits then transmitted via the IRKSh in the

MCI stage to hold a free channel on the required routing. After the subscriber
snswers,the reckoning of the length of the call begins, and on completion of the
call all of the information needed for sending bills to the subscribers is recorded
on a punchcard by means of the automatic equipment for calculating the charges.

The structure of the ANTS-1H equipment provides for assembly of it in sections, in-
cluding all forms of individual and group equipment for the number of long-distance
channels which corresponds to 90 RSLa-MIR systems. Three sections of equipment are
provided for maximum capacity of the office.

The calculation of the amount of ANTS-1M equipment basically reduces to determining
the number of RSLA-HIR systems, ZSL and the channel equipment beginning with the
designed number of long-distance outgoing channels and their loads. Depending on
the number of RSLA-HIR systems, the number of equipment sections is determined.

In the majority of cases the ANTS-1H equipment is placed in an existing facility
of the semiautomatic communications junction which permits most efficient use of
general office and auxiliary equipment.

4.3. ANTS-2 Office

The ANTS-2 equipment provides for connection of up to 3000 to 4000 long-distance
channels. With respect to type the office is an electromechanical system. Hul-
tiple crossbar connectors MKS are used as the switching devices, and relay markers
are used as the control units. Cordless type switchboards are provided to set up
calls semiautomatically and manually at the office. In addition, the office con-
tains devices for setting up calls on the zone network with automatic service. The
talk channel at the office is four-wire.

The structural diagram of the AHTSeZ office is shown in Figure b.2. From the figure
it is obvious that the office contains several switching stages: IIGI, MS, RVK and
GIN. each of which performs its designed functions. All of the switching stages

are assembled from MKS modules and form two types of switching systems: two-link
(GI and GIM) and four-link (HS and RVK). In the two-link systems 80-120-600
capacity modules are used. Each module is controlled by its own marker. The
four-link stages are assembled from symmetrically arranged two-element modules 200—
200-200, 200-200-300 or 400-600—600 capacity, and they are controlled by a common
group of markers (HHS, HRVK).

Crossbar register finding stages RI are used which are assembled from 100-500-40
capacity modules.

39

FOR'OFFKJA1.US£(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 

v \

   
  

"f;:;g;z:::;:lnzlcb

       
 

 

  
   
 
  

  

U _. . -
(1) (4) ﬁrm “W i
( ":9 |

‘-.(19)_ < ' “j ;

Inuulum |
. ' 2
Mnﬁgg)

.l‘l 'f ,
(30)

Figure 4.2. structural diagram of the ANTS-2.

Key: 1. SI. 20. IKZSL
2. RSLG 21. 1161
3. 16m 22. AUSR
lo. from another HTS. 23. “Hulls
of the city 26. MIKZS
5. VKZSL 25. SK
6. RSLR 26. VKTN
7. VB 2-7. long—distance
8. RVK channels and
9. DB interfacility SI.
10. 2K, us: 28. MCI.
11. SK 29. VK‘K
12. R1 30. 25!.
13. S 31. R551.
14. an 32. RSLAz
15. MRVK 33. RS
16. KOR 3A. to t e inter-
17. RV national office
13. MS 35. R1
19. to services of other 36. lI‘tRAz
HTS of the city 3-7. DRAM
38. TR
39. IRKK
$0. KOR
41. PK
42. vn
43. vnxx

The equipment for automatic calculation of the call charges AUSR interacts with the
equipment for automatic determination of the number of the calling subscriber, and

in the absence of A0“ it calculates the charges by having the subscriber dial his
mm number.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ANTS-2 includes a set of automatic monitoring and testing equipment, switching
equipment of the cordless type and all-office equipment for various purposes.

The design of the expansion of the ANTS-2 office reduces to determining the required
number of auxiliary devices of all types in accordance with the number of long—
distance channels for which the office capacity must be increased. Determination
of the number of line systems of all types presents no difficulties if the addi-

tional number of long-distance channels, the intrazonal network lines and the lines
for connection to the GATS are known.

Calculation of the crossbar stages of the I16! and IGIH is made considering the
additional load going to these stages. Depending on the volume of the expansion,
the number of lines in the direction of the 1161 bank can either be recalculated to
obtain the total, larger groups of lines.or for additional modules, independent
groups of lines can be organized. The calculation of the equipment for the four—
link long-distance connection stage (HS) presents some difficulty. Beginning with
the carrying capacity of the markers in this stage, it is necessary to make a care—
ful calculation of the load on the group of markers and perform a careful analysis
of the possibility of using one common group of markers. The maximum number of
markers in the group is 10. In the case where the total load (considering the
additional load) exceeds the carrying capacity of one group of markers, it is
necessary to provide a second group of markers. Here the incoming modules are

divided into two groups, respectively, each of which is serviced by its own group
of markers, and the outgoing modules form a common group, and any market can ser-

vice a call to any outgoing channel.

The equipment provided for expansion of the office must be placed in the same build-
ing with the existing ANTS-2 so that when installing this equipment and switching

services the normal operation of the existing equipment will not be inter-
fered with.

4.4. ANTS-3 Office
Brief Description of the Office

The ANTS-3 medium-capacity automatic long-distance telephone office is a set of
automatic switching devices and switching equipment of the HRU type. The maximum

capacity of the automatic switching devices does not exceed 1600 incoming and out-
going long-distance channels.

The office is designed for servicing basic terminal traffic and is used for instal-

lation in small oblast centers and cities of oblast and republic subordination
which are not locations of tandem junctions. The layout of the office provides

for establishment of tandem connections if necessary.

The office equipment includes devices for automation of the intraoblast service
by the zone principle. The channels of the intrazonal network (28L and SLH) are
included in finder stages separate from the long distance ones, and the number of
them is in practice not limited by the layout of the office.

Setting up calls semiautomatically with channels included in the Mfrs—3
equipment takes place via MRU type switchboards connected to the ANTS-3 by match-
ing circuits and located in a common building.

41
FKHICHHNCJAI.lﬂﬂECNVLY
65. lon3~line outgoing
24. RZSL3 0?? channels for auto-
3. airs 1/11 GIM 25. from the CATS natic and semiauto-
4. 1M 26. from the T88 natic service
5. order~circuit ATS 27. VKZSLG 2/4 46. HTS service at
6. GI 28. VRZ C 6/6 its office
7. LI 29. VTA 6/4 47. ZK or MK
”“131 so. as up? 48. war
3' ﬁg" 31. RI 1.9. vxzsu 4/2
10' RSL 32. S 50. VKZSLSh ...
11' VSK 33. MR! 51. rank 4/2
12' ISK 36. PM 52. TaKZLK 4/2
13: RUK 35. DIM" 53. ‘I'aKZSLK 6/4
14. nsuc 2/4 36. nux~vnxm 3;: 3f
15' RSLSL 4/2 3;: WIN 56. Mrs service at
16. PR? 39 VKTN other facilities
17. ACh 40' I HOI(5) 57. to the interna-
18. PR? ‘1: II HCI(6) tional office
19. UK? 42. NKTI 58. long-line incoming
20. TR? 43. IR Sh automatic and
21. UK? 44 VK'Sh semiautomatic ser-
22. DUB ' vice channels
59. I
60. genome): HTS
61. from other HTS of
42

a given city
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hith respect to type, the ANTS-3 equipment is an electromechanical crossbar system
with finder stage control. MKS combined into modules are used as the switching de-
vices, and relay markers are used as the control units. The switching stages are
constructed from standard two-link MKS modules. Each module is controlled by its
own marker. This structure of the switching devices permits organization of joint
operation if necessary (at one office) with the two-frequency semiautomatic service
equipment based on ten-step selectors. In this case some corrections are introduced
into the diagrams of the IKTN and VKTN systems of the semiautomatic service channels.

The AXIS-3 equipment includes the equipment for automatic calculation of the

charges for calls for outgoing automatic long distance and intrszonal service. The
euipment is designed to operate by the method of automatic determination of the
number and category of the calling subscriber under the condition that the AON
equipment is installed in each rayon ATS of its city and the IsS of the zone. In
the absence of AON equipment, the layout of the office provides for automatic reckon-
ing of the charges for calls when operating by the procedure where the calling
subscriber dials his own number. The number information is transmitted from the

ATS to the ANTS—3 by intermediate senders PR which must be installed at each rayon
ATS of its city and the TsS of the zone. Here the PR can operate both jointly with
the AON equipment and in the absence of AON equipment.

   

  

¢ 0
”to/O 6‘6
no’ooo‘o

I I J’ a

Figure 4.4. Diagram of the group formation of a
two-link module 60'80-200 (VGI, MCI, GIN stages).

  

Key: a. 200 outputs

In the presence of other HTS in the city, the ANTS-3 equipment permits organization
of joint operation with them, for which the office has matching line sets.

The ANTS-3 equipment. the channels included in it and the trunks are checked and
tested using a set of automatic and manual monitoring and testing equipment.

43

FOR 0F11C1AI.US£(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For organization of automatic order circuits, the ten-step order circuit ATS is
used which is made up of the equipment for two-frequency semiautomatic service.

A structural diagram of the ANTS—3 is presented in Figure 4.3. The switching stages
of the V61, MCI and GIH are made up of two-link MKS modules of 60-80—200 type, each
of which is controlled by its own marker. The diagram of group formation of the
modules is illustrated in Figure 4.4. The capacity of the line bank of the modules
permits organization of a group of lines with availability of 20, 40 and 60. The
number of routings can be var. ted within the limits of 200 outputs from the bank
depending on the selected availability.

The H61 and SIM stage modules for connecting the marker contain six RGI senders
each of which is attached to ten inputs of the module.

The VGI stage distributes the calls coming over the ZSL from the ATS subscribers of
its city (CATS) and from the TsS of its zone, with respect to the required routings:
to the long-distance channels for automatic access to other zones, to the subscribers
of other ATS of its zone, to the switching services, and so on. The line bank of
the V61 stage includes the following systems: RS and RSLA for the outgoing
automatic long-distance and intrazonal service; VKZ 4/2 fof access to the switch-
boarda of its office: IKZLK 4/2, IKZSLK 4/4 for access when necessary to the
switchboards of other offices of its city. at which the corresponding incoming
systems are installed and also (in the future) systems for access to the interna-
tional office.

The RSLAH and RSLAz systems combined with the primary recording device UPF and the

IMRAM, IHRAz senders receive and record the number information coming from the
subscribers 7'when setting up automatic calls and transmittcdto the subsequent instru-

ments of the intraoffice connecting path and to the equipment for automatic calcu-
lation of charges AUS.

The IHRA senders are connected to the RSLA and the RSLA-UPF to the instruments
for calculating the charges UKP via the register finding stages. The RI stage con-
sists of two-link MKS modules with a capacity of 100-50-30, and it is serviced by
two markers. The group formation system of the RI stage is shown in Figure 4.5.
with respect to carrying capacity of the markers this RI stage can contain no more
than three modules. In this case when it is necessary to transmit a larger load,
several RI stages have been designed, each of which provides for access to thirty
registers.

The long-distance : call" junction of the MCI, beginning with the capacity of
the MKS modules, as a rule, is made up of two stages: IHGI and IINGI, each of
which is controlled by its own markers. Both stages provide for setting up out-
going, incoming and tandem calls with automatic and semiautomatic long-distance
service. The following systems are connected to the inputs of the Incl: the RSLAM
for outgoing automatic long-distance service, the relay—repeater RUK from the MK
HRU for outgoing semiautomatic service, incoming long—distance channels VKTN and,
when necessary, incoming line systems for interoffice service VKSh from other HTS
of its city. Trunks to the CATS and the TsS of its zone and also lines to the
modules of the IIMGI stages for access to the long—distance channels are connected
to the line bank of the IHGI.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR.0FFKJAI.USEGDNLN

   

12.105

Figure 6.5. Group formation system for the twOFlink
module 100-50930 (RI stage).

Key: a. 100 inputs

The IIHGI modules are divided into groups, each of which is connected on the input
side to one of the routings of the IHGI bank. when joint operation with the two-
frequency semiautomatic service equipment is required, provision is made for con—
nection of the outputs of the crossbar stage of the INS! to the inputs of the ten-
step stage of the IIHGI(6) and also connection of the outputs of the IMGI(6) to the
inputs of the crossbar stage of the trust.

Outgoing long-distance channels for automatic and semiautomatic service (IKTN) are
connected to the line bank of the IIHGI, and if necessary, outgoing line systems

for interoffice service IKSh for coupling to other HTS of its city. The groups of
long-distance channels on the direct and bypass routings are included, as a rule,

in different groups of IIHGI modules.

The outgoing service stage with the local telephone network subscribers (GIN) pro-
vides access to the CATS subscribers of its own city, to the subscribers of the
rural networks of its own zone via the T35 and also access to the order-circuit

ATS. Beginning with the adopted numbering system and capacity of the standard MKS
modules, the GIM stage is usually made up of two stages: 161M and DGlH. The seven-
digit subscriber number is realized as follows: the IGIH stage is selected by the
digit a of the million group, and the DGIH by the digit b of the loo-thousand group
of numbers which corresponds to the junction rayon of the loo-thousand formation

for the CATS, and the administrative rayon service by one Tss for rural networks.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When necessary the IGIM or DGIH stages can set up calls by two digits of the zone
number (ab).

The lines from the following are connected to the inputs of the IGIH stage: the
RSLA systems for the intrazonal service, the IHGI bank for the incoming long-
distince service, the RSLK 2/4 systems for access from the long-distance switch-
boards to the CAT and the T38 of the zone. Trunk groups to the groups of DGIH
modules and trunks to the order-circuit ATS via the RSI.B1 4/2 matching systems
are connected to the line bank of the 101“ stage.

The SLH line systems to the incoming message junctions UVSM of the loo-thousand

groups of CATS and to the Tss of the rayona of its zone are connected to the line
bank of the DGIH.

The line systems connected at the input of the V61 stage and the output of the DGIH
stage are provided for three versions of the lines:

VKZSLG 2/4, RSLG 4/2 for the physical OATS lines;

VKZSLGU 4/4, IRSLGU 4/4 for the CATS lines organized over the transmission system
channels with isolated signal channel;

the VKZSLT 4/4, IRSLT 4/4 for the intrazonal network lines organized over the
transmission system channels with signaling in the talk frequency band (the VTA 4/4
and ITM 4/4 systems were used temporarily for this purpose).

When installing the individual converter bays with isolated signal channel SIP-VSK
for the intrazonal network lines, the VKZSLGU 4/4 and IRSLGU 4/4 systems can be
used.

The control signals (digits of the number dialed by the subscriber) are transmitted
over the ZSL by the multifrequency method. Each digit is defined by a combination
of two frequencies out of six (700, 900, 1100, 1300, 1500, 1700 hertz). The digi-
tal data on the required connection on the automatic long-distance or intradesignal
service routings goes to the multifrequency code receivers PM and then is recorded
by the I I or the IHRAz registers. For this purpose the PH receivers are con-
nected through the connecting system (SK) to the markers of the V61 stage (HVGI)
and also the IHRAM and IHkAz registers.

The line interaction signals are transmitted over the long-distance channels by the
two-frequency system using 1200 and 1600 hertz frequency combinations. The equip—

ment includes the generators of these frequencies common to the office CTN and
individual for each receiver channel PTN combined with the outgoing and incoming

channel systems.

The digits of the number are transmitted over the long-distance channels and SLH
from the ANTS to the GATS and the T93 of the zone using decade pulses.

For incoming or tandem service and also for service from the switchboards, the
information about the zone (area) code is received by the incoming code register
VRKSh connected to incoming systems (VKTN; RDK) through the relay connectors VK-
VRKSh, RUK—VRKSh. The connectors VKvVRKSh have a capacity of 100 inputs, 20 inter-
mediate lines and 15 outputs. When necessary-the number of inputs can be increased

46

FOR OFTWCJAI.US£IDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to 300 using the attachment for 200 inputs. Each intermediate line services from
S to 15 inputs. The diagram of the VKoVRKSh connector is shown in Figure 4.6.

The RUK-VRKSh connectors have a capacity of 50 inputs, 25 intermediate lines and
6 outputs.

(b) 61/”

  
     

,——__/\___. (C) ”I!
la..:: r7 ————— n . 5 ,—.A—-‘
(811.” I I :5
l

: fawnwhw
(dwznri._:e.)__-- I

Figure 4.6. Diagram of the VK-VRKSh 100(300)-20-15
connector.

Key: a. first group (p1)
b. VKTN
c. VRKSh
d. attachment
e. 20th group

The PSh decoder selects the routing according to the information recorded in the
IMRAM and the VRKSh registers. The decoder is connected to the registers via the

RK—PSh connector.

The intrazonal service is realized via VGI and GI“ stages directly, bypassing the
MCI stage without participation of the decoder.

When developing the design of a specific office, the structural diagram must re-

flect the design solutions (having the corresponding equipment) regarding organi-
zation of all forms of external communications for the given office, in particular,

joint operation with the semiautomatic service equipment, organization of communi-
cations vith existing HTS in another building, and so on.

initial Principles for Equipment Design

One of the most important initial principles for equipment design is the instrument
service system and determination of the norms for the quality indices of their
operation. Let us consider the basic office junctions from this point of view.

VGI Stage. The VGI marker is a one—line service system to which the simplest flow
of calls passing through the module inputs comes. "hen the incoming system is
busy, a request to connect a marker occurs. If the marker is busy the call waits
until it is free.

In order to find a free line on the required routing the marker makes one, two or
three tries depending on availability (20, 60 or 60). The busy time of the
marker setting up a call with a single try is 0.9 second, a double try 1.0 second,

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and triple, 1.1 seconds. Studies have shown that in the single-line group with
discrete distribution of the service time, when it can assume three values quite
close to each other, the waiting time distribution function almost coincides with
the distribution function with constant service time. Thus, from the point of

view of estimating the service quality, the marker busy time can be considered con,

stant .

The quality norms for operation ofothe marker are the waiting probability P(Y > 2"):
0.01 and the average waiting time Y = 0.2 second.

 

Figure 4.7. Burke curves for determining the proba—
bility P(Y > t) for single-line systems.

In order to determine what lead on the marker this norm corresponds to, the Burke
curves are used for single-line systems (Figure 6.7) and the curves are used for

determining the average waiting time with constant busy time (Figure 4.8). As is
obvious from these curves, the average load on the marker for indicated quality is

0.28 Erlang.

The number of calls corresponding to the given load is determined beginning with the

average busy time of the V61 marker for setting up one call. For the majority of
cases it is possible to assume that 602 of the calls will be set up on a single try,

401 on a double try and 20% on a triple try. Then the average busy time of the
marker for one call will be: 0.4.0.9 + 0.4'1.0 + 0.2-1.1 - 1.0 sec.

Thus, the average number of calls which one marker can service with given quality
13‘1 = YH-3600/TM - 0.28-3600/l.0 - 1000.

The number of lines included in the switching bank of the V01 modules for each
routing depends on the size of the incoming load and the average load for one input

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

of the V61 stage. For calculation of the magnitudes of the loads on different types
of systems with respect to servicing incoming calls it is necessary first of all
to determine the average busy time of the systems for one call.

            
        

 

' -

m- 12——

6==============-—_—J==============
- ”——

1 “ﬁr—WA

 
  
     

’ ﬁﬂﬁlllll/ ,
:wnunlll/IW/M}

_-—-----'-lllIl/l
=_._._—_.-- ---- ".m,
-—-—r— _—'-----'n 5.11!-

- _‘—_-- ---l-lI/lI/I(r

       
 
  

  
 

    

J = 1' -.- - r
L- 1- - .l 7" 'I'Illlllll /

Ill AIIIIHIUIZLUZﬂW

--v I
"7.1711 Vllll/I/A'l/ll/

— —_—---------.unou——
-‘.—-—'-- ---unllllllu-
-_ ——————----no nan
-—l-— - JI-l-llll II
III' I
-_.

 
 
 
    
    

 

 
    
 
 

 
 

 

'- "--'--- Ill
I-:-’I_---.Il-..'l"ll. _—

-1'- '..""I"lll_—
F$:’=mv- l'IlHlllI/l-

.111... llllII'IlII/‘_

’i'i'luumn/I/M—
“.6 v.1 at u 1.0 1.! :1 13(5)

 

 
   
   
 
 

 

    
 
   

  

(“I

Figure 4.8. Curves for determining the average vaiting
time with constant busy time.

Key: a. Ywait

b. a, Erlangs

For the RS and RSLAz systems we begin with the average busy time of an outgoing
channel for ong-distance or intrazonal service for one call: In q - Tp a/n. As

was stated in section 3.2, the average talk time TP a - 5.25 minutes, and the num-
ber of attempted calls for one completed call, ﬂ - 2.5. Consequently, TB H - 5.25/
2.5 = 2.1 minutes. '

During the process of setting up a call the RSLAE system is busied before the out-
going channel; therefore its busy time per call s somewhat greater than the

channel, by approximately 101. Thus, the average busy time of the RS system

for servicing one call TRSLAH - TB H'l.l - 2.31 minutes. The load on t e RSLAH

systems is determined by the total number of calls sent to the outgoing long-
distance channels for automatic service from the subscribers of the CATS and the

zone T38.

69

IWJR 0FF1CLAL USEZCMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For intrazonal service the average busy time of the outgoing channel (SLH ) for one
call T3.z - Tp z/ﬂ - b.25/2.5 - 1.7 minutes, The average busy time of thg RSLAz
system TRSLA - TB '1.1 - 1.87 minutes. The load on the RSLA systems is deter-
: .z z
mined by the total number of calls sent from the subscribers of the CATS to the
zone Tss and from the subscribers of the TsS to the CATS and other T88 of its zone.

For calculation of the load on the VKZSLK equipment we begin with the fact that
these systems service calls going to the long-distance switch board operator for
semiautomatic connection from the CATS and the zone TsS. Here it is considered that
in accordance with the operating process only requests are received over the ZSL.
Therefore the average busy time of the VKZSLK equipment corresponds to the request
reception time, that is, T - 1.0 minute.

ZSLk
The magnitude of the average load for one input of the VGI stage (a) is determined
beginning with the total load which must pass through the stage and the calculated
number of modules of the VGI (g):

a ' chasmM + Ynsuz + vazsuc)’ (603)“

The choice of accessibility in the switching bank of the VGI depends on the magni-
tude of the route load. For lines to the RSLAn and the RSLAz it is expedient to

select the maximum accessibility —- 60 —— inasmuch as these routings will service
all of the increasing load, and in the routing to the VKZSLK, in which the load is
small and decreases with time, the accessibility can be selected minimal, that is,
20. In cases where in addition to the indicated routings other routings (for
example, to other HTS of the city) must be connected to the VGI switching bank,
when selecting the magnitudes of the accessibilities it is necessary to consider
that their sum must not exceed 200, that is, the number of outputs in the switching
bank of the VGI modules.

0n the routings of the VGI bank, both fully accessible and incompletely accessible
line groups can be formed. For completely accessible connection, the number of
lines in the group is less than the accessibility or equal to it, that is, the load

on the given routing is such that it can be serviced by the connecting units
accessible to each input. For the incompletely accessible inclusion, the number of

lines in the group exceeds its accessibility, that is, the load on the given rout-
ing is such that more connecting units are required than there are individual out-
puts on the renting for each nodule.

0n the routings to the RS and RSLA as a rule the load is so large that it re-
quires incompletely accessi 1e connecEiOn of the lines; on the routings to the
VKZSLK and the IKZSLK, completely accessible groups can be organized.

The number of lines on the routings of the VGI bank depends on the loss norm P and
the number of loading groups 3 in addition to the routing load Y, the average load
on the input a and the accessibility D. By the given parameters it is possible to
determine the number of lines on each routing of the VGI bank [10]. Here it is
necessary to consider the following fact. The number of lines on the routing with
high load can reach significant values, sometimes exceeding 1000. Inclusion of

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

such a large number of lines in the form of one common group from all of the vet
modules presents significant difficulties when installing and executing cross-
connections. Therefore when calculating the number of lines on a routing with
heavy load it is necessary to break down the load and the V61 modules, respectively.
into several groups that are as equal as possible calculating that in each group
the number of lines will be quite large (in order to insure high use of the group),
but not exceed 200. The number of lines is determined separately for each group of

modules; then the results with respect to all groups are summed, and the total
number of lines to the corresponding systems is determined.

RI Stages. RSLA and UP? systems are connected to the inputs of the RI stages, and
IHRA and UK? registers, to the outputs. The RI stage can contain several modules

having common outputs to the registers. The number of RI modules in the group de—
pends on the load, but it cannot exceed three for a total number of outputs of 30.

The group of RI modules having common outputs is serviced by two markers which
operate in the mode with blocking, that is, each of them can be connected to any
module of the given group, but both markers cannot service one module simultaneously.
When the module input is busy, a request arises to connect the marker; if both
markers are busy, the calls are placed on hold.

The total waiting time by a call for servicing is made up of the following: Y“ --
the waiting time by the module to which the call has come for connection of the
marker; Ybl -- the waiting time by the call for servicing in the module; Yreg -—

the waiting time as a result of blocking in the two~link system and absence of

free registers. The average total waiting time is equal to the sum of the indi-
cated average values.

As the norms for the quality indicea of operation of the RI stage it is assumed that
the average waiting time by a call for servicing must not exceed 0.19 second and
P(Y > 2")‘5 0.006. In order to satisfy these norms and also for arguments of
operating reliability of the markers, the admissible use of a marker is 0.35

Erlang, which for T - 0.7 second corresponding to 1800 calls serviced by one marker.
A total of no more n 2°1800 - 3600 calls should come to a group of RI modules.

Calculation of the RI stage consists in determining the number of RI modules, the

number of MRI markers and the total number of registers subject to connection at
the stage output.

The number of RI modules is first determined beginning with the number of sets
connected to the inputs of the stage and the capacity of one module (100 inputs).
The obtained number of RI modules is divided into groups, each of which is serviced
by two markers. If the number of calls for one RI group, that is, for two MRI
markers, exceeds 3600 calls, the number of groups and also the number of RI modules
and HRI markers must be increased correspondingly.

The RNRAM, IHRAz registers and the 0!? systems are connected to the outputs of the

RI stage fully accessibly, and in groups of no more than 30 instruments each (in
accordance with the number of outputs of the RI stage). The number of IHRA¥ and
IHRA registers and also the UK? systems is calculated considering the magn tude
of the load on these devices under the condition of satisfying the quality index
norms for their operation.

51

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬁC]Al.USEioNlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The load on the IHRAH and IHRAz registers is determined beginning with the number

of calls subject to servicing by these instruments and their average busy time
servicing one call. For the the average busy time for servicing one call is
18 seconds considering the tandem connections on the network. For the IHRAz for
intrazonal service this time is 9.5 seconds. The norm for the operating quality

indices of the registers is P(Yreg > 0).: 0.005.

The load on the UK? systems is determined beginning with the total number of com-
pleted calls serviced by these instruments and the average busy time of the UK?

servicing one call which is 10 seconds. The operating quality norm of the UK?
P(y > 2").i 0.05.

Hultifrequency Code Receivers. The , lMRA registers and the markers of the
V0]: stage are connected to the multifrequency rgceivers through a connector. The
connector is fully accessible, its capacity is 30 inputs and 8 outputs to the PM.

The servicing quality norm for the receivers is: P(Y > 0.35“) i 0.002. The average
busy time of the PM servicing one call will be: 0.6 second from the HVGI. 2 sec-
onds from the IHRAH, and 1.8 seconds from the IHRAZ.

The number of connectors and receivers, respectively, required to include and ser-
vice the NVGI, IHRAH and IHRAz is found by calculation. When determining the num-

ber of markers and registers which can be connected to the input of the connector,
it is necessary to consider the following. The busy time of the PM when servicing
the MVGI and the registers differ significantly. In the case of joint connection
of the HVGI and registers to one connector, the waiting characteristics approach
the waiting characteristics for exponential service time distribution (the proba-
bility of waiting more than a given time and the average waiting time by comparison
with conditions of constant service time increased). By these arguments it is

desirable to connect the MVGI and the registers to the inputs of different connec-
tors.

For satisfaction of the service quality norms it is possible to connect either 25
HVCI or 30 registers to the input of one connector. Eight PM are connected to the
outputs in both cases.

During assembly of the connector inputs it can become necessary to have a cor-non

connector for connecting the registers and markers to the eight PH. In this case
the service quality norm is satisfied with a ratio of a maximum of up to 5 HVGI,

12 {NRAM and 10 IHRAZ.

VRKSh Registers and Connectors to Them. The load from the long-distance incoming
channels come to the VRKSh registers through relay connectors for automatic and
semiautomatic service and also from the long-distance switchboards for outgoing
semiautomatic service. The average busy time of the VRKSh servicing one call de-

pends on the type of call, and it is expressed in the following values,
seconds:

for incoming automatic calls (reception of information
from the register) 1.1

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for incoming semiautomatic calls .(reception of infore

mation from the number dialer) 3.0
for tandem calls 9.5
for outgoing semiautomatic calls 11.0

As a result of significant differences in the busy time of the VRKSh for different
types of calls, two types of connectors are provided: VKrVRKSh and RUK-VRKSh.

Primarily the sets of incoming long-distance channels VRIN are connected to the
inputs of the VK-VRKSh connector. In the case where joint operation with another
HTS in the given city has been planned for, the incoming sets of lines for inter-
office tandem connection VKSh are connected to the connector input. The service
quality norm of the VK-VRKSh connector is the value P(Y > 2").§ 0.08.

The register busy time is 1.1 seconds for incoming automatic terminal calls:

for incoming semiautomatic terminal calls it is 3 second; for tandem C3119
9 seconds. The average busy time of the VRKSh (rave) is defined as the rated mean
value as a function of the ratio of the types of calls The values of the

admissible load on the intermediate line Yinter and the connector VK—VRKSh for
three values of Tave are presented in Tablé"b.l.

When it is necessary to service a load exceeding the admissible load by one
call.several connectors are defined with their own groups of VRKSh registers.

The RUK systems used for outgoing semiautomatic service are connected to the inputs
of the RUK-VRKSh connector. The service quality norm is assumed to be P(y > 2").f
0.05. For satisfaction of this norm the load on the connector should not exceed
1.5 Erlangs.

 

MCI Stages. Information is received over the routing to the H51 by six RCI regis—
ters, each of which is attached to ten inputs of the module. The input to the mod-
ules of stage IMGI are busy independently of the presence of free and accessible
RGI; therefore for busy RGI the call must wait for its release.

The operating quality norm of the R61 is the value of P(Y > 1") f 0.002. The average
busy time of the RSI for one call is 1.0 second. In order to satisfy the service
quality norm the load on one register must not exceed 0.056 Erlang. Considering

that one RGI services ten inputs of a stage, the admissible number of calls per in-
put will be 8 ~3600/(1'RGI-10) - 0.056-3600/(1~10) - 20.

The magnitude of the average long—distance load for one input of the IHBI stage is
determined beginning with the admissible number of calls (20) and the average busy

1 inp - Yl reg

53

FOR OFFIC1A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time of the long—distance channel per call T3." - 5.25/2.5 I 2.1 minutes:Y1 inp H61-

31 iinB.H/6° - 20'2.l/60 - 0.7 Brlang.
Thus, the average load per input of the IHGI must not exceed 0.7 Erlang not only
from the arguments of optimal carrying capacity of the modules, but also as a re-
sult of the necessity for observing the quality norm for the RSI.

when calculating the number of lines on the routings of theIMGIbank usually the
following accessibilities are selected: to the IGIH stage where the heavy load is
directed, D - 60, and on the routings to the groups of modules IIHGI.D I 20. Here,
within the limits of the capacity of the line bank of IHGI modules (200 outputs)

a maximum of up to seven routings can be organized to the groups of IIHGI modules.
The loss norm on the lines in the directions from the bank of the 1MB! to the IGIH
and IIHBI is P I 0.002.

The number of lines in each routing of the IMGI bank is determined (analogously to
the V61 stage) as a function of the load time on the given routing Y. the average
load on the stage input a, accessibility D, loss norm P and number of load groups
g. However, in the process of this calculation, some peculiarities of the follow-
ing (after the IHGI) finder stages must be taken into account. In particular,
when determining the number of lines on the routing to the IGIM, it is necessary to
consider the following: each IGIM module is serviced by one marker, and for
reception of information about the A call routing it contains RGI, each of
which services ten inputs. The circuit diagram for connecting the marker and
registers to the inputs are the same as in the H61 stages. The difference is that
the inputs in the group are busy only when the register servicing this group is
free. If the register is busy, then the free inputs of the group serviced by it
are blocked from busying them on the part of the preceding finder stage. In order
to satisfy the service quality norm and compensate for blocking, the number of
lines from the preceding finder stage, that is, from IHGI must be increased corre.
spondingly (by about 52).

When calculating the number of lines on the routings from the line bank of IHGI to
the groups of IIHGI modules, it is necessary to consider that the outputs of the

IIHGI have the outgoing longvdistance channels to other AHTS connected to them.
Here the groups of long-distance channels are organized in two versions: 1) on
the direct routings to other offices and 2) via the UAR or the ANTS performing the
functions of the UAR. As the loss norms for the long-distance channels, P - 0.01
is adopted. For group finding in a two—link module the total losses consist of
two parts: the losses on the lines Pt and the losses to blocking as a result of
the fact that the intermediate paths are busy P , that is, P - P, + P . For
direct channels P2 - 0, for in the absence of ffee channels on the dirkét routing
the decoderdirects thecall to alternative trunks. Therefore in the modules which
include the direct routing channels, it is possible to permit losses to blocking

of 0.01. For the bypass routings the losses in the channels and to blocking
must be a total of 0.01.

In connection with the fact that the layout of the ANTS-3 provides for controlling
the setting up of a call by the finder stage modules, when the intermediate paths
in the stage IIHGI are busy, it is impossible to transmit a call to another group
of IIHGI modules. As a result, significant losses arise from internal blockings.
In order to reduce these losses it is necessary artificially to increase the
collectedness parameters and the expansion coefficient in the IIMGI stage. In

56
POP OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

order to double the connectedness. each outgoing channel is connected to two points
of the IIHGI bank, and in order to increase the expansion coefficient, the admis—
sible magnitude of the average load to one input of the IIMGI nodules is reduced.

The necessity of busying two points of the line bank for each channel creates defi—
nite restrictions on the capacity of the AHTSw3. No more than 200/2 - 100

channels can be connected to each of the seven groups of IIHGI modules, and the
maximum number of outgoing channels cannot exceed 7'100 - 700. Hence, the total
capacity of the office will be 700 outgoing + 700 incoming - 1400 long-distance
channels.

For different groups of channels with respect to capacity, the values of the avail-
able average magnitude of the load reaching the input of the IIHGI module are dif-
ferent. For modules which include high-use direct groups. the values of this load
are presented in Table 4.2.

The high-use direct groups are connected to individual groups of 11MB modules, that
is, to individual routings from the IIMGI bank. Here it is necessary to strive to
have identical or similar groups with respect to capacity connected to each group
of modules.

 

 

Table 4.2.

Number of channels 6 12 18 24 30
in the group

Load, Brlsngs 0.26 0.31 0.34 0.35 0.4

 

On the bypass routings the channel groups are connected to individual groups of the
llMGI modules. For these modules the load on the entrance is not rigidly limited.
The maximum capacity of such a group connected to one group of modules will be 30
channels (for maximum accessibility of 60). If there are more than 30 channels on
the bypass routing, the channels of this routing are divided into 30-channe1

groups which are connected to different groups of modules. All the channels of
the direct and bypass routings are included in the IIHGI bank fully accessibly.

161M and DGIH Stages. The operating conditions of the 61“ stage are such that the
calls through it must be set up during the interseries time of 0.5 second.
Therefore for proper setting up of a call it is necessary that the busy time of the
marker T be sufficiently small, and the waiting time by the register for the marker

not excegd Twait - 0.5-0.06-0.1-Tn. Here 0.06 second is the time of lengthening

of the last pulse in the series as a result of operation of the VKTN corructor;
0.1 second is the release time of the series relay in the register.

The improved diagram of the marker of the 61H stage (CIR-3), in contrast to the
initial I/IIGIM layout permits a call to be set up not only with a single

try. but also with double and triple trials. The busy time of the marker for a
single trial is 0.145 second, for double trial it is 0.16 second, and for triple,
0.18 second. here the waiting time must not exceed 0.195, 0.18, and 0.16 second
respectively. On the average the marker busy time is equal to its busy time for

a double trial. The admissible servicing quality for the IGIM marker is determined

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the value of P(Y > 0.18“) 5 0.001. The average load per input of the module
must not exceed 0.6 Erleng. With this load. BHGIH - Ymp‘éo-WITB - 0.6-60-60/2.1-

1000 calls cone to the marker of the 10m module. The load on the marker is YMGIM'
1000°0.16/3600 - 0.0445 Erlang.

All of these arguments also pertain to markets of the Dam stage. The inputs to
the DGIH stage are husied under the condition of the presence of free ROI of the
DOD! stage.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 5. DESIGN OF THE ANTS-4 AND AHTSvé TYPE UAK

5.1. General Remarks

The ANTS-4 type AHTS and UAK equipment has been developed fully in accordance with
the requirements of the national system for automated telephone communications of

the country, and it is basically designed for terminal offices, but it can be used
as s terminal-tandem office before putting the corresponding UAR into operation.

5.2. Operating Capabilities of the Office

The ANTS-b and UAK equipment is a mechanoelectronic office in which the switching
of the talk channel is realized on crossbar connections, and the control units. of
the electronic type.

In addition to the automatic method of cmumudcations the ANTS—4 office offers the
possibility of semiautomatic servicing of long-distance calls which can be
made using switchboards of both the cordless and cord types.

The electric parameters of the equipment are designed for the possibility of using
channels switched to the ANTS-4 and DA! not only for telephone communications, but

also for transmitting facsimile, phototelegraphic messages and digital data at
speeds of 600 and 1200 baud.

The structure of the ARTS-6 and UAK is a united four-link switching system which is
made up of symmetrically arranged twOvlink MKS modules; All types of channels and

lines are connected to the line banks of these modules: the incoming and outgoing

long-distance channels are connected to the UAK, and in the ANTS-6, in addition,

there are communication lines with local city and rural networks and also when
necessary, interfacility lines for connection to other city HTS.

Setting up calls in the switching system is accomplished by a single-line system
making use of a common electronic marker and decoder interacting with the register
equipment. For matching the operation of the highrspeed electronic marker with
the cross bar connectors, the memories 2U of the modules are used, where each
module is serviced by individual 20. The structural connection of the marker to

the registers imposes restrictions on the total number of registers which must be
no more than 900.

Basically the £00P400-600 type modules (400 points of a line bank, 600 intermediate
lines and 400 intermodule lines) and partially 200v200-200 are used in switching

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systems. The maximum number of modules of an office is 15 incoming and 15 outgoing,
that is, the number of points of the line bank can be up to 6000 incoming and 6000
outgoing. The minimum number of modules must be no less than two incoming and two
outgoing which is necessary for uninterrupted operation of the office.

The capacity of the ANTS-4 is limited by the carrying capacity of the control units.
Calculations performed using computer simulation demonstrated that under the condi-
tion of satisfying the norms of the quality indices, the marker can service no more
than 70.000 calls in the PLH. Beginning with this fact, the total admissible load

to the office which in practice permits us to obtain an office capacity of no more
than 4000 incoming and 0000 outgoing channels and lines is determined.

The research performed by the TSNIIS established that fulfillment of the last norms
for internal blocking (P . 0.002 to 0.003) is insured with an average load on one
switching bank point of no more than 0.6 Brlang. that is, with a load on the 600—
400-600 module of no more than 240 Erlangs. and for the 200-200-200 module of no
more than 120 Erlangs.

In contrast to the ANTS-2 and ANTS-3, the equipment of the ANTS-6 decoder permits
analysis not only of the three digits of the long-distance code ABC, but also
two digits of the intrazonal numbers -— ab(ABCab), which is necessary for access

to the zone where several ANTS are located. The layout of the decoder permits con-
nection of up to 240 outgoing routings to the office. here automatic setting up of
a call on a direct routing is possible, and when it is busy, over one of the four
bypass paths.

The distinguishing feature of the ANTS-4 by comparison with the ANTS-2 and ANTS-3
is also the possibility of predominant servicing (priority) of calls coming from

subscribers of individual categories. The "priority" subscribers are serviced by
the system with limited waiting with outgoing, incoming and tandem calls. The re-

maining subscribers are serviced with incoming and outgoing calls by the system
with rejects, and only for tandem calls, with limited waiting. Priority is possible

only for subscribers of the ATS at which the AON equipment is installed. Provision
is made for the possibility of segregated priority servicing of up to 120 lines

of direct subscribers connected to the cord type direct subscriber switchboard.

The central instruments of an office —— marker, decoder, waiting equipment -- are
redundant.

The ANTS-4 and UAR equipment is designed for technical servicing by the monitor-
correcting method. In order to maintain a given operating quality of the equipment,

provision is being made for automatic monitoring and testing equipment KIA at the
office which provides for the following:

continuous monitoring of the condition of the control units;

statistical monitoring of the entire set of office equipment;

checking the group (registers) and individual (line systems) equipment on the basis
of the results of statistical monitoring;

checking the control units using special KIA programs based on the continuous moni-
toring results;

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI()FF1CIAI.IJSEZ(MHLV

self-monitoring of the KIA and segregated register adapters.

The results of the monitoring and testing are printed out at the KIA work place.
The causes of failure messages are determined and eliminated from the results of
analyzing the messages.

The automatic equipment for calculating the load AUN and the equipment for monitor-
ing service quality AKK which is part of the ANTS-4 and UAK permit data to be ob-

tained for optimal prospective planning of the development of long—distance and
intrazonal networks. Using the AU“, the number of calls distributed by the ABC
and ABCab codes is determined in order to establish the uniform gravitations from
the given office. and the number of busies and channel, line and station instrument
loads are determined to check the correspondence of the number of line systems.group
and general office instruments installed at it by the calculated data and monitor
their performance during operation. The AKK equipment continuously monitors the
percentage of rejects as a result of busy channels and waiting equipment A0 on
each routing of the last-choice path. In addition. the ARK periodically monitors
the percentage of calls separately from priority and nonpriority subscribers wait-
ing for the release of AD more than a fixed time. On the basis of this con-
tinuous monitoring with respect to each last choice path PPV, two states of viola-
tion of the service quality norm are noted:

1) the service quality norms for priority and nonpriority calls are violated;
2) the service quality norms are violated.only for nonpriority calls.

Signals of the occurrence andexPirationof these states are transmitted to the
zone monitoring station PKZ and the main dispatcher monitoring station of the
country GDPK for making decisions to maintain a given service quality.

For organization of intraoffice and interoffice order-circuit service at the ANTS-
4 and UAK provision is made for an order-circuit crossbar ATS of the ATS K-lOO/ZOOO
type. The maximum capacity of the order—circuit ATS is 900 numbers. The order-
circuit ATS subscribers - supervisory and duty technical personnel - have access
through the switching system of the AHTS (UAK) to the long-distance telephone net—
work channels. The intraoffice servica between order-circuit ATS subscribers is
realized appart from the switching system of the AHTS (UAK).

5.3. Structural Diagram of the ANTS-6 and UAR
In the diagram in Figure 5.1, the boldface lines indicate the office elements which

are common to the ANTS-4 and UAR. the fine lines depict the elements belonging only
to the ANTS-4. As is obvious from the diagram, the UAR includes the following de-

vices:

the line systems of the long-distance channels with single-frequency (VKIS. ITKS)
and two-frequency (VKTNA, IKTNS) signal systems and also the incoming systems from
the order-circuit ATS (VKS);

the switching system KS consisting of the incoming AV and outgoing SD modules;

the storage elements of the Au—AV and the zu—sn modules;

59

FKHICNWHCJAI.lﬂﬂE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the marker H;
decoder P;
waiting equipment A0;

registers: tandem TR, incoming latching VSR, order circuit SR, outgoing latching
ISR;

the register finding stage RI;
connecting sets of registers RSP.

The ANTS-4 office contains the following devices in addition to the equipment stan-
dardized with the UAR:

the ZSL and SLM line equipnent for communications with the CATS and T38 of its zone;

the trunk equipment for connection to other HTs of the city (if necessary);

the line equipment of the trunks for connection with the cord type switchboard
equipment located in the same building (RUSK, IKZM) or another building (VKHS, IRKUK);

the cordless type switching equipment;

registers: outgoing IR, matching semiautomatic service PSR, RI stage and connecting
systems RSP;

charge calculating equipnent AUS;
device for data request and reception from the AON (UZPI).

Each version of the registers performs its own basic functions. The tandem register
TR services the tandem and terminal incoming calls and is connected to the incoming
systems of the long-distance channels with single—frequency signal system VKTS.
Analogous functions are performed by the incoming latching register VSK, but with
respect to the two-frequency system channels, and it is connected to the incoming
systems of the VKTNS. The incoming matching register ISK is connected to the out-
going IKTHS systems of the long-distance channels with two-frequency signaling
systms

The outgoing register IR services the outgoing terminal calls; it is connected
to the ZSL equipment and connected to the ABS and the UZPI. In contrast to the
ARTS-2 and the ANTS—3, the outgoing automatic call is setup without using
intermediate registers at the A18. The number information is sent from the ATS
instruments directly to the ANTS register. Accordingly, the receiving part of
the AON equipment -- the UZPI system - is installed at the ANTS.

The matching semiautomatic service register PSR services calls set lip
semiautomatically. These registers are connected to the incoming RUKS and VKHS

systems of the long-distance cord type switchboards or the switchboard positions
URN of the cordless switchboards.

60

FKMICMNNCIAL USE!MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gm (6)
I! ”EH MN:

”(103 .
Mr IMII.(7)

 

Figure 5.1. Structural diagram of the Mfrs-lo and OAK.

Key: 1. 251. from CATS and T98 17. VKMS 38. A05
2. input HG channel 18. RUSK 2/6 39. UZPI
3. lines from other HTS l9. VKS 40. [R

of the city 20. MIG/’1‘ 101. ESL
10. from the order-circuit 21. SK 102. TR
ATS 22. 51. b3. VSR
5. to the AK of the order 23. RM 104. PSR
Circuit ATS 2’0. IKSLH-u. [.50 SR
6. SLM to the UVSM of the 25. ms 106. RI
CATS and T35 26. IKTNS
7. outgoing HG channel 27. 11010
8. lines to other HTS of 28. 11015
the city 29. IKZH l0/2
9. mux 30. IKZK 4/2
10. ms in another building 31. mm loll.
11. waiting lines A0 32. KLMG
12. to the order-circuit ATS 33. MK b/t
13. VKZSL-... 34. 21.
14. VKTS 35. 35L
15. VKTNS 36. 2K
16. V1010 37. [SR
61

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The memories ZUeAB and ZU-CD are each attached to one module and just as the
modules, they are connected to each other by the "eachwto—each" principle. They
are used to match the operation of the MRS of the module with the high-speed

electronic marker.

The marker H, decoder P and waiting equipment A0 connected to it make up the basic
control units of the office.

The lines to the order-circuit ATS, the waiting lines A0 and the recorded voice
equipment KPMS are connected without line switches to the switching bank of the
link D of the outgoing module.

“hen using cordless switchboards, the lines are connected directly from the univer-
sal connecting equipment USK of the switchboards to the switching bank of the in—

coming modules.

5.4.‘ Setting up Calls

Outgoing Automatic Calls on the LongeDistance Channels. For establishment of
automatic service with a subscriber of another zone, the subscriber A of the ATS
equipped with AON equipment dials the prefix for access to the ANTS "8" and the
ten-digit long—distance number of the called subscriber B. After dialing "8" the
subscriber line is connected to the outgoing equipment of the ZSL, from which the
busy signal is sent in the direction of the VKZSL at the ANTS by the battery or

frequency method depending on the type of ZSL.

If the VKZSL is busy, a free outgoing register IR is connected to it via the RI
stage. A special notice of the presence of AON equipment at the ATS is sent from

the set to the register electrically. The outgoing register busiea the UZPI, re-
ceives the resistance AON interrogation signal from it and relays it to the VKZSL.

The resistance signal requesting information from the AON is converted by the
VKZSL line equipment in accordance with the method of transmitting line signals of
the given type of ZSL, and it is transmitted to the ATS.

The IR register connects the lines betw~en the VKZSL and the 0221, over which a
frequency information request signal is transmitted from the UZPI to the ADM.
Receiving this signal, the AON dispatches information on the category and number
of the calling subscriber A by the mnltifrequency method by the "2 out 6" code
using the "no-interval packet“ method. In the IR register this information is
received from the UZPI by the resistance method by the "2 out of 5" code. A buzzing
signal that the ANTS equipment is ready to receive information about the number
of the called subscriber B is sent to subscriber A from the register. The regis-
ter IR receives information about the number of subscriber B. After completion
of recording of the long-distance number (ten digits) the IR busies the automatic
charge computing equipment AUS. The information about the numbers of subscribers
A and B is output by the register IR to the A08 in four steps. After dispatching
information to the AUS, the IR register is disconnected from the AUS and calls

the decoder.

0n the basis of this call the marker H selects the calling register IR which by
a signal from K is connected through the R8? to the decoder. The IR register

outputs the required information to the decoder (five digits of the long-distance
number) which determines the outgoing routing (direct or bypass) and it outputs a

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

notice to the free incoming equipment of the selected routing. The marker H
selects one of the free paths from the VKZSL to a free outgoing routing and
transmits information about the selected path to the module memory. After selec-
tion of the path the decoder transmits information about its method of operation
in the further phase of completing the call to the IR based on the "path selected"
signal received from the marker. Then the decoder and marker are released.

Under the control of the Ld—AB and the ZU—CD, the MRS of the A, B, C and D links of
the switching modules connect the path from the VKZSL to the outgoing equipment of
the required routing. The latter is busied and sends a busy signal over the long-
distance channel to the next ANTS or UAK. The IR register receives the frequency
request signal from the register of the next office and transmits information about
the category of the call and the number of subscriber B to it by the multifrequency
procedure "2 out of 6“ code by the "pulse packet" method. After reception of the
signal of correctness of reception of all of the transmitted information from the
register of the next office, the IR is released.

In the absence of A0“ at the ATS, notice of absence of the AON is transmitted to
the register after busying the VKZSL and connection of the register from the system
to it. A buzzing signal that the ANTS instruments are ready to receive information
is sent to subscriber A from the register. After receiving and recording the in-
formation about the numbers of subscribers A and B, the register IR is connected to
the decoder and transmits the information required to set up the long-distance call
to it, and a signal to check correctness of the number dialed when the subscriber
A is dialing his own number to the subscriber A. In the case of positive results
from checking. hisIR busies the A08 equipment and transmits information to it about
the numbers of subscribers A and B. After completion of the interaction with the
AUS, the decoder is again busied. and information is transmitted to it to set up
the call to subscriber B.

In the absence of free paths from the VKZSL to the free outgoing equipment. a
special signal is fed to the IR from the decoder, by which the register releases the
decoder and marker, and after some time (about 100 milliseconds) again connects to
the decoder for a repeated try at setting up the call. In case of rejection as a
result of absence of a free signal in the required direction, for priority calls

the decoder transmits a signal to the IR to set up the call for waiting and busies
the waiting system (via the switching system). The IR register connects the "please
wait" recorded message to the line of subscriber A. For nonpriority calls the
decoder transmits the "busy" signal to the register. on which the IR must be re—
leased. In the waiting equipment A0 which is constantly connected to the decoder,
the required information is present about the waiting calls (the routings on which
the waiting calls are being held and the categories of the waiting calls).

When the channel becomes free on the routing of the A0 waiting, the signal is trans-
mitted via the waiting line and switching system to the waiting register IR that it

must again call the decoder. If several registers are waiting for the given routing
to become free. service priority is given to registers with priority calls. The

IR register, receiving a signal, again calls the decoder, breaks the connection via

the switching system to the waiting line and is connected to the decoder.

At the time of connection of the waiting IR to the decoder (using the marker M and
the register switch RSP) further completion of the call is realized analogously to
the normal call via an office (without waiting).

63

FOR OFTWC1A1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On arrival of the "subscriber B answers" or “busy" signals from the channel during
the setting up of a call and also after completion of the call on arrival of the
“ring-off" signal, the VKZSL system transmits a signal to this effect to the AUS
equipment.

For service over the channels with ANTS—2 and ANTS-3 operating by the two-
frequency system, the ANTS-4 has outgoing matching registers ISR which receive in-
formation from the IR by the multifrequency method and transmit it to the ANTS-2
or ANTS-3 by the decade method in two steps by the "transmit code" and "transmit
number" signals.

After receiving the ring-off signal. processing of all the information and determi—

nation of the charge for the call begin. All the accumulated data. including the
length of the call are transmitted to the AUS recorders.

Incoming Long-Distance C3118-' Automatic and semiautomatic incoming calls
depending on the type of office where they originate. are set up through dif-
ferent incoming systems and registers. The calls from like offices (ANTS-4 or
ARM-20) are set up through the VKTS systems operating by the single-frequency signal
system. Here, a tandem register TR is connected to the VKTS equipment. and its
interaction with the lecoder and marker of the switching system takes place just as
in'the case of the outgoing service with the IR.

The calls- from ANTS-2 and ANTS-3 over the long-distance channels are set up
via the VKTNS equipment with the participation of the incoming matching registers
VSR which receive information from these offices by the decade method in two steps
by the "transmit code" and "transmit number" signals. Information is transmitted
from these registers by one of three methods depending on where the call is
going: the decade, multifrequency by the "pulse packet" method or multifrequency
by the "pulse shuttle" method.

In the absence of free trunks to the ATS of its zone, the setup for waiting is done
only for calls of the priority category.

Automatic Intrazonal Connection. For setting up an automatic call within his zone,
subscriber A dials “8" for access to the AHTS, "2" (the intrazonal service prefix)
and the seven-digit number of subscriber B. In the absence of AON,subscriber A
dials his own number. Further setting up of the call takes place just as with
automatic long-distance service.

Semiautomatic Long-Distance Calls. This form of call is set up from long-distance
switchboardsof theno-delaysystemHKNSand thecordlesslong-distance switchboards for
delay-basis outgoing calls xxxzs. At each switchboard position there are six
universal connecting systems USK. The answering sides of the USK are connected to
the line bank of the incoming and outgoing modules of the switching system. The
calling sides of the USK a?! connected only to the incoming points of the line bank.

Calls from subscribers goto the answering sideof the USK. por connection to the NKNS,
subscriber A dials the prefix "8" and the two-digit code of the HMNS. At the
ANTS. the VKZSL and IR are busied. The register is connected to the decoder and

transmits information to it about the category of subscriber. the HKNS code and
"end of dialing."

64

ﬁOR¢NﬂﬂCJAl.US£(NVLY
FORioFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

In the case where there is a ready switchboard position, the call is setup from
the VKZSL to the selected USK; if there are no free switchboard positions, the call
is put on hold. and a light indicating the presence of waiting calls lights on the
MKNS.To make a switchboard position ready ' it is necessary to throw the “an
swer " and "ready to receive call GPV" switches which provides for-markingthe free
point of the bank in the ZU-SD and sending the notice to the transmitter of the
presence of ready switchboard positions on the routing. The switchboard posi-
tions of the “IRS are divided into two groups: one group services subscribers of
the priority category, and the other group, the remaining subscribers.

After busying the USK, the information request signal is sent from the switchboard
position of the URM to the IR. The register receiving the request transmits the
category and number of subscriber A to the USK by the "pulse packet" method. In
the case of absence of AON. the IR register sends information about the provisional
category and provisional number of the subscriber. After receiving this informa-
tion a signal confirming reception is sent to the IR. The telephone operator.
answering the subscriber, proceeds with setting up the call. Throwing the "dial
B" switch feeds the request to the R1 to connect the semiautomatic service register
PSR. After connecting the PSR the dial light on the call side of the LNV lights
up at the switchboard position. The telephone operator dials the code and number
of subscriber B. The notice of the call priority is transmitted to the register
automatically when it is busied.

The PSR register connects the decoder which marks the routing. If there are no

free outgoing channels the priority MKNS are connected to the waiting system. and
nonpriority ones receive a "busy" signal. Thetalkchannel in the USK is connected
to dispatch the dial digits from the PSR to the register of the next office. After
receiving the signal confirming correct reception, the register is disconnected from
the URM. The ring-off light OLV lights up on the switchboard.

0n connection to a free subscriber line the telephone operator hears the call send-
ing monitoring signal. If the subscriber line is busy with a local call, the OLV
light blinks and the call can be heard; if the line is busy with a long-distance
call, the OLV light blinks and a "busy" buzzing signal is heard. After the sub-
scriber 8 answers, the OLV light goes off. and it lights again on ring-off.

A call is set up with subscriber A on the HKNS and MKIZS over the SLH trunk via the
answering side analogously to setting up a call on the long-distance channel.

Communications with Order-Circuit ATS. An outgoing call from a given ANTS-4
office to subscribers of the order-circuit ATS of other THTS and UAK is set up via
the VKS system and the switching system of the AHTS using the SR register over
ordinary long-distance channels. The interaction of the instruments of the switch-
ing system, the RI stage and the line switches takes place just as when setting

up ordinary long-distance calls, but without connection to the charge com-
puting equipment.

The incoming calls from other ANTS and UAR to subscribers of the order-

circuit ATS of the given office pass through the switching system and the special

RSLV equipment which forms part of the order-circuit ATS which is connected to the
switching system of the ANTS-6.

65

FiltCNﬂﬂC]Al.lﬂﬂE(ﬂQLY
c FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calls to the controlled KIA (KIA-2) are set up via the ordervcircuit ATS with
remote measurements and testing of the long-distance channels and line equipment.
For this purpose, the order-circuit ATS has a special switching stage GI-KlA, the
outputs of which are connected to the KIA-2 systems.

Communications with the services of the switchboard shop and other ANTS services
and also with the GTS information serviceareorganized with the order-circuit ATS
via a special stage Glinformation'

Servicing Direct Subscribers. For servicing segregated direct subscribers it is
proposed that the existing sets of direct subscriber lines connected to the cord
type switchboard equipment be used. For incoming calls the direct subscriber lines
are connected to the order-circuit ATS. For outgoing service the direct subscriber
lines are connected to the cord type switchboard equipment entering into the ANTS-4.
Special Jacks for the priority systems RUSK are allocated on the cord switchboards
if the cord switchboard is in the same building with the ANTS, or IRUK sets if the
cord switchboard is in another building. The RUSK and VKHS equipment must send
notice of a priority call to the PSR and VSR registers.

The direct subscriber cord switchboards are located in the ANTS building.
5.5. Description of Basic Types of Office Equipment

Line Equipment

The line equipment of the ZSL and SLM provided for communications with local tele-
phone networks are in four versions used depending on the type of lines:

VKZSL-Z, IKSLH-Z for physical three—wire lines;

VKZSL-é, IKSLH-A for physical four-wire lines; '

VKZSL-U, IKSLM-U for transmission system channels with segregated signal channel;
VKZSL-T, IKsm-T for transmission system channels without segregated signal channel.

All the ZSL equipment interacts with the registers via the RI stage and also with
tne AUS and AUN equipment.

The interfacility line systems VKHD and IKMO are used for communications with the
ANTS-4 or ARM-20 in the given city over the physical four-wire lines. The interac-
tion signals are transmitted via the midpoints of the transformer over a single-
frequency signal system.

Using the VKHS and IKHS systems, communications are organized with the ANTS—2 or
ANTS-3 of the given city. The interaction signals are transmitted over a two—
frequency signal system. The indicated systems can be used both for tandem

calls between facilities and for outgoing semiautomatic service from the cord type
MTS.

The relay-repeater matching equipment RUSK is designed to organize
semiautomatic service via the ANTS-4 from the long-distance switchboards of the
cord type MTS of the MRU installed in the same building with the ANTS-4. In this

66

FOR’OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

case a key pulser must be installed on the long-distance switchboard MK. The

RUSK system interacts with the PSR. Information is output to the register by the
multifrequency method using a key pulser on the MK. The RUSK input is connected to
the bank of the switchboard of the cord HTS of the MRU over the two-wire talk channel
system, and the output. to the incoming point of the line bank of the switching
modules by the four-wire system.

The outgoing relay-repeater equipment IRUK is designed to organize semiautomatic

service from the cord type HR installed in another building. 0n the incoming end
the interfacility line is connected to the VKHS system of the ANTS-4. The inter-
action signals are transmitted by direct current. The number information is dis-
patched by the multifrequency method using the key pulser on the long-distance

switchboard. The six-frequency oscillator systems are placed in cannon frames with
the IRUK systems.

The outgoing sets of interfacility recording trunks IKZK4/4 provide ser-
vice with the cord type MK installed in another building. 0n the incoming end of
the ZSL, VKZSLSh4/2 must be installed. For reliable operation. the resistance of
each wire of the interfacility ZSL must not exceed 1000 ohms; the insulation resis—
tance between the wires with respect to ground must be no less than 150 kilohms.
The potential difference on the interfacility ZSL is 8 volts. The interaction sig—

nals are transmitted over the midpoints of the transformers by signal code adopted
for the ANTS-4 offices.

The outgoing sets of interfacility recording trunks IKZK4/2 are designed
for coupling the ANTS-4 over physical two-wire lines with the delay-basis switch-
boards of the cord type HTS located in another building. 0n the incoming end of
therecording trunk an VKZLSh 2/2 must be installed. The four-wire input of the
IKZK 4/2 is connected to the outgoing point of the line bank, the two-wire output
to the physical interfacility recording trunk with the parameters: the resistance
of each wire of the physical line no more than 1000 ohms; insulation resistance

with respect to ground and between each othen no less than 150 kilohms; potential
difference with respect to ground is 8 volts.

The outgoing IKZH 4/2 systems are designed for coupling the ANTS-4 to the long-
distance switchboards of the cord type HTS located in the same building with the
ANTS-4. The four—wire input of the IKZH 4/2 is connected to the outgoing point
of the line bank, and the two-wire output. to the MK bank. The IKZH 4/2 system
transmits and receives interaction signals from the MK by direct current. The

system permits tandem calls to be set Up with manual service channels
connected to the cord type MK.

Switching Modules

In the ANTS-4 and UAK two types of switching modules are used: 400-400-400 and
200-200-200. This provides for economical assembly of offices of various capaci-
ties.

The group formation diagram of the module is presented in Figure 5.2. A three-
position crossbar connector MKS 10 X 20 X 6 providing for four-wire switching of

the talk channel is used as the switching element. The basic element of the link
is the switchboard consisting of two MKS. Within one link the switchboards are

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.2. Group formation diagrams of switching nodules of the ARTS-4
and UAR: a) module 400-600-1000 (f - l); b) nodule 200-200-200 (f - 2).

not connected to each other; only switchboards of different links are connected to
each other.

The 400-400-400 module is singly connected, that is, there is only one intermediate
line between the first-link switchboard and one switchboard of the second link.
The 200-200-200 nodule is doubly connected, that is, one switchboard of the first
link is connected to one switchboard of the second link by two intermediate lines.

The two-line nodule AB (CD) of the 1900-1000-1000 type is arranged in eight frames
(four frames of link A and four frames of link 3); the two-link ZOO-200.200 nodule is
placed in four frames (two frames of. link A and twoframes of link 3).

Up to ten MKS forming five switchboards (two MKS each) are installed in each frame.
Each switchboard has 20 verticals and 20 bank lines. Thus. 100 verticals and 100
bank lines are formed on one frame Beginning with this fact, the number of frames
of the MKS is determined for each link of the nodule.

Figure 5.3 shows a structural diagram of the switching system. All of the calls are
set up via four links. The following participate in a connection between the input
and output: the intermediate line between links A and B. the intarmodule line be-
tween nodules AB and CD. the intermediate line C and D. The incoming lines and
channels are connected fully sccaasibly to the switching modules AB; the incoming
lines and long distance channels of direct and bypass routings are connected fully
accessibly to the switching modules 01). The outgoing and incoming channels of one
routing must be distributed uniformly over all the outgoing and incoming nodules,
respectively. The same thing pertains to the 281. groups from each ATS and the SLH
groups to the incoming message junctions of the CATS (WSM) and the Tas of its zone
and also to other lines connected to the switching bank.

During the process of servicing a call coming to the input of the switching system,
the corresponding incoming and outgoing points of the bank are marked to which the
the free lines or channels of the required routing are connected. Then an attempt

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.U$E(NNLV

 

Figure 5.3. Structural diagram of the switching
system of the ANTS-6 and UAR.

Key: 1. VK b. IX
2. ZU-AB 5. Marker
3. 20-00 6. P

is made to set up the call via the free intermediate lines between links to all
free lines of the required routing.

The selection of free intermediate lines between links is made by the marker. The
losses occurring in cases where free incoming lines are theoretically available for
the call coming into the input. but at the given time it is impossible to busy them
inasmuch as there are no free intermediate paths to these lines or losses as a result
of internal blockings. The probability of these losses depends on the average
amount of traffic coming to the bank point and the size of the group of intermediate
(intermodule) lines. The probability of losses to internal blocking increases with
an increase in traffic to the bank point.

The load must be distributed uniformly between all the incoming modules AB, the
modules CD and also between the switchboards of links A and D. In this case if the
calculated value of the average load to one line turns out to be greater than 0.6
Erlang, not all points of the bank should be taken, which is achieved by increas-
ing the number of modules. here the untaken points of the bank are distributed
uniformly among all modules.

Each module AB is connected to each module CD by intermediate (intermodule) lines.
Independently of the number of modules and size of the load on the intermediate
line all the lines in the intermodule group must beactive. Here the intermodule
lines must be distributed by modules in such a way that the number of lines will be
a multiple of five in the group between each pair of modules.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500030063-4

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

a.
v.
v.
v.
v—
on

o—
o.

2

||'°|'°| l'l ll'ISI

l:"!"'|

  

  

  

                

a o
I 2
o. 3
I v
I a
a. . 2
I v
v v
o o
l o
a o
l 8
I 2
I a
o 2
-- a
w o
« o
I a.
I 8
I 8
I h
a a.

3.603

a a.“ «on: uo .02

an“: 2595

  

 

§+§
31.82

a +2.8.
n+8:

sax?
818.2

aux w

83—Hour

Sax
3+2;

Sax?—

3.24%

.Sioax a
aux
_m+o_+sax
.2135".

.miwaxcu
8x.

8x v

Sax
.2. .. sax
.85...“

        

uo unsouw >n

«on: 0.16
Ion—nous no

   

       

8 a
3 o.
8 2
a v
3 _
8 a.
s m
an

8 o
3 a
an a
3 o.
3 o
9 .
3 o
8 n
on v
on n
3 v
8 n
8. v
a: .
on. «
3a. N.

nod—ave!
no 2:6...»
.3 one:

aqua-53

calm—2x:
caanSv

Sun—\Sv

“Ia—:5.

8n _ . 83
ale—23v

$433
SISS.

hauntsv

8'28.
8.128..
81:8.

”glass
8«.n«\8v

8 Eu
.2 no :2.
£000 525

land NO ﬂOdu IOS won—dd HO

Inn—«33 ._ . oz «macaw

  

nods—Xx.—

     

   

w— a.
v. I

a. «.—

2 «—

2 2
c. o.

V‘DO h
VO‘O h

an
N

       

go :aqunn .

   

satnpon av

   

.H.m wanna

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500030063-4
FOR OFFICIAL USL ONLY

 

6..

Econ

£816
on

2
..‘
2

a.
Z

0-00‘05 ..

. oz
HQUdu
qu>

N .n «Hana.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NULY

The method of distributing the intermodule lines by groups of verticals of links
B and C has a significant influence on the probability of losses as a result of
internal blockings. The most expedient distribution of the intermodule lines for
offices of different capacities is illustrated in Table 5.1. An example of the
intermodular connections for an office containing seven AB modules and seven CD
modules is illustrated in Table 5.2.

Module Memories
Each module has its own memory ZU-AB and ZU-CD corresponding to it.

The ZU-AB memory controls operation of the MKS of links A and B of the incoming
module AB. From module AB information is transmitted to the marker aboutavailability
of intermediate lines which can be used at the given time to set up a call. The
results of marker selection are entered in the ZU-AB. 0n obtaining information

from the jointly operating ZU-CD that the call paths have been defined, the ZU-AB
connects the MKS.

The ZU-CD memory controls connectors C and D of the outgoing module CD. Informa-
tion is transmitted from the CD module to the marker about intermediate lines which
can be used at the given time to set up a call. The result of marker selection is
entered in the 20-60. After determining the paths of the call information is trans-
mitted about this to the jointly operating ZU-AB and the MKS is connected.

After checking the connection of the channel the ZU-AB and ZU—CD are released. The
busy time of the 2U setting up one call is 90—95 milliseconds; of this 30 milli-
seconds go for joint operation with the marker and decoder; 50 milliseconds go for
connecting the switching channel; 10-15 milliseconds are the relief time and opera-
tion of the monitoring circuits.

The incoming module AB can be connected to the marker only if the 20 [memory] of
this module is free, that is, the fact that the ZU-AB is busy can increase the
marker call waiting time somewhat. As for the 20 of the outgoing modules. for the
indicated relation of the busy times of the marker and the 20, the incoming call
can encounter one, two or three simultaneously busy 20-00, that is blocking of the
switching modules CD by the memories is possible. If free channels are found only
in the outgoing modules which are blocked by the ZU, the marker waits for release
of one of these modules.

Two ZU—AB or two 10-00 are placed in one frame.
Switching System Marker

The marker performs two functions: 1) selection and determination of the register
which must be connected to the decoder; 2) selection of the connecting path between
the incoming and one of the marked outgoing points of the bank.

The marker chooses the register and the connecting path in one busy (in 30 milli-
seconds). The busy time of the marker setting up the call to the A0 is 60 milli-
seconds. The marker permits selection and determination of one of 900 registers

which are separated into 30 groups of 30 registers each. According to the opera-

tion of the selection system the marker determines one of the intermediate lines
in interaction with the module ZU.

73

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to insure uninterrupted operation of the equipment at the office two

markets are provided which operate alternately. Both markers are in the same
frame.

The setting up of the call is controlled by the marker over a one-line circuit.
The marker can be connected to any incoming or outgoing module of the switching
system and it is possible to set up calls from any incoming system to any outgoing
system. If the call comes at a time when the marker is busy, it waits for release
of the marker. The register receiving a call when the marker is busy is put on
hold. This form of waiting is external waiting for the marker.

In the next phase of setting up the call the marker is connected to the nodules
AB and CD, the memories of which must he free. If the free outgoing lines of the
required routing are available only in the modules, the ZU of which are busy (that
is. the modules are blocked by the ZU), the marker waits for release of one of
these ZU-CD. This form of waiting is internal waiting for the marker.

According to the results of simulation and calculations performed by the TsNIlS.
the probability of blocking of the CD modules by the 20 is about 42. The waiting
time by the marker for release of an outgoing module blocked by the 20 can assume
discrete values: 5, 35, 65 milliseconds (95 milliseconds for the ZU).

The average busy time of the marker for servicing any call is made up of the

operating time setting up connections in the switching system and the waiting time
for servicing connections to the modules blocked by the ZU:

lu-l;(l—P.)+I.P_,

where Pm is the probability of waiting by the marker for release of a module blocked
by a ZU; t' is the busy time of the marker for setting up the call when ser-
vicing cal s to modules not blocked by 20; to is the busy time of the marker when
servicing calls to modules blocked by ZU.

In order to determine the value of t‘ it ir necessary to consider the service system
adopted at the ANTS-4 with the possigility of limited waiting on channels. The
average busy time of the marker for calls which are serviced without waiting on

channels is equal to 30 milliseconds, and for calls which are serviced with waiting
on channels (when setting up the call to the A0). about 60 milliseconds. with a

probability of setting up a call for waiting PB’ the marker busy time for modules
not blocked by ZU is

¢;-30(1—p.)+6op,.

The average busy time of a marker for calls waiting for connection to modules
blocked by ZU is

‘0 =!; +?.I

74

FOR 0FF1CIAI.USEioNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Y0 is the waiting time for a waiting call.

Substuting the values of PH - 0.06. PB - 0.01, Y0 . 5, 35, 65 milliseconds in the

above-indicated expressions, we obtain the average busy time of the marker equal to
tM - 31.6 milliseconds (for 70 - 65 milliseconds).

The calculation of the marker reduces to determining the maximum number of calls
which the marker system can service with an admissible waiting time. Since at the
ANTS-4 the murker system is one marker, the waiting time in it is determined just
as in a systan with waiting consisting of one instrument. The calls are selected
from the queue for servicing in random order.

The average waiting time for connection of the marker for all calls depends on the
load on the marker and can be defined by the formula for a single queue system with
constant service time:

i. - Y.!./[2 (I —Y.)] .

The value of § . 30 milliseconds is taken as the norm for the admissible average
marker waiting time. Beginning with this fact, with an average marker busy time for
one call t" - 31.6 milliseconds the load on the marker Y“ must be within the limits

of 0.6 to 0.65 Erlang. Here the number of calls which the marker can service will
be

8,, =0.6~3600- l000l3|.6= 70000.

Decoder

The decoder is designed for selecting the routing and marking the line equipment of
the selected routing on the basis of information received from the register in
parallel code (for each digit there are six wires, the digit is transmitted in a

"2 out 6" code by direct current). After analysis of the received information about
the number of subscriber B or the service (to five digits) the decoder determines
the group of routings, it selects the routing in the order of the established queue
in which the free channel is available, and it marks the selected routing. After
reception of the signal from the marker that the path has been selected. the de-
coder transmits the necessary information to the register and disconnects.

The decoder consists of a central part, the routing number modules and the outgoing
routing modules. The central part is constructed from electronic circuits. The
central parts of two decoders are placed on one frame. For the routing number
modules and the outgoing routing modules, composite frames are used. On each com-
posite frame there are 120 routing number modules and 80 outgoing routing modules
or 260 routing number modules. A maximum of 860 routing numbers and 240 outgoing
routings can be connected to an office.

A routing number is the number by which the routing to the UAR, ANTS or the network

of its zone is defined - AB, ABC. ABCab and Zab. The number of routing numbers
at the ANTS is determined by the sum of the following: the number of long-distance

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

service rontings (to the UAK) determined by the decoder by analyzing two digits
of the long-distance code AB which can reach 15;

the number of three-digit ABC codes (to the ANTS) dialed by the subscriber or
telephone operator which can reach 300;

the number of routings to zones in which several ANTS are installed determined by
the decoder by analyzing five digits -* ABCab;

the number of routings of the zone telephone network including the routings to the
UVSH CATS, within the territory of which the designed ANTS is located.

Each routing number corresponds to a block of routing numbers 3R. Each outgoing
routing corresponds to a block of outgoing routings 43. Each 3R block can be con-
nected to five 48 blocks, that is, to five different routings (one direct and four
bypass).

For connection of the maximum number of blocks, that is, 840 SR and 240 4R blocks.
five composite frames are required. The makeup of the decoder frames is illustrated
in Figure 5.0. The composite decoder frames are redundant.

.11:-
-I3-
—
-I"l-
[Lama
[ma
um:
mama

(.1 man:

M
r501) (i) Peualm uranium/p mm!»

    

I

Figure 5.4. Makeup of decoder frames.

Key: a. central part of the decoder A
b. central part of the decoder B
c. central frame
d. composite frames
e. specialization board
f. VA-R
g. VA-P board ...
h. adaptor frame P and A0
1. redundant composite frames
j. VAR-P board ...

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Waiting Equipment A0

The waiting equipment is designed to insure the possibility of servicing calls
with limited waiting for the release of channels, trunks and switchboard positions.

Only priority subscriber calls are set up for waiting at the AHTS with outgoing
terminal connections if all channels and trunks are busy. Subscribers of other
categories. having no priority, are rejected if all the channels and lines of the
routing are busy. Tandem calls are serviced with limiting waiting for subscribers
of all categories - priority and nonpriority. However, for calls from priority
subscribers privileges have been been provided for in the A0 equipment -- reserving
of a waiting place and priority servicing of waiting calls from priority subscribers.

The maximum number of waiting lines is 40. These lines are connected fully acces-
sibly to the outgoing modules of the switching system. The ratio of the number of
waiting lines for calls can be as follows: for channels and SLH 20, 30. 40; for
switchboards 20, 10. 0.

The waiting equipment makes it possible to limit the number of nonpriority calls
waiting for the release of channels. Restricting the waiting with respect to time
is divided in three gradations: 15-30. 30-60. 65-90 milliseconds. 0n expiration
of the control waiting time the call is taken off hold.

0n connecting the waiting equipment. information about the routing number (two,
three or five digits of the long-distance number: AB. ABC, ABCab and 2A3) and
category of the waiting call is transmitted to it from the decoder. Each routing
number corresponds to a block of routing numbers 36. Each outgoing routing corre—
sponds to a block of outgoing routings ac. It is possible to connect to two ac
blocks to each 3C block for the call can be set up for waiting on two routings.

Constant monitoring of the business of the channels on the routings connected to the
A0 and blocking of released channels for waiting calls are provided by connecting
the outgoing routing blocks ac in the A0 to the corresponding blocks bk in the de-
coder.

The A0 equipment is placed in central and composite frames. The following are in-
stalled in the central frame: the waiting line systems, memory of the A0 and the
routing number analysis circuit. This frame is connected to the switching modules
and the register distributor. The composite frames contain the routing number blocks
3C and outgoing routing blocks 60. One composite frame has 90 4C blocks and 125

3C blocks or 250 3C blocks. The central frame and composite frames are redundant.
The makeup of the A0 equipment is shown in Figure 5.5.

Register, Decoder and Waiting Equipment Adaptors

The adapters VA-R. VA—P and VAR-P are located on a separate frame.

The segregated adapter of the VA—R registers operates jointly with the test adapter
of the registers on the monitoring and testing equipment KIA frame and is connected

at the time of testing to wires between the tested register and the decoder.

The isolated adapter of the decoder VA-P is designed to test the decoder and waiting
equipment automatically (using the KIA) and manually.

77

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Imumnmnm

MMMHNWH

HUMHMHW

           

 

“It u______——_V_———_—_—_a

w
(6) Wm! mm» mm

Figure 5.5. makeup of the waiting equipment frames.

Key: 1. waiting place of the SH
2. memory of the A0 and analysis circuit
3. central frame
4. composite frames
5. SH
6. redundant central frame
7. redundant composite frames

The isolated recording adapter of the VAR-P decoder is designed to record errors
which occur during operation of the decoder or waiting equipment or during joint
operation of this equipment with other equipment.

Register Equipment

Different types of registers are used correspondingly to service different types
of calls.

The outgoing register IR is connected to the VKZSL equipment of all varieties and
services the outgoing automatic calls over the channels of the long distance and
intrazonal networks. the outgoing automatic and semiautomatic calls for interna-
tional service and also calls for the services of the switchboard shop of
the ANTS. It receives information about the number of subscriber 3, about the
Category and number of subscriber A and dispatches this information by the corre-
sponding means to the instruments of its MS, to the long-distance channels, over
the trunks to the ATS instruments of its zone and to the charge computing equipment
AUS.

In order to receive information about the category and number of subscriber A
connected to the ATS with the AON equipment, the receiving part of the A0“ ~-
information request and reception unit UZPI which is connected to the R through the
connector 8 -- is installed at the ANTS. In the UZPI information about the

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFTWCJAL.US£!0NLY

category and number of the subscriber A comes from the transmitting part of the AON
installed at the ATS.

International calls are set up by using a special international service attachment
PMS which is connected through the connector S :o the IR when the subscriber dials
"10“ -- the code for access to the international network. The connector S has 30
inputs and 4 outputs. The IR are connected to the inputs, and four 02?! or four

PMS are connected to the outputs. The PMS attachment receives and records the last
four digits of the international number, determines the end of dialing of the inter-
national number and is essentially an auxiliary memory of the outgoing register.

The connector and the attachment are arranged on the S-PMS frame which is installed
jointly with the IR and the IR/K frames.

The tandem register TR is connected to the VKTS Systems and services the incoming
terminal and tandem calls over the single-frequency signal system channels. The
register receives and records information about the category of the call and the
long-distance number of the subscriber B and outputs information to the control
units on the caregory of the call and the first five digits of the long-distance
number of subscriber B. Output of information to the control units begins after the
register receives five digits of the long-distance number. The remaining five
digits are received simultaneously with information output. The information output
procedure is determined by a signal from the decoder depending on the routing of the
call.

The incoming matching register VSR is connected to the VKTNS systems and services
incoming and tandem calls arriving over the long-distance channels of the two-
frequency signal system. Tandem connections of these channels (when necessary) can
be made with the channels of both the two-frequency and the single-frequency signal
system.

The register VSR receives and records the long-distance number of subscriber A from
the register of the preceding office during automatic service or from the number
dialer of the telephone operator in the case of semiautomatic service, it transmits
information on the category of call and the first five digits of the long-distance
number to the decoder and outputs the complete long—distance number (or part of it)
to the next register. The information output procedure is determined by a signal
from the decoder.

The outgoing matching register 15R is connected to the IKTNS systems and services
the outgoing long-distance automatic and semiautomatic calls over the two—frequency
signal system channels. It receives the long-distance number of subscriber B from
the registers connected to the incoming line equipment and records it. The informa-
tion output to the channel begins on completion of reception of all digits of the
number by the decade method in two steps (code and number).

The ISR register operates without a decoder. The channel busy signal is transmitted
by the line equipment after connection of the register to it.

The semiautomatic service register PSR is connected to the RUSK. VKHS equipment and
to the switchboard positions of the long-distance switchboards, it services semi-

automatic calls over the long-distance channels. over the intrazonal network lines
and communications with the services of the ANTS.

79

IR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFN3A1.USE4DNLY

The PSR register receives the long-distance or intrazonal number of subscriber B,
the long-distance or local number of the order-circuit ATS subscriber and also the
international service number or long-distance code of the base international office
from the key pulser of the switchboard position or from the terminal line equipment.
After receiving and recording all of the information the PSR is connected to the
decoder and transmits the information needed to set up the call to the decoder.

By the signals from the decoder, the recorded information is output in the corre-
sponding way to the registers of its or another AHTS or the local network.

The PSR register can make a repeated attempt to set up the call if the first attempt
is unsuccessful in the case of busy intermediate paths in the switching system or
reception of the "information received incorrectly" signal from the register of the
Opposing office. The PRS register provides for transmission and reception of the
required signals for setting up the call for waiting and also for taking it off

hold if the control time expires or a free channel appears on the required routing.

The order circuit register SR is connected to the VKS equipment and services the
calls . between subscribers of different order-circuit ATS within the limits

of one zone and different zones. It receives the long-distance order-circuit num-
ber from the order-circuit ATS, records it, transmits information to the decoder
consisting of the first five digits of the full long distance number of the order-
circuit ATS subscriber and the category of the call "automatic nonpriority" (the
register creates the call category itself), and it outputs the long-distance order-
circuit number to the control units of the office.

Information comes to the ANTS registers by the following methods: the long-
distance number of the subscriber B by the decade method (IR, VSR, SR) or multi-
frequency (TR, ISR, PSR); the call category, multifrequency (TR, SR), by the resis-
tance method from the decoder (IR, PSR), or it is formed in the register itself
(VSR, SR);

the category and number of subscriber A by the resistance method ("2 out of 5" code)
from the UZPI when working with the ATS containing AON equipment or by the decade
method from the number dialer of the subscriber when working with the ATS without
AON (in this case the IR itself creates the provisional category of the subscriber).

A multifrequency receiver is provided as part of the registers for receiving infor-
mation by nultifrequency code. The recorder of the received information is con-
structed on the basis of a hereon relay.

Information is fed to the decoder by means of the electronic circuit by parallel
code. The information from the decoder required for further operation of the
register (for example, the subscriber number output method iron which the digits
begin to be output, and so on) is received by the register also in parallel code.
The information can be output from the registers as follows:

by multifrequency "2 out of 6" code by the "pulse packet" method (VSR, TR, SR, IR,
PSR);

by the decade method (VSR, ISR, TR, SR, IR, PSR);

by multlfrequency "2 out of 6" code by the "pulse shuttle" method (VSR, TR, SR, IR,
PSR).

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The RI stage serves to connect the terminal line equipment to the registers. In
this stage two-link modules with concentration are used. Internal blockings are
possible in the modules. With respect to capacity, RI modules of three types can
be used: 120-100—30; 160-100-20; 200—100-10. Group formation circuits of the R1
modules are shown in Figure 5.6.

' _____ ' I31:
; soon
soon ”and
: ~ 3332'"
5 0.00 (3)
Ion ————— oo
:00 .o
..
;.. :: £19)
:3 :3 hi
loo ..
IC.———n—_..
cJ

 

loo——_-_..
3:: '°
I.
n. ., (P)
. andnilnn
:z: :.A~M
1.0 ..
1°. 00
i0. 0.
Doo—_--_..
bl

Figure 5.6. Group formation circuits of the RI stage
modules: a) RI 120/20; b) RI 200/10; c) RI 160/20.

Key: A. 30 outgoing points to the registers
B. 20 outgoing points to the registers
C. 120 incoming points to the line equipment

D. 160 incoming points to the line equipment
E. 10 outgoing points to the registers

F. 200 incoming points to the line equipment

The RI stage module contains 10 MKS (10-12-12), to the verticals of which terminal
linc equipment is connected, and to the outputs of the switching bank, registers.
The registers TR, VSR, ISR, PSR and TR can be connected to the outputs of the group
of RI modules both by a fully accessible group and incompletely accessible group.
The number of RI modules entering into a group is selected as a function of the
magnitude of the incoming traffic. but must be no more than two. The number of
registers in the group must not exceed the number of lines at the output of the
used type of RI module. The IR registers considering the requirements of the ADS
equipment can be included at the outputs of only one RI module.

Each RI module is serviced by two markers operating alternately. The marker of the
R1 stage is universal for all versions of modules.

The line equipment connected to one RI module is divided into 20 groups of six,
eight or ten lines in a group. When the input is busy, the request to connect the

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R1 marker arises. The marker selects the group, then the set in the group, from
which the call has come. On the basis of information about free registers and
free intermediate lines in the module the marker selects one register. controls
the connection of the MKS RI, monitors connection of the bank and disconnects.
The operating time of the marker and the connection time of the RI module is
approximately 130 milliseconds.

The marker is connected only if there is an available free register. If all the
registers are busy or there are free registers but they are inaccessible as a result
of blockings in the two-link system, the incoming call is placed on hold. A ser-
vice system with limited waiting is used in the RI stage.

The choice of the type of module in the RI stage is made on the basis of a compari-
son with respect to number of registers required to service the corresponding
traffic from the group of RI modules. The calculations demonstrated that IR, VSR,
ISR and SR are most economically connected to the outputs of the 120-100—30 modules;
TR and PSR are most economically connected to the 160-100-20 modules. The 200-100-
10 modules are used primarily for connecting the TR to the UAR.

The register equipment is located in frames of two types: "normal" and composite.
Only registers are installed on the "normal" frames, and in addition to the regis-
ters. the connecting systems of the RS? registers or multifrequency oscillators
MG are located in the composite frames. By using one RSP system it is possible to
connect up to 10 registers to the marker and the decoder.

The makeup of the frames with the registers is presented in Table 5.3.

  

Table 5.3.
No. of registers No. of frames for a Additional equip-
on a frame group of 20 registers ment of the com-
-composite normal composite total posite frame

 
   

 
  

    
 
 
 
 
 

Two RSP systems

VSR The same

lSR One HG

SR Two RSP systems
IR The same

The same

  

As is obvious from the table. for all types of registers except the ISR. two RSP
systems are placed on one composite frame which can service a group of up to 20
registers. One multifrequency oscillation which can service up to 30-35 circuits

is installed on the composite frame of the ISR. However. for uninterrupted operation
of the equipment the ISR registers must be serviced by a group of two oscillators
which requires installation of two composite frames.

Oscillators
The ringer oscillator CTN is designed to obtain audiofrequency currents required

to transmit line and control signals over the long-distance telephone channels for
automatic and semiautomatic service. The two-frequency oscillator is tuned to

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

frequencies of 1200 and 1600 hertz; the single-frequency oscillator, to a frequency
of 2600 hertz.

A group of two oscillators operates in the hot reserve mode. Under normal condi-
tions the oscillators operate each on its own group of channels and provide simul-
taneous sending of a signal frequency over 20 channels. Under emergency condi-
tions, one oscillator can provide for the possibility of simultaneous sending of

a signal frequency over 40 telephone channels.

The nultifrequency oscillator HChG is designed toobtainsignals of six frequencies
(700. 900. 1100, 1300. 1500, 1700 hertz) required to transmit control signals in '
"2 out of 6" code. The group of two oscillators operates in the hot reserve mode.
Under normal conditions oscillators operate each on its own group of registers and
must provide simultaneous sending of signals to ten registers. Under emergency
conditions an oscillator can provide the possibility of similtaneous sending of
signals to 20 registers.

The multifrequency oscillators are placed in combined register frames on RSP plates.
Two multifrequency oscillators are installed on one RSP plate.

Automatic Charge Computing Equipment AUS

The AUS equipment is installed in the ANTS to record outgoing data required to com-
pute the charge for calls and other types of information transmission for long-
distance and intrazonal automatic service. Further processing of these data for
reckoning payments and settlements with subscribers is done by computers which can
service one or several ANTS.

The A08 equipment is constructed by the group principle using ferrite, semiconduc-
tor elements and RES-14 type relays; one AUS module services 120 VKZSL. The
module includes the following basic modules:

the ferrite memory FZU for recording information from 120 VXZSL (a maximum of 150
bits per one VKZSL);

the register for recording numbers RZN which records information about the subscri-
ber numbers. the category and numer of the IR for subsequent recording in the FZU;

the register for recording the time RZV to record information about the time the
subscriber 8 answers and subsequentlyenter it in the FZU;

the register for reading numbers RSN to record the number information read from
the FZU and subsequently transmit it tothe buffer memory DP via the connector RS-BP;

The register for reading the time RSV to record the time the subscriber B answers
read from the Flu and also information about the VKZSL number received from the
UU/FL.-FZU connector. All of the information recorded in the RSV must be transmitted
further through the RS-BP connector to the 81’;

the control unit UU of the FZU for controlling the operations of erasing an entry
and reading in the F211;

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL.USE|DNLY

the recognition unit OP-VK for selecting one of several VKZSL calling the AUS in a
group of 120 systems;

the UU-FZU connector for connecting the corresponding verticals of the FZU to the
erasure, recording or read circuits in the US/FZU and also for transmitting the
VKZSL number to the RSV;

the automatic clock ACh for receiving one-second pulses from the primary clock to
accumulate information about the time of day in the VU or the RZV and also trans-
mission of the day pulse to the automatic calendar;

the subtraction circuit VU for determining the length of the call;

the blocking relay BR for blocking a group of 120 VKZSL in case of failure of the
AUS module or transmission of a signal to the IR on operation without the ADS;

the through connecting circuit PU for connecting the lines marking a completed or
incompleted call from the VKZSL to the RSV.

Every two AUS modules contain the following common modules:

the buffer memory BM for storing all of the information reflected on the punch card
and subsequent transmission of information to the punch;

the connector between the read register and the buffer memory RS—BP for connecting
lines from the RS“, RSV and VU to the BP;

the recognition unit OP-RS for controlling the operation of the connector Rs-BP;

the recognition unit of the buffered memory OP-BP for connecting the BP to ordinary
or hospital output units;

the automatic calendar AK for storing information about the day and month and subse-
quent transmission of this information to the 8?.

Recorded Voice Connection Systems KPHG

The "recorded voice" machine is designed to output the messages "incorrectly
dialed number," "call the operator," "wait" and so on. This machine is connected
through the KPHG equipment to the outgoing switching modules of the office.

Switching Equipment

Switching equipment of the following types is provided in the ANTS to set up
calls by the semiautomatic method and give out information:

NKNS -- long-distance switchboard of the no-delay service system;
HKIZS "- long-distance switchboard for the outgoing delay-basis calls;
TsSK -- central information switchboard;

RSh -- rayon information switchboard;

84
FOR 0F11C1A1.USE(3NLY
FOR‘OFTICJAI.USElNNLY

KNS -- shift chief switchboard.

For operating convenience the cordless type switchboards with remote relay section
are used. The switchboards only have switches, buttons and lights necessary to
control the setting up of a call.

The recorder and display for recording the category and number of subscriber A
consisting of eight digital lights are installed in the “MRS. A multifrequency
receiver is available at the switchboard position to receive the digits of the num-
ber and the category transmitted by the multifrequency method.

The HKNS switchboards are divided into two groups: the priority and nonpriority
switchboard positions. The arrival of a call at one group or another is determined
by the category of the subscriber. 0n connection of a register from the switch-
board positions of each group, the corresponding priority mark is transmitted to the
register. The number is dialed on the MK by the key pulser.

The HKIZS switchboard can transmit a mark to the register both for priority and non-
priority calls by examining the operation or according to design. The transmission
of the priority mark to the register is provided by installing the corresponding
jumper on the circuit board of the universal switchboard position URN.

The switchboard HR is made up of two switchboard positions. Each position has one
URN system and six universal connection systems USK. The connection systems have
answering-and calling sides. The answering side of the HKNS switchboard is connec-
ted to the incoming and outgoing line banks of the switching stage, and the calling
side. only to the incoming line bank.

There is a possibility of installing a special brigade leader‘s system in any HR
to organize a brigade leader's switchboard position.

The TsSK switchboard is designed to give out simple items of inform tion and trans-
fer the cail to obtain complex information to the RSK. The RSK number is dialed

via the order-circuit ATS. The TsSK switchboard is built as a cordless type switch-
board with remote relay section, and it has 15 connecting systems.

THe RSK switchboard is designed to give out complex information. It is made as a
cordless switchboard and has 12 connecting systems.

The KNS switchboard is cordless with two switchboard positions. The switchboard has
individual indicators to indicate the presence of an operatorat the position,

lights showing readiness to receive calls, buttons for connecting the moni-
tored position to the operator‘s headset. The MK. TsSK and RSK switchboard positions
are divided into four groups for monitoring. The KNS can monitor one position in
each group simultaneously.

The switchboard equipment has no special production monitoring switchboard KPK. The
KNS can be used for this purpose. For recording the operation of the monitored
workplace it is proposed that tape recorders be used which can be located in the
switchboard drawers. Each switchboard position of the KNS has a set of equipment
connecLed to the line bank of the ANTS for connection to long-distance channels.

85

FOR OFFNJAL.USE(NVLY
F1)R‘OFIW(]Al.lH5EZ(NNLY

For order-circuit calls the HR, RSK and KKS switchboard positions are equipped with
a two-way communication line with the order-circuit ATS. The TsSK switchboard
positions are equipped with an incoming line from the order-circuit ATS. The
switchboard positions of the brigade leaders, KNS and RSK a : equipped with a two-
way line with the CATS. The KNS switchboard position is equipped with direct com-
munication lines with the brigade leaders' switchboard positions and the operative
services of the office. The order-circuit lines are equipped with the universal
connecting line USL systems located in a separate frame.

For organizing order.circuitsbetween operative services the desk type ordes circuit
service switchboards used in the ANTS-2 can be used. The switchboards, in contrast
to the ANTS-2, are fed from the frame corresponding to each switchboard position.
This version excludes the necessity for a special power distribution frame with
respect to the RPK switchboards.

For servicing direct subscribers it is proposed that the HRU type switchboards with
direct subscriber PA line systems connected to the order-circuit AT be used. in
this case the corresponding corrections must be made in the PA equipment.

Automatic Traffic Calculating Equipment AUN and Quality Control Equipment AKK

The AUN equipment provides for tccounting for the number of busies and the load
of individual types of office devices and consideration of the load distribution
with respect to routings. The equipment contains devices for calculating the num-
ber of busies and the traffic of the UZN and devices for calculating the call distri-
bution by the ABCab codes of the URV. The number of calls with respect to each
ABCab code is recorded in the corresponding electronic counters of the URV, from
whicn after defined time intervals it is output on the PL-8O tape punch. The call
distribution can be calculated simultaneously with respect to no more than 40 pre-
viously given codes. The information about the number of busies and the load is
also recorded on the electronic counters and the electronic erlang meter and after
defined time intervals it isOUtPUtonthe PL-80 tapo punch.

The AER equipment provides for accumulation of statistical data on the operating
quality of individual types of equipment and the number of calls and rejects in
defined time intervals. The equipment contains the following: the V0 input device
and four electronic quality recorders. Every electronic quality recorder has an
electronic counter with counting capacity to 100. an electronic counter with count-
ing capacity to 30 and a decoder. The information is recorded in the electronic
counters and is picked up or the punch tape after defined time intervals.

The input unit VU is used to match the ARK equipment to the office instruments:
Lhc decoder, waiting equipment, and relay systems for different purposes.

The AUN and ARK equipment is placed in universal frames on which the following are

installed: four quality meters, two erlang meters. 40 URV counters and ten UZN
counters.

Monitoring and Testing Equipment KIA

The automatic monitoring and testing equipment of AMTS-A is a set of equipment which
includes three basic assemblies: KIA-l, KIA-2, KIA-3. The switching, control and
line equipment of the offices are tested using the KIA-l. For control of the tests

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

and measurements programs written on punchtape are used which are input to the cen-
tral part of the KIA. The tested equipment is connected to the central part of the
KIA via the first and second type connecting units (PU-l and "1-2).

The test results are recorded by the recording module operating by its own program
transmitted by command from the central part of the KIA.

The KIA-2 assembly is used for testing and measurements of the long-distance channels
jointly with the KIA-l. The operation of the KIA-2 located at the incoming end of
the channel is controlled by a programtecorded inthe KIA-l at the outgoing end.

The control instructions for the KIA-2 are transmitted from the KIA-l over the
measured channel or any other channel. Connection to the switched channel (together
with the terminal line equipment) is realized on the outgoing- end via the PU-l

which is connected directly to the outgoing system. Connection to a channel with-
out line equipment is realized using the PU-2.

the KIA-3 equipment is installed at the ATS and designed for testing and measuring

the ZSL and SLH. The operation of the KIA-3 is controlled by the program written
in the KIA-l.

The number of KIA-l and KIA-2 sets at the AHTS-é is determined by calculation and
can reach a total of ten.

The KIA includes the following: sets of measuring devices, test units (adapters).

automatic isolated adapters VA and also the workplaces of the channel equipment
bench STK and the duty engineer's bench SDI.

The structural diagram of the KIA interconnected with the ANTS-b and ATS equipment
is shown in Figure 5.7. The incoming and outgoing systems of long-distance channels
are provisionally designated as VK and 1!, respectively, and the registers of all
varieties (except IR), by R.

The first type connecting units PU—l are designed to couple the ingoing and outgoing
line equipment also registers and adapters with test equipment. The connection is
provided over two paths:

the first path for connecting the incoming line equipment. registers and test and
recording adapters to the test equipment;

the second path for connecting the outgoing line equipment to the test equipment.

Figure 5.8 shows a structural diagram of the first type connecting unit. As is
obvious from the diagram, each connecting path consists of several stages of
switches. The number of stages depends on the total number of tested sysiaks and
devious and also the accessibility of each stage. 1},

The first stage switch 1? is part ofthc switch runtrol unit KUP. The switches of
the last stage SP are placed in the same frames as the connected devices. The 2P,
3F and so on switch stages are connected between the l? and SP. These switch stages
are placed in the sidewalls or the frame rows. If it is necessary to install

several KIA systems (a maximum of up to ten), the combining switch 50? is used which
is placed on a separate SP frame.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
" "' _ —I
0' 'z'ﬁa—‘— g... c b m:
2" rn1 .: __".I ‘32-; " “in _
'9 dub. : I. I a'
- - L: n. .
All-I“ _ u.
“Era-I .
(1a...- II 1 g
‘4‘ 1') [£25 135E.
3. SF

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     
 

”Eh-I!

m

Figure 5.7.

 

Structural diagram of the KIA of the

ANTS-4.

Key: 1. from the other ANTS or UAK 16. KlA-... 31. to the other
2. VKZSL l7. STK ANTS or UAR
3. Pu—2 18. PU-III
A. VK 19. CI
5. KS 20. AI
6. IKSLM 21. RSLI
7. 1K 22. RSLV
8. order-circuit ATS 23. AON
9. HR]. 210. ATS K

10. RI 25. RSLA
11. IR 26. II 61"
12. AUS 27. LIM

13. R 28. 161

14. P A0 29. PI

15. SP (PU-1) 30. ATS DSh

The number of frame switches SP for the VK, 1K
number of the corresponding frames (one SP per
53? is determined beginning with the fact that
the outputs of one such switch. The number of

beginning with the fact that it is possible to
82?.

and registers is determined hy~the
frame). The number of group switches
it is possible to connect ten SP to
SZP is determined analogously

connect 53? to the outputs of one

Thescgregated testand recording adapters (VA and RA) are connected to the outputs of
the 53?. The ANTS—h equipment includes the following types of adapters:

88

FOI.OFFNJAI.USEZONLY
FIN!(Hﬂﬂ(]Al.lEﬂE(M‘LY

 

Figure 5.8. Structural diagram of connecting units.

Key: 1. IR 7. KUP I
2. SP 8. VA
3. S3P 9. $2?
4. KIZ-Z 10. R
5. SDP 5/2 11. SP
6. KB? II 12. VK

recording for the marker H (VAR-H) placed on a separate VAR-H frame;
test for the marker H (VA-H) placed on the marker H frame;

segregatedfortheregisters (VA-R) placed on a separate adapter frame which is part
of the decoder P equipment and the waiting equipment A0;

segregated for testing the decoder (VA-P) placed on the frame of the adapters P and
A0;

recording for the decoder (VAR-P) placed on the frame of the adapters P and A0;
segregated for the RI stage (VAR-RI) plsed on the RI-l frame.

The adapters of all types (except the VAR-RI) are designed the same for the office.
The number of adapters VAR-RI is determined calculating one adapter for the RI
module. that is, the number of VAR-RI adapters is equal to the total number of RI
modules. It is possible to connect 20 adapters to the outputs of 83?.

For the second connecting path the number of group switches S3P is determined cal-
culating the possibility of connecting five SP to one 53?. The number of combining
switches of the SD? is determined beginning uith the possibility of connecting ten
83? to the outputs of one SDP.

Order-Circuit ATS

As the order-circuit ATS for an ANTS-4 and UAK. the crossbar equipment of the ATS
K-lOO/ZOOO type is used. The maximum capacity of the order-circuit ATS is 900

numbers. When designing the order-circuit ATS. the office capacity must be taken as
a multiple of 100 numbers.

89
FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FORiOFFKJAL.USE(MNLY

The structural diagram of the order—circuit ATS is shown in Figure 5.9. The ATS
K—lOO/ZOOO office contains the following stages: subscriber finding AI, group
finding GI and register finding RI. The processes of setting up the calls are
controlled using the registers and markers. The markers are attached to the
switching modules of the finding stages. Each module of the AI. GI, RI stage has
an individual marker setting up the connection only within the limits of the given
module.

 

Figure 5.9. Structural diagram of an order-circuit ATS

for ANTS-4.
Key: 1. subscriber 9. ShKS 16. ANTS services
2. AI 10. GI-KIA and information
3. Shk 11. Clint service of the
a. order-circuit ATS GT5
12. ANTS

5. GI 13 AB module 17. TSK

6. RSLV ' 18. CD module
14. KIA-2

7. R1 15 VKS 19. SK

8. RS-3 '

The order-circuit ATS is designed to organize order-circuit service both inside the
given office and with other ANTS and UAK over the long-distance channels. Accord-
ingly. the order-circuit ATS includes special RSLV equipment for coupling to the
switching system of the ANTS (UAK).

The inputs of the Al stage include the operative subscriber lines (supervisory and
duty technical personnel), the one-way lines from the direct subscribers of the
ANTS. the one-way lines from different services of the switching shop and from the
NK, two-way lines from different ANTS services.

The RSLV systems designed for incoming long-distance order-circuit service are con-
nected to the inputs of the Cl and RI stages. The outputs of the VI stage are con-
nected to the intraofficegroupsof lines forming routings to the hundreds modules
of the AI stage, the outgoing lines to the ANTS for the long-distance order-circuit
service. lines to the KIA-2 test units of the ANTS via the special GI-KIA nodule
connected in place of the hundreds module of the AI and also lines to the switch-
board shop services, other services of the ANTS and to the GT5 information service
via the special module GIinf connected to the GI bank instead of the hundreds
module of the AI.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJAI.US£(MNLY

Lines from the information service of the AHTS are connected via the ShKS systems

to the inputs of the GI n module. The ShKS systems are connected in turn to the

inputs of the R1 stage. The three-digit registers RS-3 are connected to the out-
puts of the RI stage.

5.6. Calculating the Volume of ANTS-4 Equipment
Initial Data

The following materials are used as the initial data for calculating the office
equipment:

the data on the number and mode of the channels and lines corresponding to the in-
stalled capacity of the office;

data on the flow distribution of the incoming traffic with respect to the outgoing
routings;

the percentage ratio of the crossbar and ten-step ATS;

design solutions regarding the interaction of the ANTS-4 with other long-distance
communication facilities in the same city;

quality index norms of the operation of the ANTS-4 instruments and lines;
the operating indices of the office;
data on the average busy time of the ANTS-4 instruments for setting up calls.

The outgoing materials with respect to number of channels, lines and their load are
compiled on the basis of the given master plans for development of the long-distance,
intrazonal and city networks for the city in which the construction of the ANTS-é

is planned. These data reduce to the table compiled like Table 5.4 which is pre—
sented as an example for designing the office. The number of channels N and the

load Y for each group (version) of incoming and outgoing long-distance channels,

ZSL and SLM and also for communications lines with the long-distance switchboards,
with the order-circuit ATS. to the recorded voice unit and waiting lines are in-
dicated in the table.

The lines from the long-distance switchboards connected to the bank of incoming
modules of the KS service two traffic flows:

to the outgoing long distance channels with the semiautomatic method of setting up
calls;

to the SLM for connecting to ATS subscribers of its city and zone with long—distance
semiautomatic calling available to them.

The lines to the long-distance switchboards connected to the switching bank of the
1 outgoing modules service the load sent to the long-distance switchboards HTS of

. the cord type located in the building with the ANTS-6 (basically for tandem connec-
Ztlons with the manual service channels connected to the cord-type MK).

91

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030063-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6.

 

 

Line No of
equipment chant
identiiiv N
cation code

Types of channels and lines

 

Incoming channels and lines
Long-distance channels with signal system:

 

single-frequency VKTS 500
two-frequency VKTNS 500
25L from the CATS:

physical three-wire VKZSL—Z 400
physical four-wire VKZSL-é 200

for a transmission system with segre—
gated signal channel VKZSLU 600

ZSL from the zone Tss for a transmission
system without segregated signal channel VKZSLE 650
Lines from the long-distance switchboard RUSK 406
Lines from the order-circuit ATS VKS 49
Total 3105

 

Outgoing channels and lines
Long—distance channels:

 

single-frequency signal system iKTS 500
two—frequency signal system iKTNS 500
SLM to the UVSM:
physical three—wire IKSLM-Z 250
physical four-wire IKSLM-b 125
with a transmission system with segre-
gated signal channel IKSLM-T 375
SL3 to the zone TsS for a transmission
system without segregated signal channel lKSLM-T 676
Lines:
to the cord tvpe MK _ IKZM 4/2 03
to the order-circuit his RSLV 56
to the recorded voice unit KPMG 36
waiting A0 40
Total 2620

With respect to the communication lines with the order-circuil
determined approximately beginning with the fact that on the a

52 of the outgoing long-distance load.

The number of lines to the recorded voice unit is reckoned ca]
of calls from the local network subscribers of the zone (the t
is calculated below).

The flow distribution of the incoming traffic over the outgoit
iently represented in the form of a checkerboard table. As a:

92

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030083-4
ﬁOI.051ﬂC1Al.USEiDNL¥

Table 5.5 is presented. The basis for the traffic flow distribution is the percen-
tage ratio of types of traffic and gravitation characteristic of the city in

which the construction of the ANTS is planned obtained as a result of analyzing the
statistical survey material.

Table 5.5.

IdentificationgTotal
code of incom— incom-
ing equipment ing

 

       
 
 

Outgoing equipment load. erlangs

  

 

   

 

 

 

, . I . .
was «:0 i 40 a Ins l95.s| us ! 14
Views 400 — 64 .31.!) 95.5'145 | M
VKZSL-Z f3 3; — _ I _ | 3} 3 _
VKZSL- " " “'I l '-
VKZSL-U , 200 so — — i - - as s —
“251,-: , ass I a: | 42 21 53 I 25 lo —
Rugs - :34 8| an so 16 I 46 70 l _ l 10

_ VIC | :u . l7 :7 - . .. | _ _ _

Total loss imgwolmo xm'awlslzluiaa

___.____, : . l

Note. ' Tandem calling between like equipment VKTs-IKTS

and VKTNS-IKINS is provisionally provided for in the example.

Under specific conditions a tandem call can be made be-

tween these systems in any combination.

The data on the ratio of the number and capacities of the crossbar and ten-step
ATS in its zone are required to calculate the number of registers inasmuch as these
offices are characterized by various methods of information reception.

The design solutions for interaction of the ANTS-6 with other long-distance tele-
phone offices in the same city arereflected in the structural diagram of the authors
and also in the table of the number of lines and magnitudes of the loads over these
lines. These solutions are based on analyzing survey materials, the data from the

masterplansom the prospects for development, and they are reinforced by the corre-
sponding agreeements.

The operating indices of the office are determined on the basis of an analysis of
the statistical materials on long-distance traffic in the city where the ANTS is
planned. The accumulated experience in the operation and maintenance of AMTS in

different cities makes it possible to assume the following average operating indices
when designing new offices:

Average length of a long-distance call for the following types of
setups. minutes:

automatic Tp 4.0
semiautomatic Tp.ﬂ/a 5.0
intrazonal T z 3.0

Time for setting up a long-distance call, minutes:
automatic Ta

semiautomatic Tﬁ/a

°.°
(”VI

93

FOI.051H(1A1.US£10NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Average number of calls (attempts) for one completed call:
automatic 2.5

semiautomatic in a common group with the auto-
matic service channels

semiautomatic on a separate routing

outgoing over the SLM of the ANTS-ATS

PNN
. o
MNUI

Average busy time of a long-distance channel for one call of the
following types. minutes:

automatic 5. 25

1“ - 1'.-2.s+ 7'” - 0.5-2.5+ 4.0 - 5.25

semiautomatic on a separate routing 6.62
Trul- " Til/{2'7 '5' Tau/n - 0'6'2'7 ‘1" 5-0 ' 6-82

semiautomatic in a common group with automatic
service channels 6.5

79,. - rm-2.5+r”,. :- 0.6-2.5 + 5.0- 6.5 ~

Average busy time for one call in the case of automatic long-
distance calling, minutes:

long distance channel 2. l

T... -. u../2_5 - 5.25/2,5 -2,I

281. 2.5

TB 251. -Tu-l.2-2.I-l.2-2.6

SLH 2.1
- -2,I
TB SLM T"
The same, for semiautomatic calls on an individual routing,
minutes:
long-distance channel 2.5

rm, -ru,‘,2.1 mica/2.7 - 2.5

SLH to the ATS for incoming calls 2.5
T -
B 81141“? mule
SLM to the ATS for outgoing cells 5.0
95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1' +|,sr.)/I.5-(6.&+1.5-0.5)/I.5-5.0

-(T
B SLHout k.ﬂ/a

Average busy time of one call for intrazonsl calling. minutes:
5124 4.25

I? SLH -r.'2ts+T’_’-0o5'205+3.o-‘.25
2

ZSL 5.1

TPZSLZ I Tp smz'1.2 - 5.1

Average busy time for one call in the case of intrazonal calling,

minutes:
SLH 1.7
TB SLH - Tp SLH /2.5 - lo.25/2.5 z 1.7
2 Z
ZSL
‘1‘B ZSL - TB SLM -l.2 - l.7'l.2 z 2.0
x z
lines to the order-circuit ATS TB s1 0.7
Average expenditures of telephone operator time, seconds
to receive a request over the ZSL Trequest 55
to receive a request over a long-distance
channel (from the telephone operator) TB 1gp ho
to give out simple information '1‘“ ¢ 30
to give out complex information Tc c 180

The average busy time of an MC information channel. seconds, per
call consisting of the following elements:

average sentence time T 6.5
sentence
waiting time for completion of the sentence
Tcomp.sent 3'0
interval between sentences Tint 1.0
THC - Tsent.2 + Tint 2 + Tcomp.sent . 6.5.2 + 1.0-2 + 3.0 - 18

The data on the average busy time of the ANTS-4 instruments to set up calls are de-
fined primarily on the basis of the results of measurements performed on an experi-
mental model of the equipment, and for some instruments. by calculation. The values

of the average busy time of the instruments for different operating conditions are
presented in Table 5.6.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The quality index nouns, the explanations for which are presented above (see sec-
tion 3.6) are expressed by the following values:

1) loss probability P:
long-distance channels of the last-choice path,

28!. to the T95 and SLH from the T55 0.01
281. from the CATS 0.005
SLH to the UVSH CATS 0.002
interfacility tandem lines and trunks to the cord
type MK ' 0.001
SL from the order-circuit ATS 0.005
SL to the order—circuit ATS 0.002
$1. to the MG unit 0.01
switching system 0.003
2) probability of waiting for release:
TR, TR, VSR, ISR, PSR. SR P(>0)§0.01
M and P P(>0)_<_0.65
P(>l3'l‘H)§0.001
3) average waiting time for release H and P 0.03

Calculating the Number of Calls Coming to the Office in the PU! [Peak Load Hour]

The number of calls in the PLH is determined beginning with the magnitudes of the
loads Y on the channel group and line group connected to the ANTS and the average
busy time of a channel or line for one call TB by the formula 3 - Y'60/T . Assum-
ing that the values indicated in Tables 5.4 and 5.5 pertain to a specifig office.
let us calculate the number of calls for this example. The values of Y make up

traffic flows along the routings indicated in Table 5.5, and the values of TB are
presented above.

1. Calls sent to the outgoing long-distance channels with single-frequency signal
system (lKTSl.

a) the number of calls coming over the 281. from the CATS and the T38 of its zone,
Bout.a I Yin.a.60/TB.a'

Here the load You:.& is made up or' the loads sent to the IKTS from the VKZSL-Z is
67 erlangs. from the VKZSL-3, 33 erlangs, from the VKZSL-U, 80 erlangs and from the
VKZSL-T, 82 erlangs. The average busy time of a long-distance channel for one call

with the automatic method of calling TB 3 - 2.1 minutes. Thus. the number of calls
will be '

out.a " (67 + 33 + 80 + 82)6/2.1 - 7500.

b) the number of calls coming from the incoming long-distance channels of a single-
frequency signal system with automatic tandan calling.

stand I Ytand.60/TB.a I 40'60/2.1 I 1143.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It!!(lﬂﬂ€]Al.USE(NNLY

Table 5.6

Identifica«
tion code of

    
         
   

 

    
        

Average

Operating conditions busy

instruments time sec
H Setting up a call in switching system 0.0316
P The same 0.0316
ZU-AB Any call 0.095
ZU-CD The same 0.095
MRI The same 0.13
13 Call:
with long-distance channel 22.13
with a subscriber of its zone on the ten-
step ATS 22.88
The same, on the crossbar ATS with the long- 20.18
distance switchboard operator 8.88
TR Incoming terminal call to the ten-step
ATS subscribers 10.0
The same. to the crossbar ATS subscribers 4.0
Tandem cull 3.0
VSR Terminal incoming call to ten—step ATS
subscribers 20.0
The same to crossbar ATS subscribers 15.0
Tandem call: reception and output of
of the complete number SBCabxxxxx considering
a time delay of 7.7 seconds for determining
the end of dialing 20.0
reception and output of the complete number
ABCabxxxxx 15.0
ISR Terminal outgoing call:
reception and output of the complete
ABCabxxxxx number 15.0
reception of the abbreviatedcode and number
1 abxxxxx and output of 1 abxxxxx 11.0
PSR Call:
with a long-distance channel 7.58
with a subscriber of its zone on the ten-
step ATS 10.63
The same on a crossbar ATS 7.93
SR Reception and output:
of the complete number A800xxx 9.0
of the abrevisted number ABCOxx considering
a time delay of 7.5 seconds for determing
the end of dialing 15.0

 

c) the number of calls coming from the order-circuit ATS subscribers via the VKS
systems,

Bout.sl - Yout.s1.6o/TB.31 u 17'60/0'7 ' 1460'

97

FTHR¢)FFICIAI.IIBE:(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d) the number of calls coming from the MK via the RSK equipment in the case of
semiautomatic calling,

noutm/a ' “a“:.W/a-cmltmia - 81-60/2.5 - 1941..

The total number of calls sent to the IKTS will be

- =I2M7.
BIKTS 7500+IM3+1460+I9H

Let us determine the total nunber of calls sent to the long-distance channels of the
two-frequency signal system (IKTHS) analogously. In our example BIKTNS - 12,067.

2. Calls coming to the incoming long-distance channels of the single-frequency
signal system (VKTS).

a) The number of calls to the GArT and the zone TsS with automatic calling

Binp.a - Yinp.a.6°/TB.a'

The value of Yinp a is made up of the traffic flows sent from the VKTS to the IKSLH-

2 systems, 64 erlangs, to the IKSLH—é. 31.5 erlangs, the IKSLH-U, 95.5 erlangs, and
IKSLH-T, 145 etlangs. Consequently,

Binp.a ' (“'° + 3"5 +95§+ N5) 60/2,! - 9600.

b) The number of calls coming to the outgoing longdistsnce channels for automatic
tandem calling,

Btandem I 1163 (see item lb).

c) The number of calls coming to the order-circuit ATS subscribers via the RSLV
systems,

60/T - 14°60/0.7 - 1200.

Binp.s1 - Yinp.sl. inp.sl

d) The number of calls coming to the MK via the IKZH 6/2 system for semiautomatic
calling -- reception of a request from the opposing office operator.

'3600/T I 10'3600/40 - 900.

Binp.n/a I Yianr/a B.inp.n/a
The total number of calls coming over the VETS,

BVKTS I 9600 + 1143 _ 1200 + 900 - 12.843.

The total number of calls coming over the incoming channels of the tun-frequency
signal system (VKTNS) is determined analogously. For our example BVKTNS - 12.843.

98

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USB(HVLY
FOI1OFIWC1AI.USE(MNLY

3. The calls coming over the ZSL to the HR via the IKZM 6/2 syst- with semiauto-
matic servicing (including approximately 501 requests and 502 information).

a) The number of calls by request

Brqur/a ' Yreq'0-5'3600/Treq ' (5 + 3 + 5 + 10)-o.s-3soolss - m.

b) the number of calls giving out simple and complex information to the subscribers
(let us provisionally assume that the information calls are half and half
simple "nc" and complex "cc")

BIB-+3
c

inf he I Yreq'0.25'3600/Tﬂc + Yreq'0.25'3600/Tcc I (5 + 3 +

C

S + 10)-0.25-3600/3O + (S + 3 + 5 + 10)'0.S'3600/180 I 805.

The total number of calls coming over the ZSL to the MK.

BZSLWIa 8 BrquI’la + Binf. - 753 + 805 ' 1558'

4. The calls serviced by the 281.2 and SLHz for intrazonal service.

a) The number of outgoing calls from the GATS to the zone Tss via the lKSLM-T systems

z.out I Yz.°ut°60/TBSLH I (61 + 31 + 35)’60/1.7 I 4482.
2

b) The number of incoming calls over the 281. from the zone TsS (VKZSL-T) to the
nus via the IKSLH-Z, msm—a, Ixsm-u synceis

Bz.inp I YLmP'60/TBZSLZ I (42 + 21 + 63)60/2.0 I 3780.

c) The number of tandem calls inside the zone via the VKZSL-I and the lKSLH-T systems

'60/‘1‘B S I 25-60/l.7 I 882.

Bz.tand - Yz.tand Lu

2
The total number of calls for intrnzonal service

82 I Bz.out + 82 in + Bz.Cand I 5482 + 3780 + 882 I 9144.

The total number of calls coming over the ZSL from the GATS and the T38 of its zone,

B231. " Bout.a(IKTS) + Bout.a(lK'l'NS) + 32 + BZSLIIa - 7500 +

7500 + 9144 + 1558 I 25,702.

99

Illl(lnﬂ(1AI.UBE(HWEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. The calls sent from the long-distance awitchboards for outgoing semiautomatic
connection via the RUS systems to the CATS and the TsS of its zone:

V I Y '60/T I (30 + 16 + 46 + 70)60/5.0 I 1945.
$1M“,a 81.31"]a B Shin/a

6. Calls routed from the MK (RUSK) to the order-circuit ATS (RSLV),

BMK 81 I YMK 81'60/‘1‘3.31 I 10°60/0.7 I 857.

7. Calls coming from the CATS and T55 of its zone to the recorded voice unit MC.

The recorded voice unit contains two information channels: "number dialed incor-
rectly" and "call the operator.“ Beginning with operating experience, it is pos-
sible to assume that the number of calls coming to the ”number dialed incorrectly"
information channel is about 102 of the total number of calls coming over the ZSL.
and to the I'call the operator" channel, about 52. Thus,

BHGI I BZSL-0.1 I 25702‘0.1 I 2570;

BHGZ I BZSL'0.05 I 25702‘0.05 I 1285.

The total number of calls in the PLﬂ which must be serviced by the switching system

I I 4}-
Bus Burrs + Bnews vas + BViews + BZSLn.’a + “MK 31 ﬂuci +

BMGZ I 12,067 + 12,047 + 9600 + 1200 + 900 + 9600 + 1200 + 900 +

1588 + 91b6 + 1944 + 857 + 2570 + 1285 I 66,852.
Calculating the Number of Office Devices

The number of devices of all types is determined depending on the load which must be
serviced by group of devices for satisfaction of the corresponding quality index
norms. The magnitude of the load is determined by the number of calls in the PLH

and the average busy time of the devices to service one call.

Switching System and Basic Control Units. The number of switching modules and their
capacity are calculated beginning with the total number of lines and channels con-
nected to the office and the load which the switching system must service.

On the basis of the data in Table 5.4 a preliminary selection is made of the type of
modules. and their number is determined as a function of the number of lines and
channels. Subsequent correction of the number of modules is made beginning with the
size of the load coming to one module considering observation of the operating
quality index norms of the switching system.

For our example, as is obvious from Table 5.6, the total number of channels in the

lines will be Ninp I 3105; “out I 2620. The load which the switching system must

100
IIIICNNHK1A1.UBI‘NNLY
IIII¢MNHCJAI.IEHECIVLV

service is: Y - 1993 erlangs. with respect to the number of lines con-

- Y
in out
nected to the switching bank, first we select the type of 500—400-400 nodules.

- - - 1. - I
Eggs-the number of nodules NAB Min/400 3105/400 8 . “CD ﬂout/400 2620/

Let us check the reliability of the obtained number of nodules by the magnitude of
the load per nodule. As was stated earlier (see section 5.2) in order to satisfy

the quality index norms the average load on one 600-690-400 nodule must not exceed
2&0 erlangs.

In our example YAB - 1992/8 - 250 erlangs, and Y - 1993/7 - 285 erlangs. that is.
the load on the module is higher than the given sglue. Therefore the number of

modules must be increased to “AB - "CD - 1993/260 - 9. Here the points of the

bank remaining unequipped are distributed uniformly with respect to nodules. Con—
sidering that each b00-400-600 module consists of 8 frames. the total number of
frames of the switching system will be "frame AB - NAB'B - 9'8 - 72; “frame CD -
NCD - 9'8 - 72.

The memories of the modules ZU-AB and ZU-CD are provided for in accordance with the

number of corresponding modules. for each module is serviced by its own 20: NZU-OB-
t 0

“AB - 9, NZU-CD - “CD - 9. Beginning with the fact that on one frame there are

ZU it is required that: “frame ZU-AB - 9/2 - 5; “frame ZU-CD - 9/2 - 5.

The marker H is checked for correspondence of the total number of calls which it
must service to its carrying capacity. As is obvious from the results of calculat-
ing the number of calls. for our example it will be: 3K3 I an - 66.852, which does
not exceed the carrying capacity of the marker system (70.000 calls).

For the specific design if the number of calls obtained turns out to be more than
70,000. it is necessary to decrease the number of channels and lines connected to
the office equipment correspondingly.

The calculation of the volume of decoder equipment P consists in the fact that de-
pending on the number of outgoing routings (4R) connected to the office and the total
number of routing numbers (3R) (AB, ABC, ABCab, 2ab), the number of composite frames
required for the modules considering redundancy is determined.

For our example let us assume that the number of outgoing routings is 120. the num-
ber of routing numbers 600. The routing numbers are distributed as follows: AB --
15, ABC -- 300. ABCab -— 7, 2th v- 78.

As was stated above (see section 5.5) each composite frame has 120 routing number
modules and 80 outgoing routing modules or 240 routing number modules. For place-
ment of 120 AR and 403 R modules. 120/80 + 600/120 I 2 4R frames + 6 38 frames are

needed, that is, a total of six frames. and considering redundancy 6 + 6 - 12
composite frames.. These frames can be placed in six composite bays (see Figure 5.4).

1Here and hereafter values are rounded to the nearest whole number.

101
FOI40FFHJAI.USE|MWLY
ROI 0F!1(JAI.US£1ONLV

In addition to the composite bays. the decoder equipment includes one central bay
in which the central parts of two decoders are placed and one adapter bay for

testing the decoders. In ull.the given office requires 6 + 2 - 8 decoder bays.

The number of waiting equipment A0 bays is determined (analogously to the decoder)
from calculating the number of routing numbers 3C and the outgoing routings ac.
Since 125 3C modules and 90 4C modules or 250 3C modules are placed in one composite
bay. for our example 600/125 + 120/90 - 4 3C frames + 2 4C frames or a total of

six frames are required. These frames can be placed in 3-2 B 6 composite bays.
Considering the two central bays. a total of 6 + 2 - 8 bays are required for the
waiting equipment A0.

Register Equipment -- Register Finding Stage and Registers. As was pointed out
above. in the RI stage a system with limited waiting is adopted. In connection with
the fact that there are no methods of calculating the link systems with waiting
published in the literature, an approximate calculation method was used based on
expressing the parameters of a system with waiting in terms of the parameters of a
system with losses. 0n the basis of this method curves were constructed for calcu-
lating the number of registers (Figure 5.10) expressing the waiting probability

P > 0 as a function of load for service quality P (>0) §_0.01.

The TR, VSR, RSR. PSR and SR registers are connected to the outputs of the R1 module
groups. The number of RI modules in the group depends on the magnitude of the in-
coming load. but it must be no more than two. The outputs of both modules in the
group are paralleled. The IR registers are included at the outputs of only one

RI module. For connection of the IR, VSR. ISR and SR registers it is expedient to
use the type 120-100-30 module; for connection of the TR and the PSR registers,
modules 160-100-20. The 200-100-10 modules are used to connect the TR to the UAR.

Calculation of the RI stage in each section of the system consists in determining
the number of R1 modules and registers connected to the outputs of these modules.
The number of RI modules is determined in advance beginning with the number of

line systems subject to connection to the given stage. Then the total load on the
given type of registers in the load for one group of modules is calculated. The
number of registers connected to one group of modules required for this load must
not exceed the capacity of the RI stage at the module output. Otherwise the number
of RI modules must be increased correspondingly.

The magnitude of the load on the registers depends on the number of cnllsand the
average busy time of the register to service one call. If the registers of the
investigated type service only one type of call, the busy time of the regis-
ter is assumed to be constant. If the registers service several types of

calls. the average busy time of the register for one call is defined as the weighted

mean value. The data on the average busy time of the registers are indicated in
Table 5.6.

The results of calculating the loads with respect to each type of register permit
determination of their number using the curves in Figure 5.10. For determining the
number of racksof each type of register, the data in Table 5.3 on the assembly of
the rackswith the registers are used.

Let us calculate the register equipment for our example.

102

FOIUOIIIC1A1.U§I(NVLY
POI “MAL USE ONLY

9 I" Ii! 35

fag" "‘ 5r
'W'Mg y ‘7? 2
Wm M :2
W

Vanni.
“\“n
‘IN‘ISI‘IBI

“E7
\
vi.
Y.
.4
.1

‘Slhﬁllt
III-IIII§IL.

«:23

‘QIS‘IQIIIIkK

E .

Iii

   
 

 
  

 
    

”WW

; M "r

 

I F 0 II 0‘ D' W 6 5 ﬂ ﬂ 0 5v 2/ I? 5' I 5 y.mn
Figur c..510 Cur cacullating esgit
Key: a. number of registers
IR Registers and RIZSL—IR Stage. The type 120-100—30 RI modules are used to connect

the IR. The num be: of RI nodu les is determined in advance by the number of ZSL
connected to the mg in mp

NRI ZSL-1R -NZSL/12°

Thc totaln Mb on ZSL is dct ermin eda cording to Table 5.4:

Nzsx. ' Nvxzsn-z + "VKZSL-a + "vxzsn-u + “vszL-r'

For our example NZSL - 400 + 200 + 400 + 650 . 1650. Then the preliminary number
of RI modules

NR1 ZSL-IR - 1650/120 - 14.

The total load on the group of outgoing registers Y1R is made up of three terms:

103

FOR OFFICIAL l3! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) the loads with respect to servicing calls coming to the outgoing long-distance
channels with automatic calling -— Yout a;

2) the loads for servicing calls for automatic intrazonal service —- Y1;

3) the loads to service calls coming over the ZSL to the MK operators for semiauto-

matic calling —— Y , that is.
ZSLﬁla
YIR ' Yout.a + Yz + YZSL “I '
Let us determine the load Y hy the formula
out.a

Yout.a a Bout.aTIRM/3600'

The number of calls Bout a made up of the calls routed to the IRIS and the IKTNS,
that is, Bout a - 7500 + 7500 = 15,000. The average busy time of the In for

calls to the long-distance channel (see Table 5.6) T = 22.13 seconds. Thus.

mu

You t - 15,000-22.13/3600 - 91 erlangs.
When determining the size of the load Yz it is necessary to consider the different
busy time of the IR to service calls to 2the crossbar (K) ATS subscribers and the
ten-step (DSh) ATS subscribers of its zone. Beginning with the ratio of the number
of ATS of these two types (known from the initial data), let us calculate the

busy time of the register to service one call on the average: TKIR P + ngh (l - P),
z z

where P is the proportion of calls to the crossbar ATS. In our example P - 0.5.
Using the data of Table 5.6 on the busy time of the IR for setting up calls with

both types of ATS, let us determine the average value: 21R - 20.18-0.5 + 22. 88

(l - 0.5) = 21.53 sec. Substituting the values obtained in the formula. we find

Y2 - BzTIR [3600 - 9164'21.53l3600 - 54.6 erlangs.
2
Finally, let us determine the size of the load
YZSLn/a - BZSL “/ TIR MKI3600 - 1558 8 88/3600 I 3. 84 erlangs.

Thus, the total load on the IR is

YIR - 91 + 54.6 + 3.84 - lb9.44 erlangs.

In order to calculate the number of registers and more precisely determine the
number of RI modules, let us determine the average load for RI modules:

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFTNCIAI.USEGDNLN

Ymod I YIR/la I 149.64/16 I 10.65 erlangs.

Using the curves in Figure 5.10, we find that for a load of 10.65 erlangs. 20
registers are required, which does not exceed the number of outputs of the RI module
(30 outputs). A total of N I 14.20 I 280 of the IR registers are required for

the 11. IR modules. In
The number ofracks for the RI _ 9 stage is determined beginning with the fact that
one module is placed in two ”Wt; R‘I-l and RI-Z: N I llo'2 I 28. The

rEICkRIZSL-m

number of IRracks is determined by the data in Table 5.3. It is obvious from this

table, for the group of 20 registers 9 normalrncks and two compositeracks are re-
quired.

The number of IR determined by calculation is divided into groups of 20 registers
each. The number of such groups is 280/20 I lb. The number of IR-Nracksrequired

is 14.9 = 126. and IR-Kracks.1b'2 - 28. In all 126 + 28 I 154 eracks are re-
quired.

TR Registers and RIVKTS Stage. For connecting the TR, the RI modules of the 160-

-TR
100-20 type are used. In accordance with the number of VKTS. there must be

I "V s/l60 I 500/160 I 4

N
”was-TR ’3

such modules. Let us divide the number of RI modules into two groups of two modules
per group.

The total load on the tandem registers Ytan is made up of the following:

the load Yin ok for servicing calls coming over the incoming long-distance channels

with single-frequency signal system (VKTS) to the crossbar and ten-step ATS of its
zone for automatic and semiautomatic long-distance calling;

the load Ytandem for servicing tandem calls from the VhTS to the outgoing
long-distance channels.

Formulas are presented below for determining the indicated loads:

YTR - Yin.ok + Ytan;

K..DSh _, ._ ,
TTR ok TTR at + TTR 0k(l - P) 4 0.5 + 10 0.5 7 seconds,

Y + B )T

in.ok I (Bin.a in.sl TR.ok/3600;

Yin.ok I (9600 + l200)-7.0I3600 I 21 erlangs;

Ytan BtanT‘l'R tan/3600 I 1143'3.0/3600 I l erlang.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the total load YT -= 21 + 1 - 22 erlanga. Let us divide it into two parts,
with respect to the num er of groups of the RI modules. The load on one group of

RI modules is Y8: - Y I2 - 22/2 - 11.0 erlangs. Twenty registers (determined by

TR
the curves in Figure 5.10) are connected to one group of RI modules. Then for two
groups of RI modules it is necessary to have 40 registers. The number of RI racks
N I - 4-2 - 8.

racks IVK‘IS-‘I’R

The number of TR racks is determined beginning with the fact that for a group of 20

registers six TR-N racks are required, and one TR-K rack; consequently for two groups
of registers, 12 TR-N racksand two TR—K racks are required. In all it is necessary
to have 12 + 2 - 11¢ Tr racks at the office.

VSR Registers and RIVKTh'S—VSR Stage. The type 120-100-30 RI modules are used for
connecting the VSR. According to the number of VKTNS. there must be

H - N , I120 - 500/120 - 5
RIVK'rns-vsa VKT“S

such modules.

The incoming matching register VSR services calls coming over the incoming long-
distance channels of the twovfrequency signal system via the W5 systems with
incoming terminal and tends-C6113. The calculation of the load on the VSR is
analogous to calculating the load on the TR (with substitution of different values
of B and T).

The average busy time of VSR when setting up an incoming terminal call T

x osu vsa ok'
TVSR oh? + TVSR 0k(1 - P) . 15'0.5 + 20°0.5 - 17.5 seconds. The average busy time
of the VSR for setting up a tandem call TVSR . 20.0.5 4- 15‘0.5 . 17.5
seconds. tan

The total load on the VSR

Y -(B 4'

VSR T [3600 . [(9600 + 1200)°17.5 +

in.a Bin.sl)TVSR ok + Btan VSR tan
1143'17.S]/3600 - 58.3 erlangs.

Let us divide this load into five parts according to the number of RI modules. The
average load on a group of registers connected to one module Y - 58.3/5 - 11.7

erlangs. The number of registers in the group (found by the cm“ in Figure 5.10)
for this load will be 22 VSR. In all for five groups NVSR = 22.5 - 110 registers
are required. The number of racks for the RI stage N - 5-2 - lO.

RI'VK'i‘N-VSR

rack
The number of racks with registers is determined beginning with the fact that for a
group containing 20 registers, one VSR—K rack and six VSR-N racks are required. Then
'for 110/20 - 6 groups of registers it is necessary to have six VSR-chks in which
6-2 - 12 registers are placed. Three registers each are placed in the VSR-Hracks.

Beginning with the fact that the number of VSR-N racks is (110—12)/3 - 33, a total
of 33 + 6 - 39 VSRracks are required.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ISR Registers and RIIKTﬂs-ISR State. For connecting the 15R, the type 120-100—30

RI modules are used. With respect to number of IKINS, it is necessary to have

N I120 - 500/120 - 5

RI ' “IKTNS
IKTNS-ISR

such modules.

The outgoing matching register ISR services the calls routed to the long—distance
channels of the two—frequency signal system via the IKTNS systems for automatic and
semiautomatic calling.

The busy time of the ISR for one outgoing call (see Table 5.6) is different
for the calls for which the next station is tandem (reception and output of
the complete code and the number) and calls for which the next station is
terminal (reception and output of an abreviated code and number). The average

busy time of the ISR depends on the ratio of these types of calls. For our
example we shall assume that they are equal. Consequently, TISR - 15'0.S + ll'O.5 I
13 seconds. The total load on the ISR

Y [3600 - 12047-13.0/3600 - b3.5 erlangs.

ISR ' BIKTNSTISR
Beginning with the size of the load, five R1 modules can be broken down into four
groups of which three will be made up of one module each and one will be made up of
two modules. The load on the group containing one module, Y 1_3 - 43.5.120/500 -
10.4 erlangs. The load on the group containing two mcdules,Sr Y 4 - 43.5 -
10.4-3 = 12.3 erlangs. 3'

The number of 18R in one of the first to the third groups is 20, and in the fourth
group, 22. Consequently, a total of NISR - 20-3 + 22 - 82 registers are required.

The number ofracks for the RI stage - 5'2 . 10. The number of ISR-

Kracksdepends on the required number of mu ti equency oscillators which are in-
stalled in them. Inasmuch as two multifrequency oscillators service a group of 60
registers. for 82 ISR, it is necessary to have N - 82/60 - two groups x2 of
oscillators. that is, four oscillators. Considegiag that one oscillator is placed
in a rack a total of four ISR-Kracks are required. The number of ISR which can be
placed in theseracks (see Table 5.3) is 6-4 - 16. For the remaining registers it
is necessary to have (82 - 16)/’4, that is, 17 1811-1! racks.

Thus, the office must have a total of N - b + 17 I 21 racks.
rackISR

PSR Registers and RI Stage. The type ISO-100-20 modules are used to connect

RUSK-P58
the PSR. According to the number of RUSK it is necessary to have

N /160 - 406/160 I 3

RI ' “RUSK
RUSK-PSR

such racks.

107

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

The semiautomatic service matching register PSR services the outgoing semiautomatic

calling over the long—distance channels. The load on this register Y is made up
PSR
of the following

the load Your "/8 from the long-distance switchboards routed to the outgoing long-

distance channels (IKTS, IKTNS) for semiautomatic calling;

the load YSLMﬂ/a routed from the MK over the SLM to the crossbar and the ten-step

ATS of its zone to provide subscribers with long—distance service. A formula is
presented below for calculating YPSR:

Y I (B

PSR + 3

)/3600 - [(1944 + 1944)-

out . n/aTPSRﬂ/s SLMn/aTPSRz

7.58 + 1944(10.63-0.S + 7.93'0.5)]/3600 - 13.2 erlangs.

The three RI modules obtained by the calculation (and the load, correspondingly) are
divided into two groups: one contains two modules and the other one module. In

the group of one module it is expedient to equip all 160 inputs of the module. Then
the load on this group Ylmod - 13.2'160/406 - 5.2 erlangs. The load on the group of

two modules Y2mod - 13.2 - 5.2 - 8.0 erlangs. The number of PSR will be NPSR -

12 and d - 16, respectively. At the station there will be a total of 1'0d
PSR2mod

NPSR - 12 + 16 - 28 registers.

The number of RIracks for three modules N - 3'2 - 6. For 28 registers

'“kklnusx-Psa
for semiautomatic service, 28/20 - 2 PSR-Kracksare required inwhich 2-3 - 6 PSR

registers can be installed. The remaining registers are installed in the (28 - 6)]
4 I 6 PSR-N racks.

A total of “rackPSR - 2 + 6 - Bracksare required for the office.

SR Registers and RI Stage. Modules of the 120-100-30 type are used to connect

VKS-SR
the SR registers. In accordance with the number of VKS there must be NRIV -
KS-SR

49/120 - l such rack.

The order-circuit service registers SR service the calls between subscribers of
different order-circuit ATS within one zone and the order-circuit ATS in different
zones. The average busy time of SE for one call is determined depending on the

ratio of these types of cells. For example we assume that the number of calls with-
in its zone will be 501 of the total.

The load on the SR will be

YsR - Bout.slTSR/36oo - (1460 + 1460)(9.0°0.5 + 15.0'0.5)/3600 - 10 erlangs.

This load (according to the curves in Figure 5.10) corresponds to 19 order-circuit
service registers.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The R1 stage consists of one module, that is, two racks. For placement of 19 SR.
it is necessary to have one SR—K rackin which three SR registers are installed.
The remaining 19 - 3 - 16 registers are placed in 16/4 - a SR-N bays. At the office

a total ofggck SR - 1 + 4 - 5 SR racksare required. The total number of registers

at the office “reg - 280 + 40 + 110 + 82 + 28 + 19 - 559. The total number of R1
f8Ck5§ack RI - 28 + 8 + 10 + 6 + 2 - 66. The total number ofracks with registers

gack reg I 154 + 14 + 39 + 21 + 8 + 5 - 261.

Generating Equipment. The number of signal frequency generators for the single-
frequency (2600 hertz) and two-frequency (1200 and 1600 hertz) signal systems is
determined calculating the number of channels which a group of two generators can
service for given service quality norms.

The probability of simultaneous sending of a signal frequency over the channels de-
pends on the number of calls coming to the channels connected to the group from the
two generators, the average duration of arrival of the interaction signals over the
channel and the number of simultaneously busy channels. As a result of calculating
the number of chahnels which can be connected to the group of generators it is
established that it is possible to connect up to 400 channels (incoming and outgoing)
to the two single-frequency generators, and up to 300 to two-frequency generators.
For our example the number of generators is: single-frequency (500 + 500)]600 - 3
groups x 2 - 6, two-frequency (500 + 500)]300 - 4 groups X 2 - 8.

The number of multifrequency generators MChG is determined beginning with the number
of registers which one generator can service. The number of registers which can be
connected to a group of two generators HChc is 40 TR or 60 IR, VSR, ISR, PSR or SR
registers. In our examples for 60 TR two generators are required, and for IR. VSR.
ISR, PSR and SR (322 + 110 + 82 + 28 + 19)]60 - 10 groups X 2 - 20 generators.
respectively. A total of 2 + 20 - 22 generators MCHG are requiredforthe office.

Automatic Charge Computing Equipment A05. The automatic charge computing equipment
constructed by the group principle consists of modules, each of which services 120
ZSL systems. One module includes seven bays: AUS-I-l. AUS-I—Z, AUS-II. AUS-III,
AUS-IV. AUS-V, AUS-V-l. The AUS-Iv bay is common to all modules.

In our example the total number of VKZSL is 1650 sets; consequently, it is necessary
to have 1650/120 = 13.8. that is, 14 modules. The total number ofracks for the AUS
(considering the fact that the AUS-IVrackis common to two modules) will be 6'14 +
1'7 = 91.

Equipment for Connecting the Recorded Voice KPHG. The number of KPHG systems is
determined depending on the load on the "incorrectly dialed number" and "call the

operator" channels for observation of the given call loss probability norm as a
result of the PHG being busy equal to P . 0.01.

The number of calls coming from the ATS subscribers of its zone to the "incorrectly

dialed number" information channel of the H0 is approximately 10-15% of the total
number of calls, and to the "call the operator" information channel. about 3-52.
The duration of each sentence is 4-6 seconds. 0n the average the sentence is
repeated twice. Considering the intervals between sentences and the waiting time,

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the busy time of the MC for one call will be about 18 seconds. The number of
KPHG, depending on the load for P = 0.01, can be determined using the Erlang tables.

In our example the load on the information channels

YHGl . BHGlTHGI3600 - 2570'10/3600 - 12.85 erlangs;

YHGZ - BnczTuc/3600 ' 1285°18l3600 - 6.4 erlangs.

The number of KPHG for this load will be: 22 for MCI and 16 for M02, 8 total of
36 sets.

Switching Equipment. The procedure for calculating the number of cord type
switchboard positions has been fully discussed in [10]. For calculation of the num-
ber of cordless type auitchboards the same procedure can be used. As the observa-
tion data and time stuuies show, the average time spent by the telephone operator
on setting up a call is approximately the same for switchboards of both types.

Order-Circuit ATS. As has already been stated, the ATS K-100l2000 equipment is used

as the order-circuit ATS. The procedure for calculating such offices is discussed
in [11].

Monitoring and Testing Equipment KIA. The KIA connecting devices. as has already
been pointed out above, contain uni and group switches for the incoming line equip-
ment and registers and also group switches for the adapters. In order to calculate
the number of switches, we determine the number of arks with incoming line equip-
ment, using data on the number of channels and lines connected to the office (see
Table 5.6) and also data on the plant makeup of the ﬁrks. The office contains the
following number of nxks with incoming systems: 32 VKTS (since 500/16 - 31.3); 32
VKTNS (500/16 - 31.3); 25 VKZSL—Z (600/16 - 25); 13 VKZSL-4 (200/16 - 12.5); 25
VKZSL-U (600/16 - 25); 61 VKZSL-T (650/16 - 40.6).At the office there are a total
of 168 unks with incoming systems. Correspondingly. dwreare 168 rack switches for
incoming sets.

The number of racks with registers (from the calculation example) is 261. Correspond-
ingly, the number of nmk switches for the registers is 261.

The number of group switches of the third stage S3P is 168/10 + 241/10 - 62, and the
second stage 82? 62/10 - 5.

The total number of adapters at the office is as follows: 1 VAR-H, 1 VA-M, 1 VA—
R, VA-P, 1 VAR-P, and 32 VAR-RI (according to the number of RI modules). There are
a total of 37 adapters. The number of group switches S3P for the adapters 37/20 - 2.

The number of ark, group and combining switches for the outgoing line systems of
the long-distance channels and the SLM (1K) is determined as a function of the
number of corresponding racks.

The number of 1K nxks (in accordance with their makeup) will be: 21 IKTS (since
500/24 - 20.8), 32 IKTNS (500/16 - 31.2), 9 IKSLM-Z (250/28 - 8.9), 8 IKSLH—é (125/
16 - 7.8). 21. IKSLH-U (375/16 - 23.1.), 63 IKSLM-T (676/16 - 42.3).

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN3R OF1JCJAI.USEZCHNLY

In all, the office has 137racks with outgoing systems. Correspondingly, the num-
ber of rack switches SP for the IX is 137. The number of group switches 53? is
137/5 - 28, and the number of combining switches SDP is 28/10 - 3.

The number of KIA-1 systems required to check the equipment, channels and lines
depends on the test programs, their periodicity and time spent on each test. The
load on the KIA-l has a nonrandom nature. The source of the load is checks in the
cycle or by request entered in the corresponding test programs. "hen checking in
the cycle of devices, channels, and lines, all devices in a group are checked in
accordance with the program tests.

For the register equipment the test program consists of checking the functional
states and measuring the time parameters, and the check periodicity is recommended
as once a month. It is recommended that the terminal line equipment be checked by
an abreviated program once a month, and by the full program once a quarter. It is
recommended that the control units -— markers, decoders and waiting equipment --
be checked by the complex program twice a month.

The busy time of the KIA—1 checking channels in a cycle by the "interaction signals
+ residual damping + noise“ program is: for the channel in good working order 3
minutes; for a channel not up to normal 6.5 minutes; for a damaged channel 5.0
minutes. The busy time .i the KIA-1 when checking channels on request is 5.5 min—
utes. When checking channels in the cycle it is provisionally assumed that: the
number of channels not up to normal is 102. the number of damaged channels is 52

of the total number of channels. The number of tests on request is assumed to be
70% of the total damaged channels. The periodicity of checking the channels can
be different depending on the local conditions: 1. 2 or 4 times a month.

For calculating the number of KIA—1 systems. the total time required to perform all
the necessary checks during the year is determined, and then the average test time
per day (Tday)‘ Knowing the value of Tday and the use time of one KIA-1 system per

day. the required number of KIA-l systems is determined. The use time of one KlA-l
system for checking equipment an. channels is about 20 hours per day (2 hours per
day are alloted for self-monitoring and 1 to 2 hours for preventive checking and
repair).

The number of KIA-2 systems depends on the number of requests to check channels
coming from the KIA-l of other offices. Since the load sources for the KIA-2 are
several KIA-1. it is possible to consider that the load on the KIA-2 is of a random
nature. Beginning with this fact, the number of KIA systems is determined by the
Erlang tables for P - 0.01. According to the preliminary observation data, the
busy time of the KIA-2 per day is 901 of the busy time per day of the KIA-1 for
checking channels.

5.]. Purpose and Operating Capabilities of the UAK

The automated switching centers are designed to set up tandem long-distance calls
and for creation of bypass paths. In accordance with the adopted principle of
construction of the long-distance telephone network discussed in Chapter 1, auto-
matic switching centers of two classes are organized on this network: UAK-I and
UAR-II. The main centers are the UAK-I which are connected to each other by the
"each-to-each" principle by groups of channels of sufficient capacity (no less than

111

FORlOFFKJAl.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

36-48 channels on each routing). Each UAK-i is connected to several UAK-Z. and

the latter are connected to the ANTS office. For creation of the bypass paths,

the UAK-I can also be connected directly to the ANTS. Thus, direct groups of
channels are connected to the UAK-I: to all other UAK—I, to the UAR-II and the
ANTS of its territory; to the UAK-II and the ANTS of other territories. In addi—
tion, channels to the long-distance office can be connected to the UAK-I equipment.

The UAK-II equipment has direct groups of channels connected to it: to the UAR-I.
OAK-II and ANTS of other territories; to the UAR-I and ANTS of its territory.

The UAK—I and UAK-II equipment is also used to set up tandem calls for communication
of the computer centers and departmental communications networks.

The UAK equipment is standardized to the maximum with the ANTS-4 equipment. The
switching system, the line equipment, the switching system marker. decoder, wait-
ing equipment. registers and central part of the KIA are universal. identically
suitable for the ANTS and for the UAK. Just as in the ANTS-4, the UAK equipment
includes the order—circuit ATS designed to organize the intraoffice and interoffice
order-circuit service. The subscribers of the order-circuit ATS are operative sub-
scribers of the UAR - supervisory and duty technical personnel. The order-circuit
ATS has access via the switching system of the UAR to the long-distance network
channels. The capacity of the line bank of the switching system of the UAK
(analogously to the ANTS-b) is within the limits from 400 incoming—400 outgoing to
6000 incoming-6000 outgoing bank points. Here the capacity can be increased by
modules beginning with two incoming and two outgoing modules.

5.8. Structural Diagram of the UAR and Operation of the Devices During the Process
of Setting up Calls

As is obvious from the structural diagram (see Figure 5.1), the basic equipment of
the UAK includes the following:

the line equipment of the long-distance channels and lines for communications with
the order-circuit ATS (VKTS, VTKTNS, VKS, IKTS, IKTNS);

the switching system modules AB and CD;

the memories of the modules ZU-AB and ZU-CD;

the markers N, the decoders P, the waiting equipment A0;

TR, VSR. SR, ISR registers and RI stages;

order-circuit ATS.

In addition. the UAR equipment includes monitoring and testing equipment KIA, load
computing equipment AUN and quality control equipment AKK and also the equipment of

the generators and signal-ringing sets. For interaction of the control units
with the KIA, register and test adapters are used.

Let us consider the operation of the UAK devices when setting up calls.

112

FOR.0FTWC3AI.USE‘ONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Setting Up a Tandem Call via the UAK. When the incoming system is busy with re-
spect to the channel from the preceding office, the corresponding register is
connected to it via the RI stage. The information coming from the preceding office
by request of the connecting register is stored in it. After storing the required
number of digits the register calls the decoder. 0n the basis of this call, the
marker of the switching system selects the calling register which on a signal from
the marker via the register switch R5? is connected to the decoder in order to
transmit the required information to the latter (category. first five digits of the
stored number, and so on). On the basis of this information the decoder outputs
the mark to the outgoing systems of the required routing, and the marker of the
switching system uses the ZU-AB and the ZU-CD to determine the connecting path.
Information about the path selected by the marker is recorded in the ZU of the
modules A3 and CD. After selecting the path, on the basis of the "path selected"
signal received from the marker, the decoder transmits information to the register
about its method of Operation in the further phase of setting up the call, and

the decoder and marker of the switching system are released. Simultaneously. the
20 begins to control the operation of the MRS of the switching system. After con-
necting the path via the switching system to the outgoing system, the 20 of the
modules are released.

When the outgoing system is busy, a channel is busied to the next office, and the
register transmits the stored information to it (on request from the register of
the next office), and then it releases. During the call, only the incoming and
outgoing sets participating in the connections and the connecting path between
them via the switching system remains busy at the UAR. After completion of the
call, the systems and connecting path are released successively, beginning with
the incoming set.

Setting Up a Call with Waiting. When the decoder detects the absence of free
paths (direct and bypass), the call is set up for waiting. For this purpose the
decoder jointly with the marker creates a connection via the switching system

by the usual method except that instead of the input of the outgoing system the
path is connected to the input of the waiting line A0 and information is transmit-
ted to the register from the decoder but the call has been put on hold. During
waiting the incoming system is busy at the UAR, the path through the RI stage,

the register. the path through the switching system and one of the inputs (waiting
lines) of the A0 are busy. In the A0 equipment which is constantly connected to
the decoder, the required information is available about the waiting calls (their
categories and routing numbers).

At the time of release of the channel on the awaited routing. the A0 transmits a
signal via the waiting line and switching system to the waiting register
that it must again call the decoder. if more than one register is waiting for

the release of of a routing, then the registers with priority calls are serviced
first.

The register, receiving the signal, again calls the decoder, breaks the connection
via the switching system to the waiting line and is connected to the decoder. From
the time of connection of the waiting register to the decoder (using the marker of
the switching system and the register switch R8?) the further setting up of the
call is analogous to ordinary calling via the UAR (without waiting).

113

FORl0FFﬂJAl.US£lNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Communications with the Order-Circuit ATS. An outgoing call to subscribers of the
order-circuit ATS of other UAK and AHTS is set up via the VKS equipment and the
switching stage of the UAK using the SR register over the ordinary long-distance
channels. The interaction of the switching system devices, the R1 stage and the
line equipment takes place just as when setting up a tandem call.

The outgoing calls from other UAK and ANTS to the subscribers of the order-circuit
ATS of the given UAK pass through the switching system and a special RSLV which is
part of the order—circuit ATS which is connected to the outgoing line bank of the
switching system of the UAK.

Calls are also set up via the order-circuit ATS to the KIA-2 during remote measure-
ments and testing of channels and line equipment. For this purpose, a special
GI-KIA stage is provided in the order-circuit ATS.

5.9. Calculation of UAK Equipment

The data from the master plan for development of the long-distance telephone net-
work for the same period as the given UAK is designed are used as the initial data
for calculating the UAK equipment. The class of UAK (UAR-I or UAR-I1) and its
capacity are established by the master plan data. The number of long—distance
channels and the load on each routing are determined by the same data.

For calculation of the number of line systems of each variety, information is also
needed on the type of equipment on opposite ends of the channels. Couplings to
like equipment (ANTS-lo, UAK. ARM-20) are organized over the single—frequency signal
system channels with the application of the line equipment IKTNS, VKTNS.

The data on the average busy time of the instruments when setting up calls and the
service quality index norms required to calculate the number of instruments are
identical to those used for the ANTS-lo.

In connection with the fact that the switching and control units and also the
register equipment are standardized with the ANTS-4. the method of calculating them
is identical to that for the ANTS-lo. and therefore it will not be presented here.
The assembly of the UAK ruck». structural design and peculiarities of their place-
ment are identical to the corresponding equipment for the ANTS-lo.

5.10. Structural Features of ANTS-lo and UAK Equipment. Placement Principles

The rack equipment of the ANTS-4 and UAK, in contrast to the types of ANTS equipment

existing up to now is made of hollow steel tubes. the structural design of which
permits installation of 10 , rt-olmeable rotary boards in the rack. The boards are comet-

tcd to the rackcable by connectors. As a result of the fact that the W are
rotated on the front side, the racks can be installed in double rows with the in-
stallat ion sides tight against each other. On the face panel in the upper part of

the rack are the main rack fuses, signal lights and plugs for connecting the office
cables The rack has doors on the front.

Hhen equipment is put in the switchroom all of the basic racks are installed in
parallel double hays with the exception of the order-circuit ATS. the racks of which
are placed in single bays. The depth of a double bay is 600 mm. and the width of
the basic equiv»: nt racks with respect to the face is 1050 m.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1,
I
I
n
m
I
1

I
ll‘l It'lt'ult 7 l.

DIAwN¥>

Tag
m: 25: 32 .22

<Hx
Boon

«maneun mHN
noou w:«=aoau
udmﬁﬂhunﬂﬂ
soou oua>hoa
Boon
uuoauoaﬁvw

.r—

.B
.A

.3

Bean
“accouuon
oocchuuuua

gm
.8. ram
8.

as.
82.22.
am

23

zu:

um

.Ha.n ounwam

.«
.5

.u
.u
.v
.u
.n
.o

"ho:
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The bay signal units are designed for setting up bays of 10 x 2 racks in a bay. Trun-
are put in special entrance cabinets 225 mm wide installed at the ends of each
bay. The distance between bays (on the face side) must be no less than 800 mm
inasmuch as the rack boards are rotary and it is necessary to provide for rotation
of the board by no less than 90°.

GeneraI office signal units permit installation of up to 80 double bays in the
switch room.

The metal structural elements for laying cables consist of bay and long-line cable
channels. In addition. for cases where the bay is broken by a column, special
structures are provided to close the ends of the broken b8)“

The intermediate switch panels have a design permitting them to be installed as a
continuation of the bays.

The work places of the technical personnel (STK, SDI, and so on) must be set up in
the technical monitoring and servicing facility which is located beside the switch
room. A part of an example layout of equipment in the switch room of the ANTS-lo is
presented in Figure 5.11.

5.11. Electric Power Supply for the ANTS-4o and UAK

To power the equipment of the ANTS-4 and UAK, -60 volt, -24 volt dc power supplies,
and the municipal ac electric power network are used. Voltages of -20 volts and +6
volts required to power the transistor circuits are developed using voltage conver-
ters fed from the primary -60 volts. The converters are located on the rack signal
board- One converter can power several racks.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 6. ARM-20 TYPE ANTS DESIGN
6.1. General Information

The crossbar ANTS with relay control type ARM-20 of Swedish-Yugoslavian production
has found application on the long-distance telephone network. For delivery to the
Soviet Union, the equipment of these offices has been modified in accordance with
the operating-technical requirements presented by the USSR Ministry of Communica-
tions. The content of the operating—technical requirements was made as close as
possible to the analogous requirements on the ANTS—4.

6.2. Operating Capabilities of the Office

The equipment of the ARM-20 type ANTS is designed to service both terminal and tan-
dem traffic and is used for installation in large cities of the country. For
switching the talk channel, one common switching system is used, the switching banks
of which (incoming and outgoing) include long-distance and intrazonal network
channels, CATS communication lines and all other lines for different purposes. One
office permits connection of up to 6000 incoming and 4000 outgoing lines and
channels. The layout offers the possibility of joint (paired) operation of two

such offices in one building, which permits the maximum capacity of the office to

be increased to almost 8000 incoming and 8000 outgoing lines and channels.

The number of outgoing routings which can be connected to an office can beach 160,
including up to 110 long-distance routings. The maximum capacity of a group of
channels on each routing can reach 650.

MKS are used as the automatic switching devices, and control realized by a common
group of relay markers. The maximum carrying capacity of the common control units
of one office is 70,000 cells in the PL“ [peak load hour], which corresponds to

a total load on the switching system of no more than 2600 erlangs.

For semiautomatic calls over the long-distance channels, the office contains match-
ing devices that permit use of the HRH type long-distance switchboards.

The line equipment of the ARM-20 type ANTS is specially adapted for interaction
with the equipment available and installed on the network of our country. For

the long-distance channels, line equipment is provided with single-frequency line
signaling (on a frequency of 2600 hertz) and equipment with two-frequency signaling
(on frequencies of 1200 and 1600 hertz). Using the corresponding line equipment,

117

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

provision is made for interaction with crossbar and ten-step ATS of the city and
rural telephone networks both in the presence of AON equipment and when it is
temporarily unavailable.

The office has special units which offer the possibility of priority servicing of
subscribers of individual categories under the condition that these subscribers

are connected to the ATS equipped with AON equipment. During the process of setting
up a call, the priority subscribers have the right to priority servicing if the
required routing is overloaded.

For automatic charge computing for calls on automatic long-distance and intrazonal
service the office has some special equipment. The data for settlement with the
subscribers are recorded on punchcards.

The order-circuit service is organized using a crossbar agency's order-circuit ATS
of the Swedish built ARK-522 type.

The automatic monitoring and testing equipment offers the possibility of technical
servicing of the office by the monitoring and correcting method.

6.3. Structural Diagram

Figure 6.1 shows the structural diagram of the ARM-20 type office. The names of the
devices and their abreviated notation correspond to the technical forms produced by
the company delivering the equipment. As is obvious from the diagram, the office
contains the following devices:

the line equipment of the long-distance channels of a single-frequency signal system
incoming PIR-T~Y and and outgoing PUR-T-Y;

the line equipment of the long-distance channels of a two-frequency signal system
incoming FIR-ZT-Y and outgoing FUR-QT-Y;

line equipment of physical two-wire lines for ZSL PIR-ZL-H and SLH FUR-L-H;

line equipment of the transmission system channels with segregated signal channel
for ZSL FIR-ZT-ﬂ and SLH FUR-T-ﬂ;

line equipment for the transmission system channels without segregated signal
channel for the ZSL FIR-ZT—N and SLH FUR4T-N;

line equipment for communications with the long—distance switchboards of the HRU
type -- incoming from the MK FIR-L-O, outgoing to the MK FUR-L-O;

line equipment for the recorded voice unit FUR-S and the automatic answering de-
vice KIA FUR-P;

switching modules. incoming GI(GIA-GIB). outgoing (GU(GUA-GUB);
register finding stages RS;

registers REG-KIN. REG-Y/O, REG-2T;

118

FOR 0FFK3AI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

code receivers KH-D. KH-V;

code transmitters KS—D; KS-K; KS-V;

connectors SS;

register analyzer AN;

automatic charge computing equipment TT;

connector for connecting registers to markers RH;
basic marker H;

route marker (decoder) VH:

connectors of the modules incoming HGT, outgoing HGU;
blocking device GGD;

call distributor RK/M;

test modules TB;

free routing marking relay VL;

priority unit PE;

device for requesting and receiving information from the AON (UZPR) A-NR;

the ARK-522 order circuit which includes the relay systems for coupling the incoming
FIR-SE and the outgoing FUR-SE to the ANTS.

As is illustrated in the diagram, the incoming FIR line systems are connected to
the switching bank of the CIA link. and the outgoing line systems, to the GUA link
bank.

The BIN registers service the outgoing calls and are connected through the RS stage
to the ZSL equipment and the incoming equipment from the order-circuit ATS. The
automatic charge computing system TT is also connected to the ZSL equipment. The
H/N registers are connected to the AN analyzers, the decade pulse receivers KM-D
and the UZPI A-NR and also to the transmitters KS-D, KS-K and KS-V.

The Y/O register services the terminal and tandem calls over the long-distance
channels of the single-frequency signal system and are connected to the incoming
equipment of the channels of the single-frequency signal system PIRrT-Y and also to
the incoming line systems from the long-distance “RU svitchboards. At the switch-
board positions of the MK NRU for joint operation with the ARM-20. a key pulser is
installed which provides for transmitting the number information by audio-frequency
currents (“2 out of 5" code). The Y/o registers are connected to the AN analyzers,
the multifrequency code receivers KHrV and the KS-D and KS-V transmitters.

119

IN)!<0FINC1AI.IEHE(”VLY’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 
  
      

(M It qt w
(10)
M KIM (1) m I
ft m
.m . I" 32)
MM M (2) ’nmaruw)
m I M M
win :1: ua }' lo)
‘ .' ' u- ..
3::-
[LI
Instant:
M ((5) (3)
up: w um;
mm“ 6
lung: A] :II
'11".
E1]
11-!

Figure 6.1.

Key: 1. lines to the MK 11. recorded voice

2. lines from the HR 12. long-distance channels

3. to the registers of the single-frequency

a. to the FUR signal system

5. lines to the order- 13. long-distance channels
circuit ATS of the two-frequency

6. lines from the signal system
order-circuit ATS lb. SLM to the city UVSM

7. (UZPI) 15. automatic answering

8. des. device_

9. charge computing l6. ZSL fronthe zone central
equipment office

10. SLH to the zone cen- 17. ZSL from the city ATS

tral office
The 2T registers service calls over the long—distance channels of the two-frequency
signal system and are connected through the RS to the incoming FIR-ZD-Y systems.
The 2T registers are connected to the AN analyzers. the decade pulse receivers KH-
D and transmitters KS—D, KS-K and KS-V.

The outgoing systems connected to the GUA links (except the SLH) are connected to
the test blocks TB and the routing release relay VL. For access to the SLM, the

120

FORGDFFKJA1.U5310NLY
IN)R‘0F1NCJAI.IJSEZ(NNLY

office layout provides the possibility of connecting both through the four-links of
the switching system and through two links.

When setting up calls via the two links, the line equipment of the SLH is connected
to the vertical of the link 3 of the incoming module. The Soviet-made switching
stages IGlM and DGIH can be installed in the SLH channel. Accordingly, the number
of outgoing modules of the ARM-20 office decreases. However. the total number of
SLH increases significantly, for each incoming module has its own group of lines
running out of it.

The choice of the version of inclusion of the SLH (via 2 or 4 links) can be made un-
der specific conditions on the basis of a technical-economic analysis.

Two ARM-20 offices can be joined to each other as shown in Figure 6.2. Here the
following devices are added: the device for connecting the routing marker of office
A to the routing marker of office 3 (VM-VH) and the relay equipment of the intra-
office connecting line between interacting offices FAB. The connection is made
through two links of the incoming module of the office A and through four links of
office 3 or in the opposite direction. via two links of office 3 and four links of
office A. The usual connection through four links with paired operation of the
offices can also occur at any of the offices.

 

Figure 6.2. Diagram of paired operation of two offices.

Key; 1. office A
2. office 8

The groups of lines (channels) of the outgoing routings usually are shared between
offices. However. individual routings can be connected completely to one office.

The line and control signal systems of the ARM-20 type ANTS are analogous to those
which are adopted for the ANTS-4.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.4. Setting Up Calls

Outgoing Call Via Four Switching Links (see Figure 6.1). When the incoming line
equipment FIR is busy, the register finding stage R8 is called. Finding a free
register, the RS bmies it and connects the wires from the FIR to this register.
In the register the wires are connected through to the ICH digit code receiver.
After reception of a defined nunber of digits of the called subscriber's (3)
number required to determine the routing. the All analyzer register is called which
reads these digits. and transmits the information indicating after which received
digit the route marker W must be called to the register. After the register
receives the required information the All is released.

The register calls the free routing marker VH via the RM connector and connects

to it. Using the call distributor RK/M, the next VH connection is made. By the
signal from the FIR, the routing marker delays the incoming module nunber. The
register transmits digits to the VH to determine the routing and information about
the category of the calling subscriber (A). The routing marker calls a free test
block TB which is connected to the unit for determining the presence of a free
line on the required routing VL. After connection to the TB a test is run. and

a free outgoing line (channel) FUR is selected.

The routing marker calls the free marker H and connects to it. Information about
die nunber of the incoming module is transmitted to the marker from the VM, and
from the TB, information is transmitted about the number of the outgoing module
in which the incoming and outgoing lines can be selected. Then H calls the common
blocking units for these modules (:61) in order to discover whether any other marker
is setting up a call in one of the given switching nodules. After a check indi-
cating that no other calls are being set up in the indicated modules, the marker
H receives access to the switching modules via the connectors of the MG nodules
which connect the test and control lines between the markers and the switching
modules. The marker H defines a free switching channel between the incoming and
outgoing lines, establishes a connection via four links and trmsmits the sigml
of completion of setting up the call to the register.

The register releases the marker H which becomes ready to service nu: calls. Then
the register sends the digits and signals required to set up the call to subscriber
B to the outgoing line (channel). This information is output using the code
transmitter KS connected to the register via the connector 88. On comletion of
output of the information the register is released. During the call,only the

line equipment and the switching elements of the four links of the switching
nodules remain busy. After completion of the call the equipment and modules are
released.

If all the outgoing lines on the required routing are busy. the type of servicing
of the call is determined by information on the category of subscriber A.

For subscribers of individual categories serviced with priority, the incoming call
is put on hold by means of the PE equipment. For the remaining subscribers the
call is rejected.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Outgoing Call via No Switching Links. When accessing routings of very high
capacity, for example, when connecting to a paired office or for incoming connec-
tion to the local telephone networks of its zone, the call can be set up via two
switching links instead of four. In this case only the incoming nodules partici-
pate in setting up the call. and the outgoing line system are connected to these
modules on the intermodule line side, that is, to the GI]! link.

When the FIR is busy, a free register is busied via the R5. The wires are connected
to the code receiver in this register. After the register receives
the required information, it connects to a free routing marker and transmits the
routing digits to it. In the routing marker a relay responds which is used to
tonne-1t via two switching links. The circuits for testing and selecting a free
marker H to which the W is connected, are created via the contacts of this relay.
In the marker H, one of five routing marker relays connected via the two links
(there can be no more than five such routings) responds. Determination of the
incoming module and calling the locking unit 660 for the given incoming module
take place almost simultaneously. After a check indicating that no other calls
have been set up in the given module, the starting relay responds. The marker H
is connected to the incoming side of the given switching module. Then the test
circuits are connected to the test relays of the outgoing system FUR connected
to the link (:15 on the intermodule line side. The marker uses the test circuits
to find a free switching channel between the incoming and outgoing line system,
connects this channel through and transmits the signal setting up the call between
the FIR and the FUR to the register. The register releases the marker and sends
the digits and signals for setting up the call to stbscriber B to the outgoing
line. After output of the information, the register is released, and on comple-
tion of the call, the line equipment and switching module are released.

Incoming Automatic Connection. In the case of an incoming automatic connection
the call arrives at the incoming system of the long-distance channel FIR-T-Y
or FIR-ZT-Y. The RS is connected to the incoming equipment and busies the free
register REG-Y/O or REG-2T. Then the call is set up just as for an outgoing
call except that the called office is the local network ATS.

Tandem Automatic Connection. In the case of a tandem connection. the call
arrives at the incoming system of the long-distance channel, the register finder
R3 is connected to it which finds and busies a corresponding free register. Then
the process of setting up the call is analogous to an outgoing call. The out-
going systeus of the long-distance channels PUR-T-Y or FUR-2T4 are connected,
and the automatic charge couputing equipment TT does not participate.

Outgoing Call from a Long-Distance Switchboard. When it is necessary to set up
a call from the long-distance switchboard, the telephone operator inserts a plug
in the long-distance channel jack and dials the nunber by means of a key pulser
via the matching equipment, FIR-L-O. The call is then set up just as for an
outgoing call, but without participation of the TT equipment.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Incoming Call to a Long-Distance Switchboard. A call addressed to the MK
operator comes to the incoming equipment of the long-distance channel to which
the stage RS is connected and busies a free register. The further process of
setting up the call is analogous to an incoming terminal call except that when
dialing a defined number by means of the outgoing matching system FUR-L-O, a
connection is made to the switchboard.

6.5. Paired Operation of Two Offices (see Figure 6.2)

Let us assume that a call arrives at office A. The first step in setting up the
call is the same as described above: busying the FIR, through connection via

the RS, busying a register. reception of the digits, calling the routing marker,
through connection via the RH, transmission of the digits from the register to
the VH, marking the incoming module from the FIR to the VM and transmission of
digital information from the KS to a special relay in the VM. If all the lines
of the required routing are connected to office 8, then the marking relay AI
designed for paired operation responds in the routing marker of office A.
Accordingly, the routing marker of office 8 is called without testing the routing
at office A.

Let us consider the case where the lines of the outgoing routing are distributed
between two offices, and a call comes from the direction of office A, but the
free outgoing equipment exists only at office 3. After storing the digits in the
routing marker. a special test relay responds in both offices. Using the marking
relay AI of office A. free routing markers at office 8 are called. On completion
of the calling of one of them via the VH-VH connector. the call is set up
between the routing markers of the two offices. In the routing marker of office
A, a marking relay responds to set up the call via two switching links. After
selecting the marker H and connecting it to the routing marker, a special marker
of the routing connected via the two switching links responds in the routing
marker. This relay is used only when setting up a call via a paired office.

Information about the number of the incoming module in which the given FIR is
located is transmitted to the marker H from the VM. and the GOD for the given in-
coming module is called via the contacts of the cc—PAB system which is part of
the blocking unit GOD. The relay system GG-FAB prevents mutual blocking of the
paired offices on counter connection of them when the 000 is busy, and it offers
the possibility of setting up a call on only one routing at a given point in time.
On completion of the check indicating that no other calls are being set up in the
indicated incoming module. the marker H is connected to the incoming side of this
module. Then the test circuits of the switching system are connected to the test
relay in the FAB.

After setting up the call in the links CIA-GIB at office A, in the FIR system the
busying relay responds on the routing CIA and the relay sends a plus via its
contacts through the register finding stage RS. the register and routing marker

to the marker M. In the marker the completion of finding relay responds. but

the signal of completion of setting up the call is not transmitted to the register.
and the marker remains connected. In the FAB, the busying relay from the 613

of office A responds. The device VH—VM transmits information about the number

of the incoming module to the routing marker of office 3 via the contacts of

124

INJR OFTNCJAL.USE2(MQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the aforementioned relay over wires a and b, via the switching links in the office
A. FIR, RS, REG. RM, and VM of office A. Then the digits are transmitted from
the register of office A via the VM-VH unit to the routing marker of office B

to the digit code receiver relay. Then, just as when connecting via four switch-
links, the routing is marked at office B, the routing is tested, the test module
is selected and connected, connection is made to the required routing, and a

free line on the routing is tested and selected.

0n comletion of testing free lines of the required routing connected at office B,
the lines connected to office A are not tested. This is achieved by means of the
AK-REG system which belongs to the routing marker. SimultaneOusly with connec-
tion of the test block TB to the routing marker, the marker H is selected, it is
connected to the routing marker. Information about the numbers of the incoming
and outgoing switching modules is recorded on market M. Then the common blocking
units 000 for these modules are called. After testing by the 001) unit, the start-
ing relay responds in the marker H of office B. The relay feeds a minus to the
relay which is secondary for the starting relay in marker 11 of office A. This
relay responds, sending a minus to the test relay in the FAB equipment. Then the
basic test is made and the switching channel is selected.

On completion of setting up a call via station B from the FUR via the FAB equip-
ment and the switching module FIR, Rs, REG and RM. the conpletion of finding
relay response circuit is created in the marker H of office A. Then the finding
completion relay responds in the register of office A via the unit VH-VM and the
routing marker of office A, which leads to disconnection of VM and H at both
offices. After Output of all information, the register is released, and only the
FIR, FUR, FAB and switching modules remain busy during the call.

6.6. Brief Description of Office Equipment

Switching System. The switching system consists of symnetrically arranged two-
link modules which 2:: connected to each or?!" by inter-modular lines. Three-
position crossbar connectors MKSlOXZOXS are used as the switching devices. These
connectors provide four-wire switching of the talk channel. The incoming or out-
going lines are connected to the links CIA (GUA), and the links 013 (CUB) are
connected by the intermodular lines.

The capacity of a two-link module on the switching bank side is 200 points, the
nunber of intermediate lines between links A and B is 200, and the nunber of
intermodular lines can be 200, 130 or 400. Thus, modules of the 200-200-200,
200-200-300 and 200-200-400 type can be used.

The group formation system of the 200-200-600 module is shown in Figure 6.3.
The links CIA and CUA have 200 verticals (two racks). In each of the racks there
are ten MKS forming five switchboards (two MKS in each). Each switchboard has
20 verticals and 20 bank lines. Thus, 100 verticals and 100 bank lines are
formed in onerack, and 200 verticals and 200 bank lines, respectively, in two
racks.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
  
 

I000.

'0000

’0000

1.000 .

I000.

§0oooo

;::::: _ I A

533:3: M M [a .m’ﬁ-‘lﬂ
1:33: W

{00000 ‘ (3)
5:23 (15 waft”)

.::::: (

{0.000 0:

i233: . :-

IIJO’ILIII

Itloilllil IIIOIIYIIJ IIIOIIYIII IIIOIIIIII
0000000000 0000000000
0000000000 0000000000
0000000000 0000000000
0000000000 0000000000
0000000000 0000000000

“0
.0...

0.00.”... .00... O

    

0.0
O

0000000000 0000000000
0000000000 0000000000
0000000000 0000000000
0000000000 0000000000
0000000000 0000000000

«0‘ 0 u..- 00.“.--

0.000.000.0000000000
0000000... 00.60.0000

0.0.0.0... 000....
~ ~.u 0 q q Q's u u

Figure 6.3. Group formation diagram of the 200-200-400 module

1. Intermodular lines
2. Module CHOU)
3. Lines (channels)

The 618 and Gun links contain 200. 300 or 400 verticals (two, three. four racks),
depending on the load and the required nunber of intermodular lines. Instead of
a set of intermodulnr lines in the vertical of link (:13, relay system of the
incoming lines can be connected to the local telephone networks (with the version
of setting up cells via two switching links). In link (:18, up to five routings

of such lines are provided. One of them is usually reserved for paired operation
with a possible second office.

Line Equipment

The one-away or two-way lines can be connected to a line bank with respect to the
two-wire or four-wire system. The relay systems connected to two-wire lines
contain a differential system permitting conversion to a fourwwire switching
system for the talk wires (in Figure 6.1 these system have additional notation

in the form of the provisional aynbol for the differential system along with the
identification codes for the set).

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 7.5L incoming system and the SD! outgoing system are matched according to
the layout with the crossbar and ten-step ATS on our network.

Register Finding Stage

The register finding stage RS is med to connect the line equipment to the
registers and the registers “IN to the 021’! (ANR).

The RS stage is a crossbar module for 16 inputs and 20 outputs. There are two
versions of these modules with respect to the nutter of switched wires: the 20-
wire RS-ZO and the 10-wire 118-10. The Its-20 module is nude up of two ms and is
used for connecting line equipment to the registers. Each type of register is
connected to the systems via an individual register finding stage. The module
RS-10 consists of one MKS and is used to connect the code receivers m to the
receiving part of the A0" -- the device for requesting and receiving information
of the UZPI located at the MS. The group formation system of the 85-10 and
RS~-20 modules is shown in Figure 6.1.. For controlling the stage RS, the marker
RSM is used which recognizes the calling equipment, for exanple, the line system,

establishes the presence of free registers and selects one of them.

For paired operation of two offices, the register finding stage includes an addi-
tional unit RSH-S which makes it possible to use two additional signal wires
providing for interaction of these offices.

The 35-10 stage contains two versions of the markers: RSH 128/20/10 for connect-
ing 128 inputs to 20 outputs and RSH 64/20/10 for connecting 66 inputs to 20 out-
puts. For the stage Its-20, the marker R5" 66/20/20 designed for connecting 66
inputs to 20 outputs is used.

 

1 - .
£2; v-Iyﬂu (5 MW ”(5)
3 I'lmI-U 9 q
' 1’ ﬂ
(4) "‘1“, '0 .‘ I‘
7).” 0-9 9 q q q
Halon-v9 s s <9 <2
1'93“»- 9 9 9 9 4
I I J l 5
°:8 3 2 8.
mmlﬂ{gno o o o5
030 o 0 on
Figure 6.6. Group formation system of the 115-10 and RS-20 modules
Key:
1. 10-wire RS 6. 1-8, wires 1-10
2. Line equipment 7. 9-16, wires 1-10
3- 1'8. "if“ 1'10 8. 1-8. wires 11-20
4. 9-16, wires 1-10 9. 9-16, wires 11-20

5 . 20-wi re RS

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The presence of these versions of the markers is connected with universality of
the makeup of the RS racks. Eight ms. the mrkers RS?! and additional systems
RSH—S for paired operation are placed in one rack RS. For the module RS-lO. eight
MKS permit connection of 16'8-128 inputs, and for the module RS—ZO, 16-4-64 in-
puts, respectively. Beginning with this fact, when using the RS-lO the rack can

have either one marker RSH 128/20/10 or two markers RSM 64/20/10, and when using
the Rs-ZO. one marker RSM 66/20/20.

The ISM-S system are designed to service 61. relay system; therefore two such
systems are placed in the rack.

Register Connector $8

The register connector SS is an MKS module with capacity of 16 inputs and 60 out-
puts which is controlled by the marker SSH. The connector can be of two types,

depending on the nunber of switched wires: 10 and 20-wire. The group forming
system of the connector 53 is shown in Figure 6.5.

Registers are connected to the connector inputs. The connector outputs can be
wed for connection to three types of devices. In particular. the register
connector is used to connect registers to any of the three types of code trans-
mitters (see version d in Figure 6.5).

A completely equipped connector services 16 registers which are divided into two
identical groups and are connected to two (SSV III, IV) or four (SSV I, II. III.
IV) ms, depending on the nunber of wires at the switching point. The col ling
register group and type of required unit are noted in the marker. Each group of
registers can be connected to ten intermediate lines or verticals (V).

The connector 85 is also med to connect the matching part of the code receiver
KH-V (board HVA) to its remaining elements. In this case, only one type of unit
is connected to the outputs of the connector. With more than 40 m—v, fully
accessible connection is used (see version a in Figure 6.5).

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

, .SWI “VI
(A) hump» vooo - 9- ‘5
(B) H" I” W W W i '7'99 VI
.110“! 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
() 37' .07,
C hut-1.0M um 99999
(D) MI-QMIlw ??¢.99
noose 9999c
W—W" vw— HP g.--“
I I J t 5 7
'g’gggo 303,0:
1 o o o o o 070
"10(0)” 0110 o o o o o o c or
9310000 00000“)
(E) Mann: W
(p) m HVI-V.‘ II! it; ”VI-v.7 m
int-r! If? 73W'W ,III
IIW-VJ’ Ill ”Hf-W III
(G) ”0?th [(5
If: [hm/,5”: Vt.v5 II!
{mama v2,v7 u
5:3w.anv' vavv n9
vsmsn mu m
n:svz.sw _ vua n
I! :xw, .00 W. V! rm
65: 5m. 3m v5. w m

(a) 6.7mm: 5W mu I WW .9

be

.7 d’ '

Figure 6.5. Group formation system of the connector SS

Registers 1-8, wires 1-10
Registers 9-16, wires 1-10
Registers 1-8. wires 11-20
Registers 9-16, wires 11-20
Connection of registers

Registers
Connection of KS
Versions of connecting the mite to the outputs of the SS stage

129

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Register Equipment System

The register system contains four types of devices: the code receivers 101, the
code transmitters K5. the code analyzers AN-S and registers REG. The register
is the main unit of this system and is used to record and store the information
required to set up calls. The office contains three types of registers: REG-KIN.

REG-Y/O and REG-21?. Figure 6.6 shows the structural diagram of a register equip-
ment system.

(.1) I 11-30

":7 "-‘l

 

Figure 6.6. Structural diagram of register equipment system
Key:
1. to the RS-ZO
2. to the 1"! equipment
3. ANR (UZPI)

The register H/N is connected to the incoming systems ZSL and lines from the
order-circuit ATS for servicing automatic calls. For reception of information.
the code receiver KM—D is connected to the register.

The register Y/O is connected to the incoming system of the long-distance
channels of the single-frequency signal system and the lines from the long-
distance suitchboards for servicing automatic and semiautomatic calls. A key
pulser is installed on the long-distance svitchboards for this purpose. The

information is received by means of the code receiver KM-V connected to the
register.

The register 2T is connected to the incoming systems of the long-distance
channels of the two-frequency signal system and is designed to service automatic

and semiautomatic calls over these channels. The code receiver 101-!) is connected
to the register to receive information.

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All three types of registers can output information by any of the three methods

adopted at the office, by connection via a connector $8 to the required type of
code transmitter.

The code receivers 101 are used to receive digital information transmitted by a
defined method. The office contains two types of code receivers: Ind-D and
lei-V.

The receiver KH-D receives decade pulses which can come from the direction of:
the 251., the incoming long-distance channels of the two-frequency signal system
and the orderbcircuit ATS. The receiver converts the decade pulses to positive
pulses by the "two out of five" principle and relays the information to the
register.

The receiver KH-V receives informtion by the multifrequency method by a "two out
of six" code by the "pulse packet" method from the long-distance channels of the
single-frequency signal system and from the key pulses of the long-distance
switchboards. Then it converts the frequency signals to positive pulses and
relays the information to the register.

The code transmitters K8 are designed to transmit information by a defined pro—
cedure. The office has three types of code transmitters: KS-D, KS-K and KS-V.

The transmitters KS-D are used to output information by the decade method on

the routing to the ten-step ATS: when setting up an ordinary call - to sub-
scriber B - and a monitor call -- to subscriber A. The monitor call is set up
at the outgoing ANTS if the ATS to which the subscriber A is connected does not
have A0“ equipment. The KS-D transmitters are used to output information by the
decade method also over the long-distance channels of the two-frequency signal
system.

The KS-K transmitters are used to output information in the multi-frequency "2 out
of 6" code by the "pulse shuttle" method on a routing to a crossbar ATS (when
setting up ordinary and monitor calls).

The KS-V transmitters are designed to output information over the long-distance
channels of the single-frequency signal system by the multi-frequency "2 out of 6"
code using the "pulse packet" method.

The AN-S analyzer is used to process information coming from the register. Bach
analyzer is calculated to process information from 20 registers. Bach register
can be connected to only one analyzer. The analyzer offers the possibility of

limiting the access to individual automatic communications routinga if required.

If it is necessary to record the nuﬂaer of subscriber B which contains more than
eight digits, an auxiliary eight-digit memory element EMA can be connected to
each register.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The El“ register equipment has additional devices ATT and ANR (UZPI), which is
connected with the special operating conditions of the “IN register. The MT
system is the storage element for the ntﬁer of the calling subscriber connected
to the equipment for automatic charge computing TT.

The operation of the H/N register system in the presence of AON equipment at the
ATS proceeds as follows. When a call arrives from a subscriber connected to the
MS with Am, the corresponding mark is transmitted to the register from the in-
coming ZSL equipment. The UZPI device desimed to receive the category and nmdrcr
of the calling subscriber from the AON is connected to the receiver loll-D via the
RS. The UZPI device sends an "AON request" line signal in the direction of the
ATS. and then a 500 hertz signal if required. The information from the AON comes
to the UZPI by multi-frequency "2 out of 6" code by the "no-interval packet"
method, and it is converted to plus pulses by the "2 out of 5" code. Then the
signal about the category of subscriber A is sent to the register and the sub-
scriber A category storage element, and the entire number of subscriber A is trans-
mitted digit-by-digit to the storage element ATT. After output of all of the
information the UZPI is released. Subscriber A receives a buzzing response from
the MS and proceeds with dialing the number. The first eight digits of the
nuniaer of subscriber B are recorded in the storage element for number 3. eight
digits in the REG-BIN register, and the rest in the BMA.

In the absence of AON equipment, the RIM register system operates by the method
where the subscriber dials his own number. In this case when the call comes in
from the subscriber connected to the ATS without AON, a flag noting the absence

of the AON is set in the register from the incoming ZSI. equipment. The subscriber
A receives the buzzing response of the MS. The subscriber dials the number of
subscriber B, and then his own number. The information that number 8 has been
completely received is stored in the register and transmitted to the KH-D. Receiv-
ing this information, the lCM-D sends the next digit to the ATT. After receiving
the entire number of subscriber A, a monitor call is set up in his direction.

When a signal arrives that the line of subscriber A is busy, the monitor frequency
1700 hertz is switched on at the A1115. which is sent over the trunk to the ATS.

If the call is set up to the required subscriber, the 1700-hertz frequency must
be received at the KM-D. Information about the test result is transmitted to a
register which begins to set up the call with subscriber B if the information is
positive. when operating by the system where the subscriber dials his own number,
the category of subscriber A is created in the register itself.

The interaction of the REG-HIM with the automatic charge computing equipment TT
is realized wing the relay system ATT located on the RIM register board. From
the incoming ZSL equipment (FIR) a mark is transmitted to the ATT which indicates
to which group of 100 FIR the calling set beIOngs. The mmiaer of subscriber A

is transmitted to the ATT. Interaction with the 1"!“ equipment begins after the
register informs the FIR that it is possible to call the TT equipment. The call
is sent from the FIR to the rr equipment. and. in turn, the TT transmits informa-
tion via the FIR to the register that the TT equipment is free, after which the
wires between the register and the TT are connected through or the TT equipment
is busy, after which the connection is made without computing the charge or
there is a disconnect.

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Information about the nunber and category of subscriber A, the nunber of sub-
scriber B and also whether the subscriber 3 line is busy or not or the category
mark is transmitted from the register to the. IT equipment. The indicated informa-

tion is transmitted in four or five steps depending on the number of digits in
the nuaber B.

Automatic Call Charge Computing Equipment 11‘

The IT equipment (Figure 6.7) is made up of grOups that service 100 of the 7.8L
systems each. The calls coming over the 251. are received and recognized by the
identifier servicing the given hundred group of line equipment. The ordinary call
requires three categories of references to the TT equipment. Accordingly, each

of these categories has its own identifier which is connected in a defined step
of the call: namely,

For the reception and recording of the digits of the number of subscribers A and B
- AK-FIRI;

For marking the time of receiving the response signal -- AK-FIRZ;
For marking the time of receiving the disconnect signal -- AK-FIRJ;
In additim, there is an AM—PIR system for recording a call without an answer.

In the case of technical damage in the 11' equipment, the blocking relay creates
a circuit for blocking calls from all the FIR system.

If more than one 251. system references the TT at the same time, the identifier
selects and services only one, giving preference to calls requiring recording of
the end of call. 0n the first reference, after recognition of the FIR system. the
identifier AK-FIRl informs it that the TT equipment is ready for recording. The
information from the “IN and the EMA -- stbscriber B's nunber and the category of
subscriber A -- from the AT! -- subscriber A's number is transmitted via the
connector RTI‘ in four or five steps to the recording register SHS.

The connecting relays RT‘I are multi-winding and provide for the connection of ten
H/N registers to the recording registers of two sets of IT equipment.

The register for recording the digits SIS is used to store subscriber B's nunber
and also the category and nuuber of subscriber A before entering them in the
ferrite memory. Information is stored in two Sis-I modules and two or three SIB-II
modules. After recording the SIS sends the confirmation signal to the FIR which
releases the sus. the RI“! and the identifier to service other cells. The sns
register calls the control equipment of the ferrite memory KR—PM for entering

this information in the ferrite memory 1-11. In the ferrite memory FM every FIR
corresponds to its own memory rows.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

. I ﬂeplwme
- bun/K175” (18)

<12 mm

Figure 6.7 Structural diagram of the automatic charge computing

equipment
Key:

1. ZSL 14. Rate analyzer

2. Blocking relays 15. Read register

3. Emergency signal 16. Connecting relays
lo. Identifier 17. 1 pulse/second

S. to the other H 18. Primary clock

6. Connecting relays 19. to the test equipment
7. Recording register 20. Calendar

8. Ferrite memries 21. Buffered mmory
9. Clock 1 22. PR? 88
10. Relay CR 23. PRF 1-2
11. Clock 2

12. Stabilizer
13. Couputer

The KR-FM equipment performs the following functions:

It simultaneomly transmits only one call to the ferrite memory, operating as a
connector;

It controls inclusion of the series in the PM nemory in accordance with the number
of the calling FIR;

134
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It generates pulses needed for recording, erasure and read-out of the information.
The wires from the KR—F’H are connected through to the corresponding rows of the
FM for transmission of the recording. erasing and reading pulses using the multi-
uinding connecting relays IR-i-‘M.

The ferrite nemry FM consists of two m1 and I-‘HZ system operating in different
conninations depending on the nnmber of digits in the subscriber B's nnmber. The
system containing one F111 and one M is used in cases where the nunbers of
subscribers B contain up to ten digits. The system consisting of two m provides

for the possibility of storing the subscriber B's nnmber containing up to 16
bits.

0n the second reference to the TT, the call from the given FIR goes to the identi-
fier AK-FIRZ after receiving the answer signal. Again, FIR is recognized. the
register for recording the answer time SM? is busied, which, calling the auto-
matic clock, receives data on the time of day in tens and units of hours. minutes
and tenths of minutes. The SHT register calls the KR-FM to record this data in
the magnetic memory. The confirmation signal is sent, on reception of which the
FIR releases the SKI, RTT and the identifier for servicing the other calls.

When the disconnect signal arrives in the FIR system. the TT equipment is again
called. The read registers LIB and LMI‘ are connected to the identifier AK-FIR3.
All of the information recorded in the magnetic nemry is transmitted to the

read registers in three steps. The time of arrival of the disconnect signal in
the magnetic memory is not recorded. After output of all of the information the

confirmation signal is sent, and the FIR releases all of the devices for ser-
vicing other calls.

The LHS and LHT read registers store the information after it is read out of the
magnetic memory and control the computer and rate analyzer.

The computer is used to calculate the length of the call by subtracting the
answering time from the time of arrival of the disconnect signal. The data on the
tin: of arrival of the disconnect signal are transmitted directly from the auto-
matic clock, and the data on the time of arrival of the answer signal, from the
LMT. Clock I (the main clock) and clock II (the reserve clock) make up the auto-
matic clock system. The relay system CR monitors their operation and sends an
emergency signal if the difference in the clock readings exceeds the adjustment
level by 6, 12, 18, 24 and 3) seconds.

The rate for the given call is determined by the rate analyzer which is designed
to determine 100 different rates. The rate information is transmitted to the
buffered storage in the form of tens and units in the "2 out of 5" code.

After completion of processing of the data, the calling relays AK-LN and connect-
ing relays LM-BH are used to call the free buffered storage to which the follow-

ing information is transmitted: the disconnect signal time, the FIR nutter, the
call length. and the rate.

The calling relays AK-LH pick up the calls from the read registers of two sets of
TT equipment and call a free buffered storage. Then the Alt-LN connect the
cannecting relays LM-BH which connect the read registers to the buffered memory.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

No LH-BM system and two buffered storages are provided for one TT system (for
100 FIR).

On completion of transmission of all of the information to the buffered storage,
the read register and all of the devices connected to it are released. The
buffered storage records the information coming from the read register and calls
the automatic calendar, from which information comes on the date (the day and
mnth of the call). The automatic calendar is connon to the two buffered storage
elements in each T'l‘ system (for 100 FIR).

Using the AK-BH and the “(-3168 devices, the buffer memory calls the punches
and, finding a free one, connects to it. The Alt-BM controls the connection of the
BH to the two punches 81 and 82 which are used to record information from the
ordinary subscribers. and the AK-BHSS controls the connection of the B)! to a
special punch SS which is used to record information about the calls requiring
direct processing (hospitals and so on). On completion of punching, the buffered
memory is released. For calculations of long-distance call charges, the punch
card has the following data:

The zone [area] code, the intrazone number and category of the subscriber A;
The zone code and the intrazone mmber of sdoscrlber B;

The date and time of day of arrival of the answer to the call;

The length of the call;

The rate which must be applied to the given cell and certain other data.

Control Unit System

The system of control units for the switching system (Figure 6.8) includes the
following: the markers H, the routing markers VH, the module connectors M8,
the connectors between registers and markers RM and the test blocks TB. In
addition, there are blocking mits 001) and the call distributor RK/n.

The marker H controls the setting up of the call between the incoming and outgoing
lines via the switching units of the line hank. Information about incoming and
outgoing modules containing the indicated lines is received by the marker H from
the test block TB and the routing marker vu.

A completely outfitted office contains 20 markers which, jointly with the other
control units of the office, permit servicing of a maximum of 70,000 calls per
hour. Each marker M can be connected to no mre than 20 routing markers VH. In
order that the markers M be able to access all the V" (the maxim number
reaches 40), they are divided into two groups, a maximum of 10 markers in each
group. The markers H of one group will have access to the routing markers VH
which are connected to ten out of 20 incoming switching modules, and the markers
M of the other group will have access to the VM connected to the other ten in-
coming modules out of 20. Thus, each lurker is accessed by a maximum of ten
incoming switching modules.

136

FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY
FOR 051-10.“. USE ONLY

   
 
     
  
  
   
  
   

"a “II"
'1'] "‘ P’I ‘
- will}... ." .m- M

     

I

”*ﬂﬂih'i’f’

[warn-yup, ‘ (mm
“milling
-L11-& all
“indullllll n .1

F—Jllllllllhj“
—-----é
.- FEE;
"I'M ' ._.-'—T
meme-Fm
' VII-mm III' 22“
mm '. $15

I

   
  

   
 

Figure 6.8. The grouping circuit of control mite considering
paired operation of two offices

The test and control wires between the marker M and the switching modules are
connected through by the module connectors HG. Bach rack of connectors of the
incoming modules MCI services a maximum of five incoming modules and can be
connected to ten markers H. Bach l‘tCk of connectors of the outgoing modules HGU
services a maximum of ten outgoing modules and can be connected to ten narkera H.
Thus, each marker has access to all 20 outgoing modules via tworacks HGU. In
marker M relays are provided for marking the routing to the

paired office in the case of joint operation of two sets of offices.

The routing marker VH is designed for determining the number of the incoming
module, the routing and the rate. In addition. it determines the initial time
and the method of transmitting information about the lumber of subscriber 3 over
the trunks and the long-distance channels. When setting up the call via four
switching links. the outgoing routing is noted on the VR routing relay. For
connection through two switching links, the writer H sets the flag about this

in the routing marker VM and marks the routing.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For joint Operation of two office systems, the long-distance channels of the
outgoing 'routings usually are divided between these offices. The call is first
set up via its own office. If at this office all the routings are busy, the
routing marker VM checks all the lines of the given routing in the paired office
and reports to marker N that the call will be set up via the paired office, and
then it calls the routing marker VM of the given office for joint operation.

The routing markers VH are broken down into groups with a maximal: umber of
markers in a group equal to five. Etch group of five VH is connected to a group
of registers using one group of connectors RH which are nude up of two racks.
Bach rack of connectors is designed to connect a maximum of 50 registers to the
group of markers. The fully equipped office contains eight groups of W, that
is 40 routing markers. One group of WI services a maximum of 10 incoming modules.
For 20 incoming modules it is necessary to have at least two VH groups. Each
VM has the possibility of connection to any test block TB (there can be up to 40
TB blocks at the office) for selection of the outgoing line and also to any
marker H which enters into one of the two groups of markers «hiking the given
gram: of VM.

Using the VM-VM system, the routing marker of the given office is connected to the
WI office operating with the given one in a pair. The group of five VM of one
office is thus connected to a group of five VN of another office. In the rack
there are two VM-V'M sets.

The blocking units GGD are designed so that two markers will not be able to
connect simultaneously to one switching unit.

The call distributors RIC/H perform the function of distributing the calls
coming from the registers to the VM, setting them up in order of arrival.

The test blocks TB are connected to the routings for testing and selecting a

free line on the requiring routing. The me of the test blocks for line finding
permits the lines of the same routing to connect to different blocks, which leads
to more uni form load distribution between the outgoing module. In addition, the
presence of TB permits the switching module to be taken out of service without
Completely blocking the load with respect to defined routings. The groups of
outgoing lines are connected to the test block TB. Each group of lines forms only
part of a routing. The total number of groups of lines which can be connected to
one test block reaches 30. In each group there are up to 2!) lines, but the total
number of lines connected to one test block does not exceed 150. The office lay-
out permits distribution of the lines connected to one test block with respect to
no more than 10 different switching modules.

The lines of one routing are distributed among three test blocks. Thus, one
r0uting contains 15) to 90 lines. If there are routings in which the capacity
of the group of dzannels or lines is greater than 90. then up to lo by-pass paths
are organized permitting us to obtain up to 450 lines on a routing. The test
block services from 10 to 1.0 routing markers.

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The office equipment has an individual test block In for selecting a defined
channel (line) on a routing. Individual channel (line) selection is required,
for example. for tests and measurements performed using the automatic channel
testing equipment. For the possibility of outgoing channel selection the out-
going I-‘UR system are assigned defined numbers. These systems are connected to
an individual test block by the same wires which are used for mnnection to an
ordinary test block. The individual test block interacts with the BH and the M.
The routing marker, receiving information from the register that the transndtted
digits form an individual nunber and that a call must be set up through the office
to the outgoing system with such a nunber calls an individual test block.

Monitoring and Testing Equipuent KIA

The technical servicing of equipunt making up an office, with the exception of
the punches and the information request and reception devices UZPI, is carried
out by the monitoring and correcting nethod. As a rule, this method provides for
exclusion of all preventive work and replacement of it by centralized automatic
monitoring.

Constant automatic monitoring of the operation of group instrumnts is realized
wing built-in circuits which output information about the condition of the
transmission of calls and technical failures to the office signal and counter
system. In addition, the built-in circuits output information for the markers.
the routing markers and the test blocks to the recording unit of the central
recorder and also information for the charge couputing equipment to the punches
for subsequent recording of it on punch cards. As a rule, the built-in circuits
monitor the time spent by one instrument or another for the performance of
thfined functions of setting up a call.

The office signal system and the memory elements used in it permit information

to be obtained not only about the presence of damage or failures in transmission.
but also the degree of their influence on the operating quality of the office.

The storage elements include the DI. and VL systems, and the equipment for monitor-
ing the state of repair of the outgoing routings connected to the office is made
up of the UL devices.

One of the means of monitoring the condition of the equipment, the operating
quality of the office and routings connected to it are the counters. 111s readings
of the counters offer the possibility not only of obtaining statistical data,

but also determination of the nature ‘and the segment of the damage.

In addition to the automatic monitoring means, the office also has instruments
by means of which periodic tests are run on defined equipment assemblies. and
the location and nature of damage are determined. These instruments include the
office tester SPR, the instrument for testing the automatic charge computing
equipment, the rats vertical busy indicator, the load meter over the routings TM
and so on.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For periodic testing of the channels and lines the office has equipment for auto-
matic testing of the long-distance channels with single-frequency signal system
AIME, long-distance channels with two-frequency signal system APKA, trunks and
recording trunks APSL.

The Cph central recorder is designed to record faults occurring at the office

when setting up a call, and it is the basic instrument by means of which a fault
is found in the markers VH and M and also in the instruments interacting with
them. The equipment of the central recorder includes the Cph nu*.with relay
systems installed in the equipment room with the switching equipment and a printer
located in the technical monitoring room. The central recorderrack is connected
to the V H, H and TB, but all calls to the central recorder equipment go through
the VH. The machinery of the central recorder consists of 20 printers. which
permits recording of 20 different information units in each of 20 columns. The

recording on the central recorder tape makes it possible to determine the
phase Of the switching process in which faults occurred. "hat inscrmnts

have participated in unsuccessful efforts to set up a call, in what circuits of
the monitored markers a short circuit has occurred. Joint analysis of the read-

ings of all columns permits determination of the possible cause and nature of
damage.

The counters are designed to monitor the operating quality of the office instru-
ments. the routings connected to it and also for traffic observations. The follow-
ing counters are provided as part of the office makeup:

Statistical reporting;

For obtaining detailed information about the operating quality of the instruments.
switching modules and observation of the number of busies on the outgoing routings;

Load observations (erlanga);
For determination of the section and nature of £301C5-

The statistical reporting counters are designed for long-term monitoring of the
operating quality of the office and the outgoing routing instruments and also the
number of calls. They record the number of busies of the instruments, the cases
of blocking the routings and the busy states, and the number of failures.

The counters for observing the load are connected to the incoming and outgoing
line equipment and also to the registers in accordance with a given program.

The counters for determining the section and the nature of 8 fault are mounted
on the CDK and the Cph rack.

The MKS vertical busy indicator is used to check to see that all verticals are
busy. This check is made in combination with the rate measurements. The instru-
ments are cut into the jacks to which the vertical wiring is coupled out. The

indicator is equipped with a metal sheet with contact "points" corresponding to
the verticals. When busy, each vertical forms a hole in this location.

1&0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The instrument for testing the automatic charge computing equipment is used to
check the incoming 28!. systems together with the TT equipment. The instrument

is connected to one or several incoming systems and automatically checks the
switching and the charge commuting functions. If a call is set up via the instru-
ments of an office with tested outgoing system. the testing device checks the
correctness of the set up in the incoming rate system corresponding to the dialed
number and also that accounting pulses are sent after the proper intervals from
the rate units.

The office automatic tester SPR is used for automatic testing of the outgoing
and incoming line equipment and registers. The number of the called subscriber
B is set up using buttons. after which the instrument automatically calls this
number. If damage is encountered, the instrument stops and switches on a signal.

By the lights on the instrument it is possible to determine in what stage of
setting up the call failure was detected. The instrument also permits additional
tests to be rm. When creating an artificial load for testing, the instrument
operates continuously. The number of calls and failures is indicated on counters.
For testing a register, the automatic tester is connected to the corresponding
incoming equipment and by means of buttons on the rack of the register finding
stage it is connected to the required register.

The automatic office tester is structurally in the form of a dolly on wheels
and it can easily be moved to the switch room.

The instrument for checking out the multifrequency signalling equipment HFC

is used to check the operating reliability of the multi-frequency signal system.
The instrument is used to measure the levels at the inputs of the audio frequency
oscillators and the operation of the frequency signal receivers is checked out.

The meter that measures the load by routings TRT is in the form of automatic
testing equipment which checks the call service quality. It is connected to an
ordinary stbscriber line at the local office and sets up the call via

the ANTS equipment, checking the call with respect to quality of transmissior
charge computing, sending the call, cross-talk attenuation and ring-off signalling.
All of the calls from the load meter are accounted for by the counters. and
failures are entered on the central meter. The counters indicate the call dis-
tribution with respect to various test numbers of the calling subscriber A and

the number of completed and incompleted calls. In the presence of failure the
central recorder records in what combination of tested numbers and in what phase
of setting up the call it was lost. For determination of the location of the
failure, an improper connection is blocked. Various charge routings are tested
one after the other by a given system and in given order, thus checking the
quality of the service under the same conditions that the subscribers are given

The equipment for automatic channel testing ATM! is designed for automatic
measurement of the transmission characteristics of long-distance telephone

channels with a single-frequency signal system executed from one central station
of the network. The test program is printed out on a punch card or punch tape,
and punch cards or alphabetic printers are used to record the test results.

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The operation of the equipment is based on the application of ordinary switching
units to set up calls over the charmel on which the tests are run. For exchange
of information between the testing units, the signalling system by the multi-
frequency method is used.

 

Figure 6.9. Simplified diagram of part of an automatic long-
distance network with switching centers A, B. C.

Key:
1. Tester A 7. Office C
2. Tester B 8. Register H
3. Office A 9. Tester C
4. IKTN 10. Tester B
S. VKTN 11. Office 3
6. Tester B 12. Register H

Figure 6.9 shows a simplified diagram of part of an automatic long-distance net-
work with switching centers A, B and C. Office A is the staticn from which all
neasurements are made and where all data received during the measurements are
recorded. From station A the long-distance channels are neasured on routing B

or C. In addition, instructions are transmitted from station A to station 8 to
perform measurements on routing A or c and report the results to station A for
recording.

For measurement of the transmission characteristics of the tested channel, a
call is set up to the tester of station 3. For measurements performed from
station A, the call is set up from the tester of this station; for remote measure-

ments the call is set up from the tester of station C which receives the test
program from station A.

Thus, the equipment for automatic testing of long-distance channels with single-

frequency signal system consists of the tester A for controlling the direct and

remote measurements and recording the results and a different number of testers
B and C, in accordance with the network configuration.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The test program includes measurements of the attenuation and noise level in the
channels. Attenuation is measured on both routings on three frequencies --
400, 800 and 2800 hertz -- with input imedance of 600 ohm. The results are
presented in digtal notation. The purpose of measuring the noise level is to
determine whether the noise exceeds a given mazdmum value. The noise level can
be brought to -35, -lo3 or -52 decibels with respect to the 0.775 volt level.

For each long-distance channel connected to the test program there is a control
punchcard. This punchcard contains information for setting q) a test call by
whid1 measurements and analysis are performed, an estimate is made and the results
are recorded. 0n inputting the pmchcard to the tester A a call is automatically
set up over the measured channel and the tester B (or B and C) with remotely con-
trolled measurements) is connected at the remote office. The usual switching
equipment is used here. This means that all form of equipment connected to the
long-distance channel and influencing its transmission characteristics (signal-
ling equipment, attenuators, differential system, and so on) are also connected
in the test process. On completion of measurenents. the measured values. devia-
tions from the rated attenuation with indication of whether these deviations were
within the given limits or not and also individual peculiarities of the channel
are recorded on the punchcard of the given channel. The tester A can control
measurements of on the order of 100 channels per hour or 1000 channels in a night.

(2) (3
l” "' —- TM? 7?);— -1

 
 

5M

   
  
 

1 Mn _- ________ J|
\ "1
\\ r |
\ I
‘(92 WU. _______ .1“)
‘r-‘- _"'Tu7n_'—_'1l
' l
I I7
c 5) l
l [Hit/m J

Figure 6.10. Circuit diagram of the APKA:

APKA-UV -- incoming unit for testing incoming channels and their
equipment jointly with the APKA of the outgoing HTS: APKA-UI --
outgoing unit for testing the outgoing channels and their equip-
ment jointly with the APKA of the incoming Hrs.

Key:
1. APKA-UI 6. mas-3
2. I MG! 7. NS
3. II MCI 8. APKA-UV
lo. VK'I'N 9. MES-2
S. APKA-UV 10. ms DSh

1103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ATM! equipment consists of relay system placed in the racks. The connections
between the different relay system are made using service bones. For offices
with testers A and 8, three racksare required, for offices with testers C and 3
two racks are required. and for an office with one tester B, only one rack. Inn

the testers A and C there is a control panel which is mounted on the bench of the
tester. For recording the measurement results, tester A can be connected either
to the punchcard reader with punch or to the punch tape reader with two teletypes.

The AP'KA equipment contains incoming units APKA-UV for testing incoming channels
and their equipment jointly with the APKA of the outgoing HTS and the outgoing
units APKA—UI for testing the outgoing channels and their equipment jointly with
the Am of the incoming ms. The circuit diagram of the APKA for testing
channels with two-frequency signal system is shown in Figure 6.10.

Office Signal Sys tem

The basic purpose of the office signal system (Figure 6.11) is to warn the main-
tenance personnel by visual and audio signals of the presence of failures in the
office. Depending on the type of failure and degree of its influence on the
operation of the office (and, accordingly, the urgency of elimination of the
failure) various categories of signals are provided in the signal system:

1. A category Al failure signal is sent if failures have occurred which are so

serious as to cause significant or complete interruption of the operation of the
office and require imediate elimination at any time of day.

2. The category A2 failure signal is sent in case of failures which increase the
frequency of incomplete calls or have a significant negative effect on the service
quality at the PU! [pads load hour] and require immediate elimination during
working hours. This signal can be accompanied by a signal from the storage units
recording failures or incompleted calls as a result of the presence of failures
in the less inportant group devices and outgoing routings if they have a negative
effect on the operating quality of the office.

3. A category A3 failure signal is sent in case of failure of individual system
or less important group devices. Such failures are eliminated at the first con-
venient moment.

4. The category 01 control signal is sent for manual and automatic blocking of
group devices and units, and it is necessary to discover the cause for its appear-
ance during working hours.

5. Category 02 control signal is sent in case of technical failure of individual
and separate group devices, and the cause of its occurrence must be explained at
the first convenient moment.

11.1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 6.11.

Input terminal block
Monitoring test panel
Rack 1

Rack n

Bay 1 bay signed board
Bay 1 signal

Bay It row signal board
Bay n signal

Bay 1

Bay n

Rack 1

Rack n

Room 1 signal

Room n signal

EPU - electric power supply station
Room 1 with switching equipment
EPU

Room 1

Room n

EPU

TT punch

145

22.

23.
210.
25.
26‘
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
“I
35.

37.

t4.“ m (26)
Mon .1 1
' Jun

#529

mun-t) (31)
Wu I(32)

m. (33)
. . M (29)
- ——————— .v 77"‘(34)
'(27)

so n(28)
3" (29)

i__ 3'88}
1w... 892

: M (29)

General office signalling system

and other signal lights. switches
and counters

Technical control room

PShch

PShch-L

Service facility

noon 1 signal

Room n signal

EPU signal

Punch signsl

Roan 2 (to n-l)

Room 1 signal

Roon n signal

Roan n

Electric power supply station (BPU)
Punch

Switchboard room

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. The N signal is sent on disappearance of the ac network voltage feeding the

electric power supply station of the office -and requires that inediate measures
be taken.

7. The off signal is sent from the charge computing equipment in case of failures

in the output units (punches) and requires that measures be taken immediately to
find and eliminate the failure at any time of day.

The signal systea consists in the following: the rack signal unit; thebay signal
unit; the VL, DI. devices and route alarm system; the technical and service
facility signal units; the technical control room signal unit.

The rack signal unit is designed to monitor the condition of the equipment located
on the given rack. The signal panel of any rack consists of a relay. fuses,
buttons and jacks. Signals come from each rack with individual or group equipment
to the office signal system:

Blowout of the rack fuses 881. (the $51.8 light burns on the rack):

Blowout of the main fuses of the panels SSL-V (the SIS-V lignt burns on the rack);
Blowout of the minor fuses of the panels 81.;

Technical failure FL;

Blocking BL.

The main fuses control the feed circuit of the panels on the racks with group antl
individual equipment, on failure of which the device or equipment group on the
given rack is completely removed.

The minor fuses control the feed circuit of individual relay system and auxiliary
relays and also the signal lights on the rack control panels.

The baysignal unit is designed to monitor the operation of the racks in the given
bay. The bay signal panel must receive signals from the racks of the given bay
and transmit them to the office signal system. All of the wires over which the
signals from the racks of one bay reach thebay signal panel are cemented to the
outside of the pins of the auxiliary input terminal block. 0n the inside of this
terminal block, all the signals coating from the racks of one bayare combined
into the corresponding signal categories Al, A2, A3 and so on by means of junqaers.

After response of the relays R1, R2. R3, R4 located on the bay sips]. panel, the
corresponding lights burn on the light display of the bay. 0n the intermediate
distributing frame (on the vertical shelf side) the signal wires of all bays of
the given equipment room are connected in parallel.

The VL. DL and signal units by trunks are designed for monitoring the operation
of the control equipment and channels (lines) of the outgoing trunks and make it

possible to have an additional signal system for the condition of the correspond-
ing equipment.

1106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The VI. determines that in a group of markers H and W! the nutter of failed units
has reached the mandmum admissible value as a result of blowout of the fuses,
and sends the signal A1 to the equipment facility sigml unit (the CLR) where
racks H and W! are installed, and it sends signal A2 to the technical control
room.

The DL determines the group of control units (RS, KS, REG, VH and M) in which the
admissible percentage of incompleted calls has been exceeded for the given grow
as a result of functional failures, and it sends signals Al or A2 to the equip-

ment facility simal mit where the indicated devices are located, and it sends
the signal from the corresponding DL directly to the technical control room.

The route alarm determine whether there are blocked (failed) channels on any of

the routings and whether the mater ha exceeded the admissible maximum for this
routing.

The nunber of D1. and route alarm systems depends on the capacity of the office
and, consequently, on the number of control devices and outgoing matings
connected to the office.

The alarm system of the equipment facilities with switching equipment include
the central alarm relay system CLR and a light display.

The purpose of the CLR system is to receive sigIals from the equipment in the
given equipment facility and other equipment facilities, including the technical
control room. The signals come from the bay signal panels (A1, A2, A3 and 01)
from the VL, DI. and route alarm system and they are transmitted to the light
display.

The mst important signals are also output to certain service facilities. for
example, to the panel in the chief engineer's office (A2 and Al).

The light display permits observation of the alarm signals if personnel are in
one of the equipment facilities (for example. when eliminating failures).

A CLR is installed in each equipment facility in which switching equipment is
located. A separate cm is provided to connect the electric power swply station
alarm equipment. The punch room and switchboard rooms do not have central alarm
relay systems, for failures of the equipment located in these room have no
influence on the switching process and, Consequently, there is no need to send
signals from the indicated facilities to other equipment facilities except the
technical control room.

The technical control room alarm equipment is concentrated in the miter bays
CDK to which all types of signals are coupled out coming from the equipment and
service facilities. and together with the other monitoring and display equipment
this equipment is designed to organize tedunical maintenance by the monitoring
and correcting method. The given equipment permits service personnel in the
technical control room to determine the section and possible nature of failures
by means of signal lights. switches and meters and also the central recorder.

167
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The lights for observing the switching process which monitor the operation of the
main control units W! and M play a special role in the alarm system. Each step

in setting up a call is noted by switching a certain light on (off). The lights
are coupled out to the monitoring and testing panels of the marker equipment racks,
and they are diplicated in the technical control room. In addition, all of the
racks (including the W and M racks) have individual buttons and lights for each
type of equipment which perform auxiliary functions of monitoring and observing
the operation of the corresponding equipment and facilitating the testing of it.

6.7. Calculating the Volume of Office Equipment

Initial Data

Materials analogous to the materials listed in section 5.6 for the ANTS-lo are used
as the initial data for calculating the volume of ARH—ZO equipment. In addition,
before beginning the calculation, the problem must be solved of whether to design
one office for the installation or two offices with paired operation. This
decision is based on preliminary calculation of the total mmber of lines and
channels to be connected to the switching system of the office. The version of
the organization of the incoming communications with the ATS of the local net-
works -- via four or two switching links -- is chosen simultaneously on the basis
of a technical-economic comparison of these versions. Solving the indicated
problem makes it possible to compile a structural diagram of the designed office
which determines the specific oowosition of the equipment to be calculated.

The initial data on the number of channels and lines connected to the office.
their load and also data on the incoming traffic flow distribution with respect to
outgoing routings are presented in tables of the type of Tables 5.1; and 5.5.
(compiled for the ANTS-lo). The data on the operating indices are analogous to
those used for the ANTS-lo.

The average busy time of the different equipment, seconds, when setting up one
call is presented below for the ARM—20 office:

UZPI (ARR) equipmnt 2.6
Register:
am 29
2T 20
Y/O 18
Code receiver [CM-v 10
Code transmitter
KS-D 8
Ks-K S
KS-V 5

Calculating the Nunber of Calls Coming to the Office in the PU] [Peak Load Hour]
As is known, the number of calls is defined by the expression B-Y-6O IT;. The
values of the load Y for each type of channel and line connected to the ANTS are

known from the initial data, and the average channel (line) busy time for one
call TB is determined by the operating indices.

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As an exasple, let us present a calculation for an office with the same initial
data as were used in the examle for the ANTS-lo (see Tables 5.1: and 5.5). It
must be noted that at the ARM-20 office, in contrast to the ANTS-4, there is no
equipment for four-wire physical lines. As a result of these lines in the example
with ARM-20, the number and load of the two-wire physical circuits of the 231.

and SLH are increased respectively. In addition, in contrast to the AM‘lS-lo. the
ARM-20 office does not have A0 waiting lines connected to the outgoing bank of the
ANTS-4 switching system modules, but there are lines (in smaller nuuber) to the
automatic answering device of the mnitoring and testing equipment.

The data on the couposition of the channels and lines, their lead and also the
traffic flow distribution at the ARM-20 are presented in Tables 6.1 and 6.2.

The pooposed ratio of local network ATS with respect to types of equipment is as
follows: crossbar ”I, lO-step 701. The degree of equipment of the ATS with Auk
equipment is taken as 752. The remaining 252 of the ATS are serviced by the
method where the subscriber dials his own nunber. The total nutter of routings
connected to the switching bank of the office (considering development) is taken
as 120. For semi-automatic outgoing service, the number of information units is
taken equal to the number of requests coming over the 25!. to the long-distance
switchboards. Of the number of information units. 501 are complex and 501 are

simple.

Let us calculate the number of calls for our example, using the data from
Table 6.1 and 6.2.

l. The nunber of calls routed to the outgoing long-distance channels with single-
frequency signalling system (FUR-T-Y):

For automatic calling from the CATS and 1'35

8531): a Yncu'so'r.,; '= (100+ 30 +32)W.2.l - 7500:

Key: 1. outgoing a

For automatic tandem calling from the incoming long-distance channels

at”, = Y,,..,-50 T." - ‘0'602J =- ”‘3.
Key: 1. tandem
From the subscribers of the order—circuit ATS
-60 T -
It.
(23

Key: 1. outgoing. order; 2. 8. order

17-60
8, ‘:.,-Y. _- 1450;
(33 (I ca 0.7

For semivautomatic calling from a switchboard via the FIR-L—O

8 (1) _y

:06: I’ll.

-60 7(2) = a: -60 2.5 =19«.

vex l'lII eels

Key: 1. outgoing.semi; 2. B. semi

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030063-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The total mate: of calls to the outgoing long-distance channe
frequency signalling system

Table 6 . l

 

Designation of
Types of channels and lines line equipment

 

Incoming dlannels and lines

Long-distance channels with simalling system:

Single-frequency FIR~T~Y

ﬁlo-frequency FIR-Z'r-Y
281. from the CATS:

Physical FIR-ZL-li

Transmission system channels FIR-ZT-li
ZSL from the zone TBS -- the same PIR—Z‘r-N
Lines:

From the long-distance switchboards FIR-L-O

From the order-circuit ATS PIR-S-B

Total

Outgoing channels and lines

Long-distance channels with signalling system:

Single-frequency FUR-T-Y
’No— f req uency PUR- ZT-Y
SLM to the CATS:
Physical FUR-L-II
Transmission system channels FU‘R-T-ﬁ
SLH to the zone T35 -- transmission system
channels FUR-T-N
Lines:
To long—distance switchboards FUR-L-O
'I‘o order-circuit ATS FUR-SE
To recorded voice equipment FUR-S
To the automatic answering device FUR-P
Total
150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600030063-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.2

 

1 Identification code for the incoming equipmmt

2. Total incoming load
3. Outgoing equipmnt load, erlsngs

lo. Total
*In the exanple a tandem connection is provided between the like equipnent of the

long-distance channels with single-frequency and two-frequency signalling systems.
Under the specific conditions a -tandem call can be made between these
systems in any combinations.

Let IS determine the mnber of calls routed to the outgoing long—distance channels
with two-frequency signalling system analogously:

awn” -12 on.

2. The nunber of calls coming over the incoming long-distance channels with
single-frequency signalling system (PIR-T—Y):

For automatic calling to the CATS and T38 of its zone

Y“x V60

all. - -(96I5+95n5+|‘5)60ﬂJ-m;
(1.) Tan

 

Key: 1. in. a

For automatic tandem connections to the outgoing long-distance channels

Btandem - 1163;
To the order-circuit ATS subscribers

59.2, - rm: “IT-m - l4-60/0,7 = I200 ;

Key: 1. in. order

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For semi-automatic connections to the svitchbosrds via the FUR-L-O -- reception
of a request from the opposing office

3-95). " Y.$_];,2,-asoo/rum = Io-aaoono - 900.

Key: 1. in. semi

The total number of calls coming in over the incoming long-distance channels with
single-frequency sigaalling system

BFII-T-V ' 9500 +1143 + I200 + 900 -12 us.

Let us determine the number of calls over the incoming channels with two-frequency
signalling system analogously

BFIR'"'Y - '2 M3.

3. The number of cells coming over the 281. to the long-distance switchboards via
the FUR-b0 in the case of semi-automatic service (including 501 requests and 501
information units):

With respect to reception of requests from the CATS and srs subscribers of its
zone

a, - Yur°.5-3600IT,. - (a + 5 + Io) 0.5-3600iss =- 733;

Key: 1. req

For dispatching of siupl nd complex information units to the subscribers
21

.u. a?! 1491’ Momma-.93

+ Yw0.25~3600/*3 (8 + s + Io) 0.25.3500» +

+(3+5+l0)0.25-36001l80-806.
Key: 1. information unit: 2. simple information unit; 3. couples: information

mic; lo. req;

The total numer of calls coming over the 281. to the long-distance switchboards
via the FUR-L-O
Bruno ' 5m + amp - 753 + 805 = [559.

(l) (2)
Key: 1. req; 2. information unit

4. The nuuber of calls serviced by the 281. and the SIM in the case of intrszonal
service:

Outgoing from the CATS to the zone us via the FUR-T-N
5(1)-Y‘1)-so/r‘§} .-(92+3s)eon.1-«32;

"c! “C!

Key: 1. zone. out; 2. 3. SIM z

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Incoming over the 251. from the T35 (FIR-ZT-N) to the CATS via the FUR-21.4! and
FUR-ZT-H

”(all - ﬁzz-50178.25, - (63+me - mo;

Key: 1. in: 2. B. 251. z

Tandem calls within the zone via the FIR-ZT-N and the PUR-T-N

59.2... ' ’53.)...“17‘33, - 26-60/1J — em.

Key: 1. z. tandem; 2. B. SI.“z
The total number of calls with intruonal service

-8 ' - -
Key: 1. z; 2. 2. out; 3. z. in; lo. 2. tandem

S. The total umber of calls coming over the 281. from the CATS and the T38
JI)-B (2

4 «Luzon-M + ”magma-2M) 4’
+ «gum-N) + 3 Sgt-«mam» " 75°° + 750° "-'
+91“ +1558-25702.

Key: 1. 281.: 2. out. a (FUR-T-Y); 3. out. a (FUR-ZT-Y); lo. 2; S. 281. semi

6. The number of calls routed from the long-distance switchboarda for outgoing
semi-automatic calling via the FIR-L-O to the CATS and the T58 of its zone

55R]. - $112.56me I. - (4s + 46 + 70) 60/6 -1944.
Key: 1. swam;

7. The total nunber of calls routed to the CATS and the one T38

581? '= ”Egan-Tm + 3.“ menu + 5: + ”my. -
-9soo+9soo+9m-:-|9«-aom. (3)

Key: 1. $1.14; 2. in. a; 3. 2;.4. SIM seal
8. The nunber of calls routed from the MK (PIR-L-O) to the order circuit ATS
(1) (2)
PMK ca " ymxu'eo’rua ' '0'60’0'7' 557-

Key: 1. m order; 2. order

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

9. The total nulber of calls routed from the MK via the PIR-L-O.
a“) (1)

BFIR- b0 " sex. n/IIFUR- --T W" -Bau.nll(m ’7 Y) +
+acﬁz,.+ang(3)-19u+19«+19«+as1-m9.

Key: 1. out. send; 2. SLM semi; 3. HR order

10. The total number of calls routed to the order-circuit ATS

1). 8(2)
5"" no!!!“ 1 w + 592: (run 21’ Y) + 3311‘
- 1200+ 12w 4- 857 - 3257.

Key: 1. order; 2. in. order; 3. a: order

11. The mater of calls coming from the CATS and the Tss to the recorded voice
equipment HG:

To the "incorrectly dialed nunber" information channel
a 31)" egg-0.1 -25m-o.1 -2570;

Key: 1. m1; 2. ZSL

To the "call the operator" information channel

“(1) 812)
BM!“- xlf'o 05 -1285

Key: 1. M62; 2. 281.

The total nulber of calls in the PLE which the switching system mat service

' 2
.Bgz' Brut-M + Brun- 21' v + (3m 1 v" ‘55:»:20 +

+ (59134” _ Bras-H: (Wu. +(0+ Mgr-In

geygczl. KS; 2. tandem; 3. ZSLsemi; 10. z; 5. swam; 6. MK order; 7. H61;

Calculating the timber of Office Equipment Units

Switching System. The nulber of switching modules depends on the nunber of
channels and lines to be connected to the switching banks and the magnitude of
the load which these nodules must service when fulfilling the quality index norms.
Considering the carrying capacity of the switching system of one office, the
average load for one point of the switching bank must not exceed 0.65 erlsng.

156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The type of switching modules. that is, their capacity on the intermodulnr line
side is determined on the basis of calculating the number of intermodular lines
required to service the designed load. The required nunber of switching units is
mre precisely determined by the calculated nulber of intermodular lines.

Initially the number of switching modules is determined by the number of included
lines and channels and the capacity of the switching bank of one module:
“GI'Nin/ZOO; “GU-"out/ZOO'

The number of intermodular lines is calculated beginning with the magnitude of

the load on the group of lines between each pair of modules and the average equiv—
alent load on the switching bank point. The magnitude of the equivalent load is
determined as a function of the average loads individually for the point of the
incoming and outgoing banks which are equal to the following: for the incoming
mdules a'Yin [(nG'I ~200); for the Outgoing modules d'You -200). Here Yin

and Yout are the total loads of the incoming and outgoing “agytching bank.

  

I
: ' HIIII h
a a: e: «v 40 45 0.! 170.342)

Figure 6.12. Curves for calculating the equivalent load on
a bank point
Key:
1. d. erlangs
2. a. erlands

If a-d, then the equivalent load al-a-d. If aid, then the equivalent load a1 is
determined by the curves in Figure 6.12.

The load on a group of intermodular lines is determined beginning with the fact
that when coupling each incoming module to each outgoing module the load is
distributed equally among all modules:

. I .’ )'
l {13 ("0| "0U

Key: 1. out

155

FOR OFFNJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nunber of lines in the intermodular group is determined depending on the
values of A and al for a loss norm P'0.002 by the curves in Figure 6.13. Since
the capacitance of the group must be a multiple of S (by the requirements of the
circuitry). the number found by the curves is rounded correspondingly to the
next highest nusber.

Beginning with this umber of intermodular lines (200. 300 or 400), the type of
modules is determined. If the wiser exceeds 1:00. the mater of modules must be

increased.

The number of MKS racks is determined in accordance with the makeup of the modules
and racks. One rack is made up of ten MKS (100 vertical). For link A consisting
of 200 verticals, two of the KS racks are required, and for link 3 consisting

of 200, 300 or £00 verticals two, three or four racks are required, respectively.

Let us determine the nutter of racks of the switching system of the office for
our example.

The nunber of incoming modules (preliminary) is equal to 16 (3105/200), and out-
going modules, 13 (2586/200). The average load on the bank point for the incoming
module a-l993/(16-200)-0.62 erlang; for the outgoing module d-l993/(13-200)-0.76
erlang. The equivalent load on the field point (by the curves in Figure 6.12)

for a-0.62 erlang, d-0.76 erlang is equal to a1-0.68 erlang.

.n-' a
s‘aol

‘1 um-‘lI-I_ I-n‘HIC-n III-‘- I
n...-‘ll.‘lllullt II

Im‘II'IIIIL‘II'IIIIL‘

ii===ﬂlmiiu
l|:!!llllmﬁL

nah—'V

 

Figure 6.13. Curves for calculating the mater of intermodular lines:
admissible losses P-0.002; Y - load on the group of intermodular
lines; a -- equivalent load on the bank point; N - nuuber of

intermodblar lines
Key:
1. erlang

156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The load on the group of intermodular lines A-l993/(16.13)-9.58 erlangs. The
nunber of lines in the intemodular group (by the curves in Figure 6.13) for
1199.58 erlangs, a -0.68 erLang and P-0.002 is 30. The mater of intermodular
lines per module s as follows: outgoing w'lé-hm, incoming 30-13-390.

Since the number of intermodular lines for one outgoing module exceeds the mximun
capacity of the module (1000 lines). the number of these modules is increased from
13 to 16. Then the load on the group of intermodular lines A-1993/16-16-7.8
erlangs. There will be 25 lines in the intermodular group for A-7.8 erlangs.
a1-0.62 erlang and P~0.002. The total matter of intermodular lines per module:
outgoing 25-16-600, incoming 25'16-400.

Thus, the type 200-200-400 modules are provided for the installation, each of
which consists of two MKS racks of link A and four MKS racks of link 8.

The total nuaber of racks is as follows: link A (16+l6)2-6lo; link 3 (16+l6)lo-128.

Register Equipment. The nuﬂaer of registers, code receivers and transmitters is
calculated in combination with the register finders and connectors considering
the peculiarities of their grouping.

For calculation of the load on these devices, the results of calculating the
number of calls to be serviced by each type of device and also the data on the
average busy time of the devices for One call are used.

The "In register services calls from subscribers:

CATS and T55 of its zone to the outgoing long-distance channels with automatic
service;

CATS and TsS of its zone to the long-distance switchboards for semi-automatic
service;

Order-circuit ATS to the outgoing long-distance channels;

Local networks of its zone for intrezOnal service.

The load on the registers is determined beginning with the total number of ser-
viced calls:

YWN-Bum (“m/m.

The number of RI“ registers is determined=depending on the group formation of
adjacent units of the station connected with them. The automatic charge computing
equipment TT has direct coupling to the “IN registers. The TT equipment is

made up calculating the division of the 281. into groups (no more than 600 lines
each). A ZSL group is serviced by its own registers. The nuaber of line equip-
ment units in the ZSL groups must be identical insofar as possible.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The line equipment units are connected to the registers via an RS—ZO stage. For
each 281. group, the mater of MKS of the register finding stage R8 is detemined:

"RS'2"PIR/15° Then the total number of HRS of the stage as and the total number
of racks RS for all groups are determined.

The number of markers RSH 64/20/20 is equal to the nuuber of racks RS-ZO inasmuch
as one marker designed to service eight MKS for Its-20 is placed on the same rack.

The load on each register group is determined in accordance with which line equip-
ment units and with what load the given group of registers is serviced. For

determination of the nuﬂaer of registers in the group it is necessary to calculate
the average load on the intermediate line to the register (on the RS-ll/N vertical):

- s - y,<,3.>.,.m..i(’2;. - no) .

Key: 1. gr.reg.R/N

 

Figure 6.14. Curves for calculating the nulbar of registers:
losses P-0.002; accessibility mq-ZO; s -- average load on the
vertical RS

Key:
1. erlangs

The nunber of registers for P-0.002 is determined by the curves in Figure 6.14.
On the same figure the curves are calculated for a maximun of up to 90 registers.

In the case where the amplitude of the load requires a large mater of registers,
the calculation is performed by the formula of the TsNIIS Institute:

.v ..' s + as Y/Y...
5')

Key: 1. reg

158
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Y90 is the load which 90 registers can service for a given average load
8.

The nunber of EMA units, code receivers [CH-D and system for coupling to the
automatic charge conputing equipment ATT is equal to the nmber of BIN registers.
The number of AN-S analyzers is determined calculating one for 20 HI“ registers.
The REG-BIN rack has four sets of registers and one AN-s set.

The device for requesting and receiving information UZPI is connected to the code
receivers 101-!) via the register finding stage 113-10. The load on the 02?! depends
on the nunber of calls coming from the subscribers of the CATS and Tss equipped
with A0" equipment,B s and the average busy tin of the U2?! for servicing one
call equal to Tusz-Z. 3 seconds:

Y -(B-oT [3600”,
"T13 (21 iii"
Key: 1. UZPI: 2. subscriber

where 2 is the coefficient indicating which part of the city ATS and zone T55 is
equipped with AON. The average load on the intermediate line to the UZPI is
determined from the expression

“ﬂag/(N35. IO). us {”23" ”MD/15.
Key: UZPI; 2. where

The nunber of UZPI sets, depending on the magnitudes of Y and s, is determined
UZPI
by the curves in Figure 6.11;.

In the RS-lO stage the number of racks is determined beginning with their makeup
(eight HKS and two markers on a rack).

The registers 2T are connected to the incoming FIR-ZT-Y of the long-distance
channels with two-frequency signalling system, and they are desiyled to service
the incoming automatic and semi-automatic calls coming over these channels.

The load on the registers 2T is determined as a function of the total nuwer of
calls routed to the CATS and the T88 subscribers, the order-circuit ATS sw-
scribers and the outgoing long-distance channels (in the case of tandem connec-
tion).

As a result of symtric structure of the office with respect to the control
units, the FIR-ZT-Y are divided into two groups, each of which is serviced by its
own register group. The line equipment is connected to the registers via the
Its-20 stage. The nunber of MKS in the RS stage is determined individually for
each group by the formula

”as “' 2 ”imam/'5-

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then the total umber of MKS in the RS stage is determined for both groups of
line equipment. The number of markers RSH 64/20/20 is determined by the mater
of racks RS.

The load on each group of registers 21' is Y r T-Y /2. The average load on
an intermediate line to the registers is detérminedZSy the fornula

,_ riﬂe .
Key: 1. gr

By the curves in Figure 6.14, the number of registers in one group is determined
and then the mater of registers for both groups. The lumber of EMA devices and

code receivers lei-D is equal to the number of registers 2T. The mater of analzyers
AN-S is equal to “21/20.

The Y/O registers are connected to the incoming FIR-T—Y of the long-distance
channels with single-frequency signalling system and also to the FIR-L-O equipment
of the lines from the long-distance svitchboarde, and they are desimed to service
calls coming:

Over the incoming long-distance channels with single-frequency signalling system
with automatic coupling to the CATS and the T38 subscriber;

The same, to the order-circuit ATS subscriber;
The same, to the outgoing channels( through connection);

Over the incoming long-distance channels with single-frequency signalling system
with semi-automatic service;

From the long-distance svitchboards to the outgoing channels with semi-automatic
service;

The same. to the $1.11 for the out 'oing semi-automatic service;

The same, to the order-circuit ATS.

The load on the Y/O registers depends on the total umber of these calls. The
number of WC registers is calculated analogously to the calculation of the
registers 2T.

The code receivers KM—V are connected to the Y/O registers for reception of
information by the multi-frequency method by the “2 out of 6" code. The code

receiver contains four types of system:

The NVA is the natdling part of the code receiver for interaction with the Y/O
register;

.160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
      
 

   
    

   

yﬁK>lEkh§Iii§U§.;-§i—
Unhﬁut‘llbe‘llla‘lﬂlﬂlll.‘Illi—

5 m :5 manna)

   
    

 

J
'l IIIumuamnx‘nsea‘see‘xe‘a ;
IllIII“\IM|\\\‘\VBNS‘§\\‘%§>Y&
a IIIIIIIITILII“NW\‘S\. .--.. ugd§§s
o, “III-ave “Medan; 'Vemmnhx‘w
llllll u I‘mmm‘unausuw
mmllllllln‘uta‘uwuuuu
0123055709101!”

new

     
 
     

(1)

5

”Innunluuuamnnuunxumvnvm‘ \\\ ‘
a!-IIHIT|‘|‘IIB‘II.IEIIIIII‘1‘\‘II\\‘\\“ \\ \\\‘

Inmnunuumuua: “wanna-a van“:
a] mllgII “'f'llﬂltfllull |‘|““NKI“‘\WI\\\‘
' mlll;|lﬂlIII'II“IHll'l‘l‘l‘1‘“'I‘W‘“\‘.\NI“K‘
IluunmInunurnuununnummwunw

a s n rs 10 MM (1)

 
   
   
   

 

new

   

mlllllll
ulll‘ll' ‘I

m"

I-I'IBIIIHIIUI

  

       

-II‘III I“lI‘ll-uI‘-‘I“‘-Il-—O-I-“IJ
m‘tll < ““7 n1"; ‘Rl" ““N‘I‘I‘ﬂ‘l!’ -“’I
\n'I VHII““"“IIIII‘IIII“‘\I‘I.VI‘\1L‘II

’5 I.

  
        

     

I“ l‘ 1“\$§a tau "9 “1‘ I x~ m ma an an \‘ogc
um nl“- ‘kt‘ , “acawxn‘aaru‘x‘cuwu‘
ﬂn'l‘un-‘ﬂnju ‘awax‘knwsuwﬂsk1:s|k

77

77 75 30 '- ’ I: ’

 

       

 

Figure 6.15. Curves for calculating the amber of code receivers

and transmitters for small loads:
Y -- load on the receivers or transmitters; N -- number of

receivers or trmsndtters; s - average load on the input SS;
SS 16/60; losses P-0.001; availability liq-10, 20. I), 60.

Key:
1. erlangs

The M is desigled to receive information by the nulti-frequency method by a
"2 out of 6" code and for conversion of the frequency signals to positive "2 out
of 6" pulses;

161

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The HVS is used to check the received information for the presence of two
out of six pulses and transmission of the nunber digits to the plus feed register
over two out of five wires, and the category digit over two out of six wires;

The HTS is designed for interaction with the register connector SS.

The MVA is rigidly connected to the register. and the number of these system is
taken equal to the nuﬂaer of Y/O registers. The HVA are mounted on individual
HVA racks, 18 sets on a rack. The rest of the code receiver equipment (1011‘, INS,
HTS) is connected to the INA via the register connector SS.

   
   
   

  

III II] t
IIlI/I/I/

//
I/
,5

     
   
 
 

Figure 6.16. Curves for calculating the number of code receivers
and translutters for large loads:
Y -- load on the receivers or transmitters;
N -- number of receivers or transmitters:
s -- average load on ‘the input 38;
ss 16/60; losses P-0.001: accessibility ins-10, 20

Key:

1. erlangs

The code receivers service the same nunber of calls as the Y/O registers;
therefore the load on the receivers IOi-V is determined from the following
expression:

Yum" " 8‘10 (my/3800.

The nutter of modules of the register connector 88 is determined by dividing the
number of registers Y/O by the nunber of inputs of the 85 stage:

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”55 = Nylollﬁ.

The average load on the SS nodule input
’ " yxn-v/(Nss' '5)-

By the curves in Figure 6.15. the required number of receivers KM-V is determined
for P-0.001, mq-IoO and the corresponding value of s. The code receivers lei-V
(1011', MVS and ms) are put together 18 sets on a rack.

The code receivers KS-D, KS-K, KS-V are connected to the registers 21', Y/O, H/N
via the connectors SS. The capacity of the SS nodule is 16 inputs and 60 outputs.

The nunber of code transmitters is calculated in the following sequence:

The load is determined for each type of transmitter depending on the number of

calls subject to servicing by them and the average busy time of the transmitter
for servicing one call;

The number of SS modules is determined depending on the total nunber of registers
at the input and capacity of a module;

Beginning with the total load on all the transmitters and the number of SS modules,
the average load s on one intermediate line to the transmitter is determined;

Depending on the load on each type of transmitter and the value of s, using curves
in Figure 6.1.5 or 6.16, the number of transmitters KS-D, Its-K and KS-V is
determined.

The load on the code transmitters Its-D is created by the ordinary and mnitor
calls, on arrival of which it is necessary to output information to the ten-step

ATS and over the outgoing long-distance channels with two-frequency signalling
system:

YK$.D - (Bl + 8mm) (K5313600.
Key: 1. mnitor
where 3D is the number of ordinary calls which the Ks-D transmitters must service;
Bmonitor is the nunber of monitor calls; In is the coefficient which indicates
the fraction of ten-step ATS in the total mmlber of ATS.
The mamitude of ED is made up of the incoming calls routed over the SLH to the
ten-step T38 and CATS (85m m) 'and the calls over the outgoing long-distance
channels with two-frequency signalling system (BPUR_2T-Y):

B: - Egg!" + B FUR-215V .

Key: 1. 301

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The number of monitor calls is made up of the outgoing calls routed over the

automatic service long-distance channels and the SD! to the zone Tss coming from
the sxbscribera of the ATS not having AON equipment:

59.): 5‘90 —0.

Key: 1. mnitor; 2. out

where I. is the coefficient indicating which part of the city ATS and zone T88 is
equipped with AON equipment.

The load on the code transmitters KS-K is created by ordinary and monitor calls
on arrival of which it is necessary to output infomtion to the crossbar ATS

Yxsx '13. + 4:352 (l -— In)! Inwlaaoo.

Key: 1. monitor

The value of Bk is made up of calls routed over the SLH to the crossbar TsS and
CATS [BSLMﬂ-mn and calls routed to the order-circuit crossbar ATS from the
long-distance switchboards and the incoming automatic service long-distance
dnannels (B ):

order ATS

tin-8.3.1.20 -‘m)+8§32w

Key: 1. SLH; 2. order ATS

The load on the code transmitters KS—V is created by calls, on arrival of which
it is necessary to output information to the outgoing long-distance channels with
single-frequency signalling system:

Yxs-v ' ems-m Rev/3500'
When determining the nutter of SS modules (with a capacity of 16 inputs, (.0 out-
puts) for connecting registers to three types of code transmitters let us select
the versimof connection of the outputs with breakdown into three routings with

an availability of 20, 10 and 10 (see Figure 6.5 d). The routing with avail-

ability of 20 calls is used to connect the type of transmitter which transmits
the highest load. The number of SS modules

.vss - (NM... + 1‘,T -:- Mm) IS.

The aVerage load on an intermediate line to the transmitters

’ ' ”no '9' Yxs-x + Yum-1W9“)-

Thc nunber of code transmitters KS-D, KS-K and KS-V is determined by the curves
in Figure 6.15 or 6.16 depending on the mgnitude of the load of each type of
transmitter. the selected availability and the value of s. In the case where

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the load for any type of transmitter is such that the number KS exceeds 150 (the

maximum mmber of them indicated in Figure 6.16), K8 is calculated by the
formula

b5 u Iw+ (Y‘s —Ym)/n.

where YlSO is the load which 150 Ks can transmit for the given value of s:
calm/AN“ is the average load on one K8 in the secticn from 1110 to 150 KS.

0n the KS-D rack there are seven sets of code transmitters, and on the Its-K and
Ks-V racks, five each.

Let us calculate the register equipuent for our exasple.

H/N Registers and as Stage. The total number of line equipment sets (281. and

lines from the order-circuit ATS) serviced by the all! registers according to the
above-presented data is

GooFlR-ZLH + 400 FlR-ZT-H + 680 FlR-ZT-N + 49 FIR-SE - 1699.
This number of sets is divided into approximately equal groups. in each of which

there can be no more than 600 (in accordance with the makeup of the automatic

charge computing equipment directly connected to the 281. and the all! registers);
we obtain three such groups.

The line equipment is distributed by groups a follows:
Group 1(2): 200F112-2L-H+IsoF1R-zr-H+2201=11z-z'T-N:
Group 3, 200FlR-ZL~H+IO0F]P-ZT-H+2loFlR-ZT-N+49FlR-SE.

Let us determine the nudaer of HRS for the IRS-20 stage for group 1(2)

N . ,
was.“ - 2 lg. .. 2(200,1s-,— 150/15+

+ 220/151-2114 + 10+ 15) - 78.

For group 3
, Nam - 2 (200/15 + 100/15 + 210/15 + 49/15) -

-2(N+7+|4+4)-78.

The total number of ms for three groups NRS'3'78'23" The nulioer of racks RS-ZO
(eight ms on a rack)

N49,, - 2 (2m + 20/8 + 30/11) + 20/11 + 14/11 +
+ 23/11 + m - :13.

Key: 1. rack 38-20

165

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000600030063-4

KINO 350 1VDL'HO 80:!

The outer of calls subject to servicing by the HI“ registers

1 ' 2 . '
Bu/N ' 8‘30)! 4' snag/mm? T B-ex(3 , «mﬂ-v: '
- mm + 14604-1460- 28622.

Key: 1. 281.; 2. out SL(PUR-T-Y); 3. out SL (FUR-2T-Y)
The load on the RIM registers

YHIN ' u/N THIN/36m ‘ 28622‘29/3500 - 2-“ 5391(1)
Key: 1. erlengs

The load on the group of ZSL systems connected to the 1(2) group 0

xmu m -" ym-zw'WINrm-n-H + Vruumx
X 'mlNFlR-Z‘MI + yFlR-zT-N'nOINPlR-ZT-N -
- ammo/soc + 200-160/400 + 325-220/650 - 235 spa/1)

Key: 1. erlengs

The load on the 281. group connected to group 3 of H/N registers,

Ym: - Waco/600 + zoo-1001400 4- 3254101650 +
+ a4 - 2893mm

-' Key: 1. erlangs
The total load on the ZSL equip-em:
73%|" 285+285+289-8593M.(2)
Key: 1. 281.: 2. erlangs

The load on group 1(2) of HIM registers

. 1 ,
yam m" Yum (Y1$a))rpscn’waén) -

-231 mas/ass) - 773M 3)

Key: 1. 1(2) gr 28L; 2. 251.: 3. erlengs
The load on group 3 of “IN registers

yum-231.64.71— 77,539.. (1)

Key: 1. erlengs

166

A'INO EIS/l 1VDL-IJO 80:!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500030063-4
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

The average load on the internediate line to the BIN register for each group

lum- ’7 “.2053”:

 

 

" “" Wasp)” mm to (1)
77.5
h -178“) 10- 0.2“”-

Key: 1. erlang

The malber of all! registers in each group in the given case will be determined by

the formulae considering the increased load on the registers by comparison with
the curves in Figure 6.16:

”HI" I (I) - 5 + “Ya/N ‘ (allyll - 5 + 35-77/‘9 I
" ‘39 :Nmu. - 6+ BIS-mam - I40.

The total number of registers anrz.139+1ao-a1s. The mater of am racks:
"rack “/N-lolB/lo-IOS (four registers on a rack).

UZPI Equipment and RS Stage. The load on the 112?! is determined by the formula

- asm-m/asoo) 0.15 - 13.939113)
Key: 1. UZPI; 2. 281.; 3. erlangs

The nuaber of MRS on the RS-lO stage: “Rs-mm/lS-lolB/ls-ZB. The nuiaer of
ns-1o radcs: “rack Rs-28/8-4. The average load on the intermediate line to the
UZPI

5... yggu/(NRS-lp) - 13,9/(20-10) - 0.0639411)
Key: 1. UZPI; 2. erlang

The manner of UZPI (according to the curves in Figure 6.110) is 27. The nuaber
of UZPI racks (two sets on a rack) “rack Uzu-ZﬂZ-llt.

2T Registers and as Stage. The mater of line system serviced by the registers
ET is equal to 500 FIR-ZT-Y. The equipment is divided into two groups of 250
each. Each group is serviced by its group of registers. The amber of HRS in
the RS-ZO stage for one group N r '21!“ _ T_Y/15-2°250/15-34. For two groups
NRs-3lo-2-68. The number of re 5-20: rack Rs-34/s+31./s-1o.

The nuaber of calls subject to servicing by the registers 2T, Bn-Bm2T_Y-12047.

The load on the registers 2T

y" - am”, rn/aooo - non-2013500 - 11.36 span)
Key: 1. erlangs

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The load on each of the two groups ‘of registers

14,12, - 11 .3512 - 35.683". (2)

Key: 1. gr 2T; 2. erlangs

The load on the intermediate line to the register

'(1)

Y 3553
_ 4m- - - , 3,... 2
‘ (”Rs/2m (34;?)10 021 H

Key: 1. gr 2T; 2. erlang

 

The nutter of registers in a group (according to the curves in Figure 6.1%) is 68.
The total mater of registers in the two groups Nn-2-68-136. The nlﬂer of
racks "rack 2T-136/lo-3lo.

Y/O Registers and RS Stage. The nulber of line system serviced by the Y/O
registers is 500 FIR-T—Y and 606 FIR-L-O. Let us divide the equpnent into two

groups, each of which consists of 250 FIR-T-Y and 203 FIR-1’0 and is serviced by
its group of registers. The number of ms in the IRS-20 stage for one group

u”.,--msons +203/18) -207 + u) - an.
The total nuber of IRS for the two groups mks-2.62424.

The umber of racks 115-20

”:3 .. - 3418 + 28/8 4- 3m + 2m - II.

“a“ 1- “and: 35-20
The nutter of calls subject to servicing by the Y/O registers is

By/o - 8'13?” + BUR-Lo - 12 “3 + 6609 1.19532.
The load on the WC registers is

rm, - am rmmsoo; Imus/35m - 97.6 sum
Key: 1. erlengs
The load on each of the two groups of registers

1
7.5.1120 - 97.612 - 45.83.».(2)

Key: 1. gr Y/O; 2. erlengs

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The average load on the intermediate line to the register

 

Y”? 48 a
_ .JLLo. _ '
’ (NRSI2H0 (62/2) Io " °' '57 3"" (2)

Key' 1. gr Y/O; 2. erlang

o

The nunber of registers in each grow (by the curves in Figure 6.16) is 83, and
in two groups NYlo-Z-S3-l66. The nutter of racks Y/O: “rack "0-166/6-42.

AN-S Analyzers, Additional Storage Elements EMA and Decade Receivers KM-D.
The nuaber of analyzers AN-s is determined beginning with the fact that one

analyzer services 20 registers of each type:

”ans ' an+ ”31”” 4' ”no/2° '
.. 4|8,’20+136/20+166/20 - 2| + 7+9 - 31.

The analyzers are located on the register racks.
Additional storage elenents EMA are provided in a nuﬂaer equal to the umber of

regsters:
Nu“ - Hm+Nn+Nw°-4Ia+ 136+ 106 -m.

On one rack there are 20 EMA system for one version of the registers.

The total water of EMA registers
N41,)“ - “ta/20+ nae/20+ l66/20 - 31.

Key' 1. rack EMA

The decade code receivers 104-!) service the BIN registers and the 2T registers and
The number of receivers KM-D is as

are rigidly connected to these registers.
On one rack there are 15 receivers

follows: "mp-Nam” “184-136-554.
connected to one type a register. The nuﬁer of racks KM-D: “rack Inn-D-

-6l 8/15+l36/15-38.

KM-V Code Receivers and SS Connectors. The load on the KM-V receivers

ym_v - BY’on.vlm -(12 M3 +
+6689)4/3600 - 21.743”. (1)

Key: 1. erlangs

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The nunber of nodules SS:Nss-NY/o/16-166/16-11. The average load on the module
input

3 =- YKM.\..'(N55~16)- 2| ,74/(ll JG) - o. l233pa.(1)
Key: 1. erlsng
The nuber of code receivers KH-V (according to the curves in Figure 6.15) for
P-0.001. nq-loo and 3-0.123 is V'37' On one [Oi-v rack there are 18 receivers.
The nuﬂaer of rocks “rack ”H;- [1822.1, that is, 3.
Code Transmitters Ks-D, Ks-K, Ks-V. The nutter of ordinary calls serviced by the

16-0 transmitters is

8‘ a Bag. + 8wn-na - N288-0J-i- '2 0‘7 - 3247.

Key: 1. 51.“

The total number of monitor calls
1
“'59 H ‘0 " (‘Quwa-T-w + 5." mun-arm ‘3'

+B,)(l—l)-(7m+7500+9l44)0.25-m6.
Key: 1. monitor; 2. out; 3. out.a
The load on the transmitters KS-D

Yxso =' (5- + 59'3") Tao/360° "
- (x5241 Moss-0.1) 8/3500 - 83.3394.(1)

Key: 1. monitor; 2. erlangs

where the coefficient n-0.7 determines the portion of ordinary and monitor calls
from a ten-step ATS.

The nunber of ordinary calls serviced by the KS-K transmitters is
an 35%,)" —m) +352). mas-0.3+aw-12m.
Key: 1. SIM; 2. order

The mater of monitor calls B -6036. The load on the transmitters KS-K

mitor

7K” - (a. + W: — an TKSK/asoo -
- (newness-0.9513600 a 19.33;». (1)

Key: 1. monitor; 2 erlangs

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The load on the transmitters KS-V

rm - 8,1,..va 13M . asoo -l2’17-5/3600 - 17.2 39.1.(1)

Key: 1. erlangs

The number of SS modules
1v$8 - (.vm + r" + Mug/16 - (us +136 + l66)/16 - 4.5.

The average load on the intermediate line to the transndtters is

8 - (YKgp + YKS~K + YK$V)I(N“- l6) I
- (83.3 +193 + 17.214646) - 0J633pa. (1)

Key: 1. erlang

The nmber of transmitters (according to the curves in Figure 6.16) for P-0.001,
3-0.163 erlang is, respectively: Nxs_D-l36 (for III-20); “Ks-W“ (for mq-IO);
“KS-K'SI (for 1111-10).

The nutter of racks is, respectively: "rack Ks_D-l36/7-20; "rack Its-x-Sl/S-ll:
“rack Ks-V'l'l'ls'g'

General Control Units. The markers M and the route markers VH service cells both
when setting up ordinary calls to ewscriber B and when setting q) mnitor calls
to subscriber A if subscriber A is connected to an ATS not equipped with A0“
equipment. ‘

The nunber of calls reaching the markers 1! and VH,

5M ‘ Bum 4' 8“. + 81.0 ‘9' (8.9}: + f2)" " 1"
Key: 1. out.a; 2. z

where BH/N' 32.1., BY 0 are the numbers of calls serviced by the corresponding
registers; 13 ut.s’ ‘2 are the numbers of calls reaching the outgoing long-distance
channels with automatic service and on the 81.! to the zone TsS from the ATS
slbscribers; (1-1) is the coefficient indicating which part of the CATS and TeS

is not equipped with A0" eqtdpnent.

The mater of markers H and W is determined depending on the number of serviced
calls and RH groups by the curves presented in Figure 6.17. The group contains
two RH connectors. The figure shows two families of curves. The family of
curves 1 pertains to half of the office (the amber of calls to 35000. H to 10,
VH to 20 and RH groups to four). The family of curves 2 is designed to determine
the additional number of control units H, V)! and RH groups which must be added

to the basic system (defined for 70000 calls per hour) for joint operation of

two offices. The table in Appendix 3 can be med to calculate H and V“.

171

FOR omen. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Beginning with the fact that each RH group can connect up to 100 registers to a
group of route markers, the nmber of groups RH as a function of the amber of

registers is

N“ - (Nam + .va + NW). [00.

The obtained nutter of RM grows must be corrected by the curves presented in
Figure 6.17 in accordance with the nuliaer of calls.

The equipment of the marker M, just as the equith of the route marker VH OCCIP
pies a whole rack. One RH relay connector rack can connect 50 registers to five

route markers .

‘ “EIWWBIL‘?
III-Ill-

m

mm-mnnll " lull

'VyrfimlioIII-FVII- “IVA-l
M

";+:m u-u- _ u:
llmnm.= I

 
  
       

 

    
 

Figure 6.17. Curves for calculating the general control units

M,VHandRH

1. No of calls per hour

2. Family of curves N2

3. Total nunber of RM groups
lo. No of basic RM groups

5. No of amdliary RM groups
6. Auxiliary nunber of H

7. «'0 RH groups + 1 RH group
8. 6 RM groups 4- 2 RH groups

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
16.
15.
16.
17.

Family of curves N1

In our exauple the nulber of ordinary and mnitor calls serviced by the markets

will be

Bu-BM+B,,+ay,o+s_g_1L28622+
+12m+19532+6036-55237_

Key: 1. monitor

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In accordance with the curves in Figure 6.17 and the table in Appendix 3 the
following are taken for the setup: markers M-lO~2-20; M racks 20: W! route
markers 16'2-32; VM racks 32; RM groups 6.2-8; RM-S-Z-lé; RM racks 16.

With respect to the nunber of registers the nunber of RM groups: Ngr m-(418+136+
166)/lOO-8.

The MCI and mu nodule connector racks are designed in the number satisfying the
following layout possibilities: the MCI rack can service a maximum of five
incoming modules; the MGU rack can service up to ten outgoing nodules; each MCI
and mu rack can be connected to all markers of one of the groups of markers H
(see the structural diagram in Figure 6.8). The naunuu number of not racks and
also MGU racks is four.

The quantitative interrelatim of the switching modules, the MG racks and markers
M for our exanple is expressed as follows.

The calculated ntmber of incoming modules, that is, 16, is divided into four
grOups of four CI in a group. Each of these groups is serviced by one MCI rack,
that is, four MCI racks are provided. of then the first and second MCI racks are
connected to ten M of the first group of markers, and the third and fourth MCI
racks, to ten M of the second group of markers.

For the outgoing modules, the calculated mater 16 is divided into two groups of
eight GU in each group. Each of these groups is serviced by two mu racks, that
is, two groustZ-lo MGU racks are provided. Of them, the first MGU rack connects
the first to the eighth GU to ten M of the first group of markers, the second MCU
rack connects the first to the eighth CI) to ten M of the second group of markers,
the third MGU rack connects the ninth to sixteenth GU to ten M of the first group
of markers. and the fourth MCI] rack connects the ninth to the sixteenth GU to

ten M of the second group of markers.

The test blocks TB and ITB are designed beginning with the following data:

It is possible to connect 120 outgoing lines to one test block TB for a TB use
coefficient of 0.8; consequently, “aﬂoat/12°;

It is possible to connect 600 outgoing line systems FUR to one main rack of an
individual test block ITB. The office can have a madman of four nain racks.
When necessary, an additional ITB rack for lo-loOO lines is installed which together
with the main ITB racks provides for connecting a Inadmun of outgoing lines
Nm-600-4M-400-4000 to these racks.

In our exanple the nuaber of test blocks is “TB'2586/120'22' there are 22 TB
racks. The number of ITB racks for 2586 outgoing lines is lo«600+l'1000-5.

The sets of nonbusy relays for a routing VI. signal the presence of at least one
free line in that part of the routing which is serviced by the given set.

173

FOR 0mm]. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The outgoing lines of one routing are divided into three parts, each of which is
equipped with its set of relays indicating nonbusy of the routing. The signal of
nonbusy of a routing is sent to all route markers.

The nuﬂaer of sets of VI. depends on the total mater of routing markers at the
office and the number of lines connected to each of the routings (Table 6.3).

 

Table 6.3
No of VI. 3 stem on a routin for

No of lines on a N <20 N 20
routingI no more than M W)

90 l 2

1w 2 lo

270 3 6

360 4 8

450 5 10

On the VL rack there can be up to 60 relay sets. In our example it is assumed
that the nuber of lines in each of the 120 routings does not exceed 90. Conse-

quently, for W32(>20), 2-120-240 sets are provided. The number of VI. racks
is 240/60-4.

Priority Equipment. The device for servicing calls with priority insures priority
of calls of the subscribers granted the right of priority by comparison with calls
from other sxbscribers in the case of overloading on the required routing. This
is realized by blocking the given routing for some time for all calls except
priority calls. Here. the FBR of the device for priority calls uust receive in-
formation about granting a connection first to the priority subscribers. The

device for priority calls interacts with the relay systems in the markers H and
W.

If a priority call is rejected on the blocked routing, the register again calls
the route marker which tries to set up the call. The effort to make a call and
set it up is repeated every 5 seconds until 90 seconds of monitored time expire,
after which the register disconnects.

The priority equipment is located on the VM-VB racks,md if necessary VB racks
are added. The number of these racks depends on the number of basic sets of VB-lo
and VH-B making ‘9 the priority equipment.

The ”-4 system is designed for blocking routings with connection through four
switching links. One VB-lo system contains relays for one routing and ten route
markers. If the outer of route markers is less than or equal to 20 at due office,
then two VB-lo system are required for each routing; if the nuaber of route
markers is more than 20, four VB-lo are required for each routing.

The VH-B arc auxiliary equipment for the route markers when setting up a call via
four switching links. One VH-B is designed to service five route markers VM.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Consequently. the nunber of VH-B will be “VH- - [5. It is possible to put four
\M-B on one VH-VB rack. Beginning with this get , the number of racks at the
office will be VB-“VH-B/l" e'here are 20 W6 on one Vii-VB rack. The total
nunber of sets wh ch is placed on the Vii-VB rack will be “'VD—d'szH-VB' The
remaining ”—4 (N a-N'VB_(.) are placed on the VB racks, each of which is
designed to instal 28 VB-lo. The nuﬂner of V3 racks will be "rack “((wa-
N.VB-IO)/28‘

In our examle the number of VB-lo routing blocking system is determined calcu-
lating four systems for each routing, for the nunber of route markers at an office
is 32 (>20): mad-IZOMm. The number of sets of auxiliary equipment VM-B

is determined calculating one VH-B for five route markers. that is, N 3-7.

The number of Vii-VB racks is equal to two (“MB/6). On two VH-VB rs s it is
possible to install 20-2-50 VBPlo. The remaining VB-nlo (no-1.0440) are located

on the VB racks, the nunber of which is determined calculating installation of

28 vnplo on one rack: "rack VB-loan/Za-IG.

Numer of Line Equipment System. The nuniner of line system of all versions is
determined by the number of lines connected to the line bank of the switching
system. The water of racks with line equipment is determined beginning with the
fact that either 30 or 20 systems are placed on one rack depending on the type.
Thirty system each are placed on the PIR-T-Y, FIR-lira, FIR-L-O, FIR-SE.
FUR-L-H, FUR-T-H, FUR-L-O, FUR-S racks. Nenty system are installed on the
FIR-ZT-Y, FIR-ZT-H, FIR-ZT-N, FUR-T-Y, FUR-Z'r-Y, FUR-T-N, FUR-SB racks.

The nulber of receivers of the single-frequency signal system TH-‘l' is determined
by the number of line systems of the incoming and outgoing channels of the single-
frequency signalling system and also 281. and SD! organized with respect to the
transmission system channels with signalling in the talk band. 0n the TH-T rock
there are 100 receivers.

The nunber of receivers of the two-frequency signalling system TM-ZT is determined
by the number of line system of the incoming and outgoing channels of the two-
frequency system. On the I'M-2T rack there are 30 receivers.

In our exsmle the nutter of racks with receivers of the single-frequency system
will be "rack m1.-(SOO+SOO+650+676)/100-26, and with the receivers of the twee
frequency system, "rack m21-(SOO+500)/30-34.

Automatic Call Charge Computing Equipment TI. The call charge computing equipment
is made up considering the division of the 281. into equal groups, in each of
which there can be a mximum of 600 lines. Each such group is serviced by its
group of “IN registers. Beginning with this factor, the nunber of devices of all
versions entering into the TT equipment is determined separately for each 251.
group.

The rr equipment consists of racks Nos 1, 2, 4, 5 and TOR on which all elements
of this equipment are placed. The number of racks No 1, 2. la is taken reckoning
one rack for 100 ZSL system. On rack No S the RTT connecting relay panels and
the LM—BM connector panel are located. There are two types of No S racks:

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9.) Racks on which six RTT and four LM-BH are located;

b) Racks on which ten KIT are placed.

Each RTT serves to connect ten H/N registers to the SPB recording registers of

two TT equipment sets. For each ZSL group, the following number of RTT are
required:

V 1‘] IN .\
'RTI'= %.%.

For 100 25!. systems. two [J‘l—BH are required to connect the read registers to two

buffered storages. For each ZS]. group. a nuuber of LH—BH sets equal to 2“.” is
required.

The following number of first-type No 5 racks (“53) are required for each ZSL
group

”5,12 = ”LM'BM" = 2 Nnﬂ.

Key: 1. rack 5a

The number of RTT sets which are placed on racks of this type for the 28L group
will be deterrdned from calculating

(1)

”menu = “‘VLM-aM/ ‘) ' “Mfr!” '" 3"’r'r'
Key: 1. rack 5a

For the remaining KIT. the second type racks (N51,) are used, the hunter of which is

N93, = (.vm— synmo.
Key: 1. rack 5b

Then the total nunber of racks for both types of TT equipment for all 281. groups
is determined.

The TOR racks are common to the office; their amber is reckoned calculating one
rack for 1500 28]. systems.

The number of all remaining elements of TT equipment (identifiers, recorders.
and so on) is determined in accordance with the makeup of the No 1. 2, lo, 5 and
TOR racks.

Let us calculate the TT equipment for our example.

The total amber of ZSL system is 650+600+400-1650.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us divide this number of 7.5!. into three groups of 1650:3-550 28!. each.

The nunber of No l, 2, 4 racks (reckoning one rack for 100 281. systems) will be:
No l racks 6-3-18; No 2 racks, 18; No 4 racks, 18.

The number of RTT sets for connecting the H/N registers is determined from the
following calculation:

1) For the first (second) group of HIM registers

N .V
‘VRTT- JIf._TL-ﬂ.i=”_3=42:

i0 2 I0 2

2) For the third group of “IN registers

- I40 6
N -_,_._ ,
m '0 2..“3c-IQ.

It is necessary to have a total of (dd-126 R‘I'I‘ for the three groups.

The number of LM—BH for each group of H/N registers (two sets for 100 ZSL)
NL‘I—BM-Z.6-12‘

The nunber of No 53 racks for one 281. group Nra It NS -12/lo-3. The nunber of RTT
which can be placed on three No 5a racks, Nm-T-S'é-lg.

The nunber of No Sb racks for the remaining system for each 231. group "rack “51f-
(42-18)/10-3.

The total nunber of No 5a racks is 3. 3-9: the total number of No 5b racks is
303'9.

The nutter of TOR racks (calculating one rack for 1500 281.) “rack TOR'“25L/1500'
(600+aoo+650)/ 1500-2.

6.8. Structural Features of the Equipment and Its Placement

A distinguishing feature of the office rack equipuent is the fact that on all the
racks the internal wiring is coupled out to service homes. In the office there

are two types of racks: Ebb and 31m.

The BDD racus are equipped with all-rack service devices by means of which the
wires from these racks are connected to the wires of the office cables. me
service units are placed in the upper part of the rack on a vertical superstruc-
ture 500 mm high. The MKS of the incoming and outgoing switching modules and
also the multiwinding relays for the R11, MCI and MGU connectors are located on
the EDI) racks. The BBB rack is 670 m wide and 280 mm deep. All the remaining

types of equipment are placed on the BBB racks.

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The BBB racks contain individual service units on each relay panel. The circle
design of the BDH racks perndts installation of them with the wired sides tidit
against each other. The sun rack is 961 mm wide, the depth of a double row of
these racks is 425 mm. The height of the Ebb and BI)“ racks is 2900 an.

All of the racks. with small exception, contain mnitoring and testing panels on

which fuses, signal lights, test jacks, and so on are mounted at the same height
from the floor.

Some of the circuit elements located inside the relay panels Such as the electronic
circuits on printed circuit boards are individual special-design relays are cut
in using independent service boxes inside the panel.

The racks are arranged in the switch room either in solid bays with lateral
passages or bayson both sides of the central passage depending on the configura-
tion and size of the room. The spacing between bays must be no less than 700 m.

The width of the central and lateral passages must be 1500 to 2000 m depending
on the total width of the room.

The grouping of the racks in bays is decided beginning with arguments of economical
use of the office cable and convenience of servicing. This, for example, in

the same or adjacent bays it is desirable to install the following:

Line equipment and the register finding stages RS connected with it:

Cannon control units M, VM, TB and so on;

Different types of registers, code transmitters and connectors to them (REG, Ks.
ss);

MG module connectors and RM connectors for connecting the registers to the route
markers.

In order to save table it is desirable to locate the ID? [intermediate distribut-
ing frames] at locations of concentration of the largest nunber of cables
connected to the 10?. for example, between thebays of racks with line equipment
and thebays of racks of switching modules.

In addition to the ARM-20 type equipment, certain types of Soviet-made equipment,
in particular, the alarm systems and system for testing long-distance two-
frequency system channels (PTN, SGTN, APKA), the A0N (UZPI, CD, MG) equipment,
the equipment for checking the connecting lines of the APSZ. and the Pl-BO-U
punches are also installed in the office switch rooms. The PTN (TH-2T) receivers
are installed on the frames of the ARM-20 racks which it is desirable to locate
closer to the racks with the line equipment of the long-distance channels of

the two- frequency signalling system.

The monitoring and testing equipment of the APKA and APSL is located in one bay

and as close as possible to the racks with the line equipment of the long-distance
channels and the trmks.

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OF1NC1AI.USE¢MNLY

 

Figure 6.18. Fragment of a layout plan for the ARM-20 type
ANTS equipment
Key:
1. hertz

The UZPI racks and the CD group sensor rack having a height of 2650 u. are
arranged in a row with the KH-D rack. The rack of multi-frequency oscillators

for the key pulsers is installed in the rack switchboard room as close as
possible to the cable exit to the svitchboards.

179

FOR OFFlC1A1.USE1HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The patches and the technical monitoring equipment (CIX, DK, 110 are installed
in individual facilities adjacent to the switch room.

A fragment of the equipment layout plan for the ARM-20 type MS switch room is
shown in Figure 6.18.

6.9. Electric Power Supply for the Office
The ARM-20 type MS equipment is designed to take power from 48, -2b, -60 volt
dc power supplies and also from the ac municipal electric power network. The

office equipment has stabilizers that convert the -68 V voltage to stabilized
+6. -12, -18 volt voltages which are used to power the electronic devices of the

equipmt.

180

NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 7. DESIme ANTS ICE (KVARTS) QUASIBLBCTRONIC AUTOMATIC LONG-DISTANG
TELEPHONE OFFICES

7.1. General Remarks

The qmeielectronic ANTS office is qualitativelyanew type of equipmnt in which
both the switching elements and the control units differ from those which were
used previously. Therefore in order to prepare for desiyling such offices it is
necessary to become familiar with electronic switching equipment and also with
the principles of the computer equipment used as specialized control mite.
Published sources are recomended for this purpose [12, 13. 14, 15].

7.2. Operating Capabilities of the Office

by the fact that sealed magnetically controlled contacts are used to switch the
talk channel, and a specialized computer operating by a written program is used

as the control unit. The maximum capacity of the ms KE office is about 8000
incoming Bid 8000 outgoing channels and lines. The output capacity of the computer
permits up to 160,000 calls to be serviced in the PLH [peak load hour].

The basic operating characteristics of the office are analogous to those which
are provided by the ANTS-lo and ARM-20 offices: nalely, the possibility of trms-
mission of facsimile and phototelegrlpnic mssages and digital data in addition
to the long-distance telephone calls, automatic switching from the direct to by-
pass paths, priority servicing of subscribers of individual categories, the use
of cord or cordless type switching equipment for semi-automatic service. and so
on. Program control, however, permits expansion of the operating capabilities
of the office. In particular, subscribers of the ATS connected to the ms ICE
can set up automatic calls over the channels of the long distance and zone net-
works by dialing an abbreviated nuaber for the called subscriber. This possi-
bility will be used both by the quasielectronic ATS subscribers and the cross-
bar and ten-step ATS subscribers. 0n connection to the quasielectronic ATS, the
abbreviated amber is received and recalculated to the complete nuuber at the
ATS, and on connection to the crossbar or ten-step ATS the recalculation is done
the ANTS KB.

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A characteristic feature of the AMl‘S KB equipmnt is introduction of line and
control signal transmission systems for interaction with other ANTS KB over a
cannon signal channel (0K3). In individual cases where this system is uneconomi-
cal, provision is made for the application of the single-frequency method of
transmitting line signals on a frequency of 2600 hertz and the mlti-frequency
method of transmitting control signals by the "2 out of 6" code. The same signal
system is provided also for interaction of the ANTS KB with the AMPS-4 and ARM-20
offices. For coupling to the ANTS-2 and ANTS-3 offices existing on the network,
the ANTS KB equipment contains the devices required for the two-frequency line
signal transmission system with decade transmission of the dialing pulses.

The ARTS KB equipment provides for interaction with the quasielectronic. crossbar
and ten-step ATS. The trunks and recording trunks organized either on physical

lines or by transmission system channels are used for coupling to the ATS, de-
pending on the ATS-AHTS distances.

The signalling system used on the ZSL and SLN depends on the type of ATS. 0n
interaction with the ATS KB as a rule provision is made for the organization of

a conmnon signalling channel (0K5). In individual cases when this system is un-
economical. the line signals will be transmitted depending on the type of line:
over physical lines by direct current, over transmission system channels with
segregated signal channel, on a frequency of 3800 hertz. on transmission system
channels without segregated signal channel on a frequency of 2600 hertz. The
method of transmitting the control signals over the ZSL is determined by the type
of ATS or the local network junction: namely,

ATSKE are coupled to the AHIS KB with storage of the category and number of
subscriber A at the ATS and subsequent output of all of the information to the
ANTS KB by the multi-frequency "pulse packet" method; subscriber A can dial the
nunber using a dial or key pulser;

The crossbar and ten-step ATS are coupled to the AMTS KB without storing the
category and nunber of subscriber A at the ATS as follows: after subscriber A
dials the prefix "8" connection is made to the ANTS; on the request signal coming
to the AON from the ANTS. the ATS transmits the category and number of the calling
subscriber by the multi-frequency "no-interval packet" method, and then after
receiving the "AMTS answer" signal. the dialing pulses are transmitted by the
decade method. 0n the physical lines the decade pulses are transmitted by direct
current. on the transmission system channels with segregated signal channel.

on 3800 hertz, and on the transmission system channels without segregated signal
channel. on 2600 hertz.

For transmission of control signals over the SLH when coupling the MS KB to
the quasielectronic and crossbar ATS. the multi-frequency "pulse shuttle" method
is used, and for coupling to the ten-step ATS. the decade method.

In addition to controlling the process of setting up calls, the special control

computer also perform the functions of automatic long-distance call charge
computing and gathering of statistical data.

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬁCIAL USE ONLY

It is proposed that the equipment of the agency [PBX] quasielectronic ATS be
used as the order-circuit ATS in the ms KB.

7.3. Structural Diagram and Composition of the Office Equipment
The office contains the following basic junctions and devices (Figure 7.1):
Line equipment which. in addition to the already known equipment includes new

versions of outgoing and incoming IVK operating with the me of a connon signal

channel OKs-IVK for transmission system channels and IVK-Z, IVK-lo for physical
lines;

The switching system KS consisting of the BVL incoming line modules and the BIL
outgoing line mdules;

Switching system control units UUKS;

Group devices of the switching system (single- frequency and multi-frequency

receivers and oscillators, acoustic signal sets. receiving and transmitting units,
and recorded voice unit);

Identifiers (scanners) and distributors connected to the line equipment;

Central address unit TsAU;
Central distributor TsRU;

Peripheral processor PPr;

Central control unit 'IsUU consisting of two specialized control conputers SUVH-l
and SUVM-Z operating synchronously and external input-output devices;

Monitoring and testing equipment KIA and the office service panel;

Signalling equipment over the coamnon channel 0K8;

Order-circuit ATS;

Cord or cordless switching equipment.

In order to provide uninterrupted operation of the office not only the central

control units are redundant, but also peripheral units: PPr, ‘l‘sAU, TsRU, UUKS,
and so on.

The switching banks of the 3V1. and BIL modules are connected to all types of
incOming and outgoing dnannels, 281. and SLR, and also the group devices for

receiving and transmitting line signals and control signals. Each 3V1. is
connected to each 311. module by intermodular lines.

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A
-
1;. m

1
LE

‘1'.
IE.
hi].-

E

1

 
    
       

=--:',., 51.11 j
1:2". I ! an
i.” .1 I— am: (26)
.‘LPL‘I I'lh! I! ‘5
HE‘S. [gm
915%; :rg‘ﬁ- ,'_
III-”NI.

I

1
LE
I

I— ..-_'—_
'zu'ﬁzag! Wynn

'55:..2! m

m. meg- (28)

I
In“! 1152-: (29)

ILEEI. m m (30)

I
a
L

a!
“a

1
}\

,.
I

IIIII1I1-lllllll‘llll
-’ ‘--iLE---

Figure 7.1. Simplified structural diagram of an ms [(5
Isee key on p 185]

18:.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Fig 7.1]:

1. 281. from the CATS and T38 26. 8!." to the CATS and 1‘35

2. Incoming long-distance channels 27. Outgoing long-distance channels
3. From the 1K d/T 28. To the K sh/t in the AMTS build-
4. From the 1K sh/t in the ANTS building ing
S. From the K sh/t of another building 29. To the 2K sh/t in another build-
6. From the order-circuit ATS ing
7. KIA operator panel 30. To the order-circuit ATS
8. VKZSL- .. . 31. To the HR sh/t in another build-
9. IVK . . . ing
10. VKTS 32. 0K5
11. VKTNS 33. Distributor
12. RH 34. First halfset/an halfset
13. USK 35. UUKS
11¢. RUSK 36. Identifier
15. VKMS 37. TsAUl
16. VKS 38. ‘l'sAU 2
17. Group units 39. PPr
18. BVI. 60. SUVM-l
19. BIL (01. SUVH-Z
20. KS 42. TsPr
21. IKSLH . .. (o3. USZU
22. IKTS 1010. P21)
23. IKZH 105. 020
24. IKHK 1'6. USVU
25. IKS 1.7. Peripheral devices
108. sm
49. IKTNS
50. mm

The line equipmnt provides for interaction with all types of ms and ATS. The
logcal operations of processing the signals are performed by the control computer

which has made it possible significantly to reduce the amber of relays in the
line equipment.

Each of the two SUV'M includes the central processor, PPr, the permanent and ready-
acoess memories Flu and 020 and also the channel equipmnt for coupling to tne
peripheral devices. The peripheral devices W are med for connecting the
operator to the SUVH and also for data storage. The peripheral devices include

the punch tape input-output units, typewriter, various types of information stor-
age elements and other devices.

For interaction of the TsUU with the switching system. the line equipment and
other of the peripheral devices there are peripheral processors PPr. central
address and distributing devices TsAU and Tall!) and also distributors and identi-
fiers. Each SUV" is connected to each of two peripheral processors.

185

Ml! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

An iuportant couponent part of the computers is the software SH) which is in

the form of a set of interconnected progress and data determining the sequence

of operations performed by the SUVH in one situation or another during the process
of setting up a call. Each SUVH has an output to the KIA and service panel of

the P0 office. In addition, the TsUU has a set of test instruments KI? and spare
parts ZIP.

The control units of the switching system UUKS set up calls directly in the
switching system based on information received from the SUVH. Bach UUKS is
attached to one BVL or rm. and is made up of two identical mutually redundant
halfsets which, independently of each other, can set up calls in different switch-
ing groups.

The identifiers serve for periodic inspection of the condition of the incoming
line systems and relaying of all changes occurring in the channels and lines to
the peripheral processor.

The distributor performs the functions of servorelays of the line and group sys-
tems operating on instruction from the control computer.

7.4. Setting Up Calls

The process of setting up calls takes place under the control of the SUV)! by the
recorded program. Each type of automatic and semi-automatic connection over
different types of channels and lines is made by the corresponding priorities for
setting up calls. By priority we mean exact prescription of the order for per
forming the individual operations when setting up a call.

The algorithm for setting up various types o.’ calls are translated into machine
language. programd and stored in the computer memory. Bach algorithm for
setting up one type of call or another is broken down into phases. With this
structure of the algorithms and software, standardization of individual phases

of the various types of calls is achieved. Consequently. defined phases in setting
to the calls will have the salt: programs, which will permit economy of the most

expensive part of the control comurer -- the memory.
The following set of programs is stored in the SUVH memory:

Technological, providing for setting up variom types of calls, including addi-
tional services;

Monitoring, providing for correctness of the operation of the equipment, correct-
ness of transmission and reception of control signals;

Auxiliary. providing for the process of controlling tne inclusion of the tech-
nological program. the monitoring and diamostic programs. and the data input-
output programs:

Diagnostic, providing for determining the location of a failure in the various
devices of the office.

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Various types of memories are provided to store the program in the ANTS KE
equipment.

The process of setting up calls in general form takes place as follows. The
calls coming from the city ATS, zone networks or long-distance offices are
received by the office line equipment. However, there is no processing of the
calls in the line equipment. If these are dc signals, they are relayed to the
comn office devices —- identifiers; if these are ac signals. they go to the
corresponding frequency receivers for conversion to direct current. The group
identifiers constantly test all the line equipment with a 10 millisecond cycle
and relay all changes occurring in the lines and channels to the peripheral pro-

cessor. The identifiers are passive devices that perform the functions of signal
relays.

The mission of the peripheral processor is to record changes occurring in the
lines. However, the peripheral processor does not determine the type of signal.

Its purpose is establishment of the end of the signal or beginning of a new signal
and transrdssion of data on changes to the SUW.

The data about all lines and channels connected to the office are stored in the
SUV}! memory. 0n receiving information about changes from the peripheral pro-
cessor, the sum determines the type of call, provides a search for a free inter-
mediate line in the switching system to connect the required group unit. The
control commds from the SUV)! are transmitted via the peripheral processor, the
central distributor, distributor or switching system control unit. The informa-
tion about all calls in the office is stored in the SUVH. For example, after out-
put by the SUVH of instructions to connect the office answer buzzer, the next step
in setting up the call is reception of the number from the subscriber. Since
three types of lines are entered in the SUV)! memory, when obtaining the changes
from the peripheral processor. the SUVM clearly outputs an instruction to connect
the defined receiver. Here in the tin: of sending the office response signal. it
determines the free receiver and free intermediate paths in the switching system
for connecting the receiver so that reception of the nuliaer is provided for.

After reception of the nutter the SUVH determines the routing code and provides

a search for free intermediate lines for connecting the long-distance channel.

Inasmuch as data is stored in the SUV}! memory on all routing: and types of channels,
the signalling system, the composition of the sigml and the required devices for
transmission and reception of the dialing signals and line signals are uniquely
defined at the same tine. Therefore by the given program the SUVH outputs
instructions for transudssion of a busy signal to the channel. receiving confirma-
tion signals. output of the number dialing signals. receiving the subscriber
answer signal and connecting the switching channel for two subscribers to talk.
All of the comands, just as before, are relayed via the peripheral processor,
TsAU, TsRU, distributors and identifiers of the UUKS. On receiving the "sub-
scriber answer" signal, according to the program the SUVH begins to reckon the
time for determining the length of call to conpute the charges.

During the call the identifiers test the busy sets. If subscriber B hangs up his
receiver. the ring-off signal arrives which is relayed by the identifier, and

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the peripheral processor provides information to the SUV)! about the change that

has occurred. On this instruction the SUV" stops the charge computing and starts
the program which discmnects the subscribers.

If the SUV" does not find a free intermediate line, group device, channel or
trunk during the search, on two or three unsuccessful atteupts the subscriber is
sent a "busy" signal. When searching for a free channel on the routing and

in the absence of the latter an effort is made to find it on by-pass routings.
If there are no free channels on the by-pass routings, then any call is put on
hold if it is a tandem office or a call with priority is put on hold, and for an
ordinary call a "busy" signal is sent to the sxbscriber if the office is an out-
going office.

When setting up calls cases of failures of the instruments, failures of individual
office assemblies are possible. In the SUV“ the so—called "tiller" program is
always operating. It regularly outputs time marks after defined intervals. In-
asmuch as the SIM! Operates in real time, all the program (technological. moni-
toring, auxiliary and others) follow the call setting up process when processing
calls by time marks. If for any reason the signal lasts longer than it is set to
or a new signal to request a program does not arrive for a defined time or a con-
firmation signal is not received. in all of these cases the SUVH with the help of
the monitoring program and the technological program. enters the information
about these events in the conputer memory (first in the ready-access memory and
then on the magnetic tape NHL).

In all cases of failure to set up a call, as a rule. the subscriber is sent a
"busy" signal or an effort is made to set up a new call. The monitor program
have a defined level of priority in the office and call the KIA for transmission of
data on stored failures. Then by a defined algorithm the KIA jointly with the
SUVH begins to check out the failed assemblies.

The charge computing and load data are stored on magnetic tape and are then trms-
mitted to the computer center for processing. The transmission to the computer

center can be accomplished by transporting the magnetic tape or it can take place
over the data transmission channels.

7.5. Brief Description of Switching System

As was stated above. for talk channel switching, sealed magnetically controlled
contacts, so-cslled reed relays are used. In general form the reed relay is

an electromagletic coil (solenoid). inside which there are several soldered glass
tubes with metallic magnetically controlled contact plates made of magnetically
soft material. These glass tubes with natal contacts are called sealed contacts
or hercons for short [12]. For creation of a closed magnetic circuit in the
relay, a metal yoke is provided.

The operating principle of the reed relay consists in the following. On trans-
mission of a direct current through the relay winding. a magnetic field with a
defined magnetic [lint is created. The main part of the magnetic flux is closed

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

through the contact plates and the yoke. Part of the flux is dissipated. Under
the effect of the magnetic flux the plates are attracted to each other, and the
contact is closed.

The contact surfaces of the hercons are closed by noble metal -- gold, silver and
rhodium. This insures high reliability and long service life. The location of
the metal contact in a sealed glass bulb creates reliable protection of the
contacts from the influence of the external environment -- dust and corrosion --
which are a basic source of damage to the relays and MKS with insealed contaots.

0n the whole, the reed relay is distinguished by high reliability, small, stable
contact resistance, long service life with small loads, short response and
release time, low control power and simple structural design.

At the present tine various types of hercons are being produced. Hercons that
operate on closure (type A), on opening (type B) and switching (type C) are
known. Hercons can be both inside the coil and outside it.

The "ferride" type hercons are used for ANTS RE. A ferride is a reed relay in
which the magnetic circuit made of magnetic (ferrite) material with rectangular
hysteresis loop is introduced. The ferride is distinguished from an ordinary
reed relay by the presence of magnetic blocking and a short inclusion pulse dura-
tion (microseconds). On transmission of a dc pulse of sufficient magnitude
through the winding, the contact plates are closed, and after the end of the
pulse, they remain in this state as a result of residual magnetization of the
core. In order to open the plate, a current pulse of opposite polarity is passed
through the winding so as to remove the residual magnetization.

For the construction of a switching circuit, the ferrides are placed on a mOunt-
ing board in horizontal and vertical ruws, forming a rectangular matrix called
the switching circuit. The contacts are joined so as to form a coordinate grid.
The ferride is installed at the point of possible contact (intersection) of a
horizontal and vertical; therefore it is provisionally called the intersection
point or switching point.

In a switching circuit. in contrast to a finder, both the horizontal and vertical
can be both input and output; therefore the names "input" and "output" in the
given case are of a purely provisional nature. In addition. in contrast to the
PK8, in the switching circuit the horizontal and vertical are equivalent, for the
response of only one relay at the switching point is sufficient to connect the
corresponding vertical to one of the horizontals.

The relay at the switching points of a switching circuit is connected by a con-
trol unit. For inclusion of the ferride, the inclusion current pulse is sent.
Inasmuch as a ferride has magnetic blocking, no current is required to maintain
it in the operating state. Each ferride contains two windings forming a differ-
ential system. On transmission of a current through both windings the ferride
responds, and on transmission of a current pulse through one winding the ferride
does not respond, and if it was in the working state, it is switched off.

189

FOR‘OFHKJAL.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mien constructing the switching circuit the first windings of the ferrides form-
ing the horizontal are connected in series. Analogously. two windings of the
ferrides forming verticals are connected in series. in order to include the
ferride at the switching point. the current is fed to one horizontal and one
vertical. In this case the ferride which is at the switching point responds. At
the same time the current passes through one of the two windings of all ferrides
located in the same horizontals and verticals and switches off the indicated
ferrides if they were on. Thus, there is no necessity for completing a comet-
tion to release the switching point. The opening of the connection is automatic
as soon as the connection is set up at any point in the same row.

The four-wire 8xs input/output matrix is selected as the basic switching unit.

The switching group KC (Figure 7.2), on the basis of which the group formation
circuits are constructed, consists of eight matrices of link A, and eight matrices
of link 3, that is. it has a capacity of 64'64 input/outputs. The matrices of
link A are connected to the matrices of link 8 by intermediate lines. The two-
iink switching block is made up of 16 switching groups and, consequently, has a
capacity of IOZAXIOZA input/outputs. At the initial point in time when there are
no other calls. any input is accessible to any output. and the circuit in fully
accessible. If calls have been set up in the block, then it can turn out that
there are no free intermediate lines for setting up calls from a defined busy input
to a defined free output. that is, internal blocking occurs. Consequently, the
two-link block is a circuit with internal blocking. In order to decrease the
internal blocking, four-link blocks are used.

 

Figure 7.2. Group formation circuit of a switching module with
a capacity of 64xz input/outputs

The four-link block is formed by connecting two-link blocks to each other by the
"each to each" principle. The group formation diagram of the indicated block In
illustrated in Figure 7.3.

As is known, the structure of the switching system must provide for servicing a
given load with required quality with a minimum number of switching points. As

a result of calculation and analysis of various versions of the group formation
systems for the ANTS KB. two types of systens were selected depending on the
capacity of the office: six-link for offices with a capacity to 4000X2 channels
and lines and eight-link for offices with a capacity of more than 4000*2 channels
and lines.

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 7.3. Group formation diagram of a four-link module
wi :h a capacity of lOZloXZ input/outputs

In the case of the six-link diagram of the switching system the outgoing line
module MI. is selected four-link. and the incoming line module BVL, two-link:
for the eight-link diagram BIL and BVL are four-link. Each W]. is connected to

each BIL by intermodule lines.
7.6. 0K5 Common Channel Signal System

The OKs signal system is characterized by the fact that line and control signals
are transmitted over the signal channel commn to some number of talk channels
(audio signals are transmitted over talk channels).

The OKS signal system can operate in two modes: connected and unconnected. In
the connected operating mode the simals are transmitted between two offices

which are terminal stations for the group of talk channels and for the 0K5. In
the unconnected operating rode the signals are transmitted over two or more series-
connected 0K8, the transmission routes of which differ from the transmission route
of the serviced talk channels. Here the signals are processed and transmitted
through one or several intermediate offices. The connected method of operation

is economically justified for large groups of channels and trunks (more than 60).

The cannon sigmal channel can be organized on the basis of standard voice-frequency

channels. The 0K5 telephone signals are transmitted by the method of series data
transmission by sections where the transmission of the signals from one section

to the next is realized only after processing of them.

The information transmitted over the channel is divided into information modules
of 69 bits each. The data transmission rate in the channel is 1200 and 21000 baud.

7.7. Long-Distance Call Charge Computing

In the ANS KB using specialized control conputers SUVH for control. the functions

of automatic long-distance call charge eowuting are left to the SUVM. Per-
formance of the charge computing function by a recorded program insures relative
freedom of alteration of the charge computing algorithm in one of providing the
subscribers with additional form of services or changing the conditions and
the process for reckoning the charges and sending out bills at the computer cen-

ter Vl‘s.
191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The set of programs used for the SUVN to perform the operations of gathering.
primary processing and transmission of the charge data to the computer center and
also the equipment entering into the ANTS KB and performing the data gathering
function and transmission of the data to the computer center make up the charge
computing subsystem PUS.

The following information must he gathered and transmitted to the computer center
to send the subscriber a bill for the ANTS KE:

The category of the calling subscriber;

The number of the calling and called subscribers;
Length of call;

Time and date of completion of call.

For determination of current time and also the date of the call a tine-calendar
sensor DVK has been programmed in the ready-access memory OZU of the SUVH. Inns-
much as data files are created as a rule for transmission to the computer center.
the time and date of coupletion of the call do not acconpany every call, but a

file of calls. When forming the file we begin with the fact that it is expedient
to include data on I) to 90 calls in one file.

The charge computing data is transmitted from the ms KB to the computer center
automatically via the data transmission equipment APD. Magnetic tape storage
elements NHL are used as the buffered storage. Their function includes smoothing
of the peaks of the output data in the PU! and storage of data in the periods when
data transmission to the computer center cannot be accormlished for some reason.
Thus, the primary docmnt for settlements with the Subscribers is a magnetic tape,
and it must be stored for some time for possible analysis of subscriber claims.

The transmission of data to the computer center via the APD is expedient for sig-
nificant distances between the ANTS K5 and the computer center. If the computer
.:enter is located near the ANTS ICE (possibly in the same building). it is more
efficient to transport the magnetic tape to the computer center with subsequent
direct input of the data from the tape to the computer center computers.

Data transmission via the APD to the computer center is realized over a physical
pair or over an attached telephone channel with a speed of 2600 baud.

For imediate notification of hospital administrations about the cost of long-
distance telephone calls from telephones installed in the hospital, the following
method of processing the call data is used. With respect to the hospital sub-
scriber category the call data are Output to a special zone of the ready-access
memory where a hospital call file is formed. This file is not output on magnetic
tape, but is transmitted directly to the computer center via the APD.

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!!MHHC]A1.USE(MNLY

7.8. Telephone Load Computing and Service Quality Control System

The telephone load computing and service quality control system at the 4 “5 RE is
designed for constant monitoring and display of the service quality at the office
and on the zone network, for periodic calculation of the data on the basis of
which optimal development and future planning of the telephone network, redistribu-
tion or the maintained communication means at the expense of available reserves
and also statistical monitoring of the equipment are realized.

The accornting and control system has software and hardware. The software is
designed for gathering, primary processing and output of the initial data, and the
hardware, for ready display, intermediate storage of the data and transmission of
it to the computer center for processing.

All of the indices are divided into service quality indices and load indices. The
service quality indices are divided into operative and statistical, and the load
indices are categorized as statistical. The initial data for calculating the
operative and statistical load indicea (percentage losses on the connecting paths,
percentage blocking of devices and lines, the number of attempts for one call, the
average busy time of the devices and lines, and so on) are gathered in the SUVM
where primary processing takes place, and then they are transmitted to the com—
puter center for processing. The results of the primary processing of the opera-
tive data are displayed and recorded by the hardware. The operative indices are
recorded to obtain statistical data which is accumulated for a defined interval,
after which it is transmitted to the computer center and again processed by a
special program. The secondary processing results are printed out in convenient

for for direct reading. In addition, for each change in quality of servicing
calls on the last—choice paths. the monitor information is transmitted in coded

form to the control stations for display.

The initial data for determining the statistical service quality and load indices
are considered periodically on request of the operator. The statistical data is
program copied from the external memory of the SUVM on the hardware in a form

convenient for direct input to the computer center computers or it is transmitted
to the computer Center by means of the APD.
7.9. Order-Circuit ATS

The order-circuit ATS is designed to organized intraoffice and interoffice ser—
vice:

Between operative aubscribers of the long-distance telephone offices of the USSR;

Telephone operators of the HTS with information services of the GTS and talk
stations of their own and other cities;

Telephone operators of the MTA with segregated direct subscriber lines;

Workers in the various ANTS (HTS) services.

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The order—circuit ATS provides for the possibility of four-wire connection of
remote control units of the voice-frequency channel quality control equipment.

7.10. Monitoring and Testing Equipment KIA

The presence of a control computer permits automation of the monitoring of the
operation of the office equipment with the application of programmed monitoring
devices. The servicing of each call is participated in by a large number of
devices of different stages of the ANTS KB. Failure can occur in any of them

or in the coupling (the buss equipment. repeating and receiving systens, and so on).
The search for the failed equipment in a large volume of suspected equipment is
complicated and lengthy. Therefore in the ANTS KE the monitoring system is set

up in such a way that each equipment stage has its own closed, quite complete
monitoring system. When detecting a failure in one stage, the devices of other
stages are not suspected.

From the point of view of the monitoring system, the office equipment is divided
into three stages:

1) The set of specialized control computers, including central and peripheral
processors, storage units. external input-output units;

2) Centralized and junction units which include the central address and dis-
tribution units, the switching system control units, distributrrs, identifiers
and also buss equipment connecting the enumerated devices;

3) The switching system, group devices and individual line systems.

For detection of failures in the central and peripheral control units basically
continuous monitoring by built-in equipment is used. The presence of redundant
control units makes it possible to switch to units in good working order after
detecting a failure, and to determine the location of the failure with consider-
able accuracy.

The system for monitoring the central and junction equipment is made up of special
hardware and software which provide for determination of the location of the
failure and switching of the corresponding unit to reserve.

Failures in group and individual devices. channels and lines of the ANTS K5 are
discovered by the special set of organizational measures and hardware. The basic
hardware of the group and individual equipment monitoring system includes the
following:

A segregated set of monitoring and testing equipment at the office KIA located
in the switching shop;

The set of equipment for automated testing of the standard channels AISK located
in the line equipment shop LATs.

194

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IK”ICHWNCJAI.USE1DNLY

In addition to the basic hardware at the AHTS K2 the following hardware is also
provided:

On each line and group equipment rack there is one special program control unit
for the switching relays each for connection of individual devices and KIA (the
UP connection unit) on connand from the central control unit;

On each line equipment rack (or group of racks) there is a level matching system
(low-frequency amplifier);

On each rack (or group of racks) of the incoming line systems there is one out-
going line system designed to operate via the ZSL, SLH or the long-distance
channel with given form of incoming systems;

On each rack (or group of racks) of the outgoing line systems there is one in-
coming line system each designed to operate via the ZSL. SLM or long-distance
channel with given type of line equipment;

In each line system the special program—controlled relays for connecting the
line side of the equipment via the switching relay system to the inputs and out-
puts of the KIA;

On each rack (or group of racks) of line equipment special monitor frequency
generators (1800 hertz) and a receiver of this frequency to check the correctness
of setting up a call through the switching system;

In each line system (outgoing and incoming) a special additional wire for sending
the signal characterizing the state of the system. to the LATs and also the block-
ing signals of the system from the LATs.

The basic operating conditiana of the KIA system are automatic an instruction
from the TsUU.

For diagnostic and preventive checks of equipment taken from the work places the
KIA operates in a semi-automatic mode, and in some cases, in the manual control
mode. Manual and semi-automatic control is realized from the KIA diagnostic
stand panel.

The basic Operating conditions of the AISK equipment designed for monitoring and
checking the standard voice frequency channels and trunks arsseud-automatic, by
request. The request for a check, measurement or repair of channels can come
from the ANTS KE operator, from the operatousof adjacent ANTS, UAR, ZTU and the
dispatchers of the control system for the primary network of voice-frequency
channels, by user request. The reception of a request to check, measure and
repair the channels and lines, document recording of the contents of the request
and control of the monitoring and measuring equipment AISK are all realized at
the channel engineer work places -- the panels of the channel engineer bench STK.

19S

FOR‘OFFICJAI.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.11. Initial Principles for Calculating ANTS KE Equipment

The number of channels and lines subject to connection to the switching system of
the MS K1: is determined from materials corresponding to the master plans for
the development of the long-distance, intrazonal and city telephone networks
(analogously to other MS).

The number of group systems and transceiving units is calculated beginning with
the number of calls which these devices must service and the avarage time they
are busy servicing when called. The number of calls is calculated by the same
procedure as for the ANTS-lo and the ARM-20. Preliminary data on the average busy
time of the group devices (in seconds) are presented below:

Audio signal system KAS:
call sending monitor ‘CSH'9
recorded voice trec.voice'15
PPU-l transceiving equipment:
information reception from the AON tAON'o'B
pulse packet information reception from the single-
frequency signal system channel
PPU—Z transceivers: '
pulse packet informatics! transmission to the single-
frequency sigtal system channel
information transmission over the SLM to the crossbar
ATS by the "pulse shuttle" method tpulse slnuttle'3°7
Single-frequency signal-4 transmitter for operating in the
mde with dialing of one' s own number P08:

tpulse packet'l'l‘

tpulse packet-1' 1'

monitor frequency transmission H.001 or freqmncy=2
decade nunber transmission over the SIM tdec- '5

ReceiVer PU:
monitor frequency reception trec.m.f'2

By the magiitude of the load on each type of indicated devices the outer of
devices is determined using the erlang tables with loss norm of P-0.001.

The eight-link switching system with a capacity of 1024x2 channels and lines
combined with the BVL and BIL control units and two intermediate panel sections
is a module by means of which the office capacity is built up. The channels and
lines and also the group devices are distributed uniformly among all the office
modules. This permits corresponding determination of the twist of modules.

The load on a 1024 channel and line switching unit should not exceed 512 erlangs.
This must be considered when distributing the channels and lines by blocks. An

example of line and load distribution for the blocks of one module is presented
in Table 7.1.

196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Table 7.1
Name of No of Load,
block Name of lines and system Iines crlangg
BVL Channels and lines 750 641
Group systems and transceivers 40 27
Test lines 32 10
Reserve 202 34
Total 1024 512
BIL Channels and lines 655 439
Group systems and transceivers lol 30
Test lines 32 10
Reserve 296 33
Total 1024 512

7.12. Structural Design of ANTS [(5 Equipment and Its Arrangement

The structural characteristics of the ms KB equipment consists in the fact that
it is made up of individual structural elements, which are assenbled at the
installation location. The primary structural element is the standard replacement
element TEZ equipped with 88 spring plugs. The standard replacement element is

a line system or any other element of the office equipment.

The TEZ elements are fastened in the horizontal connection frames CRS which are

also standard structural assenblies. The horizontal frames with TBZ are asseldoled
into sections (racks) of standardized prefabricated design. The connections
between the different CR5 and sections are made by cable jumpers with 88-contact

spring plugs.
The alarm panels (PS) are installed in the central part of the racks.

The peripheral control units are connected to the central mite by means of busses
made of TPV type cables. For distribution of the bosses by routings, the T3111]
central distributor is used.

The supporting structure is made up of vertical supporting frames which are
fastened together at the top and bottom. Each of these frames contains guides
for nine GRS which are installed with 304 ml spacing vertically. Above the
frames is a cable chute connecting the supporting frames and baysof sections
(racks) to each other. The cable chute has main spans between every two sections
which permit branching of the cables to the required section.

For the construction of the electronic devices of the conputer, the modular design
is used with breakdown into five basic structural elements:

19 7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Integrated circuitry 16 containing the simplest logical elements:

A card TEZ (standard replacement element) including 2!. integrated circuits;

The panel on which the 40 standard replacement elements are placed:
The frame on which six panels are installed;
A bay containing three frames.

The logical elemnts have a plastic case with pin type terminals. A two-way
printed circuit board is used for the T32, on which there are 48 contact plugs
for connection to the panel. Forty plugs are installed on the panel for TEZ and
eight plugs for external connections.

The structural base of a frame is a welded structural frame made of special alum-
inum section. Cooling fans are installed for each frame.

The inter-panel wiring is done basically by twisted wire moo 230.2 and HGDPO
and also coaxial cables of type IKH-Z and RK-SO. The plug board type plugs are
also installed on the frames.

The standard bay contains three frames, of which the middle is stationary and the
two edge ones turn. The structural base of the standard bay is a metal welded
frame on which panels are mounted on the ends and doors that open are installed
on the sides.

'3

 
  

:3
=3
3

 

 
   

l- .
l-i-;-:—""-r'i-II ril-
t? DEN?
Mil Hit 52}. 3133?”.
'Llii'ij'ﬁ :3: k‘id;.l:
31902:: H309?
”faint-"3:43“?-
I "ﬂirts-in

l

    

a[.ff__§'-

  

Figure 7.4. Diagram of the arrangement of the equipment
baysin the ANTS KB switch room

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     
   
     
       
  

 

, 7
-gg§g)

inn!” mm; annual: ( 8)

E -(9)

7

Figure 7.5. Diagram of the placement of the equipment rows
in the runs KB machine room

(1)

known
manhunt»!!!
ll
meta/non]

  

)

   

 

Key:
1. Programrs and operators room 7. UP?
2. NHL - magnetic tape storage 8. Control unit
3. UUNHL - magnetic tape controllers 9. SM
6. AtsPU
5. PS

6 . Operator panel

"hen compiling the layout for the equipment it is necessary to consider that the
peripheral processors are installed jointly with the SUVM equipment. The central
address unit can be removed from the peripheral processor by no more than 150 to
200 meters. The operator room. the SUV)! room and the room for the input-output
devices UW must be located territorially aide-by-side. A passage has to be
provided between the operator room and the UW room.

In the switch rooms the equipment is arranged by modules. Each module contains
one BVL and one BIL, the calculated nunber of line equipment racks and group units.
The equipment module is placed in adjacent bays.

The diagrams of the arrangement of the equipment bays in the switch room are pre-
sented in Figure 7.1.. and in the machine room, in Figure 7.5.

The address and information busses must be arranged in separate packets (from the
remaining cables) in special shielded chutes or in a space protected from induc-
tions.

The structural design of the cordless type switchboard equipment is analogous to
that used in the ANTS-4.

7.13. Electric Power Supply for the ANTS KB

Guaranteed -60 and ~21. volt direct current, guaranteed three-phase ac industrial
frequency 380/220 volt current, unguaranteed three-phase 380/220 volt ac current
and unguaranteed single-phase 220 volt industrial-frequency ac current are
required to power the ANTS KB equipment.

The different ac voltages (except -26 volts) required to operate the electronic
devices are obtained by conversion of the ~60 volt voltage by special converters.

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 8. REQUIREMENTS 0N ANTS AND UAR BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES

8. 1. General Remarks

As is obvious from the preceding chapters, modern ANTS and UAK are complex sets of
equipmnt consisting of a significant number of different high-sensitivity and
high-precision elements. In order to guarantee reliable operation of this equip-
ment with the required service quality and also to insure the required conditions
for normal activity of the service personnel, the buildings and facilities in
which the ANTS and OAK are located must satisfy defined requirements both with
respect to size and structural specifications and with respect to climatic param-
eters of the facilities; A brief discussion is presented of the basic initial
principles which must be followed when designing MS and UAK buildings, recompend-
ations for determining the initial data for designing these buildings and certain
other requirements on them. A detailed list of all the structural requirements,
ventilation and other parameters is included in the Tedmological Design Norm,
I3. 16].

8.2. Initial Data for Designing ANTS and UAR Buildings

Buildings desigled for AXIS and UAK must be calculated for a high degree of fire-
proofness (no less than second degree), and in areas with increased seismicity,
for the corresponding earthquake proofness.

The voluae of the building, its dimensions and the‘nunber of stories are deter-
mined depending on the type and quantity of process equipment which must be
installed in the building and also the configuration and sizes of the site for
building the building.

The dimensions of the switch room and, correspondingly, the remaining shops and
services are designed for the possibility of 15 to 20 years of development of the
office from the time it is put into operation, that is, for the prospective size
of the office. Exact dimensions of these areas can be determined only after
calculating the amount of equipment and developing the layout plans for it. How-
ever, considering that the volule of the designed building is calculated for a
significant developmnt reserve, the sizes of the areas can be determined in
consolidated manner, beginning with previously calculated average value of the
areas of the switch and switchboard rooms per unit capacity of offices of various
types. For AHI'S-lo and ARM-20 the area of the switch room is determined reckoning
0.2 n:2 for one point of the switching bank. For ms RE the awitd: room areas
can be determined approximately reckoning 0.05 m2 for one point of the switching

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘.’

hnnk. Here the office control units must be located in a separate room about
1.00 m2 in area. In addition, for various auxiliary technical services a number
of facilities with a total area of 300 to 1000 m2 are required.

Hultistory levels under the machine rooms must be designed for a load of 1000 kg/mz.

The nomenclature of the facilities and services of the ANTS and UAR and their
characteristics are indicated in the corresponding technological design norms

[3, 16]. For ANTS KB, however. in view of novelty, the list of technical facili-
ties and services is presented here. The list includes the following: the
special computer equipment service SUVH, including the input-output devices;

The switch room facility (switching system. with control units. line and group
systems, address and distributing devices);

The operating and maintenance service (KIA);

The data preparation service (patches and other equipment);

The paper storage and facilities for cutting paper;

Magnetic and paper tape archives;

Technical documents archives;

Facility for storing ZIP;

Programmers' room;

Operators' room;

masurement and repair workshop (the basic operations include determining failed
'I'Ez, replacement of the T32 with operating TEZ, automatic determination of the
location of a failure);

Mechanical workshop;

Electric power supply room;

Office chief's room;

Technical personnel room;

Lounge.

The equipmnt in the switch rooms must be arranged calculating that the free
area for subsequent expansion of the office can be tenporarily isolated and used

by the maintenance service of the office as it sees fit.

ihe mutual arrangement of the technical facilities must provide for minimum
length of the office cable, convenience of technical servicing of the equipment

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and also minimum requirements on movement of large nunbers of people between
floors. Beginning with this fact. the switchboard rooms are usually placed no
higher up than second floor, the line and equipment shops with their services on
the third floor, and the switch rooms with their services higher up. The KIA,
technical monitoring and servicing rooms must be placed beside the switch rooms
(or in direct proximity to them) for the possibility of providing constant moni-
toring of the operation of the equipment.

8.3. Climatic Parameters in the Tedanical Facilities

The equipment with which the switching shops of the MS and L'AK are equipped
contains conplex automatic devices for the electromechanical. electronic and
other system. For normal operation of these devices with sufficient operating
reliability in the facilities where the equipment is installed. defined climatic
conditions must be created. These conditions are determined by the temerature,
relative humidity and atmospheric pressure parameters which must be kept constant
within the following limits:

Teuperature from +18 to +28’C (for the ANTS KE from +19 to +21'C);
Relative humidity from 50 to 701 (for Mfrs ICE 40-60);
Atmospheric pressure from 720 to 780 mm Hg.

The indicated parameters mat be used in the calculation when designing the
heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment.

For reliable operation of the office equipment, maximum insulation from outside
air, that is. protection against dust penetration, blowing, direct sunlight, and
so on are required. Beginning with this fact, the window openings in the switch
room must be kept to a minimum in mmber and size necessary only to maintain the
health of the service personnel. Special masures must be taken to prevent dust
penetration -- exclusion of opening of the windows and doors, finishing the
facilities in materials that exclude dust generation or accumulation, and so on.

In the switchboard rooms and the punch room of the ANIS provision mmt be made
for sound-absorbing covering of the walls and ceilings to reduce the noise level
as much as possible (in accordance witn the norms).

Only incombustible materials that do not release sulfur, chlorine or fluorine
cospound vapor should be used to finish the facilities of the switch room and

other technical services .

In the facilities where a significant number of service personnel work constantly
(switchboard room, outfitting and adjustment workshops. and so on). natural
lighting must be provided. In the switch rooms where the technical personnel
spend only brief mounts of time (only when eliminating failures), artificial
lighting is provided insuring the required level of illumination.

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When designing buildings for the ANTS KB, increased requirements are imposed
on both the climatic conditions and the fireproofing in the technical facilities.
These requirements are listed in the technological design norms [3, 16].

In order to bring in the line cables from the entrance chamber and power cables
fr0m the power supply station to the process facilities on the upper floors of

the building it is necessary to provide vertical shafts separated from the remain-
ing facilities by a fireproof bulkhead and eqUipped with fireproof doors. The
construction cf the floor in the switchboard room and other technical facilities
mat be such that it provides for the possibility of installing channels mder

the floor for laying cables to the equipment.

when designing buildings for ms and UAR, analogous requirements on the LATs
facilities and also specific requirements on the electric power simply station
facilities are taken into account. For determination of the sizes of the
facilities required to install the electric power supply station equipment. the
total consumption of intake electric power to feed the office equipnent is first
determined.

In the ANTS and the UAK buildings, in addition to the technical services. facili—
ties must be provided for the auxiliary production and administrative and general
services. A detailed list of these facilities and the floor space required for

them are indicated in the corresponding norm [3, 16].

8.4. Hunter of SerVice Personnel

For calculation of the volume of sanitary engineering facilities and general
services of the designed ANTS and UAK buildings it is first necessary to deter-
mine the total number of personnel servicing the office and also the number of
the production staff for the maximum and adjacent shift. In addition, the number
of service personnel must be known with distribution with respect to qualifica-
tions also to calculate the operating expenditures when determining the cost

effectiveness of the office.

The number of technical personnel of the ANTS and UAR switching shops depends to
a significant degree on the system of technical maintenance of the equipment.
Until recently the preventive technical maintenance system predominated at the
long-distance telephone offices. As automatic switching equipment developed. the
possibility arose for using automatic monitoring and testing equipment to convert
to the more advanced statistical monitoring (or monitoring and correcting) method
for which a significantly smaller number of service personnel are required. The
essence of this method is that two types of monitoring are performed at the ANTS:
1) continuous (using the office alarm system) and 2) as necessary (using the
monitoring and testing equipment). The continuous monitoring units send signals
out when the equipmnt has gone beyond the limits of the established norms. The
monitoring and testing equipment provides for monitoring :2... operating quality

of the office and testing the office equipment for correspondence to the estab-

lished req uirements .

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The statistical monitoring method conpletely replaces preventive maintenance only
in the new types of offices -- mechanoelectronic and quasielectronic. For cross-
bar offices, in particular, ANTS-2 and lens-3, it can only be partially used, for
these offices do not have the necessary mnitoring-recording and other devices
available to them. If. the same time the presence in these offices of a signifi—
cant amount of automatic monitoring and testing equipment significantly facili—
tates the work of the technical pt rsonnel with respect to servicing the office,
which leads to a relative decrease in the number of personnel.

For calculation of the nunbcr of service personnel of the ms and UAK switching
shops, the Ciprosvyaz' Institute has developed temporary calculation normatives

that determine the consolidated average nunber of basic technical personnel, the
engineering and technical supervisory personnel and telephone operators for the

different types of MS.

The normatives for the number of technical personnel are reckoned per unit capacv
ity of the office. As a unit capacity the following are taken:

One zone service line or channel -- for the ANTS-2 and ANTS-3;

One switching bank point -- for the ARM-20, ANTS-lo, lens KB;

One long-distance channel (semi~automatic or manual service) connected to the
cord type switchboard equipment;

One semi-automtic service channel -- for cordless type switchboards.

When developing the average number of technical personnel, basically data were
used on the expenditures of time to service a unit of equipment in a month (in
man-hours). Racks of all varieties and the switchboard position were taken as
equipment units. The conVersion of the total expenditures of time on servicing
each unit of equipment (man-hours per month) to the nunber of personnel was made
calculating a 7-hour working day, which corresponds to 176 hours per month per
worker.

The mmber of telephone operators is determined by the output norms established
by the Commications Ministry. The maximum shift is 502, and the adjacent shift,
601 of the total number of technical personnel. The number of telephone opera-
tors in the maximum shift is equal to the nunber of switchboard positions.

For determination of the volume of sanitary engineering equipment and general
services of the AMTS (UAR) which depend on the nunber of personnel, the calcula-
tions must be performed for the future capacity of the office for which the size
of the building is designed. Here the total number of personnel and also the
size of the maidmum and adjacent shifts are determined.

For the performance of specific calculations of the nuniaer of service personnel
for the designed ANTS (UAK) it is necessary to refer to the Ciprosvyaz' Institute
normative data.

2014

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 9. CABLE CONNECTIONS AT THE AMPS AND UAR

All the office equipment elements are connected to each other by office cables
that provide for the layout of the office. Depending on the fmctions performed
by the individual devices, the office wiring is also divided up by functions:
line, power supply, signals. frequency, and so on. The types of cables used are

determined by the corresponding All-Union State Standards in effect when the
office is designed.

In recent years basically office cables in polyvinylchloride sheathing type TSV
with the following capacity gradations are used for line wiring: SX3, lOXZ,
lOX3. ZOXZ, 20X3. For power supply wiring aluminum buases ASh ZOXS and 15K),
power cables and wires with aluminum cores and rubber insulation me 16.
IXlO. lXZS, 1X35, IXSO. IX70, 2X70; APR 1x10, IXG, lxm, 1XI6, IXZS; AVRG 1X6
are used. For the signal wiring, the HEDShl. 1X0.?. and 130.5 wiring is used,
and for frequency wiring, shielded cables RVShE 1XZ and sz. For cross connec-
tions on the intermediate panels, the PKSV ZXO.S and 3XO.S cross-connection
wire is used.

For individual types of equipment, considering the specific nature of the opera-
tion of the system. special requirements are imposed on the wiring. Thus, for
example, in the ANTS-2 and ms-a the wires connecting the electromagnets of the
punches to the UK? racks must be shielded, copper, 0.5-0.7!» m2 in cross section.
and the resistance, no more than 1.0 ohm.

The cables are laid in the switch room in OVerhead boxing. In the punch facili-
ties, the technical service rooms and other facilities are laid in ducts under

the floor. It is expedient to feed the cable from the rack equipment to the

switchboard bays through openings in the floor under the entrance chambers of the
switchboard bays .

The cable connections between the different elements of the ms (UAR) equipmnt
are made on the basis of the theoretical and functional diagram of the office

equipment which determine the purpose and nunber of the wires connecting each
equipment element to all others within the office.

In each segment of the office diagram the total number of connecting wires is
determined, which then are grouped into standard-capacity cables. This operation
is usually performed by putting together cable circuit diagrams separately for
each type of equipment or for a functional assewly. The compilation of such

diagrams for the entire office is complicated and inconvenient as a result of the
large number of varieties of ANTS equipment.

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The cable circuit diagram contain the following information:

The address of the connection (the name of the equipment on both ends);
The purpose and nunber of connecting wires;

The nuuber of cables, their type and capacity.

For calculating a large number of cables of each variety a cable table is
compiled in which the total list of laid cables is presented with indication of
the laying sections, the points at which both ends are connected and the lengths

of each piece of cable (or the average lengths of the pieces of cable in a group
of like equipmnt).

Simultaneously with compiling the cable circuit diagram and the cable tables,
cable circuit diagrams are developed for the input terminals of the equipment and

the frames of the switching panels. These diagram permit selection of the most
economical types of cable for each laying section.

During installation of the offices, first the cable table is used. on the basis
of which the pieces of cable of the corresponding length are cut, and they are
laid in all sections of the station. Then, using the cable circuit diagrams.
the ends of the cables are fanned out, and the ends of the cable cores are

connected to the corresponding terminals of the frames on the racks, switchboards
or switching panels.

For compilation of the cable tables and. the circuit diagrams for connecting the

cables to the equipment, it is necessary to use standard materials developed by
the Ciprosvyaz' Institute for each type of AXIS.

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJA1.USEZONL¥

APPENDIX 1.

Long-Distance Area Codes for the Zone Telephone Networks

within the USSR
______________.._.___________——_————-
ABC

Regublic, krax, oblast, cit! Code Regublic, kraz, oblaat, cit!
Abkhazskaya 881 Kalmykskaya [Kalmyk]
Adzharskaya 882 Kaluzhakaya [Kaluga]
Adygeyakaya 877 Kamchatakaya [Kamchatka]
Azerbaydzhanskaya [Azerbaydzhan] 892 Karagandinskaya [Karaganda]
Aktyubinskaya [Aktyuba] 313 Karakalpakakaya [Karakalpa
Alma-Atinskaya [Alma-Ata] 327 Karachayevo-Cherkeaskayn
Altayskaya [Altay] 385 Karel'akaya [Karelian]
Amurakaya [Amur] 616 Kashka-Dar'inakaya [Kaahka-Dm
Andizhanskaya [Andizhan] 3710 szl-Ordinakaya [szl-Orda]
Armyanskaya [Armenian] ] 885,886 Kemrovakaya [Kemerovo]

Arkhangel'skaya [Arkhangel'sk] 818,819

Astrakhanskaya [Astrakhan] 851
Ashkhabadskaya [Ashkhabad] 363
Bashkirakaya [Bashkiria] 367,348
Belgorodskaya [Belgorod] 072
Breatskaya [Brest] 016
Bryanskaya [Bryansk] 083
Buryatakaya [Buryat] 301
Bukharskaya [Bukhara] 365
Vinnitskaya [Vinnitsa] 043
Vite‘oskaya [Vitebsk] 021
Vladimirskaya [Vladimir] 092
Volgogradakaya [Volgograd] 841.
Vologodakaya [Vologda] 817
Volynskaya [Volynka] 033
Voronezhskaya [Voronezh] 073
Voroshilovgradskaya [Voroahilov— 064

grad] .
Vos tochko-Kazakhs tanakaya 32 3
[Eastern Kazakhstan]

Cornel'skaya [Gomel'] 023
Como-Badakhshanskaya 364
[Borno-Badakhshan]
Como-Altayakaya [Como-Altay] 388
Gor'kovskaya [Gor'kiy] 831
Grodnenskaya [Grodno] 015
Gruzinskaya [Georgian] 883
Gur'yevakaya [Gur'yev] 312
Dagestanskaya [Dagestan] 872
Dzhambulskaya [Dzhanbul] 326
Dzhezkazganskaya [Dzhezkazgan] 310

Kievakaya [Kiev]
Kirovogradakaya [Kirovograd]
Kirovakaya [Kirov]
Kialovodsk

Kokchetavakaya

Kokand

Komi

Kostromakaya [Koscroma]
Krasnovodskaya [Krasnovod]
Krasnodarakaya [Krasnodar]
Krasnoyarakaya [Krasnoyarak]
Krymskaya [Crimean]
Kuybyahevakaya [Kuybyahev]
Kulyahakaya [Kulyab]
Kurgarskaya [Kurgan]
Kurgan-‘lyube

Kurakaya [Kursk]

Kuatanayakaya [Kuatanay]

Latvinakaya [Latvian]
Leninabadakaya Leninab ad]

Leningradakaya [Leningrad]
Lipetakaya [Lipetak]
Litovakaya [Lithuanian]
L'vovskaya [L'vov]
Hagadanakaya [Hagadan]
Mangyahlakakaya [Mangyshlak]
Hariyakaya [Mari]
Haryyakaya [Mari]
____________________._________________
ABC

RegublicI kraxi oblast, citv Code
Dzhizakskaya [Dzhizak] 372
Dnepropetrovskaya [Dnepropetrcvsk] 056
Donetskaya [Donetsk] 062
Dushanbinskaya [Dushanbe] 377
Yevreyskaya [Yevra] 426
Zhitomirskaya [Zhitomir] 041
Zakarpatskaya [Trans Carpathian] 031
Zaporozhskaya [Zaporozh'ye] 061
Ivanovskaya [Ivanovo] 093
Ivano-Prankovskaya 034
[Tvano—Frankovsk]
Irkutskaya [Irkutsk] 395
Issyk-Kul'skaya [Issyk—Kul'] 319
Kabardino—Balkarskaya 866
[Kabardino-Balkar]
Kaliningradskaya [Kaltningrad] 011
Kalininskaya [Kalinin] 082
Odesskaya [Odessa] 048
Omsknya [Omsk] 381
Orcnburgskaya [Orenburg] 3S3
Orlovskaya [Orlovskiy] 036
Oshskaya [Osh] 332
Pavlodarskaya [Pavlodarl 318
Penzenskaya [Penza] 841
Permskaya [Perm'] 342
Poltavskaya [Poltava] 053
Primorskaya [Primorskoye 423
Pskovskaya [Pskov] 811
Pyatigorsk 879
Rovenskaya 036
Rostovskaya [Rostov] 863,864
Ryazanskaya [Ryazan'] 091
Samarkandskaya [Samarkand] 366
SaratOVSkaya [Saratov] 84S
Sakhalinskaya [Sakhalin] 424
Sverdlovskaya [Sverdlovsk] 343,344
Severo-Kazakhstanskaya 315
[Northern Kazakhstan]
Sevcro-Osetinskaya 867
Seminalatinskaya [Semipalatinsk] 322
Smolenskaya [Smolensk] 081
SOChi 862
Stavropol'skaya [Stavropol'] 86S
Sumskaya 054
Surkhan-Dar'inskaya 376

[Surkhan—Dar'ya]
—_____—__—————————

ABC

RegublicI krgx, oblastI cit! Cod
Syr-Dsr'inskaya [Syr-Dar'ya] 367
Taldy-Kurganskaya 328
[Taldy-Kurgan]

Tambovskaya [Tambov] 075
Tatarskaya [Tatarsk] 8103
Tashauzskaya [Tashauz] 360
Tashkentskaya [Tashkent] 371
Codes:

Long-distance offices

For connection to the KIA

Departmental networks
For checking equipment
Automatic charge computing AUS

For access to the main dispatch
monitoring station of the TsKU

For access to the message switching
centers TsKS

Code reserve -- used as the network 1
Distance between ms
gh one tandem junction

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
between these ANTS with indication of the magnitude of excess

Table of the number of segregated direct channels between
loads and limiting distances to which it is expedient to

ANTS as a function of the magnitude of the outgoing load

Lnn<500 kn, excess load passes throu

segregate n direct channels.

APPENDIX 2 .

. >m__________>m________>m>m_._______>m ______
_

III llllllllllllllllll
.nm a
2— : nmunn$7w“Manamaamunumnunnmxwwwwsmawnwwmnmmumu _
u» .
um R

hmmmmQlmLLLhzmmmQQQLLLLEZEQQQQQLILLLmZQOmmL m

 

 

 

 

WWW a nwwwwwwmmmwmmmunnmmuuummmwwwwwmwmmmwuwunxnxu
JJPII. I.

w». m énﬁmjojonmj mﬁﬁjnémﬁo 5 maméﬂﬁmémﬁ m ﬁmﬁmm
"ma 1 n nnnnuuumwwm nnwwwwmmm m mmmnﬂmuﬁxm m manna
mu

 

[tiller

 

 

 

w . m m m m__________:_____________>m__.____:
w. ) .III I
'
my... .. mm.mm.mmlmuunnmﬁmsﬁmnﬁmmuand»?w
M. w _ _ _ __ _OnvOnZuonuonvOnuonuonvonuonuonuOIIIOnwonmmdwmnPhL
u R

 

a. 0606060666666.66666666666666666.066622222222290
ul‘lllsI-IIII-Il

 

 

 

5 j J AﬂoJJAsﬁnostzonjﬁrssmsoso 505050505
1 I

‘
I 1- II. 1'2’2222222333333333344556 6.:7889900
ll

Key

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

No of direct channels, a

3. Excess load R-yEnU)

.6.

Outgoing load y. erlangs

L111:

1.
2.
DMOUIOUIO 0| 0 0‘

5535.35??? .3" 5‘5 353388888 gjs.
OU‘

 

 

32222222323233883338835:
'rrrrrPPPPPPPrrr777999PN

£8832983$8£388*$8882“%5“
PP?:’:’:‘.".“:".".’°P!°?!°.°!°S
8888238“ 33581883389332

 

§VI I II I I I3V§v§v§v§
W

3 8 :3. s 29.88888:
O 0'

<> 2: cacaiu132n2>2n1

9'86

___—_———————

n——p—~—--——~———__.—.=—=
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPENDIX 3

Table for calculating the numbers of M and VB as a
function of the nulber of calls for half of the office

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

1 (3)
6.: Rama 3. Kean-cm
i; [Mufﬁn mom _ 3% Xumaugam
a
(D525 (2) M V“ . xs‘ (2) “ V"
1 3400—4000 I I 2 I 17100-13200 6 6
4000-6400 2 2 18200—19900 5 9
6400—1300 2 3 i 19900—22” 5 9
7300—8700 3 3 22500—23800 7 9
87m—9GN 3 4 23800—24“ 8 9
9500—l0500 4 4 24500—25“ 7 I2
IO500—II 200 4 5 23500—27300 8 I2
“NO—11500 5 5 27300—28400 9 l2
2 4200—6700 2 2 284m—29M IO I2
6700—8400 2 4 29000—29600 9 15
8400—[0 7W 3 4 29600—30800 I0 I5
l07m—I2 IN 4 4 4 4W8200 2 4
12100—12500 3 6 32m—II 000 3 4
l25m—I4600 I 4 5 II m—IJMO 4 4
15600—15100 ; 5 s 13500—13800 3 a
lo 700—16400 0 5 Haw—I7 700 4 8
16400—16800 5 0 17700—20200 5 3
2 ISM—Isa” G 3 20200—22100 6 8
lam—lam . 7 8 ”IN—234W 7 8
lam—I9” 8 3 23413—24300 8 8
19 ”—20'00 7 I0 24300—25000 6 I2
20100—20800 8 I0 25000—28000 7 I2
KIM—2| N0 9 l0 28000—30000 3 I2
21000—21 I00 I0 I0 WWI IN 9 I2
3 4500—7“ 2 3 31 INF-3| 000 I0 I2
7300—I0200 3 3 31800—39800 9 I6
{2000.”°‘{§% 2| 2 ammo? '° M
I I
15500—I7 I00 5 8 0 2°

      

 
 

 

Key:
1. No of RM groups
2. No of calls in the peak load hour (PLH)

3. Number

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. COST 19472-74. AVIOMA'I'IZATSIYA TELBFONNOY SWAZI. TERMINY I OPREDELBNIYA
[All-Union State Standard 19472-74. Automation of Telephone Service.

Terms and Definitions].

2. COST 19692-74. SISTEMY I PRIBORY SWAZI KOHHUI'ATSIONNYYE. TERMINY I
OPREDBLENIYA [All-Union State Standard 196962-74. Switching Systems and
Devices for Communications. Terms and Definitions].

213

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

S.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROVONYYE SREDSTVA SWAZI. STANTSII MEZHDUOORODNYYE TELEPONNY‘YE.
VEDOFBTVENNYYE NORM! TBlGINOLOGICﬂESKOGO PNYEKTIROVANIYA [Wire Oomunications
Media. Long-Distance Telephone Offices. Departmental Technological Design
Norm], Moscow, Svyaz', 1979.

AVTOMATICHESKAYA MEZHDUOORODNAYA I SEL'SKAYA TELEFONNAYA SWAZ‘ [Automatic
Long—Distance and Rural Telephone Service], edited by Ye. A. Zsyonchkovskiy,
Moscow, Svyaz', 1976.

Livshits, B. 5.; Fidlin, Ya. V.; Kharkevich, A. D. TEORIYA TELBFONNYKH I
TELEGRAFNYKH SOOBSHCHBNIY [Theory of Telephone and Telegraph Commications],
Moscow, Svyaz', 1971.

TEORIYA TELETRAFIKA [Teletraffic Theory], translated from the German,
edited by G. P. Basharin, Moscow, Svysz', 1971.

Elldin, A.; Lind, G. OSNOVY T80R11 TBLETRAFIKA [Principles of Teletraffic
Theory]. trmslated from the hglish. edited by A. D. Kharkevich, Moscow,
Svyaz' , 1972.

Shneps, M. A. CHISLENNYYE MENU? TEORII TBLETRAFIKA [Numerical Methods of
Teletrsffic Theory], Moscow, Svyaz', 1974.

Basharin, 6. P. TABLITSY VEROYATNOSTEY I SRZDNEKVADRATIGINYKH O'l'KLONENIY
POTER' NA POLNOWSTUPNOM PUCHKE LINIY [Tables of Probabilities and Mean

Square Deviations of Losses on a Fully Accessible Group of Lines], Moscow.
Aksdemizdat, 1962.

Il'in, O. K.; Rozenshteyn, I. I. PROYBKTIROVANIYE MEZHDUOORODNYIO-l
TELEPONNYIGI STANTSIY [Designing Long-Distance Telephone Offices], Moscow,
Svyaz', 1973.

Livshits, B. 8.; Mel'nikov, K. P.; Frolovs. A. A. RASGlET CHISLA PRIBOROV
ATS K-100/2000 [Calculating the timber of ATS K-lOO/ZOOO Automatic Telephone
Office Devices], Moscow, Svyaz', 1968.

Lutov, M. F. KVAZIELEKTRONNYYE ATS [Quasielectronic Autouatic Telephone
offices], Moscow, Svyaz', 1968.

Ivenova, O. N. ELEKTRONNAYA KOPMUI‘ATSIYA [Electronic Switching], Moscow,
Svyaz', 1971.

Ivanova, 0. N.; Popova, A. 6.: Solovoy, Yu. V. UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYE USTROYSTVA
KVAZIBLEKTRONNYKH KOWATSIONNYKH SISTEM [Control Units for Quasielectronic
Switching Systems], Moscow, Svyaz', 1975.

Fraser, 3.; Trnkc, Ya. ELEKTRONNYYE TBLEFONNYYE STANTSII [Electronic
Telephone Offices], translated from the Czechoslovakian, edited by
V. G. Lazerev, Moscow, Svyu‘, 1976.

214

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16. SWRUWIYA GRAZEDANSKIYE PREDPRIYATIY PROVONOY I POGTOVOY SWAZI.
VENISTVENNYYB NORM? MOWGIGIESKOGO PROYERTIROVANIYA [Hire and Postal

Service Civilian Agency's Structures. Departmntal Technological Design
Norms], Moscow, Svyaz', 1976.

17. RAZVITIYE SWAZI V SSSR [Development of Comications in the USSR], edited
by N. D. Psurtsev, Moscow, Svyaz', 1967.

18. Gol'ahteyn, L. 11.; Sasonko, S. H. ORGANIZATSIYA HEZHDUCSROINOY SWAZI
NA MESTNYKH TBIEPONNY'KB SBTYAKH [Organization of Long-Distance Service on
Local Telephone Networks], Moscow. Svyaz', 1976.

oopmcu'r: Izdatel'stvo "Svyaz'", 19a)

108105
080: 8364/0489

-EN‘D-

215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY