APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100030045-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030045-8

I‘UK Ul'HLlAL USI'. UNLY

JPRS 13/8342

19 March 1979

TRPNSLATIONS 0N TELECOWICATIONS POLICY,

RESEARCH AND DEVELG’PENT
(FOUO 4/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030045—8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSUIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
mar Jns LI 8342

u n - specs are
msunous on rsucomuulcnnous roucr. answer: 19 March 1979
ms osvemmur, (rouo 4/79) _

1. Amber“) I. Prise-la. Org-simian Reps.

   

 
 

. Patterning Oigaaiaaelea Name sad Ad on i0. Heker/Taai/‘sck Uaii Na.

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

It. Speech; ouaaiaasiea Name sad Mdtess

  
    
  

II. Comma/Gran Ne.

 
    
   
 

is. Type el lepen a Period
Covered

As above

‘8 Supplementary "one

“at“

This serial report contains translations from the world press and radio
relating to worldwide political. economic and technical developments in
telecomunieations. computers. and satellite communications. Coverage will

be worldvide with focus on France. Federal Republic of Germany. United Kingdom,
Italy. Japan, the USSR, People's Republic of China, Sweden, and the Netherlands.

Worldwide

Computers

Satellite Col-mications

Electronics and Electrical Engineering
Telecommicationa

Telemetry

"h Idsasﬂien/Opee-Eaded Tums

m cosm rum/amp 093. c, F, 173, 223
Availability ace-sat

For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

'0.“ NYC... "0") VOCO'IO-OC OOIDE’I'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/l
19 Marc]

TRANSLATIONS ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(P000 4/79)
Coureurs
HORLDHIDB AFFAIRS
HORLDHIDE AFFAIRS

Nonalined Radio Meeting To Be Held in Havana
(Leopoldo Pormoso; PRELA. 26 Jan 79) ..............

NSC Cross-Bar Exchange Sales to Thailand Recounted
(NIKMN KOGYO SHINBUN. 1 Feb 79) coasts-0003000....

Africa-Europe-South America Submarine Cable System
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS. 9 Feb 79) ...

Briefs
Voice of Islam
Chinese News Agency To Open Bureau in Ecuador

ASIA

JAPAN

Utility Company President Criticizes U.S. Procurement
Pressure
(ASAHI SHINBUN. 1 Feb 79) .........................

Briefs
Satellite Orders
Nev-Type Computer
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

LATIN AMERICA
CUBA
New Omnicationa Facilities for Nonalined Su-it
(PRBLA, 7 Feb 79) .................................
USSR
USSR

New TV Transmitting Equipment
(V. I. Avdeyev. V.P. Popovich; VBSTNIK SWAZI.

NOV 78) .0030...000ooooo-oooooooooooooota.000000000

. HES‘I'ERN EUROPE
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Paris-Bonn TV Satellite Construction Debated
(Pierre Lansereux; AIR 6 COSMOS. 3 Feb 79) ........

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL US£ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UORLDWIDE AFFAIRS

NOﬂALIIIBD RADIO “MIN 1’0 H mm Ill HAVANA
“2‘32le llavaha mm in Spaniah 1855 081' 2‘! Jan 79 name OFFICIAL 038 ONLY
[Pool itea by Leopoldo Pornoao]

[Text] Havana. 24 Jan (Fiﬁ-The representatives at ll nonalined countries will acct here in
early February-manly 1 Ionths any from their sixth aunit Ieetingnto diaeuss important
uttera connected with the field or radio oo-unicatiana.

M groups of experts fro- the cooperation count» or the nonalined countries radio
broadcasting organisation will participate in these discussions and. along other things.
dill discuss the redistribution or radio frequencies at the international level.

This and other topic: will be analyzed by the world adainiatrative radio centerence.
which is slated to be held in Geneva. slitserland, in October.

The first oi‘ the too groups will be presided over by repreaentativeo of Algerian
radio and television aervicc and the second by reproacntative: or "All India Radio."
which epeeializea in radio broadcasting by satellite.

The sessions will be held free 2 to 6 Pebruary at the "Ii-vane Litre“ hotel in this
capital. Delegations from the Wrath People's Republic of Korea. Cuba. manna.

trad. Kenya. ligeria. Tunisia. Yugoslavia and Zaabia will also participate in the
Wonta

The nonalined oountries' first radio broadcasting conference we: held in aaraJevo.
moslavn. from 27 to so October 1977. and was attended by 5‘0 aeaber countries. On
that occasion. an action proaan tor the world radio conference. which is to be held
in Geneva. was outlined and a coordinating cornittec presided over by Malena
organized. 'i'hat co-ittee included M1810. Algeria. Guinea. Nigeria. logo. Tanzania.

'Iairc. Kenya. labia. mdia. Afghanistan. Denocratic Korea, Jordan. n'aq. misyaia,
Ouba. Peru. Pane-a and Yugoalavia.

last year in Algiers. the group or expert: held their i'irat aeeting. This one coup
will not: meet in this capital to begin a Joint coordinated effort in connection with
the aforementioned Geneva conference. The final declaration oi‘ the Algiers meeting
caulasned the idea of toner colonial powers saintaining radio stations in the terri-
tories of nenalined countries and. because of their interventionist nature. likened

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

theoc ctaticnc to the precence or noocolonial military Moon. The 'biratc" work
'cnnvieu out by the radio atatione oi‘ certain Vectern countries. which produce inter-
i‘cx-onoc on the nonalinod countriec' local rrequenoiee, was alco denounced. m the
cthcr hand. the doculont exprecced aolidarity and aupport tor the radio program broad-
cact fro- variouc partc ol‘ the world by the national liberation movemente. One topic
that won broadly discussed and which will be debated once again here concerns the

adoption or neaeurec aimed at guarmteeins a more equitable distribution of the
(requcncioc at the international level.

Both in the nonalincd countries movement and in uncoo. the unjust distribution or
radio i‘requencicc and the monopoliution or the information and coauunicatione services

by the large oontere or econcnic power. particularly the trcnanational coapaniec, hae
boon denounced.

The participants at thece neetinse will alco take part in activities. including a
vicit to the Palace or Coherence, uhioh is currently under oonetruction and will be
new on neat or the sixth nonnlined cumait next Septuber.

C80: 5500

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HORLDHIDB AFFAIRS

NBC CROSS-BAR EXCHANGE SALES T0 THAILAND RECOUNTED
Tokyo HIKKAH KOGYO SHIHBUH in Japanese 1 Feb 79 p 1

[Tent] Nippon Electric Company, Limited. (NBC) (Tadao Tanaka, president).
announced that it signed a contract with Thailand Telegraph 6 Telephone
Public Corporation [TTTQE/ on January 31. following a successful bid for
40,000 cross-bar exchange circuits and related equipment at 3.25 billion
yen, the largest award yet under Thailand's exchange project. Since 1967.
NBC has received orders from TTTPC. on a yen loan basis. for about 330,000
circuits for 60 stations as part of the telephone exchange equipment for
Thailand's metropolitan area. Orders for cross-bar exchanges. including
the latest transaction. now total 12 billion yen. NBC now has supplied

92 percent of all the telephone networds in Thailand's aetropolitan area.
Delivery will begin within 10 aonths from the signing of contract and will
be completed in 2 1/2 years.

In 1967. the Government of Thailand negotiated a loan from Japan for the
construction of the telephone network. Ever since NBC began to receive

orders in that same year for the initial project by TTTCP, it has enjoyed
preferential treatment. It has dispatched 150 of its own technicians and

project managers and is training TTTPC technicians, about 100 in Tokyo
and 150 in Bangkok.

According to NBC, TTTPc'a plan calls for cross-bar exchanges for about
00.000 circuits annually.

COPYRIGHT: Hikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1979

9097
080: $500

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HORLD'IIIDB AFFAIRS

AFRICA-EUROPE-SOUTH AMERICA SUBMARINE CABLE SYSTEM

Peri; MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French 9 Feb 79
P 31

[Text7 A meeting of experts from seven countries which last
September signed an agreement for a submarine cable system
linking South America8 Africa, and Europe was held in Dakar
from 30 January to 1 ﬁebruaw It was decided that the tele-
phone link will begin to operate in 1982 at the latest.

The total cost is estim ted at 50 billion CPA LAfrican Financial
Community Monetary Uni francs. Senegal will pay about 5
percent of the costs.

The experts agreed on the number of circuits needed -- between
1,200 and 1, 800.

On 5 September 1978 Brazil, Argentina, Senegal, the Ivory

Coast, France, Italy, and Portugal signed an agreement of
intent to develop a "submarine cable communications system"
linking the three continents. Later several other countries,
including the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Germany, and Nigeria,
joined the first group after wei ing the advantages of such

a system: in addition to increas ng communications among these
countries, the development of high capacity cables provides
telephone and telegraph circuits at very competitive prices.

The system in question consists of two main sections: the
Recife (Brazil)- Dakar (Senegal) section, 1,800 nautical miles
long (3, 330 km) and the Dakar-Lag 05 (Portugal) section, 1 ,650
nautical miles in length (3, 053 km). This configuration was
chosen after technical and economic studies were done based
on two factors. The first is the diversification of traffic

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

routing between cables and satellites in order to improve the
security and reliability of communications among the three
continents.

The second factor was the selection of Dakar as an intermediate
point in order to concentrate the Brazil-Europe and Africa-
Europe traffic in one large-capacity cluster of channels. This
will reduce the cost of a channel and will also provide direct
links via submarine cable between West Africa and South America.

The system now linking Dakar to Morocco and to France, on one
hand, and to the Ivory Coast and soon Nigeria, on the other,
may well be saturated within the next 3 or % years.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie., Paris, 1979

7679
C80: 5500

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100030045—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030045-8
STATINTEL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

UTILITY COMPANY PRESIDENT CRITICIZBS U.S. PROCUREMENT PRESSURE

Tokyo ASAHI SHINBUN in Japanese 1 Feb 79 Morning Edition p 9 0“

treat] The United states is strongly amt. that 'Japan change the Nippon roieg'iispn
and Telephone Public Corporation's [mm] present supply systcn to u empetitivc bidding

cystu so 0.8. enterprises can take part in the bidding. At present the mrc proourec
natuials by discretionary contract.

it the Tokyo round or the our lultilstercl trade negotiations. this practice use a
subject or controversy. hoarding the u.s. duand. mm Resident Akilcusa told the
press on 31 January that neither the hinistry of Posts and ‘releeo-nunieatiens nor the
more intend to make any concessions and bitterly criticised the high-handed (1.3.
political pressure. he following is a summary or his statusent:

1. It is a common practice or all so countries to procure domestically machinery. such
as eocnunieations equiment. that requires a continuous and stable supply. They procure
such equipuent not throuyt ompetitive bidding but by discretionary contract. The United
States is not asking the sc countries to change their procurunent syst- so v.3. fins
can participate in the bidding. In the United States. Aﬂ' prooures its equipment only
free western Electric. its 100 percent affiliate.

2. several cabinet members or the cartc administration cane tron 18!. and we have the
inpreseion that In! is behind the strong v.3. political pressure.

3. The mm does not totally exclude tereim products tro- its procur-ent. In fact.
it purchases 3 billion yen worth a: equipaent tron abroad annually. In marketing goods.
the seller must invest years or extort. In promoting sales. 0.8. firms prepare lists or
specifications and oonduct sales negotiations in mglish. virtually telling the buyer.
"You do the translation." He cannot tolerate the high-handed attitude or telling us to

tuy their products without their naking any promotional ottomt. At any rate. it will
take another (uonth) or two to settle this issue.

COFYRIGRT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Honcho 1979

CSO: 5500

7
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

BRIEFS

SATELLITE ORDER$--hitsubishi Electric Corporation has received a 6 billion
yen order for an INTELSAT standard-A earth station from Saudi Arabia and a

2 billion yen order for s si-ilar earth station from Malaysia. Both sta-
tions. slated for completion in April 1980, will be used for conmunications
with Japan and North America via IV-A and V satellites. [Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI
SNINBUN in Japanese 31 Jan 76 morning edition p 8 0H]

NEH-TYPE COHPUTER--Three Japanese firma--Nippon Electric. Tokyo Shibauru
Electric and Nichiden Toshiba Information System-announcsd on 6 February
that they will put on sale a new-type mediua-to-saall-sized coaputer

"ACOS System 250" beginning next July. in rivalry with IBM's b300-type.

The Japanese type is the first of its kind produced domestically and. ac-
cording to Nichiden which developed it. its efficiency is "30 to 60 percent
higher than the 13" version." Fir: officials think that they can sell 2,000
units of the new co-puter in 6 years. The price is 30.8 million to 132 nil-
lion yen per units. and the rent will be 700,000 to 3 million yen per month.
[Tokyo TOKYO SKINBUN in Japanese 7 Feb 79 morning edition p 3 09]

C50: 5500

1 8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100030045—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030045-8
STATINTEL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CUBA

m commas-mm rectum ton mamas swear
rue-(2219 llavsna mu in Spanish 2017 m 7 Pee 79 “upon anew, me out!

[Text] Havana. 1 Feb (PL)--cube will guarantee a hiya technical level in oc-unioetions
during the sixth nonalined suit cents-ems to be held in septa-her. This raark was
undo by Cuban Ccmnioations hinister Pedro duel-es during his closing speech at the
third meeting oi” radio broadcasting experts held here tree 2 to 6 February. According
to duel-es his ninistry is staking considerable invesumts and conﬂicting a couples

and well-planned prop-an to insure telephone. telepaph. radiophcto. radio and television
easuniostions.

‘l'he pros-en is based on experience obtained in eomnieetions services during preceding
«us-it coatings in Algiers and ari Lenka. A nodern telephone central is 'now being

established to serve internatimel trsi‘tio. The center has the eeuillent necessary to
guarantee speed and quality.

A new autonetie telephone eentrel is being oasploted. Ii'his will allow the Cuban
telephone operators to diel the requested nunbers in these countries linked with the
internstionel traﬂ'ie centers. The ministry is also installing new telephone and
teley-oph equip-Amt to be used by s satellite trecldng station. This will allow the
broadcast or radio end television pecans to those countries who so desire it.

Two mlly equipped telephone rouse with a considerable nuber or telephone booths.
radiophoto end other services will be available to the hundreds or news-en who will
cover the eeeting.

The Palace ot congresses. where the ieportent nesting will be held. will have other in-
stellstiens for radio and television broadcasts as desired. It will also have a rose
with international telex eouiusent located in a section or the press roos- which. like
other rooses oi‘ the palace. will be equipped with television nonitors oomeoted to e
closed-circuit color television systu.

The einister :zaid thet the urban telephone network is being expended end that private.
outustio nodim- end large-sited panels tor con-Inieetions service will be instelled
throumout the eres in whieh the nesting will be held. These pensla will be hooked up
to national end inta'national systees. he said that a coup of mgineers. tectmicians
and workers ere installing o couples. hics quality cmiestiens systu which will
eomcet hotels. hospitals. airports and other service installations.

lle seid i'imlly that the respective coordination is being established with the depart-
Isent: that will serve as international trei‘i'ic channels in order to link me: with all
the countries in the m-ent so as to best serve the nonalined at-it.

cso: ssoo 1°
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

NEH TV TRANSMITTING EQUImENT
Moscow VESTNIK SWAZI in Russian No ll. Nov 78 pp 29-31

[Article by V. i. Avdeyev, chief technologist in GKRU [Main Administration
of Cable-Line and Radio Relay Comnications facilities]. USSR Ministry of
Comnications. and V. P. Popovich, GKRU leading engineer8 "Special Fea-
tures of New Television Transmitting Equipent Developuent and Operation."
Paragraph in slantiines printed in boldface]

[Text] lProviding high quality transmission of color TV programs is a
vital task at the present time. One way to accomplish this is creation
of new types of TV stations. The Zona-II and ATNS-S/l TV stations fall
in this category. They will permit increased quality transmission of the
color TV picture.l

Modern principles in the develoment of TV trans-lining equipment are
embodied in the Zena-II and ATnS-Sll TV stations (Figure 1). As a result
the basic indicators of these stations (see Table) correspond to the values
accepted by the COST [All-Union State Standard]. However. the new TV sta-
tions also retain principles proven during construction of the previous
eouinaent generation. Thus. cannon for the two types of stations is use
of operating and spare oscillator assemblies (the passive stand-by circuit)
and of tire autonoms parallel amplifiers for the picture and audio radio
channels. the power outputs of which are added at the output (the active
redundancy circuit).

The problems of adding the power of the transmitters and of the subasselnblies
as a whole. as well as of the output couplers, have been solved just as they
were in equipent previously produced. The signals from the picture and
audio channels at the output of each subasseably are added in a canon load
with the aid of a filter (FVCh) [upper frequency filter]. its outwt is
switched to the adding bridge (l8) input of the subaosenbly power. The
adding bridge coupling system (0K6! UK?) makes it possible for two power
outlast subassublies to simltaneously operate to the antenna. If one

fails the operable subassenbly can be switched to the antenna via an adding
bridge bypass. The capability of loading the transmitter and the faulty sub-
asseebly to the duty antenna has been envisioned.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030045-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Parameters ATRS-S/l
Frequency band l-III
Picture channel power, kw 5
Audio channel power, kw 1

Carrier stability for 1 month without
adjustment, Hz. no worse than 1100

Ratio of the peak-to-peak picture signal
to background interference a. a back-
ground level at input up to 502, db,
at least 1:2

Varied ampliiications of the brightness
and color signal, db, not to exceed :1

Distortion factor for the brightness
signal. 2. not to exceed 15

Distortion of the differentiated

amplification type. 2. not to exceed 10
Inwt power without the ventilation

system. kw, not to exceed 20
Dimensions, m 3020x870x2298

 

Figure l. ATRS-S/l TV Station

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030045—8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As opposed to old equipment. the maximum amount of transistorization.
restriction in the number of electronic tubes, wide use of integral cir-
cuits in the logical control circuits. and automatic switching to a

spare are reason for the new TV stations. Transmitters and dmny antennas
are air cooled at these stations and the capability has been envisioned
to locate the equiunent both in two- as well as in one-story buildings.
Easy access to the main components has been provided.

At the same time construction of the oscillators. input stabilizing cir-
cuits. and the sultiplication-and modulating stages in each station has
its ovn peculiarities. Thus. for the Zena-ll (Figure 2) a combined os-
cillator has been used for the picture and audio transmitters. to which
the picture and audio signals are fed via input couplers (UKll 0K2).

 

Figure 2. Structural Schematic of a Zona-ll
TV Station. (a) - modulator! (b) - harmonic
filter! (c) - upper frequency filter; (d) -
adding bridge) (e) - 3 kw: (f) - oscillator)
(g) - video} (h) - gauge) (i) - audio.

The signal processed in the oscillator via a coupler (UKIA) reaches transis-
torized mltiplier l in which a carrier signal of 5-10 watts is formed and
aplii’led. Amplifier stage 2 consisting of an RE 025 XA tube is be;.‘.nd

the multiplier. Modulation through a control grid and amplification of the
signal to 300 watts is accomplished in third stage 3 consisting of a [hash-
pull circuit made of the same tubes. The significant nonutilization of the

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

power in the second stage tubes makes it possible to use a tank. which
causes relatively great attenuation b°tween stages 2 and 3. This insures
stable noncritical aligment of each stage.

Circulator la is placed between modulating stage 3 and final alplifier S
and is intended for their mutual decoupling. The final stage consists of
an RE 5th tetrode using a circuit with a grounded grid providing ampli-
fication to 2.5 ha.

The video signal is fed from the oscillator to the transistorized modulator
input and reaches a peak of 60 uatts at the modulator output. Modulation
directly on the carrier frequency is accomplished 'at a sufficiently high
power level. The result achieved should be considered Very good for
transmitters of this type. Here the station's high frequency tract has
only 3 tube stages and only 2 tube stages in the audio tract.

The transmitter‘s audio tract is analogous to the picture tract. Beyond
tube preliminary stage 8 and final stage 9 modulated in frequency approxi-
mately 300 watts power is achieved on the audio carrier.

in the ATKS-Sll TV station (Figure 3) the picture and audio signals are

red to the oscillator via the inwt lines block (DVL). where the quality

and presence of these signals are monitored. This block has a device for
automatic cutting in of the station when the program signal is fed to its
inwt and for cutting it off five minutes after the program: signal is removed.

   

[—

Figure 3. Structural Schematic of an ATRS-Sll TV Station.

(a) - harmonic filter} (b) - upper frequency filter:
(c) - signal analyzer! (d) - adding bridgel (e) - 3 In”
(t) - oscillator) (s) - input line block: (h) - audios
(i) - video! (5) - gauge.

1’.
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPl’lCIAl. USE ONLY

The modulated picture carrier signal is fed from the oscillator output
via a coupler (MS) to the inputs of 2 power amplifier subassemblies.

The picture tract in each subasscmbly contains 2 tube stages'

penultimate 1 made of tetrode some and final 3 made of tetrode (EU-733.
Circulator 2 is cut in between the cascades to provide mutual decoupling.
The as audio carrier signal via a coupler (Ulla) is fed to the inputs of
final power amplifiers 4 constructed in a manner analogous to stage 1.
Harmonic filters (R2) have been installed in the ATlis-Sll and in the
Zena-ll at the inwt of the picture and audio channels in each subassembly
in order to reduce them by at least 60 db.

One of the chief advantages of the ATRS-Sll TV station is the ability

to operate without the continual presence of service personnel. Among

the special features of the station's design is the use of modulation

at a small' level of the radio frequency signal and on a lower intermediate
frequency with subsequent shifting of the spectrum ofthe operating frequency
channel set aside for broadcast. The station envisions automated monitoring
of basic parameters. which control the stand-by system and others.

This station has the capability of selecting automatic, remote, or local
(manual) control.

in the first instance personnel do not become inVolved in station operation.
It cuts in after receiving the program signal at its input (the trigger
reacts to the presence of the svnc pulses in the transmitted signal).

if the program signal drops the transmitter operates for 5 minutes in the
black area transmission mode and automatically cuts off if the signal re-
mains absent. The entire station as sell as the oscillator assemblies and
power uplifier subassemblies are cut in and cut off in the remote control
mode. Given local control atep—by—step (unit-by-unit) control of the
station and feeder switches is accomplished.

The basic parameters of the output signal are automatically monitored by
signal analyzers (AS) in each subassemblyt the power outmt level in the
audio channel and picture channel (other than peak poster output). the
relative peak-to-peah value of the synchronization signals, background
level. presence of modulation, and unmodulated carrier level. The corres-
ponding output power subassembly automatically cuts out if one of the sig-
nal analyzers registers a deviation in these indicators from the assigned
tolerance. If such a deviation is simultaneously registered by two signal
analyzers. this signifies a fault in an operating oscillator assembly. in
this event a spare oscillator is cut in with the aid of couplers (UKlo, UKS).

if an increase in failures occurs the failures are registered but the equip-
ment does not cut off.

The ATE-ﬁll TV station includes new monitoring and measuring equipment of the
Yahhont (Figure 6) and “2-27 type. Use of this equipnent makes it possible
to carefully measure qualitative indicators in the picture and audio channels.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

|
lg» n
--

{n e . .
9- WWW m
8'33 55m M853!“
Enigma:

~‘.... -1

 

Figure 0. Yakhont Monitoring and Measurement Complex.

Experimental models of the Zona-ll and ATRS-S/l TV stations were installed
for testing in l976 at the radio and television stations (RTS) in the
cities of Orel and Volgograd. Results from operating the Zona-Il TV
station in Oral, as well as know-how in operating the first series-
produced models,indicated high equipment reliability, parameter stability,
and ease in uaintenance. Testing of ATRS-S/l TV stations continues.

The television stations described are among the best in operation in our
country and are being introduced more widely into the transmitting network.
By early 1979 approximately 20 Zona-II television stations will be installed
at the 815 in various cities. Series production of ATRS-S/l TV stations

will begin soon.

COPVRIGHT‘ Izdatel'stvo ”Svyaz"3 "Vestnik svyazi'h 1978

7869
C50! 5500

16
FOR OFPXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL APTAIRS

PARIS-BONN TV SATELLITE CONSTRUCTION DBBATED
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 3 Feb 79 p 36

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Hill Paris and Bonn Builds Direct TV Brood-
casting Sstellite?"]

[Text] The European u-Sat direct television broadcast satellite project is
stymied. The preliminary project definition study conducted by the Euro-
satellite consortiun-«Aerospatiale. HBB chsserschnitt-Boelkow-Blohml. and
BTCA [Aerospace Engineering and Manufacturing Company of Beligunl--under a
European Space Agency (BSA) contract of approxinately 6.5 million dollars.
was subaitted to the agency in December 1978. In January. BSA recommended
that work on the project be continued. This recouendation was totally
rejected by the two major interested parties. France and Germany.

In Franco's view. develop-eat of a national or European direct TV broad-
casting satellite. or France’s participation in such a project, is linked to
a such broader context involving necessary expenditures for other higher
priority national space projects such as the SPOT earth resources observa-
tion satellite and the Telecon-l satellite. Germany. on the other hand. no
longer has a large national project of its own and sees an opportunity to
aesuae leadership of an operation offering attractive export prospects for
its industry. This is why Bonn advocates direct construction of an opera-
tional TV broadcasting satellite instead of first going through the stage
of building an experinentsl satellite like the R-Sst. Hence interest in
the European project has greatly diminished. Especially since Ger-any has
already coepleted its own study of an operational direct TV broadcasting
satellite. namely the TV-Set project. A detailed proposal for this satel-
lite uas submitted to Volher ﬂauff. the 736's sinister of research and
technology. on 18 Dace-bar 1978.

The proposal was the result of a 6-nillion Deutsche mark definition study
funded by the SHIT [Ministry of Research and Technology] and conducted by
the German fires AEG-Telefunken. Dornier System. ERNO. and SEL. with H38
as prise contractor.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The German project calls for a geosynchronous satellite weighing about 1 ton.
It would have a transmitting power of 235 watts per channel--supplied by a
3-kilowstt solar generator-~capable of transmitting color TV programs di-
rectly to small community or individual receivers equipped with antennas
only 70 to 90 centimeters in diameter. The satellite is of modular design.
uses a platform (bus) with a life of 10 years obtained by a three-fold
redundancy for electronic components and electric thrust units for attitude
control. The satellite is also equipped with a combined bipropellant pro-
pulsion system derived from the one developed by M33 for the U.S. probe.
Csllileo.

The proposal submitted to the BUTT by HEB calls for development of the TV-
Sst between mid-1979 and end-1982 so that it can be launched in 1983 and
broadcast TV programs on German territory over three channels. Operational
five-channel service would begin in 1986. At least one channel would be used
to relay 16 radio programs and two others would be allocated to the two prin-
cipal German TV networks (ARD and 20?). thus leaving two channels available
for new services.

 

Configuration of TV-Sat with its central unit fitted with antennas and two
large 3-kw solar panels [partly cropped on the drawing]

COPYRIGHT: AIR 5 COSMOS, Paris, 1979

8061

C50: 5500 END

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY