FOR OFHUAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10581
10 June 1982

USSR Report

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

{FOUO 5/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

' no: omcuu. use ONLY
m

.1733 publications contain intonation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sunnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itala are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGH‘ LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING M33831? 0?
MATERIALS ”PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TMT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOR BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
ussa REPORT ‘
ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

(POUO.5/82)

CONTENTS

AEROSPACE & W10 SYSTDIS

Operation of Airport and Air Route Radio Equipment ............

Electronic Devices for Shipboard Automation ...................
BROADCASTDBJONSUHBR ELECTRONICS

Charge-Coupled-Device Imagere .................................
CIRCUITS & srs'rms

Electronic Circuits Hith Nonlinear Feedback ...................

rid IC for Charge-Tine Interval Conversion .'................

W388

Computer Hodeling and Optimization of Radioelectronic
M1698(Integrated Circuit Design) so... none-ooooooooooooooo

BIBCTMAGNETIC WPATIBILI‘H
6th International Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility...

Electromagnetic Detection of Engineering Service Lines and
Imal mmlies .00....0.0.0.0000...OI.IOOCOOCICOOOOOOOIOIOIO

3mm DEVICE
Domestic Receiving and Amplifying Tubes and Their Foreign

”31°88 Oloouoocoooo0.00o000on...OCOOIOot-Ooooooooooooooooolo

- a. - [III - USSR - 212 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MICROWAVE THEORY & TECHNIQUES
Integrated lO-Bit Sequential Approximation Analog-Digital

CODVGI'tBr cooeoootoeoooioIn.0.000000000000000090000000.0000.

Functional Testing of Logic Circuits by Exhaustive Sampling
of hmtwd state COOIOOOOOOOIOUOO0.0.0.000...'OOOOIOOOCOII

hmctional Signature Testing of Integrated Circuits Used
in Main Storage Using Data-Shifting Method ('Harsh'

Test 00000000000too...0.00o000.000.00.000000QQOOIOOIOOIOIOO

High-spew Hieropower Malog‘mgital converter 0 o o a o o o o v o o o o 0
MR WINKERING
Improving Fuel Utilization at Nuclear Pouerplants Using vvm-hLo

Reactors 00.00....OI0....0...0..00.00000000UOOIOOOOOOIOOOIOI

011 Article by V. H. Sedov, P.G. Krutikov and 3. '1'. Zolotukhin:
'Ghemical-Technological Modes mring Start-Up and Initial
Operating Period of m Using m Reactor oceans-ensues...

QUANTUM WORKS, BLECTRO OPTICS
Optoelectronics in Processing Motion Picture Film ............

Use of Charge-Coupled Devices in Optical Data Processing

systems on...cooo.000000OI.0.0.00.000.IODOCOIOIQOOODOOOnOOII

new ACTIVITIES, mscsrumus
Application of Infrared Technology in the National Bcononw....

mmmomx
AEROSPACE & ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS

one 629.75'623:396.022
opztmon or moon AND AIR noun mm EQUIPMENT

Moscow EKSPLUATATSIYA RADIOOBORUDOVANIYA AERODROHOV I TRASS in Russian 1981
(signed to press 10 Dec 80) pp 2,5, 223-224

[Annotation, author's foreword and table of contents from book "Operation of
Airport and Air Route Radio Equipment", by Al'bert Andreyavich Kuznetsov and
Viktor lvanovich Dubrovskiy, Izdatel'stvo "Transport", 6000 copies, 226 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book examines the organizational structure of civil aviation subdivisions
involved in operating airport and air route radio equipment, and provides a
brief description of the basic types of such equipment. Questions involveoin
technical and economic planning and organizing the maintenance and repair of
radio equipment are explained, and basic information is provided on the acquisi-
tion and processing of reliability data. Radio equipment integrity testing
methods are explained briefly.

The book is intended for engineering and technical personnel involved in technical
operation of air traffic control systels and facilities, and may also be useful

to students in graduate civil aviation institutes. 74 illustrations, 17 tables,
26 bibliographic references.

[This book was reviewed by V.S. Novikov.]

Author's Foreword

Efficiency and flight safety in civil aviation are determined to a great extent
by the level of developnent and operating reliability of radio navigation and
air traffic control equipment. Civil aviation today has numerous airports with-
in whose zones pass more than 1000 aircraftiper day. Sophisticated air traffic
control systems and facilities are needed under conditions of such heavy traffic;
therefore, operating aviation enterprises are equipped with route and dispatcher
radars, secondary radar facilities, television signal conversion equipment and
other technology. Active work is under way on creating and introducing the
"Start", "Start-2" and "Terkas" automated air traffic control systems.

1
FOR OFFKJALVUSEGNVLY
roa OFFICIAL/us: own

Nonetheless, as more complicated air traffic control systems and facilities are
put into operation. the amount of production and operating expenses for mainten-
ance and repair increase sharply, and the requirements for air traffic control
efficiency and system operating reliability are heightened.

The continuing improvement of air traffic control systems and facilities leads

to a quantitative and qualitative change in the engineering and technical staff
using it. Furthermore, if us consider that air traffic control system and
facility operating costs are nearly as high as the equipment cost, the problem

of increasing reliability in reducing operating costs becomes urgent.

The organization of the operation of air traffic control systems and facilities
must facilitate the highest possible operational readiness, which is achieved by
a high level of organization and by using modern forms and methods of maintenance.

Sections 2.3-2.5 were written jointly by the authors and engineer Yu.G. Kuznetsov,
and engineer V.K. Pechenezhskiy participated in writing section 2.6.

*Aircraft is taken to mean both airplanes and helicopters.

Table of Contents
Conventional abbreviations 3
Author's ‘ 'evord 5

Chapter 1. Organization of Operation of Navigation and Air Traffic

Control Radio Facilities in Civil Aviation 6
1.1. Operating civil aviation enterprises, their classification and
structure 6
1.2. Structure of radio equipment and communications operating bases 8
1.3. Line management at radio and comsunications equipment base 12
1.b. Technical-economic planning at radio and communications equipment
bases 19
1.5. Self-supporting production associations for operating air traffic
control radio systems and facilities 29
1.6. Organization of air traffic control system and facility repair 33
1.7. Hetrological support in civil aviation 60

Chapter 2. Operating Characteristics of Air Traffic Control Radio

Systems and Facilities 65
2.1. Basic concepts and definitions as
2.2. Efficiency of technical operating process 53
2.3. Acquisition and processing reliability data 55
2.6. Processing failure and malfunction data using interpolation . 63

2.5. Predicting technical characteristics of ground radio electronic
equipment 66

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.6. Estimating reliability indicators of comlex navigation and air
traffic control system

Chapter 3. Air Traffic Control Radar Installations
3.1. Primary and secondary radars

3.2. Airport air traffic control radars

3.3. "Koren'-AS" secondary radar

3.6. Landing radars

3.5. Brief infomtion on airfield scanning radars

Chapter lo. Radar Complexes, and Positions Used in Automated Air
Traffic Control Systems .

6.1. Domestic radar complexes

6.2. "Terkas" radar positions

Chapter 5. Automated Air Traffic Control System

5.1. Classification and brief characterization

5.2. Route systems

5.3. Design singularities of systems for air traffic centers
5.4. Airport systems

5.5. "Tsentr 1-Rayon 1" data acquisition and processing couple:
5.6. Controller trainers

Chapter 6. Information Display Equipment

6.1. Television readout equipment

6.2. "Pu1'-2" air traffic controller console couple:
6.3. Simplified air situation display equipment

Chapter 7. Radio navigation Facilities
7.1. Guidance radios

7.2. Radio beacon aircraft landing systems
7.3. Close—range navigation radio system
7.6. Automatic radio direction finders

Chapter 8. Methods, forms and Models of Operating Air 'n'affic Control
Radio Systems and Facilities

8.1. Characterization of maintenance methods and forms

8.2. Methods of organizing'maintenance

8.3. Models of operation with periodic maintenance and tasting
8.1.. "Demand" methods of replacement and repair
8. 5. "Demand" maintenance method using centralised remote control and

testing

Chapter 9. Measuring Air Traffic Control Radio System and Facility
Parameters Using Airborne Laboratories

9.1. Organization of flight tests of air traffic control system and
facilities in civil aviation

2. Brief characterization of flight test complexes

3. Flight testing complexes

lo. Plight testing of parameters of radio beacons in landing systems
useu in meteorological minimum categories I and II

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9.5. Flight testing of guidance radios. marker beacons, USN radio direction

finders and ISBN radio beacons 206

Appendices
1. Some flight safety terms and definitions 212
2. List of publications and documentation used in operating and repair shop 213
3. List of operating and repair shop equipment 213
6. List of tools, attacﬁments and instrumentation used in operating and

repair shops 215
5. Characteristics of instrumentations used to measure electrostatic

charges ' 215
6. List of materials used in operating and repair shops 216
7. Communications cables (HP cables) recommended for use on remote devices

of radar and radio navigation stations 217
8. Examples of maintenance requirement cards 218
9. work order card for. 220
10. Repair protocol form 221
Recommended literature 222

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Transport", 1931.

6900
cso: 1860/230

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ELECTRONIC DEVICES FOR SHIPBOARD AUTOMATION

Leningrad BLEKTRONNYYB US‘I'ROYSTVA SUDOVOY AV'IWATIKI in Russian 1981 (signed to
press 23 Jul 81) pp 2-1., 238-252, 257—2143

[Annotation. foreword. table, and table of contents from book "Electronic Devices
for Shipboard Automation". by Boris Sergeyevich Tarstorkin. Itdatel'stvo "Suda-
stroycniye", “00 copies. 2’08 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book examines the operating principles of solid-state instruments used in
shipboard auto-scion devices, as well as construction principles, operating pro-
ceases and characteristics of analog pulsed and digital circuits used in electronic
automation. A great deal of attention is devoted to m circuits, conbinatory

and sequential devices.

The book is intended for students at higher ship-building schools in'specialty
0669. It may also be useful to engineers specializing in the area of electronic
autosation and infornation-neesurenent technology, as well as a wide group of
radio amateurs who are acquiring expertise is logical aicrocircuit engineering.

[This book was reviewed by Candidate of Technical Sciences Yu.N. Afanas'yev,
Automation Depart-eat, Leningrad Institute of Water Transport.]

Foreword

This book is a teaching aid for studying the first part of the course on "Blee-
trical Elements and Devices for Automation" taken by students in specialty 0669
at higher ship-building schools.

The education of a modern engineer working in the area of automating shipboard
power installations, individual nechsnisas and systems is inconplete without
lastery of the operating principles and devices used in electronic elements and
circuits for automation. Scientific and technical progress in the area of
electronics and autonation manifests itself in an unceasin'g expamion of the
types of discrete solid-state devices and integrated circuits. improve-ant of

r,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use van

their properties and capabilities and in the appearance of a series of devices which
are new in principle. In contrast to certain other areas of technology. new
technical devices do not so much replace existing devices. as was the case with
transistors which have replaced electron tubes almost everywhere. as they expand

lhc capabilities of automation facilities by finding specific areas of application.
For example. the logic microcircuits which have appeared over the past 10 years have
begun to play a dominant role in discrete control automate, narrowing insignificantly
the use of low-power and power transistors and other solid-state devices in various
types of actuating circuits, in electrohydraulic and electromagnetic mechanisms.

in sensors, measuring circuits, etc. This singularity of electronic technology
produces a wide spectrum of electronic elements and devices now_used for shipboard
automation which are gradually proving their advantages in practice over various
mechanical, pneumatic and hydraulic devices for controlling objects aboard ships.

Since the operating principles of conplex microelectronic devices can be understood
only on the basis of a preliminary study of their component elements and charac-
teristic circuit arrangements, the present book examines an extremely broad group
of electronic instruments and circuits, starting with diodes and ending with logi-
cal automata using microcircuits.

Appendix

Technical Data for Most Widely Used Series K155 Hicrocircuits

Number of outputs

Power

 
   

 
   
   
 

  
  

Maxi
power.
I”

 

Function and Maximum input urrent
' NA

    
 

 

 

 

Inputs IOutputs

  

4(2NAND) I. 2 3
9" i3 6

5

l3 I? H

    

   
  
  

 

4 (ZNAND) with ‘

onen collector
KISSLAB

. I
I

  

 

 

 

 

3
\l
:uon:
~uou
I.
..
aou— I

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

KlSSLNl

i . 'lo'. I
._———\_.__. _
6

3(3NAND) _Is I l6 so I4 1 I '- I3 “—
KISSIM 1 '4 5 '5.
I 9 l0 II a
2(4NANn) with —l.6 so 5 -— 92 I4 1 l 2 4 5 a
power output 9 IO. I! I3 8
K155I./\6
IINANII —l.6 I6 5 — 2| II 7 I. 2. :I. 4. s. a
K155M2 6. u. I?
6(N0‘l') I —I.6 I I6 ' 5 I — ' I73 I I4 I 7 i I. 3.5 9. 2 4 G 8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Maximu- Haxinmlﬂaxinn

Maximum
Function and input °“t “t Currentlpover,
brand urrent, “A "" Inputs Outputs

 

Power

(20!!)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11551.1.1
—2--2—2AND—6NOR —l.6 I6 5 — I 41 I4 7 l. 13; 2. 3. I200-
Lth 0R expansion ' ' 4 5; 9' '0 '8l ((3),
21551.!” I I
I
- ' _ _ _ _ 20 u 7 1.3.3. 4 12 (K).
[AND-0R expander] '5 ‘ I 5. 6. 3. III II (3)
l

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Schmitt trigger - "‘ 5 32 I - N 7 l. 2. 3. 4 N?)
ch ammo logic I 9. no. I2. 1.1 no)
x155n.1

   
 
 

our D-flip-flops
(”SIMS

flip-flop with _3,2 l6 5 IN “5 l4 1
|&J- 3&K_ 1631c '
155W].

 

 
  
   
    
 
 

9336. ﬂag, a (Q).
:5 (33: 2 (75); 6 ‘6)
I2 (0

Lvibretor with — 7

ll—IHR); I 6(0).
- - (I.2<R<,ﬂ0 K9"
31' 1 ZANDinput uf)

 

  
   

ll—IO (a); u ( ,
cs4ooo 3. c (3): 6

.0“1 C I 5 (V)

1551\01

   
 
     
   
 
   
   
   
     
   

: — s 63 5 I0 6. 115R): 12. 9. a. u
”5?,“ counter —6.4 M (Tl). HT!)
ISSHe2 '

   

IO 2. 3 (8- R): 12. 9. 8. ll

2 8! 14(17): I(T2)

lSSTYeS

I32 5 I2 3. 6. 7. 8 IS. 15. 8.
9. 13. I4.
ll. ID. I

inn ry- dec lual 4.2 7 60 25

ucodc r

innry counter ’ .33
155ml l

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN OFFICIAL USE URL!

   

 

 

.—

Nuubet of outguts

Pave r

    

 
 
 

p

Function and Haximninput
brand Current, M

   

 

Outputs

   

Inputs

       
 

    

 

+53| OI

    
 
 

I3. I2. II.

Four- bit shift 4.2 6 (V):
register . 9(0: 10(0)
KISSIRl ‘

“Io-hi t emulator — -— 5 58 _. 4 II 2. I4 (A); I. I2 (5);
KISSIHZ 3.51:3)”: '0 (P)

    
      
 
   
  
        

-_..____—————__————————————————

I4 7 s. 4. a. 2. I. 6(6)
5w! cell 13. I2. I! (0);
K1 ssxl’s l0. 9. s (5)

Eight-channel. _o.5 ‘ _ 5 43 230

      

Slxteen- b1: 5. . 7. 80’): II. I'M?)
operational 3.3. :5 “I’m; -

 
 
  
 

   

memory
K1 5 SRU 1

 
  
      
      
 
  
   

1024-!» I. t read- —I OJ — I” -— I5 8 lg. I6. gigs).-
only memory “'"3 ‘
Kl SSREZI (F,

   
        
  
  

         
    
 
   

BCD— to-blnary —I EM 5 :04 — 8 l0. ll. 12. I. 2. 3:4.
code ,converter ”3514019). 55%)"
K155PR6
Binary-to-BCD - —I 0.! 15 10‘ — I6 3 I3. ::.(ll)1;. l.52.63.74.
converter with. IMF) ' Mb).
oncn collector
K155PR7

 

 
 
 
  

'dcv [cc

Arithmetic-1021c - " 5 — ‘ Casing with. 2‘ out!“ta
K155II’3

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents

Foreword

Chapter 1. Active Elements for Solid-State Electronic Automation

51.1.
51.2.
51.3.
510‘.
51.5.
51.6.

Semiconductors and controlling their properties

Semiconductor.devices without n-p junction

Unijunction devices

Graphic-analytical analysis of circuit containing nonlinearity (diode)
Bipolar transistors

Hultijunction devices

Chapter 2. Shaping Circuits

52.1.
52.2.
52.3.
52.4.
52.5.
52.6.
52.7.

Transfer of information by signals

Signal shaping and detection circuits

Square-lav detection and signal conversion

Phase-sensing detectors

Frequency detectors

Sections with assigned transmission nonlinearity
Multiplying devices and circuits for obtaining signal ratio

Chapter 3. Amplifying Circuits

53.1.
53.2.
53.3.
53.4.
53.5.

Transistor connection

Stabilization of quiescent nodes of transistorized stages
Cascaded connections of amplifying circuits

Output stages of power amplifiers

Feedback in anplifying devices

Chapter 4. Self-Excited Oscillators

56.1.
66.2.

Conditions for self-sustained oscillations
Sinple self-excited LC— and RC-oscillators

Chapter 5. Pulse Generators

55.1.
55.2.
55.3.
55.6.
55.5.
55.6.
55.7

55.8.
55.9.

Types of pulsed signals

Simple relaxers

Linear signal generators

Pulse generators with transformers
Hultivibrators with collector-base coupling
Univibrators with collectorbbase coupling
Balanced flip-flops

Emitter-coupled pulse gencrators

Auxiliary generator circuits

Chapter 6. Linear Integrated Hicrocircuits

56.1.
56.2.
'56.3.

Operational amplifiers
Voltage stabilizers and regulators
Oscillators using analog Iicrocircuits

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

103
106
109
118

120
120
132
136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7. Integrated Logic Circuits

57.1. Information transmission by discrete signals
57.2. Binary logic operations and base cells

57.3. Composition of TTL series of logic circuits
57.6. Other varieties of logical microcircuits

Chapter 8. Standard Units Used in Electronic Automation Circuits Based on
Logic Circuits

58.1. Pulse generators

58.2. Flip-flop devices

58.3. Counters and distributors

58.6. Registers

58.5. Code converters

58.6. adders and other arithmetic devices

58.7. Digital-analog and analog-digital converters

58.8. Large-scale integrated circuits

58.9. Microprocessors

Chapter 9. Fundamentals of Simulation of Algorithnic Structures Using
Integrated Logic Circuits

59.1. Algebraic logic and logic function notation

59.2. Synthesis of single-cycle automate using base logic cells

59.3. Singularities of simulation of algorithmic structures with delays,

memory and feedback
59.4. Hatching sections and units in logic system
Appendix
Bibliography
Subject Index
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1981

6900
C50: 1860/209

10
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
BROADCASTING, CONSUMER ELECTRONICS

UDC 621.382.8

CHARGE-COUPLED-DEVICE IMAGERS

Moscow FORHIROVATBLI VIDEOSIGNALA NA PRIBORAKH S ZARYADOVOY SVYAZ'YU in Russian
1981 (signed to press 28 Aug 81) pp 2-5, 105-131. 136

(Annotation, foreword, chapter 5, conclusion and table of contents from book
"Charge-Coupled-Device Imagers" by Feliks Pavlovich Press. lzdatel'stvo “Radio 1
svyaz'", 10,000 copies, 136 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book examines the operating principles of imagers based on charge-coupled
devices. Constructions of linear and matrix iaagers are given, and attention is
devoted to questions of the technology and utilization of CCD imagers.

The book is intended for engineers involved with the development and application of
charge-coupled devices.

[This book was reviewed by Doctor of Technical Sciences Yu.R. Noaov and Candidate
of Physical and Mathematical Sciences V.V. Kolotkov]

Foreword

The idea of charge-coupled devices (COD) appeared in 1969, when work was underway
on creating a solid-state magnetic-bubble memory analog [1]. The fact that this
work provided the impetus for the appearance of a new type of device can be con-
sidered random; the basic reason and motive force consisted of a continuing trend
toward processing increasing amounts of information. Increasing the amount of
information requires the development of reliable devices with a high degree of
integration. The integrated circuits which were known in 1970 were based on

p-n junctions. regardless of whether the p-n junction was part of a bipolar or

MOS transistor. From the viewpoint of increasing degree of integration and operat-
ing reliability, p-n junctions are far from ideal: they take a lot of space,
require the connection of contacts, and each p-n junction performs potential-charge
conversion and back. which is characterized by some ambiguity. This ambiguity
results from the spread between the technological and operating conditions; for
this reason, when the number of p-n junctions is increased, information processing

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJALIﬂHEONLN

performance is unavoidably degraded.

The elements in charge—coupled devices are not made of p-n junctions, but rather
more compact Mos-capacitors. The primary fundamental distinction of the CCD was
the implementation of the principle of "localized charge transmission by manipu-
lating electrical potentials" [2]. Localized charge (charge "packet") transmis-
sion means that information processing does not require that the potential be
converted to a charge and back. This conversion is done only at the input and
output of the device. Information charge packets are formed at the input of the
CCD by the action of light or by charge conversion of the p-n junction potential.
By changing the electrical bias, these charge packets are then transferred un-
changed from one HOS-capacitor to the next. The charges which were input to the
CCD reach the output, where they are converted to potential or current. This
principle is simple, elegant and ideally permits high quality information process-
ing. For example, the dimensions of the HOS-capacitors may differ, but if the
charge packets do not cause the capacitors to overflow, the spread in the dimen4
sions has no effect on the transmission of information. The absence of a set of
p-n junctions and individual contacts, as well as the small areas of the MOS-
capacitors, increase the degree of integration: from the moment they appeared,
CCD became the largest integrated circuits. If the maximum degree of integration
in bipolar and ass circuits is approximately 10“ cm'z, this figure reaches 105 cm'2
in CCD. The power required for information processing in CCD is also an order

of magnitude lower than for other integrated circuits: 53-10"6 W/bit.

From almost the very appearance of CCD, three basic areas of application were
defined: video imagers, memories and analog information processing devices. The
present book examines video imagers: readers who are interested in other types of
CCD can find information about them in [3-5]. CCD imagers permit the conversion
of an optical image to a sequence of electrical video pulses, replacing television
vacuum transmitting tubes such as vidicons. '

Over the past 20 years, radioelectronics has been extensively affected by micro-
miniuturization; it is now difficult to imagine a computer or receiver which uses
tubes rather than semiconductors and integrated circuits. Television is one of
the last remaining areas which uses vacuum devices. Of course, electronic tele-
vision equipment has long used integrated circuits, but the basic part of any tele-
vision camera - the imager-- is a vacuum device, which is rather cusbersome and
requires a heated cathode and a complicated system for controlling the electron
beam. Attempts to create a solid-state analog for the transmitting television
tube in the form of a photoresistive, photodiode or phototransistor matrix [6]
have not met with success, since the operation principle and complex technology
made it impossible to obtain a number of elements comparable with tubes. Only
the invention of the CCD has brought this idea to reality.

A modern solid-state vidicon analog using CCD is a sheet of silicon about the

size of a small postage stamp. The sheet holds several hundred thousand miniature
MOS capacitors (each element is approximately 20 r 20 umz). An optical image is
projected onto the surface of the imager by means of a lens. The photons absorbed

by the silicon cause electron-hole pairs to be generated, and the minority
carriers from these pairs are accumulated in the MOS capacitors. The amount of

12
FOR 0FFKJA1.USE!DNLY
charge accumulated in a given well (imager element) is proportional to the number
of photons striking that area, i.e., the local illumination. The result is the
formation of a charge distribution which duplicates exactly the distribution of
illumination in the optical image. By changing the bias on the electrodes of the
MOS capacitors, the charges are then moved serially to the output of the imager,
thus providing electron scanning. The video pulses which are output are amplified
and used to modulate the electron beam in the kinescope. The movement of the
beam is synchronized with the movement of the CCD charges, and the picture which
was projected on the surface of the imager is drawn sequentially, line by line,

on the screen of the kinescope. CCD imagers have a number of important advantages
over vacuum tubes. Size and weight are reduced by approximately an order of
magnitude, and service life and mechanical strength are increased significantly.
No high-voltage power supply, heated cathode, or deflection and focusing system
are required. Valuable new properties appear which tubes cannot provide, e.g.,
high geometric accuracy of the image, absence of dispersion, close coordinate
agreement and lack of lag.

This book will acquaint the reader with the operating principles of CCD imagers,
the basic types of imagers and their characteristics, methods of constructing and
manufacturing devices, the use of imagers in various types of television equipment,
and the prospects for further development of CCD. It seems to us that this broad
approach to the problem responds to the tasks of the present series, since the book
may also be useful for both developers and users of CCD imagers.

5. Imager Application

Imagers are being developed at high rates unusual even for solid-state microelec-
tronics. Only 18 months elapsed from the time of the physical idea, proposed in
1970, to the first experimental television camera using a 128 x 128 matrix.
During 1971-1975, military and space organizations in the US (NASA, USN, USAF)
concluded major contracts with leading firms working on imager development such
as Fairchild, RCA and General Electric. This provided the impetus for imager
development, and determined the basic area of their application - special-purpose
military and space equipment. The use of imagers in place of vidicons reduces
dimensions, weight and power consumption by one or two orders of magnitude, i.e.,
provides a gain in those parameters which are especially important in on-board
equipment. The high cost of imagers (the large-format CCD-221 imager costs more
than $3500, and the medium-format CCD-221 costs about $900), coupled with the

low percentage of production of good articles, has frightened the developers of
industrial and domestic equipment, but is not generally important for military
developers because the advantages of the imagers compensate for the coat. Spec-
ific singularities of imagers, in contrast to vidicons, include a rigid geometric
raster, practically lag-free operation and a low-noise output. It is sufficient
to note that the appearance of a hard-raster imager has made it possible to create
a guidance system with characteristics which could not be achieved earlier using
vidicons.

The use of imagers in applied as well as broadcast television is being delayed by
difficulties in producing matrix imagers with 5 x 105 cm‘2 elements, i.e., large-

13
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

format matrices. Television cameras with medium-format matrices, both foreign

[62, 66] and domestic [63-65]. are now being used in industrial television systems,
video telephones, various tyres of testing and monitoring equipment, for produc-
tion automation. etc.

Color television using imagers is being developed rapidly in Japan. The first
report of a joint Japanese-American development of a color television camera using
nediunrformat matrices (288 x 264 elements) appeared in 1975. By 1979 color
television cameras compatible with the television standard had been developed by
two leading companies in Japan (Sony and Toshiba). Sony expects to reduce the
price of a CCD color television camera to 5600-800 in mass production [66]. In
this case. we can expect wide domestic use of CCD-imsger cameras, where they

will replace ordinary photographic and movie equipment.

It must be noted that imager developers in Japan are going their own way: without
increasing chip size (in order not to reduce the output of good articles), they
are increasing the resolution to the level required by the TV standard with the
help of special construction and circuit engineering treatment, specifically using
the spatial shift method.

Having acquainted ourselves briefly with the general situation in the area of
imager application. let us now consider specific developed equipment models
(according to foreign and domestic literature between 1973 and 1979). Figure 59
shows a general diagram of the areas of application of imagers.

Military gguipmen . One of the first imager applications was an aircraft video
rcconaissance system [67]. A 1600-element linear imager was installed along the
axis of the aircraft, and a rotating four-faceted prism formed the scan band.
The video data were transmitted to the command point by a television transmitter.

The USAF then used a miniature camera with a linear CCU-121 imager containing
1728 elements. This camera was designed for real-time transmission of video infor-
nation from low—altitude low-speed aircraft or manned rockets.

1hc use of mechanical movement of the prism in order to increase the viewing angle
reduces system reliability. Systems containing no moving parts,1n which a wider
view is achieved by using wide-format lenses, are being developed in parallel
with these systems. The resolution of the photosensitive element is increased
through hybrid assembly of the linear imager. For exasple, [23, 67] report the
development of high-resolution wide-format video systems using three CCD-lOl
linear imagers (1500 elements) and nine CCD-121 imagers (1728 elements). The
total number of expansion elements in the photodetection section can thus be as
high as 15,000; in order to have such a "super receiver", it is necessary to use
complex, cumbersome objectives with a wide working field and low distortion.

The Fairchild Company is developing an aerial reconnaissance system which pro-
poses the use of a two-row collection of 9 or 10 COD-121 linear imagers and a
160° lens; the size of the lens is only 30 cubic inches (this is pointed out as
an achievement, since lenses are usually large, e.g., with lengths of up to

0.9 meters) [67]. The resolution of the system is 0.3 meters through an angle
of 120' at an altitude of 65 meters. There are also plans for multi-lens serial

1
FOR10FFNJkI.USE(N‘LY
..——.— a _

computer
data inpu

    
  
   
 

  

koordinat;
EChlne- to
control

automatic
W devices
L.

(:51... the bug

_.-.-

pattern recis on llec an ca cilfograp
[recognitio “Edna“ \ Vim equipment 1
. o _' .
232%.? {Beta _ s t reame r '
ts cameras )

      
 
 
     
  
    
 
  

      

 

atient monitor g. "dun," In
Video recording on,“ .
t” ”Inna“; Sill“
'ral'ev'Ss—Fo H video K lelectronic‘
Ll -mnv e E} eleohones photograph

L_e_quipment_]

 
 
 
 

CW3!!!
. [serial and]
soace reco

[naissanceJ

 
 
  
 
 

or on-boar
armament;

art e'f'v '
video reco
snssJ

  

riscooes f r
esubmarines T

     

Figure 59. Areas of image: application

reconnaissance devices. RCA and Bourns Inc. are competing in the development of a
wide-aperture camera using a Pairchild imager. The RCA camera is based on a stand-
ard photographic camera which uses 35-1-1 film. Each of five lenses projects the
image of its own strip on the ground onto five CCU-121 linear imagers containing

1728 elements. The camera is designed to cover a 160' field of view, which corres-
ponds to a strip 1.6 km wide on the- ground with the aircraft flying at 300 meters

[68].

One shortcoming of video systems using linear imagers in the short accumulation .
time. so that they can only operate during the day when the illumination is suffi—
cient. This shortcoming can be overcome by using matrix-imager video systems
operating in the usual frame storage mode or storage and hold mode. ‘

The ﬁll-250 television camera which uses 256 x l90-element CCD-le matrix imagers
is being utilized in the development of on-board video systems. A design for
mini-class piloted rocket equipment with a large-format camera using a CCU-221
matrix (“8 x 380 elements) has been reported [69]. The matrix in the television
camera is cooled by a miniature cooler. Besides this camera. which works in day-
light. an analogous device is being developed in which the matrix is- coupled by
means of fiber optics to an optical amplifier. The mlifier (of the electron-

15
me omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY

optical converter type) uses a luminophor which converts the original wide—spectrum
image to a uniform image with a narrow spectral interval which coincides with the

maximum sensitivity of the imager.

 

Figure 60. Use of imager in artillery video reconnaissance system: l-projectile;
2--CCD camera and transmitter: 3-command point.

The unique version of video reconnaissance is provided by a system which delivers
the television camera to the required area by means of an artillery projectile
(figure 60). The head containing the camera is released from the projectile at the
required altitude and dropped by parachute. The transmitter, which is carried
along with the camera in the head of the projectile, sends an image of the terrain
to the command point in real time. This system, developed by the Pairchild Company.
is based on a 155-mm artillery star shell. The camera uses a ecu—211 matrix (254 x
190 elements). "The reality of creating such a system," assert the developers.

"is provided only by the use of CCD; a vidicon cannot withstand the 12,000-15.000 g
loads which occur at the firing moment" [70]. A prototype camera using a 100 x 100
matrix has been tested under actual conditions: after being fired with accelera-
tion of 8.000 g and ballistic flight lasting 15 seconds. the camera separated and
transmitted an image for 100 seconds while being dropped by parachute [70].

The hard geometric raster of imagers is attracting guidance and orientation system
developers. There are plans to install a miniature camera using a CCD-221 matrix
imager on the stabilized platform of guided air-air missiles [69]. Information
about the position of the target within the field of view of the camera is input
to a feedback circuit to correct the missile flight. The camera is powered, and
the signals processed, by an electronic unit outside the platform. Preliminary
bench tests have indicated that the guidance unit can track flying objects without

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
losing the target even when other bursts are present.

The moving-target isolation (selection) process is of major importance in military
equipment. Target selection is needed primarily for detecting rocket launches,

and for tracking aircraft and satellites. The use of imagers makes the simplest selec-
tion method possible. If a utrix imager is provided with an input register, the
device can be used in a moving-target indicator in the following way. The indica-
tor consists of two analogous imagers: an image (figure 61) is transmitted onto one
of then and is then transferred to the other image where it is stored on a frame.
The stored image and the image from the next frame coming from the first imager

are applied to a differential anplifier. The inter-frame difference extracted by
the differential amplifier will indicate whether the information in the next franc
has changed; if the picture has not changed, i.e., there are no moving targets,

the amplifier outputs no signal. Cameras which extract inter-frame difference are-
especially needed for on-board systems, since only the narrowband difference signal,
which is easier to transmit and harder to intercept, need be transmitted over the
downlink. rather than the entire broad spectrum of frequencies corresponding to the -
frame recording. A description of an experimental prototype of a moving-target
indicator using two 160 x 100 imagers is given in [71].

    
 

to TV
monitor

Figure 61. Extraction of inter-frame difference by imager: l--light-sensitive imager;
2--storage imager; 3--amplifiers; budifferential amplifier

Inagers are irreplaceable in electrooptical submarine periscopes [72]. The require-
ments for periscope photoreceptors are high: first, they must be highly sensitive,

' since periscopes are capable of 360° revolution, and the faster the periscope moves
the lower its probability of detection; secondly, it must be burn-resistant, in case
the enemy detects the periscope and tries to destroy it with a laser beam. Peri-
scopes use both linear and matrix imagers; store-and-hold matrices, which make it
possible to combine a large number of picture elements and high sensitivity, are
especially suitable for this purpose [73]. In contrast to CRT (and, of course. the
human eye), imagers are not susceptible to burning; when hit by a laser been an
imager is "blinded" and then fully recovers. The unique capability for processing
video information directly within the imager chip makes it possible to develop a
device for detecting masked man—made objects which is suitable for field operation.
The ﬂushes Research Lab is developing an integrated circuit with three parallel

shift registers which allows aperture correction and isolation of the image

contours formed by the imager [710]. Using this approach, image processing can he

' 17
Iron omcm. use ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

done 300-1000 tines faster than by a general-purpose conputer.(aa is now done).

Study of space and natural resources. The develop-ent of the STOT system is an
impressive example of using imagers for observing the ground and prospecting for
natural resources. The creation of the STOT satellite system, which is part of
the European satellite observation system, is planned for completion in Prance
during l983—l98b [75]. The system is based on a Fairchild linear imager containing
three rows of 1000 elements each. At an orbital altitude of 809 km. the system
can distinguish 20-meter objects on the ground; in the developers’ opinion, there
are no difficulties in principle in improving the resolution to 10 meters (by
comparison, the LANDSAT—D satellite provides 30~meter resolution). The system is
designed to operate in the visible 0.68-1.05 um band, and should have high sensi-
tivity. since the image from a single strip 20 meters wide is stored for 3 msec
instead of l usec. as was the case in the mechanical scanning system.

The star orientation system for "flying laboratory" satellites generally uses a
vacuum-type television tube, or image dissector [76]. The shortcomings of this
system include the distortion inherent in an electron-optical image. sensitivity
to electrical and magnetic fields, nonuniform sensitivity across the surface of
the tube. requirement for stabilized high voltage, and fragility. Because of this.
precise calibration was required prior to each orientation operation, as well as
frequent corrections.

The use of imagers makes it possible to avoid these shortcomings and to achieve
orientation accuracy of about one angular second. The system first makes a lO—second
search for an appropriatestar within the field of view of the lens, and then the
coordinates of the star are continuously measured with accuracy of 1:7000; the
information is output every second. It is noted that if the image dissector accum-
ulates a total of five photoelectrons per element over 10 seconds, an imager can
store up to 300,000 as the result of integration: this increases recording relia-
bility significantly. It is proposed that the orientation system being designed
use 500 x 500 Texas Instruments matrices which are back-lighted (since interference
from overlapping electrodes during front illumination may cause errors in determin-
ing the coordinates). The matrix is cooled to -60'c and operates in the slow-scan
node [76]. '

Thanks to their high sensitivity. imagers are used in astronomy to record images
of weakly illuminated objects. Photographic film registers about 12 of incident
photons. while the beat brightness amplifiers register approximately 201; an
imager using phorodiodes as the light sensing elements, or back-lighted imagers,
can actually record each photon. In order to reduce the influence of noise,
imagers must be cooled with the help of a miniature cooler. The article [77]
mentions the use of a back-lighted 400 x 600 Texas Instrument matrix imager in a
telescope for photographing deep space. The matrix was cooled to -hO°, so that
dark currents dropped sharply and the frame holding time could be increased to
10 seconds or more.

Theoretical comparison of multi-element receivers (photoresistive with address
switching. inager and vidicon) indicates that the use of imagers is effective for
medium and low photon intensity [78]. When working with the low illumination

18 '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
characteristic for astronomy, sample and hold matrices and imagers with electronic
image input (and amplification) are of particular interest. The article [79] exam-
ines the use of this type of matrix; it is noted that a CCD—ZOl matrix has been used
in the store and hold mode to obtain high quality pictures of the night sky.

lmagers are used in astronomical instruments with wide spectral ranges (from IR

to X-radiation). An imager located at the focus of an X-ray telescope provides an
x-ray picture of the sky with good angular and energy resolution [80]. Furthermore,
imagers can be used for recording and energy analysis of individual x-ray photons.
For example, a small—format COD-202 matrix (100 x 100 elements) has been used suc-
cessfully to detect x-ray photons with energy of 5.9 and 22.4 Rev [80].

Applications and broadcast television. The COST 7865-55 television standard requires
definition of about 600 lines (5.10 elements per frame). Although large-format
imagers have been developed both in the USSR and abroad [17, 18] which are compa-
tible with the requirements of the television standard, it is still early to talk
about replacing vidicons with definition of up to 750 lines, especially in studio
equipment. However, there still remains a huge field of activity for imagers in
applications television. Television cameras using imagers are being developed in
three phases: 1) realization of lOO-line resolution (i.e., 10“ elements per frame);
2) 300 lines (approximately 105 elements); and 3) 600 lines (5-10s elements) [81].
Imuger cameras with loo-line resolution are of limited interest for television,
although they can be used successfully in automation systems, astronomy. etc.
Cameras with resolution of about 300 lines are being used widely in applications
work. Such cameras can be used, first of.all, to create a new generation of in-
dustrial television installations. The CRT television camera (vidicon) has always
been a complicated, capricious device requiring the qualifications of an engineer-
ing specialist to operate it. Because of the use of a heated cathode in the tube,
the camera life is short, and the power consumption and heat emission are high.

in addition, it has not been possible to reduce the size of the camera significantly,
even using transistors and integrated circuits, since size reduction is limited by
the unit containing the tube and focusing-deflecting system. These shortcomings
of vacuum-tube television cameras have retarded the development of applications
television.

The development of television cameras using medium-format matrix imagers (domestic
[63-65] and foreign [62]) makes it possible to lay the foundations for the wide

‘ penetration of television installations into various areas of industry. As an
example, we can cite two domestic cameras using a 288 x 232-element mediumrformat
matrix. Both of these cameras are fully solid-state, and consume 0.5—2 H with a
10-24 V power supply. The cameras operate at frequencies of up to 5 HM: with
illumination levels of 1-2 lux, and transmit all of the gradations of a test pat-
tern on the screen of any television receiver with external video signal input.

Television cameras such as these can be used in devices for monitoring various
production processes and natural phenomena. As one example, a forest—fire warning
system using a network of image: cameras, which are reliable, consume little energy
and require no adjustment, can provide a significant economic effect.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in addition to industrial television installations, medium-format matrices are

used in video telephony. For example, the "Picturephone" video telephone system
uses 256 x 220-e1ement Bell system matrices [5, p. 175]. Cameras using medium-
fornat matrices are produced by a number of companies in two special-purpose ver-
aiuns: for producing a visual image with an analog output, and for various indus-
trial applications - with analog and digital outputs. The General Electric Com-
pany. for example, is actively advertising cameras based on charge-injection
matrices. The rn-zooo camera is used for imaging; it uses a 244 x lac-element
charge injection matrix. The TN-ZZOO camera is specialized for the requirements of
automation, and is produced with 128 x 128-element and 60 x 340-element matrices
(for monitoring long narrow objects). There are plans to produce a general-purpose
TN-2500 camera with a 266 x ZSO-element matrix and an analog and eight-bit digital
output. -

The Pairchild MV-ZSO cameras, using a medium-format CCD-le matrix (266 x 180
elements) have been used for several years in military, space and industrial tele-
vision eauipment. Among the areas of application of medium-format matrix cameras
are the mining industry, where they are used to monitor boring; the chemical and
gas industry, where imager cameras are becoming irreplaceable, since they can
operate in explosion-hazardous areas, in contrast to vidicons. The use of a camera
with a medium-format matrix converts an optical microscope to a television micro-
scope. Outputting the information to a television screen makes the operator's work
easier, and allows the object to be studied by several observers, for example in
teaching. A separate area of television technology is represented by facsimile
equipment designed to read and transmit texts and graphic images over distances.
These devices require linear imagers with over 1000 elements. For example, the
COD-121 linear imager with 1728 elements and the upD—792 with 2068 elements can

be used to read a page of text 216 mm wide and 257 mm long at 10 NH: with resolu-
tion of eight lines/mm.

A television camera with a linear imager can be used effectively when the image is
unidimensional: for reading envelopes, monitoring monetary symbols, sorting small
objects, and monitoring phase boundaries during chemical reactions. An example

is the Fairchild CCD-1300 television camera. This canera uses a lOZé-element
con-131 linear imager. Modular construction of the control and signal processing
units, operation in both analog and digital modes, automatic gain control and
computer interface capability are the basic features of the camera which ensure
demand on the part of industry; the cost of the system, including the camera,
power supply and lenses, is about $3000.

The use of linear imagers for television transmission of slides and movies is of
interest. Item [83] describes the development of an experimental telecine trans-
mitter using a 1024-element linear integer with a latent channel. The Valvo

Company has developed a system for showing color slides (television slide trans-
mitter) on a television screen which uses a SOD-element linear imager with photo-
diode light sensing element and peristaltic registers [84]. An industrial PDL-6O
color telecine transmitter using three linear COD-131 imagers (1026 elements) has
been developed in the PRC. Figure 62 shows a functional diagram of the telecine
transnitter which competes successfully with the familiar travelling beam system.

20
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY
The transmitter consists of light source 1, tape transport mechanism 2, rotating
prism 3 and light splitter 4 with a linear imager. Section 5 controls the linear
imager and provides additional correction. This is followed by unit 6, which
provides matrixing, black and white level referencing and gamma correction; this
section outputs standard color TV signals. Then the luminance and chrome signals
are converted in section 7 to digital eight-bit signals (signal/noise ratio 50 dB)
and input line by line into a 16 kilobit memory. Frame storage is necessary for
interlaced scanning. Unit 8 corrects the color and definition and provides analog
conversion of the signals. The entire operation of the telecine transmitter is
controlled by an 8080 microprocessor [8S].

 

Figure 62. Transmitter diagram: l--light source; 2-—tape transport mechanism;
3--rotating prism; 6-light splitter; S-linear imager control unit; 6-matrixing
unit; 7--snalog-digital converter; 8—-color/definition corrector/digital-analog
converter; 9--light intensity regulator

A domestic camera using a 512-element linear imager has been developed for monitor-
ing the growing of silicon ingots; questions involved in the construction of tele-
vision cameras using linear inagers and timing generators for controlling linear
imagers are explained in [86, 87].

As was noted above, the utilization of imagers in broadcast television is made
more difficult by the fact that the definition of large-format matrices is not

yet good enough by comparison with vidicons. However, television cameras using
large-format imagers are under intensive development worldwide. The very lightest
remote news camera using vidicons weighs about 8 kg; the weight of an imager

news camera can be reduced to 1.5-2 kg. If television cameras using large-format
imagcrs replace vidicon cameras in domestic equipment (video cassette recorders,
video disc players, etc.), thus providing improved reliability, operation. weight
and size, imager developers will be ensured an extensive. stable area of applica-
tion for many years. The appearance of such television cameras will make possible

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHI'IAL USE ()NIN

the development of electronic photographic equipment which will replace ordinary
equipment, eliminating the need to deal with photographic film and its processing.

One feature of current developments of TV cameras using large-format imagers is
the fact that they are primarily intended for producing color images. It is ac-_
tuaily in color cameras that the advantages of CCD over CRT (e.g., vidicons) show
up most clearly; it is sufficient to note that the hard geometric raster of the
CCD makes picture color convergence easier.

There are three possible configurations for color cameras using imagers. In the
three-matrix design (figure 63a) one of the matrices (the green channel) forms

the definition video signals, so the highest possible resolution is required;

the matrices in the blue and red channels can have resolution one-fourth as good
(these are actually not fully utilized). Solid color filters are used in the
three-matrix camera. The two-matrix design (figure 63b) equalizes the requirements
for matrix resolution. One of the matrices works in the green channel just as in
the three—matrix camera. A blue and red striped filter is placed ahead of the
second matrix; therefore, all of its elements participate in creating the color
image. The single-matrix camera (figure 63c) requires a three-color cellular
filter containing twice as many green cells as red or blue. Slow-scan television
uses a sequential—type single-matrix camera with a rotating disc containing green,
red and blue filters in its openings [88]. The three-matrix color camera produces
the best picture. The shortcomings of this design require the use of a large
number of matrices, which are rather scarce because of the low output of good com-
ponents, a complex light splitting section and low vibration resistance.

The attempt to increase the output of good matrices by reducing the number of ele-
ments along the horizontal, and conssquently the size of the sheet, led. to the
development of the "spatial shift" method. This method consists essentially of
shifting the matrices horizontally and using line-frame transfer. As we know,
the image formed by a matrix with line-frame transfer leaves "empty" vertical
strips which correspond to the shift registers not participating in creating the
image. It is possible to insert, so to speak, into these "empty" strips the
banded image formed by the second matrix. This image has an analogous structure
but is shifted one step horizontally, i.e., by the width of an element (assuming
that the width of the light-sensitive element and the vertical shift register

is the same). The overall resolution doubles, i.e., in order to obtain the re-
quired horizontal resolution it is possible to use matrices with half as many
elements along the horizontal.

An effective example of the use of the spatial shift method is provided by the
three-matrix camera developed by Sony [89]. This camera uses matrices with a
line-frame structure containing 492 elements along the vertical (in agreement with
the Japanese TV standard) and a total of 226 elements along the horizontal. The
matrices in the blue and red channel are shifted by one-half step horizontally

in relation to the green-channel matrix. As a result, the definition of the
color image perceived by the eye is increased. The definition can be increased
still further by using half the signals from the blue and red channels to synthe-

size a quasi-green signal.

22
IN)R 0511(JAL USEiCNVLY
Figure 63. Color imager camera configurations: three-matrix (a), two—matrix
(b), and single-matrix (c); 1-imager; 2-solid light filter; 3--separation of
light beams; &--lens; S-~banded light filter; 6-cellular light filter

A three—matrix scheme is being used in a color camera under development in this
country [90). Three large—format frame-transfer matrices containing 575 x 532
elements are used. The use of horizontal and vertical correctors in the camera
makes it possible to compensate for inefficient charge transfer [91]. This
camera is intended for news reporting.

TVo-matric cameras contain fewer matrices, have a simpler light splitting device
and are more vibration resistant. The spatial shift method is not used here:

borh matrices are fully utilized, but each must contain a large number of elements.
A two-matrix camera using frame—transfer matrices containing 512 (vertical) x 340
elements is being developed by Toshiba; there are plans to market the camera
during the 19803, and the developers believe that the two-matrix construction
responds best to the requirements of color television [92].

The NBC Company (Japan) is developing a single-imager color camera containing 492
(vertical) x 400 elements. The line-frame transfer matrix uses photodiodes as
photosensing elements, which makes it possible to improve the sensitivity in the

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

blue region of the spectrum by almost an order of magnitude (by comparison with
HOS elements with polysilicon electrodes). The desire to improve spectral sensi-
tivity distribution forces developers to use either photodiodes or EDS elements
with transparent electrodes in modern imagers for color television.

Regardless of the fact that cameras using large-format imagers are under intensive

development in many countries, the only industrially produced cameras are the

Fairchild black and white system using the CED-221 matrix (598 x 390 elements) and

the RCA device using the SID-51232 matrix (512 x 320 elements). These cameras

. are built by special order, and cost between $5000 and $8000. In 1979, RCA
offered the three-matrix SID-51232 camera for sale. This camera was successfully

used in a bathyscaph for research beneath the Pacific Ocean at depths of up to

'3 kilometers, with good color image quality [93]. The Pairchild black and white

camera is used in military equipment. RCA plans to use their camera in 1983

on a space vehicle for investigating Jupiter, as well as in an astronomical tele-

scope [1].

Automation, computers. The simplest automation device is an imager TV camera

which monitors some object, process or parameter. Within the extensive class of
automatic devices working on the standard-comparison principle, imagers not only
replace CRTs, but also provide far better accuracy thanks to hard coordinate tie-in.
Devices such as these include, for example, program-controlled machine tools. In
developing equipment for fabricating semiconductor devices, imagers can be used

in assembly machines which automatically find the contact areas, in photolitho-
graphic alignment devices, in devices for monitoring defects and measuring the
dimensions of masks, etc.

The continuing increases in the speed and memory capacity of computers requires

a shift away from unreliable, slow optical-mechanical paper tape or punch card
readers to direct optical input of printed and handwritten text. No less important
is computer input of data concerning the movement of equipment assemblies, e.g.,
tools, the coordinates of stationary or moving objects, variation in the spectral
composition of radiation reflected from a surface under investigation, etc. Com-
puter input of more complex half-tone images makes it possible to solve a number
of interesting problems: analysis of kinograms of fast processes, studying

x-ray pictures and processing spectrozonal and stereoscopic pictures received
from satellites. Imager-based sensors have a number of important advantages over
familiar optical sensors such as photodiodes and photoresistive matrices, vidi—
cons. photoelectronic multipliers, etc.: they are universal (allowing data input
in both analog and digital form), they provide high accuracy in determining coor-
dinates and they are fast.

The item [96] examines examples of the use of medium-format matrix (288 x 232
elements) and linear (512 and 1024 elements) imagers in devices for inputting
spatial and angular coordinates of pixels, including stereoscopic, binary data
from paper tape, punch cards and holograms, and half-tone optical images. Special
note is made of the prospects of using matrix imagers to build pattern recogni—
tion devices using the correlation principle. A matrix-imager correlator can
execute a two-dimensional correlation function in lO'Zsec. To do the same thing
digitally requires 108 operations, i.e., in order to complete the process in 10'2

2h
roe OFFICIAL use can
see, it would be necessary to have the extremely high speed of 1010 op/sec.

Instrumentation. Linear imagers are ideal devices for precision measurements of
remote or inaccessible objects. The contours of the object being measured are
projected onto the linear imager, and the number of pulses "contained" between
the boundaries are counted. The absolute error is i 1 pulse; if the linear image:
contains 1026 elements, the measurement accuracy can reach 0.12. A SlZ-element
_llnear-matrix system is being used successfully to measure the diameter of a
silicon ingot and to keep that important parameter at the required value. In a
device used to monitor the dimensions of rolled articles, whose temperature can
reach 700-1200’C. a linear imager is replacing the optical-mechanical scanner,
which is unreliable and slow. Measurement accuracy at distances between 10 II
and 15 m is 0.6-0.51; 0.12 can be achieved by using the differential measurement
method. Linear imagers can replace expensive diffraction gratings in devices
where precise coordinate measurement is required. An example is the photodupli-
cator used to make masks, which registers the coordinates of the moving table
along both axes within a fraction of a micron.

Inagers are used extensively in oscillographic instrumentation. Until now.
pulse amplitude measurement, curve measurement, and determination of time inter-
vals have all been done very inaccurately using graticules. A simple oscillo-
graph attachment which projects an image onto a matrix imager makes it possible
to measure any figure on the screen precisely. Furthermore. thanks to the lack
of delay in the imager, it is possible_to write high-speed processes from the
oscillograph screen and then read them at lower speed.

A COD—202 imager (100 x 100 ohms) is used in streamer cameras for recording fast
processes [95]. Replacing photographic film with an imager has made it possible

to increase measurement sensitivity by an order of magnitude; the capaoility of out-
putting data digitally provides additional convenience. "

Medicine. The high sensitivity of imagers allows them to be used successfully

in devices for investigating internal organs (gastroscopes, cystoscopes, etc.).
Two-matrix imagers can provide the basis for a device to teach the blind to read;
this device analyzes printed texts and transforms the letters into a pin code
which is sensed by the hand of the student. A plan for creating an artifical
eye is presented in [96]. A matrix of microelectrodes is implanted in defined
sectors of the brain where electrical current stimulation produces the sensation
of light spots (phosphenes): 6b electrodes are enough for a blind person to have
an idea of the shape of nearby objects and to be able to orient himself spatially.
The electrodes are coupled with the imager matrices, which are mounted on eye-
glass frames, by means of induction coils through the skull. A significant
shortcoming of this prosthetic eye is the fact that the electrode connection
scheme must be selected for each patient, since there is no direct relationship
between the positions of the matrix element and the light spot which it produces.

Miniature color or black and white TV cameras using imagers are extremely useful
in operating rooms: placed directly above the operating field. they can make
video recordings of complicated operations and display the work of the surgeon
to a large teaching auditorium. Simple TV cameras, even with medium-format

25
won omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imagers, can be used to monitor the condition of critically ill patients in wards.
to observe neonates in incubators, to provide two—way contact with infectious
patients, etc.

Now that we have looked at the basic areas of application of imagers, we shall

now consider the operation of this class of devices. The hardware developer must,
in addition to having information on imager parameters, be able to build an '
optimal imager control and video signal processing circuit. Transfer efficiency
depends upon the shape of the timing pulses, the amount of overlap and the edge
slope. Stray pulses from the electrodes and the reset transistor leak through

to the output of the inager: the degree to which they can be suppressed deter—
mines the quality of the television image. As an example of solving the circuit
engineering problems which arise in imager operation, let us examine the operation
of a camera using a medium-format matrix with 288 x 232 resolution elements [63].

Figure 6b shows a functional diagram of the camera, which includes two timing
generators comprised of sync generators and phased voltage generators, as well

as a video signal generator/amplifier. One timing generator, which operates at
280 Kilz, controls the accumulation and storage sections. while the other, high-
frequency (up to 115 His) generator, controls the output register. The camera
outputs to a television monitor without interlaced scanning. The rasters of

both fields coincide, each containing 288 lines on the forward vertical scan and
2!. lines on the reverse scan. This reduces the requirements for frame synchroniza-
tion performance; the difference between the frame or line frequency and the stan-
dards does not exceed 0.22. In order to transmit an image, the first field uses
odd lines, blanking the even ones, with the reverse being the case in the second
field. During the vertical scan return. 1“ charge transfers are made from the
accumlation section to the memory section. Information is output from the memory
section in two-line intervals during the line scan return. The rate of all
transfers in these two sections is the same, or approximately 95 KHz.

in order to improve charge transfer efficiency, and to improve the contrast-fre-
quency characteristic, the camera uses optical background charge injection done
in the near—IR portion of the spectrum with the help of two emitters. In order
to obtain a nonlinear light response (i.e., to do game-correction) and to trans-
mit bright details without degrading the transmission of dark areas, the camera
changes the capacitance of the potential well during charge accumulation. Gal-aa-
correction is done in one step; at the end of each field, for an amount of time
equal to 1/13 the duration of the field, instead of accumulating the charge for
the electrodes of one phase, the charge for the electrodes of two phases (first
and second) is accmlated. This also makes it possible to reduce the dark cur-
rents in the accumulation section (lower voltage is applied during most of the
time) and to set the accumulation section to the same state as the memory section
which is required for the next synchronous charge transfer.

induced timing currents are suppressed in this camera by the use of a differential
output. There is also a way to control induction by using dual correlated saw-
ling [36]. The use of dual correlated sampling makes it possible to suppress
induced timing currents and to cowensate for noise in the reading section. 'ihe
item [65] contains an actual dual correlated sampling circuit. Hore details on

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 64. Functional diagram of TV camera using medium-format imager:
1--oscillator; 2--sync generator; 3--accunulation section phase voltage
generator; 6--memory section phased voltage generator; 5-output register
phased generator; 6-level converters; 7-amplifier-aixer; 8--reset; 10-
PN [expansion not given]; ll--PP [expansion not given]; lZ-accumulation
section; l3-nemory section; lb-CCD matrix; lS-level converter control;
l6--IR emitter control; l7--level converter control; 18-output register;
19--1evel converter voltage distributor; 20--voltages; 21-separation;
22--substrate; 23-—depletion; 26--accumulation; 25--storage; 26--output;
27-transfer; 28-supply voltage; 29--output device; 30--output; 3l-aync
pulses; 32--blanking pulses -

the construction of the timing generators and video signal processing circuits
can be found in [66, 65. 86].

In operating imagers it is desirable to know how the devices behave at high and
low temperatures and in the presence of radiation, and how sensitive they are
to electrostatic overloads.

Elevated operating teapetatures are undesirable for charge-coupled devices, in

which the information charge is very low. In the opinion of many hardware
developers, the advantages of inagers justify the use of miniature cooling devices.
The domestic TEHO-3, HTS-1, and HT9-l microcoolers are small, which allows them

to be installed directly on the frame of large-format matrices.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Cooling of medium-format (288 x 232) and large-format (576 x 360) matrices to
-60°C has made it possible to almost eliminate all image defects caused by
local sections with increased generation-recombination rate, and to use imagers
as analog memory devices which provide a one-frame delay [82, 97]. The frame
time can be increased at -ao°c to three seconds, while this figure does not
exceed 0.5 seconds at room temperature.

lmagers are extremely sensitive to radiation. In devices using a surface channel,
the degradation under the influence of gamma-radiation is more severe than in
devices with a buried channel [98]. The largest change in parameters is observed
in n-type devices using a surface channel (i.e., on a p-type silicon substrate);
060 with p-type surface channel and buried n-type channel are.more stable. The
state density on the interface boundary and dark currentincreases by an order of
magnitude under a dose of 2-102 J/kg in devices with a surface channel. Plat-
zone potential also shifts: from -lV at 102 J/kg to -4 V for polysilicon elec-
trodes and -2V for aluminum electrons st 103 J/kg. A technological process has
been proposed for manufacturing CCD which can withstand enhanced doses of gamma
radiation [98]. The basic idea is to eliminate high-temperature silicon process-
ing and any other influences which disturb the seaiconductor material. For
example. it is proposed to apply the oxide pyrolytically at temperatures below
925°C. and to deposit aluminum using the ordinary vacuum deposition method with-
out using an electron beam, since a dose of up to 10k Jlkg is imposed during
electron-beam deposition, and its effect cannot be completely eliminated by
annealing. Nonetheless. CCD using a surface channel made using this approach

are still degraded significantly after a dose of 103 J/kg; after a dose of 10“
J/kg the transfer efficiency was only 0.992 for a 502 background charge.

lmagers are protected against electrostatic potential. first through design, by
introducing guard diodes beneath the contact areas of electrodes. and secondly
by using grounded clothing and bracelets, shorting the leads with pieces of foil.
using special conducting packaging. etc.. during operation. The literature con—
tains no information on the sensitivity of imagers to electrostatic influences.
but we can assume that they behave in this respect the same as HOS devices and
H08 iCs.

Conclusion

To sumrize the content of this book briefly, we can say that the imager is a
new, rapidly developing class of instruments which both improve the indicators
of photoreceiving equipment and also realize qualitatively new characteristics:
progress in the development and application of imagers is determined entirely

by the technological level.

The principle of processing information only with the help of charges is in fact
a new one and distinguishes CC devices fundamentally from all others. The rate
of growth of charge-coupled devices is surprising, even against the background
of the rapid development of microelectronics: no more than 18-24 months passed
between the appearance-of the CCD and industrial production. It must be noted
that imagers are hardly likely to become mass-produced devices -— perhaps only
later, when domestic color TV cameras using imagers win the recognition of

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consumers. replacing movie cameras and photographic equipment. The qualitative
aspect is now more important that the quantitative aspect in the application of
imagers in radioelectronic equipment. Table 2 shows the advantages of charge-
coupled devices, and their qualitatively new properties.

The problems which now face integer developers generally consist of the follow-
ing: increasing resolution. improving sensitivity, especially in the blue region
of the spectrum in connection with the development of color television, and
controlling image blurring during local light overloads (blooming).

There are several ways to improve imager resolution: simply increase the number
of elements on the chip, thus increasing the size of the chip; increase the degree
of integration, i.e., reducing the size of the element and increasing the number
of elements without increasing the size of the chip; using hybrid assemblies
where possible (linear imagers, store and hold devices); using design and circuit
engineering approaches such as the spatial shift method.

The trend toward increasing chip sizes which was so evident during 1971-1975 is
now absent: this is because of the low output of good devices with large active-
region areas. The Bell Labs matrix imager using a 16 x 20 In crystal is not
being produced because of the difficulties in obtaining good crystals. The

1975 RCA matrix (512 x 320 elements) has an active crystal of 169 mng the analo-
gous 1979 matrix from Toshiba reduces this area to 59 mmz. The maximum number

of elements in linear imagers is 2068, with a further increase hardly justified.
The number of vertical elements in matrix imagers is fixed by the TV standard
(from 688 to 576); horizontally there are between 350 and 500 elements. The
Texas Instruments Company announced plans in 1979 to develop an 800 x BOO-element
matrix, but this imager is intended for special use in astronomical equipment.

Table 2

Comparative Characteristics of Imagers and CRTs

Characteristic Iggger £31
Sensitivity (threshold) High (low output capaci— High output capacitance
tance)
Resolution 500 TV lines; up to 750 TV lines

several thousand in
hybrid assembly

Raster Fixed Floating

Information processing Easy Impossible
within device

Arbitrary sampling Possible (in PZI) Impossible
[expansion not given] ‘

29
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Characteristic Inger CRT
\ ‘
Lag None 15-40!
Power consumption, H 0.5 5
Supply voltage. V 5-25 ZOO-10,000
Height, 5 5 50
Size, cn3 0.5 5
'Service life, hours 15,000 500-800
Mechanical strength 3 To 20,000 1000
Explosion hazard None Exists
Hicrophonic effect " "
Sensitivity to magnetic and
e ectricsl fields " Present
Increasing the degree of integration by reducing element size is attracting fer
lore attention on the part of developers. For eunple, in s nutrix ilsger using
rsne transfer, the dinensions of the light sensing elements have been reduced
ran 3‘) x 11.2 (1975 level) to 26 x 13 “20979); the size of the light sensi
elements in the Sony line-{rang Intrix linger is only 7 x 13 m2. lagers with
e enents this shall require not only significant inprovenent in photolithogr phy
quality. but also the use of more sophisticated optics. Switching CRT television
equipment over to (:60 leads to the need for developing high-ope
resolution of at least 200 lines/II.
ssenblies
metal oxides (tin,antimony); reducing the thickness of the silicon substrate to
10m and illuminating it from the back; and using photodiodes instead of ms
structures. All three methods are receiving equal development, and it would be
hard to predict which of them will win out in the future. Imagers using photo-
diodes have received slightly more recognition recently; the sensitivity of these
devices is an order of magnitude better in the blue region than in imagers
using polysilicon electrodes.

The phenomenon of blooming is suppressed best in charge-injection devices which
can withstand local light overloads of up to 1000 times. Good anti-blooming
characteristics are also exhibited by CCD in which it is possible to construct
a drain region for excess minority carriers -— linear imagers with one readout
register, and matrix imagers using line-frame organization.

The aforementioned problems refer to imager development and fabrication. These,
of course, are not the only problems arising in the development of this young
area of microelectronics. For example, the prospects for development of imagers
are determined to a great extent by where the devices are to be used. Hardware
developers must understand that the application of imagers often opens up com-
pletely new possibilities which could not be realized on the basis of earlier
image generators. Obviously, it is necessary that we not simply replace vacuum
tubes with charge-coupled devices, but that we find, as s first priority, types
of equipment in which the switchover to CCDs is most justified.

We can hope that resolution of most of these problems, through the joint efforts
of imager and hardware developers. will promote further progress in microelectronics
and television technology.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
1. Operating principles of CCD imagers 6
2. Types and characteristics of imagers 31
3. Construction .of imagers ' 60
lo. Imager technology 88
5. Imager applications 105
Conclusion 128
Bibliography 131

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981.

6900
050: 1860/232

31
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CIRCUITS & SYSTEMS

UDC 621.372.524:621.011.72

ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS WITH NONLINEAR FEEDBACK

Moscow ELEKTRONNYYB SKHEHY S NBLINEYNYHI OBRATNYHI SVYAZYAHI in Russian 1980
(signed to press 15 Dec 80) pp 2, 278-280

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Electronic Circuits With Nonlinear
Feedback", by Yuriy Vasil'yevich Safroshkin, Indetel'stvo "Nauka", 2700 copies,
280 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book explains the conception of the formation of analog-discrete properties
in inseparable electronic circuits with stepped (piecewise-constant) feedback.
The physical aspects of feedback are clarified on the basis of a closed method
of direct measurements of reverse translission, and generalisation of its proper-
ties for various circuits. A classification of such circuits is proposed, and
basic principles for utilizing then are formulated. A unified engineering
approach to the investigation and calculation of statics is presented along with
the fundamentals of the dynamics of modern circuits using operational amplifiers
with nonlinear feedback. New capabilities are explained. A number of practical
directions are developed. investigated and extended for utilizing analog-discrete
properties. A great deal of experimental material is presented, and specific
developments of instruments and equipment for scientific research are described.

The book is intended for scientific workers and engineers interested in modern

circuit engineering and circuit theory and their applications to problems of
instruacnt building, radio electronics and automation.

Table of Contents

Introduction 3

Part 1

General and Methodological Questions of Investigating Feedback in

Electronic circuits 11

Chapter 1

Physical Interpretation of Feedback in Electronic circuits 12

1.1. Prerequisites 12
32

FOI!0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY
1.2. Physical concept of reverse transmission and possibilities of quantitative

estimation 15
1.3. Basic properties of reverse transmission 21
1.4. Reverse transmission in single—loop active circuits 25
1.5. Circuits with multiple feedback loops 36
1.6. Mathematical interpretation of feedback . 43
Conclusions 46
Chapter 2
Nonlinear Feedback and Geometric Interpretation 48
2.1. Brief review of development of nonlinear feedback 48
2.2. Basic concepts, properties, definitions 54
2.3. Piecewise-linear characteristics of components and discrete-stepped

approximation of dependence of reverse transmission 63
2.4. Classification of active circuits in terms of presence and types of

feedback and with respect to analog-discrete properties 70
2.5. Special types of nonlinear feedback ' 73
Conclusions 81
_Part II .
Engineering Methods of Investigating Circuits Hith Nonlinear Feedback an
Analog-Discrete Properties 82
Chapter 3
Statics of Resistive Circuits Hith Two-Valued Characteristics ' 84
3.1. Goals and method of analyzing statics 84
3.2. Analysis of circuits with nonlinear feedback loops 89
3.3. Analysis of circuits with nonlinearities in direct channel 97
3.4. Regularities of formation of regenerative hysteresis 103
3.5. Simulation of circuits with hysteresis characteristics 111
3.6. Combined utilization of hysteresis characteristics 116
Conclusions 119
Chapter 4. Fundamentals of Dynamics of Circuits Hith Hysteresis Characteristic3120
4.1. Method of analysis of relaxation processes 120
4.2. Self-excited relaxation processes 124
4.3. Monostable relaxation processes 132
4.4. Practical approaches to estimation and formation of relaxation properties 136
4.5. Features of fast transient processes 145
4.6. Combination of linear and pulsed properties 155
Conclusions 157
Part 111
Some Analog-Discrete Applications of Nonlinear Feedback 159
Chapter 5.
Trigger Protection in Voltage Stabilizers 160
5.1. Brief review of methods for current protection of stabilizers 161
5.2. Analysis of trigger self-protection of sequential stabilizer with

differential input amplifier 163

33

FINICMﬂﬂCJAl.USE2(MVLY
f0“ 0"“.th vat. URL!

P

J.3. Logical capabilities of stabilizers with trigger self-protection in
multichannel supply systens
Conclusions

Chapter 6
Some Ca,.bilities of Stepped Feedback in Heasurenent Technology

6.1. Hideband frequency-selective Rc-devices

6.2. Devices for investigating electrical characteristics of cells and
membranes

Conclusions

Chapter 7

Converters with Autonatic Switching of Linear Ranges

7.1. Triangular function generator and its basic properties
7.2. Structures with ”metrical-sawtooth characteristics
7.3. Structures with say-metrical-sawtooth characteristics
7.4. Dyna-1c features

Conclusions

Chapter 8

Analog Computing Devices

8.1. Special-purpose analog computer for analyzing conplex spectrograns
8.2. Universal and special-purpose functional converters

Conclusions

Conclusion

Appendix 1. Stabilized Power Supplies

1.1. Universal single-channel power supplies

1.2. Universal two-channel power supplies

1.3. Three-channel power supply with nutual protection

Appendix 2. Measurement Devices
2.1. Hide-range RC—generator for calibration voltages

2.2. Infralou-frequency oscillation generator and filter
2.3. Preamplifiers for high-resistance transducers

2.4. Set of electronic instruments for cell research
2.5. Expander for chronatographic signal processing

Appendix 3. Instrument for Expanding Spectral Curves
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1980

6900
cso‘: 1860/212

3h
l-‘OR omcm. use on“
HYBRID 10 FOR CHARGE-TIME INTERVAL CONVERSION

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA BKSPERIHENTA in Russian No l, Jan-Feb 82
(manuscript submitted 31 Jul 80) pp 102-104

[Article by's. c. Basiladze, Yu. Yu. Dotsenko, r. x. Han'yakov and s. n.
Pedorchenko, Combined Nuclear Research Institute, Dubna]

[Text] This article describes a hybrid integrated circuit for linear
charge-time interval conversion with input speed of a few nano-
seconds. The circuit can be used in energy measurement channels,
in time-digital converters and in modified form in amplitude-digital
converters. The circuit has a fast reset input for stopping the
conversion process. The minimum measurable signal range is 256 pC
or 250 mV in the amplitude measurement mode. The maximum conversion
time is 50 usec, and integral nonlinearity amounts to 0.32.

The functional designation of general-purpose analog integrated circuits do

not always respond to the requirements for analog-digital code converters used

in nuclear physical experimentation. For example, one specific requirement for
converters is. that of rapid cessation of the conversion process and restoral of
the initial state if the event recognition system outputs a negative decision.
Transistorized analog-time interval convertGrs contain approximately 50 electronic
comonents, consume about 1000 m", and occupy approximately 20 cm2 on a printed-
circuit board, which makes it impossible to accomodate more than 8 10—bit analog-
digital code converters in a CANAC unit. In addition, the thermal stability of
the "pedestal" of the. converter is not very good.

The present article describes a hybrid integrated circuit for linear charge-

time interval conversion with input speed of a few nanoseconds. This circuit can
be used in channels for measuring energy (pulse "ares"), in time-digital converters
and in modified form in amplimde-digital converters. The circuit has a fast

reget input to cut off the conversion process, and is held in a Ito-lead 25 x 20

mm case.

The converter, whose schematic diagram is shown in figure 1, consists of a buffer
amplifier, linear throughput circuit, capacitor charge dc source and time interval
extraction unit. The buffer amplifier (El, 32-2) is a current follower which
provides low input impedance and high output impedance through negative current

35
ms omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

feedback. The current gain of the amplifier is near unity. The auplifier can
work with negative input current pulses (shown in figure 2a and b) and with low-
amplitude positive pulses (figure 2c). The maximum negative working current
pulse is 20 mA. while the maximum positive voltage pulse is 300 nvl.

 

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of converter. 1, input; 2, strobe; 3, output; 4,
COIIII'IOI‘I .

The linear throughput circuit selects the input pulses by means of the paraphrase
Strobe signal (e.s.1. [expansion not given, possibly emitter- coupled transistor
logic—-Tr.] levels). The current from one transistor in 23 is switched to the
other transistor, and the linear throughput circuit switches from the normally
closed state to the open state. Resistor kl. which is connected to output 14
(figure 2). determines the initial current through the circuit and assigns its
"pedestal". The recommended "pedestal" current is 100-300 HA, and the value of
£1z6 V. Transistor pair Eu matches the levels. Transistor 32-1 is the internal
+2.3 V source.

The output of the linear throughput circuit (lead 6) can be connected to lead
5 (charge measurement mode, figure 2a) and to lead 3 (input pulse amplitude
measurement mode, figure 2b and c).

The extracted input current pulse charges C3. This is an external capacitor,
which means that its value can be varied in order to change the conversion factor
of the circuit and to allow it to be used in amplitude measurement channels. In

1A signal divider can be connected to the input of the converter, since the

conversion factor in the amplitude measurement mode is much greater than unity
(cf. below).

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the charge measurement mode. the minimum value of C3 is 130 pf, and 300 pf in the

amplitude measuralent mode. The working pulse amplitude range for C3 is 0-2 V.
The recommended value of resistance R1u200-510 ohms.

Figure 2. Converter hookup variations:
a - measuring pulse charge; b, c-
measuring amplitudes for pulses with
negative and positive polarity; 1, input,
2, strobe (e.s.l. [possibly EVIL-TrJ,
3. (3.3.1. output.

 

Capacitor C3 is charged with dc whose value is assigned by external resistor R2
and voltage +32. The only elements in the charging-current source which belonged
to the circuit is transistor assembly 85, the transistors in which are connected
in a Darlington circuit in order to reduce temperature drift of the charging
current due to variation in a current gain a. The value of the charging current
can vary between 10 and 100 uA, while £2212 V. A fast-charge current generator
for C3 with value of up to 5 M can also be connected to lead 6.

The time interval is extracted by the comparator, which uses an operational
amplifier (35, £7, T1, T2) with nonlinear feedback over two channels: over the
primary gain channel (E74, T2, T1) and over a parallel channel (137-1, T1) to
ensure stability of the anplifier. During time interval extraction transistor

T, is closed, T3 is open and the feedback in the amplifier is disrupted. The
circuit produces a standard output signal in BCTL levels (cf. hookup in figure 2a
and b), or 'I'I'L (open collector from lead 2, cf. figure 2c. The pulsed current
applied to the load does not exceed 10 mA.

3?
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Inputimpedance, ohms l
Coefficient of reflection of signal from

         

   

   
 
 
 
 
  
 

  
     
    
 
 
 

  

  
 

        
 
   
     
   
 
 

  

    
    
     

  
 
    
   

 
 

input, 1 10 14
Input pulse duration, ns
in charge measurement mode )5 35
in amplitude measurement mode 100 with (:3- No
300 pf
Switching time of throughput circuit, ns 3.5 2*
Smallest measurable signal range
in charge measurement node, pC 256 with C3- 256
in amplitude measurement node, v No
Maximum conversion time, sec 50
Integral nonlinearity, 2 0.5
Fast convertor reset time, sec 0.5
Temperature drift conversion factor,
10"'/°c 4
of "pedestal", pC/°C 0.02 for Iped' 0.2
100M
Power consumption, an 260 510*

 

*‘l‘he circuit of the QI‘lOOB does not have a unit which refers the strobe pulse to

the ECTL levels; the circuit has a nonstandard capacitive input requiring large
strobe-signal pulses.

The table presents the basic characteristics of the present circuit. For com-

parison, the characteristics of the analogous QTIOOB circuit produced by the
Le Croy Cunpany [1] are also given.

It follows from the table that the converter in question is superior to the MIME
in terms of a number of parameters, especially temperature stability.

In conclusion, the authors would like to express their graditude to V. I. Kakurina
for technical assistance and to A. F. Belov for his support of the work.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Past-Pulse Instrumentation Catalogue, Le Croy Research Systems Corporation, USA
N. Y., 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1982

6900
C50: 1860/226

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 681.3.06:621.396.6

COMPUTER MODELING AND OPTIMIZATION OF RADIOBLECTRONIC DEVICES (INTEGRATED CIRCUIT
DESIGN)

Moscow MODELIROVANIYE I OPTIMIZATSIYA NA EVE RADIOBLEKTRONNYKH USTROYSTV (PROYEK-
TIROVANIYE NA INTEGRAL'NYKH MIKROSKHEHAKH) in Russian 1981 (signed to press 18
Jun 81) pp 2-4, 270-272

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Computer Modeling and
Optimization of Radio Electronic Devices (Integrated Circuit Design)", by

Zalman Hikhaylovich Benenson, Mikhail Rostislavovich Yelistratov, Lev Konstantino-_
vich Il'in. Sergey Vladimirovich Kravchenko, Dmitriy Hikhaylovich Sukhov and
Mikhail Abramovich Udler, Iadatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". 25000 copies, 272 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book presents methods for modeling and optimizing radioelectronic devices
in a computer-aided design system. Modern algorithms for computer design of
these devices are examined. Descriptive languages for radioelectronic devices
are given. The book is intended for radioelectronic equipment, control system
and computer-aided design engineers and developers.

[1his book was reviewed by Professor A.I. Petrenko, doctor of technical sciences,
and Doctor of Technical Sciences v.1. Peskov.)

Foreword

Computer-aided design systems are used in all stages of developing radioelectronic
devices. The introduction of these systems began with the automation of a number
of design operations: the arrangements of components and functional units in
various standard constructions. arrangement of wiring and printed-circuit con-
ductors, and production of paper tapes for controlling the manufacture of multi-
laycrcd printed circuit boards and integrated circuits. Computer-aided design
systems now include subsystems for modeling and optimizing radioelectronic devices
which make it possible to improve characteristics significantly and to reduce

the debugging time of designed equipment. These aubsystems.are especially
effective in calculating the characteristics of switching circuits and automatic
control devices.

39
FOR‘OFFHJAI.US£1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Significant difficulties arise when computer-aided design systems are used to
model radio receiving and television devices due to the fact that the intrinsic
oscillation periods in then are much shorter than the transient processes. These
types of electronic devices can be modeled by computer only if an integrated solu-
tion is found for the problem of increasing computer output, creating special-
purpose terminal and computer devices within the computer-aided design system

and constructing efficient algorithms which allow for the circuit engineering
singularities of high frequency radioelectronic devices.

Increasing the degree of Ic integration introduces significant complication

to radioelectronic equipment models based on a composition of models of individual
components, i.e., the dimensionality of the equations to be solved increases
sharply. Dimensionality can be reduced by using the macro-modeling method in
which the model of the IC included in the overall mathematical model of the de-
vice is represented by a simplified circuit or simplified system of equations.
when this is done. acceptable accuracy should be achieved in approximating the
output characteristics of the IC within the operating range of input effects.

In addition to the difficulties enumerated above, difficulties in formalizing
the problem also arise in optimizing radioelectronic devices. These are usually
multicriterial optimization problems, which are the most complex problems in the
theory of mathematical programming. Successful formulation of the optimization
criteria and the approach to constructing the target functions and limitations
can in many respects help to achieve a successful choice of the boat electronic
device parameters with acceptable amounts of computer time.

“ﬂue present book is devoted to modeling and optimizing radioelectronic devices

in computer-aided design systems. This theme has been reflected in a number of
references, the contents of which can be used to track the development of problem-
solvlng methods and the development of the areas of application of computereaided
design systems. The primary attention here is therefore devoted to problems

which have become most urgent in recent years: the construction of IC macro-models
and functional radioelectronic units, methods and algorithms for solving linear
and nonlinear equations with a large number of variables and rarefied coefficient
matrices, algorithms for defining steady-state modes and transient processes in
weakly-damped high frequency systems, construction of target functions of the
Optimization problem and universal languages for describing radioelectronic equip-
ment, as well as accommodation of the interactive mode in the computer-aided
design system. In addition. certain related problems are examined hhich arise

in designing radioelectronic equipment: modeling of static magnetic fields and
thermal analysis of radioelectronic equipment. The connection between these and
traditional problems involved in analyzing electrical circuits is demonstrated.

Analysis of the methods used to model and optimize radioelectronic devices, as
well as experience from the practical utilization of computer-aided design systems,

indicates that the areas of application of computereaided design systems and
radioelectronic device design can be expanded significantly.

This book was written by a collective of authors. Sections 1.1-1.6, 2.8, 3.1-3.10
were written by Z.H. Benenson; sections 1.7. 3.12-3.14, 6.1-6.3 by S.V. Kravchenko,

ho
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
section 2.1. 5.1-5.3. 5.5, 6.5 by L.K. Il'in; sections 2.3—2.5. 6.7. 6.8 by M.A.

Udler: section 2.6. 2.7, 4.1-4.7, 4.13, 4.15. 6.6 by M.R. Yelistratov; section

4.8-4.11 by D.M. Sukhov; sections 2.2, 5.4 by z.M. Benenson and L.K. Il'in;

section 3.11 by Z.M. Benenson and M.A. Udler; section 4.14 by z.M. Benenson and
D.M. Sukhov; section 6.4 by Z.M. Benenson, S.V. Kravchenko and L.K. Il'in.

The authors are deeply grateful to reviewers Professor A.I. Petrenko, Doctor of

Technical Sciences, and Doctor of Technical Sciences M.I. Peskov, who provided
_ valuable comments which helped to improve the content and structure of the book.

Table of Contents
Foreword 3
Chapter 1

Construction of Mathematical Models of Radioelectronic Devices in a
Computer-Aided Design System

1.1. Problems of automating functional design of radioelectronic devices 5
1.2. Radioelectronic device components 9
1.3. Equations in mathematical model of radioelectronic device 1
1.4. Statement of digitization problems 1
1.5. Methods of solving nonlinear equations 20
1.6. Methods of solving optimization problem 25
1.7. Organization of computational process in solving electrical circuit

equations 31
'Chapter 2

Models of Radioelectronic Device Components
2.1. General questions of constructing mathematical models of radio-
electronic device components
2.2. Macro-models for linear mode
2.3. Models of solid—state devices
2.3.1. Models of bipolar transistor
2.3.2. Model of integrated MOSFBT for large signal node
2.4. Macro-nodels of analog IC
2.4.1. Operational amplifier
2.4.2. Macro-models of multiplier
2.4.3. Macro-models of logarithmic and anti-logarithmic devices
2.4.4. Macro-model of divider
2.5. Macro-models of digital IC
2.5.1. Macro-model of two—input NAND gate
2.5.2. Macro-model of JKRS-flip—flop
2.6. Modeling static magnetic fields. Definition of parameters of
transformer models
7. Mathematical model of nonlinear transformer .
.8. Modeling thermal mode of radioelectronic equipment
2.8.1. Meat flow through wall
2.8.2. Thin film

umwuugeoogggp

NN
OOO‘O‘m

In
roe omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. Cooled plate

.8.3
8.4. Heat transfer through boundary layer

2
2.

Chapter 3.
Algorithms for Solving Systems of Linear and Nonlinear Algebraic Equations
of Radioelectronic Devices

3.1. Preliminary prerequisites

3.2. Gauss' algorithm

3.3. Estimation of error of solution of linear equations

3.4. Determination of round-off error of Gauss' algorithm and selection
of main element

3.5. Special types of matrices

3.6. Solving linear algebraic equations of electrical circuit using
dynamic programming method

3.7. Construction of algorithm for solving linear system based on extension
of dynamic programming method

3.8. Extended dynamic programming algorithm

3.9. Algorithms for selecting order of elimination

3.10. Algorithm for solving network linear equations based on dynamic
programing method

3.11. Solution of nonlinear equations of radioelectronic devices

3.12. Computer implementation of Lu-expansion algorithms

3.13. Computer implementation of dynamic programming algorithms

3.14. Comparative computer evaluation of various algorithms for selecting
order to elimination of variables and equations

Chapter 4.

Computer Determination of Transient Processes, Frequency Characteristics
and Fields in Radioelectronic Devices

4.1.
4.2.

Preliminary remarks regarding integration methods

Discretization of differential equations in backward differentiation
formula method

Stability of numerical integration processes

Application of extrapolation of integrated variables

Discrete models of circuit components using backward differentiation
formula method

Derivation of expression for current integration error

Selection of step and order of integration method

Problems of analyzing linear radioelectronic devices

Comparative evaluation of methods for analyzing linear circuits in
time domain

. Analysis of linear circuits in frequency domain
. Algorithm for computing transient processes by frequency response

of circuit

Algorithms for computing transient processes of high-Q resonant
circuits

Adaptive frequency analysis of processes

Algorithm for calculating periodic and transient processes in
nonlinear weakly-dawed systems

ha
son omcuu. use on“

66
67

68
71

73
77

82

as
91
97
163
109

112
115

119

121

123
125
130

131
140
142
146

147
150

154

157
164

170
6.15. Construction of system of algebraic equations for numerical analysis
of static magnetic fields

Chapter 5

Basic Stages of Optimizing Radioelectronic Devices

5.1. General characterization of problems of optimal design of
radioelectronic equipment

5.2. Methods of constructing target functions in optimizing radioelectronic
equipment ‘
5.2.1. Electrical filters
5.2.2. Group of resonant-type devices
5.2.3. Pulsed devices
5.2.6. Strongly-damped systems

5.3. Interval evaluation of radioelectronic equipment characteristic
quality

5.6. Methods for solving optimization problems based on conception of
conjugate equations

3.5. Organization of computational process and examples of solving radio-
elcctronic equipment optimization problems

Chapter 6
Set of Programs for Analyzing and Optimizing Radioelectronic Devices.
Examples of Practical Applications
6.1. General requirements for set of programs
6.2. Composition. basic functions and interaction of programs in analysis
and optimization set
6 3. Sequence of machine analysis and optimization stages
6.6. Input language of radioelectronic equipment analysis and optimization
set ~
.1. Elementary language constructions
.2. Assignment, cycle, control and jump statements
.3 Circuit and equipment component data input statement and
modeling results output statement
6.6.6. Descriptions
6.6.5. Optimization function assignment statement
6.6.6
6.6.7

. Procedures
. Basing, writing. reading and editing statements
6.6.8. Service statements
Use of input language for radioelectronic equipment modeling
Set of programs for modeling plane-parallel magnetic fields with
complex configuration of interface between different media
6.7. Examples of practical application of set of programs
6.7.1. Operational amplifier
6.7.2. Video signal amplifier

am
e

09‘
.o

6.7.3. Sinusoidal signal generator
6.7.6. Four-quadrant multiplier
6.7.5. Voltage stabilizer

6.7.6. Bandpass filter

6.7.7. Magnetic deflecting system

ha
FOR OFFICIAL use any

186

188

190
197
198
199
199

199
206

216

218

219
226

225
227
227

231
236
237
237
239
261
261

266
268
268
251
255
256
259
260
261
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007i02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500070027-0

FOR OFFICIAL USI‘. ONLY

6.8. Interactive Iodenng of radioelectronic equipment

Blbl iography
COPYRIGHT: Iwatel'stvo ”Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981

6900
cso: 1860(213

bl;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070027-0
mscmmmxc WATIBILI‘H

6TH INTRNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON mmmtc WATIBILI‘I'Y
Moscow ELHKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 2, Feb 82 p 16
[Unsigned article]

[Text] The next International Synposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility (ENC)
will be held in September 1982 in Wroclaw (Polish People's Republic). 'lhe reports
will cover the following themes: radiation, susceptibility and induction in

ENC systems and subsystem; radiation and susceptibility of electronic devices
and elements; spectra: utilization and frequency planning for intelligence-bearing
signals; undesired influence of electromagnetic radiation on fuel and explosive
substances; investigation of origin and characteristics of natural and man-nade
electromagnetic radiation for the case of separate sources and aggregate sources;
measurement nethods and equipment; antenna behavior outside working barn and outside
primary operatim direction; gemral fundamentals of standardization; computer
analysis and design of ENC. A special section on the biological influence of
electromagnetic radiation is also planned.

An exhibition will be held during the symposium which will display the following:
modern instrumentation; noise and crosstalk suppression elaents; screen chambers;
shielding and observing materials; non-radiating and noise-protected devices;
modern devices for tracking EH spectrum.

The official languages of the symposium will be English and Russian.
wPYRIGﬂT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 mar”. "Elektrosvyaz'", 1982

6900
C50: 1860/ 195

1:5
roe omcm. us: ONLY
FORtofFNJAl.USE(MVLY

UDC 550.837/550.83§/621.370
ELECTROMAGNETIC DETECTION OF ENGINEERING SERVICE LINES AND LOCAL ANOHALIBS

Kiev ELEKTRDHAGNITNOYB OBNARUZHENIYB INZHENBRNYKH KOHHUNIKATSIY I LOKAL'NYKB
ANOHALIY in Russian 1981 (signed to presle Dec 81) pp 2—5, 225-226

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Electromagnetic Detection
of Engineering Service Lines and Local Anonalies" by Vladimir Ivanovich Gordiyenko,
Vladimir Petrovich Ubogiy and Yevgeniy Vasil'yevich Yaroshevskiy, Izdatel'atvo
"Naukova dunks", 1000 copies. 227 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book presents a systems analysis of passive and active electromagnetic systems
designed for detecting underground and underwater local anonalies and engineering
service lines, for determining their depth and paths followed. The fundamentals

of physical sodeling of problems involved in terrestrial and maritime electromag-
netic surveying are developed. An installation is described for harmonic-field
monitoring of a broad class of prohlems. Results of the modeling investigations
are presented. lnduatrielly produced devices for detecting underground engineering
service lines are described.

The book is intended for specialists involved in developing the theory and equipment
for detecting engineering service lines and local anomalies.

76 illustrations, 10 tables. 215 bibliographic references.

[This book was reviewed by Ya.l. Burak and L.A. Koval']

Foreword

One of the Iain national economic problems associated with continuously developing
civil and industrial construction and the extensive network of hydraulic structures
is the detection of the branching underground and underwater network of service
lines such as comnunications cables and various types of pipelines. This problem
is difficult to solve because the various processes occurring in the ground and
under water (chemical. electrochenical. geological, hydrodynamic, etc.) during

extended operation causes the depth and position of these lines to change con-
stantly.

1:6
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
Electromagnetic methods are used widely in detecting engineering service lines
[2, 18. 19, 31, 55, 57. 59, 67, 82, 111, 139, 143, 156, 156, 163, 166, 169, 170].
However, regardless of the abundance of methods and devices used to carry out
these tasks. their efficiency remains low, and the data provided remains ambiguous.

All of the existing instruments described in [7, 126] can only be used to test
depth discretely, i.e., at particular points along a cable while the operator
making the measurements is stopped; in addition to electrical calibration, most
of these devices require that the primary transducer be moved mechanically across
the cable path during each measurement.

No standards have been set for the basic error of series-produced instruments for
determining depth [7.126], i.e., these are essentially indicating rather than
measuring instruments, which do not provide good performance in monitoring depth
and correcting cartogrm.

These shortcomings in measuring devices make it significantly more difficult to do
the required amount of work in making depth measurements and finding cable paths;
these shortcomings are generally caused by imperfection in the measurement methods
upon which the devices are based, as well as imperfection in the primary and second-
ary transducers. Task of developing new methods and means for determining routing
and providing continuous depth monitoring with sufficient accuracy therefore re-
mains urgent.

Theoretical questions relating to the creation of electromagnetic devices for de~
tecting and testing the condition of underwater pipelines and main communications
cables are also underdeveloped [36, 33, 85, 161]. The primary attention of the
authors is therefore focused on the development of principles and ways of comtruct-
ing electromagnetic detection systems, by which we mean functionally closed auto-
nomous structures which represent as a unified whole all of the interconnected
functional units, and which ensure execution of the required task.

The first chapter analyzes electromagnetic systems for determining the routing
and depth of engineering service lines carrying alternating current. A classifi-
cation is given for the induction method of measuring the depth of service lines
by means of contact excitation of the latter. Existing and developed structural
versions of primary measurement transducers are examined, and requirements are
formulated which an electromgnetic system for determining the coordinates of
engineering service lines must satisfy.

The second chapter analyzes active systems for maritime electromagnetic surveying
using a low-frequency harmonic field, which contain dipole radiators and differ-
ential receivers, in order to establish rational geometry alternatives.

The methodical errors of these system caused by geometric instability during
electrical surveying work in motion are investigated.

The third chapter explains the theoretical foundations of physical modeling of

problems of marine geophysical surveying using a harmonic field, and presents the
basic indicators and similarity criteria which determine the interconnection be-

1:?
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

tween the working frequency, linear dimensions, electrodynsmic parameters and
electrical and magnetic field values under actual conditions and in the model.
Requirements are formulated for the electrical and design parameters of models
of the radiating and receiving elements. and conditions for modeling problems of
detecting engineering service lines are defined.

The fourth chapter is devoted to a description of a modeling setup developed by the
authors which is characterized by a high degree of automation of the amplitude-
phase and relative (impedance, admittance or dimensionless) measurements and
recording of the investigation results. This setup has expanded functional capa-
bilities and supports investigation of a broad group of problems in underground

and maritime electrical surveying using a harmonic electromagnetic field.

The fifth chapter consists essentially of an analysis of the results of modeling
investigations of active electromagnetic marine surveying systems designed for
detecting underwater pipelines and local anomalies on the ocean bottom.

The results of theoretical and experimental investigations and conclusions from
their analysis contained in the first five chapters of the monograph have served
. as the basis for developing passive and active systems for detecting and modeling
the coordinates of engineering service lines and local anomalies, for which the
functional diagrams are described in the sixth chapter.

The seventh chapter is devoted to a description of expanded functional capabilities
and schematic diagrams of instruments which are being used in practice and which
were developed with the participation of one of the authors.

Chapters 1 and 7 were written by Ye.V. Yaroshevskiy. and 2 and 3 by v.1. Gordiyenko
and V.P. Ubogiy jointly. The authors contributed equally to writing the fourth.
fifth and sixth chapters.

The authors will be pleased to receive any remarks on this work. which should be

addressed to the Physical-Mechanical Institute of the Ukrainian 833 Academy of
Sciences (L'vov. 47. ul. Nauchnaya, 5).

Table of Contents
Foreword 3

Chapter 1. Analysis of electromagnetic systems for determining routing

and depth of buried engineering service lines 7

1. Basic elements of systems 7

2. Systems with horizontal primary transducers 11
3. Systems for measuring orthogonal components of magnetic field intensity

vector 20

4. Systems for monitoring coordinates of engineering service lines 25

5. Errors in measuring depth of engineering service lines 35

he

FOR OFTWCJAI.USEGDNLY
Chapter 2. Analysis of electromagnetic system for detecting local anomalies 1.6

1. Basic elements of systems 66
2. Spatial geophysical problem (08
3. Hethodical system errors 65
Chapter 3. Fundamentals of physical modeling of harmonic-field electrical

surveying systems 82
1. Basic indicators and similarity criteria 82
2. Criteria and similarity indicators for emitting and receiving elements 86
3. Modeling conditions for detecting engineering service lines 93
Chapter lo. Setup for modeling harmonic-field electrical surveying system 99
1. Functional diagram and construction of modeling setup 99
2. Amplitude-phase measurement channel 107
3. Amplitude-ratio meters for two variable voltages 118
4. “Io-channel closed divider 125
S. Single-channel TDH divider 132
6. Germination-frequency errors of single-channel dividers 166
Chapter 5. Modeling active electromagnetic detection systems 157
1. System for detecting local anomrlies ' 157
2. Systems for detecting underwater pipelines 165
3. Systems using contined dipole radiator 173
Chapter 6. Electromagnetic systems for determining coordinates of '

service lines and local anomalies 180
1. Passive systems 180
2. Active systems 191
Chapter 7. Instruments used in electromagnetic systems for detecting service

lines 207
1. Instrument for measuring and continuous monitoring of depth of

comaunications cable 207

2. Instrument for measuring deep buried comunications cables 211
Bibliography 213

‘COPYRICIIT: Izdatel'stvo "Hanks-vs dunks". 1981

6900
050: 1860/2 39

1:9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRON DEVICES

UDC 621.385 (03)

DOHESTIC RECEIVING AND AMPLIPYING TUBES AND THEIR FOREIGN ANALOGS

Hoecow OTECHBSTVENNYYB PRIYEHNO-USILITEL'NYYE LAHPY I IKH ZARUBEZHNYYB ARALOGI
(SPRAVOCHNIK) in Russian 1981 (signed to press 13 Jul 81) pp 2-6, 455-656

lAnnotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Domestic Receiving and
Amplifying Tubes and Their Foreign Analogs (A handbook)", by Boris Vladimirovich
Katsnel'son and Aleksey Stepanovich Larionov, Energoizdat, 100,000 copies, 656 pages]

[Text] Annotation

'nxis handbook presents information on domestic receiving and amplifying tubes
which are widely used in modern radio equipment (low-noise. pulsed, tubes for
color televisions, movable-electrode tubes, high-reliability tubes), as well as
foreign tubes which are analogs of the domestic versions. In contrast to the 1974
edition, the present edition includes information on new tubes; information on
obsolete tubes with limited use has been eliminated.

The book is intended for specialists involved in developing and operating radio—
electronic equipment, and may also be useful to students of institutes of higher
learning and technical training schools during course and diploma design.

[This book was reviewed by N.V. Parol'.]
Foreword

Modern electronic devices are distinguished by high quality, improved reliability
and service life, as well as significantly improved parameters and characteristics.

Extremely modern electronic vacuum devices of various classes are now in production,
including receiving and amplifying tubes which are widely used in measurement.
medical and domestic radio equipment and in widely varying receiving and transmitting
devices. Since these devices are reliable and have good parameters, the receiving
and amplifying tubes will be in extremely wide use for a long time, which is con-
firmed by the experience of many other countries. This is necessary both to

ensure the usability of industrial and domestic devices produced earlier, and also

in connection with the fact that the conditions do not yet exist for replacing all
tubes in many types of equipment.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The significant expansion in international scientific and technical cooperation,
rapid development of export and import of electronic equipment and international
cooperation in the area of television determine substantial interest on the part
of a wide group of readers in questions of the interchangeability of domestic
and foreign tubes.

1pc third edition of the handbook contains information regarding 3&0 domestic re-
ceiving and amplifying tubes. as well as their foreign analogs produced in the

SBV [Council of Mutual Economic Assistance] member countries. These tubes are

used widely, and data on their parameters and properties are needed by specialists,
as well as radio amateurs, students, and consumers who use domestic radio equip-
ment, since the tubes in television sets, radio receivers and other widely used
radio devices can be changed by nonspecialists.

in contrast with the preceding edition, the handbook has been revised and supple-
mented significantly. Over 90 new types of devices have been added. including
color television tubes, high reliability tubes, a number of original devices with
special properties, including electronic movable-electron tubes, as well as
certain widely used foreign tubes. In addition, the handbook contains important
changes and clarifications associated with improvement in the parameters of more
than [00 tubes.

Because of space limitations, the present edition of the handbook does not include
obsolete types of limited-use tubes; the reference data on a number of other tubes
are presented in slightly abbreviated form. without graphic characteristics.

For convenience in using the handbook, all of the tube nomenclature is convention-
ally divided into sections which combine the lamps in terms of number of electrodes
(diodes, triodes, pentodes, etc.); within the sections tubes are grouped in terms
of operating properties, for example 6P14P, 6P14P-V, 6Ple-YeV.

Many of the tubes produced in various countries have identical or very close para-
meters and dimensions and like function and can be interchanged in equipment.
These tubes are usually called analogs. Various modifications of the same types
of tubes, e.g., long-life tubes, are sometimes produced both here and abroad.
These varieties of tube analogs which differ in terms of some special'properties
are not included in the groups of tubes in the handbook; only the parameters of
the basic tube are given.

The analogs of domestic tubes are indicated for their type designation. Evaluating
the conditions for interchangeability of tubes in certain types of equipment, de-
pending upon the application and operating conditions. requires examining more
extensive data than are provided in the present handbook.

In addition to complete analogs, which can be exchanged with no circuit or mode
changes without disturbing performance. there are also similar tubes which differ
in their base-connection diagram, design configuration or certain parameters.
Iniorchanging tubes such as these requires modifications of the equipment, for
example. resoldering board contacts, replacing resistors, etc. Such tubes are

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sometimes called "partial analogs“. The most calmonly used types of such foreign
tubes, which have close parameters, are also included in the handbook.

The information on analogs are based on SEV deta, company catalogs. foreign hand-
books and other materials.

The handbook was compiled using standards in effect in the USSR, general technical
specifications for receiving and amplifying tubes, operating recommendations and
other technical documentation.

The following information is given for each tube:

-—typc designation;

--size and weight;

--basic electrical and other parameters;

--nomina1 parameter measurement mode;

--limiting operational data, including resistance to external effects.

In addition. the electrode-pin connection diagram is given for each group of tubes,
as well as standard averaged anode and anode-grid characteristics. Scale drawings
of the tubes are presented at the end of the book.

This handbook does not replace official documents (standards and analogous tech-
nical documents) which set requirements for tubes and determine their performance.

The preceding edition of the handbook engendered definite interest on the part of
radio amateurs and specialists. The authors are grateful to readers who submitted
their suggestions and reaarks, most of which were able to be incorporated in the
present edition. The author is also grateful to Docent Candidate of Technical
Sciences N.V. Parol' for his valuable remarks and advice provided during editing
of the manuscript.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Part 1. General information 5
1.1. Summary table of tubes 5
1.2. Tube designation systems 15
1.3. Basic definitions 21
1.4. interchangeability of domestic tubes and foreign analogs 25
General data 25
Interchangeability with respect to mounting and overall dimensions 26
Limiting operating data systems 28
Some singularities of evaluating interchangeability of analog tubes 29
1.5. Recommendations for application and operation of tubes 32
General instructions 32
Influence of electrical modes on tube operation 33
52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
High-reliability tubes 40

Movable-electrode tubes 41
1.6. General explanations for reference data 43
Part 2. Reference data for two-electrode tubes - diodes and kenotrons 48
2.1. Diodes for detecting HP and licrowave oscillations 48
2.2. Dual diodes 54
2.3. Damper diodes 58
2.4. Special-purpose diodes 63
2.5. High-voltage rectifier tubes 66
2.6. Low-power kenotrons 72
Part 3. Reference data for three-electrode tubes - triodes and dual triodes 79
3.1. Triodes ' 79
3.2. Dual triodes . '138
Part 4. Reference data for nultielectrode tubes 180
4.1. Four-electrode tubes - tetrodes 180
4.2. Five-electrode tubes - pentodes with short anode-grid characteristic 190
4.3. Five-electrode tubes - pentodes with long anode-grid characteristic 263
4.4. Secondary-emission tetrodes and pentodes 282
4.5. Output pentodes and bean tetrodes 288
4.6. Tetrodes and dual pentodes 331
4.7. Heptodes 337
4.8. Hcptagrids 346
Part 5. Reference data for combination tubes 351
5.1. Diode-pentodes ‘ . 351
5.2. Triode-pentodes 352
5.3. Triode-heptodes 376
5.4. Dual pentode—triodes 382
Part 6. Reference data for special-purpose tubes 384
6.1. Electronic light indicators 384
6.2. Electronetric tubes 388
6.3. Movable electrode tubes 395
Part 7. Reference data for certain foreign tubes 405
Part 8. Dimensional drawings of electron tubes 436
8.1. External configuration of electron tubes 436
8.2. Drawings of superniniature tubes 437
8.3. Drawings of niniature Lubes 442
8.4. Drawings of octal-socket glass-envelope tubes 445
8.5. Drawings of socketless glass-envelope tubes 447
8.6. Drawings of metal-ceramic tubes 450
8.7. Drawings of tubes with disk seals 451
8.8. Drawings of ceramic-envelope tubes 452
8.9. Drawings of metal-envelope tubes 452
Alphabetic index of tubes 453
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdst. 1981
6900

(:50: moo/222
53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HIGROHAVB MY & TWIQUBS

UDC: 621.317.72
INTEGRATED lO-BIT SEQUENTIAL APPROXDIATION ANALOG-DIGITAL WINER‘BR

Moscow PRIBORY I TEIOINIKA EKSPDRIHMA in Russian No l, Jan-Feb 82
(manuscript received 31 Her 80) pp 115-117

[Article by A. I. Antonevich, V. V. Butskiy and A. H. Sarzhevsltiy,
Belorussian State University, Minsk]

[Text] This article describes a 10-bit analog-digital converter built
with 6 integrated circuits and 2 stabilizer diodes. The conversion

time is 32 usec, input signal range ~10 nV—lO V, conversion non-
linearities 0.11.

Analog-digital converters which use the. sequential approximation or bit-weighting
method provide high resolution and high speed [1.2]. Series production has now
begun of the KISSIR17, K572PA1, [62181.3 and K597SA3 nicrocircuits, which can be

used to build high-perfornance analog-digital converters with sinple configurations
(cf. figure).

To begin with, let us consider briefly the function and operating principle of
these nicrocircuits. The K1551R17 nicrocircuit is a 12-bit sequential approxi-
mation TrL register which is used as a controller in analog-digital converters.
This register is examined in sufficient detail in [3,4]; however, some clarifi-
gations are needed. First of all, applying the logical zero level to the

3 input sets all of the auxiliary flip-flops of the register to "l", i.e., pre-
pares it to operate. In order to start writing the intonation in the register,
the "1" level must be applied to the 8 input. As a result, the leading edge of
the first timing pulse causes the primary high-order bit flip—flop to switch to
state "0", and the flip-flops of the other bits to "l". Secondly, when all of
the bits have been filled, the_register switches to the data hold node until a
"1" reaches the 8 input. The B is used to write a "l" in the high-order bit
and to block data from being written in the remaining bits. The K572PA1 nicro-
circuit is a 10-bit digital—analog converter which converts reference voltage
to current whose value depends upon the digital code applied to the inputs of
the circuit. The control signal levels are the sane as for m. circuits.
K5215A3 [S] and K597SA3 microcircuits are designed to operate as precision
voltage comparators with high naximn achievable differential and phased voltages
(>10 v) .

5h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”I
1 .
f ' IllllI-m
, o _IIIlI---
[— II -
16 _I: ,
11

U
3%-

   

& 21:

Figure. Ml-K1551R17, “2-K572PA1A, Ha-KSMUDZA, lit-K5975“, H5-K159N'l'lv, H5-
K140U07; Dl-KSZlOZh. Dg-KSl9lF. Adjusting resistors R1, R3, R7-SP5-14, R2, R5.
Re-SS-SS, Ru-SS-S-l. Rs-SP3-19. Others — OHM-025; capacitors-1046; 1, parallel
binary code; 2, start conversion; 3, end conversion.

The analog-digital converter (cf. figure) consists of 6 nicrocircuits and 2
stabilizer diodes. Input signal ”in, which is a negative-going pulse with length
equal to the conversion time, is applied to the inverting input of comparator H4.
and compared with the signal coming from the output of the digital-analog converter.
The digital-analog converter is made up of reference voltage source vith nicro-
circuits H5, H6. reference voltage-to-current converter using H2 and current-
voltagc converter using H3. The reference voltage is set by resistor R7, and
consists of having voltage of -lO.23 V at the input of H3 when a logic 1 supplied
to all of the control inputs of H2. Resistor R6 balances the bias voltage of H3.
while capacitor C corrects the voltage set tine at the input of the digital-analog
converter Udac- The value of this capacitance is refined during aligment of the
analog-digital converter, and is between 10 and 30 pf.

The signal from the output of Mr. is applied to the D-input of nicrocircuit H1 and
controls writing 0 or 1 in the primary flip-flops of the register. During the

11th cycle from the beginning of conversion. register output Q] produces a negative-
golng End of Conversion signal which is used to read the code obtained. The con-
version time of the analog-digital converter is thus Tao-lllft, where ft is the
timing frequency. The value of ft depends upon the speed of the register and of

the digital-analog converter. According to [3]. ft-ls mu for [0551817.

however, the set time in the K572PA1 nicrocircuit with Udac'5 V (weight of high-

55
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

order bit) is approxinate 2.5 usec. Therefore, ft was selected as 350 :52, so
that Tco=32 usec. The length of the triggering signal is 3 usec, with negative
polarity.

This analog-digital converter has the following basic characteristics: input
signal range 10 nV-lO V; polarity - negative; output code - parallel 10-bit;
differential nonlinearity 0.1% of total scale; integral nonlinearity of scale
0.1%; conversion time - 32 usec; tenperature drift 50 ul'c; input impedance 10

K9. This analog-digital converter is used in a device which transmits data fro-
an instrument used to measure scintillation-type signals to an "Elektronika-D3-28"
microcomputer .

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Greben, A. 8., "Proektirovaniye analogovykh integral'nykh skhen" [Designing
Analog Integrated Circuits]. Hoacmglzdatel'stvo energiya, 1976, p. 229.

2. Shilo, V. 1.. "Lineynyye integral'nyye skhuy" [Linear integrated circuits]
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Sovetskoye radio, 1979, p. 339.

3. Gorovoy, V. V., Petrovskiy, I. I., Savetin, Yu. I. ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST',
No. 8, 1978, p. 16.

lo. Bulakay, V. 6., Kryuk, I. P., Luk'yanov, L. H. "Integral'nyye skheny."
[Integrated Circuits. Analog-digital and Digital-analog Convertors].
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo energiye, 1978, p. 267.

5. Vartin', V. R., Dokoka, Yu. V., Hatavkin, V. V., Hikheyev, I... A. WRWNAYA
PRMSHLENNOST', N0 4, 1978, p 10.

(DPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperinenta", 1982

6900
C50: 1860/226

56
ron OFFICIAL use onu
UDC 62l.382.8.001.6

circuits, in particular the signature analysis method [1]. make it possible to
realize compact. flexible equipment, in quantit .Eor functional testing

of logic circuits which is so necessary for the acceptance testing by bulk users
of microcircuits and which is based on the proposed method of exhaustive linear
sanpling of permitted inputs.

bits (i.c., four hexadecimal digits) long - data series or code signatures with
extrenely high accuracy (1 - 1/215) which characterise the original "compressed"
binary sequences. The output response signature obtained in testing a logic
circuit is compared with a standard signature which has been verified experimen-
tally. The result of the comparison is the criterion for correct functioning

of the microcircuits. Since in the case in question the length of the output
binary sequence (output binary vector) is practically irrelevant, and the number
of input test sets nay also be fairly large, it is possible to do a complete
linear sampling of the input states except, of course, for any possible forbidden
states. The nain shortcoming of the exhaustive sampling nethod is that the

test cycle takes more time than, for example, the use of minimized test procedure
sets. however, for a large class of microcircuita, there are no more than 28
leads on the case. Since two leads are generally used for power, and no sure
than 8 leads serve as outputs. we can assume that the number of leads serving

as inputs does not exceed 20. Even at a timing frequency of 2 Hﬂz, the sampling
frequency of each output is 2 MHz/22° - 2 Hz, i.e., the test cycle takes 0.5
seconds. For nicrocircuits in cases with 16-16 leads, this time amounts to
fractions of milliseconds.

57
ron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1 shows an expanded flowchart of a test algorithm which serves for both
combination and serial microcircuits. The algorithm includes analysis of the
truth table of the aicrocircuit, linear connection of the microcircuit inputs to
the outputs of the test generator, which is based on a binary counter, formation
of a separate binary output vector for each output of the tested circuit, analy-
sis of the binary vector obtained, machine analysis of the signature of the
vector and experimental verification on a known good microcircuit. (If the
analytical and experimental results differ, the truth and switching table must
be reanalyzed. and the wiring of the switch must be checked.) Since the length
of the output binary vector is practically irrelevant, the output sequences

from all of the outputs of the tested circuit can be automatically multiplexed.
i.e., the binary vectors from all of the outputs can be arranged in a single
cannon output vector whose length is' a multiple of the number of outputs, obtain—
ing the overall signature of the microcircuit case by "compressing" that over-
all vector, which simplifies the test procedure significantly by reducingit

to recording only the overall signature. The capability still remains of doing
output diagnostics by recording the signatures for each output.

Cowination-Type Logic Hicrocircuits

In accordance with the co-on expanded algorithm, the truth table of the tested
circuit is analyzed from the viewpointgof classification of the type of function
it executes (codaination, serial). If the circuit in question is a codination
circuit and has no special additional inputs (two-phase on expansion inputs in
TTL circuits, and single-phase inhibit inputs), its inputs are connected to the
outputs of the input signal generator in arbitrary order. Bach subsequent input
of the tested microcircuit is controlled by a signal having a repetition fre-
quency which is half that of the preceding input. The signal at the final
input. which has the lowest frequency, is the "start/stop" signal for the sig-
nature nnalyaer and determines the length of the measurement window. The micro-
circuit section with a given output iaplements its function once during the
measurement interval. The preceding sections of the microcircuit being tested
realised their functions repeatedly, since the frequency of their input signals
is higher, i.e., they are tested redundantly, and the output vector of the cor-
responding section of the nicrocircuit will contain periodically repeating compon-
once. The output vector corresponding to each output in this case is formed
"manually" using the heuristic approach. The truth table and switching (distri-
bution) scheme of the outputs is used to do this. The overall binary vector

of the microcircuit is formed by compiling and arranging the vectors of each
output sequentially. If the number of outputs of the microcircuit is a multiple
of a power of two. the cannon output vector is composed of only the binary vectors
of each output. If the number of outputs of the case being tested is not a
multiple of a power of two, the col-on output vector is made up by adding a
"ones" vector to the vector comprised of the binary vectors from the individual
outputs. This ones vector has a nwber of ones equal to the length (in the
sense of the number of cycles) of the measurement window for an individual
output. The output binary vector obtained from the time diagram is analysed

for correspondence to the truth table, i.e., for correspondence between the out-
put response and the input signals. If the correspondence is present, the sig-
natures are then computed by machine. In order to do this, the binary vectors

58
roe omaat use ONLY
are represented in a fairly sinple input language which defines the nunber of ones
and zeros in a row in the form ...N0 + K) + 1.0 + H) + .... If a vector contains
periodic components. it can be represented by expressions of the for! D(B(No + K1) 4'
Lo 4- .... where D, B, N, K, L, M, ... are decimal numbers with subscripts indicat-
ing the type of binary intonation (0 or 1). A plus neana that the indicated
numbers of aros or ones is "built up" sequentially. Constants without subscripts
indicate the amber of repetition cycles contained in parentheses. of the per
iodic cowonents of the binary vector. The cowuted signature values are compared
with experimental values obtained using a group of known good circuits. When

they agree, the set of input test signals is assuned to be completely correct,
albeit redundant. The signatures obtained are kept for the signature library

and entered on the test chart.

 

Fig. 1 Fig. 3

ngre 1. General flowchart of algorithm used to form binary output vectors and
signatures for logic circuits: l-truth table analysis; 2--connection of tested
circuit inputs to driver outputs; 3--fornation of binary output response vectors
of each output of tested circuit; lo—couputation of signatures of output binary
vcctors and overall signature of case; 5--experinental neasuretaent of signatures
of binary output vectors of each output and overall signature of case; 6--ana1y-
sis of agreement between computed and experimental data; 7--corresponds to "?",
8-~inclusion in tested nicrocircuit library and output of test chart; I -—truth
table analysis error: II--rearrangenent of inputs; III--output response forma-
tion error: IV--input error: Vusvitch wiring error.

59
ron OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2. Connection of tested logic circuit (P) to driver-counter (CT2). mul-
tiplexer (ﬂux) and signature analyzer (CA).

Figure 3. Prevention of undefined situations in strobing data reception into
flip-flop register by inverting low-order counter-driver signal: l—-main sync
signal; 2--CT° (strobe input); 3-CT1 (input D) - switching later than 01°;
4-CT‘ (input D) -- switching earlier than 6T0; 5—-CTo inversion (strobe input);
6—-l received; 7--0 received

If the_computed and experimental signatures do not agree, the wiring of the
switch is checked carefully once trivial errors in manual input of data regard-
ing the binary vector components have been eliminated. The adequacy of the input
signals can be monitored by oscillograph during the experiment. In addition,

the binary vector from each output is checked for agreement with its truth table
and with the switching scheme of the line switch.

If a combination circuit has additional special—purpose inputs, e.g., two-phase
0R expansion inputs for TTL circuits, an OR expansion microcircuit is connected
to the inputs of the tested circuit; one of the inputs of the expansion circuit
is connected to the high-order bit of the output of the signal generator, and
the other inputs are connected linearly to the inputs of the generator. The
rest of the process by which the output binary vectors are formed is analogous
to that explained above for combination circuits. The periodicity of the output
vector components change. since the input of the OR expander does not act upon
the microcircuit during the first half of the measurement interval, and it usu-
ally blocks the operation of all other inputs during the second half. When a
microcircuit being tested has an inhibit input. there is no need to connect
additional elements. Depending upon the input signal level (active, null, unity),
the microcircuit is tested in the functional sense either during the first half
of the test period, or during the second, which is of no special importance.

Output vectors can be formed for various sections of a combination microcircuit

by implementing the conception of exhaustive linear sampling of input signals '
from a natural binary counter (figure 2) in which the output signals of the binary
counter are represented as periodic binary vectors. If a combination circuit

(AND, OR, "AND, NOR) with n inputs is being tested, these inputs must be controlled
by using counterbits 0, l, 2...i, ... (n - l). Desi natin the switching time of
bit 0 as a sequence of 10 and 11, i.e., 10 + 11 - 20 + 21 + 28 1 (where the
plus sign indicates sequential arrangement), the second-bit switc ing period

20 + 2' - 201 + 20‘ - 26/1, and the ith bit switching period 2 [text garbled - Tr.]
we obtain a length for the measurement interval formed by the (n - 1) th bit of
zs-I + 23-1 - 1-297} - 20-237] (where the multiplication syiwl indicates the

number of sequential periods). Accordingly, the number of i-bit periods per
measurement interval period is 2n'1'1:20,1 (zn-l-i+i+l - 2“). For bit 0 (i - 0),

the number of periods is 2n'1.28,1 (2“"*° “1 - 2“). If a k-input AND gate with

its kth input driven by hit 1 of the counter-driver is being checked in a tested
case with n inputs, the measurement window will obviously be 20’1‘1o23, - 2n

cycles. The ones components of the output vector will be determined by the

60

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
Kl. - Kk - lif-output of the driver, and the output vector of the AND gate in question
will be defined by the expression ..

2--'-'-(2.‘+2."'+.. . +2.”""'+2'.'“"’ )

W-2""‘ ( 22. "'" +2:"" ")

Accordingly, the output vector for en HAND gate will be

W-m'r‘". (2.2mm, +2: ”cl I») .

01’

For a k-input OR gate

W0 .-2"" “(2: (PI) +22I-u-n)

For a NOR circuit

Table l

Binary Vectors and Signature: of KlSSLIl Hierocircuita

 

Element 1" | Outpu 518'“ u e vector
01.1 m 3 2936 u (3.“. -m
01.2 250 - 0 am 10 our . mu.
m. J 250 8 1108 ‘ (43.446. mu,
01.10 256 11 nor 192.404.".
Case .024 - 7907 R|+n;+lg*ﬂ|

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As an example. let us examine the testing of a simple combination nicrocircuit
consisting of four two-input AND gates without auxiliary function expansion or '
case select inhibit inputs. (The total number of inputs n - 8. with each AND
gate having k - 2 inputs.) The truth table of this nicrocircuit is elementary —
the output of each section is the conjunction of two inputs.

In agreement with the general methodology. this nicrocircuit is tested function-
ally and paraletrically by inputting the signals fret the 8 outputs of a counter-
driver (cf. figure 2) linearly to all of its 8 inputs.

The sync signal for the analyzer is the counter-driver triggering sync signal.
The "start/stop" signal in this case is either taken from the output of the
clghth bit 0! the counter-driver, corresponding to a window of 2a - 256 for
measuring the signatures of each output separately, or from the output of the

second bit of the counter-multiplexer for measuring the overall signature which
corresponds to a sync signal cycle window of 21° - 10210.

The procedures by which the output binary vectors are for-ed for each AND gate
are presented below.

AND gate No. 1 Output vector forsation

8

10‘

+ 2.‘""”)- «(www- new.)

i
2 (=3 2-.-. ( Z aka-0+ 2:«u-u) _ 2‘(2:-"-"+ 2.5-9“) +

"1|

+ 23-0-0

)- 15(29'+2o’+2.') - 1003044.)

I
3 i=5 2--'-' ( 2 2. """+ 2.‘""” ) - 2'(2.'+2.’"+ masons.)

1-:

I
4 m7 2'-'-' (2 2."""’+ 21"”) -(2.'+2."'+ :1" )- mm.
I I

The first AND gate is checked in four cycles. during which its truth table is
checked fully (and redundantly). There are 256/16 - 16 check cycles for the

second AND gate (15 of which are redundant). 256/64 - lo (3 redundant) for the
third. and 256/256 - 1 for the fourth (none redundant).

The complete vector for the case with a window of 1024 will equal

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
W-M (3.+ I.) +16(12.+’n.) M (48,146.) +192.+64..

Table l_shous the experimentally verified signatures for a KlSSLIl microcircuit.
1hc duration of a single test with a sync signal frequency of 2 MHz and a 1026—
cycle interval is approximately 1 msec (2-102b-0.5 usec), i.e., approximately
1,000 tests can be made in one second.

The algorithm used to forn the input test procedures for sequential microcircuits
also includes exhaustive linear trial of input signals. In doing this, the truth

butcd among the outputs of the input signal generator. or counter. In this case,
the inputs are distributed such that the low-order bits which are switched at

high-order bits which are switched at the lowest frequency are connected to the
mode set, case select, etc., inputs. Although the exhaustive linear sampling
principle is retained for sequential circuits, they have some singular features
due to the use of memory elements which may result in the presence of certain
forbidden states, i.e., the sinultsneous application of active signals to cer-
tain inputs results in an undefined state at some outputs. An example of this
is the "add" and "subtract" sync signal inputs in reversible counters, the "sup~
press" and "set" of flip-flops or registers, etc. Since the main unit in the
input signal generator is a natural binary counter. the states of its'individual
bits will sometimes coincide, and the signals which result when this happens
are unacceptable. Forbidden states are avoided by introducing a binary decoder

the folloving bit if it is switched earlier, and in the ones state if it is
switched later (figure 3). Accordingly, either a zero or a one will be received
for different cases of the same type. In order to prevent ambiguity, the
signal applied to the "receive" sync input must be inverted. Once the initial

corrected as indicated, the binary Output vector of each output is formed separ-
ately. like in combination circuits, in the truth table function and distribution
of the nicrocircuit inputs among the outputs of the driver. Correspondence
between the truth table output vectors is then analyzed, i.e., analysis is

done to see whether all possible switching combinations have been achieved

for the outputs of the tested circuit; then the signatures are computed and
measured experimentally. the computed and experimental data are compared and
entered in the library, and the test chart is produced. If there are any

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

disagreements, the distribution of the inputs must be checked and analysis must
be done to see whether there are any forbidden states, whether decoders or other
additional elements must be added and whether the signals from the individual gen-

erator bits must be inverted.

 

Figure 4. Connection of case of KlSSIBZ decimal counter

Let us examine the testing of a relatively simple KlSSIBZ asynchronous binary-
decinal counter controlled by cutting off the input sync signal (1 » 0 pulse)
and having the following operating modes: counting from 0 to 9 (sync signals
at input 1 and input 16). reset (set to 0) (AND ing inputs 2 and 3), set "9"
(AND ing inputs 6 and 7). Setting "9" takes precedence over reset and count,
and reset takes precedence over counting. 'The case contains a flip-flop for
the low-order bit of the counter (element 01.1) and a 3-bit counter (element
01.2) which counts from 1 to b (shifting "b" (100) to the left yields "8"
(1000)). and 1 in 01.1 (001) yields 9 (1001) (in order to obtain a four-bit
decimal counter the output of 01.1 must be connected to the inverting input of

element 01.2, which will produce binary-coded decimal at the circuit outputs)
(table 2) .

61:
ran omcm. use ONLY
Table 2

Signatures of [(155182 Hierocircuita

Element Signature

 

Figure 5. Test regions of K155 £2 microcircuit: 1--f1rat 32 cycles: Z—eecond
32 cycles: 3-th1rd 32 cycles; low-fourth 32 cycles; 5--set "9"; 6-count:
7--sct "0",(comon); 8--start; 9-stop

“a W

input‘nn
(It) I
output MI '

(I?)
'7 °Z,¢l II ‘Zpl l l I
'12:. min 2. '1' g -1 I. 1.! I

outputnu 5 5
(/2) ¢

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Diagrams of input/output signals during testing of KISSIBZ decimal
counter: a-—for element Dl.l; b-—for element 01.2; 1--first 32 cycles; 2--
second and third 32 cycles; 3-eight cycles - set "1" ("9"); 4--fourth 32
cycles; S—-reset; 6--eight cycles; 7-set "b" ("9")

In agreement with the general methodology, signals from the generator are applied
to all six inputs of the Idcrocircuit (figure 6). The signals from generator
bits C10 and CTl are inverted before being applied to the sync signal inputs

in order to eliminate the influence of transient processes when the counter
switches at times when the sync signals are being cut off. In addition, the
third bit (012) of the counter is not used in order to lengthen the cycle and
make sure that all switching combinations of the circuit are tested. Therefore,
the seventh bit (CT6) is the high-order bit of the counter, although only six
bits are used. The diagram in figure 4 also indicates the numbers of the con-
tacts of the switch which switches the inputs/outputs of the tested circuit to
the outputs of the generator and inputs of the multiplexer, switches the power
and common bus, and switches "start/stop" signals to the inputs of the signa-
ture analyzer.

In the case in question, the "start/stop" signal is taken from the output of the
seventh bit (CT6) of the generator, which corresponds to a window of 2 - 128
for measuring the signatures of each output (without multiplexing), or from the
output of the second bit (CTl) of the multiplexer counter to measure the overall
signature. which corresponds to a window of 27°22 I 29 - 512. A time diagram

of the measurements is shown in figure 5, where the regions of exhaustive trial
of all input signals are shown for each element.

A window of 128 is distributed as follows: when the individual values of the
last two bits (CTS, CT6) of the generator are the same, a zero-set signal

is formed in the last 32 cycles (figure 6). When the individual values of the
two preceding bits (CT3, CTh) are the same, a nine-set signal is formed; this
signal is narrower (eight cycles) and is generated four times - at the end of

66

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USEZONLN
each group of 32 cycles.
During the first three 32-cyc1e groups, counting is thus permitted only during
the first 24 cycles, with "9" being set in the last eight cycles of that

group. i.e.. the low-order bit is set to "l". The binary output vector of the low-
order. bit appears as

"1—6(10+21+10)+8l+2(6(1l+20+1l)+8l+240+8|~

\——-——t ~_~_¢
first 3’ cycles Second and third fourth

32 Cycles 32 cycles

For the remaining bits, respectively,

nt-z(zo+4o+20)+80+2I+30+2(60+2(41+‘0)+2o+80)+3203
ﬁg-14.+4.+8.+8|+2(2'+16.+4g+2.+8|) +24.+8|o

The overall binary vector of the KISSIEZ case with a window of 512 will be
n5 - n] + n2 + n3 + n... Table 2 shows the corresponding signatures of the [(155
case.

BIBLIOGRAPKY

l. Frohwerk, ILA. Hewlett-Packard Journal, 1977, Hay, p. 2

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Hanks", "Hikroelektronika". 1982

6900
cs0: 1860/ 219

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘l-‘K'Ml. USE ONLY

UDC 621.382.8.001.6

SHIPTING METHOD ('HARSH' TEST)

Moscow MIKROELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 11, No l. Jan-Feb 82 (manuscript received
21 Nov 80) pp 54-63

[Article by G. Kh. Novik, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Electromechanical

[Text] Testing the microcircuits used in main memories is one of the most important
problems in modern digital technology. The use of microcircuits in main memory

is increasing. and the information capacity of the Iemory chips themselves is
growing as well. while the producers of microelectronic articles have sufficiently
powerful, universal and efficient equipment, users (of which there are far more

than there are producers) have practically no equipment for functional acceptance
testing of LSI memory devices. This reflects on the quality of the industrial
articles which they produce in quantity, and, accordingly. on the reliability of
these articles and their operating efficiency.

magnetic core memory devices with rectangular hysteresis loops. The borrowing of
this method fails to take into account a number of specific features inherent in
microelectronic solid-state memory elements, and this is reflected in the testing.
A memory microcircuit. like any other microcircuit, is characterised by a truth
table of some degree of complexity. The states of this table are determined by
the values of the signal at the output of the memory chip as a function of dif-
feront combinations of select enable/inhibit, read/write signals input to the
microcircuit. Traditional methods of testing memory circuits consist primarily

(from different addresses, of course) while selection is enabled. It is therefore
extremely important to develop a methodology and construct relatively simple
equipment for functional testing of memory circuits with respect to the complete
truth table. which is of great significance for consumers and developers of math-
produced equipment who use memory circuits.

1hu industrial equipment now available for testing LSI memory devices is extremely
cumbersome and expensive, requires highly qualified personnel to operate and is
usually need on the use of computers. These include such familiar devices as

the Makrudeyt 106 [l], the Blekon [2] and the "Integral" ATS [automated infonmation
system7based on the "Saratov" computer [37;which cost this and hundreds of thousands

68
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
(two hours) and eight hours. respectively, which is, of course, unacceptable.

The data shifting test ("Harsh" test) belongs to the class of «2" tests (where
N Is the memory capacity and u a constant). A defined background ("1" or "0")
is first read into all of the addresses in the memory field; then the background
data is read from each address one at a time and replaced at each address with
its opposite, which remains in the tested locations as subsequent addresses are
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tested (the test, so to speak. leaves a trail); the background is reversed as the
test proceeds (if the background data consisted of ones, it is replaced upon being
read out with zeros, shifting from a zero address to the next (N - 1) address
against the background of the replaced ones). After all zeroa have been written
in the memory field as a result of the first half of the test, the field will
then he read during the second half of the text, with ones being written in

each current location. as if it were shifted from the null address to the
subsequent (N — 1) address against the background of the replaced zeros. There
should thus be two operations - READ and “RITE - in each current address; the
input data should be reversed during the first and second passes through the
memory field.

 

Figure 1. Testing LSI memory using le MARSH test in READ and "RITE mode (a);
in READ - CHANGE - WRITE mode (b); for LSI memory with NxK organization (c).

ﬂue circuit in which the input signal source is connected to the inputs of an
le(k) LS! memory chip and with n-addreas lines (N - 2“) (figure 1) implements
this MARSH test algorithm completely using simple hardware, since the output
rvsponsos are registered by a signature analyzer whose data input receives the
output signals from the tested LSI memory during each system sync signal cycle
without exception. The measurement "window" in the signature analyzer is formed

70
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Figure 2. Tine diagram of formation of select enable s_ignals (RV) in READ and
"RITE node_(a); in READ - CHANGE - WRITE nods (b): l-RV READ and_U_RITE node;
2--status l of bits 8T1 & 8T2; 3—status of 2 bits S'l‘I a 8T2; lo-RV READ - CHANGE -
HRITE node; 5--low-order address; 6-read; 7-wr1te

for the START/STOP input by the last bit of the counter—driver which is used; that
bit is also used to drive the data input of the tested LSI device, so that the
"window" includes the entire cycle during which the data change in the sequence

0 -v 1.

The select enable signal W is formed by a 2 -> lo binary decoder, to the two inputs
of which a pair of the three low-order bits of the generator ("0" and "l" or "1"
and "2") can be applied. The binary decoder produces sequential signals corres—
ponding to the decoded status of two of its inputs: 0, l, 2, 3. The length of
these signals is a multiple of the cycle length (one period) of the sync signals
produced by the tinting generator in the system. If output bit "0" and "1" from
the generator are applied to the inputs of the decoder. the length of the signals
at the output of the decoder is one cycle. If comter bits "1" and "2" are
applied to the inputs of the decoder. the length of the signals at the outputs of
the decoder is two cycles which,_3_s will be shown below, is required for forming
different select enable signals RV. The decoder output signals have active zero
value because of the particular hardware used. The signal RV __is formed different-
ly depending upon node: READ and “RITE (select enable signal RV is separate for
the READ in_s_t_ruction and for the WRITE instruction) or READ - CHANGE - WRITE
(where the RV signal is canon for the READ - WRITE instruction cycle). In the
REM) and "RITE node, the RV signal is the output state "2" decoded by the decoder
when cmnter hit§_"0" and "l" are applied to the inputs; in the READ - CHANGE -
wm‘rv. node the RV is formed when the two states "'2'" and "1" combined by the two-
input AND gate apply counter bits "l'_'_and "2" to the inputs of the decoder (figure
lb), which provides__a double width RV signal. (In order to prevent "gaps" in

the middle of the RV signal at state output "1", it is shunted by a small caps-
cltnnce of 150-200 pF. which eliminates any effect from differences in the length
of the processes involved in switching decoder outputs "l" and "2".) This

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'MI. USE ONLY

for-scion of the select enable signal RV guarantees that it will be located on

the time axis within the address signals (figure 2), since the low-order bit of
the address is driven by counterbit "3", while bit "2" drives the READ/WRITE

input of the LS! being tested. It is essential for the MARSH test that the
READ/"RITE phase be suppressed in the READ/WRITE sequence. Canter bit output

"2" has phase of 0-1. Therefore, when the READ command of the memory being

tested has an active-low level (with the "RITE instruction having active-high
level), the output "2" is connected directly to the READ/"RITE of the device being
tested. when the READ instruction has an active-high level (and the WRITE instruc-
tion an active-low level), comter bit "2" is connected to the READ/"RITE INPUT
through an inverting gate.

, The address inputs of the tested device are driven by sequential bits of the
generator, starting with bit "3" with n-address inputs and ending with bit 3 +

(n - l). The last bit of the 3 + n-counter which is used stimulates the data
input, so that a zero will be written during the first half of the text after
ones have been read from all of the addresses, and in the second half of the text
a one will be written after zeros have been read from all of the addresses. Since
the mechanical connection of the case to the driving circuit is not synchronized
with the generator, the first driving cycle is not a test; the test begins with
the second measurement window, which is irrelevant, since the testing cycle
length is small. As figure 1 indicates, n + 3 Iiguthe last comter bit used. This
means that the total number of test cycles is 2 . Consequently, the number of
cycles for an L8]. memory with capacity of e.g., 6!! (N - 4x, 11 - 12) is £23“ -
2I6 - 65K. If the time required to test the 1.81 device (delay between RV signal
and output of signal) is r (us), the acceptable minimum timing signal length.
whose leading edge triggers the generator and whose trailing edge poles the
output of the tested LSI menory, must be sowhat greater than that quantity.
Allowing for the speed of the generator (approximately 130 ns) and signature
analyzer (approximately 110 ns), the duration of the sync pulse is not less than
2100 +1 381, and the period is 2(260 + Tsel). Hence, the driving frequency does
not exceed 105/2 (260 + 1391). Por 1.31 - 500 as, this quantity is 0.6 Mile, and
the time required for one test cycle of a 4K LSI memory is 65Kx2(240 + Rel) '-
65Kx2(260 + 500) = 1 second.

Table 1 presents data on the nulber of cycles and the cycle time for a series of
LS! memory devices during testing using the present methyggg as well as data for
R-blt LSI memories with N addresses and K bits (with 2“ cycles in this case,
where n - 1082"). The signatures for some chips have been calculated theoretically

and verified experimentally.

The principle used to test multibit LSI memories using this method is fully
analogous to the testing principles explained above for single-bit 1.81, with

the added factor that the K data inputs of the tested 1.81 are obviously not driven
by the last (n + 3) bit of the generator, but rather by a group of bits (cf.
figure 1c): 3 +n, 3+ n+ l, ..., 3+ n+ (I: - l) - n + k+ 2; therefore, the
total number of cycles in a complete testing program will be 2“““3, and the
start/stop input of the signature analyzer is controlled by the last bit used

(n + k + 3). ObviOusly, the output response will have some redundancy, which

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
is not of any particular significance using the signature method. As table 1
indicates, the testing tines are short, not exceeding fractions of a second.

One important patter is the analysis of the formation of the binary output

vectors during testing, keeping in mind that the state of the outputs, i.e.,

the components of the output binary vector, are recorded by the signature analyzer
at the cutoff of each sync pulse, so that testing is ensured in all states

of the truth table of the 1.51 being tested. The current address duration. as
determined by driver counter bit "3", is equal to half the switching period
(l/2x2"), i.e.. eight cycles. Therefore, for single-bit [.81 it is sufficient to
examine the formation of the output binary vector for eight current address cycles
during the first half of the test, when D1“ - 0, and in the second half of the
test uhen D1“ - l. The summary output vectors are easily obtained by multiplying
the eight—cycle group vectors by the number of groups. which is “/8. Since the
truth tables are different for different types of 1.51, it is useful to examine
the question of the formation of binary output vectors using specific examples,
for which we have selected K56loRUZ (25611 bit) single-bit LS]: and KISSRUZ (16x10)
multihit [.81. let us consider the example of the formation of the binary output
vector for a K566RU2 1.51 for which n - 8, k - 1 (the second output is inverse).
The measurement window is 212 - 6096 cycles. The time diagrams are sham in
figures 3 and lo. The possible states of the outputs of this circuit are sham

in table 2, the data in which provide the basis for table 3, uhich records the
states of the output in the eight-cycle prograns during the first (during the
first 201.8 cycles in the case in question) and in the second half of the interval
(during the second 201.8 cycles in the case in question), for the READ and WRITE
mode; table ls presents the snalogom information for the REA!) — CW8 - WRITE mode.

Table l

     
     

+I+a h ..
‘sel a“; ti? ﬂew. 513““

   

 

«mm M is i i 60 m 1,2
msm'yz oi 66 i b 10 i024 0.7
Imwys 256 256 1 8 70 $096 2.8
(1:) ISM‘Vi 256 256 1 8 200 i000 3.0
isswr. 1K iii 1 I0 250 16“ 10
134?ch in m 1 I0 500 18K M
Miil'ﬂ MC 4K 1 l2 180 05!: 55
BMW): Ali 1K 4 I" 200 130K :20
urmvvus M 16 4 4 10 2058 i
ISSOOPYMB M M l 0 15 1024 0.5
luxxwwlﬁl‘q, m 250 I s 40 was 1,:
"5mm. H: m l 10 30 16“ 8.8
Icmu'yz am 256 l 8 650 mm 2.8 cusr
Im‘n'w m m 1 In em 10K 8': mm
Eml'vr. m m 1 m cm ml: 30 .
“morale m m 1 IO 450 101: 2.1 . . 82cc
uranwn 1K 1|: 1 [0 can 10K 320 . . 5 8200
Ram's/l um 16K 1 M 450 260K 70 . .
'; m m I 10 um um 27

1m 6" I I2 200 (if-I: 00

It?" um I M 200 can: no A100
natal-wt.) om MK 1 I6 200 m 1000 9553
1.... ”2(130i'lml'u: )—2(2iou...)
qu'" ”ﬂak

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2

 

o 0 Read ’Data Data

° - ' “my “" “"

i 0 Write 1(2) 1(2)

1 i Inhibit 1(2) 1(1)
Write

The corresponding binary output vactora iron the outputs of a KSéSRUZ 1.81 are
ifollous: for the REA!) and WRITE node - out. (13): 201081 + 2048 (21 + 10 + 51).
out. (16): 20108 (21 + 10 + 51) + 20681; the signatures of these vectors are Cﬂ83
and H730. respectively. The overall binary output vector is formed by arranging
these vectors sequentially, and equals 20681 + 6096 (21 + 10 + 51) + 2048;;

its signature is 0115?.

 

Figure 3. Tine diagram of input/output signals for functional testing of K564!!!”
and [6611102 Ienoriea in READ and "RITE mode using MARSH test; A -- eight cycles
(current address); l--£irst 2068 cycles; Z—Becond 2068 cycles; 3-read; lo—write;
5--read "1": 6—vrite "0”; 7--read "0"; Write "l"; 9—inhibit; lO—enable

7h
l-‘Oll omcm. use ONLY
Figure A. Time diagrams of input/output signals in functiqnal testing of 566RUZ,
561802 memory circuits in READ - CHANGE - WRIT! mode using MARSH test (designa-

tions as in figure 3)

Table 3

Bi a
Operation Read I Hri te | 01120::

I
CycleNo.1I2 aLéjs G 1 8|

 

 

 

"“d“ Inhibit Read nhibi and write Inhibi
00t 1 Dada - . 1 1 1

(mm W Data '11) (I) (I) (1)

RN!" 1/ 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 a.
urltc 0 (o a) (m 1 1 1 1 1 a+u+s
Read 0/ 1 1 o 1 1 1 1 1 z.+1.+5.
"rice 1 i i Q .‘ i I i I 8.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6

 

        
 
   

 

  

      

 

 

 

 

vector
Cycle lb. 1 2 ' 3 g 5 l a 7 8
me Inhibit Read Write Inhibit
(63f) ‘ ‘ - Data 1 1 1 1
' ‘ Data 1 1 1 1
Seed 1/ 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 s.
rite 0 (I) (1) (0) (0) (1) (1) (3) (l) 2‘+%+"
Read 0/ 1 0 0 1 1 1 1
unite l (1) “’ m (0 (i) (I) (I) (n _ $2.”.

 

Formation of the binary output vectors for a multi-bit LSI memory is examined
for the READ and WRITE mode using the example of a KlSSRUI microcircuit (N -

16, n - 6, k - 4) with a 23““ - 2n - 2048 window connected in accordance with
figure 1c and having the truth table in table 5.

The data in table 5 provide the basis for table 6, which contains the states of
the outputs in the eight-event cycles in the first half (during the first 1026
cycles) and in the second half (the second 1026 cycles) of the interval for the
REM) and WRITE mode. The time diagram corresponding to this mode is shown in
figure 5.

There is some redundancy in formation of the binary output vectors, since the
switching periods of the faur bits of the counter which drive the data inputs of
the. LS! memory are not multiples of powers of 2. Therefore, the read l/write 0
test for the high-order bit D3 occurs during the first 128 cycles of an exhaustive
sampling of 16 addresses. with 8 cycles each. Since there is no input to D3
during the remaining 896 of the 1026 cycles (the output of bit 10 remains O).

tho. zeros written in the first 128 cycles will be-read. and zeros will be written
to all of the addresses. As can be seen from table 6 and the explanatory time
diagrams of the stimulation of input of the various bits of the KlSSRUZ LS! and
the distribution of the modes nun ilwnm 0, new omrm 1. READ o/wamo,
READ l/VRITE 1 (figure 6). the binary output vector of output D3 during the

first half of the interval will be 16 (21 + 10 + 5]) + 8961. For the second

half of the interval, the READ 0/HRITE 1 test will occur during the first 16
cycles. while the READ l/HRITB O‘test will occur during the remaining 896 cycles.
'ihc corresponding vector is (cf. table 6) 16(61 + loo) + 112(21 + 10 + 11 + loo).
The input of bit D; is switched half as often as the input of hit D3; therefore,
during the first 128 cycles the READ l/HRITB 0 test mode will occur, and the
RI-ZAI) OIHRi‘i'E 0 mode will occur in the following 381: cycles, after which the value
at the input will be 1, which corresponds to the READ OIHRITB 1 node. The first
half of the interval is repeated during the second 102‘ cycles of the interval.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A

' Elli; J n J n

7 -
I In
"/37, -
m, ‘IIllll ‘ 5
m- III-ll '
W :I::::-- ---------
(1:) -----— 5
"—ﬁ—

3., IIIIII . a __

, ----- --:
g. IIIIII . .a

,) ----- 2::
m IIIIII ' 3 ,u
iiiiii' .3 '1

l I
Z I If(6,+6.)

Figure 5. Tine diagrams of functional testing of K155RUZ nenory circuit in

READ and "RITE node using MARSH test: A -- eight cycles (current address),
1--output "0". first 128 cycles; Z—output "0". second 128 cycles; 3--inhibit;

lo--read; S-write; 6--first, and all odd, 128 cycles; 7-second, and all even,
128 cycles; 8--first, and all odd, 256 cycles; 9—-second, and all even, 256
cycles; 10--first and third 512 cycles; ll--second and fourth 512 cycles;

12--t'irst 1026 cycles; l3—-aec0nd 1026 cycles

The READ 1/URI‘1'E 0. READ OIHRITE 1, READ 1/URITE 1 cycles will be repeated four
times for bit D; (table 6 and figure 6), and the cycle READ 1/HRI'1'E 0, READ 0/

HRII‘E 1 will be repeated eight tiles for bit 0.). The binary output vectors (and
their signatures) of the output of a KISSRUZ LSI neaory, formed according to

table 6 and figure 6, appear as:

Output 0.: 8(16(2.+i.+5.)+16(4.+4.)) (sigmtureOODA)

Output 0.: 4(18(2.+1.+ 5.)+i28.+16(4.+4.)+
+16(2.+1.+i.+4.)) lsigmture 6630)

Output 0;: 2(16(2.+1.+5.)+384.+13(4c+40)+
+48(2.+1.+l.+4o)) himture 1090)

Jutput 0.: 16(2.+1.+5.)+896.+16(4.+4o)+
+li2(2.+i.+l.+6.)) (sigmture QUPS)

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6.1‘11Ic diagram of stimulation of inputs of various bits of KlSSRUZ
Inc-cry clrcuita and distribution of nodes read llvrite 0, read Olvrite 1, read 0/
write 0, read 1/wr1te 1: 1--16 addresses -- 1028 cycles; 2--read Olurite 1;
3--read 1/vr1te 0; buread Olvrite O; 5--rcad llwrite 1

Table 5
. ﬁr READ/Hana node Output:
_—__.1__—_
0 0 Write _ﬁ;;|
0 1 -Read . "'
Data
: :1 Inhibit on,
No operatim I
Table 6
Shaw
Operation Write output
vector

 

 

‘ in '7an

 

CycleNO-I 1 511 113
"ode 111ml“? Read Ilnhibi'! 10h bit Write nhibi

Output I Data in
Road l/Urlte 0 1 1 1 1 1 1
Read OIHrite 1 1 1 1 o o o (‘1 212"“
Read OIHriteU 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 a.
Road llwrite 1 I I 1 0 0 0 o 3.+1.+1.+‘,

 

 

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When the overall signature of the chip is recorded by multiplexing the output
vectors. its overall output vector is analogous to a series of these vectors

arranged one after the other, and the overall signature of the chip for an
interval of 2048“ I 8192 is OOHS.

This functional testing method for 1.81 memories using the "data shift against
inverted background" (MARSH test) is general. and can be implemented using simple
equipment, allowing bulk users to use it for acceptance testing of LS! memory
devices. It can also be used as the basis for more complex LSI memory tests.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Chroncs C. EPP. 1980, No. lo, p. 63
2. Bogoroditskiy, L.A., et. a1. ELBKTRONNAYA PROM-ST', 1975. No. l, p. 26

"l. Zharkova. P.Ye., Savel'yev. V.S., Slivitskiy, Yu.A., ELEK'I‘RONNAYA PROM-5'1",
I976, No. 8, p. 78 .

lo. Novik C. Kh. ME. Vol. 11, No. 1. 1982
(:UI'YRICIIT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Mikroelektronika". 1982

6900
(:50: 1860/ 219

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 681.325.3

HIGH-SPEED MICROPOWER ANAIDG-DITIGAL CONVER'IER

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHMA in Russian No 1, Jan-Feb 82
(manuscript submitted 27 Feb 80) pp 117-119

[Article by Ye. A. Kolombet and B. K. Fedorov]

[Text] This article describes the 10—bit bit-weighting amlog—digital con-
verter with throughput capacity of l mbps (10 bits per 10 pace); in-
put voltage range 0-10 V, power consumption <100 nil.

Bit-weighting analog-digital converters generally have a complicated control cir-
cuit, require many high—precision elements and adjustment circuits and consume a lot
of pouer (3-5 H), and are consequently not usable in autonomous systems with limited
power supply output. Thanks to the use of modern NOS LSI and new circuit treat-
mcuts. it has been possible to reduce power conarmption in the bit-weighting analog-
digitul converter we have developed to 100 all. while retaining sufficiently high

speed .

The slowest section of the bit-weighting analog-digital converter (figure 1) is
the. digi tal-analog converter which generates the feedback signal. The output sig-
nal of most modern digital-analog converters 19 a current signal. In order to
increase the speed of converters using such digital-analog converters it is neces-
sary to arrange current feedback in bit-weighting analog-digital converters. i.e.,
to add together at the input of the voltage comparator the current equivalent 11,,
of the input voltage and the output current Id (feedback current) of the digital-
annlog converter. Current Id is added to the output current of the input analog

signal sample-and-hold device.

The output voltage from the sample-and-hold device is converted to current [in by
internal resistor- R0,; in the digital-analog converter used. The minimum rise

time of the current Id in each cycle can be obtained with a minimal (10-100 ulna)
equivalent load impedance R2. of the digital—analog converter, while the required
N-blt resolution in the bit-weighting analog-digital converter can only be obtained
as long as klzupzml/IezZJNm with ":8, standard digital-analog current lesl mA
and the usual ambiguous zone for modern comparators of U 15 mV). The impedance
R1 must thus have a nonlinear volt-ampere characteristic? '

80
FOR OFFICIAL use om
Uz-U for 1er /2N+1(1.e., n -0);
|u;|<u: for 49/51"ch (re/2M

(i.e. up me/I );
utrup for Ire-IJBNH (ﬁe. Rz-O).

Herc Hg is the voltage fluctuation at the point at which Iin and lg are added,
y using a new

and lp-Im-Id. This is achieved in this analog-digital converter
active voltage limiter structure.

  
 

L Tannin! angle!“
0—

Flguru 1. Functional diagram of bit-weighting analog-digital converter. Counters -
564ch9. flip-flops — 5641112, inverters - 566L112, digital-analog converter -
S72PA1A, voltage comparator - 5218A3. 1, timing generator; 2. timing pulses; 3,
sequential approximation register; 6, control flip-flops; 5. aample-and—hold cir-

cuit; 6, output; 7, active voltage limiter; 8, digital-analog converter; 9,
voltage comparator.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.Thc structure of this digital device (figure 1), which contains a sequential
approximation register, automatically triggered variable timing generator andcon~
trul flip—flops, is sufficiently understandable. we p01“: out only that complete
conversion to an N-bit word requires 2 N cycles of the timing generator, which
results from an operating pecularity of the SGéIYe9 LSI (the output pulses of
these LSI may overlap in time; therefore, only half of their outputs are used in
order to avoid incorrect operation).

Let us examine the active voltage limiter and aample—and-hold devices (figures

2 and 3), which to a great extent determine the parameters of the entire device,
in more detail. The maximum delay introduced by the digital-analog converter in
the present arrangement is obtained when IP-Ie/Z“, and amounts to tdd3U22NC2/Ie,
where N is the resolution of the analog-digital converter; “8 is the voltage
amplitude at the point at which 11“ and Id are added; Ie is the standard current
of the digital-analog converter; Ct is the parasitic capacitance operating at
the summation point. As this expression shows, the only possible way to reduce
the delay tdd is to limit Utmax at its minimum level with a maximum difference
current I . In addition, when the current I .1e2‘N is minimum it is necessary to
satisfy the condition U m1n<2'(“+l)IR , in order to obtain a conversion error

of half the least-signi icant bit. The required mode current 11>Ie/4 and the
values of the resistors needed to ensure the required Utmax and ”2min are cal-
culated for this active voltage limiter by the following expressions:

Uzmx-OrlnI-‘o (Ix-Ian)! 1,]-
(I I-Ie/6)Rl<U 8;
UZmin'W'l'ln (I l 2”” IJ—I) R1 aupmn,

where quin is the minimum threshold voltage of the voltage comparator; "38 is
the maximum acceptable voltage at the output of the digital-analogconverter.

hit-weighting analog-digital converters are known to be characterized by methodical
error equal to half the least significant bit due to the fact that the ideal gain
of the analog-digital converter and digital-analog converter do not match. In
order to eliminate this error, an additional direct current is applied through
resistor Rk (figure 2) to the summation point:

0 I
Ik'ﬁﬁh 'aﬁ'r + 1m

Mlerc Is” is the input current of the voltage comparator.

In contrast to other sample-and-hold devices, the present one (figure 3) consumes
current from the power supply only during the sampling time (=500 nsec). In the
hold mode T|-u is closed, there is no current in the differential stage and while
the bit—weighting analog-digital converter is operating (=10 usec), direct current
"lnRoS is consumed from the power supply. It is not difficult to determine that
the sample-and-hold device consumes maximum power only when U1n-B p/2, and amounts
to P-(E p)2/4R°s. The innovation in this circuit is the use of transistor 12-3,
which compensates for the charge current of memory capacitor C3 with the base

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3. Sanple-and-hold device.
T1. T2 - 198N11, T3 - 198m5, 1,
control; 2. output.
FOR OFF“ ‘IAL USE ONLY

current from T2_3. If the base current gain 8 of transistors 12-3 and T2_.. is
approximately the same, the charge current of net-cry capacitor 03 in the hold
mode is negligibly small, which made it possible to eliminate the buffer upli-
l‘icr from the sanple-and-hold device and to charge C3 within 10 usec using‘ no
more than 5 mV.

Tests of the analog-digital converter in the :SO’C temperature range indicated
that the conversion time, to within 10 bits, is 10-15 usec with error equal to
half the least significant bit and power consumption of 80-90 I“.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1982

6900
CSO: 1860/226

8!:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mum ENGINEERING

Moscow BLRTRQCHESKIYE SPANISH in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 8-9

[Article by A. A. Hatveyev. Yu. I. Savchuk and Ye. I. Ignatenko. engineers,
Kola ABS]

the extent of nuclear fuel depletion should be euphasized. The reloading of
nuclear fuel (replacing spent fuel with fresh) occupies a special place in the
organizativ of an optimal fuel utilization node. The best alternative, which
yields the greatest benefits, is continuous refreshing of fuel-rod assemblies which
the reached their design depletion level. Due to singularities of construction
[1). the design of the VVER-MO has provisions for 3 partial -re-loads during the

reactor life-cycle. The reactor operates for approximately a year between reloading.

if the fuel is reloaded more frequently (than 3 tines per run). Then the mnber of

uring each subsequent recharging
of the reactor. In this case, stoppage of the reactor for reloading will not always
coincide with the sunner lull in power consumption. It is economically profitable

fuel magazines requires that the fuel loading be kept symetrical. ‘Ihe number of
working fuel magazines to be replaced with fresh ones must be a nultiple of 12

85
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6 or 3. The number of working supply magazines which is closest to the design
number of 102, which we shall use as the initial quantity. Reducing this number
by 12 each time, we obtain the following series of values for the number of
magazines to be reloaded: 90, 78, 66, 54, etc., such that fuel loading symmetry
is maintained.

It must be noted that as the number of fuel magazines decreases, the amount of

time each spends in the active zone of the reactor increases. For example, when

a reactor is fed with 90 magazines, the length of stay of 46.72 of the fuel magazines
in the active zone increases to 4 years; if the number of fuel magazines is re-

duced to 78, all of the fuel will have a 4-year run time.

The experience of the Kola Nuclear Powerplaat, where most of the fuel assemblies
can be operated successfully for 4 yearsushows that this increase in the operating
life of nuclear fuel is fully attainable.

The neutron-physical characteristics of the stationary fuel cycles of the WEIR-220
reactor have been obtained (analytically) in order to substantiate the choice of
required fuel enrichment when a smaller wmber of fuel magazines is used [2, 3].

The initial fuel load used is the typical load of a series-produced WEI-4100

reactor. The reactor enters the stationary fuel made only after the ninth reloading.
The table shows the length of the fuel cycle as a function of the number and
enrich-eat level of reloaded fuel assemblies when the reactor enters the

stationary load.

Figure i [not reproduced] shows the length of the stationary fuel cycle of the
WISR-MO reactor as a function of the enrichment of the fuel for a fixed lumber
of reloaded fuel magazines. The duration of the stationary fuel cycle with the
reactor loaded with 102 working magazines with enrichment of 3.61 comprised 326
effective days. It follows from this that when the reactor charge is reduced to
90 magazines and the same fuel cycle length is realized, the required enrichment
of nuclear fuel amounts to 3.91, and when 78 mgazines are used their enrichment
should be increased to 10.32.

The average fuel depletion for the unloaded fuel is increased in the first case
to 38.300 Mw~daylt the first case, and to 40,300 m-day/t in the second (figure 2)

Inot reproduced l .

The use of enriched fuel in wan-1.2.0. reactors makes it possible to improve the
technical and economic indicators of a nuclear powerplant. Although the cost of
the fuel assemblies in these cases increases in proportion to the enrichment,
the total cost of the fuel, i.e., the costs over the fuel cycle of the reactor,
is reduced. The economic indicators of nuclear powerplants which are changed
by charging a WEB-460 reactor with a smaller number of enriched fuel magazines
are presented below.

Number of fuel magazines 102 90 78
U235 enrichment of fuel magazines, 2 3.6 3.9 4.3
Reduction, X, of land electricity prime
cost: - 1.7 3.1
of its fuel component- - 6.5 7.9
variable portion of fuel component - (0.7 8.4

86

FOR OFFICIA'. LSE ONLY
1.

Conclusions

One way to increase the depletion of nuclear fuel at nuclear powerplants

using wan-440 reactors is to feed the reactor with enriched fuel and simultaneously
reduce the number of reloaded magazines.

2.

Feeding the reactor with enriched fuel makes it possible to extend the operating

cycle of the wen-1.40 reactor to 6 years, with a separate fuel cycle length of
one year.

3.

The implenentation of a 4-year run for the WBR-MO reactor mkes it possible

to reduce the fuel component of the prime cost of electricity by 7.91. and to re-
duce the prime cost of electricity produced at the poverplant by 3.12.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sidorenko, V. A. "Voprosy beaopasnoy raboty reaktorov VVER" [Questions of
Safe WER Reactor Operation]. Moscow, Atomizdat, 1977.

Petrunin, D. H.. Belyayevs, Ye. 0., Kireyeva, I. L. "BIPR-S - A program
for calculating 3-dimensiona1 energy extraction and fuel depletion fields in
angle-group diffusion approximation for WEI! reactors" . Moscow. IAB
Prcprint 2518, 1975.

Sidorenko, V. D. "Calculation of Criticality and Depletion of Arrays with
bow-Enriched Fuel and Ordinary-Hater Moderator". Moscow, 1A3 Preprint 11034,
1967. '

mPYRIGH'l': Energoizdat, "Elektricheskiye stantsii", 1981

6900

(:80:

1860/227

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: [621.311 . 25: 621 . 039]:621.182.lo68-57.006.13

0" ARTICLE BY V. H. SEDOV, P. G. KRUTIKOV AND S. '1‘. ZOLO'I'UKBIN: 'CHDIICAL-TECH-
IDLDCICAL I‘DDES DURING START-UP AND INITIAL OPERATING PBIOD 017 A38

usmc nmx Rumor '1
Moscow nmsxcussxnz sumsn in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 9-10

[Article by G. D. Volgin, candidate of chemical sciences, Leningrad ABS]

[Text] It follows from the essence of the material presented in the title article
that the author is talking about post-installation flushing of the internal surfaces
of thc condensate-feed section of a nuclear powerplant using an M reactor.

in addition, in both the title ami the article itself, post-repair pre-startup
flmhlngs of the condensate-feed circuit are treated as chemical-techmlogical nodes
during the startup period, which obviously is not the same thing.

The post-installation f lrshing of the inside surfaces of the condensate-feed circuit
of Units No. l and 2 at the Leningrad Nuclear Powerplant imeni V. I. Lenin was done
with ammonia monocitrate during chemical flushing and sodium citrate during passi-
viznt ion.

In developing the technology for post-installation ﬂushings of the condensate-feed
circuit of Unit No. 3 at the Leningrad Nuclear Powerplant. we studied the experience
of the Kursk Nuclear Powerplant in flushing the condensate-feed circuit of Unit No. 2
using water with hydrogen peroxide, considering the results with respect to maintaining
the water-chenical node during subsequent operation of the power unit. As we know,
the performance norms for the coolant in Unit No. 2 at the Kursk Plant were
achieved earlier than after chemical flushing; no further difficulties in operation
of the turbine condensate cleaning installation occurred. Since the amount of
hydrogen peroxide actually expended was only 1.5-3 milligrams per square meter of
surface area . it was possible to asst-e that there was no influence of the hydrogen
permiide additives on the results obtained.

Instead of chemical flushing. the inside surfaces of the condensate-feed circuit
in power Unit No. 3 at the Leningrad Plant was flushed after installation with non-
reagent water. The quality standard for feed water in terms of iron content was
achieved in power Unit No. 3.after 60-50 hours of operation at power; the iron-
content norms were, for practical purposes, not exceeded in the forced recirculation

‘lﬁicrmcnasxnr 511110511, No. 2. 1981.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circuit during startup and when operating at power. The condensate-feed cir-

cuit in power Unit No. 4 was also flushed with with non—reagent technology.

The iron content in the water in the forced recirculation circuit net the established
norm during startup, gaining power and operating at power; the iron content in the
feed water reached the normal value after 50 hours of operation at power. As

power Units No. 3 and lo continued to operate, no significant increase was observed

in the coolant iron concmtration after stops and starts, while the concentration

of iron in the feed water dropped to below 10 micrograms per liter within a few
hours after each startup.

A significant positive effect is also achieved with non-reagent water washdown of
condensate-feed circuits because this technology is implemented using stock equip-
ment and without a tine break between flushing the condensate-feed circuit and
starting up the power unit.

We consider the improvement in operating conditions of devices for maintaining the
water-chemical node during startup, savings in supply material (citric acid) and
savings in the construction of neutralizer baths to be important facts arguing

on behalf of non-reagent water flushing technology for condensate-feed circuits,
which consist of the following basic stages:

-post-installation water (cold) flushing of the condensate-feed circuit, dis-
carding the water;

-post-rcpair water (hot, 70-80°c) closed-circuit flushing.

The article noted correctly that chemical cleaning and passivization using
sodium nitrite or amonia have been borrowed from thermal power engineering for
nuclear powerplants using RM reactors. The results of starting up recent power
units using RINK-1000 reactors indicate that this should not have been done.
(DPYRIGH'I‘: Energoizdat. "Elektricheskiye stantsii", 1981

6900
C80: 18601227

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

QUANTUM RLBCTRﬂﬂICS, ELECTED-OPTICS

OPTOBLECTRONICS IN PROCESSING MOTION PICTURE FILM

Moscow OPTOBLEKTRONIKA PR1 OBRABOTKB KINOPOTUHATBRIALOV in Russian 1980 (signed
to press 11 Jul 80) PP 2. 189-191

(Foreword, table of contents and annotation from book "Optoelectronics in
Processing Motion Picture Film", by Iosif Solomonovich Barbanel'. Izdatel'stvo
"Iskusstvo", 6000 copies, 191 pages]

[Text] Author's Foreword

The present monograph is devoted to questions of testing and evaluating the polymer
base and emulsions of motion picture films and magnetic tapes using coherent and
holographic equipment. These problems are solved on two theoretical planes:

1. Determination of require-eats for optimal processing of holograms recorded on
thin-film carriers allowing for the characteristics of the recording media
(photographic materials, thermoplastic material, photothermoplastic materials.
etc.).

2. Synthesis of special optoelectronic processing devices used to analyze record-
ing media including photographic emulsions, magnetic tape coatings and film bases,
and to analyze the "transfer" characteristics of recording media (characteristic
curve. phase relief of medium as function of exposure for phase media, etc.).

All of these devices are divided formally into three basic subclasses: refracto-
meters, photometric devices and microcompoaition analyzers; the book is structured
to reflect this.

All of the devices considered use holograms to some extent as the basic elements.
or holographic methods of basic functioning principles: this made it necessary

to include a chapter on optimal processing of actual holograms.

The author is grateful for the work done on the manuscript by Doctor of Technical
Sciences 8.1. Kripitskiy, by Z.H. Krasnovskiy and A.H. Bekker and, for their

assistance in experimental research, to Candidate of Technical Science V.V.
Kulikov, and ".3. Ioffe, A.Yu. Shanin and Yu.I. Vdovin.

Table of Contents

Author's Foreword 2

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 1. Holography and Its Application

51.1.
51.2.
51.3.

51.4.

§1.5.

Recording complete wave field information
The lens as a Fourier converter
Holograms: their varieties and use
Representative holograms

Holographic television

Sound recording

Basic directions in optoelectronics
Optical matched filter

Optical correlators

Optical filters

Classification of directions of synthesis of optoelectronic
devices for physical-chemical processing

Chapter 2. Optimal Processing of Thin-Film Holograms

52.1.
52.2.
$2.3.

52.6.
52.5.

52.6.
52.7.

52.8.
52.9.

Mathematical definition of basic parameters of holographic
elements

Statement of optimization problem and its reduction to nonlinear
programming problem

Solution of optimization problems for specific analytical.
approximation of assigned functions F3

Optimization of hologram recording for the general case
Optimization of recording of holograms with nonuniform spatial
distribution

Mathematical basis

Experimental research

Extension of methods to k-dimensional cases '
Optimization of recording mode of phase holograms of set of
diffused and point objects

Statement of optimization problem

Solution of problem

Examples of calculation

Use of multidimensional optimization method for comparative
analysis of methods for holographic coding of binary information
Basic formulas

Exposure limitations

Solution of problem

Limiting formulas

Chapter 3. Optoelectronic Refractometers

53.1.
53.2.
56.3.

Application of refractometers

Brief review of refractometric devices

Synthesis and analysis of optoelectronic refractometers
Synthesis of refractometers

Implementation of algorithms

Harmonic holographic refractometer transparency
Estimation of device parameters

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

53.6. Adjustable refractometric cuvette 101
Chapter 6.' Construction Principles of Coherent Photometers 103
56.1. Brief review of photometers 105
56.2. Use of photometric analysis in motion picture technology 107
56.3. Homodyne photometer 110
56.6. Spectral resolution in homodyne photometers 113
56.5. Harmonic obturator-modulators 115
Influence of constant submodulation component 117
56.6. Homodyne photometer with dual amplitude submodulstion 118
56.7. Three-channel homodyne photometer 120
56.8. Influence of phase error 121
Homodyne photometer with phase compensation 122
Description of optical section adjustment circuit 123
Phase-invariant homodyne photometer 127
56.9. Metrological estimate of homodyne photometer parameters 131
Statement of problem 132
Basic formulas . 133
Threshold values 135
Analytical data 136
Errors for phase-invariant photometer 138
56.10. Recursive definition of contrast sensitivity of optoelectronic
'converter 160
56.11. Estimate of influence of nonlinearity of elements in optical
section of homodyne photometer with amplitude submodulation 163
56.12. Creation of optical standards 169
56.13. Increasing contrast sensitivity of television systems 150
56.16. Coherent photometer with spatial phase keying 153
Chapter 5. Optoelectronic Hicrocomposition Analyzers 158
55.1. Simple coherent microcomposition analyzer 162
55.2. Hicroparticle analyzer with high energy sensitivity ~ 163
55.3. Spatial spectrum analyzers 165
55.6. Space-time scattering indicatrix analyzers 167
55.5. Phase-suhmodulated homodyne spectrum analyzer 171
55.6. Analyzer for integrated space-uniform scattering indicatrix 173
55.7. Microparticle analyzer with decoding of scattering indicatrix 176
55.8. Hicroparticlc analyzer with visualization of scattering indicatrix 178
Bibliography 186
Annotation

“118 monograph is devoted to questions of the application of optoelectronic devices
for analyzing and evaluating motion picture films and magnetic tapes using the
methods of coherent technology and holography. The principles of holography and

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
directions in optoelectronics associated with nation picture photography and
television are examined. The book describes instruments for physical-chemical
analysis which are designed for motion picture films, emulsions and coatings,

as well as still. motion-picture and magnetic film buses; also presented are
methods and facilities for calculating the optimal modes of photochemical process-
ing of holograms, which are the basic elements used in building these instruments.
The book is intended for specialists in the area of motion picture technology,
optoelectronics, coherent technology and holography.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Iskusstvo", 1980

6900
cso: 1860/229

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UN: 621.382.8.069. 77b
USE OF CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES IN OPTICAL MIA PROCESSIM srs'rms

Moscow PRIIKJRY I TEKHNIKA EKSPBRIHBNTA in Russian No 1, Jan-Feb 82
(manuscript received 10 Nov 80) pp 98-102

[Article by V. A. Arutyunov, N. A. Yesepkina, B. A. Kotov, Yu. A. Kotov. A. P.
Lavrov and I. I. Sayenko, Leningrad Polytechnical Institute]

[Text] The example of an acoustooptical radio signal spectrum analyzer
is used to demonstrate the possibility of using new solid state
photodetectors based on charge-coupled devices in optical data
processing systans. The article describes the construction and
operating features of these photodetectors, the characteristics
of the linear (unidimensional) CCD-photodetectors which we used
which contain 50 32 x 1500 m2 light-sensitive elements, as well
as the schematic diagram of their control device. The acousto-
optical spectra: analyzer investigated had an analysis range
of Alf-=40 MHz, frequency resolution nun-100 m2 and provided
the capability of parallel spectral analysis of continuous and
pulsed signals up to l pace in length.

Optical systems provide high processing speed for large data files in real time.
They make parallel analysis of several input signals possible, converting them
to the spatial distribution of light intensity in the output focal plane of an
optical system. Various photodetectors are used to translate this information
to an electrical signal. The current most promising photodetectors are multi-
elcment solid state photodetectors based on charge—coupled devices (CCD) [1].
These have a high quantum output, up to 801. a wide dynaic range of 60-80 dB.
and they use small light sensing elements (tens of micrometers and less) arranged
with high geometric precision approaching 0.1 pm.

The present article describes a CCD photodetector and its use in an acoustooptical
spectrun analyzer.

CCD photodetector. Hultielenent CCD photodetectors contain a group of photo-
sensitive elements (charge accumlating section) and shift registers (charge
transfer section). The photosensitive elements - photodiodes or photocapacitors--
convert light intensity to its proportional electrical charge. The shift regis-
tcrs act as a buffer memory and move the charge distribution obtained serially

91;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to [he outpul. unit. They nuke it possible to connect all) to various external
devices, including computers, thus making it possible to build hybrid optical-
digital data processing systems [2].

'me photosensitive elements and shift registers are constructed as an integrated
structure based on a silicon chip. CCD photodetectors are produced with both
separate [2] and combined charge accumulation and transfer sections [3]. The
mltielement CCD we used had combined charge accunulation and transfer sections,
and consisted of a linear four-phase CCD shift register (figure 1. H7). The
use. of transparent polysilicon electrodes made it possible to use this register
simultaneously as both aphotosensitive structure and a data output device. The
elements in the register were spaced 32 um apart. The light sensitive region of
the register was 1.5 m wide, which made it possible to integrate the light flux
for one of the coordinates. The total number of elements in the register was
50. The spectral sensitivity region of the instruments used was 0.4-1 In. with
maximum sensitivity of X-0.8 un.

 

“gun. 1, Schematic dis ram of CCD photodetector and control devices. H1 - 56hLYeS,
My. Ha - 56lolYe9, H3 - 5 T82, 14., - 564m, H5 - 56loIYe10, H7 - CCD photodetector;
1‘. - Kl’303V; diodes - KD102A.

11ncre are output units at both ends of the CCD register which convert the charge

distribution to a proportional output voltage. Data can be output to either output
unit, depending upon the operating mode. When necessary, the charge signal can be
input electrically to the shift register through one of the output units [1]. This

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

makes it possible to add the electrical and optical data in the CCD photodetector
itself. which expands its capabilities.

The charge accumulated in a CCD element is proportional to the illumination and
accumulation time. The saturation exposure for the instrument we used was 0.1
lux — sec. The lowest recordable illumination level is determined by the maximum
possible accumulation time, which is limited by dark currents. Their value
depends upon the power supply conditions and the chip temperature. In the instru-
ments in question the maximum accumulation time at room temperature is several
seconds. Figure 2a shows an oscillogram of the output signal which characterizes
the dark current level and distribution for the elements of the CCD photodetector
at room temperature with a 10-seeond accumulation time. The saturation illumi-
nation for this accumulation time is 0.01 lux. After the dark current signal

has been output from all 50 elements of the P25 strip, a pulse can be seen on

the oscillogram from an electrical signal applied to one of the elements which
corresponds to one~half the saturation signal.

One of the most important features of this CCD photodetector is the capability of
processing charge distributions directly in the output unit, which consists of

an electrometric stage with "floating" gate [4]. This expands the capabilities
of systems using this type of photodeteetor. For example, the derivative (figure
2b). extremal value (figure 2c), as well as the signal proportional to the sum of
the signals in the individual elements, i.e., the "integral" of the original dis—
tribution, can be observed at the same time as the signal proportional to the
light flux intensity distribution. In addition to the derivative, figure 2b

also shows its corresponding visual distribution obtained by projecting a spot of

light on the register. The discrete points on the oacillograms correspond to the
signals from the individual elements in the CCD strip.

Figure 2. Oscillograms of CCD photodetector output
signal: a - dark current distribution for elements
after lO—second accumulation and electrical input
pulse; b ~ signal proportional to element difference
or derivative of initial distribution; c - signal
proportional to extremal value. Vertical scale

1 V/div; number of signals from photodetector
elements per division along the horizontal:

a - 7.5; b, c — 3.

 

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A controller whose schematic diagram is shown in Figure 1 was developed to con-
trol the photodetector. The controller assigns the periodic operating mode of

the CCD and produces all of the required service control pulses. It uses series
K564(561) integrated circuits. The microcircuits in these series have good

power supply agreement with CCD without the use of additional convertors. The
range of variation of the (120 control voltages is 0-20 V. while that of the micro-
circuit supply voltage is 5-16 V; in addition, these circuits consume extremely
little power. '

The operating period of the controller and CCD photodeteotor is made up of two
intervals: the accumulation interval Ta and data output (read) interval To.
During the read interval. pulses phase voltages 01-01. must be applied to the CCD
in order to move the charge distribution obtained during the accumlation interval
to the output unit; pulses to control the output unit rust be applied as well.
During the accumulation interval, constant voltages are applied to the CCD instead
of pulsed phase voltages, along with the aforementioned output unit control pulses.
In connection with this CCD operating algoritlu. the device which generates phased
voltages 01-0.. and the output unit control pulses (Reset and Output pultes) is

a variable lo-phase generator (HI-H3 in figure 1) [5]. The generator controls the
device which forms the accumlation and read intervals, which consist of M5 and H5.
Elements Mq_1-Hu_a, are the buffer amplifiers for working into a capacitive load -
the CCD register. The data output rate from the CCD in this controller is deter-
mined by the frequency’of master; oscillator H1. The mxinum output frequency is
6-105 elements per second, which corresponds to a signal output time from one
element of 1.7 usec. This frequency is limited by the speed of the microcircuits
used. and can be raised to 2-106 elements per second by using elements with lower
inertia.

The CCD output signal is a pulse train. The number of pulses in a sequence is
the some as the nunber of CCD elements, or 50 in our case. In order to obtain
the envelope it is necessary to use a "sample and hold" circuit. With control
voltage amplitudes of 10 V, the maximum CCD output signal level does not exceed
3 V.

The controller uses a single +(lO-15 V) power supply. The operating integrity
of the CCD photodetector and controller is retained with supply voltage varying
from +6 to +16 V. When EP-lO V, the power consumption :30 m". The controller
is sufficiently simple and compact, and consists of a 100 x 100 mm2 printed
circuit board. Figure 3 shows the appearance of the board holding the control
circuit and CCD photodetector.

_A_cgu__stooptica1 sEctrum analyzer. The operation of the CCD photodetector in

an optical data processing system was investigated on a breadboarded accusto-
oplicnl spectrum analyzer. Figure I. shows the functional diagram of the analyzer,
which was built on a standard optical bench. The radiation source was a Rel-Ne-
lascr with radiated power of 15 m“. The radio sigmls were input through an
neoustooptical modulator with a fused quartz acoustic conductor operating in the
lirngg diffraction mode. The center frequency of the modulator was Po-130 MHz, with
bandwidth of (SF-40 MHz. The signal propagation time through the acoustic conductor
19-10 l-sec, which corresponds to frequency resolution of Humans-100 KHz.

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL Lb}. UNI)

 

Figure 3. Appearance of PC board with
CCD photodetector and controller.

 

Figure 5. Output signal from spectrum analyzer
corresponding to spectra of two radio pulses.
F1-123 MHz, 71-10 usec. F2-126 MHz, r2-3.S usec
(a) and l usec (b).

The CCD strip was located in the output focal plane of the spectral analyzer, and
the signal taken from it was recorded on an 51-76 oscillograph. The following were
the parameters of the CCD controller: charge accumulation time in CCD elements
13-10 nsec; signal output time from one element 10 usec; time to read information
from entire strip 0.75 msec.

The operation of the CCD photodetector in the spectrum analyzer was investigated
with pulsed input radio signals formed in two independent channels (figure 6).
Parallel signal processing is one of the primary advantages of acoustooptical
spectrum analyzers.

Figure 4. Functional diagram of accusto-
optical radio signal spectrum analyzer.
AOM - acoustooptical modulator, L1, L2 -
collimating lenses, L3 - integrating lens,
1 - laser, 2 - CCD, 3 - control unit, 4 -
recording unit.

 

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 5 a and b illustrate the operation of the spectrum analyzer. The oscillo-
grams show the output signals of the spectral analyzer which correspond to the
spectra of two radio pulses with different duration and carrier frequency. In
order to increase the do ratio and to provide visual clarity, the pulse repetition
1", is significantly shorter than the accululation tine ‘1‘a (gin-0.05).

The partmelie'a of the matching optical systen were selected so that there were
approximately 2 CCD elements per spectrua analyzer resolution element (Afu -
100 KHz). It is apparent froa Figure 5a an! b that the shorter pulaea (123.5
pace and 12-1 'usec) with spectra of AP2-300 IO]: and ”2-1 His, are recorded by a
larger nunber of (:00 elements than a pulse with duration r1-10 usec.

The sufficiently high sensitivity of the photodetector and low dark current level
made it possible to record the spectra of single pulses lasting :1 usec. The
energy of the optical radiation pulse received by an individual CCD elarent coal-
prises ~]0'13 J. The laser radiation was pulse modulated during neasurenent of
the spectra of single short pulses, which made it possible to reduce the noise
level. The modulation period was synchrcnized with the tine of arrival of the
radio pulses and the read period of the signal from the CCD strip.

we used an analogous CCD photodetector as an output device in an integral-optical
spectrum analyzer. Our work with linear COD photodetectors demonstrated their
simplicity and convenience for use inaligning and adjusting the optical system
in the spectrun analyzer, and for recording the output signal.

Linear CCD photodetectors with 500-800 elmenta have now been developed [6]

whose controllers are essentially the sane as those examined above. The use

of these photodetectors will make it possible to improve significantly the parameters
of optical processing systems as a whole, and in particular to increase the number
of channels in spectrum analyzers, and simlify processing of widebani signals.

CCD photodetectors can be used in spectrum analyzers as well as other optical pro-
cessing systeas, e.g., acoustooptical correlators [7].

BIBLIWRAPHY
l. Seken, K.. Toapset, H. "Pribory s perenoson zaryada" [Charge-transfer devices].
Translated from English. V. V. Pospelov and R. A. Surisa. editors. Moscow,
Mir, 1978.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

7.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Yesepkgna, Np At, KOCOV, BI A0. “WV, Y“. Ac, etc ‘1. AWOHETRIYA.
No. 3, 1978. p 50.

Arutyunov. V. A., Berezin, V. Yu., Yesepldna. N. A.. et. al. ”5'!“ V 21m,
Vol. 9,’ No. 20. 1979. p. 1260.

nerezin, v. Yu., Kotov, a. A. TEKBNIKA snaps-w SVYAZI. SER- 1mm
TELEVIDENIYA. No. 5. 1979, p. 51.

Aksenov. Ye. ‘l‘., Yesepkina, N.'A.. Lipovskiy, A. A.. Pavlenko, A.I.
915'!“ V ZHTP, Vol. 6, No. 19, 1980, p. 1211.

Arutyunov. V. A., Kotov, B. A., Kotov. Yu. A., et. a1. "Princneniye netodov
opticheakoy obrabotki informatsii 1 golografn." [Collectiom Application of

Optical Data Processing and Holographic Methods]. Leonel-ad, LIYaP AN SSSR,
1980, p 325.

chepkina, N. A., Bukharin, N. A., Kotov, Yu. A., Mikhaylov, A. V. PIS'HA V
zm'r. Vol. 6, No. 2, 1980, p. 23.

(DPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory 1 tekhnika eksperimenta". 1982

6900
C80: 18 60/ 226

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEW ACTIVITIES, MISCELLANEOUS

UDC 621.386.3
APPLICATION OF INFRARED TECHNOLOGY IN THE NATIONAL ECONOMY

Leningrad PRIMENENIYE INFRAKRASNOY TEKHNIKI V NARODNOH KNOZYAYSTVE in Russian
1981 (signed to press 27 Jul 81) pp 2-5, 263-266

(Annotation, foreword, table and table of contents from book "Application of
Infrared Technology in the National Economy", by Isidor Borisovich Levitin
(deceased), Energoizdat, 8000 copies, 264 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book generalizes and systematizes domestic and foreign experience in the
application of modern infrared technology in industry. agriculture, science,
medicine, etc. The book presents the results of numerous investigations and
developments, describes methods for analyzing radiating devices and radiation
modes, and contains a description of various technical devices.

The book is intended for engineering and technical workers who use infrared
technology, and may be useful to students in institutes of higher education.

[This book was reviewed by H.G. Tsokurenko.]

Foreword

Deep roots connect one of the branches of modern light technology -- infrared
technology -— with the sinilar ultraviolet technology. infrared technology
uses the same physical bases, concepts, terminology, a number of relationships,
ctc., although of course. infrared technology also has its own specific char-
acteristics which promote its extremely broad area of application for both
peaceful and military purposes.

The present book touches exclusively upon peaceful uses of infrared technology
in the economy, although by no means all of them (which would require a much
larger book). Nonetheless, the most important aspects of these applications,
albeit with insufficient completeness, are presented here, often in an attempt
to allow the reader to becone acquainted with the principles of designing and
analyzing infrared devices. In particular, the book introduces a method for

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

analyzing iR heating devices developed by 8.“. Yermolinskiy which has not been fully
published before and which is of undisputed interest regardless of the analytical
methods developed by other authors which are in use. N.N. Yermolinskiy's method

ls closer to familiar methods in light technology, is distinguished by its
simplicity and provides accuracy sufficient for practice.

Table P-l, borrowed from R. Hudson's familiar monograph [167] gives an
idea of the variety of areas of application of IR technology for peaceful purposes --
in production, construction. agriculture, science, medicine. etc. It should be
noted that the areas of application of IR technology are continuously expanding,
as a result of which no review can pretend to sufficient completeness of infor-
mation in this sense.

For the reader interested in supplementing information regarding various
areas of the use of IR technology, our first recommendation is a regular famil-
iarization with the abstract journals of the All Union Institute of Scientific
and Tachnlcal information ("ELEKTROTBKENIKA I ENERGETIKA", "PIZIKA". "BIOLOGIYA",
"lSSLEDOVANlYE KOSHICHESKOGO PROSTRANSTVA" etc.).

Table P-l
Area of applica— I Industry and hbdicine and Scientific
t ion . purpose transportation iology research
Active systems Infrared heating Beam thermal ' Space communica-
and drying. Beam ltherapy. Deter- tions. Landscape
heating. Infrared ;mining distance illumination for
soldering and weld— lfrom obstacles night motion picture
E ing. Guarding plant :(for the blind) and still photo-
I and storage areas. _ ! graphy. Investi-
l Aircraft landing. ' ' gation of mechanism
Registering through of communication
I transportation. 39- between animals.
, timating relative _ Studying noctural
speed of transportation animal life

facilities. Prevent-
ing motor vehicle col-:

lisions. I
Sunrching. track Detecting forest Automatic guide Space navigation
Eng and range fires. Guiding fire- for the blind ' and spaceflight
measurement control rockets. ' control from the
Fire detection in air-_ earth. Vertical
craft tanks. Preven- i sensors. Satellite
tion of fuel explosionF detection. Orienta-

' tion of optical
(astronomical) in-
struments. Inves-
tigation of optical
I structure of hori-

| ' zon

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-
___. .— —.—_——_—_———

——-—.———_——.-_

_ _____—.—_- _______._..—_._

  
   
   
    
   
 

Industry and
transportation

Non-contact meas-
urement of temperature
of industrial facili-
ties (cutting tools,
rolled metal, brake
linings. etc.). Inte-
grity testing of elec-
trotechnical equipment.
Non-contact dimension
measurement. Technol
gical process control.
Determination of rail-
road journal box over-
heating.

Detection of air
turbulence. Chemical
analysis of organic
compounds. Analysis
of gases. Detection
of oil in water.
Finding pipeline
leaks.

Non-destructive
testing of articles.

Testing effectiveness
of sheet insulation.
Testing optical
materials.

Industrial super-
vision and accident
prevention. Obser-
vation of photograph-
ic film during pro—

Hedicine and
biology

——-——-—

Noncontact skin
temperature measure-
ment. Investigation
of temperature percep
cion.
of cancer.

 

removal of dressings.
Remote biosensors.

Detection and pre-

vention of air pollu- 2

|tion. Determining
‘coz content in blood
land exhaled air.

Early cancer diag-
nosis. Early diagno-
.sis of pre—infarct
Icondition. Placental
Elocalization.
Emination of optimal
.amputation point.
.Investigation of ef-
Efectiveness of polar
Iclothing.

 

Measurement of
ldismeter of the
'pupil of the eye.
IExamination of the
leye when cataracts

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I
l

Scientific
research

Measurement
of the tempera-
ture of the moon.
planets and stars.

Early diagnosis RemOte determina-
Honitoring' tion of weather
wound healing without i'conditions.

g Measurement of
' earth's heat

balance. Investi-

3 gation of heat

transfer'in
plants. Forensic

_ exanination.

Deter--

Determining
composition of
the atmosphere
of the earth and
other planets.
Monitoring traces
of life on other
planets.

Prospecting
for earth's res-
ources. Forest
fire detection
from satellites
in aircraft. In-
vestigation of
heat flow. Vol—
cano study. De-
tection and in-
vestigation of
pollution of
bodies of water.
Detection of
fissures in ice-
bergs. Iceberg
surveys.

Determining
nature of sur-
face of moon
and planets.
Identification
Area of applica- : Industry and inedicine and
_tlon. purpose ' transportation

run urtauanu Us)“ Ul‘hl

biologg_

 

I
I
I

duction. Nocturnal .
movie and television tigation of obstructedi
imagery. Determina- and varicose veins.
tion of types of tread Monitoring eye move- .
in mixed forests. meats. Monitoring
wound healing process.I
Studying nocturnal }
animal life.

present. Inves-

 

i

j Scientific
' research

of points in
archeology. por—

: traiture. etc.

Palientology
investigations.
Investigation of
documents.

1 Analysis of vate

quality. Detec-
tion of plant

disease.
Table of Contents

Foreword 3
chapter 1. Infrared Radiating Devices 6
1-1. The economic isportance of IR heating technology and its advantages 6
1-2. Heat formation mechanism during IR radiation 7
1-3. Drying mechanism using IR radiation 8
1-6. Role of correlation of spectral characteristics of radiation sources

and irradiated materials 9
1-5. Some indications for designing irradiating IR devices 12
l-6. Some industrial devices for IR heating built in the USSR 16
1-7. Some special irradiating IR devices 29
Chapter 2. Irradiating Devices for Infrared Heating Installations 36
2-1. Classification of IR radiators and radiating instruments 36
2-2. Electrical IR radiators and radiating devices used in heating

installations 43
2-3. Gas IR radiators and radiating devices and their characteristics 57
Chapter 3. Design of Infrared Irradiating Installations 69
3-1. Design of irradiating IR installations using N.N. Yermolinskiy's

method 69
3-2. Some general considerations regarding calculation of heating using

IR radiators 70
3-3. Calculation of coefficients'ck and C1 76
3-6. Simplified method for calculating power irradiation (illumination)

of articles according to given temperature (during steady-state mode) 78
3-5. Calculation of power illumination of articles during heating 87
‘u6. Calculation of power of radiation sources 94
3-7. Calculation of power illumination in irradiating installations

with tubular electric heaters 115

10h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3-8. Nomographic method for calculating drying mode of lacquer and
paint coating (L.L. Pavlovskiy's method)

Chapter 6. Use of Infrared Radiation for Space Heating

6-1. General considerations

6-2. Warmth comfort and requirements for its provision

6—3. Irradiating devices for infrared space nesting

6-6. Economic factors in infrared space heating installations

6-5. Some recouendations for designing and building devices for infrared
space heating

6-6. Examples of some existing installations for infrared space heating

6-7. Simplified method for designing installations for space heating
using gas IR-radiators

Chapter 5. Use of Infrared Radiation in Agriculture

5-]. General information

5-2. Biological action of IR and UV irradiation of agricultural animals
and poul t ry

5-3. Irradiation standards (power irradiation) and dosing of IR and UV
irradiation of young animals and poultry

5-6. Technical devices for irradiating young animals and poultry

5-5. Radiating devices

5 6. Economic effect derived from using I! and UV irradiation of young

animals
5-7. Use of IR radiation for drying plant products
5-8. Use of gas 1R radiators in agriculture

Chapter 6. Infrared Systems for Radiometry

6—1. .6eneralized IR system. Functional diagram of IR radiometer

6-2. iR-radiation receivers

6-3. Optical elements of IR radiometers

6-6. Reference radiation source

6—5. Basic characteristics of generalized IR system

6—6. Coefficient of irradiation of object and equalization during IR
measurements

6-7. Reproduction of information regarding thermal field of heated oojecta

Chapter 7. Obtaining Images Using Infrared Radiation

7-1. Hethods of obtaining images of various objects using IR radiation
7-2. Example of modern IR imager

7-3. Temperature sensitivity of scanning IR radiometers (IR imagers)
7-6. Direct photography in IR radiation

chapter 8. Inframethods for Nondestructive Tasting of Electronic Articles
8-1. Nondestructive testing and the role of IR method
8-2. Heat mode of electronic articles and IR radiation which they produce

chapter 9. Infrared Spectroscopy
9—1. Features and capabilities of IR spectroscopy

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

120

121
121
126
131
133

136
138

160

162
162

166

166
150
156

156
157
163

166
166
165
171
180
186

186
189

191
191
193
196
197

211
211
202

216
216
I'Uﬂ ‘II'I'ILIAI. var. UI‘LI

Empirical relationship between a structure of molecules and their
spectra

[R nonochromators and spectrometers

Use of IR spectroscopy for qualitative analysis purposes

IR gas analyzers

Chapter 10. Use of Infrared Technology for Space Reseanch

10-1.

10-2.
10-3.

1R equipment for astronomical, astrophysical and meteorological
research

In equipment for space navigation

IR equipment for space communications

Chapter 11. Medical and Biological Applications of Infrared Radiation

11-1.
11-2.
11-3.

11-4.
11-5.
11-6.
11-7.
11-80
11-9.

investigation of capillaries using IR photography

Use of IR radiation for investigating the eye

Use of IR cinematography for recording eye movements in human-
engineering research

Use of IR radiation in forensic medical diagnosis

Use of IR photography in dermatology

mermography

Therapeutic applications of IR radiation

Use of IR radiation in biology and parasitology

Use of IR photography in botany and paliontology

Chapter 12. Some Special Uses of Infrared Technology

12-1.
12-2.
12-3.

12-4.
12‘s.

Determination of temperature of heated metal

Determination of overheating of radial car journal boxes

Use of IR photography and reflectography for investigating paints
in archeology and art galleries

Use of remote IR methods in aerial and space imaging of the earth
Detection of turbulence of clean air

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

6900

C30: 1860/211 END