FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10126

19 November 1981

Translation

ANTIRADAR CAMOUFLAGE

8y

Yu. G. Stepanov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10126
19 November 1981

ANTIRADAR CAMOUFLAGE

Moscow PROTIVORADIOLOKATSIONNAYA MASKIROVKA in Russian 1968 (signed to
press 26 Apr 68) pp 2-144

[Book by Yuriy Grigor'yevich Stepanov, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye Radio",
Moscow, 12,200 copies, 144 pages, UDC 623.68]

CONTENTS

Annotation 1
Introduction 2
Chapter 1. The Reflective Properties of Radar Targets a
l. The effective back-scatter cross-section 4
2. Amplitude fluctuations of returns and the radar cross-sections of

targets 8
3. Phase front fluctuations of a return 15
4. The polarization characteristics of a return 17
5. The effective target cross-section in the case of diversity

(bistatic) radars 18
6. The average values of the effective radar scatter cross-section of

real targets 22
Chapter 2. Experimental Studies of Effective Target Back-Scatter .

Cross-Sections 23

1. Methods of experimentally studying the effective radar cross-

section 23
2. Specific features of electromagnetic simulation 24
3. Measurement systems for the study of effective radar cross-sections

with models 27

4. The RATSCAT facility for the measurement of the effective radar
cross-sections of various objects 32
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070041-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. The Reduction of the Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Sections
of Objects by Using Poorly Reflecting Shapes and Radio-
Absorbent Materials

1. The use of poorly reflecting shapes

2. General information on radio absorbent naterials

3. Some theoretical questions

6. Narrow band interference coatings

5. Broadband radio absorbent coatings and materials

6. Measuring the characteristics of radio absorbent materials

Chapter 4. The Camouflage Properties of Terrain and Hydrometeors

l. The effective back-scatter cross-section of surface distributed
targets

2. The reflective properties of the earth's surface

3. The masking properties of returns from a sea surface

A. The masking action of hydrometeors

Chapter 5. Artificial Radar Reflectors and Their Applications

1. General information

2. Dipole reflectors

. Corner reflectors

. Luneberg lenses

. Passive antenna arrays

. Guided missiles - decoy targets

. Antiradar camouflage for ballistic missiles

NO‘UIbu

Bibliography

- b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070041-6
FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE(NNLY

Annotation

[Text] Basic information is given on the techniques and tools
of antiradar camouflage for military and industrial facilities.
The reflective properties of radar targets are treated as well
as ways of reducing the radar visibility of various objects, the
camouflage properties of terrain and hydrometeors, and distract-
ing and masking false targets. Experimental methods of determin-
ing effective back-scatter cross-sections are described.

Along with theoretical questions. considerable space is
devoted in the book to the description of specific samples of
foreign camouflage hardware and the ways it is used. The
methods and means of solving the major problems of antiradar
camouflage are consistently set forth.

The book is intended for engineering and technical workers in the
radio engineering specialty. as well as for military readers
interested in questions of radio camouflage.

Some 5 tables, 87 figures and 65 bibliographic citations.

Table of Contents

Introduction [6]
Chapter 1. The Reflective Properties of Radar Targets [7]
l. The effective back-scatter cross-section [7]
2. Amplitude fluctuations of returns and the radar cross-sections of

targets [12]
3. Phase front fluctuations of a return [20]
4. The polarization characteristics of a return [22]
S. The effective target cross-section in the case of diversity

(bistatic) radars [2‘]

FOR 0F11C1A1.USIE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. The average values of the effective radar scatter cross-section of

real targets [28)

Chapter 2. Experimental Studies of Effective Target Back-Scatter
Cross-Sections [29)

1. Methods of experimentally studying the effective radar cross-

section [29]
2. Specific features of electromagnetic simulation [31]
3. Measurement systems for the study of effective radar cross-sections

with models [36]
4. The RATSCAT facility for the measurement of the effective radar

cross-sections of various objects [41]

Chapter 3. The Reduction of the Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Sections
of Objects by Using Poorly Reflecting Shapes and Radio-

Absorbent Haterials (44]
1. The use of poorly reflecting shapes [64]
2. General information on radio absorbent materials [48]
3. Some theoretical questions [50]
4. Narrow band interference coatings [55]
5. Broadband radio absorbent coatings and materials [59]
6. Measuring the characteristics of radio absorbent materials [65]
Chapter A. The Camouflage Properties of Terrain and Hydrometeors [68]
l. The effective back-scatter cross-section of surface distributed
targets [68]
2. The reflective properties of the earth's surface (71]
3. The masking properties of returns from a sea surface [75]
6. The masking action of hydrometeors [80]
Chapter 5. Artificial Radar Reflectors and Their Applications [85]
1. General information [85]
2. Dipole reflectors - [87]
3. Corner reflectors [97]
4. Luneberg lenses [115]
5. Passive antenna arrays [121]
6. Guided missiles - decoy targets [131]
7. Antiradar camouflage for ballistic missiles [136]
Bibliography [163]
Introduction

The rapid development of radio engineering and radio electronics has necessitated
a transition in military affairs to fundamentally new techniques of weapons
utilization and reconnaissance in enemy territory. One of the major scans of
target detection and recognition. as well as for the guidance of ones own weapons

- 2 -

FORIOFFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the target is radar. Radars and radar systems make it possible to determine
the coordinates of military, industrial and defense installations of an enemy at
long range, regardless of the visibility conditions.

Almost from the very first days when radar appeared and in the course of its fur-
ther development during the Second World Var, means of countering the effect of
enemy radars were also being developed. A new special field of radio engineering
appeared: electronic countermeasures. At the present time, the goal of electronic
countermeasures is not only the suppression or reduction of the effectiveness of
the-means of radio communications, radio navigation and radar, but also fire control
facilities, primarily missile guidance systems. Under modern conditions, where
radio electronics is the major means of combat equipment and troop guidance, skil-
fully set up electronic countermeasures can in the final analysis significantly re-
duce the combat capability of the enemy and boost the effectiveness of one's own
forces and equipment.

Antiradar camouflage is one of the major methods of reducing the effectiveness of
enemy radar facilities in the overall set of electronic countermeasures. Its basic
function is to render difficult or to completely preclude the possibility of detec-
tion of military, defense or industrial facilities by means of radar equipment.

In refining their means of attack, the military specialists of the imperialist
states take into account the fact that the Soviet Union possesses everything neces-
sary to deal a shattering blow in reply. For this reason, they also devote great
attention to the design of new equipment and the refinement of techniques for anti-
radar camouflage. This attention is explained not only by the necessity of con-
cealing their own military and industrial installations from an answering strike,
but also by the striving to assure the suddenness of the use of weapons of mass
destruction.

The considerable increase in the detection ranges of various targets, the improve-
ment in the precision of the determination of their coordinates, the automation of
the processes of obtaining and processing the information as well as the increase
in the noise hmnunity and operational reliability of modern radar equipment have
made it a considerably more complex matter to realize antiradar camouflage and have
expanded its areas of application.

An especially large amount of work is underway abroad in the field of antiradar
camouflage for the means of air attack, primarily ballistic missiles. Thus

for example, a draft budget of the 0.5. Department of Defense in 1966 provided for
allocations amount to 168 million dollars for the development of means to facili-
tate the penetration of ballistic missiles through an anti-ballistic missile system
(ABM) of an enemy. The basis of such hardware is antiradar camouflage.

An attempt is made in this book to generalize and systematize information on the
means and methods of antiradar camouflage based on data from the foreign press.
Along with the analysis of the operational principle and design of individual means
of camouflage as well as the principles of their utilization, specific samples of
foreign antiradar camouflage hardware are described.

- 3 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORi0$11C1AL.USEi)NLY

The methods and means of solving the major problems of antiradar camouflage are
logically presented in the book; these consist in reducing the radar contrast of

the object being camouflaged down to the level of the ambient background; creating
an artificial masking false target of considerable extent on the radar screens,
having a return intensity much greater than the returns from the target being camou—
flaged; disorienting an observation and fire control radar system by means of false
distracting targets.

The book is intended for engineering and technical workers in the radio engineering
speciality. Some of the chapters of the book which contain descriptive material
and examples can be of interest to a wide circle of readers.

The author would like to express his gratitude to lecturer and candidate of the
technical sciences, V.T. Borovik, candidate of the technical sciences. I.S.
Luk'yashchenko and A.D. Trofimovich for assisting in the work on the book.

CHAPTER I. THE REFLECTIVE PROPERTIES OF RADAR TARGETS
1. The Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Section

One of the constant (though still insufficient) conditions for providing effective
antiradar camouflage for protected objects is the presence of the most complete in-
formation on the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the reflection of
electromagnetic energy from various targets.

when electromagnetic energy impinges on any object (a target), electrical currents
appear at its surface, if the target is a conductor, or electrical charges, if the
target is a dielectric. In this case, the target itself becomes a source of elect-
romagnetic emissions. The energy of an electromagnetic wave incident to a target

is scattered in all directions. The portion of the energy reflected from a target,
which arrives at the input to a radar receiver, forms a target marker on the radar
screen. The level of the signal reflected from the target depends on the radar
parameters, the electromagnetic propagation conditions and the nature of the tar-
get: dimensions. configuration, irradiation angle and electrical prOperties of the
target material.

A conventional quantity is used to quantitatively evaluate the reflective properties
of any radar target: at - the ef3bot£va target back-scatter cross-section (BTW).

As is well known, the secondary emission power. P2 (the energy scattered by a target
when an electromagnetic wave impinges on it). is directly proportional to the flux
density of the energy. n1, irradiating the target. i.e.:

P2 - otnl - (1.1)

The proportionality factor at in formula (1.1) is called the effective back-scatter
cross-section. Since the majority of radar targets have the property of directional
secondary emission, taking into account the directionality factor of the reflecting
object, 0, which characterizes the degree of concentration of the scattered power

- a -

FOR OFTWCLKL USEZCMNLY
Al. USE ONLY

FOR OPEC!
the direction to the radar, the expression for a; can be written in the follow—
; for! [21:
ac - (92/11:?!) (1.2)

The effective

he expressed
(d3), where 0:

determine c
section
the energy

the target
The derivation of

ch equations which exist
ne allow only for the calcula-

e beck-scatter crane-rec—
ooetric shape

 

tion of bodies a
(Table .l).
on of effective (injects with a simple geonetric shape are

back-scatter crosa- encountered rather rarely under actual radar
section unsureuent detection conditions. As a rule. they have a
units. cowl configurat on and consiat of a large
nunber of elementary reflectors. Examples 0

single targets with a complex configuration

tc. Several individual

ships. aircraf ts .

objects, locet
ly large range: a

e are gov
gnetic energy and 1
e linear dimension

he angular coor
pWCI level (eu°.1.v)-
ether and

huted target.
among such targets.
m Sphere
For a wavelen 51 f
ﬂu use "‘31-”? a:

-M’.
For a Ivavcl'en

"pa mm wﬂggm

 

Cirkmlnri C under
"nu IRIIIIIP

I I

ﬁnuu a}... 3-..};
. '2:
l-T—mm «can.
is Ithe Have dumber.
Konyccone
. ..-”O"I. '

"sup-mum damn- coovmm c or.»
(1) mn-

 

 

ﬂ ”denoun- Inna"

ﬁi—ﬁ'f'ﬂﬁi‘;—°y x

X mutual)
(2) [ ]
ﬂpn' Winem- I: mm. Win:

an“

O.-"v
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Table 1.1. continued]:

   

n‘ﬁla‘taD‘ilaa

.l
On-Iﬂflh'.téﬁgzsu)

no JI—Qyuun Bette“ l-ro mom. (3)
I19. sop-um menu I emu new:

.5
. _ . _4I'¢‘
1/5 I 1"

Dihedral Corne Reflector
nnyrplnnu yronaoeu

' orpnhneas

 

 

I new: we shaman-u patterns
at the bac -scatter pattern maxi.

trihedrai Co‘ner Reflector
pexrpuuu yroanoau

OV'IlI'CJI
Izur '
“-13— ,

a nanny-e “ups-w pattern“
at the back-scatter pattern maxim

 

Key to Table 1.1.:

1. The direction of irradiation coincides with the axis of the cone;
2. In the case of normal incidence to the plane of the plate:
3. "here J1 is a first order Bessel function. In the case of normal

incidence to the plane of the disc:. ‘

 

Radar I”:

 

Figure 1.2. The reflecting volume V - (Ilé)R29(cr/2).

If the individual reflecting elements merge into one comparatively thin layer, then

they form a surface distributed target. Such targets can be encountered in the
radar scanning of a ground or sea surface. The reflective properties of volume and

surface distributed targets are treated in Chapter 5.

- 7 _

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The calculation of the effective target cross-section of actual targets with a
complex configuration presents great theoretical difficulties. Computers find
widespread application in the analytical determination of the effective back-
scatter cross-section of actual objects.

At the present time, the effective cross-section of reflecting objects with a
complex shape is studied primarily experimentally. using special equipment and
hardware.

The following are included among the new trends in the study of radar returns:

--The study of electromagnetic energy scattering by space bodies and vehicles, as
well as by plasma formations;

--The synthesis of objects with specified secondary emission characteristics;

--The determination of the effective cross-section of objects in the case of
broadband system operation with a high resolution;

--Finding the scattering characteristics at millimeter and optical band wavelengths;

--Determining the effective cross-section of distributed objects for the purpose of
recognizing them.

2. Amplitude Fluctuations in Returns and the Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Sections
of Targets

A complex target can be treated as the aggregate of a large number of elements
which scatter the electromagnetic energy in various directions. Such elements can
be: the convex portions of the target which are characteristic "shining" spots;
flat areas, which produce a mirror or diffuse reflection. The individual struc-
tural components of a target, the dimensions of which are commensurate with the
wavelength, will produce intense secondary emission because of resonance phenomena.
The overall amplitude of the reflected signal will be governed by the relative
phases and amplitudes of the signals reflected from the elementary secondary
radiators. The amplitudes of the individual signals which have different phases
at the reception point either add together, thereby providing for a large total
return. or have such ratios that the signal is either partially or completely
suppressed. As a rule. the spacing between the individual reflecting elements
considerably exceeds the radar wavelength. In this case. the phase of the signals
at the receive point will change with a change in the position of the target
relative to the direction to the radar, something which in turn will cause addi-
tonal fluctuations in the return and the effective cross-section of the target.

In order to ascertain the mechanism for reflection from a complex target, we shall
initiall consider a target consisting of two equal isotropic reflecting elements.
spaced a distance Z from each other (Figure 1.3), where:

l < c1/2 ,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where c is the speed of light; 1' is the radar pulse width.

The overall voltage of the signal reflected from such a target will be equal to
the following at the input to the radar receiver [2]:

“in. "at = Um CO3 (" - ,l) + Una (‘05 “l _ 70.

Here. 0.1 and Du; are the aaplitudes of the voltages of the reflected signal from

the first and second targets; 91 and 62 are the phase delays of these voltages,
equal to:

«R
,|= £15L+,"; ,.=—rl+’”.
where a“ and 602 are the phase changes with reflection.

If the effective radar cross-sections of the first and second targets are equal,
then 0.1 - 01.2 and consequently.

’"in' unswmcos-Yicos (cl—£11).

where .P and ‘c are the difference and sun of the phases of the voltages 01 and Uz.

If 601 . 602. then:
?.-=2(R.-—R.)3x==-"r‘-cosl
Then the amplitude of the reflected signal voltages will be equal to:
. U.=2U..cos(—2?-oos0).
Or. by converting to the total reflected signal power, we obtain:

Pos=4p. C03. (3;!- £03.).

where P1 is the reflected signal power fraa one isotropic radiator.

Since the power of the return and the effective radar cross-section are related by

a linear function, one can write that for two elmntary targets. the effective
radar cross-sect ion will be:

o,=4o,cos'(-2§'—cos|). ' (1 3)

where 01 is the effective cross-section of one isotropic radiator.

-9-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It can be seen fran expression (1.3) that with a change in the wavelength A and
the angle 9. the quantity oz can take on any value from zero to the maximum, which
is four times greater than a; (Figure 1.6).

 

Figure 1.3. A complex target
consisting of two
scattering el-ents
elanents with a
spherical shape.

Key: 1. Radar;
2. Scattering elements.

 

Figure 1.6. Polar plots of the function
02/01 for various values of
III and the angles 0.

Real targets consist of a set of scattering elements with different reflecting
properties, where each of these elemnts can additionally interact with the others.
The mutual motion of the target and the radar. as well as the motion of individual
elements of the target itself (for example, as a result of the natural vibrations
of the aircraft or ship) exert a great influence on the nature of the flucutations
in the resulting return. It can be seen from Figure 1.5 that slight changes in the
heading angle of an aircraft can change the instantaneous value of at by a large
amount.

The amplitudes of the returns and the effective back-scatter cross-sections of
complex real targets are subject to random fluctuations. Consequently. the tech-
niques of probability theory must be employed to characterize these- quantities.
They can be sufficiently completely described by the distributions and the spectrua
of the fluctuations or by an autocorrelation function.

Let a complex target (aircraft. ship. ground structure), consisting of a set of
arbitrarily arranged reflectors, contain an element as part of it which yields a
stable reflected signal ("shining" point) , the amplitude of which exceeds the
total signal from the other elements. The amplitudes and phases of the returns of
all of the other elementary reflectors will vary (in contrast to the "shining"
point) as a function of the mutual motion of the target and the radar.

-10-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The resulting signal from such a target
will be determined by the expression:

I
E -Acosol+2 annual—9.).
...

where A is the amplitude of the
"shining" spot signal;
Bk is the amplitude of the k-th
element signal:
0k is the phase shift of the
k-th element.

With a change in the relative position
of the radar station and the target,
the ranges to the elementary reflectors
and their effective cross-sections will
also change. This leads to random
changes in the amplitudes (£1. £2, ...
ER) and the phases (0}, 02. ..., 9k) of
the reflected signals. As was demon-
strated in paper [1]. the two-dimen-
sional probability distribution of the
quantities E and o for the composite
signal can be described by the equation:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where J0(AE/v2) iﬁ a zero order Bessel function of an imaginary argument.

We derive the following from expressions (1.5) and (1.6):

. (1.7)
s a A
'(E)J-frexp[-!—g1'A- 10(4 -

Equation (1.4) is called the generalized Rayleigh distribution. If A - 0 (there

is no stable component). then As _
and the probability density “(I-Z) is 10 (1r) -Jo(0)-l-l
governed by a simple Rayleigh distribution:

V(£l--frm[--f;; - (1.8) l

\

Expressions (1.7) and (1.8) can be written in a more general form. if the following
symbols are introduced:

Then:

Curves for the distribution "(v) are shown in the graph (Figure 1.6), which were
plotted for various values of the constant component of [1]. It can be seen from
the graph that for large values of the stable component a, the distribution of
K(v) approaches a normal distribution. If there is stable component (a - 0), the
resulting signal is produced as the sun of solely the signals from the random
reflectors. The mean relative value of this signal will be equal to:

. . a .
'-5u»[-71~- .-
The dispersion of the relative signal amplitude is:
I
(I— u'-2—-§-.
By converting from the value E in expression (1.7) to power P, we derive:

-12-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“ml", -54.!) ,, LL75. (1.9)

where Po - A2/2 is the power of the stable signal component; P - E2/2 is the power
of the resulting signal. dissipated in a resistance of 1 ohm.

We shall introduce the symbol:

 
      
   
    

 
 

'2': EIIIEIII ,,,
. ‘.\' I- ll. .
it,“ apron VII -.'r- T (1 10)

a2,
a1,

I9§'0'0“ ‘-
4‘" "s as
1""‘\ §§L

Then the average power of the return
will be equal to:

   

' a, v 19.
F ' V2 + P0
Figure 1.6. Curves for the distribution
of the resulting signal
amplitudes. or. in other words:
"-I—p—--_Lﬂr
lfn l+— (1.11)

Taking expressions (1.10) and (1.11) into account, we write expression (1.9) in
the form:

IUD-#0}: [-u—(I +~)";—JX

x’°[’!/-U+~’T]

Since the effective back-scatter cross-section of the target, at is proportional
to the power of the return, then:

"'0 " '25—‘09 [— ‘l-(l +n)="—]x

(1.12)
X1. [2 le + n)_—']

If there is no stable component (m I 0), then the random quantity corresponding
to the effective cross-section of the target, is distributed exponentially:

'('-)-.o-%exp[-é:- . (1.13)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where at is the resulting effective radar cross-section of the target; at is the
mean value of the resulting effective radar cross-section of the target.

In expression (1.12), the parameter m can be treated as the ratio of the effective
radar cross-section of a stably reflecting element, 0:0, to the average us of
the effective cross-sections of all of the random reflectors. act. Thu. .or the

relative effective radar cross-section, (It/3t, the distribution densities (1.12)
and (1.13) will assuae the following forms:

v(.—-) -(| +n)exp[—u—u Mei-IX

X1. [2 Vﬂﬂ +m):—'
I - 'I
.I

' (r: ...'°"['§f]'

The curves for “(at/3t) are depicted in Figure 1.7 as a function of tag/3c for
various values of m [1]. Using these graphs, one can estimate the probability
of the appearance of various values of effective target radar cross-sections.

section distribution of a
complex target.

a
W'ﬁ‘ll. Figure 1.7. The effective radar cross-
a

    

xey: Ordinate - "(ac/3c).
0 a: 1.0 1.5 2.0 2,! a

As a rule, the spectral and correlational characteristics of returns. the auto-
correlation function and spectrum of the signal. are used to describe the fluctu-
ation variation in the amplitude of the reflected signal and the effective radar
cross-section of the target as a function of time.

The statistical relationship between the values of the fluctuating voltage 3.

broken down into a time interval T, is decsribed by means of the autocorrelation
function Rh):

r
I
- -' l l 1“.
RB) ”LT-’LUH +0
where T is the observation time.
- 1:. -

non 'omalu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The maximum value of the autocorrelation function will occur when T - O. The
value of R(T) will fall off in step with the increase in t. The duration of an
observation T should be chosen so that all of the characteristic fluctuations

in the function E(t) are encompassed.

The autocorrelation function is closely linked to the signal fluctuation spectrum.
If the changes in the amplitude of the fluctuating signal take the form of a steady-
state random process. E(t), in a specified time range of -T g t g T. then the fluctu-

ation spectrum is determined by the relation:

7
Mn- I E (l) e'"'" dl.
—7

while the spectral density is:
I
all A '.
Gth 73L’7 I N”

If E(t) is the voltage across a resistance of 1 ohm, then G(f)df is the average

power dissipated in a 1 ohm resistor in a frequency range of from f to f + df,
while C(f) is the average power density. having the dimensions of power per unit

bandwidth.

The following relationships exist between the spectral density and the autocorre-

lation function:
Q

a(!) - 4 5 Rum: 2mm.

tun—.5 am to! 2.1.4,.

The probability distributions of the effective cross-sections of real targets
and the nature of the change in the effective cross-sections as a function of time

are usually determined experimentally.

3. Phase Front Fluctuations of a Return

For a complex target, there are also fluctuations in the phase front of the
signal along with the fluctuations in the amplitude of the reflected signal.

To explain this phenomenon. we shall again turn to the target model consisting of
two point isotropic radiators and compare the pictures of the phase fronts of this

target and a single isotropic radiator (Figure 1.8).

The equal phase surfaces of a single point radiator will be concentric spheres
with the center in the radiator. For a two point target. these surfaces will be

other thansphertcal. The quantity which characterizes the bending of the phase

- 15 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

front can be found as a function of the angle 6 between normals to the equal phase
surfaces of the single point and two-point radiators for various emission angles 0.

isotropic radiator and a target con-

.___.:j;;9 ‘ Figure 1.8. The phase fronts of a single point
9
sisting of two isotropic radiators.

Key: 1. Equal phase surface of the two~
point target;
2. Equal phase surface of the
single point radiator.

Figure 1.9. On the determination of the phase shift.

 

MW Radar

Let the radar be located at remote point 3 (Figure 1.9). Then the frequency
incoming from point 1 will lag in phase the frequency from the single point source

by an angle of:
,_ 2" ‘3;
.‘T‘i "9:

while the frequency incoming from point 2 will lead it by the same angle. If the
amplitude of the transmitted signals are E and RE, where k < 1, then the vector
diagram will have the form shown in Figure 1.10a. The resulting_yector gf the
two point target field will be equal to the sum of the vectors B and RE. We

find from Figure lalob: 83h‘+.EIM(—O,
"hr—17"“. + non—c)”

l—t
.— .fc'g (Um).

Calculating the value of 6 for various values of O. k and I, one can construct

the picture of the phase fronts of a two point target (Figure 1.11). The fluctu-
ations of the phase front because of the continuous motion of the target relative

to the radar are of a random nature. These fluctuations are manifest at the output
of the receiver in the form of random changes in the error signal for the measure-
ment of the angular position of the target. and for this reason, they are frequently

called angular noise.

-16-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.10. Vector diagrams of the field ofa two-point
target.

Key: 1. Direction of the emission of a single
point source.

Figure 1.11. Equal phase surface cross-sections in I
plane of the drawing. Target point 1 :
the source of large amplitude oscilla-
tions [1]. .

 

lo. The Polarization Characteristics of a Return

3/». Effect 1'.
06’ Back-scatter
dB Croas-aection

 

I) W 00 '10 ﬂ
Aunmml Azimuth, degrees

Figure 1.12. Experimental diagram of the effective radar cross-section
of an aircraft as a function of aziauth, measured in the
plane of the wings.

Key: 1. Vertical polarization of the incident wave;
2. Horizontal polarization. Frequency of 75 MHz.

-17-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 1.2 Results of Measurements of the Losses of a Radar Signal Reflected
From an Aircraft (A - 10 CID

—______—___._———————————-—

 

 

 

;:§::::;t:::° Target Changes in the Reflected Signal Lozzes,
Plane Ideal Reflects all of the energy: 0
the polarization plane of the
reflected signal is parallel
to the polarization plane of
the incident wave
Plane Air- A portion of the energy 0.5
craft (-10 dB) is returned with
transverse polarization and
is attenuated by the receiver
Circular Air- The reflected energy is split 3
(reception craft equally between orthogonal
with the same circular polarizations
polarization
as the trans-
mission)

______________________—-—————————————

Experimental studies confirm the dependence of the reflected signal intensity. and
consequently also the value of the effective radar cross-section of the target on
the kind of polarization of the transmitted signal (Figure 1.12). When electro-
magnetic oscillationa are reflected from any object, the polarization of the
reflected wave doesnotmatch the polarization of the indicent wave in the general
case, i.e., the reflected signal is depolarized. The degree of depolarization
depends on the properties of the irradiated target and on the polarization of the
incident field. Solids exist which reflect any polarization field without distor-
tions: these are a sphere and a flat disc. irradiated in the direction of the axis.
Another extreme case is a target which produces a reflected field with one polar-
ization for any polarization of the incident wave. Such a target is a fine wire.

Objects of an arbitrary shape change the polarization of the incident field in
various ways; in this case. attenuation of the signal is observed a a rule at the
input to the receiver because of the depolarization (Table 1.2) [64].

S. The Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Section of a Target for the Case of
Diversity (Bistatic) Radar

In bistatic radar, the transmitter and receiver are located in different places.
A separation angle 8 is formed between the transmitter-target direction and the

receiver-target direction (Figure 1.13). If B - 0°, bistatic radar reduces to
the conventional nonostatic case.

-18-

IV)! 0W1NCJAI.[EHE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

'17“!an l I nub-u
transmitter Receiver

Figure 1.13. Radar using a spatially separated transuitter
and receiver.

The range equation for bistatic radar has the following fora:
P .0...0 m e
P - p = I. I I .
rec. "’ («r35 ,L...L. m

where P is the received signal power;

P“; is the transmitted signal power;
Guan is the directional gain of the transmitting antenna;
an is the directional gain of the receiving antenna;
Ouo is the effective target back-scatter cross-section;
”1 is the distance from the target to the transnitter;
Dz is the distance from the target to the receiver;
Lp nap are the radio wave propagation losses from the transmitter to the
target;

Lp np are the radio wave propagation losses from the target to the receiver.

In this case, one is a measure of the energy scattered in the direction of the
receiving antenna.

As has shown in the literature [28], for separation angles 8 9‘ 180‘, the relation-
ship between the values of the effective radar cross-sections for the case of
nonostatic and bistatic radar can be found if the following theorem is employed:

"At the linit, in the case of an infinitely snall wavelength, the effective target
cross-section, where the target is a sufficiently smooth solid, for the case of

a diversity (bistatic) radar station_with directions to the transmitter and the
receiver determined by the vectors I: and n respectively. equal to the effective

-19-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

target cross-section in the case of a combined (nonostatic) radar _station._ where
the direction to the transceiver is determined by the vector k + n. where k 4 n). "

Here. E is a unit vector directed from the transmitter to the target. while 3 is
a unit vector directed from the receiver to the target.

It is apparent that in those cases where the effective radar cross-section of a
complex target is composed of the effective cross-sections of several elements.
the transition from the bistatic to the monostatic case is accompanied by a change
in the relative phases, and consequently, in the fine structure of the effective
cross-section pattern of the target. It has been determined that when the effect
of shading is taken into account and when the angle is limited to a certain range
of values. the indicated theorem can be successfully employed. The influence of
shading effects for a large aircraft is shown in Figure 1.16. It can be seen fro-
the figure that in the case of bistatic measurements (3 - 135') the engines and
fuel tanks on the wings of the aircraft prove to be-"in the shade", while in the
case of monostatic measurements. the reflections from them considerably increase
the effective radar cross-section of the aircraft.

 
  

Transmitt-
..,..,., gm
‘ ‘ mm
(5-1157

Transmitter amnion-w \
a receiver' M" "" “'0"

Figure 1.16. Electromagnetic energy scattering by the nose section of
a large aircraft for two values of the separation angle.

It was found when comparing the results of monostatic and bistatic measurements
using this theorem [28], that the maximum values of the effective crosscsection,
as well as the limits of variation in the effective cross-section obey the theorem
with sufficient precision even for relatively large wavelengths. This can be seen
from the graph of Figure 1.15s and 1.15b, in which the results of measuring the
effective radar cross-section of the large aircraft depicted in Figure 1.14.
shown. During the measurements. the transmitter and axis of the aircraft were
located in the same plane and the angle 9 was read out from the axis of the air-
craft (from the nose) to the bisector of the angle formed by the transmitter,
target and the receiver.

- 20 -

FOR 0F11CJAI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

o co no no?
0 (b)

Figure 1.15. The effective back-scatter cross-sections of a large
jet aircraft. neaaured at a frequency of 250 MHz for the
case of horizontal polarization of the incident wave.

Key: a. Medians (every ten degrees);
b. Maximum values (every ten degrees):

1. B I 0‘;

2. 8 I 30';
3. 8 I 60’;
lo. 8 I 135'.

The theorem Considered here is not applicable to the case of B I 180‘ (forward
scattering). In this case, the effective radar cross-section of the target can be
many times greater than for a nonoatatic radar (back-scattering). In the case of
forward scattering, the effective radar cross-section of the target (if the wave-
length x is mall as compared to the target dimensions) will be equal to:

2 2
otf ("A [A ,

where A is the target projection area.

-21-

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

A sphere of radius a has an effective target cross-section for a monostatic radar
station of at - raz. Consequently, the ratio of the effective cross—sections for
the case fo forward and back-scattering for a sphere is equal to:

When all - 10. the theoretical effective radar cross-section of such a target in
the case of forward scattering is 36 dB greater than for back-scattering.

6. Average Values of the Effective Back-Scatter Cross—Sections of Real Targets
The mean value of the effective cross-section 3;. is usually employed in the

practical estimation of the range of a radar. This quantity can be dervied by
averaging the values of at for various directions of the incident wave.

 

 

TABLE 1.3.
Average Values of Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Sections
Effective
Radar Target Cross-gections,
m

Nose cone of a ballistic missile 0.2
Fighter 3 - 5
Medium bomber 7 - 10
Long range bomber 15 - 20
Transport aircraft up-to 50
Cruiser 14.000
Low tonnage transport 150
Medium tonnage transport 7,500
Large tonnage transport 15,000
Trawler 750
Small submarine on the surface 140
Launch 100
Submarine conning tower 1
Han 0.8

___________._______—__————-———_—-—-—

Average values of the effective radar cross-sections of various real targets
are given in Table 1.3, which were obtained as a result of the statistical gen-
eralization of a large number of measurements at centimeter band wavelengths.

As a rule, the maximum detection range of such targets was measured. Rmax. and
then at was determined from the basic radar equation.

-22-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER TWO. THE EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF 1115 EFFECTIVE BACK-SCAM CROSS-SECTIONS
0F TARGETS

1. Methods of Experimentally Studying Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Sections

If the atmospheric absorption of electromagnetic energy. ground or sea returns and
other limiting factors are not taken into account. then radar range in free space
is determined by the formula:

_ I.
Rmax A(/¢?) (2.1)

where A is a factor which conﬁnes the radar parameters.

It is apparent that the basic method of reducing the radar detection range for an
object to be protected using antiradar camouflage is the.reduction of the value of
the effective radar cross-section of such an object. The successful resolution

of this problem not only reduces the detection range of the object being defended,
but additionally does the following:

"Reduces the target detection probability and the probability of autoguidance
systems of missile armaments which use radar locking onto it;

«Allows for a significant reduction in the power of jaming transmitters installed
in the object being protected (if at is reduced by a factor of n. then the power
of the janming transmitter installed in this object to protect it can be reduced
by a factor of n);

"Makes it possible to the size and weight of false radar targets which simulate
the actual object with a reduced at;

«Boosts the camouflage effect of hydrometeors and sea and ground
returns.

To achieve the requisite camouflage effect when protecting one military or
industrial facility or another. it is essential to know not only its overall
effective radar cross-section, but also to determine which elements of the struc-
ture specifically contribute the major share of the reflected signal. In other
words. it is necessary to ascertain which portions of the object's surface must
be camouflaged first of all. To obtain such data by means of theoretical research
is an extremely canplex problem. and at times, even impossible. For this reason.
the major method of studying the effective radar cross-sections of real objects
is experimentation at the present time. An advantage of the experimental method
of study is the fact that it makes it possible to obtain a detailed reflection
pattern in the elevation and azimuth planes and to ascertain the fluctuation and
polarization characteristics of the return. The precision of the experimental
method is sufficient for the design of a false target which simulates the real
target with a high degree of reliability. The data obtained in this fashion can

-23-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be utilized for the solution of the inverse problem: identification of the signal
from a real object against a background of signals and false targets.

One of the most obvious methods of measuring at is the study of the reflecting
properties of an object under full scale conditions. It can be seen from the
radar range equation:

P" _ an...
Prec/Ptrans - F::"37YN7 (2.2)

That if the radar is calibrated, then the value of at can be calculated by measur-
ing the transmitted and reflected powers, Vtrans and Prec-

However, the performance of such measurements in a real situation entails consid-
erable organizational and technical difficulties and requires considerable material
outlays. For this reason, the reflective properties of objects are studied at the
present time primarily under laboratory conditions or on special test sites. Both
the objects themselves or mock-ups of them made to full scale, as well as models
of the targets being studied can be used in this case. The use of mock-ups and
models makes it possible to not only study the secondary emission pattern of the
object in detail. but also to determine the influence of its individual structural
components on the total value of the effective radar cross-section and the struc-
ture of the reflected signal. The studies consist in sequentially removing the
elements being studied from the model, their reflective properties and
comparing the results obtained with the reflected signal level received from the
model of the entire object.

2. Specific Peatures.of Electromagnetic Simulation

A model which differs from the original by a scale of n - 1/: is placed in the
field of the electromagnetic radiation. the wavelength of which should be n times
shorter than when irradiating the actual target. In accordance with the require-
ments of the experiment, the model is rotated in one plane or another. Its second-
ary emission field acts on the receiver at the appropriate frequency, is converted
to an electrical signal of a definite level, which is then registered on an auto-
recorder tape, photographic film or on magnetic tape. The polar plots obtained in
this way make it possible to ascertain the level of the reflected signal as a
function of the angular position of the model.

The possibility of a simple change in the scales of the electromagnetic systems
is a direct consequence of Maxwell's linear equations. It is sufficient to meet
the similarity conditions when modeling that the dimensions of the target and the
wavelength for the measurements be changed by the same number of times, while the
quantity EIH be the same for the model and the real object (Table 2.1).

Small models of aircraft. missiles and ships are turned out of an entire piece of
metal. usually. aluminum or magnesium. Models of large dimensions are fabricated
from wood or fiberglass and then coated with several layers of conductive paint.

-21.-

FOIIOFFKJAJ.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To perform measurements on models, one mat correctlychoose the transceiving equip-
ment. and additionally. neet the three following main requir-ents:

l. A plane wave should inpinge on the model.

2. Clutter due to reflections from foreign objects (Halls. stands, supports. etc.)
should be minimal.

3. The el-ents for fastening the nodels should not have an influence on the
structure of the electromagnetic field reflected from it.

TABLE 211.
Relationships Between the Parameters of a Model and a Real sttem (Target)

 

 

 

Real

Quantity System Hodel
Length Z Z' :- l/n
Time t t' 1- t/n
Frequency f f - fn
wavelength A x' - xln
Specific conductivity Y 7' - yn
Dielectric permittivity e t' - t
Antenna gain 6 6' - G
Effective back-scatter cross-section at o" - at/n2

_____—_—_______—————————-———-—

In order for the effective radar cross-section concept to have any meaning. the
value of the effective cross-section should be determined and measured for a
certain reference standard incident field. Usually, a plane wave field is
chosen as the reference standard field. An antenna radiates a spherical wave,
and only with increasing distance from the radiator does the wave front approxi-
mate a plane front. However. in step with increasing distance of the model from
the antenna, the received energy falls off rapidly, and for this reason. this
distance is chosen as small as possible (Ruin), but nonetheless such that the
wave front differs little from a plane one. If the distance I.“ exceeds the
dimensions of the test site or laboratory, then a special lens is placed between
the radiator and the target to equalize the incident wave front.

As a rule. the electromagnetic field irradiates not only the model. but also the
support on which it is mounted as well as the surrounding objects. so that the
resulting back-scatter field at the receiver takes the form of a combination of
the useful field from the model and spurious fields. Especially great inter-
ference is obtained because of returns from walls when operating in closed rooms.

In order to reduce this kind of clutter to a minimum. measurements in closed

-25-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rooms are made in so-called amechoic chambers. An anechoic chamber is created by

means of covering the walls of the room in which the measurements are made with
radio bsorb nt coatings. Free space conditions are simulated in this way.

Anechoic chambers. the fabrication and application of which have become possible
because of the existence of high quality radio absorbing materials. make it pos-
sible to study the effective radar cross-sections of various targets and test

radar equipment in short periods of time with a high precision. regardless of the
weather.

Radio absorbing materials for anechoic chambers are materials which absorb radio
waves in a wide range of frequencies. For this, they are made with a "matched"
input, i.e., the impedance of the material at the surface is equal to the impedance
of free space and gradually increases with increasing material thickness. The
majority of samples of such materials are made from flexible or solid plastic

foam with interspersed particles of absorbing material. To improve the matching
to free space, the exterior surface of the material (coating) is made with a spine
covered appearance. Hair mats impregnated with an absorbing composition can also
be used in anechoic chambers. For the meter wavelength band, individual pyramids
made of absorbing plastic foam are produced with a height of about 2 m. The radio
absorbing materials employed in anechoic chambers operate effectively in a wide
range of wavelengths shorter than a certain ultimate wavelength which is governed
by the thickness of the material as well as the average value of the dielectric
permittivity. The reflection from their surface depends little on the incidence
angles.

Radio absorbing materials are produced by the American company of "Emerson and
Camin" in the form of sheets of flexible or solid plastic foam. They are fastened
to the surfaces being camouflaged with glue or special plastic clamps. The mater-
ials are sometimes made in the form of bricks from which walls are built up. The
solid materials for floor decking are covered on the top with sheets of fabric
81855 laminate. This same company also produces. becsides the sheets of absorb-
ing material, finished panels faced with a coating. The dimensions of the panels
are 1,800 a 1,800 mm? and 2,700 x 1,200 mmz.

Returns from the support stands on which the model is secured can also be reduced
by means of radio absorbent materials. These stands or supports frequently fabri-
cated from plastic foam. To reduce the returns from the supports, they are given
the shape of a cone or inclined cylinder, while the surface is made with a toothed
shape.

The background radiation can likewise be reduced by shaping the transmitter
antenna directional pattern so that its minimum is directed towards the most
dangerous re-reflectors. Because of the fact that the power appearing at the
receiver input changes in accordance with a l/R‘ law. it is advantageous to choose
the spacing between the antenna and the model less than the distance to the inter-
fering objects.

-26-

FOR OFTWCJA|.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It makes sense to select the dimensions of anechoic rooms great enough so that the
target can be set up as far as possible from the back wall, which must additionally
be covered with the best of the absorbing materials available to the experimenter.

For example, anechoic chambers having a length of 60 to 50 m have been built in
the 0.5.

If the dimensions of the model are so great that the distance to it should exceed
30 to 40 m, special open test sites are employed. The effective radar cross-
sections of targets can be studied at such test sites just as if the targets were
located in free space and at a separation boundary. In the latter case, the trans-
ceiving antenna and the target are placed at the surface of the earth at such a
height that with the interaction of the forward and return beams from the earth, a

maximum is obtained in the interference picture. Such a test facility will be
described below in more detail.

3. Instrumentation Systems for the Study of Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Sections
Using Models

The major difficulties which are encountered in the study of effective radar cross-
sections are related to the segregation of the return signal from the transmitter
signal and the suppression of undesirable returns from surrounding objects. At the
present time, the following main types of measurement systems are employed:

--CW systems;
--Pulsed;

-Systems utilizing the doppler effect.

A C? System. This is the least expensive system. It is usually employed for
working with small models, where the measurements are made in anechoic chambers at
distances of up 15 n from the nodal.

l

A block diagram of a CH instrumentation system is shown in Figure 2.1. The system
consists of a transmitter and receiver (1, 7), connected to the corresponding arms
of a twin T-waveguide bridge, hybrid tee S. Tuning units 4 and matched load 3
are connected to one of the arms of the bridge, while foreign antenna 9 is con-
nected to the other which serves simultaneously for transmission and reception.
When using such a bridge, one must consider the fact that half of the received
"and transmitted" power is fed to the receiver, while half is lost in the load.

The waveguide tee should be made with strictly symmetrical arms. Only in this case
will there be complete decoupling between the transmitter and receiver, while the
received return is split equally between the matched load and the receiver. In
practice, the load is intentionallyslightly mismatched so that part of the signal
is reflected from it into the arm of the tee to which the receiver is connected.
This signal, the amplitude and phase of which is adjusted by means of the tuning
units, is used to compensate for parasitic background returns. The ratio of the
energy remaining following compensation in the arm of the tee, to which the
receiver is connected, to the energy in the transmitter arm is called the degree

of system decoupling. The requisite degree of decoupling increases with a decrease

- 27 -

FOR 0511C1AI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the effective radar cross-section of the object being studied. with an increase
in the requisite precision of the measurements and range to the target. To reduce

 

Figure 2.1. Block diagram of a CH system for the measure-
ment of effective back-scatter cross-sections.

Key: 1. Regulated oscillator;
2 . Decoup let;
3. Hatched load;
6. RP tuning units;
5. Hybrid T-joint;
6. Autorecorder;
7. Receiver;
8. Mixer;
9. Transceiving horn antenna;
10. Support for the model;
11. Information on the angle.

temperature influences on the level of decoupling, the waveguide T—joint and the
antenna are fabricated from Invar. while the tuning rods in the arm of the matched
load are made of quartz.

Extremely stringent requirements are placed on the stability of the oscillator,
since a frequency deviation in it leads to the unbalancing of the bridge, a degra-
dation of the decoupling and consequently, to a reduction in the receiver sensit-
ivity. It is figured that in a system ogerating in the 10 cm band. the requisite
degreg of stability should amount to 10' for a isolation level of 85 dB and 5.8 -
- 10 for an isolation of 100 dB. Modern industrial samples of microwave oscilla-
tors provide the stability needed to maintain the requisite compensation level dur-
ing the entire measurement time and can be used as transmitters and beat frequency
oscillators in superheterodyne receiving systems.

The following procedure is used for measurements made with such systems.

At the start of the measurements, the model is taken off of the support. The con-
trols of the tuning unit are set in a position such that no signal is detected in
the receiver arm. This means that the fields produced by returns from the supports
and background clutter have been cancelled out. After the model is mounted in place
an uncompensated signal appears in the receiving arm of the waveguide T-joint from
the target. which is registered by the recorder. The model can be rotated in this
case 360' in azimuth or its positioned varied in the vertical plane. Then a

28

FOI.0FFKJAI.USE1DN1¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reference standard for which the effective radar cross-section is known is substi-
tuted for the model (sphere, cylinder, corner reflector) and the uncompensated sig-
nal from the selected reference standard is recorded.

By comparing the returns from the model being studied with the return from the
reference standard, the effective radar cross-section of the model is determined
directly. To obtain satisfactory precision with such measurements, it is necessary
that the effective radar cross-section of the reference standard be of the same
order of magnitude as the effective radar cross-section of the model being measured.

The calibration of the equipment will be correct only in the case where the refer-
ence standard and the model are irradiated by a plane wave. If the irradiating
wave is other than plane. i.e. its phase front is distorted, then the reflected
field will depend on the nature and magnitude of these distortions. In order to
check the correctness of the obtained return patterns from complex models, it is
necessary to make measurements of the field reflected from a flat plate, the pat—
tern of which is well known [10].

If the transmitted wave is plane. then the angular width of the main lobe of the
secondary emission pattern of a plate of width a will be defined by the equation
9 - x/a. The sidelobes will be twice as narrow as the main lobe. The level of
the first sidelobe should be 4.7 times less than the main one; the level of the
next one should be 7.8 times less, etc.

A check of the ratio of the levels is simultaneously a check of the linearity of
the entire receiving equipment channel. The measurement of the patterns of plates
with different widths a and their comparison with the calculated ones makes it
possible to determine at which dimensions the pattern begins to be distorted so
much that the irradiating field cannot be considered plane any longer [10].

One of the variants of CH measurement systems is a frequency modulated CU system.
The operational principle of such a system consists in the following.

A signal at a frequency of f0, which is transmitted at a point in time t and re-
flected by the scattering target (the model) at-a range of R, is return to the
receiver after t - ZR/c sec. Let the frequency of the transmitted signal change
at a rate of df/dt Hz/sec, and then the frequency of the received signal will be:

_ 2R d!
,—’e 7“?-
If a small portion of the energy at a frequency of f0 is used as the heterodyne

frequency and it is mixed with the received signal, then we obtain the difference

frequency: . a
In=I-I.=2—f—7f-.

The signals reflected from objects located at ranges other than R yield other
values of f . Interference from these signals can be avoided by means of tuned
amplifiers and filters with a high degree of selectivity. The value of the effec-
tive radar target cross-section will be proportional to the amplitude of the re-

ceived signal.

-29-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2.2. Block diagram of a pulsed system for
effective radar cross-section measurements.

Key: 1. Pulse generator and time sweep;
2. Trigger pulse amplifier;
3. Modulator;
a. Magnetron;
5. Transmitting antenna;
6. Receiver and AFC system;
7. Haveguide attenuator;
8. Receiving antenna;
9. Gated amplifier;
10. Oscilloscope;
11. Servo-amplfier;
12. Servomotor for the eutorecorder pen and waveguide attenu-
ator drive;
13. Autorecorder;
11.. Information source for the angle of rotation of the
model support.

A pulsed system takes the form of a simplified radar adapted for operation with
models set up at comparatively short ranges (Figure 2.2).

The pulse technique makes it possible to obtain a high transmission power and
provides the capability of tuning out interfering signals by means of using
special gating circuits. Pulses of from 0.1 to 1.0 microseconds are used in the
equipment at repetition rates of from 500 Hz to 25 K31. The intermediate frequen-
cies of the superheterodyne receiver run from 30 to 60 ME: with a bandwidth of up
to 10 14112. For the indicated pulse widths, no antenna switchers are used. but
separate antennas are used for transmission and reception. This is due to the
fact that the comparatively long switching and reset time of antenna switches

(gas dischargera) impedes normal operation with one antenna in the case of small
ranges (up to 50 m) from the model being studied. Thelimitations related to the
selection of the minimum range are practically eliminated. if nanosecond and sub-
nanosecond pulse widths are used in the equipment. Pulse systems with pulse widths
of one nanosecond and shorter exist. something which makes it possible to obtain a

resolution of 15 an and less. It is natural that such narrow pulses require a
very wide intermediate frequency bandwidth.

-30-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Doppler Measuranent systems. The measurement principle in such systems consists in
the following.

The reflecting object is moved relative to the observer at a definite velocity
vr by means of a mechanical system. The moving object is irradiated with an elec-
tromagnetic field (with a wavelength A). The signal reflected from it will have

a frequency which now differs from the frequency f by the amount of (the doppler
frequency) :

Af - 2vr/A

The L5 frequency is segregated in the receiving equipment by means of comparing
the reflected signal frequency with the transmitter signal frequency. The ampli-
tude of the Af frequency signal will be proportional to the effective radar cross-
section of the moving object. A block-diagram of one of the variants of such a
measurement system is shown in Figure 2.3.

Figure 2.3. A measurement installation using
. rotation of the model and refer-
u cute standard, based on the util-
ization of the doppler effect.

Key: 1. CV oscillator; 2. waveguide tee.
joint; 3. Antenna; 4. Model;
S. Rotating angle mounting bracket;
6. Reference standard; 7.8. The
equipment which receives and
records the signal reflected from
the model and the reference standard;
9. Switch; 10. Mixer; 11. Load;
12. Stands for fastening the model
and the reference standard;
13. Rotational drive with the switch.

 

The object being studied is mounted on a rotating angle bracket and irradiated by

a horn antenna. A reference standard reflector mounted in the place of the model
at the same radial distance from the center of rotation is used to calibrate the
return level. The position of the transmitting antenna is chosen so that only one
object is irradiated. Thus, during the rotation of the mounting bracket. the model
and the reference standard alternately fall in the irradiating field. The return
from the rotating body is fed to the receiving arm of a waveguide tee-joint and is
mixed there with the reference signal from theoscillator. As a result of such
mixing. a difference frequency Af is segregated. which is then amplified and fed to
the recorder. If the objects are located at a distance r from the center of

- 31 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rotation and their rotational rate is q r.p.m.. then the maximum value of the
doppler frequency amounts to:

of - srq/lSA

There is a switch for the model and reference standard recording channel on the
rotating shaft, something which makes it possible to record both channels under
identical conditions and then, by means of comparing them, calculate the effective
radar cross-section of the target being studied. A mechanical system is provided
in the equipment, which makes it possible to slowly rotate an object about its own
axis simultaneously with the rapid oscillation of the object. something which in
turn makes it possible to record its polar reflection pattern.

we shall consider open test site equipment for effective cross-section measurements
using the example of the American RAT SCAT facility [28].

a. The RAT SCAT Facility for the Measurement of the Effective Radar Cross-Sections
of Various Objects

The RAT SCAT (RAdar Target SCATter Site) test facility is the largest open air
complex in the v.5. for static measurements of the effective radar cross-section
of objects weighing up to 3.6 tons. It makes it possible to perform effective
radar cross-section measurements in a frequency range of from 0.1 to 12 GB: for a
specified transmitter and.receiver signal polarization.

Figure 2.6. Plan of the RAT SCAT test facility.

Key: 1. Rotating test stands;
2. Roads for bistatic measurements;
3. Building where the radar
equipment is housed.

 

Measurements can be made at the test facility 75 percent of the days out of a year.
The size of the test site is 1,830 x 1.220 m. The overall layout of the test site
is shown in Figure 2.4. The objects being measured are positioned close to the
ground surface on plastic foam supports with small effective back-scatter cross-
sections. Calculations and experiments show that even with slight changes in the
soil characteristics, which can be due to climatic conditions. a directional pat-
tern can be obtained for any polarization similar to that shown in Figure 2.5 in

a frequency range of 0.5 to 12 Gas. In this case, the mounting height of the

-32-

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

antenna and the object as well as the range to the object remain within limits
acceptable for practice. In order to be able to simultaneously measure the
effective cross-sections of aerveral objects. three rotating stands are positioned
at distances of 150. 360 and 750 m from the radar building (Figure 2.6). Three
devices for raising the antennas (to a height of up to 12 m) are set up around the
periphery of the building, each of which supports transmitting and receiving
antennas.

Simultaneously with monostatic measurements, bistatic measurements (two position)
can be made at transmitter--target--receiver separation angles 3 of up to 120°.
For this, there are three tracks on the test sites along with the device for
raising the antenna moves as well as a bus with the equipment.

The main equipment complex consists of transceiver systems, each of which operates
in one of seven frequency subbands, something which makes it possible to continu-
ously cover a range of from 0.1 to 12 GHz; seven additional receiver systems are
housed in the bus with the equipment and are used for the two-position measurements.
There are also six sets of circular antennas with diameters of from 0.6 to 9 m and
a set of polarizing units for each frequency band.

Figure 2.5. Idealized antenna directional
pattern of the RAT SCAT facility.

Key: 1. Equal field intensity curve;
2. Equal phase curve;
3. Mirror image of the antenna.

Figure 2.6. Block diagram of the receiver of
the RAT SCAT facility.

Key: 1. Signal from the RP mixer;
2. Intermediate frequency amplifier
(60 MHz);
Gating circuit;
Error detector;
. Amplifier;
. Timing circuit;
. Reference attenuator;
8. Digital and analog devices; 9. Drive; 10. G ting circuit; 11. Signal to
the recording equipment; 12. Timing circuit; 13. Reference signal generator.

o

 

\AO‘U‘FU

kit

The minimal peak power ofeach of the seven transmitters is 1 K". The oscillators
for the transmitters in the five upper subbands are designed around THT's; triode
oscillators are used in the two lower subbands. The pulse width can be caried in
all severn subbands from 0.1 to l microsecond, while the repetition rate can vary

from 500 to 5.000 H2.

-33-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Superheterodyne receivers with automatic gain control at an intermediate frequency,
which amounts to 60 MHz, are used in the system. The bandwidth is 2 to 10 MHz.

The primary amplifier channel is coupled to the reference signal oscillator. to
obtain a linear output signal proportional to the value of the effective radar
target cross-section in decibels (Figure 2.6). A range gating circuit passes the
signal reflected from the object; the circuit passes the reference signal after
approximately half of the interval between pulses. These two signals are compared
with respect to amplitude. and the difference signal is used as an error voltage in
a tracking circuit which controls the angle of rotation of the shaft of a precision
reference attenuator. The tracking system generates-the error signal; the level of
the signal proportional to the effective radar cross-section in decibels is deter-
mined from the position of the reference attenuator shaft. This is accomplished

by means of analog and digital coding devices. Such a method provides for auto-
matic compensation for the nonlinearity of the intermediate frequency amplifiers.

The control consoles and recording equipment make it possible for the operator to
monitor and control all of the tuning circuits of the radar, the position and
angular velocity of the rotating devices. the position of the reference standard
reflector as well as the choice of antenna polarization and reference pulse ampli-

The radar return is recorded in polar and cartesian coordinates on two autorecorders.
A digital recording is also made at the same time on punched tape. which makes pos-
sible to record data incoming via the azimuth channel in intervals of 0.1, 0.2,

0.4, l, 2 and 4 degrees.

- 3a -

FINICﬂﬁﬂCJAl.USE1DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER THREE. REDUCING THE EFFECTIVE RADAR CROSS~SECTIONS 0F OBJECTS BY USING
POORLY REFLECTING SHAPES AND RADIO ABSORBANT MATERIALS

1. The Use of Poorly Reflecting Shapes

Having obtained exhaustive data on the effective radar cross-section of the
object being protected. one can set about solving one of the major problems of
antiradar camouflage: reducing the radar visibility of the object by means of
reducing its effective back-scatter cross-section.

Reductions in the effective radar cross-sections of various targets can be achieved
in two ways:

--3y imparting a poorly reflecting shape to the object being protected;
--By using radio absorbent materials.

It is obvious that the maximum masking effect can be achieved with an efficient
combination of both methods.

The general principle for the use of poorly reflecting shapes is the imparting of
such a shape to the object that the maximum of the reflected electromagnetic energy
is deflected to the side away from the direction to the radar receiver. This
phenomenon can also be supplemented with chaotic scattering in various directions.
The most characteristic poorly reflecting shape which deflects the maximum of the
reflected energy in the direction of the reoeiver is an inclined plane or pyramid.
A characteristic feature of a cone is the deflection of the maximum of the second-
ary emission pattern from the direction to the radar and the scattering of the
reflected energy in various directions.

Comparative values of the effective radar cross-sections of simple reflectors are
shown in Figure 3.1. for which the geometric areas S of the surfaces being
irradiated are equal (1 m2). Objects. in the structural design of which flat or
cylindrical surfaces normal to the direction of irradiation. as well as corner
reflectors. predominate have the greatest value of 0:. where the geometric dimen-
sions are the same. These objects are easily observed by radars at long ranges.
Consequently, a basic condition for the use of poorly reflecting shapes is the
priority replacement of structures having such surfaces with conical. pyramidal
or flat surfaces with a particular angle of inclination with respect to the hori-

zontal.

First of all. it is necessary to eliminate from the structure of the object being
protected those corner reflectors which have large values of at with small boundary
dimensions. where the signals from such reflectors are stable on the display of a
radar set. Dihedral and trihedral corner reflectors can be formed by the combina-
tion of the side of a ship and a smooth sea surface as well as by the combination
of deck and superstructure surfaces. The surfaces of buildings. in conjunction
with smooth pavements and bridges. form powerful corner reflectors with large
surface dimensions.

- 35 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If it is impossible to employ poorly reflecting shapes on an object because of
structural design requirements, antiradar shields are used. A shield takes the
form of a current conducting sheet, which is installed with an inclination to the
vertical wall of the object being camouflaged (buildings, docks, the walls of
mooring berths. etc.). A drawing depicting the protection of a submarine in its
berth with an antiradar shield is shown in Figure 3.2. As has been reported in
the foreign press. although such shields do not completely camouflage the protected
objects, they nonetheless considerably reduce the power of the reflected signals,
something which in turn has an impact on the clarity of the image on the display
screen.

Some foreign specialists believe that such effects (although to a lesser extent)
can be achieved if the vertical surfaces of the object being protected are not
made smooth. but with a relief (corrugated). Such a ceramic plate is shown in
Figure 3.3, which is proposed in the PRC for use as camouflage for residential
buildings and industrial enterprises. Components which absorb radio waves can be
introduced into the lower portion of the plate.

ﬁoreover, West German specialists have proposed that grooves. channels and cup-
shaped projections or depressions be made in the exterior surfaces of buildings to
reduce the reflected radar signal power for the purposes of camouflaging industrial
and residential buildings. To mask vertical planes and straight lines which form
the outline of a building. it is recommended that the flat surfaces be broken up
with grooves. which run in arbitrary directions; the rectangular outlines of
fondations. doors, windows and entrances are to be provided with projections and
cup-shaped add-ons, which distort the shape of these objects. Panels can be
installed at an angle of 65' to the wall of a building above windows and doors

and grooves. channels and projections can be made on the outside of the panels [7].

+ Figure 3.1. Comparative values of the effective radar
cross~sections of reflectors of various
geometrical shapes.

*

Considerable work is underway in the
0.5. to reduce the reflectivity of

the warheads of ballistic missiles by
means of imparting a poorly reflecting
geometric shape to them. It is reported
in published materials that the effec-
tive radar cross-section of a warhead,
usually assuned to be 0.2 m2, can be
reduced by a factor of almost 1,000. As
is well known, the theoretically ideal
poorly reflecting shape is an infinite
cone, viewed from the vertex. The nose-
cones of missiles being developed in

 

- 36 _

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the 11.5. at the present time have a minimal effective radar cross-section because
the electrical characteristics of an infinite cone are reproduced in then with

the greatest possible precision. This is done by means of imparting a cone shape
to the missile nose cone with an ablation shield. in order to reduce back-scatter-
ing to a minim, as well as by asking appropriate changes in the outlines of the
base of the nose cone to reduce diffraction. Sharpening the nose cone of a warhead
not only reduces its effective radar cross-section, but also attenuates the shock
wave and leads to less surface heating, something which considerably reduces
ionization. In this case, a higher penetration velocity through the atmospheric
layers is achieved and sharp aerodynmic braking of the nose cone begins at consid-
erably lower altitudes. The problans of the enemy in tracking the missile warhead
and intercepting it are thereby complicated a great deal.

   

Figure 3.2. Antiradar shield on a submarine.

Key: 1,3. Shield;
2. Conning tower;
6. Hull.

Figure 3.3. Ceraaic plate which scatters
the radio wave energy impinging
on it.

Despite the fact that a pointed shape for missile nosecones is theoretically the
most advantageous. it proves necessary in practice to round off the sharp points
of the cone somewhat for the purpose of reducing its burn-up.

A shape close to a hemisphere. but having a specially designed double curvature
to reduce the energy flux reflected in the direction of irradiation can be the
optimal one for the base of the conical surface of a aisaile nose cone. To reduce
diffraction and back-scattering, it is proposed that radio absorbant coatings be
used on the back side of a missile warhead in areas having sharp edges and projec-
tions.

The back-scattering from a missile nose cone is a function of frequency. The
energy radiated back in the direction of the irradiating source due to diffraction
reaches a maximum when the wavelength approaches the diaensions of the warhead.
The energy of the radio waves scattered from the sharp point of the cone and froa
the sharp edges of the missile warhead increase in direct proportion to wavelength:

-37-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the greater the wavelength, the greater the back-scattered energy is and the smaller
the vertex angle of the cone, the smaller the back-scattering is.

aégégég

Figure 3.4. Nosecones of 0.5. ballistic missiles.

Key: 1. Mark 2 (Atlas. Thor missiles);
2. Mark 3 (Atlas missile);
3. Mark 5 (Titan 1 missile);
lo. Mark 6 (Minuteman missile):
5. Mark 6 (Titan 2 missile);
6. Mark 7 (Skybull missile);-
7. Mark ll, 11A (Minuteman missile).

The nosecones of ballistic missiles in [1.5. armaments are shown in Figure 3.4.

2. General Information on Radio Absorbent Haterials

In the middle of the Second World War, the English employed aircraft radar to
search for submarines. something which sharply increased losses in the German
fleet. To retain the major tactical advantage of the submarine - the fact that it
is hidden, the Germans set about the design of radio absorbing materials. The
conning towers and extendible equipment of submarines were covered with such
materials. The coatings were supposed to absorb the electromagnetic energy incom-

ing from the radar transmitter and reduce the submarine detection range by an
aircraft radar.

In the opinion of foreign specialists, radio absorbing materials are a promising
means of antiradar camouflage at the present time too for military and industrial
objects. They are being developed primarily to shield aircraft for the purpose of
facilitating the penetration of aircraft and missiles to an air defense line.

The operational principle of such materials consists in the fact that the absorbed
radar energy is converted to other kinds of energy in the material itself. In this

case. the phenomena of electromagnetic wave absorption, scattering and interference
occur. In the case of electromagnetic energy absorption, the incident wave field
is attenuated because of the conversion of the field energy to heat.

-33-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such a process is primarily explained by the presence of dielectric and magnetic
losses in the absorbing camouflage material. The scattering process is the con-
version of the electromagnetic energy flux which propagates in a certain direction
in the material to fluxes in various directions. The radio wave interference phe-
nomenon (on analogy with optical interference) is responsible for the reflectivity
of an absorbing material in the direction of greatest secondary emission from its
surface.

In terms of structural design, absorbing materials can be broken down into two
main types:

1. Radio absorbent coatings - materials which are applied to the surface (as a
rule, metal surface) of the object being protected.

2. Radio absorbent construction materials: such materials, which are used for the
construction of military or industrial facilities, combine, along with good strength
characteristics, the property of absorbing radio waves transmitted by enemy search
radars.

The following requirements are placed both on these and other material:
-Hinimal radio wave reflection from the surface being protected;
--Haximum electromagnetic wave absorption;

--A wide frequency range of absorbed energy;

-High strength characteristics;_

--Hinimum size and weight;

-Capable of operating in a wide range of positive and negative temperatures.

Radio absorbant materials can be broken doen into two main types, according to

the operational principle: narrow band types. which are interference materials and
broadband types, absorbing materials. In narrow band interference coatings, the
secondary radio emission is suppressed because of the interference of the radio
waves reflected from the exterior surface of the coating and the surface of the
object being camouflaged. In broadband absorbing materials. because of their
definite structure, there are no reflections from the external surface of the
material and almost all of the electromagnetic wave energy entering the camouflage
coating is gradually attenuated and converted to heat by virtue of the induction
of scattered currents and magnetic hysteresis or high frequency dielectric losses.

Depending on the electrical and magnetic properties. radio absorbing materials can
be broken down into dielectric and magnetic-dielectric types.

- 39 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Some Questions of Theory

An absorbing material will correspond to its designation in the case where there is
no electromagnetic wave reflection from the external surface while the energy pene-
trating into such a material is completely absorbed in it. Meeating these condi-
tions is achieved through the appropriate choice of the electrical properties of

the material, primarily the complex dielectric permittivity and the complex magnetic
permeability:

c - e’—I a".
H - |l'—ht".

The imaginary components of the permeability and permittivity are due to losses in
the material. He shall consider the conditions for theabscence of electromagnetic
energy reflection from the absorbing material. Let this material with electrical
parameters of t and u have the form of an infinite plane. where a radio wave
arrives from the external space (clul) normal to the plane (Figure 3.5).

The field of such a wave at the surface of the absorbing material and the field
inside the material will be described by Maxwell's equations [5. 9]:

E.= [idem +514") (3'1)
. 0.
11.: 133 w" _ se‘m) ,0
E'I=Euew’o <0
‘7 - z - 3.2
”n. = E. VT e). r ( )

Here in - Zu/x and k' - kn are the wave factors for the ambient medium (the air)
and the absorbing material respectively. n - I; is the complex index of refrac-

tion in the absorbing medium; a is the coefficient of radio wave reflection from
the surface of the coating.

If boundary conditions are used which the field must satisfy at the surface of
the material (the separation boundary of the media). i.e.. when the tangential

components of the electric and magnetic fields are equal, we obtain the following
expression for the reflection factor:

 

It is apparent that the factor a will be equal to zero (there is no reflection

from the coating) when the dielectric permittivity and magnetic permeability of
the material are equal, 6 - u.

-40-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3.5. Schematic explaining the derivation of equations
(3.1) and (3.2).

/ / The expresions for s can be rewritten
’0' 60‘ in a different form:
A M- l
// 3:" + ' I
l where m - 21/22, and 21 and 22 are the
complex impedances of the first and
second media in which the wave propa-

s gates.

If the first medim is the ambient air,

// //I' then z - 377 ohms. In the case where
the second median is an absorbing

. material, it is necessary for the lack
of a reflection that the equality
22 3 21 be observed, from which it fol-

Figure 3.6. The influence of the angle at lows that m _ 377 ohms, or

the vertex of the spines of
the exterior surface of a __
coating on the number of V PI .5377 on ohms
reflections within the cells. or

Thus, if the radio absorbing material has n; rel I l (nonmagnetic dielectric), then
it is necessary that ere]. also be close to unity. A material having such properties
should be porous (for example, rubber or polystyrene foam). However, it is also
difficult in this case to meet the condition t - u for the input layer.

To reduce residual reflections, the exterior surface is not made smooth, but rather
with relief, by arranging pyramidal projections over the entire surface (spines).

In order to increase the number of reflections between the spines (and consequently,
reduce the reflections from the coating surface), it is advantageous to make the
angle small at the vertex of a spine (Figure 3.6).

-41-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A material which such properties can operate in a rather frequency range, given the
condition that the imaginary components jc and ju, which are due to energy losses
when it passes through a layer of the selected material, are sufficiently large.

The effectiveness of a coating is improved if
, £335$3§ its absorption factor gradually increases

from the outside surface of the coating to the
protected surface. Hultilayer dielectric radio
absorbent materials (urel . l) are used for
this purpose, where these materials have a
permittivity t which increases from the
exterior surface deep within the coating.

Hhile the bulk of the energy impinging on
absorbing protective coatings is converted to
heat before the electromagnetic waves reach .
the reflecting surface of the protected object}

 

Figure 3.7. A radio absorbent in interference (narrow band) coatings. the
interference coat- lack of a reflection from the object being
ing with a thick- camouflaged is achieved through the interfer-
ness of a quarter ence of two radio waves: the one reflected
wavelength. glued from the exterior surface of the coating and
onto a metal sheet. the one from the surface to which the coating

is applied (Figure 3.7). Naturally. in this

case, the spacing between the reflecting

surfaces (the coating thickness) should be
such as to provide for the out—of-phase addition of the reflected waves. In other
words. the suppression of the incident wave occurs when its phase shift in the
layer is 6 . n. i.e., when the layer thickness d, is equal to an odd number of
quarter wavelengths:

0 ' (2b - 1):,

where b - 0, l, 2, ...
d - (2b - l)A/4n.

The masking effect of radio absorbing materials (coatings) is effective only in
the case where the linear dimensions of the flat surfaces of the protected objects
(targets) or the radii of curvature of their surfaces with a complex shape consid-
erably exceed the wavelength in the coating material, i.e.. when the following
condition is met:

-’EV3>IO.

where S is the cross-section area of the body.

- 42 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When the wavelength exceeds the maximum diameter of an object, so-called Rayleigh
scattering is observed. In this case, scattering by an object with a finite

conductivity proves to be almost the same as for an object with infinite conduc-
tivity, something which can be seen directly from the expression for the propaga-

tion constant:
1=u‘/‘W(—_ |+]_)

where n is the conductivity.

In fact, at sufficiently long wavelengths, the second term in the expression for

y begins to predominate, because of which, a coating with a finite conductivity
will behave as an ideal conductor and the incident electromagnetic energy will not
be able to penetrate into such a coating and will be absorbed in it. Experimental
studies performed with metal spheres and cones with vertex angles of 60°, 90° and
120° have demonstrated that in the region of Rayleigh scattering, applying a
coating to the surface of a sphere even leads to a slight increase in the back-
scattering. and consequently, the effective radar cross-section of the sphere.
However, in the region of resonance scattering ([ZI/Ala ; 0.6, where a is the
radius of the sphere). just as is to be expected, back-scattering decreases when

a coating is applied.

Back-scattering by cones in the Rayleigh region when a coating is applied increases
considerably (by 20 dB), and the back-scattering level begins to fall off in step
with an increase in the diameter of the base of the cone. i.e., as the region of
resonance scattering is approached.

4. Sarrow Band Interference Coatings

The simplest interference coating takes the ‘orm of a resonant absorber, consisting
of a homogeneous dielectric layer applied to the metal surface being protected.

The thickness of the dielectric layer d, its dielectric constant c and the tangent
of the dielectric loss angle, tans, are chosen so that the reflection factor for
the incidence electromagnetic waves is equal to zero.

Camouflage interference coatings are manufactured abroad from various plastics or
rubber, filled with graphite powder or carbonyl iron. Merits of such coatings
are their considerable mechanical strength, flexibility, comparatively small
thickness and low weight. A major drawback consists in the fact that absorption
takes place in a narrow band of frequencies. This is related to the basic condi-
tion for obtaining a nonreflective interference coating: its thickness is a func-
tion of the transmitter wavelength as well as the dielectric permittivity c and
the magnetic permeability u of the material itself, i.e.:

l

d=—-—

”'5'

_ 43 -

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070041-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to meet this condition. it is necessary to precisely cho
e, u and the thickness of the coating. The coatings can be rathe
wavelengths with large dielectric and magnetic losses in the mate
materials work well only in the case of normal incidence of the r
their surface. At other incidence angles. the reflection factor

increases sharply.

TABLE 3.1
Characteristics of Narrow Band Camouflage Coatings

 

 

 

brand of Thick- Wavelength Band- Height.
Material ness. Range. cm width, kg/mz
JIL. _1__
m1 2 3-3.4 10 7
m 2 — 10 9
- 351 6 - 25 1/
H83 5 9.1-10.5 2!. 17
'hm.i
2
Pr.’. 1

     
  

 

Figure 3.8. The power refle
coating as a fl
length for the
incidence.

‘I IIII

illlnlll
ll IIEEIIIII

1.0 J.’ 17 13 1.0!

    

Figure 3.9. The power reflected
coating as a functn
length for the case
incidence.

 

The type MK and HS radio absorbent coatings developed by the Eng
"Plessey Company”, can serve as the most characteristic example
interference materials (Table 3.1). The basis of the coatings i
is nixed with carbonyl iron. The back side of the materials is
copper sheet or flexible brass fabric. In the latter case. the
to fit the shape of the camouflaged object.

The bandwidth of HS material is considerably wider than that of:
large content of magnetic material, and consequently, the large

- an -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070041-6
the characteristic impedance. These materials take up little space, and if their
back side is firmly fastened to the solid surface of the camouflaged object. they
are good conductors of heat, and can absorb and dissipate approximately one watt/
/cm2. During a short—term exposure of such materials to a field with a power of
approximately 200 K“ on a surface of a few tens of centimeters, no changes were
observed in their properties.

Curves showing the power of the reflected signals as a function of the wavelength
and the angle of incidence for the H51 and MRI materials are plotted in Figures
3.8 - 3.10. They all have a narrow absorption band, and moreover, the power of
the returns rises rapidly with an increase in the angle of incidence.

Figure 3.10. The power reflected from
the M51 coating as a
function of the angle of
incidence e at a wave-
length of 3.2 cm.

     
   

II IIIIEI.
I IIII r
E Illllla
I IIIpwn
A'I

II Igg, I
.II!!.eg.siII

m 20 :o co p.000

 
       

  

Key: 1. Horizontal polarization;
2. Vertical polarization.

     

degrees

Type ﬁx and HS coatings with a small thickness and low weight have a comparatively
high mechanical strength, something which makes it possible to use them for the
antiradar camouflage of small mobile objects: motor vehicles, tanks, small ships,
buoys, the helmets and weapons of night patrols; etc. [21, 30, 39].

The RS radio absorbing interference coating, designed for operation in the three
centimeter band, was developed in the 0.8. The coating is manufactured in the
form of flexible plastic sheets 1.75 In thick, with which metal objects of any
shape can easily be covered. This covering provides for a reduction in the re-
flected power by a factor of 100 (as compared to reflection from a metal surface)
at a wavelength of 3.2 cm. The material is distinguished by good strength charac-
teristics, it can operate both at high (up to 205 'C) and below freezing tempera-
tures, as well as in conditions of solar radiation, wind and rain. A square meter
of such a covering weighs about 5 kg.

It should be noted that the production process for the fabrication of thin sheet
and film interference coatings, which have good radio engineering and mechanical
properties. is extremely complex.

Here. for example, is how a radio absorbent material is fabricated for a resonant
frequency of 7.5 . 109 Hz. The technology was developed by the American firm of
"Dupont de Nemours Company". It is first of all necessary to fabricate the so-
called neoprene absorbing cement, the composition of which includes the following
components: 150 parts neoprene, 3 parts phenyl-B-naphthylamine, 7.5 parts zinc
oxide, 6 parts calcined magnesium oxide, 0.75 parts stearic acid. 84 parts furnace
black and 696 parts xylol. At first, the phenyl-B-naphthylamine, magnesium oxide,

- 45 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

zinc oxide, and furance black are mixed in a special mixer for three minutes at a
temperature of 63 'C. Then the temperature is lowered to 35 °C, neoprene is added
to the mixer and the temperature is again increased up to 88 'C for seven minutes.
The mixing is carried out at this temperature for five minutes. The resulting
composition is placed in a rubber mill, where the zinc oxide is added to it at
room temperature. Such a mixture, which is prepared in a cold rubber mill, is
placed in a paddle mixer and half of the xylol contents are added, after which the
intermixing continues for another 5.5 hours. The cement solution prepared in this
manner contains 33.? percent solid material by weight and is filtered through a
fabric filter to remove the insoluble clumps. Then a homogeneous composition is
prepared from the filtered mass. which is suitable for application to a flat surf-
ace with a conventional putty knife. For this. 171 parts by weight of neoprene
cement is mixed with 12.6 parts by weight of graphite and 42 parts toluene. Such
a solution is applied to the surface of glass plates (coated beforehand with a
polyvinylchloride film 0.025 mm thick) and dried for 30 minutes at room temperature.
Yet another coating layers are applied in the same way. The finished coating is
removed from the glass plate. kept at a temperature of 70 'C for 26 hours to
remove the solvent and is vulcanized at a temperature of 140 ’C for an hour.

The vulcanized film 0.5 mm thick contains 11.9 percent (by volume) graphite and
22.7 percent (by volume) furnace black. Three such films are placed one on top
of the other and pressed. The finished film is firmly joined to the metal foil.

it is recommended that graphite and acetylene black be used to absorb lower fre-
quencies, and in this case, their content in the film is increased up to 25-50
percent (by volume).

Also of interest is the work underway abroad on the design of radio absorbent
materials which take the form of a system of dipoles oriented in a dielectric and
arranged at a distance of aquarterwavelength from the metal surface of the object
being camouflaged. It is believed that such a system will make it possible to
extend the bandwidth in which narrow band materials operate. It has been deter-
mined that for each length of the dipole used in the absorbing system there exists
a lattice constant for the grid formed by the dipoles such that the reflection
factor is minimal.

Under actual modern combat conditions. a large number of radars will be used
simultaneously which have various working wavelengths. In this case. narrow band
interference coatings will have little effectiveness. Broadband radio absorbent
materials are considered more promising. As a rule, they have considerable thick-
ness and wieght. but nonetheless can camouflage the objects they protect against
radar stations operating at different frequencies.

5. Broadband Radio Absorbent Coatings and Materials
The development of broadband radio absorbent coatings. which were intended for
camouflaging submarines, started during the Second World War in Germany. The

coverings consisted of a number of layers. the conductivity of which increased
with depth. The layers were separated by a foam-like plastic with a dielectric

- 66 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FKﬂICNHWCJAl.USE2(NULY

permittivity close to unity. Absorption was good in a range of wavelengths from
a to 13 cm. However. because of the great thickness and considerable weight, the
covering samples which were developed did not find practical application.

Many industrial companies and scientific research organizations abroad are working
on such materials at the present time. It is believed that the use of absorbing
coatings on aircraft and missiles will make it possible to significantly facilitate
their penetration of air defense zones of an enemy, saturated with radars operating
in a broad range of frequencies. The opinion has been put foreward that if even
the speed of a camouflaged object is reduced through of such materials. the then
slow nuclear weapons vehicle which is poorly visible on a radar screen can prove
to be more dangerous than a fast vehicle which produces a strong return and is
detected by the radar at a great range. A merit of such materials is also the

fact that they do not have to cover the entire camouflaged object, but only the
"shining" areas of its surface which are determined during the process of studying
the effective radar cross-sections of various targets.

 

 

 

TABLE 3.2
Characteristics of Broadband Camouflage Coatings
Lower Haxi- Height Cost per
Brand Limit of mum Thickness, per Square
the Wave— reflec- mm Square Meter,
length ted Meter, Dollars
Range, cm power,Z kg
AN-R-72 1.5 1.5 3.2 0.4 h8.5
AN-w-73 6.0 1 9.5 0.8 54
AN-w-76 8.6 1 15.9 1.2 63
AN-u-75 12.5 1 25.6 2.0 72
AN-w-77 32.0 1 53.5 3.5 117
AN-w-79 66 0 1 114.3 8.0 140

The American company "Emerson and

Camin" produces the AN-H series of radio
absorbent materials, which are recom-
mended for use on aircraft and objects
exposed to the open air (Table 3.2).

The company advertises this material as
light, flexible and a sheet covering
which can assume the form of the object
being protected. The dimensions of a
sheet are 600 x 600 mm. The covering
parameters do not depend on the weather
and do not change at temperatures of
from ~55 to +150 'C.

 

Figure 3.11. Af-ll radio absorbent
material, the outer surface
of which is corrugated.

A neoprene fabric
covered with nylon is applied to the
material, which is glued to any surface.

-47-

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
The type RH "Echosorb" broadband radio absorbent material was also developed by

the same company to camouflage aircraft and space vehicles. It takes the form of

a flexible silicone foam capable of operating for a long time at high temperatures
(up to +260 '0). The power reflection factor in a range of wavelengths of from

4 cm ans shorter does not exceed 2 percent. Changes in the polarization plane of
the incident energy or the angle of incidence have little effect on a change in

the reflection factor. The material is produced in the form of sheets 300 x 300 am.
At a thickness of 9.5 an. the weight of one square eater of the material is 2.98 kg.
A variant of the RH "Echosorb" has been developed for a range of wavelengths of

8 cm and shorter. It weighs 6.85 kg/mz. while the thickness is 28.6 an [43].

The English firm of "Plessey Company" produces the AF series of broadband radio
absorbent materials, which are intended for camouflaging stationary objects or
objects which move at a slow velocity (Figure 3.11). These coverings are specif-
ically recomended for use in camouflaging the superstructures of ships, buildings,
port facilities, canals. etc. [7, 30].

The AF-lO material is fabricated from two layers of porous rubber. mixed with
carbon dust. The absorption increases gradually from the first layer to the
second. The covering layers have the following characteristics:

First Layer Second Lazer
Characteristic impedance, ohms 225 190
Attenuation, dB/m:
At a frequency of 3,000 mi: 125 ' 210
At a frequency of 10.000 MHz 560 970

In the case of normal incidence of a beam on the first layer. the power reflection
factor in a range of wavelengths of 3 to 10 cm is 6 percent. The corrugation of
the surface reduces it down to 1 percent in the 10 cm band and down to 0.2 percent
in the 3 cm band. Because of the relief surface. the reflection factor depends
little on the angle of incidence.

The AF-ll coating which is intended for wavelengths of 5.7 cm and shorter has
finer absorber grains and less weight than the AP-lO.

Figure 3.12. The electromagnetic power re-
flected from AFZO material as a
function of wavelength for the
case of normal incidence.

 

-48-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ffﬂl()FF1(1AI.IJSIZ(NVLY

Figure 3.13. The electromagnetic power re-
flected from AF-ZO material as a
function of the angle of inci-
dence at a wavelength of 3 cm.

Key: 1. Horizontal polarization;
2. Vertical polarization.

 

The lightest end hardest covering is the AF-ZO type. It consists of pressed grains
of polystyrene foam, surrounded by a tough carbon film. The front side is likewise
corrugated, just as the AP-ll material. The AF-ZO materials can be used in open
air if their surface is protected by a layer of hydrophobic siliceous paint. In
this case. atmospheric moisture can fora individual drops. which do not increase
reflections, on the corrugated surface of the covering. The reflection factor from
such a coating does not exceed one percent with respect to power in a wide range

of wavelengths (Figures 3.12. 3.13).

Ferrites have found widespread applications in recent years for the manufacture of
broadband radio absorbent materials. Coverings made of such materials are distin-
guished by light weight and small thickness. The American company of "Conductron"
manufactures material based on ferrites. intended for camouflaging the nose cones

of ballistic missiles. It provides for the absorption of electromagnetic energy at
meter and decimeter wavelengths. Other broadband materials by the same firm make

it possible to absorb radio elissions in a range from meter to centimeter wave-
lengths. Coatings of materials of this type have a thickness of 6.3 to 12.7 In and
attenuate the reflected radiation by a factor of 20 to 1,000. One of these coat-
ings 5 mm thick (a square meter of this coating weighs 6.9 kg) provides for a reflec-
tion attenuation in a range of frequencies from 60 to 3.000 MHz down to 1 percent

in the center of the band and down to 7 percent at the edges. The "Conductron"
company is working on the design of a radio absorbent material to camouflage air-
craft and missiles. which simultaneously has thermal shielding and radio absorbent
properties. It is thought that ablation heat shield coverings can be obtained

with the introduction of plastics into the composition of the radio absorbent cover-
ings developed by this company.

The radio absorbent fabric developed in the PRC is also of interest. It is proposed
that ground objects be canouflaged with panels of such fabric: aircraft on airfields.
tanks. ordinance. missile installations, etc. The fabric has a layered grid struc-
ture, the cells of which are filled with graphite powder along with a binder. In
some layers of the fabric. the graphite powder particles are arranged so that they
do not fill the cells completely or uniformly, leaving air gaps. The camouflage
panels consist of three or five layers. where the dimensions of the cells in the

layers are not the same [7].

Radio absorbent coverings for so-called anechoic chambers are produced abroad in
a wide assortment. Their structural design and use were treated in the previous
chapter. The most widespread type of absorbing material for anechoic chambers is

- 49 -

FOR 0FFNJA1.USE¢DNLY
IKYR¢JFF1CIAL.USIECHVLY

FR "Echosorb", which is used in the form of light foam blocks. It has a reflection
factor of one percent in a wavelength range of 0.6 to 12 cm with a thickness of 5
cm (type FR-330) and in a range of wavelengths of up to 66 cm with a material
thickness of 20.3 cm (type FR-BSO).

The "Echosorb" Ch“ material is especially recommended for operation at low fre-
quencies. It is produced in the form of solid or hollow pyramids. built into
blocks. as well as in the form of individual pyramids with a height of up to 1.8 m
(CHE-S60) for frequencies below 50 His.

Absorbent antiradar structural materials occupy a special place among the means of
antiradar camouflage. West German specialists are intensively involved in their
development. For example, they have proposed using porous concrete in the form of
individual construction blocks for shielding against radar detection of buildings.
Because of the presence of air bubbles in porous concrete, the radio wave absorp-
tion in it considerably exceeds the absorption in conventional concrete. For more
intense absorption. it is recommended that graphite be mixed in the porous concrete.
A multilayer absorbing construction material design with different grain and pore
sizes in the layers has also been developed in the FRG (Figure 3.l6). The outer
layer. which is irradiated by the electromagnetic energy first, amounts to half of
the material thickness (having the form of plates or blocks) and contains the
largest grains. Underneath it is a layer in which the grains are considerably
smaller. and even lower is a layer of silica with graphite added. For practical
purposes. a three-layer absorbing plate is recommended. the outer layer of which
(11 cm) consists of grains with a diameter of 10 to 20 mm: the second layer (3 cm)
contains grains 1 to 3 mm in diameter. Underneath it is a layer of fine pebbles
with graphite added. where the diameter of the pebbles is equal to approximately
0.7 mm. Radio waves which penetrate into the second layer are partially refracted
and scattered back to the outer layer and partially absorbed in the pores of the
second layer.

Sometimes, two of these layers is
sufficient to achieve the requisite
effect. The third fine-grained layer
absorbs part of the electromagnetic
energy and reflects part of it, and it
is attenuated when passing back through
the layers with pores and hollow places
of greater size.

Work is intensively underway abroad

on the study of the radio absorbing
properties of plasma for its utiliza-
tion as a means of antiradar camouflage
for missiles and space vehicles. It was
reported in the press that a radar

 

Figure 3.14. The structure of a three— emission absorption effect and a consid—
layer radio absorbent con- erable decrease in the effective back-
struction material. scatter cross-section can be achieved

with the radar probing of a metal sphere

- 50 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

partially covered with a plasma layer. The plasma layer can be extremely thin as
compared to the radar wavelength.

6. Measuring the Characteristics of Radio Absorbent Materials

The basic parameter to be measured, which must be known both during the process of
fabricating the material and in the final stage when testing the finished sample,
is the reflection factor of the coating s. The study of the properties of radio-
absorbent materials can be carried out using various techniques. The radio fre-
quency method has become the most widespread. In this case. the field intensities
EA and ER of electromagnetic waves reflected from the absorbing material and from
a flat metal reflector respectively, where the latter has the dimensions of the
coating and is mounted in the same place, are compared:

3 I EA/ER

A sample measurement set-up is shown in Figure 3.15. The transmitting and receiving
horns are positioned on supports, which can be moved in a vertical plane along a
sanicircular arc. The sheet of absorbing material being tested is placed in the cen—
ter of the arc. The polarization is changed by rotating the horns about the axis.

Figure 3. 15 .

Set-up for measuring the reflection
factor of radio absorbent materials.

 

The transmitting horn transmits the microwaves which are modulated with square wave
pulses, which pass through the graduated attenuator. The receiving horn is loaded
into a semiconductor detector. which is coupled with a cable to an amplifier tuned
to the modulation frequency.

Having arranged the horns so as to obtain the requisite angles of incidence and
polarization. the metal sheet is placed in the center of the arc. Then the attenua-
tor is set so a sufficiently high reading is obtained at the output of the amplifier.

-51-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORI)FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Then the metal sheet is replaced by the absorbing material being tested, and the
attenuation inserted with the attenuator is reduced until the previous reading is

obtained at the amplifier output. The difference in the two attenuator readings
yields the value of the power reflection factor:

a - 10 log(P1/P2) dB,

where P1 is the power level reflected by the material; P2 is the power level
reflected by the metal sheet.

The measurement frequency range is governed by the property of the horns and the
parameters of the RF generator. At lower frequencies. considerable errors appear
because of the increase in the dimensions of the horn and the surface areas of
the tested materials as compared to the spacing between them. In this case, the
reflection factor can be determined from the standing wave ratio (SHR). The
installation includes a horn. which is matched to free space. The dimensions of
the horn are chosen so that the aperture angle of the exiting beam does not
exceed 12 degrees. The covering sheet is placed in front of the horn so as to
obtain the requisite irradiation angle.

The techniques have been developed and the equipment designed at the present time
for the rapid determination of the dielectric constants and tangent of the diele-
tric loss angle of radio absorbent materials. However, it is thought that despite
the importance of these quantities, they are rather difficult to determine at s
directly specified point on a real object. It has been reported in the press that
it is obviously expedient to evaluate promising radio absorbent materials in the
future based on such variables as the capacitance and losses at audio frequencies,
which are measured directly on the object protected with the covering.

- 52 -

FINI¢MWHC1AI.USEIDNLN
non omcm. use ONLY

CHAPTER FOUR. THE "ASKING PROPERTIES OF TERRAIN AND HYDROHETEORS

l. The Effective Back-Scatter Cross-Section of Surface Distributed Targets

The camouflage effect of surrounding terrain objects consists in producing clutter
interference as a result of electromagnetic wave reflections from the surface of
the ground or sea, as well as from inhomogeneities in the atmosphere. The intens-
ity of these returns depends on the condition of the atmosphere, the nature of the
terrain around the radar station, the wavelength as well as the resolving power of
the radar. With a sufficiently high intensity, such clutter can significantly
reduce the operational effectiveness of the radar or even completely preclude the
possibility of radar operation.

The specific effective back-scatter cross-section is taken as the measure of the
intensity of returns to characterize the lasting reflections from distributed
objects (grass cover, plowed land, forest, shubbery. a sea surface, etc.). The
back-scatter level is usually taken equal to the effective back-scatter cross-
section of one square meter of distributed surface targets and is designated oy.
We shall assune that a radar. located in an aircraft flying at an altitude H, has
a pulse width 1 and an antenna directional pattern width at the half power level
of a. At each given point in time, the signal acting on the receiver input is the
result of the adding of the signals reflected from elementary reflectors arranged
in a random manner within the bounds of the reflecting area of the surface. The
geometric area of a distributed target section ("the resolving area"). as can be
seen in Figure 6.1, will be equal to: '

S...’=%R..:'c,' ((0.1)

where o is the angle of antenna been inclination to the horizontal.

The value of the effective radar cross-section of a surface distributed target,
onu. is defined as the product:

C‘

sm=o,$|.,=-§- O'ROQCY. (4.2)

It can be seen from the derived expression that the effective back-scatter surface
area of such targets depends not only on the scattering properties of the surface,
governed by the quantity 0,. but on the oblique range. angle of wave incidence and
radar parameters. The signal from the surface target produces a rather intense
luminescent blip on the radar screen, as eri as a "background". which interferes
with the observation of point targets located within the bounds of this surface
area" ships, tanks, industrial objects. etc. A target on the ground or water
surface can be detected by the operator only in the case where its signal is

- 53 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0F11C]A[.USE¢MVLY

segregated from the pips produced by the masking returns from the background
surrounding the target. Experimental data show that on a PPI display. one can
segregate a return from a reflecting surface on which a point target is located
from the reflecting areas adjacent to it which do not have point targets only when
the contrast factor is equal to:

 

K= '-+‘- <|.3+ 1.4. (as)

where ou is the effective radar cross-section of a point target and Oru is the
effective radar cross-section of a surface target.

Figure 4.1. The reflecting surface
area in the vertical (a)
and horizontal (b) when
scanning a ground or sea
surface with a pulsed air-
craft radar.

 

”Meow

5)

To improve the observability of point targets. it is necessary to reduce Gnu-
something which as can be seen from formula (4.2) can be accomplished by narrowing
the directional pattern in the horizontal plane 0 and reducing the pulse width 1.

However, it must be noted that an inprovement in the observability of a camouflaged
object through a reduction in T will not occur as rhpidly as follows from expres-
sion (5.2). since when t is shortened, the bandwidth of the receiver must be
extended, because of which its internal noise increases.

The effective radar cross-section of a surface target is also governed by the
quantity o . which in turn depends on the unevenness of the surface. the incident
angle of the electromagnetic energy. the wavelength. the polarization and the
dielectric permittivity of the irradiated surface.

As is well known. irradiated surfaces in radar are broken down into smooth and
rough. A smooth surface is depicted on a display screen in the form of a dark
spot. since in this case. the incident bean is reflected away from it in accordance
with the laws of geometric optics and does not return to the receiver. In the

case of a rough surface. a portion of the scattered energy returns back to the
antenna and produces a bright region on the screen. The transition from a mirror
to difuse reflection is related to the unevennesses of the irradiated surface.

- 54 -

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWCJA1.USE¢MNLY

A surface can be considered snooth if the height of the uneven places on it, h,
with an angle of inclination of the antenna bean to the horizontal, e, and a wave-
length A satisfies the expression:

a (6.4)
h‘ma

The majority of surface targets have an unevenness value which does not satisfy
expreesion (6.4). For such rough surfaces which produce a diffuse reflection, the
specific effective radar cross-section is justified as a sinusoidal function of the
angle 6:

a, uvssin 9. (lo .5)

where so is the specific effective radar cross-section when 6 - «[2.

2. The ReflectingPropertiesof a Ground Surface

For centimeter band radars, the majority of dry land is a rough surface, primarily
because of vegetation. The reflecting surface of such objects consists of reflec-
tors which nave little (hills, tree trunks, etc.) and reflectors which are in
chaotic motion with the action of the wind (grass, leaves and tree branches). The
stronger the wind, the more intensive their motion. For this reason, reflections
from trees, shrubbery and natural terrain features covered with vegetation consist
of a brightly expressed constant signal and a signal which fluctuates in amplitude
and phase. Radar returns from a surface covered with vegetation undergo seasonal
changes. Horeover, the nature of electromagnetic wave reflections from all sur-
faces depends strongly on their humidity and the presence or absence of snow cover.

The specific effective radar cross-sections of a ground surface covered with

forest is shown in Figure 4.2 as a function of the angle of antenna bean inclina-
tion to the horizontal. e, and sulmary graphs of:the function a, - f (e) are
plotted in Figure 6.3 based on the results of averaging the data for various types
of terrain. As can be seen from this figure. the values of o for various terrains
occupy a region with comparatively clear-cut boundaries, so t t one can judge the
overal character of the terrain from which an echo is received based on the value
of oy. Thus, for exaaple, the range of values of o for forested terrain at
various angles to the horizontal has an extent of no more than 5 dB. The specific
radar cross-section for desert terrain depends greatly on the nature of the soil
and the surface inhomogeneities, and averages 13 d3 less than for forested regions.
Measurements made over three various regions of broken rocky desert yield very
lose results, where the course of the ay - f(¢) curve for a desert has almost the
same form as for forested terrain. The back-scattering by sandy desert (even, dry
sand) proves to be the least of dry land. Back-scattering by the sea, as a rule,
is less than the scattering by dry land, end the values of oy occupy a region 10 to
15 dB wide.

- 55 -

non omau. uss'omv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electromagnetic energy scattering by built-up regions always exceeds the scattering
by forested terriin. The range of possible values of 0y for built-up regions of
the earth's surface is extremely wide (20 to 30 d3).

In antiradar camouflage, the nature of the background against which a particular
camouflaged object is located is of very greet importance, since the background
frequently provides no small return, and sometimes a greater return than the object
being scanned, which in this case, will not be detected.

When taking step directed towards the reduction of the effective radar cross-section
of any ground object, its size, shape and the material from which it is made must be
taken into account. as well as the reflectivity of individual background areas
surrounding the object being camouflaged.

A priority task in camouflaging ground objects of extensive area should be the
equalization of the radar return coefficients of the object being camouflaged and
the ambient background. This is achieved through the use of radio absorbent con-
struction materials and coverings in conjunction with poorly reflecting shapes and
shields. By reducing the effective radar cross-section of a camouflaged object and
somewhat boosting the returns from individual background areas close to the object,
the contrast boundaries between the target being camouflaged and the background are
erased. Individual structures (bridges, roads. dams, etc.) or group objects (con-
centrated troupe or equipment. plants, warehouses. electric power stations, air-
fields) are camouflaged in this way.

Thus. for example, it is recommended in one of the foreign references [38] that
concrete asphalt highways and landing strips at airfields be camouflaged taking
into account the surrounding background.

In the case of vertical scanning of a concrete strip, up to 60 percent of the
incident energy is reflected in the direction of incidence. In the case of irradi-
ation at an angle of 65‘, the amount of energy reflected in the direction of
arrival is zero. In intermediate cases, the return factor falls in a range between
zero and 60 percent.

 

Figure 6.2. the specific effective radar cross-section, o , of
forested terrain as a function of the angle 0 beam
inclination to the horizontal, e.

Key: a. Temperate zone forest; b. Tropical forest; 1. Average value;
2. Range encompassing 70 percent of all measure-cuts.

- 55 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 5.3. The specific effective radar
cross-section. 07, as a func-
tion of the angle of been
inclination to the horizontal».

Kay: . Industrial regions of a city;
2. Comercial regions of a city;
3. Residential regions of a city;
lo. Forested terrain;
5. Broken rocky desert;
6. Sandy desert;
Degrees 7. Sea for a wind speed of fron
5 n/sec to 7 n/aec (the larger
values of 0,) .

 

To shield against radar detection. the return factor not be chosen in a manner
applicable to the surrounding terrain. If a road (airstrip) runs through a pine
forest, then the factor must be reduced from 60 to 29 percent, and if in open
fields, down to 10 percent while along rocks. down to 69 percent etc. For this
purpose. roughness can be imparted to a concrete surface of a road by neans of
channels. the spacing betveen which depends on the surrounding terrain. The con-
crete surface is broken down into fields, in which the grooves run in different
directions. The edges of the strip are camouflaged with shrubbery having a large
scattering cross-section so as to disrupt the syuetry and distort the outlines of
the strip.

When inplenenting antiradar canouflage measures for various ground objects, one
must take into account the fact that the enemy has surveillance radars for ground
targets and radars for detecting the fire positions of nortars and artillery.

The practically straight-line propagation of the ultrashort waves used in radar
limits the effectiveness of the ground station to the visible horizon. In other
words, by having reconnaissance data on the errangaent of enny radar stations in
a terrain, one can conpute the boundaries of their detection areas fron the well-
known formla:

a - 3.57(¢E+ vi).

where R is the line of sight range, In;
h is the radar station antenna height in n;
H is the height of the object in n.

The positioning of objects to be probed outside the bounds of this zone cannot be
detected by ground radars. no matter what kind of tactical and technical data
they have.

-57-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 6.6. The plotting of invisi-
bility fields.

Key: 1. Enemy radar posi-
tions;

2. Invisibility
fields of two
radars;

3. Invisibility
fields of one
radar.

 

In many cases. the terrain relief also does not allow the.detection of targets

by means of ground radars. Objects which are concealed behind natural shields:
hills, mountains. forests - are not detected by ground stations. This circumstance.
in the opinion of foreign specialists, makes it possible to use the terrain re-

lief on a widescsle to conceal troup groupings, combat materiel. and individual
ground objects in the so—called invisibility fields of the enemy radars.

Such fields can be plotted on a map of the terrain in the following manner

(Figure 6.4) [11]. Straight sighting lines are run from the locations of the
enemy radars through possible high crests. the edges of local objects and natural
shields. Then, profiles of the terrain are plotted using the sighting lines.

The enemy will not see in the sight profiles located behind terrain objects. since
a region of radio shadow is formed behind them which is due to the line of sight
propagation of V8? band radio waves.

3. The Masking Properties of Returns from a Sea Surface

Signals reflected from a sea surface can make it significantly moredifficult for
aircraft, ship or shore radars to detect targets on the water and in the air flying
at low altitude.

The nature of the average signal levels reflected from various sea targets and sea
waves as a function of their observation range by a ship radar is shown in figure
5.5. It can be seen from the figure that small sea targets (launches, small boats.
buoys or the extendable surface gear of submarines, the effective radar cross-
sections of which are commensurate with the cross-section of a buoy) will be
reliably camouflaged at certain ranges by returns from sea waves.

Sea returns have a very complex nature. The specific effective radar cross-section,
oy. of a sea surface depends on the angle of antenna beam inclination, the wave-

length and the radiation polarization. as well as the state of the see and the
wind strength.

- 53 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 6.5.
10
00
Key: 1.
)0
2

ammawc
rune! lady-I
u
a

    

     
      
   

’ ’ 1.1"...1...‘..d9 ” s.
"'"l 3:
n ,‘ 8.
Elli! m ..
IIIIIII m

IIIIIIIéI

  

function of
of the dire

Figure 6.7. The

phase for P -

The average levels of the
returns from various sea
targets [as a function of

range] .

Ship with a displacement of
10,000 tons;

. Ship with a displacement of

1,000 tons;

. Sea wave clutter incoming

from a range of up to 9 km;

. Clutter fron a range of up

to 7 he:

Launch;

Buoy;

Limiter level;

Range of signal variation which
can be displayed on the screen.
Signal to noise ratio:

Range, niles.

Figure 5.6. The quantity ay for a sea surface as a

the angle of inclination
ctional pattern and the wave-

length of the radar.

quantity ﬂy for a sea surface

as a function of the bean inclin-
ation angle.

Key:

1. Quiet sea;
2. Moderate wave agitation on
the sea.

Figure 6.8. The probability of radar detection of a
constant amplitude pulse packet with a random

10-6

Key: A. P.18/Pc1ucter. (13.

As a rule. the value of oy increases with an increase in the inclination angle.

something which is confirmed by the graph of Figure

6.6. The curves were plotted

from averaged experimental data for various sea states and wind speeds which

varied in a range of from 3.7 to 65 hue/hr.

-59-

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At small angles of inclination of the antenna beam to the horizontal (e < 10'),
the dependence of a, on the state of the sea is expressed especially sharply
(Figure 6.7). A critical inclination angle exists. ‘c . at which the slope of
the curve which which characterizes the rise in a, with an increase in 6 changes
sharply. A formula has been derived empirically which expresses the quantity

0 for a sea surface as a function of the angle 0, which yields good agreement
w th experimental data:

- _ _ _,
¢'="h 03‘” if .

The specific effective cross-section 0, increases with an increase in frequency:

in the millimeter wavelength band. it is approximately 8 to 12 dB greater than in
the centiner band (Figure 6.6). It was ascertained as a result of nmerOus experi-
ments that the specific effective radar cross-section of a sea surface is approx-
imately a x" function of the wavelength in the case of a quiet sea and approx-
imately a A‘1 function in the case of wave agitation.

The quantity a3' is expressed as a function of the polarization in the following
manner: in the case of a quiet sea, horizontally polarized signals yield a sig-
nificantly smaller reflection in the direction to the radar than vertically
polarized transmissions. The difference in the returns with the different kinds
of polarization decreases substantially in the presence of wave agitation.

A strong dependence of return intensity on the sea surface and sea wave agitation
is observed. With an increase in wave agitation. 0 increases up to a certain
limit. and then decreases. Thus, at a wavelength 0 3.0 cm, this limit begins at
a change in the sea wave height of from 0.6 to l m. The quantity 0, also depends
on the direction of the wind. A reflected signal will be more intense when the
antenna bem is directed counter to the wind. "hen the beam is oriented in the
direction of the wind, the return intensity will be 5 to 10 d3 less.

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

       

" I II lat-3?;
0.0 :35:§:Egg:=i in Figure 4.9. The probability of radar detection
'7 .a '9 ‘i "I of a mildly fluctuating pulse

0" =3:g:===:==== packet in the case of a Rayleigh
as =a§::::=:===== distribution for the amplitudes
”unusual-llama. (when P - 10'5).
' IIIIIlIIIIIlII
all-IIIIIIIIIII Key: A- Psig/Pclucgep d8-

: 0 3 f U ;‘ u

(A) -'

The procedure proposed in paper [60] can be used for practical calculations of
the masking effect of sea waves when detecting surface water targets with a ship-
board radar.

The problem of detecting the useful signal (the signal from a target on the water
surface) in the presence of interference (sea wave clutter) is a probabilistic

-60-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INIR 0F1HC1AL USEZCMNLY

problem. When solving such a problem, it is expedient to specify the false alarm
probability, P, at vhich a minimum signal passage probability, M, or a maximum
detection probability, D. is assured (the Neumann-Pesrson criterion).

In terns of the processing technique for the received signals, a shipboard PPI
radar is close to the optimal processing system for an incoherent pulse train. The
detection characteristics of an optimum receiver with square-lav summing at the
output of an incoherent packet of radar signals, n, are shown in the graphs of
Figure 6.8 and 6.9 for various P.

To segregate the useful signals in the final unit of a radar with a reliability
no less than the specified value, it is necessary that the signal/interference
ratio at the output of the detection system be no less than a threshold value

(pc/p,)w.

The calculation of the P31 /Pint ratio at the output of the system can be accom-
plished using the basic raﬁar equation:

P._7. MR ' 4.6
r:—:—(m ‘ )

where EA and 3} are the probability values of the effective radar cross-sections

of the target and the sea wave agitation; Yc and y, are attenuation functions

[for the signal and interference respectively]: R is the range to the target being
detected; Pc and P, is the back-scattered signal and interference power [respac- v
tivelyl.

In the special case where the observation is made at grazing angles, 6. close to
the critical angle Oct. expression (b.6) can be simplified, by reducing it to the
form:

&=—.'
I’. .’.¥- .Rm' (6.7)

where e is the width of the antenna directional pattern in the horizontal plane;
sec 0 I h/R (4-3)

(h is the installation height of the radar antenna).

The quantity Ocr can be computed from the formula:

3
sine-W. .

where hl and hz are the referenced heights of the radar antenna and the target.

- 51 -

FOR 0FFHJAI.USEioNLN
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Values of the critical grazing angle are given in Table 4.1 as a function of the
state of the sea surface.

Based on expressions (6.7) and (6.8). one can write the condition for reliable
detection of a target and a water surface against a background of sea wave clutter:

°" > (751.3” 5;- .' (a .9)

TABLE 4. l

Int-eaten! yum a". opal. -

Onto—at muon- mga "to man i. n (C)

 

Scum—State.— __
(«no I ‘mur‘ In 1 -
.(AL—.——LB)__.

I 0. I5 I .7 I .4

2 0.45 I .6 0.47
1 0.9 0.8 0.21
I I .8 0.4 0J2
S 3.2 0.22 0.01
6 5 0. I! 0.00
1 1.6 0.095 0.03

Key: A. Intensity rating;
3. Average wave height. a;
C. Critical angle, 9cm degrees, for a wavelength 1. cm.

 

sample. We shall determine the masking effect of sea waves when detecting surface
targets with a "Don" chipboard radar having the following parameters: 1’ - 1 micro-
second. 6- 1 degree, the pulse repetition rate is F, - 800 82. the antenna rota-
tional speed is n - 15 r.p.a.. h - 20 n and we specify the following values: D -

- 0.9, r - 10-5 and a. - -15 as (the wave height is note than 2 n).

We find the number of pulses to be integrated:

n - 0.5 (en/n) x la. n - 0.5 (Oh/9) I lo.

Fran the graph of Figure 6.9 we deter-nine the ratio (Pets/Pclutter)thresh. - 13 dB
substituting all of the data in expression (6.9), we obtain:

at :12 as - 16 .2.

Thus. the calculations show that in the case of sea wave agitation rated at In points
and above. surface targets having an effective radar cross-section of less than

-52-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

16 a2 can be detected only with great difficulty against the background of sea
wave clutter using the ”Don" shipboard radar with the antenna mounted at a height
of 20 m: launches. small boats, submarines running submerged with parascope up,
etc. And in this case, if measures to reduce the radar contrast are taken into
account, the masking effect of sea waves will also be extended to ships of greater
displacuent .

a. The Masking Effect of Hydraaeteors

water vapor condensation products in the atmosphere are called hydrometeors. They
can be observed in the form of rain, fog, snow or hail. when falling in the target
detection field of a radar. hydroneteors reduce its detection range or mask the
target. The masking effect of hydrometeors is amplified with a shortening of the
radar wavelength.

Hydrometeors (atmospheric precipitation) take the form of an aggregate of a large
number of individual elanentary reflectors, which fill a certain volume and which
are perceived as a single volume distributed target.

The elementary reflectors which form the overall signal are distributed within the
bounds of a reflecting volume V. In the case of pulsed radar, the reflecting
volume will be equal to (see Figure 1.2):

V = 1" R’o'a.;p "2;.

Then the effective radar cross-section of a distributed volunetric target can be
found from the formula:

a, .-.- a,v -_—. Ji- o,-R’O.J,.. 3-.
The specific radar cross-section. o , is governed by the nature of the bulk target.
If the bulk target takes the form 0? an aggregate of huaogeneous ref lectora -
rain drops, hail stones, snow flakes - then the value of 0, depends on the distri-
bution density of such reflectors in space, on the effective cross-section of each

of the particles, 01, and on the polarization of the incident wave [65] . The
specific effective cross-section per unit volume of hydrometeors will be equal to:

o,=- )rjouv“ (6.10)

where N1 is the number of particles per cubic meter.

In the case where fogs. clouds and precipitation consist of spherical water or ice
particles and their dianeter is much less than the wavelength, the effective radar

cross-section of a particle can be computed fro- Rayleigh's well-known formula:

-63-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' I‘d‘ ’—-| '
0‘: 13—(21—45 '. (6.11)

where n is the couple: index of refraction.

For water, the factor (m varies fron 0.90 to 0.92 and depends slightly

on the temperature when A changes from 0.8 to 10 ca. It is almost constant for
ice and is equal to 0.19.

By substituting upression (4.11) in formula (10.10), we obtain:

0 NJ‘
23 ,._. .
’1 = Tern) ‘
It is more convenient in practice to express the quantity 0,. in terms of the

water content of clouds or fogs, w in all-3, and the rain intensity as I, in
min/hr. Then the specific cross-sections for clouds and fogs will be:

(4.12)
o, =13.2-l0"' ";

and for rain:
I'-‘
, .

.,=o.2.io-"1— («.13)

Figure 6.10. The value of the specific effective
radar cross-section for rain of
various intensities.

  

Key: 1. Heavy rain (16 m/hr);
2. Moderate rain (6 Ian/hr);
3. Light rain (1 III/hr);
6. Drizzle (0.25 Ian/hr).

 

3' --..-
3 [JUGS-III-

It follows from equations (6.12) and (4.13) that for the same radar. with values
of H and I which are encountered in nature, the return from clouds and fog is
approximately four orders of magnitude less than the signal reflected from atnos-
pheric precipitation. For this reason. in practice it is necessary to consider
only the masking effect of precipitation (rain, snow, hail).

-ga-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The specific effective radar cross-sectim o,, is shown in Figure 4.10 as a
function of the rain intensity for various wavelengths. It can be seen froe the
figure that with an increase in the wavelength, the return from the rain falls off.

The power of the echo signal received fronatarget, taking into account radio wave
attenuation, can be determined fra the main radar equation, written in the fol-
lowing form:

p .a'v
P-I'= WT ., ..' r, (6.11.)

where 71 is a coefficient which takes into account the sigmal attenuation over the
radar-target path which is due to the influence of atnoepheric gases, fog, clouds
and precipitation.

The power of returns from atmospheric formations is determined from the relation-
ship:

Pa 4”“
p'=_(;—.;IF'-rgo ((0.15)

It is proposed in the literature [Isl] that the masking effect of precipitation
be characterized by a comparative relatimship between the range of a radar in
the absence of precipitation on the path and when precipitation is present.

In the first case. the signal to noise ratio at the radar receiver input is equal
to Free/P“, and in the seccnd case it is Prec/(Pn + Pr). where Pn is the power of
the receiver noise.

Assuming that the target can be detected at the same signal to noise ratio, and
euating the two latter relatialahipa, taking into accomt formlas (4.16) and
(6.15), we obtain:

Pena"..- - Paaﬂ’v'ere
(mw'. (“)‘iF(I’—T-+ . '

from which:

R:=':—;+7".—'_",—;.

Taking into account only the ranking effect of atmospheric precipitation, we find:
R: = R‘l'," + 5.2. l0'l‘-'R’, (lo. 16)

The first term in equation (6.16) takes attenuation into account. while the second
considers the masking return fro the precipitatim. Using the known radar range
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for good weather without precipitaticn, 30. one can determine its range under
specified meteorological conditions. R, from the graphs plotted using the above
equation. Curves characterizing the change in the range If a radar with the fol-
lowing parameters in a drizzle as well as in light, moderate and heavy rain are
shown in Figure 6.11. The wavelength is X - 3.2 cm; the power per pulse is

- 50 It“, the pulse width is r - 0.6 Iicroseconds and the antenna gain is

p
$953.6 an.

        

           

'v'"ll I I I I II
II IIEII '
hi ===IEIII=E=E=5EQ Figure b.ll. The reduction in the detection
I III. lrﬂdll range R of a 3 cm band radar
IIIIIIIIHK’ III ’ ’
”:IIIIIIIIDa‘iIEB for rain of various intensities.
Illlallpl Iran
I I IVAIVIGEII Key: 1. Drizzle;
:arazuainrﬂ 2- um
A
2’ IIIE‘IIIFEIEEII 3- “049"“ “in;
IngaelviiIIIIII 4. Heavy rain.
Ih‘!Elillllllll
mg ‘IIIIIIIIIII
, zaiIIIIIIIIIIII h
25 50 0.,“

An analysis of the curves'ehows that for Ioderate (lo mm/hr) and heavy (16 Ill/hr)
rains, radar operation is degraded quite significantly. For example, while the
range is 75 km in good weather without precipitation, moderate rain reduces it to

1.8 km while heavy rain reduces it to 30 kn.

-66-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER FIVE. ARTIFICIAL RADAR REFLEtTORS AND THEIR US!

1. General Information

An artificial radar reflector is understood to be a special device which is
characterized by the fact that the radar signal reflected from it has parameters
which are specified beforehand (power, directionality, polarization, etc.).

Such reflectors find the widest application to the anti-radar camouflage for
various objects: distorting the shore outline or the contours of water surfaces;
imparting reflective properties similar to the properties of surrounding terrain
to water surfaces, air strips and highways, etc. In this case, such a distorted
picture of the portion of the terrain on which the cuaouflaged target is located
can be created on the screens of the enemy radars that its surveillance under poor
visibility conditions will be made a great deal more difficult or altogether in-
possible.

Artificial reflectors play a no less inportant part when they are used as decoy
radar targets. The function of such targets is to mislead the enemy, overload
his target acquisition and fire control radar. and in the final analysis sharply
reduce the effectiveness of his fire power.

Figure 5.1. Extent of the propagation zones of a
_ "cloud" of chaff, ejected from a
ballistic missile in various portions
of its trajectory and in various
directions.

Key: 1. In the plane of the trajectory
in the direction of its major
axis;

2. Perpendicular to the plane of
the trajectories:

3. In the plane of the trajectory
in the direction of its minor
axis;

t1 is the end of powered phase;
t2 is apogee;
t3 is the final section.

 

Radar decoys. which are spaced a certain distance from the true target, will
attract a missile with a radar honing device to it; in this case, the probability
of destroying the protected target is considerably reduced.

- 57 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(he of the requisite conditions for the effective use of decoy targets is that

they have a sufficient effective radar cross-section which is comparable to the
cross-section of actual targets. In this case, changes in the effective radar
cross-sections of the decoy and the effective cross-section of the protected object
as a function of the direction of their irradiation by the radar should be identical.

To be added to this are such requirenmts as simplicity of the device, economy.
small size and weight, as well as the capability of the mass utilization of decoy
targets.

Decoys are widely used in the protection of the most diverse military and industrial
facilities: air. space, sea and ground installation.

An especially great effect can be achieved with decoy targets in the case of air
and space objects, primarily ballistic missiles. More than 50 various false targets
having an overall volume complexity of 100 times greater than the missile warhead
can be ejected from one missile. The extent of the propagation region of a "cloud"
of decoy targets jettisoned from a ballistic missile at various points in its
flight and in various directions relative to the trajectory is shown in Figure 5.1
[7]. The identificatim of a missile warhead against a background of false targets
is possible in principle, but requires extremely couple: and expensive equipment.
The use of artificial radar reflectors as camouflage tools and decoy targets. in
conjunction with a reduction in the radar cmtrast of the camouflaged objects,
makes it possible to confuse the operation of enemy radars to a considerable
extent.

One of the praising trends in the refinement of various kinds of radar systems is
the increasing of their selectivity up to a level which makes it possible to
reliablydiscriminate an artificial reflector from the true target based on a set of
secondary criteria which are frequently related to the fine structure of the return.

The parameters which characterize radar signals reflected from actual objects are
the following:

—1'he carrier frequency (taking into account the doppler shift in it due to the
motion of the object);

-'l'he average power and the changes in it as a function of range. azimuth and
elevation angle;

“The level of fluctuations in the power (or effective radar cross-section) and
the spectral caaposition and probability distribution of the fluctuations;

«The pulse width and waveform;
«The polarizat ion of the electromagnetic wave.
It is desirable that the signal reflected from an artificial reflector (especially

if this reflector is used as a distracting decoy) be identical to the return from
the camouflaged target with respect to the majority of the parameters enmerated

above .

-68-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The following kinds of artificial radar reflectors will be treated in this
chapter: dipole and corner reflectors; Luneberg lenses and variants of them;
antenna arrays (Van-Atta arrays); guided decoys (both passive and with an active
response).

2. Dipole Reflectors

Dipole reflectors (dipoles) are one of the most widespread means of producing
camouflage jamming. They can also be used to produce individual decoy targets
(in the form of compact clouds) for the purpose of disrupting the operation of
automatic target tracking systems of radars or honing warheads.

Dipole reflectors take the form of half-wave passive antennas tuned to the working
wavelength of the radar being suppressed. If such a dipole falls in the trans-
mission region of a radar. the frequency of which matches the resonant frequency
of the dipole. intense oscillations are excited in it and it becomes an electro-
magnetic energy radiator.

To obtain the resonance conditions. the length of a dipole Z is chosen somewhat
less than half of the radar wavelengths.

The shortening factor for the dipole is equal to:
y - 21/1.

Strips of metallized paper or foil (for meter wavelengths) or a metallized neutral
fiber or glass fiber (for centimeter wavelengths) are used as such reflectors.

The dipoles scattered in the air produce a secondary emission field. a portion of
the energy of which gets to the input of the radar receiver. and an intense return
will be observed on its displays, which is reminiscent of noise interference in
terms of its structure.

Besides producing camouflage jamming. dipole reflectors are also used to create
decoy radar targets which make it difficult to observe the situation on radar
screens and which interfere with the operation of automatic fire control systems
which receive information from target acquisition and indication radars.

The following conditions must be met to produce solid intense jamming with dipole
reflectors. i.e.. such interference that,the camouflage target cannot be seen on

the radar screen against such a background:

1) The intensity of the return from a dipole cloud should exceed the signal level
from the camouflaged target;

2) The signal power from a dipole cloud should not be significantly less with a
change in the carrier frequency of the suppressed radar;

-69-

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE20NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) Displays of the signals reflected from dipole clouds and from the camouflaged
targets on radar screens should not be seen separately. but in the automatic
output tracking devices, it should be impossible to segregate them.

The first condition will be met if the effective radar cross-section of a cloud
of N dipoles, on, enclosed in one reflecting volume, in equal to or greater than
effective cross-section of the target being camouflaged, at.

In order to determine the number of dipoles N necessary for camouflaging any
target with an effective back-scatter cross-section at. it is necessary to known
the effective cross-section of one dipole, °d' and the cloud of dipole reflectors.

O“-

The following factors have an impact on the value of the effective radar cross-
section of a dipole:

-The orientation of the dipole relative to the direction of the incoming wave;
--The polarization of the incident electromagnetic wave;

-The radar carrier frequency;

-The dipole dimensions.

It is well known that the effective radar cross-section of a single half-wave
dipole varies in accordance with the law:

ﬂ“ - 0,”, (03' or

where e is the angle between a normal to the dipole and the direction to the radar.

If the dipole is arranged parallel to the electrical field intensity vector, 31'
then the intensity of the reflected electromagnetic energy is maximal and the

effective radar cross-section of the dipole is equal to:

Canaan-0.861.. Gd III! ' 0.8612.

when the dipole is oriented perpendicular to the vector E1’ the value of ad tends
to zero.

we shall determine the mean value of the effective radar cross-section of a dipole,
when the probability is the same for any'orientation of it in space. By employing
the theorem of the mean from probability theory. we obtain the following expression
for finding the average value of the effective radar cross-section of a dipole
reflector:

21 I
_ | .
a“: T 0(0, 9) 51M!!! 49,
.'s..-. (5.1)
- 7o -

INDR‘OFF1CJAL USIICNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The angles 0 and e are shovn in Figure 5.2.

Figure 5.2. On the calculation of the re-
flection from an elentary dipole
in the case of an arbitrary
orientation of the dipole.

 

By substituting the value of 0(8. 0) in expreeaion (5.1). we obtain:

 

3, 50'3” I coa'Osin “Mr
or "I. h. I
3, =. 0.17».

If the electrical field intensity vector of the incident wave is oriented parallel
to the Z axis, then the size of the electric field vector radiated by the dipole
in the direction opposite to the incoeing wave will be deter-ined. by the expression:

E.'=:E.toe0$in f.

where to is the maximum value_of the electrical field inteneity 82 (in the equa-
torial plane when the vector 31 is oriented parallel to the axis of the dipole);
e is the angle betueen the dipole and the direction in vhich the reflected field
is observed.

The components of the vector 32 in line with the 02 and or axes will be equal to
the following respectively:

E" = (3.6131.
(Eu—:Eﬁin 1.
«no
But €051=m.
Then I?u ; E.tox 03in «fees 1 = E.cns' I:

Eu=E.cmOain-rsin1=— é—Eﬁn‘ﬁcoso.

-71-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the effective hack-scatter cross-section of a half-wave dipole will depend
on the plane of polarization of the radar receiving antenna. If the antenna re:
ceives the vector component of the reflected electrical field 222, the polarization

of which is the same as in the incident wave, then the effective cross-section of
the reflector is:

odz - od max cos 0.

In the case where the component 32x is received. which is perpendicular to 522,
the effective radar cross-section of the reflector will be equal to:

_ _ 2 2
adx od max”’1n 28cos e.

we shall determine the average effective backrscatter cross-section of a cloud of
dipole reflectors. We shall assume that there are N randomly arranged reflectors
in the radar return volume. The phase relationships between the intensities of

the reflected fields of the individual dipoles, because of their random arrange-
ment in space relative to each other and the direction to the radar. will also be
random.

By employing the techniques of probability theory, it can be demonstrated with a
random distribution of the phases of the electromagnetic waves reflected from the
dipole reflectors, the most probable value of the resulting electrical field
intensity Ezu. is equal to the mean geometric value of the field intensities pro-
duced by the pairs of reflectors, i.e.:

‘
E2”: V; 2 E'E‘V

In] .'|

where 31 and 3k are the field intensities produced by individual reflectors.

Assuming that 81 - Ek - 224, where 32d is the intensity of the reflected electric
field of a single dipole, we obtain:

Eu=EIA Vﬁ.

and the average effective radar cross-section of the "cloud" of dipoles we be
equal to:

2,; ;,~=o.mw. (5.2)

It can be seen from formula (5.2) that with a decrease in the wavelength, the
effective radar cross-section of a single dipole falls off sharply, and for this
reason, a larger number of dipoles is needed to obtain a specified effective radar
cross-section of a "cloud".

- 72 -

FINICNHHC]AI.USE¢DNLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY

The number of dipole reflectors, N, needed to simulate a target, can be determined

by knowing the average values of the effective cross-section of the target, at. and
a single reflector ad:

N - ocﬂaod,

where a is a factor which takes into account the number of effective dipoles.

Since when dipoles are dumped from an aircraft, some of them are broken, deformed
or tangled in clumps with the action of the opposing wind flow. the value of the
coefficient a is chosen in a range of from 0.1 to 0.3. when designing the dipoles,
an effort is made to obtain as large number of effective reflectors as possible and
the highest rate of their dispersal with minimum weight, volume and material con-
sumption per unit of back-scattering surface. The effective radar cross-section of
a dipole cloud, 0“, is shown in Figure 5.3 as a function of the time which has
passed since the moment they were jettisoned. A rise in the effective radar cross-
section was observed in the first three to four minutes. Over this time, the
dipoles fly apart and form the cloud. The cloud was produced at an altitude of
3,000 m by ejecting a packet of dipoles from the aircraft. The observation was
made using a radar at a wavelength of X - 9.2 cm [8].

Figure 5.3. The influence of the number of
dipoles in a cloud on the value of
its effective radar cross~section.

Key: 1. Number of dipoles (strips)
in t e packet is N - 3.75 °
° 10 . horizontal polarize-
tion of the receiving
antenna;

2. Number of dipoles in the
packet is a - 0.625 - 10“,
vertical polarization.

A. Effective back-scatter cross-
section, m2;

8. Time from the moment the
packets of chaff are
jettisoned, minutes.

 

As was stated above. the resulting signal reflected from the dipole cloud takes

the form of the sum of signals which are random in phase and amplitude from a large
number of reflectors. Therefore, the amplitude of the resulting signal from one
repetition period of the radar probe pulse to the next does not remain constant, but
changes with thee in a random manner.

-73-

FIHICHWHCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An experimental study of returns from a cloud of dipole reflectors showed that the
spectral width of the amplitude fluctuations in the reflected signal is governed
by the rate of motion of the dipole relative to each other and relative to the
radar station, as well as by the wavelength of the transmitting radar.

It can be assumed with sufficient precision that the distribution of the dipole
velocity and the spectrum of the returns from them obey a Gaussian law. For this
reason, the spectral width of the returns from the dipoles is

are S - 5(vd/A),

where 6f0.5 is the half-power spectral width, in Hz;
Vd is the average rate of dipole travel. cm/sec;
A is the radar wavelength in cm.

The width of the fluctuation spectra can range from tens to several hundreds of
hertz. For example, it is 10 to 50 a: at a frequency of 3.260 MB: (Figure 5.6).

Figure 5.0. Spectra of the return from dipole chaff in the
centimeter band (f - 3.260 MHz).

*5?
Key; 1. when the dipoles are dumped from an
‘0 aircraft and when the wind speed is up
to 60 km/hr;

a, 2. When the dipoles are dumped from an air-

, craft and the wind speed is about 16

Hz Ian/hr;
0 :0 ,0 5, on $5,, 3. when the dipoles are dumped from a

slowly moving dirigible.

Usually, glass fiber or metallized strip dipoles are packaged in a packet in such
a number that each packet simulates the actual target in terms of its reflective
properties. To produce jamming interference for radars operating at meter wave-
lengths, it is sufficient to have a few tens of metallized strips in a packet.
For counter measures against centimeter band radar, the number of dipoles in a
packet runs up to tens of thousands.

when camouflaging a certain space, such a number of reflectors should be ejected
into each reflecting volume that their total average effective radar cross-section
is equal to or greater than the total effective cross-section of the targets being
camouflaged which are located within this volume.

In this case, with any position of the radar antenna within the bounds of the
selected zone, the returns from the dipoles in one reflecting volume will be

- 74 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

observed on the display screen to merge with the returns from dipoles in adjacent
reflecting volumes.

The number of dipole packets, n, which must be dumped into each reflecting volume
to effectively camouflage the targets being protected. can be determined from the
formula: -

n ' (3;m/;§)n

where on is the average effective back-scatter cross-section of a dipole packet
cloud;

3; is the effective radar cross-section of the target being camouflaged;

m is the number of targets falling within the reflecting volume which are
being camouflaged;

n is a safety factor which takes into account the fact that not all of
packets dumped from the jamming vehicle will open up.

The timewise interval for dumping n packets of N reflectors to produce a
solid jamming field on the screen of a radar display depends on the resolving
volume of the radar, VP, which is governed by the range resolution of the radar.
AR, and the angular coordinates (As. At). The greater the resolving volume, i.e.,
the worse the radar resolution. the smaller the number of dipole packets which are
needed to suppress the radar. '

Packets of reflectors which form discrete compact clouds of dipoles are thrown
from the jamming delivery vehicle (or from the object being camouflaged) to
produce the false radar returns.

One of the major drawbacks to dipole reflectorsas a means of antiradar camouflage
consists in the comparatively small thus they act on the radars being suppressed.
This time depends on the ejection altitude of the dipoles. their rate of descent
(approximately ‘0 to 50 m/min). as well as on the wind speed and can reach several
tens of minutes, being considerably reduced in rain or snow.

The cloud formed by dipole reflectors of the same length produces a masking effect
in a narrow range of frequencies: the bandwidth does not exceed 5 to 10 percent of
the center frequency. The bandwidth can be extended by increasing the length and
width of the dipoles or by putting together packets of strips of different lengths.
Naturally, the material consumption increases in this case and the reflector
production technology becomes more complicated.

Dipole reflectors were used for the first time as a means of antirsdar camouflage
by English air forces during an attack on Hamburg in July of 1953, and were widely

used thereafter by the belligerents during the course of the Second world war.
Dipole reflectors were manufactured from foil or metallized paper.

- 75 -

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(N¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The English and American air forces dropped more than 20,000 tons of aluminum foil
over German territory during the war. The Germans themselves acknowledged that as
a result of the comprehensive use of active jamming and dipole reflectors by the
allies. the effectiveness of German air defense was reduced by 75 percent. Accord—
ing to data on the foreign press, the use of such techniques made it possible to
save about 450 aircraft and spare the lives of 6,500 flight crew members from just
the American Airforces operating in England.

In addition to half-wave dipoles, long metallized strips (up to 120 meters long)
were also used, which were dropped from aircraft on special parachutes. During

the Second World War, packets of dipoles or long metallized strips were thrown out
manually by crew members. However, a special automatic device was designed as
early as the end of the war. Then shells. mortars and rockets filled with dipole
reflectors were used for the first time. Such 82.5 In caliber rockets were used.
in particular, from launch positions on allied ships during the invasion landing

in Normandy in 1964. Some 76.800 metallized strips from 12.7 to 606 mm long were
placed in the warhead of a rocket, the jettisoning of which jammed radars operating
in a wide range of frequencies.

Dipole reflectors remain an extremely effective means of antiradar camouflage at

the present time for air and sea military objects. work is underway abroad on
increasing the effective cross-section of dipoles, extending the frequency range

and improving their mechanical characteristics. Foreign specialists are devoting
considerable attention to the development of equipment for automatically dumping
packets of dipoles from an aircraft. Such devices are usually installed in an
external container or inside the aircraft in the tail compartment. The automatic
devices are remote control. The rate at which the packets are dumped is set before-
hand, but it can be changed during the flight by the pilot.

Modern jet aircraft are much faster than the aircraft of the Second world Her
period, and for this reason, they cover a distance greater than the size of the
resolution volume during the time of dipole packet dispersal. In other words. the
camouflaging aircraft. which dumps the dipoles, travels at a high velocity and does
not conceal itself. In order to eliminate this deficiency, special aircraft rockets
have been developed at the present time which make it possible to eject reflectors
in front. behind. up, down and to the side.

A small aviation rocket has been developed in the 0.5. which is equipped with a
device for producing false radar targets by means of scattering dipole reflectors
over a specified distance. The device is placed in the nose cone of the rocket.
It consists of a tank with compressed gas. a firing pin with a trigger mechanism
intended for destroying the tank and a device which automatically separates the
nose cone of the rocket with the charge of dipoles from the rocket motor. The
replacement of the explosive charge usually employed to scatter dipoles by a tank
of compressed gas makes it possible to produce a false radar target with a more
uniform distribution of the dipoles. and moreover, provides for safety when ship-
ping, storing and using such rockets in practice.

- 76 -

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

American specialists have proposed a device for scattering dipole reflectors from
ballistic missiles. A container with the dipoles and a special mechanism are
mounted in the nose cone of the missile. The device is actuated by a clock mechan-
ism after a certain time interval following launch. The explosion of the detmator
following the actuation of the device releases a spring and opens the walls of the
container with the dipoles. The clock mechanism begins to operate at the mascot the
missile is launched. Special camouflage rockets, mortar projectiles and shells are
being developed which can be launched from shipboard and ground installations. Thus,
a special artillery shell for placing false targets of dipoles has been constructed
in France. It is proposed that the shell be used to confuse radars which determine
.the coordinates of artillery and mortar batteries based on the trajectory of shells
or mortar projectiles.

An original technique of launching dipole reflectors from a moving ship has been
patented in the 0.5. It is proposed that an additional mast and air blast blower
with a pipe fastened to this met be installed on the ship. The dipoles which are
blown out form a cloud over the sea surface. It has been experimentally estab-
lished that dipoles scattered in the air provide greater returns than when floating
on the water. Calculations show that it is n cessary to imediately throw out a
large number of dipoles, approximately 6 - 10 with an overall weight of about 1 kg
to provide effective camwflage in the 3 and 10 cm bands for 1 mile of travel

(1.85 km).

3. Corner Reflectors

A corner reflector takes the form of a structure of two or three mutually perpen-
dicular conducting planes (sides). A valuable property of corner reflectors is
their capability of reflecting a considerable portion of the energy falling within
the bounds of the interior angle in a direction opposite to the irradiation. It is
as if the corner is a mirror, the plane of which is always perpendicular to the direc
tion of irradiation. Because of this property, corner reflectors have large effec-
tive radar cross-sections, even in the case where they are small, something which
makes it possible to use them to simulate various tsrgets'.

Corner reflectors are used to create individual or group decoy targets. to increase
the effective radar cross-sections of various objects (beacons, buoys, spar buoys.
small ships. targets, etc.), reduce the contrast of the radar image of industrial
and military installations down to the level of their surrounding background as
well as to distort the shore outlines of bodies of water.

The problem of electromagnetic energy scattering by corner reflectors was solved

by A.N. Shchukin. Despite the assumptions made in this case which simplify the
solution of the problem, the design formulas which were derived are in good agree-

ment with experimental data [6].

we shall analyze the physical phenomena which are the basis for the engineering
design of reflectors with the example of the simplest (dihedral) corner reflector.

-77-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We shall assure that the direction of propagation. H, of the incident electrmg-
netic wave is perpendicular to the edge of the reflector and for-Ins an angle o with
a normal to the horizontal plane of the reflector (Figure 5.5).

At the internal faces of the corner, which are sufficiently distant free the edges,
the incident wave excites a surface current density of:

7‘ 7‘: line}.

where c is the speed of light;

[E1] is the vector product of the unit vector 3', nonsal to the plane of the
side and the magnetic field intensity of the incident wave. iii.

The elementary current moment of the incident wave is:
d(Ih)1 - 1165.

where ds is a surface element of a side.

The elementary current moment, in terns of its effect. is sinilar to an elementary
dipole. Th_e_ direction of the current nosent D(Ih)1 is perpendicular to the plane
containing h and H1 (Figure 5.5). The phase shift between the alasentary moments
d(Ih) is ”governed by their nutual positions on the sides of the corner and the
direction of the incident wave. The surface currents excited in the side of a
corner by an incident wave produced a secondary electronagnetic field which excites
secondary surface currents in the adjacent side. The back-scattering caused by the
secondary surface currents corresponds to the wave reflection iron the corner which
obeys the laws of optics; it has a considerable level for incident wave directions
which fall in a range of 1 105' around the bisector of the interior angle of the
reflector.

It is well known that the effect of a metal surface with a dipole arranged on it
can be replaced by the action of a virtual nirror inage. Then, for an actual
elementary dipole d(Ih)1, which is located on side 51 of the corner. one can
construct its nirror inage duh), on face 5'. The phases of the elenentary current
mounts d(Ih)1 and am), are identical or differ from each other by 1:, depending
on whether the direction of the current nonent d(Ih)1 is perpendicular to or
parallel with edge AB. If the phase of the current nonents flowing along the sur-
face of edge AB is taken as the initial phase, then the phase of the current
moment d(I. h), will be equal to:

2
0 u- 3; (0.“)- 1101:).

where at and a Cl are the distances fron points a and a1 to the plane of the
incident wave front of S“. which passes through the corner reflector edge AB.

-73-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The electromagnetic oscillations produced by currents duh);- in the case of omni-
directional propagation reach the planes parallel to the incident wave front, hav-
ing equal phases. In particular, their phase in the Sn plane which runs through
the corner reflector edge AB. is equal to zero. In reality, the oscillations
reaching point a at face 51 lead the oscillations reaching point 0 by the
following phase angle, where point 0 falls on edge AB:

81 - 2n/x

The current noment d(Ih) at point a also has the same phase shift (lead). The
oscillations excited by the current nanent d(lh)r, reaching the 8,. plane, phase
lag the oscillations excited by the current moment at point 0 by an angle of:

I'- '2;‘ (“I“).

Thus, the phase of the oscillations excited by the current moment d(lh)r, when
these oscillations reach the Sn plane, will be equal to zero, since:

.v-Ie—.- '2;(“-"I‘|)-

Consequently, the incident wave front is simultaneously the plane of the wave
front scattered by the dihedral reflector and propagating in a direction opposite
to the incident wave.

we shall determine the density of the energy flux reflected by the corner reflector
in the direction of the transmitter. The wave incident to the corner reflector

and perpendicular to its edge, and polarized so that the eagnetic field intasity
vector 81 falls in the propagation plane (Figure 5.5), excites 'a surface current
density 11 having an amplitude equal to:

In"' luv-5;!!qu I mu 5..
in face

I"'"’ I..- F5 ”18", I W 8..

The direction of these current planes is parallel to the edge A3 of the corner
reflector. For this reason, the beck-scattering produced by the secondary
currents jr in the direction opposite to the irradiatit .1 can be treated as the
radiation of two dipoles located in the $1 and $2 plane having current moments of
“‘11 a--.* Ihyz. which correspond to the scattering of all of the eleatary dipoles

d(Ih),1 - jrldsi and «ml-z - Jada.

-79-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.5. On the calculation of the effective radar
cross-section of a dihedral corner reflector.

These current moments are equal to:

C .
_ ”‘u - - 3; "0143508,.

“a - '— % ”a IJS'. sin y.

The secondary currents. the effect of which was replaced by the effect of a fictive
mirror image, flow in faces 51 and $2. and therefore the reflected waves are
emitted from these aides. Because of this. only the action of thoae surface
currents on face Si is taken into account, the radiation of which in a direction
opposite to the incident wave passes "through" face 52. i.e.. the integration on
face Si is carried out only within the limits of the area A02C3B.

Thus,
Ila..-— ;;MJﬁ|9m'-n
“—3‘; ”‘5'“. y. \
M,.- — 2%- 11.5.“.
o, "a. - m. + m. - - 7‘; M. (s. + some

- 80 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The latter expression shows that the beck-scattering by a rectangular corner reflec-
tor in a direction opposite to the transmission can be replaced by beck-scattering
by a flat conducting plate, DI, Dz, D3 and 04 (Figure 5.5), the area of which is
equal to the projection of the faces of the corner reflector onto the plane of the
incident wave; The substitution of an equivalent smooth plate lying in the inci-
dent wave plane for the dihedral corner reflector nakes it possible to extrasely
simply calculate the effective radar cross-section of a dihedral corner reflector,
o. in any direction lying in a plane normal to an sdege of the corner reflector:

$3
e - «Tr.

The quantity $3 is the area of the equivalent plate and depends on the direction
of the rays inpenging on the face of the corner reflector. If the areas of the
faces are the same, Sfac., then:

and the effective radar cross-section of the corner reflector is:

.-|ca-g'-de'0-

The resulting expression is correct for angles of w < loS'; when 0 > 65', the
factor sin 5': must be replaced -cos 0.

Strictly speaking, the methods of geometric optics can be used only in the case
where the angle between the direction of the incident ray and the bisector of the
angle between the faces does not exceed 105'. In the case of incidence angles close
to a nomal to one of the faces, it is necessary to take into account the diffrac-
tion pattern which coincides with the pattern of the plate forming the face.

A dihedral corner reflector yields the greatest return in the case where its faces
make an angle of 45° with the direction to the transmitter. In this case.

se - semax - fisface

and

IA ).

as: face

The nature of the change in the effective radar cross-section of a dihedral re-
flector as a function of the angle between the direction of the incident beam and

-31-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the hisector of the angle between the sides is shown in Figure 5.6. The dashed
line in the same figure also shows the change in the reflectivity of a smooth

conducting plate with an area equal to Se. The effective beck-scattering surfaces

of a dihedral reflector and a smooth ccnducting surface will be equal ally when
the incident angles are 0' and 45'.

6.00 dB

Figure 5.6. The effective radar cross-section of e

dihedral corner reflector as a function

of the eagle between the incident been
and the bieector of the corner.

 

   
   
   
 

Figure 5.7. The equivalent smooth surface.

' 8.. of a trihedral corner
reflector in a direction which
forms the following angles with
its faces: a - 38‘30'.

. B - 72'30' end 1 . 57°10'
(Se/s. m - 0.86).

   
  
  
   
 

a,llll ,
l, lineman-I
¢,l Ilurallllllk‘l
Illlnl'llllllllh‘
“ll-ZIHIIIIIIIIIIII

II'AIIIIIIIIIIIIII“
IQEIIIIIIIIIIIIIIK
‘ :0 w (0 ed (on!

I
I
I
I
III
II

    

Figure 5.8. The curve for $./Se m of trihedral corner

reflectors as a function of the direction of wave
incidence.

Key: 1. Triangular sides;
2. Square sides.

-32-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dihedral corner reflectors find extremely little application in practice, since
they scatter a considerable portion of the energy in the direction opposite to the
transmission, where this transmitted radition is in plane perpendicular to an edge.
This defficiency of a dihedral corner has been elininated by adding a third side.

perpendicular to the two others.

The calculation of the effective radar cross-section of a trihedral corner reflec-
tor is carried out in a manner similar to the case considered above, i.e., by
means of finding the area of the equivalent smooth surface 8;. The equivalent
smooth surface is plotted in Figure 5.7 for a trihedral right-angled corner ref lec-
tor.

For such reflectors, the maximn of the reflected energy falls in a direction which
forms the following angles with its sides: a - B - 1 I 54'6', i.e., when

case arm—’ntmy 4- I/V’:

For this direction. the equivalent smooth plate areas. 5. nan are equal to:

112/5 for a reflector with triangular sides, and

112/5 for a reflector with square sides, where a is the edge length of
the trihedral reflector.

The relative value of 5e/5e nax is plotted in the graph of figure 5.8 as a function
of the directions of the incident wave. which fall in a plane normal to one of the
sides, when u - B.

The mime: values of the effective radar cross-sections of trihedral corner re-
felctors are determined by the following formlas:

1) For reflectors with triangular sides:

4 ee'
“=51":

2) For reflectors with sides in the form of right-angled sectors of a circle:

-83-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. the effective radar cross-sections of corner reflectors with triangular,
circular and square sides. given the same edge length. are in a ratio of 1:6:9.
These ratios, which are derived from the laws of geometric optics. will be correct

only with the sufficiently large dimensions of the sides as compared to the wave-
length.

Since the effective radar cross-section of a corner reflector is proportional to
a“. the detection range of such reflectors by radars will be proportional to the
linear dimensions of the corner edge for the case of free space. In other words,
a corner reflector with an edge length of a - 2 m will detected by an airtraft
radar at twice the detection range of a corner reflector with an edge length of

l m. It can be seen from the formulas cited above that corner reflectors can be
used effectively on in the centimeter and millimeter bands.

The effective radar cross-section of a corner reflector with square sides is nine
times greater than that of a reflector with triangular sides, given the same size
of a side a. although the only half as much metal is needed for the fabrication

of a reflector with triangular sides. However, the reflector with triangular sides
has a wider directional pattern for the secondary emission, and moreover, its con-
struction is sturdier.

The major characteristic of a corner reflector is the dependence of the effective
radar cross-section on the direction of the incoming incident wave. Experimental
data show that when the irradiation angle changes by 3‘20 to 30) degrees with
respect to the optimal. the effective radar cross-section of a corner reflector
falls off by 8 to 10 dB. Conpensated corner reflectors are used to produce a more
uniform directional pattern (Figure S.9e)3 When the angles 0 and 0 between the
incident ray and the bisector of the corner angle exceeds 30 degrees. electromag-
netic waves start to be reflected from the additional compensating reflectors also.
It can be seen from the graphs shown in Figure $.9b that the use of additional
reflectors substantially increases the level of the reflected power. The ratio of
the dimensions b/a governs the degree of compensation. The optimum ratio is

b/a - 1. If the quantity b is high, then so-called overcompensetion begins and
there is a trough in the center of the reflector back-scatter pattern.

Corner reflectors are frequently set up on the surface of the ground or water. In
this case, it is necessary to take into account the influence of the separation
surface on the beck-scatter pattern of a corner reflector in the vertical plane,
which takes on a multiple lobe character. For better observability of such a
reflector. it is necessary to incline it in the vertical plane. The inclination
angle is chosen depending on the direction in whichrit is necessary to have the
naxinum reflected energy. Thus. for example. this angle is 35 degrees for ship
radars. The inclination angle must be chosen in a similar manner to produce the
maximum return for aircraft radars located at a great distance from the corner
reflector.

Special structures of several corners are used to provide an intense return in all
directions from a false target made of corner reflectors.

- ga -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A widespread design is the so-called octahedral group. It can he put together
from three flat metal sheets. arranged so that they form eight trihedral corner
reflectors. Depending on the position of such a group relative to the transmitter.
various reflection patterns are obtained (Figures 5.10 and 5.11).

  
 
    

II I
d‘ollllllll

vsﬂllllllll

% IIIEEIII
IrehsBNI
Id IIIUI
mm IIIII
aaam

  
  

   

         
   
  
  
   

   

    
  
    
 

‘0 III-III-
I'FZZZ‘II
.0 "IIIII I

IIIII-II

  

~ IIKAUI
III IIIIEII III-III I

IIIJI

     
 
 

         

III”.

III.-

II'I'AII

:glll
‘

  

g

e
3
G
‘

Figure 5.9. A trihedral corner reflector with supplemental corners (a)
and the return patterns (5). The solid lines in the graph
apply to a reflector with supplemental compensating corners;
the dashed lines apply to a reflector without the compensating

corners .

A more uniform reflecLion pattern can be obtained in the horizontal plane by means
of a group of five trihedrel corner reflectors. arranged in a circle (Figure 5.12).
In the group of five reflectors, all of the axes of symmetry are arranged in one

horizontal plane. and for this reason, the effective radar cross-section of such a

-85-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

group is approxﬂnately twice that of an octahedral group and the main lobes of
the-reflection pattern are of greater width.

It is unpossible in practice to obtain an omnidirectional return pattern from a
stationary structure of corner reflectors which would not have numerous maxima and
minima because of interference. For this reason, structures made of a group of
corner reflectors are employed, which rotate in the azimuthal plane. The cut-up
nature of the return pattern is smoothed out considerably in this case (Figure
5.13). The number of revolutions of such a structure depends on the type of
oscillations generated by the radar transmitter. In the case of CH radar. a few
revolutions per minute are sufficient. In the case of pulsed operation. the
number of r.p.m. of the reflector should be 25 to 50 percent of the pulse repeti-

tion rate [37).
4ﬁ§ v.‘\ z
///:j,~?§3z&:.\\\\\\\\
U. 3 ‘ ‘
.i,

   
  

 
 

....... 4
‘ ...... a t ‘-::::::

Figure 5.10. Group reflectors. Figure 5.11. Patterns of the returns

from the group reflectors
Key: a. Made of cells with
square sides; depicted in Figure 5.10.

          
 

b. Made of cells with Key: 1. with square sides;
triangular sides. 2. With triangular
sides.

One of the major requirements in the fabrication of corner reflectors is the pre-
cise observance of the perpendicularity of the sides. Even a slight deviation of
the angle between them from 90 degrees can produce interference phenomenon which
significantly reduce the size of the effective back-scatter cross-section. The
reduction in the effective cross-section with a deviation in the interior angles
of the corner reflector from right angles is explained by the disruption of the
in-phase nature of the field in the aperture of the reflector because of the dif-
ference in the travel of the rays. The relative effective radar cross-section of
a corner reflector with triangular sides is shown in Figure 5.16 as a function of
the precision of its fabrication. The greater the linear dimensions of the sides.
the more precisely the angle of 90 degrees between them should be maintained
(Figure 5.14). This is one of the drawbacks to corner reflectors. The effective

- gs -

FOR OiTWClAl.USE(MVLY
radar cross-section of a corner reflector increases with increasing size of its
sides, a, given a definite error in the manufacture, A, and a constant wave-
length. A.

 

Figure 5.12. I’attern of the return in a Figure 5.13. The pattern of the return
horizontal plane from s from a five cell corner
five cell corner reflector. reflector when it contin-

uously rotates in the
azimuthal plane.

'53:.udn

0

‘ ~
- Figure 5.14. The effective radar cross-section of
-20 an a trihedrsl corner reflector as a
”=- function of the angle between the

deg. sides for various ratios of the edge
a 'w amps! length to the wavelength.

It can be seen from the curve shown in Figure 5.15 that there is a limit beyond
which it is not expedient to increase the dimensions of a corner reflector for a
given fabrication precision A. For axaple. with an error of A - 0.5 degrees

( o - 89.5 degrees). the ultimate length of a rib amwnts to an“ - 60x.

For corner reflectors with large dimensions of the sides, the deviation of the
angle between them from 90 degrees should not exceed A - 0.5 degrees - 1 degree.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a trihedral corner reflector. the incident
wave is reflected from the three planes, each
of which changes the direction of rotation of
wave polarization to the opposite direction.
If the radar antenna is circularly polarized
with a right-rotation. then because of the
odd number of reflections fron the faces of
the corner reflector, the reflected field will
have a left circular plane of polarization.
and consequently, the radar will not detect
such a target. Various steps are taken to
eliminate this phenomenon, which reduced to
the fact that the property of a so-called
asymmetrical target is imparted to the corner
reflector.

IIIIIIIII
35'
Immmiii!!
57mg-
--I

The simplest way of designing a corner reflec-
tor for circularly or elliptically polarized

radars consists in placing a dielectric plate
in front of one of the sides of the reflector

 

Figure 5.15. The relationship be- a slight distance from it, as shown in Figure
tween the precision 5.16. Because of this plate, the phase
in the fabrication difference between the horizontally and
of a corner reflec- vertically polarized components. the wave
tor and the dimen- energy reflected from the inside plate is not
sions of the sides. 90 degrees, but falls between 0 and 180

dqnu.Asanmkofmeuﬁumofmn

wave to the component of the field reflected

at the same point in time from the outer
surface of the plate. elliptical polarization of the wave occurs, which can be
broken down into two waves with circular polarization in different directions and
different anplitudes.- The thickness of the plate and the spacing fro. the metal
side is determined experimentally.

A wdieapread type of reflectors for radars with circular polarization is a corner
reflector, in the aperture of which an array of parallel wires is placed. This
reflector will be a wideband one for circularly polarized waves. It has the same
return pattern as the conventional trihedral reflector, however, its effective
radar cross-section is 6 dB less. Moreover, such a reflector back-scatters a
field with linear polarization just a corner reflector does only in the case where
the polarization plane of the incident wave is at an angle to the elements of the
array. However, if the electrical field vector lines up with the direction of the
wires, then the reflector will behave as a flat plate having an area equal to the
aperture of the corner reflector. This drawback can be eliminated if the wire
arrays are not placed in the aperture of the reflector. but rather in front of its
sides at a spacing of A/8 from then. When both linear components of s circularly
polarized wave, which are shifted relative to each other in time and space by 90
degrees are reflected fron one of the sides with such an array, they receive an
additional 90 degree shift, because of which a linearly polarized wave appezrs.

- as -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It can be broken down into two waves with circular polarization in opposite direc-
tions, of which only one will produce a pip on a radar screen. In contrast to a
reflector with an array in the aperture, this structural design is a narrow-band
one, i.e., it operates only in a definite range of frequencies.

A variant of the corner reflector is the biconical reflector (Figure 5.17). It
has a uniform circular secondary enission pattern in the horizontal plane. The
effective radar cross-section of such a reflector when the polarization plane of
the field is parallel to the axis is the sane as for a cylinder of radius:

”avg - (1/2)(rnx + rain)

and having a height h, i.e.:

2 2
o - er‘vgh IA .

tau.
[‘"C’l.
Figure 5.16. A corner reflector for radars
m using circular polarisation.

 

The fabrication of such reflectors with the requisite precision is quite diffi-
cult, and for this reason they have not yet found nass application.

We shall now touch upon sole questions of the use of corner reflectors for the
purposes of antiradar camouflage.

A is well known, when scanning the ground or sea surface, the intensity of radar
returns is governed by the distributed targets which have significantly different
reflective properti.s. Modern aircraft radars nake it possible to discriminate
the outlines nf cities, large industrial enterprises, railroad centers, contrast-
ing objects (with respect to the intensity of the radar return) (rivers outlining
cities. bridges. dans, etc.), as well as individual and group targets. Using
corner reflectors. one can distort the image of such objects by means of changing
the reflective properties of individual sections of the ground or water surface.

The major goal which is pursued in this case is a reduction of the radar contrast
of the camouflaged objects down to the level of the background surrounding then

by virtue of increasing the effective radar cross-sections of individual portions
of the surface, where such objects are located. Since irradiating a certain

-39-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

section of a ground or water surface can be accmplished from any direction, it is
essential for effective camouflage that the intensity of the additionally produced
return is practically independent of the irradiation angles in the horizontal and
vertical plane. This can be accomplished a some extent through the use of group
corner ref letters. the structural design of which was treated above. Since the
reflectivity of a portion of a water or ground surface is governed by the effective
radar cross-section of the resolving area. 0f, then for successful camouflaging of
an object using corner reflectors. it is necessary to meet the condition a; g of.

It is apparent that depending on the dimensions and configuration of the section
being camouflaged and its reflecting properties, a various number of comer reflec-
tors can be set up per unit area with a definite arrangement and dimensions of them.

To produce decoy targets, the number
of corner reflectors and their dimen-
sions must be chosen so that the
total effective radar cross-section
is equal to the cross-section of

the actual target. The spacings
between the reflectors are chosen
equal to or somewhat less than the
resolving power of the radar.

g 5‘ Corner reflectors found widescale
ta "0 practical application for the first
§i Is time during the Second Horld War.

(1) a: :0 Thus, German submarines, in evading
£3 pursuit when running deep. using them
S to distract antisubmarine ships and

a

aircraft in a false direction. The
reflectors were thrown out in special

buoys or were suspended from an air
balloon.

 

Figure 5.17. The structural configuration
(a) and pattern of the returns

Eb) of-asbiconical 38°“? In order to confuse the enemy about
rum cm, rm cm ' the true number of large submarines.
Key: 1. Reflected signal as well as to disorient him relative
level, dB. to the direction of the main thrust,
corner reflectors were installed on
ships. launches or towed ships. Such
a method was used, for example. to disorient the enemy radar and distract the
German attack aircraft from the main assault landing forces during the landing of
the Allies in Burope at the end of the Second Horld war. Groups of small ships
approached the French coast in the region of Boulogne from points which were widely
separated fran each other. The ships towed aerostats painted with aluminum paint
and carried corner reflectors on themselves which simulate the returns from large
battle and landing ships. Small groups of aircraft dumping packets of dipole
reflectors and actively jamming German radars continuously flew over these ships.
The demonstratia: continued for about four hours and the inpression was created
among the Germans that a large number of sea and air forces were approaching the

-90-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!.0F$1C1Al.lﬁﬂE(NVLY

egion of Boulogne. Trusting the reality of the decoy measures, the Germans sent
their main forces to this region.

During the air attacks of the English and American bomber forces on Berlin. the
numerous canals and lakes in the features of the city served as good landmarks.
during the bombing. To reduce the effectiveness of bombing strikes on the capitol.
the Germans set up a large number of floating corner reflectors on the surface of
the lake. They were constructed from two vertical, mutually perpendicular metal
planes, installed on a floating wooden cross. The water surface served as the
third reflecting plane. The reflectors were placed on anchors at spacings of 100
to 150 m. In the majority of cases. the water surfaces were not completely camou-
flaged, but were used only as partial antiradar camouflage and to break the lakes
up into sections.

Because of such camouflage measures, numerous night air attacks of the English
and American air forces proved to be unsuccessful. There was an instance where
about 100 four-motor aircraft dumped their load on an accumulation of 100 corner
reflectors, set up on one of the Berlin lakes.

Similar measures were taken to protect locks and dams in the port cities of the
North Sea. The main purpose of these measures was to smooth out the contrast
between the shore installations and the water surfaces on the screens of the radars.

Corner reflectors of rather large size were used in individual cases. Thus. for
example. to "balance out" the radar image of air fields located in the vicinity
of Berlin. corner reflectors with sides of 10 x 10 m were set up againsttheback-
ground of the terrain and structures of the city. In order to reduce the wind
loads, the reflecting planes of the corners were fabricated from wire netting.

By the end of the war, the Germans had simulated the city of Kuestrin with corner
reflectors; two cities were observed at a spacing of 80 km from each other on the
screens of aircraft radar. something which naturally disoriented the radar oper-
ators.

Corner reflectors were also used to camouflage comparatively small ground facili-
ties. It was reported in the west German press that a decoy target consisting of
50 large corner reflectors fully proved itself in action where the decoy was
located close to a powerful electric power station. During poor visibility. this
decoy target attracted the attention of radar operators in the English and American
air forces. which dropped bombs on it.

Despite the design of such new effective radar reflectors as Luneber lenses.
passive arrays and others, corner reflectors still remain in the arsenal of anti-
r1dar camouflage tools. Their major advantage as compared to other similar
devices is the structural simplicity. when designing corner reflectors. the fol-
lowing major requirements are placed on them:

-Low weight;

--A minimum of assembly components:

-91-

FOR OFTTCJAI.USI3(NQLY
FORGDFFNJAL.USE(MVLY

-Sinplicity of the fabrication technology;
-The capability of being transported over various distances.

6. Luneberg Lenses

A structure node of several corner reflectors, as was shown above. nonetheless
leads to anonunifornsecondary emission pattern. Another drawback to such designs
is the fact that their effective radar cross-section, averaged over all possible
directions. falls about 7 dB below the naninun effective radar cross-section of a
corner reflector. Ideal omnidirectional reflectors are netal spheres. however,
their effective cross-section is quite small.

‘3 Figure 5.18. Trajectory of the rays in
a Luneberg lens.

“’(a) "(b)
A quite effective. though still expensive reflector is the so-callsd Luneberg lens.
Such a reflector makes it possible to obtain an effective radar cross-section
pattern in a 'ider range of azimuths and elevation angles than any of the corner
reflectors treated in the preceding section. The lens takes the form of a sphere
made fro. a dielectric. One heuiaphere of the sphere is netsllised (figure 5.18s).
The dielectric permittivity c of the outer layer of such a reflector is close to
the value of the dielectric permittivity of air and graducally increases with in-
creasing thickness of the layer. Because of this, the lens focuses a parallel
bundle of rays incident to it to a point on the metallised surface of the sphere
and reflects this bundle in the opposite direction, parallel to the indicent rays.

when one hemisphere of the lens is netallized. it uniformly reflects the energy
impinging on it within the limits of a spatial angle of 160 degrees.

The law governing the change in the dielectric pernittivity c and the index of
refraction n is determined by the following relationship:

t - n2 - 2 - a2,

where
a - r/r ,

(r0 is the radius of the sphere; r is the distance from the center of the sphere
to the point on the sphere under consideration).

The effective back-scatter cross-section of a Luneberg lens is computed from the
formula:

- 92 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0 - 13¢“?!qu
where d is the lens dimeter.

It has been reported in the press that a Luneberg lens mounted on a fighter
increased the intensity of the radar return from it by a factor of to times.

It is possible in principle to design an omnidirectional lens reflector, the re-
flection factor of which is independent of the direction of the incident electro-
magnetic wave. If the incident ray. in bending inside the lens. approaches the ox
axis at an angle of 90 degrees (Figure 5.1813). then by virtue of the spherical
symmetry, it will be bent in the lower half of the lens through another 90 degrees
and exit in parallel with the incident ray. In this case, there is no need of
netallizing a portion of the sphere and we obtain a variant of the Luneberg lens.
the so-called Eton Lippman reflector. There is yet another important difference
between the Luneberg lens with a metallized shield and the unidirectional reflec-
tor considered here. It they are both irradiated with a circularly polarized

wave, then the former reflects the polarized wave with the opposite sign while the
second reflects it with the same sign as the incident wave.

The law governing the change in t and n in such a reflector is determined by
the expression:

5 - n2 - (2/a)-l.

The index of refraction n in the center of the lens should tend to infinity,
while at the exterior surface, n - l.

 

Figure 5.19. A Luneberg lens consisting of h-ispherical shells,
with discrete changes in.‘the index of refraction.

It is very difficult in practice to realize a continuous change in the index of
refraction from unity to infinity. Actual lens reflectors are composed of a large
number of spherical shells, each of which has a constant index of refraction.

-93-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The discrete changes in the index of refraction approximate a continuous change

in it. Thus, a practical problem in the fabrication of Luneberg lens type reflec-
tors is the determination of the number of spherical shells and the amount of
change in the dielectric permittivity in each of these shells.

Polystyrene foam, the index of refraction of which depends on its density, can
serve as a material for the manufacture of such lenses.

A sample of a multilayer spherical Luneberg lens, manufactured in the 0.5., is
shown in Figure 5.19. The lens consists of concentric dielectric shells. arranged
one inside the other. The dielectric permittivity of the individual shells varies
in a range of 1.1 —— 2, with increments of 0.1 each. The diameter of such a lens
with a stepwise change in the index of refraction is about 66 cm, while the working
frequency is in the 3 cm band.

A large number of the most diverse lens reflectors has been developed based on the
Luneberg lens. Thus, a reflector which is midirectional in azimuth can be
obtained by encircling a Luneberg sphere with a reflecting metal ring, as shown in
Figure 5.20. The position of the ring relative to the equator of the sphere de-
termines the position of the main lobe of the directional pattern with respect to
the horizontal plane. If the ring is centered relative to the equator of the
sphere, the mimm of the pattern falls in the horizontal plane; if the ring is
shifted, the elevation angle will be greater. With an increase in the width of
the ring, the width of the directional pattern in the elevation angle plane also
increases, but in this case. the amplitude in the aperture of the reflector falls
off.

The maximum value of the effective radar cross-section of such a reflector can be
approximately determined from the expression:

cl": = ';:'('r' '— 2’L)‘.

where r is the radius of the sphere and
I. is the width of the ring.

A broad directional pattern in the vertical plane with a minimal reduction of

the amplitude along the aperture can be obtained by means of so-celled "heliephere".
which is practically speaking. a modification of a reflecting shield, covering one
of the hemispheres of a Luneberg lens. A helisphere can be obtained by replacing
the solid metal ring with an array of parallel wires, wound at an angle of ‘5
degrees (Figure $.21a, b).

If you look from the center of the sphere. the wires over the entire horizon will
be arranged at an angle of 65 degrees. However. if you look at such a reflector
from the outside, then behind the exterior surface wires, which are arranged at an
angle of 1:5 degrees, there are the rear surface wires which are perpendicular to
them and which have an inclination angle of 65 degrees to the horizontal. Thus. if
a plane wave with polarization of 65 degrees reaches the front surface. passes
through the wire grid without losses until it reaches the rear reflecting surface,

-94-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, 0
Figure 5.20. An omnidirectional Luneberg re-

flector (in the azimthal plane)
with a metallic ring.

2
ob M Key: 1. line:

2. Plane unidirectional
reflection pattern;
3. Conical pattern.

Figure 5.21. Various kinds of osmidirectional Luneberg
lens reflectors.

 

and if the gaps between the wires of the "helisphere" has been chosen correctly.
it is focused to a point locates approximately half way on the radius of the
sphere. The use of two orthogonal rings of wire arrays to obtain an isotropic
pattern in the azimuth and elevation angle planes is shown in Figures 5.21c and d.
The advantage of such reflectors is the fact that their effective radar cross-
section remains approximately the same both for circular polarization and for
horizontal or vertical polarisation. The polarization losses with the double
travel through the lens will amount to no more than 6 dB (as cdpared with 65
degrees polarization). and they can be caspenssted by a slight increase in the
dimensions of the reflector.

At the present time, it is considered extremely expedient to use hollow spherical
reflectors instead of heavy Luneberg lenses. In them. the dielectric sphere is
replaced with a hollow helispherical array, within which a reflective metal ring is
placed coaxially with the helisphere at a spacing equal to the focal distance,
where this metal ring takes the form of a spherical segment having a diameter equal
to approximately half of the diameter of the outer sphere (Figure 5.22).

The width of the relfecting ring. w. governs the width of the directional pattern
of the reflector in the elevation plane. Consequently. when choosing the width
of the ring. it is essential to achieve the optimal ratio between the width of the
pattern in the elevation (vertical) plane and a permissible reduction in the
amplitude over the aperture of the reflector.

The main requirements which the structural designs of hollow helispherical reflec-
tors shOuld meet are as follows: high fabrication precision for the spherical
surface. high precision in the angular position of the array wires, minimal

-95-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 5.22. A hollow helisphere reflector.

Kay: 1. Hollow transparent
sphere;
2. Array 0‘ parallel wires,
wound at an angle of
45 degrees;
3. Metal ring with a
diameter of d - 0.51).

 

 

Figure 5.23. Patterns of the return in Figure 5.21.. Diagram of the return in the
a horizontal plane from a vertical plane from a hollow
hollow helisphere (l) and a helisphere.
corner reflector (2).

dielectric losses. minimal internal impedance at microwave frequencies, high
mechanical strength. low weight, low cost and stability with respect to climatic

factors.

The reflection pattern of a hollow unidirectional helispherical reflector with a
diameter of 609 am and a structure consisting of six corner reflectors, inscribed
in a sphere with a diameter of 609 mm are shown in polar coordinates in Figure 5.23
for comparison. A grid of nichrome wires arranged parallel to each other with an
angle of 65 degrees to the horizontal was used in the construction of the heli-
spherical reflector. The wires were pressed into a fiberglass base; the spacing
between the wires is 1.6 mm. The secondary emission pattern of the helisphere for
a reflecting ring 76.2 nan wide is shown in Figure 5.21.. It has been experimentally
determined that the optimum diameter of the reflecting ring for the given heli-
sphere should he 355.6 In. The effective radar cross-section of the reflector when
the ring diameter is reduced down to 306.8 mm is cut almost in half. The reflector
weighs 3.175 kg. It can be seen from the graph of Figure 5.25 that the effective
radar cross-section of a helisphere with a reflecting ring on the inside is

~96-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approximately 10 dB less than the effective cross-section of aLuneberg reflector
with dimensions equal to it (curves 2 and 3). This is explained by the presence
of spherical aberration in such reflectors in both the horizontal and vertical
planes. Removal of the internal ring leads to an additional reduction in the
effective radar cross-section by 5 d3.

Hollow helispheres, just as Luneberg lenses of various designs can find widescsle
applications as decoy targets for antiradar camouflage, primarily air and space
objects. Such reflectors have also been proposed for installation on targets and
on controlled decoy targets to increase their effective radar cross-sections.

5. Passive Antenna Arrays

A passive antenna array (a Van-Atta reflector) takes the form of a device consist-
ing of several horizontal and vertical revs of half-wave dipoles. positioned in
one plane at a spacing of Ala from the reflecting screen (the reflector). A metal
plate serves as the reflector. In this case, the dipole pairs which are arranged
in mirror fashion relative to the center of the screen, are coupled together with
coaxial cable sections.

Figure 5.25. Values of the effective radar
cross-sections of lens reflec-
tors. referenced to the effec-
tive cross-section of a metal
sphere of the same diameter.

Key: 1. Circular disk;
2. Luneberg reflector;
3. Helisphere uith a ring on the

 

inside;
to. Hollow helisphere (linear polar-
ization);
S. Hollow helisphere (circular
E E E] E [’2] polarization).
E E E E E E
E E E [E E The systea used for connecting the 18 pairs
of radiators by means of cable of the same
E [E E E] m [2] length is shown in Figure 5.26. The coupled
,5 elements (indicated by identical numbers are
D E Q E E] E] located in diagonally opposite quadrants of
E] z the plane of the array. When the electrical
[E E E] U a length of the lines connecting the radiators
which are coupled in pairs is equal, the re-
Fisute 5.26. Schematic showing radiated wave front matches the incident wave
the connection of front. In other words, the back-scattering
radiators in a plane of the electromagnetic energy by such a re-
antenna array. flector occurs in the direction of the trans-

mitting source.

- 97 -
' ma omcul. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Antenna arrays have the following major advantages over the reflectors treated
earlier. 1) They have a wider return pattern as compared to corner reflectors.

2) They make it possible to modulate the reflected signal in accordance with any
modulating law; 3) They can return the incident wave in directions other than the
direction to the transmitter; 6) They provide for the selection of the requisite
return polarization; 5) They make it possible to use signal amplifiers built into
the connecting lines. by means of which one can obtain a significant boost in the
effective radar cross-section of the reflector; 6) They open up the widescale pos-
sibility of fabricating high efficiency reflectors (false targets) using printed
circuits and stripline technology.

The effective back-scatter cross-section of a passive plane antenna array is
determined from the formula:

on“
=

0 ~—
4"

where G - Ansellz is the directional gain of the array.
From this:

0 . sec.

where Se is the effective geometric cross-section (aperture area) of the array.

The effective radar cross-section of an array composed of n half-wave dipoles,
positioned at a spacing of l/Z from each other and at a distance of Alb from the
screen, is equal to:

a: 3:3 [sin (£40301:

where e is the angle of incidence; the factor sin([r/2]cose) characterizes the
dipole directional pattern in the plane of the magnetic field, taking the mirror
image into account; Se = nlzlé is the aperture area of the antenna.

The effective radar cross-section of an array will depend on the angle of incidence
of the incoming electromagnetic wave, i.e.. the back-scattering of a Van—Atta
reflector is a of a directional nature. The return pattern of an antenna array of
16 coaxial dipoles in a plane perpendicular to the axes of the dipoles are shoun
in Figure 5.27. The return pattern of a flat screen is also shown for comparison
in the same graph. The studies were carried out at a frequency of 2,850 MHz. It
can be seen from the figure that in the case of normal incidence of the wave, the
effective radar cross-section of the array is equal to the cross-section of a

flat metal plate (shield) of the same size as the array, while in the case of
incidence angles of 135' and 355'. it is 3 and 10 dB less than the maximum value.
when a corner reflector is irradiated in a direction which deviates from the opti-
mal by :20 to :90 degrees, its effective radar cross-section is reduced by 8 to

- 93 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10 dB; the conclusion can be drawn fron this that with identical maximum values of
the effective radar cross-section, an antenna array has a wider return pattern
than a corner reflector.

6&5 dB

  

Figure 5.27. Pattern of the return of an antenna
array of 16 dipoles in a plane
perpendicular to their axis.

Key: 1. Metal plane;
2. Antenna array (experimental
data);
3. Antenna array (calculated
data).

Figure 5.28. A dielectric rod reflector (the
shaded portion is covered with
conductive material) .

Figure 5.29. The gain of a dielectric antenna
as a function of its length.

 

The major drawbacks to antenna arrays (as passive reflectors). composed of identi-
cal half-wave dipoles, is the narrow bandwidth and polarization selectivity. To
eliminate these deficiencies. wideband radiators with circular polarization can be
used as the radiating elenents, for example, plane and conical spirals or dielec-
tric rods.

Abroad it is recommended that dielectric rods by used as the main re-radiating
elements of Van-Atta reflectors. Usually, a dielectric rod has a circular cross-
section over its entire length, decreasing towards one of the ends. At the wide
end of the rod, a volumetric resonator is created by means of coating the dielec-
tric with a thin of copper. The length of the metallized portion is governed

by structural design considerations.
The optimum values of the diameters of a cone shaped dielectric rod (Figure 5.28)

depend on the radar wavelength as well as on the dielectric permittivity of the
material from which the rod is fabricated:

- 99 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. =o.5mz V751. -
a._—_- yo—.4.l..

For a polystyrene rod (e I 2.55), at a wavelength of A I 3 cm. d1 I 12 us. while
for the 6 cm band, d1 I 25 us. When operating at comparatively low frequencies.
it is expedient to use a material with a high dielectric permittivity, for example,

low loss ceramics.

The effective radar cross-section of a dielectric rod is governed by the dielectric
antenna gain, G, which is a function of the rod length:

n - c2121“.

The function G I f(Z/X) is plotted in Figure 5.29. Knowing c and the requisite
value of the effective radar cross-section. the rod length 1 can be determined

from this graph.

The effective bandwidth of a rod reflector is approximately 1151 (with this fre-
quency deviation from the center value, the effective radar cross-section of the

reflector is cut in half).

5.“ E, dB
0

I-VaR-l
Imm‘n-
Inn “9
IMIIME
numnws
min-ll m _
mun-mu
win-Im'

" ‘l-I-Ilm

:5 20:01:20 130'

   
   
    
   
   
  

Figure 5.30. Patterns of the secondary emission
of a dielectric rod (1) and an
equivalent disk 63.5 mm in diameter
(2) recorded in the 3 cm band.

  

   
   

  

 
 
   
 

It follows from a comparison of the results of measuring the effective beck-
acatter cross-sections of a dielectric rod with a gain of 16 db and a flat disk
equivalent to it (Figure 5.30), that the aein lobe of the secondary emission
pattern of the rod is considerably wider than that of the disk. and can be brought
up to abOut 90 degrees. if the gain of the rod is substantially reduced. Naturally,
by connecting several dielectric rods in an antenna array. a false target can be
obtained using them which has a broad secondary emission pattern and a large effec-

tive radar cross-section.

An extremely simple two-element array can be obtained by means of connecting two
U-shaped rods with a bracket. It has been demonstrated that the increase in the

-100-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intensity of the return and the width of the secondary emission directional pattern
will depend on the spacing between the axes of rods. Thus, with a spacing between
the rods of 2.51, a return gain of 6 dB can be achieved above the gain of a single
rod (with the identical directional pattern width).

E an! dB

In 21-
33%- E
l Iluu
I’ll-121..I I

 

Figure 5.31. Secondary emission patterns for a U-shaped reflector
with a spacing of 2.5x (a) and l (b) between the
axes of the rode; (the directonal patterns of a single
rod are shown with the dashed lines).

If the spacing between the rods is equal to the
wavelength A, then the advantage gained in the
gain with respect to a single rod will amount to
only 3 dB in all, but in this case, the width of
the main lobe is almost doubled (Figure 5.31).

The conbination of the two U-shaped sections.
arranged at right angles to each other, takes the
form of a four-element antenna array (Figure 5.32).
For it, the intensity of the return increases by

12 dB as compared to the dual element array. Other
combinations of U-ahaped reflectors are possible
which allow for even greater return intensity.

 

' ' I As studies have demonstrated. the refleCtive prop-
erties of a single dielctric rod are independent
Figure 5'32' A four-element of the type of incident wave polarization. however,
antenna array. U-shaped reflectors provide for a next-an return

only in the case where the polarization plane of

the incident wave is normal to the plane of the bend of the reflector. If the pol-
arization plane of the indicent wave is parallel to the plane of the bend, then

- 101 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the effective radar cross-section is somewhat reduced. where the amount of this
reduction depends on the spacing between the axes of the rods. with a spacing
between the rods of 2.51, this reduction is approximately 0.5 dB. Thus, when

the reflector is irradiated with a circularly polarized wave. the reflected signal
will be ellipticslly polarized and have the same direction as the incident wave.

Elementary reflectors (dipoles and rods) can be joined together not only in planar.
but also in linear phased arrays in an appropriate manner.

The secondary emission pattern of a linear Van-Atta array of n radiators is
determined by the expression:

F"): {slnI-I-‘x': (slnI+ '72)] - a.
ﬂu l-X— (:19. +72?”
where d is the spacing between the radiators:

o is the phase shift between adjacent radiators.

A circular antenna array is shown in Figure
5.33. Here. diametrically opposite radiators
are coupled together in pairs. For such a
reflector, the expression for the secondary
emission pattern has the form:

F(I)=J. (1,113». -;-).

where Jo is a zero order Bessel function;
r is the radius of the array.

 

The directional pattern of a circular array
2x in diameter and a linear array with a
length of 21 are shown in Figure 5.30 for
comparison.

Figure 5.33. Schematic of a
circular antenna

array (1 are delay

lines). The requirement that the return from the

camouflaged object and the return from the
decoy target simulating this object be identical can be most completely met by
means of Van-Acts reflectors (see 51. Chapter 5).

Thus, if phase shifters which are controlled by a specified program are inserted
in the lines connecting the coupled elements of a passive antenna array. one can
produce amplitude modulation of the reflected signal at the requisite frequency.
Let a plane electromagnetic wave impinge on a U-shaped array at an angle of 9.

where the array is made of two radiators positioned at a spacing of 2d from
each other and joined together by a feeder of length l.

- 102 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 5.36. The secondary mission patterns
§E====E of a linear array with a length of
2x (curve 1) and a circular array

I‘.”... with a dimater of 21 (curve 2).

‘Il-

 

If a phase shifter is inserted in the connecting feed line which provides for a

phase shift of e'JB , then the anplitude of the return expressed as a function of
the incident angle 9 will have the following form [16]:

E: =tos(m towels-hf).

By changing the quantity 3 (when kZ - const.). one can vary the amplitude of the

return field in a specified direction from the maximum value to zero. A similar
result can also be obtained for a mltielement array.

The use of amplifiers for the reflected signal designed around tunnel diodes or para-
metric amplifiers opens up broad possibilities for improving the design specifica-
tions of decoy targets. Such amplifiers not only nalre it possible to increase the
effective radar cross-section of an antenna array by several tines without increas-
ing its dimensions, but also to produce a return with specified amplitude. phase or
frequency modulation. Both one-way and two-way amplifiers can be inserted in the
lines connecting the pairs of coupled elements. In the case of two-way amplifiers,
strong feedback can occur between the elements of the array, something which lisits
the level of the reflected signal gain. As a result of this phenomenon. a tunnel

diode circuit makes it possible to obtain a pernissible gain not exceeding 15 to
20 d3.

1

Figure 5 . 35 .

Schematic showing the connection of
radiators in a semiactive antenna array
with polarization decoupling between the
receiving and trmsaitting subarrays.

A structural design with two individual subarrays for reception and return is used
to increase the decoupling between the radiating elements of a Van-Atta reflector.

The subarrsys are made from orthogonally polarized radiators arranged in checker-
board fashion and connected by a feeder. as shown in Figure 5.35. In this case,

onc-vway amplifiers are employed. For the structure shown in Figure 5.35. one can

achieve an isolation between the receiving and adjacent radiators of more than
50 dB.

-103-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I
2 If frequency conversion such as shown
in the circuit of Figure 5.36 is
employed in the asplifiers built
15 h“, into the antenna arrays. then the

reflected signal can be phase and
frequency modulated. Here, a local
oscillator is used for the modulation.

0!

Figure 5.36. Scematic showing frequency
modulation in an antenna array
with amplification of the re-
flected signal. '

The results of tests of a model of
such equipment are cited in the
foreign press [16]. Tunnel diode

Key: 1. keceiving elements; amplifiers and mixers were used in
2. Transmitting elements; the circuit. Hutually orthogonal
3. Mixer; dipoles. arranged on a reflecting
lo. Amplifier. screen in checkerboard order played

the part of the radiators. The

frequencies of the received (2.000
MHz) and transmitted (2,150 Hus) signals differed by 150 KB: with an amplifier
passband of 120 Ills. The local oscillator made it possible to employ frequency
and pulse modulation. The measured gain of the array amplifier was 16 d3. Such
an antenna array can be used to simultaneously retransmit several signals at dif-
ferent frequencies. incoming from different directions.

6. Guided Missiles - Decoy Targets

Special guided missile decoy targets are used to simlate air objects which have
a high flight speed. As a rule, they are small aircraft, launched from bombers
or missible carriers at a distance from the enemy radars greater than the detec-
tion range for the bomber or rocket carrier. This leads to false conclusions
concerning the nature of the attack (instead of the real target, the enemy begins
to pursue the missile), and also overloads the enemy data retrieval and processing
system.

Corner reflectors, Luneberg lenses or other devices which increase the effective
back—scatter cross-section of the missile can be installed on decoy missiles.
However, it is difficult to generate radar returns con-ensurete in power with the
returns from actual air targets by means of decoy missiles equipped only with
passive reflectors.

It is well known that corner and lens radar reflectors produce a good effect in
the case where the wavelength of the radar irradiating them is such less than the
dimensions of the reflector, while the transmitter and receiver of the radar are
located at a single point. when the transmitter and receiver are spaced a certain
angle apart relative to the reflector, the effectiveness of the reflector falls
off sharply with an increase in this angle. This is explained by the directional
nature of the back-scattering pattern of such reflectors.

If the sigml reflected from a false target is small for the simulation of a
large object, it is necessary to amplify it. For this, a special amplifier is

-106-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

installed in the decoy missile which retransmits the echo signal impinging on the
decoy target. A missile equipped with such an amplifier-transponder will simulate
a large aircraft. even with a significant separation angle (relative to the target)
between the radar transmitter and receiver. The devices takes the form of a radar
transponder. similar to a conventional radar beacon. In receiving the signals from
the radar, it amplifies them by neans of a klystron or traveling wave tube (TNT)
amplifier and retransmits them in the direction of reception. The frequency of
the return signal for a stationary target will always be equal to the frequency of
the transmitting radar. If the trap simulates a loving target, then the frequency
of the signal transmitted by it will have precisely the same doppler frequency
shift as in the case of the motion of the actual object. When_it is necessary to
shaulate a false signal of the same power as the signal return from a camouflaged
target, it must be considered that the average pulse power of the transponder
signal of the decoy target depends on the average effective radar cross-section of
the object being simlated. 0n the other hand. the average return power is
governed by the average incident power of the search radar and the transponder
gain. Naturally. the transpondergain of the decoy target should be equivalent to
the effective radar cross-section of the object being camouflaged. The following
expression can be derived from the basic radar equation for the gain of a decoy
target with an active return:

a 2
K 10 log(éso:/l crecctrans)' d8.

It follows from this that the gain of a decoy target transponder is governed by

the effective radar cross-section of the object being camouflaged. at, the wave-
length of the radar. x. as well as the directional gain of the transponder antennas
(Cree. cctana). It is apparent that the average pulse power of the decoy target
signal is proportional to the power of the transmitting radar; the nature of this
power as a function of range should be the same as for the actual target.

The intensity of the returns from actual objects is always subject to considerable
fluctuations, which have a definite spectral composition and corresponding proba-
bility distribution of the signal parameters with time. In order that the returns
from a decoy target do not differ from the returns of the objects being simulated
in terms of the nature of the fluctuations, the signal is modulated simultaneously
with the amplification of the signal in the transponder circuitry. The envelope

of the actual signal reflected by the corresponding simulated object is used as the
modulating voltage.

Klystron amplifiers are comparatively narrow band devices: electronic frequency
tuning of a klystron is possible in a range of 30 to 60 Mﬂr, while the bandwidth
of an oscillator or amplifier using a klystron is only 10 Has. For this reason. a
klystron amplifier-transponder, installed in a decoy missile. can simulate the

target only for one particular radar or a group of radars operating in one fre-
quency band.

- 105 -

F0l.OFFMJAl.USI20NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under actual conditions, several radars can work on an aircraft. bomber or missile
vehicle simultaneously (detection. target acqusition, fire control. etc.). where
each of the radars has its own working wavelength. The target being camoulfaged
can be simulated simultaneously for several radars by means of a decoy missile, on
board which a THT amplifier is installed. Such an amplifier has 100 to 100,000
times more gain than the usual klystron and can operate in a wide rangeof fre-

The American company of "Temco" has designed a THT amplifier, which together with
the power supply weighs 4.5 kg. The equipment is built with semiconductor devices
and contained in a hermetically sealed housing. The antennas are chosen in accord-
ance with the structure of the false target for which the device is intended. The
power used by the amplifier at a DC supply voltage of 25 to 29 volts does not
exceed 80 watts. The service life of the amplifier is boo-hours. When such an
amplifier installed in a light pleasure aircraft was tested, the signals reradiated
by it produced the same blips on the screens of radars as heavy four-engine bombers.
Similar equipment is being manufactured by another American company: Lockheed
Electronics. The equipment complement includes a TNT amplifier, a transistorized
power supply and matched receiving and transmitting antennas. The frequency range
is 5,000 to 11.000 MHz. The effective back-scatter cross-section of the simulated
target is adjusted by an attenuator at the antenna output and can be increased up
to 850 m2. The minimum output power is one watt, although over the majority of the
range it reaches 3 watts. The signal gain varies in a range of 65 to 72 dB; the
DC power consumption is 100 watts for a power supply voltage of 25 to 29 volts.

The transponder can be used at a temperature of from -5h to +71 '0 and at altitudes

we shall cite the data on the American
decoy missile. the GAho72 "Green Quail"
(Figure 5.37), as an example of decoy
targets on which such transponders and
amplifiers can be installed. This is a
guided missile of the "air to ground"
class. The basic function of the missile
is to decoy the radars of the enemy air
defense system to itself, thereby providing
the long range bombers or missiles with
nuclear warheads the opportunity to reach
the set targets unimpeded. In its exter-
nal appearance. the missile takes the form
of a small aircraft. manufactured from
armor plate, with a short fuselage and
triangular wings. The length of the
missile is about a m. the weight about 550 kg and the wingspan is 1.6 m. The mis-
sile has one jet engine which can develop a thrust of up to 1,100 kg. something
which provides the missile with a speed close to that of sound. The range of the
“Green Quail" missile is 360 km and its ceiling is 15,000 m. The missile is con-
trolled by an autopilot with program control or by radio instructions; following
the execution of the combat mission. it is destroyed by means of a self-destruction

device. Special electronic equipment (of the type of amplifier-transponders

 

Figure 5.37. The "Green Quail" decoy
target.

- 106 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

considered above) is installed in the nose- of the missile, where this equipment
makes it possible to produce returns of the same levels as those from a 8-526
bomber on the screens of enemy radars.

The B-SZG strategic bomber of the 0.8. Air Force, besides the major armmsents,
carries four "Green Decoys" on board. It should be noted. that other means of
antiradar camouflage are provided on the 3-526 bodaer besides the decoy missiles.
The "Green Quail" missile can be launched from any startegic bomber in the 0.3.
Air Force. When the missile is hung in the bomb compartment, its wings are folded
and brought to the normal position inediately prior to releasing the missile

from the aircraft.

The guided "Firebee-ZO" decoy, which can be launched fras aircraft and ground
installations, was developed by the Imerican capany "Ryan". The length of the
"Firebee" missile is 7 m. the wingspan is 3.9 m and the maximm flight weight is
990 kg. The flight velocity is close to the speed of sound and the ceiling is
23 km. A Luneberg lens is installed in the tail portion of the missile while a
WT amplifier-transponder is mounted in the nose cowartment. These devices make
it possibel to produce a return level from the missile canparable to the return
frau an aircraft.

Besides air decoys, it is also proposed that ground and water decoy targets be
used, which take the form of high power electraagnetic wave retransmission or
reflection sources. Such decoys, which are set up at a certain distance from the
objects being protected, by reradiating or reflecting the electromagnetic energy
will attract the guided missiles with the radar homing warheads to theaselves.

It is thought that the widescale application of semi-active antenna arrays using
tunnel diodes or parametric amplifiers as the nplifying elements will open up
great prospects for the design of decoy targets. Using such devices, one can
achieve the most complete matching of the par-eters of the signal reflected from
the real target and the signal fra the simulator.

The effectiveness of all of the decoy targets treated in this chapter increases
sharply if a set of measurs is implemented for the object they are simulating to

reduce its radar visibility.

7. Anti-Radar Camouflage of Ballistic Missiles

Because of the continuous refinement of systems for the detection and intercep—
tion of air and space attacks, which have a great range and enormous destructive
power. extensive work is underway abroad to create means which facilitate the
penetration of ballistic missiles through an antimissile defense system (PRO)

[ABM systems]. For this purpose, various counter-measures for ABM systems are
undergoing intense development in the 0.5., which are intended for their equipping
the "Atlas", "Titan" and "Minuteman" ICBH's, the "Polaris" long range ballistic
missile and the "Pershing" intermediate range ballistic missile. According to
data in the American press, about a billion dollars have already been expended for
the creation of AB! systea counter-measures. A significant portion of these funds
is being spent on the design of antiradar csaouflage.

- 107 -
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 5.38. Standard ballistic missile trajec-
tory.

Key: 1. Launch site;
2. Powered phase;
3. Rocket motor separation
phase;
4. Central portion of the
trajectory;
5. Hasinum deceleration phase

(50 g) at an altitude of
10 to 20 km;

6. Target.

 

We shall briefly examine how the means of antiradar camouflage make it difficult
to intercept an ICBH at various points in its trajectory (Figure 5.38).

The problem of intercepting a ballistic missile in the general case consists in
preventing its warhead from exploding in the region of the object being protected.
In the case where a nuclear warhead is used. interception must be made at the
rather high altitude and long range from the protected facility, otherwise. the
explosion of such a device causes destruction over the protected territory.

Calculations performed in the 11.5. show that an interceptor should be launched
approximately 15 seconds after receiving the intercept cmand. The character—
istics of existing engines and power sources, as well as the comparatively long
time needed to cage gyroscopes malts it very difficult to meet this requirement [26].
It follows from this that for the timely interception of an ICBM, it met be
detected at the greatest possible range.

The utilization of tools which reduce the power of radar returns form ICBH's
makes it possible to sharply reduce the range and detection probability of the
missile by a radar. If the effective radar cross-section of a ballistic missile
warhead is reduced by a factor of 20 using poorly reflecting forms and antiradar
coatings. then as follows from formla (2.1). its radar detection range is more
than cut in half. The target detection probability is reduced by no less than the
same factor.

In this case. very little time remains for the interception of the ICE“. Reliable
target intercepticn can be accomplished only with a sharp increase in the speed of
the interceptor.

The relationship between the velocity of the interceptor Vans and the target

detectia: range D for a protected zme radius of 185 Inn is shown in Figure 5.39.
It can be seen frat the graph that when the ultimate detection range of an ICE“ is
cut in half (the effective radar cross-section is reduced by a factor of 16), the

-103-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

. when this condi-
ode over the territory being
defended.

It is obvious that it is desirable
to achieve a reduction in the effec-
tive back-scatter cross-section of

a ballistic missile over all portions
of its trajectory. However, in this
case it must be kept in mind that
depsite the relatively simple geo-
metric shape of the component struc-
tures of the missile, the value of
its effective radar cross-section

will change in different portions of
the flight. This is due to the
sequential separation of the rocket

 

stages and the continuous change in
Figure 5.39. Interceptor speed as a func- the radius of the last stage (the
tion of target detection warhead) relative to the radar
range. station. Morevoer. the effective
. radar cross-section can change
Key. 1’ serge; 3330:}:Zc?f because of back-scattering of the
2 v: _ 9’000 m/eec: radio waves by the rocket engine
0 s I
3. Vt _ 12.000 m/sec. flare, as well as because of inhomo-

geneities in the ionosphere. per-
turbed by the operating engine.
Despite the fact that the missile
the trajectory. there is little

The placement of
long range missile acquisition and tracking radars on radar petrol aircraft for

satellites as yet still involves considerable technical difficulties.

the rocket begins the middle
phase of the flight outside the limits of the atmosphere with the engine shut

s the radar (for example.
the "Mark-4" on the Atlas-8, Atlas-F and Titan-l ICBM's) turn end over end in the

- 109 -

IWJR OFTWCIAI.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

central portion of the flight trajectory and represent large targets for the opera-
tors of enemy radars.

Various decoys can be used following the detection of the nose of the rocket to
camouflage it. i.e., to disorient the enemy or completely saturate the carrying
capacity of the detection and tracking system of the air defense complex.

The effectiveness of antiradar camouflage of Icsu's using decoy targets can be
quite high in the central porticn of a trajectory. Since the influence of the
atmosphere is completely eliminated in thisp phase of the flight, light objects
can be used as the decoy targets, for example, such as dipole reflectors or in-
flated balloons having the shape of the warhead or a sphere.

For example, successful tests in the 0.5. of a aat.of such decoy targets ejected
from a Titan long range ballistic missile were reported in the press. The rocket
which was equipped with dummy nuclear charge flew 8,000 km and fell in the region
of the south Atlantic Ocean.

After separating the spent stages, the missile warhead jettisoned six decoy
targets. All of the decoys had balloons in the noses, where these balloons pro-
duced magnified blips on radar screens which camouflaged the true dimensions and
position of the target and made radar observation difficult [7].

Following the ejection of decoys from the nose section of a missile, it is neces-
sary to correct the position of its center of gravity which is shifted as a result
of dumping the decoy targets.

Disorienting decoys can also be placed in the last stage of the rocket, and in this
case, following the ejection of the decoy target and the separation of the last
stage, it should be thrown off to the side from the warhead by means of braking
motors or destroyed so that the trajectory of the missile warhead cannot be gov-
erned by the flight trajectory of the last stage.

Despite the fact that at first glance the destruction of an ICBM in the middle
phase of the trajectory is the most advantageous, since it can be accomplished at
a great distance from the defended facility, the problem of guiding the inter-
cptor where decoy targets are used becomes so complex, that in the opinion of
foreign specialists. there is little probability of an interception in this case
and such an approach can be treated only as an auxiliary one.

The use of antiradar camouflage which reduces the effective back-scatter cross-
section of an ICBH takes on especially great significance in the final flight

phase of the missile. In this phase, the use of false radar target "decoys" can

be less effective than during other phases of the trajectory, since because of

the different dynamic conditions for the entry of the warhead and false targets

into the atmosphere, the probability of selecting the warhead from among the decoys
increases. The warhead, which has greater weight and lower frontal resistance
begins to lose velocity at comparatively lower altitudes, while for metallized

strip or inflated balloon type decoy targets, the reduction in speed becomes percep-
tible early on at high altitudes.

. 110 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

  

 
        
   

l ’-.I-“““

I —————““

I -- —_-“‘
4‘!"- I““

,‘IIIIIIIIIIEII.

         

I'll-III‘VO‘ 1‘.

II
I III I Ill““

Figure 5.60. The use of antiradar camouflage in various phases of the
flight trajectory (x, y, z) of a ballistic missile.

Key : . Powered phase of the trajectories;

Point of separation of the last stage;
Destruction of the spent stage or the changein its
trajectory;

Passive jamming or decoy targets;

Central portion of the trajectory;

False targets in the form of air balloons;

The region of entry into the dense layers of the
atmosphere:

. Heavy reflectors (decoy targets);

9. The point of trajectory change;

10. Haneuvering nose cone;

ll. Missiles guided to the radars;

12. Target.

TlOM‘ UNH

O

The recognition of warheads when they enter the atmosphere can be made consider-
ably more difficult if heavy objects are used as the false targets, the ballistic
coeffiente of which are equal to or close to the ballistic coefficients of the
warhead.

The designers of false targets have been forced to increasingly deal with the
refinement of air defense radars as regards the increase in the volume of informa-
tion which can be extracted on air targets (their dimensions. fluctuations in the
return, objects rotating end over end in space, etc.) by means of new techniques
of analyzing the fine structure of the return. This in turn forces designers to
make the structure of decoy targets increasingly complex, something which leads to

- 111 -

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an increase in their overall dimensions and weight. However, with an increase in
the weight of decoy targets, it is necessary to consider the fact that each kilo-
gram of payload costs the same to deliver, regardless of the destructive power of
the charge. In other words. increasing the weight of decoy targets unavoidably
leads to a reduction in the weight of the missile payload.

A missile warhead, entering the dense layers of the atmosphere in the descending
phase of the flight trajectory at supersonic speed. forms a strongly ionized or
plasma sheath and a plasma trail of comparatively great extent. The plasma has the
capability of reflecting radar signals, and for this reason the effective radar
cross-section of the missile nose cone increases due to ionization. Since the
decay time of the plasma trail is about two seconds, its length for a nose cone
traveling at a speed of 600 m/sec [sic]. will be approximately 12 km.

A reduction in the ionized sheeth and the plasma trail can be achieved by means
of changing the geometric shape of the nose cone as well as through the use of
special ablation materials. Thus. for example, with a thin cone shape for the
missile nose cone section, a less intense plasma sheeth is produced, while a
rounded-off base section of the nose cone promotes the suppression of a turbulent.
strongly ionized (plasma) trail.

It is recommended that teflon be used, for example, as the special low temperature
destructible costings which are capable of absorbing the thermal radiation of nose
cones when they enter the dense layers of the atmosphere or to neutralize the
plasma by means of oppositely charged gas particles. Ways of reducing the ionized
sheeth by means of introducing special substances into it through holes in the
missile nose cone are also being studied abroad.

The set of antiradar camouflage measures treated above makes it possible to sig-
nificantly boost the reliability of penetrating and ABM system wtih ballistic
missiles. and consequently, increase the efficiency of missiles while executing
the combat missions assigned to them (Figure 5.40).

It is natural that antiradar camouflage measures for ballistic missiles should
occupy a firm place in the set of ABH counter-measures. To evaluate the efficiency
of such a complex of measures. one turns to games modeling of operations to over-
came an enemy ABM system. The solution of such a problem proves to be extraordi-
narily complex, since in the opinion of American military specialists. there are
about 20 critical parameters for an enemy ABM system and hundreds of less critical
parameters. By means of individual and successive variations of these parameters
in the course of the iterative game simulation process with a specified ballistic
missile warhead power and a given combination of ABM counterqmeasures, an estimate
can be derived for the probability of successfuly breaking through an enemy ABM
system.

- 112 -

FOR OFTICJA1.USEGDNLY
2.

3.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dulevich V.Ye., Koroatelev A.A.. Mel'nik Yu.A., et al., "Teoreticheakiye oanovy
radiolokatsii" ["Radar Theory Fundanentals"], Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1966.

Saybel' A.G., "Osnovy radiolokataii" ["Radar Fundamentals"], Sovetskoye Radio
Publishers, 1966.

Skolnik M., "Vvedeniye v tekhniku radiolokatsionnykh sisten" ["Introduction to
Radar Systems Engineering"], Mir Publishers, 1965.

. Mentser J.R., "Diffraktaiya i raaseyaniye radiovoln" ["Radio Have Diffraction

and Scattering"). 1958.

Vaynshteyn L.A., "Siaktroaagnitnyye volny" ["Electronagnetic Haves"],
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers. 1957.

. Shchukin A.N., "Ugolkovyye otrazhateli" ("Corner Reflectors"], Moscow. 1969.

Stepanov Yu.G., "Haakirovka ot radioelektronnogo nablyudeniya" ["Canouflage
against Radioelectronic 0bservation"]. Voyenizdat Publishers, 1963.

Hishchenko Yu.A., "Radiolokatsionnyye tseli" ["Radar Targets"], Voyenizdat
Publishers, 1966.

"Radiolokatsionnaya tekhnika" ["Radar Engineering"], Vol. 1, translated fro.
the English. Sovetakoye Radio Publishers, 1969.

Peresada V.P., "Radiolokatsionnaya vidiaost' morskikh ob"yektov" ["Radar
Visibility of Sea Objects"), Sudpromgiz Publishers. 1961.

Sluchevskiy B.F., "Radiolokatsiya i yeye prineneniye" ("Radar and Its
Application"], Voyenizdat Publishers. 1962.

Vishin G.ﬂ., "Selektsiya dvizhushchikhaya tseley" ["Hoving Target Indication"],
Voyenizdat Publishers. 1966.

"Porogovyye signaly" ["Threshold Signals"], Translated from the English,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1952.

Paliy A.I., "Radiovoyna" ["Electronic Herfare"], 1963.

Shlesinger R., "Radioelektronnaya voyna" ["Radioelectronic Harfare"]. Translated
from the English, Voyenizdat Publishers, 1963.

"Antennyye reshetki", "Obzor zarubezhnykh rabot" ["Antenna Arrays", "Review
of Foreign Literature"], Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1966.

Arenberg A.G., "Rasproatraneniye detsiaetrovykh i santinetrovykh voln"
["Propagatioa at Decimeter and Centimeter Havelengths"], Sovetakoye Radio
Publishers, 1957.

Proceedings of the National Electronics Conference. 1959, Vol. XV.

- 113 -
FOR 0FF1C1A1.USE1DNLN
19.

20.

21.

22.
23.
26.
25.

26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kanareykin D.B.. et al. , "Polyarizataiya radiolokataionnykh aignalov"
["Radar Signal Polarization"], Sovetakoye Radio Publishers. 1966.

MICROWAVE JOURNAL, 1961. V01 6, No. 3, p ‘0.

RADIO‘I'EKHHIKA I RADIOELEKTRONIKA 2A RUBEZHOH [RADIO ENGIRIEERING AND RADIO
ELECTRONICS ABROAD], 1959, N03. 3 and 6.

AVIATION "EEK, 1963. Vol 79, No 9.

0.5. Patents Nos. 2,996,710; 2,801,611; 3,095,814; 3 443.965.

ASTRONAUTICS, 1960, V01 5, No 10.

ANNALES DES IELECOHHUNICATH 1961, Vol 16, Nos. 3, In.

Fal'kovich S.Ye., "Vydeleniye aluchaynykh signalov na fone pouekh"

["‘l'he Discrimination of Random Signals against a Background of Interference"),

Sovetskoye Radio Publishers. 1960.

Golev K.V.. "Raschet dal'noati deyatviya radiolokatsionnykh stantaiy"
["Calculating the Range of Radara"], Sovetakoye Radio Publishers. 1962.

PROC. IEE, 1965, Vol 53, No 8.

SPACE AERONAUTICS. 1966, Vol 61, No 2.

L'ONDE ELECTRIQUE, 1958, Vol 38, No 381.

ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT NEWS, 1963. Vol 1., No 10.

PLASTICS WORLD, 1963, Vol 21. No 2.

AVIATION ”EEK AND SPACE TECHNOLOGY, 1966, Vol 80, No 3.

PHOTOGRAMH. ENG., 1960, Vol 26. No 6.

RADIO AND ELECTR. ENC., 1963, Vol 110. No 12.

Proceedings of the National Electronics Conference, 1963, Vol 19, Chicago.
RACHRICHTEN Z‘ISCHR. [COWICATIONS JOURNAL], 1964, 17, No S.

"Balkke Radarstrahlung - Radartarnung" "Balkke Radar Transmission - Radar
Camouflage"], Vol 1, Dusseldorf Knoff. 5a, 1960 [sic].

Trofinovich A.D.. Stepanov Yu.G., "Sredstva protivoradiolokataionnoy zashchity
v vooruzhennykh ailakh SShA i Anglii" ["Antiradar Camouflage in the Armed

Forces of the 0.5. and England"l. 'Morakoy abornik" ("Maritime Handbook"],
1961. No 10.

-1u-

FOR Ol-‘HCIAL USE ONLY
60.

41.

(42.

(03.

45.

1.5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Denin I.D. "Radiolokatsionnoye obnaruzheniye nadvodnykh ob"yektov na fone
passivnykh ponek " ["Radar Detection of Hater Surface Objects against a
Background of Passive Interference"]. "Informatsionnyy shornik IsNII MP"
["Infornation Handbook of the Central Scientific Research Institute of

the Maritime F1eet"], "Sudovozhdeniye i avyaz'" ["Mavigation and Communica-
tions"] Series, 1965, No 32.

Stepanenko V.D., "Vliyaniye atnoefernykh osadkov na dal'nost radiolokataion-
nogo obnaruzheniya tseley" ("The Impact of Atmospheric Precipitation on the
Radar Detection Range of Targets"], "Voprosy Radioelektroniki” ("Questions in
Radioelectronics"]. Series XII, No 6, 1960.

Stepanov Yu.G.. Levin D.2.. "Apparatura radioprotivodeystviya na sanoletakh

i kosnicheskikh korablyakh" ["Electronic Countermeasures Equipment in Aircraft
and Space Vehicles"]. VESTNIK PRO‘I‘IVOVOZDUSHNOY OBORONY [AIR DEFENSE JOURNAL],
1963, No 3.

ZARL'BEZHNAYA RADIOELEKI‘RONIKA [FOREIGN RADIO ELECTRONICS], 1965, No 4, 1966,
No l.

PROC. INST. ELECTR. ENGRS., 1963, Vol 110, No 12.
Stepanov Yu.6.. "Zashchita sanoletov i rake: ot tekhnicheskikh aredstv

nablyudeniya" ["Protecting Aircraft and Missiles against Technical Means of
Observation"), VESTNIK PROTIVOVOZDUSHNOY OBORONY. 1962, No 5.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1968

8225

C50: 8144/1882

- 115-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY