FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10540

26 May 1982

Translation

AIR DEFENSE OFFICER’S HANDBOOK

Ed. by

G.V. Zimin

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGNT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED dEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATICN
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR Ol-FICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/105‘0
26 Hay 1982

AIR DEFENSE OFFICER’S HANDBOOK

Moscow SPRHVOCHNIK OPITSBRA PROTIVOVOZDUSHNOY OBORONY in Russian 1981
(signed to press 10 Jun 81) pp 1-431

Iofficer's handbook edited by G. V. 21min, Voyenizdat, 40,000 copies,
431 pages]

CONTENTS

Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
I. AIRDEFENSE............................... 2
1.1. Tasks and Structure of Air Defense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.1.1. Tasks and Structure of Air Defense Troops . . . . . . . . . 2

1.1.2. Tasks and Strucrure of the Field and Naval Air Defense . . . 3

1.2. The State and Development Prospects of Air Defense . . . . . . . . . 5
1.2.1. Historical Infor-ation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2. ENEMY AIR-SPACE ATTACK RESOURCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

2.1. Classification of Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1.1. General Description of Air-Space Weapons and the Tasks

Carried Out by Thea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1.2. Classification of Air-Space Attack Weapons . . . . . . . . . 11

2.2. Aerodynamic Attack weapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

2.3. Air-to-Surface and Air-to-Air Guided Missiles . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3.1. Space Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

3. PRINCIPLES IN THE THEORY OF DESIGNING AIR DEFENSE WEAPONS SYSTEMS . . . . 26

3.1. Characteristics of the Air Space Envzronuent and Its Influence on
the Propagation of Electromagnetic Oscillations and Aircraft Flight
Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.1.1. Characteristics of the Earth's Atmosphere . . . . . . . . . 2b
3.1.2. Flight Conditions for Various Types of Aircraft . . . . . . 30
3.1.3. Laws of Motion of Aircraft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

3.2. Principles for the Designing of Detection Systems Against Enemy
Air Weapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

[II - USSR - F000]
- a - [III - USSR - 4 - FOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.2.1.
3.2.2.
3.2.3.
3.2.4.

3.2.5.

3.3. Methods of Determining Coordinates and Parameters of Motion for

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Systems of Coordinates Employed to Solve the Problems of
Detecting and Determining the Location of Aircraft . . . . .

Physical Principles Underlying the Obtaining of Information

Page

on Aircraft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Radar Detection of Aircraft . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Operating Range and Basic Characteristics of Ground and

Onboard Radar Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Target Detection by Optoelectronic Equipment . . . . . .

AirAttackHeapons.......................

3.3.1.
3.3.2.
3.3.3.

Distance Measuring Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Devices for Tracking the Direction of Targets

Devices for Tracking Target Speeds . . . . . . . . . . .

e

3.4. Principles for the Control of Antisircrsft and Air-Launched Missiles
Information from Aerodynamics . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4.1.
3.4.2.
3.4.3.

RADAR TROOPS . . . . . .

Missile Guidance Methods and Control Systems .
Elements of Missile Control Systems . . . . .

assesses-eoeeosoee

4.1. Weapons Systems of Radar Troops . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.1.
4.1.2.
4.1.3.

4.2. Combat
4.2.1.

4.2.2.

Detection Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Automation of Radar Data Processing .

The System Uf Taking, Transmitting and Displaying

Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Capabilities of Radar Troops . . . . . . . . . . .

Definitions and Quantitative Indicators of Combat

Capabilitigt....o..............
Methods of Evaluating Combat Capabilities . . . .

PIcmER AVIATION O I O 0 O O O I U D O O O I I O O O O O O O O O

5.1. The Weapons System of AD Fighter Aviation

5.1.1.
5.1.2.

5.1.3.

5.2.1.
5.2.2.

ANTIAIRCRAFT MISSILE TROOPS

6.1.

e

e

e

e

Design Principles of an Aircraft Missile Complex . . . . . .
Technical Realization of weapons in Aircraft Missile Complex

Combat Capabilities of an Aircraft Missile Complex (AMC) . .
5.2. Principles in the Combat Employment of AD Fighter Aviation . . .

Tactical Principles for AD Fighter Air Combat

Combat Capabilities of AD Fighter Aviation Subunits and

Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ouseeeseseseeseseesee

Antiaircraft Missile Weapons Systems . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.1.1. Combat Characteristics, Classification, Structure
and Operational Principle of Antiaircraft Missile

Systems (SAMS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.2. Combat Capabilities of the SAMS . . . . . . . . .

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

42

45
49

59
72

74

74
82
86

88
200
113
124

124
124
142
147
150

150
151

154

154
154
158
162

165
165

171

180
180

180
187
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9889

6.2 Principles of Firing Antiaircraft Guided Missiles . . . . . . . . . 200

6.2.1. Tasks and Essence of Firing Antiaircraft Guided Missiles . . 200

6.2.2. SAM Guidance Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202

6.2.3. The Coordinate Law for the Destruction of a Target . . . . . 210

6.2.4. Quantitative Indicators for the Effectiveness of SAM Firing 215
6.2.5. Impact and Launch Zones, the Capabilities of SAMS to

Successively Fire on Targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
6.2.6. Basic Concepts of Firing Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225

6.3. Tactics of Antinircraft Missiles Subunits . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227

6.3.1. Principles in the Combat Employment of Antiaircraft Missile
Subunits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227

6.3.2. The Elaboration and Adoption of a Decision by the Commander
for Combat Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
6.3.3. Support of Combat Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237

6.3.4. Principles in Controlling the Fire of Subunits in Combat . . 240

6.4. Antiaircraft Artillery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245

6.4.1. The Essence of Firing at an Airborne Target and the General
Characteristics of Antiaircraft Artillery Systems (Mounts) . 245

6.4 2. Firing at an Airborne Target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249

6.4.3. Combat Employment of Antiaircraft Artillery . . . . . . . . 252

7. CONTROL SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254

7.1. General Characteristics of Control Systems and the Process of
Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254

7.1.1. Definition, Structure and Classification of Control Systems. 254
7.1.2. The Control Process and Its Characteristics . . . . . . . . 260

7.2. Automated Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 264
7.201s AC5£1enent8..........o.............26lo
7.2.2. Controlling SAMS Fire Using an ACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . 276

8. ELECTRONIC COUNTERMEASURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
8.1. Equipment and Methods for Conducting Electronic Countermeasures . . 283
8.2. Ensuring Electromagnetic Compatibility of Radio Electronic Equipment 293

[Brief Annotation]
The handbook describes enemy air attack weapons, it outlines the tasks and struc-
ture of the Air Defense Troops, it gives a brief history of their development and

examines the design principles of the weapons systems and the combat employment of
the branches of air defense troops.

The handbook is intended for officers concerned with air defense questions.

FOI‘OFiﬂCJAl.US£‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOREHORD
The Air Defense Troops securely guard the frontiers of our motherland.

This is ensured by constant high combat readiness, by stability in defending the
protected installations, by the mastery of the combat equipment and by the ability
to hit the air enemy on the first round (launch) and in the first attack.

The personnel of the Air Defense Troops are hard at work carrying out the party's
plans and are always ready to carry out the combat mission.

A modern air defense system includes diverse weapons and military equipment which
have high combat capabilities. The realization of these capabilities in the course
of combat operations demands from the personnel profound knowledge of the air attack

weapons and the methods of their employment, the operating principles of the weapons
systems and the bases for the tactics of the branches of air defense troops.

In the practical activities of Air Defense Troop officers, the need arises to ans-
lyze and quantitatively evaluate the capabilities of weaponry to destroy air attack
weapons in terms of certain conditions of a combat situation as well as the obtain-
ing of reference data on the operating principles of the weapons systems and the
particular features of their combat employment. This necessitates the turning to
various sources of information which in a number of instances creates certain diffi-
culties.

The present handbook provides a generalized description of military-technical and
operational-tactical questions related to air defense as based upon materials found
in the unclassified Soviet and foreign press.

The handbook has been worked out under the editorship of Doctor of Military Sciences.
Prof G. V. 21min by the group of authors including:

6. V. 21min (Foreword, 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3), P. T. Buturlin and Ya. I. Nizdran'
(5.1, 5.2), s. K. Burmistrov (3.1, 3.2, 8.2), V. P. Delidov (3.3, 3.4, 6.1, 8.1).
A. S. Hal'gin (7.1, 7.2), F. K. Neupokoyev (6.2, 6.3, 6.4) and O. Ye. Orlov (6.1,
6.2).

The handbook has been prepared for pub1ishing by S. K. Burmistrov.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. AIR DEFENSE
1.1. Tasks and Structure of Air Defense
1.1.1. Techs and Structure of Air Defense Troops

The Air kaense Troops are a service of the USSR Armed Forces. They have the mis-
sion of protecting major administrative-political centers, industrial installations,
Armed Forces groupings as well as other major objectives comprising the basis of
the state's economic and military might against enemy air strikes. The Air Defense
Troops carry out their missions independently and in cooperation with the other
Armed Services by destroying enemy air attack weapons (SVN) in the air.

In organizational terms the Air Defense Troops consist of air defense field forces
and formations and these in turn are comprised of units and subunits of branches of
troops including the antiaircraft missile troops (ZRV), the air defense aviation,
the radar troops (RTV) as well as the units and subunits of special troops, the rear

units and facilities.

The antiaircraft missile troops (ZRV) are one of the basic branches of troops. In
cooperation with the fighter aviation, they are capable of preventing enemy air
strikes against the nation's major installations as well as troop groupings.

They are armed with antiaircraft missile complexes (28K) of varying purpose and
range.

Th4 antiaircraft missile troops possess great fire power and high accuracy in hit-
ting the SVN over the entire range of their flight altitudes and speeds, at great
distances away from the defended installations at any time of the day and in any

weather as well as under conditions of radio jamming.

1n organizational terms today's ZRV consist of units having fire and technical sub-
units as well as control (equipped with automatic control systems) and service sub-
units. In the system of defending the nation's installations ZRV groupings can be

created consisting of several antiaircraft missile units.

The air defense aviation is a branch of the Air Defense Troops with the mission of
covering important sectors and installations against an airborne enemy. It includes
fighter aviation (IA) units. The IA is based on units armed with missile-carrying
fighters capable of destroying the SVN both at the distant approaches to the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

protected installations as well as in close combat. The supersonic all-weather
fighter-interceptors with powerful missile weapons can hit enemy aircraft and

cruise missiles (KR) in a broad range of altitudes under any weather conditio-: and
at any time of the day. The presence of long-range missile-carrying interceptors in
the aviation ensures the destruction of aircraft carrying air-to-ground guided mis-
siles before they reach the launch line.

The radar troops (RTV) as a branch of the Air Defense Troops have the mission of
continuously scanning the air space, conducting radar reconnaissance of the enemy
SVN in the air and providing information on them needed by the command for taking
decisions and supporting the combat operations of the antiaircraft missile troops
[and] air defense aviation.

The radar troops are equipped with various modern radars making it possible during

any time of the year or day, independently of weather conditions and interference,

to detect the SVN at all altitudes, to identify and determine their precise coordi-
nates as well as provide target designation for the antiaircraft missile troops and
fighter guidance.

The rear units and facilities are designed to carry out the rear support missions
for the combat operations of the Air Defense Troops.

1.1.2. Tasks and Structure of the Field and Naval Air Defense

The field [organic] air defense is a component part of combined-arms conbat and op-
eration. It is organized by the combined—arms commanders under any situation for
the purposes of attacking the enemy in the air and repelling strikes against troops
and other installations.

The successful carrying out of air defense, particularly the destruction of air-
craft carrying cruise missiles in flight. helps to win superiority over the air
enemy, to win air supremacy as well as maintain high troop morale.

The aim of air defense is achieved by the carrying out of a number of tasks, the
basic ones being: the conducting of reconnaissance for the air enemy and the warn-
ing of troops of this; the providing of a cover against air strikes and against air
reconnaissance of the troop groupings and rear installations; destroying enemy air-
borne parties in flight; participation jointly with the Air Defense Troops in re-
pelling the first massed air enemy strike.

In addition, the missions of field air defense can also be: supporting the over-
flight of one's own airborne parties, long-range and naval aviation; the air block-
ading of surrounded enemy groupings and so forth.

The field air defense is a branch of troops which includes antiaircraft missile,
antiaircraft artillery and radar units and subunits.

Troop air defense is organized as a unified system in accord with the overall con—
cept of the combined-arms coammnder and includes the following elements: reconnais-

sance of the air enemy and warning of the troops, the firing of aatiaircraft weapora,
fighter air cover and the control system.

FOR Ol-TICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The field air defense system is based upon the firing of the antiaircraft missile
and antiaircraft artillery units and subunits.

The basic principles in the organization and conduct of modern field air defense are
considered to be the following: constant readiness to repel air enemy strikes, the
concentrating of the basic air defense resources on covering the main troop group-
ings and major rear installations, close cooperation of the air defense resources
between themselves and with the covered troops. continuity of combat operations.

maneuverability (mobility), high efficiency. stability and impassability, continuous
and flexible centralization of control.

Air defense of the troops and rear installations is carried out by the field air de-
feuses and fighter aviation in cooperation with the Air Defense Troops.

Naval Air DefEnse is a most important type of combat support for fleet operations.
This is organized in the aim of repelling enemy air strikes against the naval forces
and its shore facilities.

Proceeding from an assessment of the naval forces as air defense objects. two basic
tasks of naval air defense have been established: covering the naval bases, the
points where ships have been dispersed and the naval shore facilities; covering the
naval forces at sea.

The successful carrying out of the missions of naval air defense is possible only
with the integrated use of the navy’s own air defense resources. the air defense
troops and the air defense resources of the military districts (fronts).

Air defenses for the naval bases, the ship dispersion points and the shore installa-
tions as well as the ships in coastal areas are provided by the Air Defense Troops
in cooperation with the air defense resources of the navy and military districts
(fronts).

The ship antiaircraft weapons are the basis of air defenses for naval forces at sea.
The Air Defense Troops and the military districts (fronts) strengthen their defenses
within the range of their air defense resources.

The basic missions of air defense in a naval theater of war are the following: re-
connaissance of the air enemy and the warning of the naval forces and shore facili-

ties of it; preventing the enemy from conducting air reconnaissance and aircraft
mine laying; covering the naval forces at sea and in bases against air strikes.

in organizing air defenses for naval ships at sea, the principles are observed of
concentrating the basic efforts of the air defense rescurces on covering the naval
forces carrying out the main missions as well as in the most probable sectors of
enemy air operations as well as the principle of constant combat readiness to repel
enemy air strikes.

FIN!(NHN(]AI.USE10NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.2. The State and Development Prospects of Air Defense

1.2.1. historical Information

The birth of air defense. The rise and development of air defense (AD) go back to
the period of world War I when aviation began to be widely employed for military
purposes. In 1913 in France and then in 1916 in Russia and Germany, special anti-
aircraft cannons were developed to fire at airborne targets.

In the Russian Army field guns and naval cannons were adapted for this as well.

The first battery for firing at aircraft with 75-mm naval cannons was organized in
October 1914. In 1915, a special antiaircraft cannon was manufactured and the Rus-
sian Baltic Military Plant built the world's fighter, the RBVZ 8-16. The air obser-
vation, warning and communications (VNOS) service was organized to detect enemy avi-
ation. to observe its operations and to alert the air defense resources and the
population of cities about an air danger.

Among the measures complementing AD were also: the creation of shelters. the organ-
izing of fire fighting, the carrying out of camouflaging and blackouts in cities,
the setting up of dummy installations and warning the population of an air danger.

During the years of World War I, for the first tine in military practice the prin-
ciples were set down for the air defense of the nation's installations and the
troops; the procedures and methods of combating an air enemy were worked out.

AD during the years of the Civil Hhr. One of the first AD subunits of the young
republic was the "Steel Antiaircraft Artillery Battalion (Armored Train)" built in
Petrograd at the Putilov Plant. By the spring of 1918. the Red Army had around 200

antlaircraft batteries and 12 fighter detachments.

The organized subunits were employed for the AD of Petrograd, Moscow, Tula. Astra-
khan', Baku, Odessa as well as the troops on the fronts.

In the period of 1918-1920, the tactics of the AD troops were further worked out,
the principles for the organization of AD in the major points of the nation were
worked out and the elements of the operational art of the AD troops were born.

The development of AD daring the period from 1921 through 1941. In 1926, in Lenin-
grad, from the individual battalions the first Antiaircraft Artillery (ZA) Regiment
of the RKKA [Worker-Peasant Red Army] was organized. and in 1927, the first Antiair-
craft Artillery Brigade. In the 1920's, the organizational structure of the
nation's AD was based on the AD posts which were organized as An sectors on the
territory of the border military districts. the commanders of which were responsible
for the AD in the borders of the district. During this same period a network of

VNOS posts was organized in the border zone and around the major centers of the
nation.

In 1927, the Sixth Section was organized at the RKKA staff and in April 1930. s

headquarters in charge of AD questions. In April 1932, this was put directly under
the People's Commissariat for Military and Naval Affairs. The RKRA AD Headquarters
was entrusted with practical leadership of the AD service for the entire territory

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the nation as well as for unifying the activities of all the civilian depart-
ments, institutions and public organizations in this area.

From 1 July 1936, the RKKA AD Headquarters was headed by one of the outstanding
military leaders, Arm Cmdr. 1st Rank 8. S. Kamenev, and in September 1936 this posi-
tion was assumed by the Arm Omdr. 2d Rank A. I. Sedyakin.

Other important measures were also carried out to strengthen AD. In the military
districts, AD headquarters were organized and these were headed by the AD chiefs
of the military districts who were directly under the district commanders, and in
special terms under the chief of the RKKA AD.

In the 1930's, the AD troops were provided with new military equipment. During
these years our IA was provided with modern Soviet-produced aircraft such as the
1-15, 1-16 and 1-153, and from 1960 with the more advanced types such as the Yak-1
and Mic—3 and in 1961, the LaGG—3. Antiaircraft artillery received new models of
antiaircraft guns such as the 1931 and 1938 76.2-nmlmode1s, the 1939 85-mm and auto-
matic 37—mm, the PUAZO—Z antiaircraft fire control equipment in 1935 and the PUAZO-3
in 1939. The AD Troops were equipped with Soviet-produced searchlights, sound
locaters and barrage balloons. During this same period, Soviet industry developed
production of optical range-finders (the DYa type). In 1939, the VNOS service re-
ceived the first Soviet-produced surveillance radars, the NUS-1. and in 1960, the

RUS-Z. From 1936 through 1939, the number of ZA increased by almost 3-fold and the
IA by 1.5-fold.

There was also an improvement in the organizational forms and structure of AD troop
control. In 1937, for the AD of the important industrial and administrative centers
of the nation (Moscow. Leningrad and Baku), AD corps were organized while there were
AD divisions and separate brigades for defending other important cities and areas
(Kiev, Minsk, Odessa, Batumi. Khabarovsk and others).

These formations included all the branches of the AD troops, with the exception of
the fighter aviation which continued to remain under the air force's commanders of
the military districts. However, the IA was based in accord with the AD missions
and participated in all the operational exercises of the AD troops. With the

start of a war in operational terms the IA was to be put under the commanders of the
AD formations.

In February 1961, the entire border territory of the nation was divided into AD

zones (according :0 the number of military districts) and these zones were headed
by deputy commanders for AD of the military districts. At the center the Red Army
AD Main Directorate (GU) was organized. It was entrusted with the planning of the

operational employment of the AD Troops, keeping the records of their weapons and
directing combat training. From 16 June 1961, the AD GU was headed by Col Gen and
subsequently Chief Mar Art N. N. Voronov. Maj Gen N. N. Nagornyy became the chief
of staff of the AD GU from the moment of its organization. The measures carried out
significantly strengthened Soviet AD.

AD during the years of the Great Patﬁotic bar of 1941-1945. The start of the Great
Patriotic Har caught the nation's AD in a period of its rearming. The Yak-1 and
"10-3 which Soviet aviation was receiving possessed better performance than the Nazi

FOR OFTWC1A1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aircraft but there were not enough of them in the troops. The 2A still had few of
the new 37-mm automatic antiaircraft guns and 85-mm guns.

At the beginning of July 1961, the 6K0 [State Defense Committee] adopted a number of
measures to strengthen the cover for Moscow and Leningrad, the Donets Basin, the
Moscow, Yaroalavl' and Gor'kiy industrial centers as well as for organizing the de-
fenses of certain strategic bridges across the Volga. For this purpose significant
air, antiaircraft artillery, machine gun and searchlight units were formed. Subse-
quently AD was organized for the industrial centers of the Volga and the Volga
Riverway.

1he Moscow AD was a classic example of protecting a large center against air attack.
No capital of the capitalist states had such strong AD during the entire World

war II. This was provided by the I AD Corps under the (:0de of Maj Gen Art D. A.
Zhuravlev and the VI Fighter Air Corps under the command of Col I. D. Klimov and
which in operational terms was subordinate to the I Corps.

By the start of the German air raids (22 July 1961), these formations had over 600
fighters, more than 1.000 antiaircraft medium- and small—caliber guns, around 350
antiaircraft machine guns, over, over 600 antiaircraft searchlights, 124 barrage
balloon posts and 612 VNOS posts. The presence of Such extensive resources and the
able organization of their control broke the enemy's attempts to make mass air raids
against the Soviet capital.

The Leningrad AD was also strong and this was provided by the II AD Corps and the
subordiaate VII Fighter Air Corps.

0n 9 November 1941, the 6K0 approves a decision according to which the position of
commander of the national AD Troops was introduced, while the national AD Staff and
other headquarters bodies were organized. Maj Gen M. S. Cromadin was appointed the
first commander of the national AD Troops and deputy NKO for air defense.

For the purposes of better cooperation with the AD resources, in January 1942,
fighter aviation which had been assigned to cover installations was put completely
under the coumand of the national AD. As a result, centralized troop control was
ensured on the operational and tactical levels.

In line with the significant increase in the size of the AD Troops in April 1962, a
partial reorganization was carried out in the structure of the national AD Troops.

The HOSCow AD Front was formed with AD armies being created in Leningrad and some-

what later in Baku as well. The first operational formations of the AD Troops ap-

peared.

The changeover of the Soviet Army to broad offensive operations substantially alter-
ed the conditions for the conduct of combat operations by the AD Troops.

One of the important tasks of the national AD Troops during this period was the de-
fense of rail lines and water barriers. the airfields of the frontal and long-range
aviation, trains and river vessels underway as well as establishing an air blockade

over the surrounded enemy groupings (Stalingrad, Korsun—Shevchenkovskiy and others).

FOR 0FFNJAL.USE‘0NLY
IN)! 0FT1C1Al.USE¢DNLY

The necessity of ensuring close cooperation between the AD resources of the various
Armed Services in combating the air enemy in the zone along the frontline required
a further improvement in the AD structure.

In June 1963, the Directorate for the Commander of the National AD Troops was

broken up and in its place two AD fronts were organized: the Western and Eastern.
The AD troops defending Moscow were reorganized into the Separate Hoscow AD Army.
In March-April l94h, the Western and Eastern fronts as well as the Transcaucasian
AD Zone were reorganized into the Northern, Southern and Transcaucasian AD fronts.

In line with the further successful offensive operations by the Soviet Army, for
convenience of control. in December 1944, the formations which were defending in-
stallations deep in the nation's rear were made into a new, Central AD Front head-

quartered in Moscow while the Northern and Southern were changed into the Hestern
and Southwestern AD fronts.

In the Far East, in March 1985_ in accord with the GKO decree, on the basis of the
Far Eastern and Transbaykal AD zones as well as the AD resources which had been re-
grouped from the European USSR, three AD armies were organized: the Maritime, Amur
and Transbaykal and these were parts of the fronts.

In the course of the Great Patriotic war the AD Troops honorably carried out the
missions entrusted to them by the Communist Party and Soviet government. The chief
result of their combat activities was that they protected large industrial and ad-
ministrative centers of the nation, thousands of population points and troop group-
ings against destruction and annihilation by Nazi aviation and thereby significantly
contributed to the rapid growth of the nation's military-economic potential. During
the wartime, the AD Troops destroyed more than 7,300 aircraft and much other enemy
military equipment, thereby making a major contribution to the cannon cause of de-
fearing the Nazi invaders.

In the course of the war the antiaircraft artillery and fire aviation developed or-
ganizationally as branches of the AD Troops. The VNOS service, the searchlight
units and barrage balloon units underwent great development. Operational field
forces, operational-tactical formations and formations and units of the branches of
troops were created.

More than 80,300 soldiers, sergeants, officers and generals of the AD Troops re-
ceived orders and medals, 92 men received the high title of Hero ot the Soviet Union
while the air squadron commander, Capt A. T. Karpov became a winner of two Gold Star
Medals. For successful combat operations, 11 formations and units of the AD Troops
received honorary names and 29 became guards units.

7hr dcvcbmwncnt of AD in the postwar period. After the end of World war II, the
United States and Great Britain maintained enormous air forces. The reactionary
circles of the imperialist states began to carry out a hostile policy vis-a-vis the
Soviet Union and the other nations of the socialist commonwealth.

Under these conditions, the CPSU Central Committee and the Soviet government, in
adopting measures to further strengthen our nation's defense capability, devoted
great attention to improving its air defenses. By 1952, the AD fighter aviation had

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0R10FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

been reequipped with jet fighters, a significant portion of which had radar sights.
Antiaircraft artillery had received new antiaircraft artillery complexes consisting
of 57-. 100- and l30~mm antiaircraft guns, a gun laying radar and anti ircraft fire
control equipment. The VNOS troops received the P-3 and P-3a radars.

From 1952. the AD Troops began to receive antiaircraft missile equipment with mis-
siles of varying range and purpose. A new branch of troops was established in them,
the AD antiaircraft missile troops (ZRV). The air defense fighter aviation began

to receive supersonic fighter-interceptors with air-to-surface missiles. The VNOS
troops in mass amounts began to receive new fighter surveillance and guidance radars.
A new branch of the AD troops arose, the AD radar troops (RTV) which were officially
named this in 1955. Diverse automated control systems [ASU] and other equipment be-
gan to be received in mass amounts.

The increased demands made upon AD and the reequipping of the un’ts with new weapons
required a further improvement in the organizational structure of the AD troops and
their control system. In February 1966, the position of commander rf the AD troops
was introduced and he was directly subordinate to the artillery commander of the
Soviet Armed Forces. Col Gen H. S. Gromadin was appointed commander of the AD
Troops while Col Gen N. N. Nagornyy was chief of staff.

In 1948, for the first time the regulations stated that the AD Troops, along with
the Ground Troops, the Air Forces and the Navy were to be an Armed Service. This
notion stemmed completely from the experience of the Great Patriotic War and re-
flected the objective pattern of the increased role played by the AD Troops in the
postwar period with the advance in the SVN and the methods of their employment.
During the same year, the AD Troops were made no longer subordinate to the artillery
commander of the USSR Armed Forces. Mar SU L. A. Govorov became the commander of
the AD Troops. and from 1952, Col Gen N. N. Nagornyy. In May 1954, the position of
commander-in—chief of the AD Troops was established. Mar SU L. A. Govorov was ap-
pointed the first commander-in-chief in May 1954. Subsequently the commanders-in-
chief were: Mar 80 S. S. Viryuzov (1955-1962), Mar Avn V. A. Sndets (1962w1966) and
Mar SU P. F. Datitskiy (1966-1978). In June 1978, Mar Ayn A. I. Koldunov was ap-
pointed commander-in—chief of the AD Troops.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IM. USE ONLY

2. ENEHY AIR-SPAcE ATTACK RESOURCES*
2.1. Classification of Resources
2.1.1. General Description of Air-Space weapons and the Tasks Carried Out By Them

The military-political leadership of the basic imperialist states have assigned a
decisive role to the air-space offensive weapons in achieving the goals of a war.

The air-space offensive weapons include the field forces, formations and units armed
with air-space offensive weapons [SURE].

The SURN include ballistic missiles. aircraft, spacecraft, dirigibles and balloons.

The field forces, formations and units armed with the SURN include the air forces,
navies and ground troops.

The most important components in the 0.8. Armed Forces are the strategic offensive
forces and the general-purpose forces.

The strategic offensive forces include units of intercontinental ballistic missiles
(ICBM), the strategic aviation forces. formations and units and the formations of
atomic nuclear-powered submarines.

The ICBH and strategic bombers are part of the 0.8. Strategic Air Command. At pres-
ent, there are strategic offensive forces in the United States, England and France.

The general-purpose forces include the field forces. formations and units of the
air force tactical aviation, naval aviation, army aviation as well as the
perationaI-tactical missile units and formations.

The basic missions of the SURE can include: undermining military-economic potential;
disrupting the system of state and military control; winning air supremacy; isolat-
ing an area of combat operations; close air support for the ground troops and naval
forces.

* From materials of the foreign press.

10

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FfﬂICNHHCJAl.l£5El)NLN

The undermining of military-economic potential can be carried out by attacking the
major military and industrial installations.

The disrupting of the system of state and military control can be achieved by attack-
ing military-political centers, control centers and communications.

The winning of air supremacy is carried out by destroying aviation on airfields and
in the air as well as neutralizing the air defense system.

The isolating of an area of combat operations is carried out for the purpose of
preventing the bringing up of reserves, obstructing supply and impeding troop
maneuvers by attacking rail junctions, bridges, troops and other objectives.

Close air support consists in continuous and effective firing for effect against the
enemy from the air in the course of combat operations directly on the battlefield.

2.1.2. Classification of Air-Space Attack weapons

The SURN include: land- and sea-based ballistic missiles, aerodynamic vehicles,
spacecraft, dirigibles and balloons.

Ballistic missiles. depending upon range, are divided into close-range missiles (up
to 1,000 km), medium—range (up to 5,000 km) and long-range (over 5,000 km). His-
siles with a range over 5,000 km are termed intercontinental.

In accord with combat employment, ballistic missiles are divided into tactical,
operationa1~tactical and strategic.

Strategic missiles include the medium- and long-range missiles.

Ballistic missiles can be land and sea based. The land-based missiles are launched
from silos or mobile launchers while the sea-based ones are launched from nuclear
missile submarines.

Land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles are launched from launching silos.
These are designed to hit major administrative-industrial installations, missile
launching positions and other objectives. Such missiles have long ranges (up to
12,000 km), great speed (up to 7.5 km per second) and altitude (1,000 km and more).

The [CHM have high combat readiness and can attack at any time of the year or day
regardless of the weather conditions. For example, modern 163“ include the
Minuteman-2, Minuteman-3 and Titan-2 missiles.

The sea-based intercontinental ballistic missiles with a range of 8,000-12,000 km
are launched from nuclear missile submarines from a depth of arOund 30 m at the
moment the sub reaches the launch position. The missile is ejected from the launch
tube by compressed air and at a height of 20—30 m above the water surface the first-
atage engine is fired. On board, inertial systems are employed to control the
flight of such missiles. These 163! are designed to hit various military-industrial
installations. The Trident-l and Trident-2 are advanced sea-based ICIH.

ll

FOR'OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The land-based medium-range ballistic missiles are launched from launching silos and
are controlled in flight by inertial systems. These are designed t. hit various
military-industrial installations.

The sea—based medium-range ballistic missiles (MRI!) are capable of hittingtargets
up to a distance of 5,000 km. These are also launched from nuclear missile subs
from a depth of 30 m. Bach sub of the existing classes carries l6 missiles each.
The MRBH are designed mainly to hit major administrstive-industrial installations,
forts. bases and other objectives. The Polaris A-3, Poseidon 6—3, the H-2 and “-20
are among the modern HRBH.

The operational-tactical ballistic missiles are capable of hitting targets to a dis-
tance of hundreds of kilometers. The missiles are launched from surface mobile
launchers and this makes it possible to maneuver them in the field.

These are used for close troop support and for hitting targets in the operational-
tactical depth which are beyond the reach of aviation due to strong air defenses.

Among the present-day operational-tactical missiles are such missiles as the Lance
and Pershing. Descriptions of the ballistic missiles are given in Table 2.1.

2.2. Aerodynamic Attack Weapons

The aerodynamic attack weapons include strategic bombers, tactical fighters.
carrier-launched ground attack planes, unmanned aircraft, and army aviation sir-
planes and helicopters.

Heavy strategic bombers possess a great range, up to 18,000 km, and are capable of
operating at high, medium and low altitudes. They carry a bombload of up to 30 tons
and more as well as various weapons for attacking installations and lements of the
AD system. reconnaissance equipment, as well as SCH [electronic countermeasures]
equipment for neutralizing various radio electronic devices.

The heavy strategic bombers over the next few years will remain one of the basic
strategic means of attack.

The further modernization of strategic combers will be aimed at increasing combat
effectiveness by arming them with new SRAAM missiles and subsequently the ALCH and

ASALM. as well as increasing the capability of the ECH equipment.

These aircraft will basically be employed in a nuclear war, however considering
the experience of combat operations in Vietnam. the partial use of strategic bombers
in limited wars is not excluded. These aircraft include the various modifications

of the 8-52 and the new 8—1 aircraft which is being developed.

Medium strategic bombers are used for carrying out missions in nuclear and limited
wars. Considering their range, they can hit objectives at a distance of 2,000—
4,000 km. For the purposes of increasing the bomber flight range, mid-air fueling
can be carried out. The payload versions of such aircraft can vary. They can carry
nuclear and conventional bombs, air-to-ground missiles and equipment for setting up
active and passive jamming. The navigation equipment makes it possible for the
bombers to fly at low altitudes.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ouam

Dam

oddw

nozucaag no
acuuauog

~.~ oanuk

owauolosh

mama
unaua1038

Mann
unauuuoough

”mum
ouauuloeuzh

mama
«wouQIOJF

mxmm
owauuuoza

mumm
owcuanuoush

mxmm
owuuauooush

mum;
unqualo)a

was:

couasaaoum

Huuuuocu

acunxm
Heuucou

ooo.<

coo.c

ooo.nH

ooo.-

coo.nH ou

- nH.o
adamam
o.~
«Humﬂm
m.o
oaumﬁm
2.on
>¢H:--oH «gag:
H.o..a
>¢HZIIOA «0H5:

nodxoa
>M—zllﬂamuuuaz

Tenn
>¢HXII0HMuuH=I

«.0xn
>¢H=IIonauH52

NIA
«Human

OH
uuucwm

 

 

accuwmoa .Auauaano

vmosua:

 

NM

ON

an

Nn

an

0H

mm

mm

own

GEO»
.ugwuu:
gonzo;

«um

owl:

«I:

~-u=oc«up

glucovquu

nuo covuo.oa

nu< oak-Ho.

amused
nuamaouacuz

honIZQA
uncoaouacuz

on~uzoa
~-=-u«e

13

IVIICIﬂﬂClAl.USE(HVLY
FOR‘0F‘iC1Al.USE()NLN

The medium strategic bombers include: the comparatively new FB—lll aircraft with a
variable wing configuration and capable of operating at low altitudes at supersonic
speed; the supersonic Mirage IVA bomber and the subsonic Vulcan 3-2 bomber.

The light (tactical) bombers are employed for attacking objectives in the
operational-tactical depth and for air support for the ground troops.

Such aircraft are the English Buccaneer, the French Vautour of which there is a
limited number in service.

The weaponry of the light bombers consists of conventional and nuclear bombs,
guided and unguided missiles as well as BC“ and reconnaissance equipment.

In line with the increased combat capability of the tactical fighters (the increased
bombload and the introduction of air-to-surface missiles), the role and significance
of the light bombers have declined. For this reason new types of light bombers are

not being developed and the already existing ones are gradually being taken out of
service.

7hvtica£ fighters are used for carrying out the following missions: destroying
nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, aircraft at airfields and air defense
weapons; striking military-industrial objectives; close air support for the ground
troops; conducting tactical reconnaissance; troop air defense.

Modern tactical fighters possess a range from 2,700 to 6,100 km, speeds from 1,000

to 2,500 km per hour. and flying altitudes from 60 to 18,000 m and can carry a bomb-
load from 2 to 9 tons.

The basic 0.5. Air Force tactical fighters are the P-b, P-15 and F-lllA. The Royal
Air Force has the multipurpose Harrier and Jaguar fighters while the French Air

Force has the Mirage IIIE, Mirage SF and Jaguar fighters. Among the advanced tac-
tical fighters are the F—l6, the Tornado and Mirage 2000.

Tactical fighters can carry conventional and nuclear bombs, air-to-ground tactical
missiles, air-to—air missiles and SCH equipment. For example, in operating against
ground targets, different versions of a combat load are possible for the F-6 air-

craft: l8 360-kg bombs or 11 450—kg bombs; 6 Bullpup missiles or containers with
unguided missiles.

Bombing can be carried out from various altitudes.

From the experience of the combat operations in Vietnam, the 0.8. tactical fighters
in attacking objectives, carried out missile- and fighter-avoidance maneuvers for
the purpose of evading the AD weapons. In this war the tactical fighters were used
as part of the assault and various support groups.

Modern tactical fighters have a number of systems (an integrated weapons control

sysrem, an integrated navigation-bombing system, and a terrain following system)

which make it possible for them to reach the objective, make the attack and return
to the airfield.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carrier-based gnound attack aircraft are part of the carrier aviation. These are
used for operating from multipurpose (attack) aircraft carriers and for attacking

land and sea targets. Depending upon the type of carrier, it can have around 100
different types of aircraft, including 50-60 carrier-based aircraft.

Modern carrier-based attack aircraft can operate at ranges up to 5,000 km, fly at
speeds from 760 to 2,200 km per hour at altitudes from 60 to 14,000 m and carry a
boabload up to 7 tons.

At present, the U.S. carrier aviation has heavy attack and reconnaissance aircraft
the RA-SC, the A-b, A-6 and A—7 attack planes. They can all carry conventional and
nuclear bombs, air-to-surface and air-to-air missiles, INC and reconnaissance
equipment.

The variations for the combat load of the carrier-based attack planes can differ,
for example, the A—6 aircraft can carry two-three Bullpup or Standard ARM missiles,
unguided missiles and three bombs weighing 907 kg each.

The A-6, A-7 and A—h carrier-based attack planes were widely used in combat opera-
tions in Vietnam both for attacking targets as well as part of support groups.

Reconnaissance aircraft, as a rule, are reconnaissance versions of bombers, fighters,
carrier-based attack planes and transports which have special equipment for conduct-
ing reconnaissance. In addition, there are also special reconnaissance aircraft,
for example, iv the U.S. Air Force the 83971 and 0-2 which are designed to conduct

strategic reconnaissance.

The basic U.S. aircraft for tactical reconnaissance is the RP-4 which is employed
for photographic and electric reconnaissance as well as for radar reconnaissance
using the side-viewing radar.

Carrier-based aircraft includes the RA-SC reconnaissance aircraft and the Hawkeye
and Tracer long-range radar surveillance aircraft; these are used for conducting
reconnaissance in the interests of carrier task forces.

Unnanned aircraft are used for carrying out the following missions: for jamming the
radars of the enemy air defense system; for conducting air reconnaissance (the 80“-
35A, the 147J, H); for attacking targets and for complicating the air situation.

Unmanned aircraft can be launched from other aircraft and from ground launchers.
These are controlled by a program or by an operator from a ground or airborne post.

In recent years abroad great attention has been given to developing small-sized
remote controlled devices for conducting reconnaissance and neutralizing the radars.

Army aviation is employed for carrying out the following missions: close air sup-

port for the ground troops on the battlefield; ferrying ground troops to combat
areas and dropping tactical airborne parties; logistical support and the evacuation

of sick and wounded; conducting air reconnaissance.

15

INDIIOFFIC1A1.lﬂﬂE(HVLY
FOR OH‘KJAL USE. ONLY

in addition to the designated missions, helicopters are employed as flying command
posts.

Army aviation consists of army aircraft and helicopter units and subunits.
The U.S. Army employs the following classes of helicopters:

The general-purpose (multipurpose) helicopters, the basic type of which is the 08-10
Iroquois helicopter;

The CH-SbA, the Cﬂ-b7B and CH-67C troop carrier helicopters;
The Iroquois and Hugh Cobra fire support helicopters;

The Gains and Caiova reconnaissance helicopters.

Army aviation also employs the Bird Dog and RU-Zl airplanes.

The tactical and technical characteristics of basic military aircraft are given in
Table 2.2.

2.3. Air-to-Surface and Air-to-Air Guided Missiles
The air-to-surface guided missiles are divided into strategic and tactical missiles.
Air-to-Suxihce Missiles

Air-tn-surﬁace stnategic missiles include the SRAAH missiles which are in service on
the strategic bombers and the ALCH, ASALH and SLCH which are being developed. These
are being designed to attack targets at ranges from 200 to 2,600 km without entering
the zone of active AD weapons. In addition, the ASALH missile can be employed for
hitting airborne targets.

The air-to-surface strategic missiles possess great accuracy in hitting the targets
and the capacity to be retargeted to other objectives in the course of the air-
craft's flight. They significantly increase the capabilities of strategic aviation
in breaking through the AD system.

The SRAAH missile was put into service in 1972. It is employed on the 3-526 and H
bombers to which can be suspended up to 20 SRAAH, as well as the FB-lll which is
capable of carrying up to 6 SRAAH. The SRAAH missiles can be launched from the 3-52
in various directions in relation to the aircraft's heading.

The ALCH missile has been developed as a subsonic (H - 0.5-0.7) cruise missile cap-
able of flying at low altitudes (up to 60 m). It has a small effective reflective
surface.

The ASALM missile is being developed as a supersonic (H - k.5 at great altitudes)
capable of flying in a broad range of altitudes from low to high, including with
terrain following.

16

FOIi0FFKJAl.USEtoNlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oow.o

coo.n

can.o

ooo.n
uo>o

con.n

ooo.na

ooo.~
uaona

oco.nn

ooo.o~

ooo.on

as ..xua
vwomnaon

«sausm N
can naaauan e

:0 vcaouw
ouluua no nun
louluun one

XHEOOSL 0

to
nucleuuuuu no

no soauo>az o

to teach»
Ounuwd no ads
neuluuu one

so uuauOu
nus pa vcaouw
nauluuq Qua

acuuunm n
uc .oxuunm
no aanuaan ¢

aq<w<
vac Jua<
.:<<zm «a on

so =<<¢m o o.
~0munwul
voua=m_

2o soa< can
x<<¢m on o»

madman“:

 

0:310”!

ONIIH

Guild

Hanna; o .oaulH

«ouumn o .ONIIH

.zamnn no oNnuq

a! .ponuaao

Inuansac
acaccau

occ.n

chuaquMv
oom.~
acm.n
n.n

.xouana

Aucaauuouv
ooo.o

oon.o

c~0.o

ooo.-

000.0

coo.oa

ax .owcwm

ooc.~H

 

cacao
. ooo.-
coo on mmm4MI
. ooo.-
coo HN mmNAMI
ooo.a~ ooo.~.
uo>o con.~
ooo.a~ wwwwmm
cu m o.~
ooo.aH ooo.~H
uo>o nno_~
coo.oH ooc.-
.MOunnw can—N
coo.mH coo.na
no>o enn_~
ooo.o~ ooo.~ﬂ
.xounnu onn.~
ooo.mH can.»
HO>O ONO u H
a a .0 nu u a an
.mcuauoa ”sen H
ouu>nom sxax

.vuuan Baauxa:

:uuo

<~I<

wank

QHIh

oath

math

adult

<d|a

HHHnnh

«nun

can:

17

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
Table 2.2 continsed

 

  

     
 
  

 

 
  

Cannons

 

| Maximum speed,

Service

 

kn/hour
at altitude, m

Crew

Bomblosd

max., kg

ceiling,

 
 

Missiles

  
    

number-

      

caliber, mm

approx.
4,560
(ferrying)

6 Maverick GM

       
     
    
   

 

and air-to—

air-to-air
ground GM

         
    
 

   

4,800
(ferrying)

Tornado

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2 Martel GM

6,500

(ferrying)

  

The SLCM missile is being developed by the
command of the 0.5. Navy for launching

from subs and surface vessels and possibly
from aircraft and ground launchers. In its
tactical and technical characteristics it
is analogous to the ALCM missile.

The tactical air-to-surface missiles in-
clude the Bullpup, Maverick, Condor as well
as the tactical Jumbo and SLCH missiles
under development. These missiles, with
the exception of the SLCM and Jumbo, are

in service in the tactical and carrier-
based aviation.

The Bullpup missile put into service at the
beginning of the 1960's has several modifi-
cations. It is used to hit small-sized
well protected ground targets.

The Maverick missile was put into service
in 1972 and was designed for hitting an
radio electronic equipment, tanks, air-
planes at airfields and other ground tar-
gets. Its basic arriers are the P-4 and
A97 aircraft which can carry 3-6 such mis-
siles.

The Maverick missile has an electronic-
optical guidance system the TV camera of
which is located in the nose portion of the
body. The missile is guided to the target
by the maneuvering of the aircraft in such
a manner that the crosshairs of the optical
sight line up on the target. Then the
crosshairs of the TV camera are lined up
with the target and the missile is launched

after which it is possible to aim the fol—
lowing missile.

The Condor missile is designed for hitting
surface and ground targets with previously
known coordinates (launchers of the anti-

aircraft missile troops, command posts, in-
dustrial buildings and shore facilities and
naval vessels). These missiles are in
service on carrier-based aircraft.

U.S. military specialists are studying the

possibilities of increasing the range of
the Condor missile.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

The SLCH missile (tactical) is being developed by the 0.3. Navy for use from aur-
fnre vessels at a range up to 500 km and from submarines to a range of 260 km.

Thu albinissiles include the Quail decoy missiles and the Shrike, Standard All and
Martel AS-37 antiradar missiles.

The Quail missile was put into service in the 0.8. Strategic Aviation in 1961 and
was basically designed for use as a "decoy" which would divert the antiaircraft
guided missiles launched to destroy the strategic bombers. The Quail missiles on

the screens of ground radars simulate signals from overflying heavy bombers. The
range of the Quail decoy missile is 370 km.

The Shrike missile is an antiradar missile. It was put into service in 1964 and
over this time has undergone several modifications. The Shrike is basically de-

signed to hit the radars of enemy AD troops and has replaceable homing heads. It
was widely used by the tactical and carrier-based aviation in Vietnam.

The Standard ARM missile is a second-generation antiradar missile. The missile is

guided as part of the onboard system which determines the coordinates for the radars
of enemy AD troops prior to the launching of the missile.

According to information in the foreign press, the Harm missile which is being de-
veloped will have a greater speed and more effective guidance system with a low

cost. The basic tactical and technical data for the air-to-surface missiles are
given in Table 2.3.

Air-to-Air Missiles
Air-to-air missiles can have long, medium and short ranges.
The long-range air-to-air missiles includes the Phoenix AIM-54A.

The Phoenix missile is designed to hit subsonic and supersonic airborne targets
over a broad range of altitudes using a conventional warhead. under any weather
conditions. during the day and at night. The warhead damage area is 7.5 m. The
missile has a combined homing head which includes a semiactive pulse-doppler radar
system operating in the initial and middle legs of the flight and an active pulse-
doppler radar homing system.

Th0 medium-mange air-to-air missiles include the Sparrow-3 and Hatra R-530.

The Sparrow-3 AIM-7F missile is one of the basic medium-range missiles with a semi-
active radar homing head. It is designed to hit airborne targets under any weather
conditions. A hybrid guidance system is also being developed for this missile and

it includes a radar and infrared homing head.

The Hatra R-530 missile was developed for the Mirage Ill, Mirage P-1 and Jaguar
aircraft. it is equipped with a semiactive radar homing head. However, the mis-

siie's homing system cannot isolate targets flying at a low altitude against the
earth's background.

19

l-‘OIl OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                          

.7..— . _ .9. 03

 

 

               

 

    

              

      

 

     

        

          
       

 

             

    

         

     

 

  

  

    

    

 

               

     

  

 

    

    

    

 

.7< .o.¢ e558 E A .. 2: .28 So .538
”Hulk
.37» a m
a
cum 7< 05o: .— 8 $723
.3 .c..< .523. Sam N : n~ ~96 5:8 8? 9:25
Eé :1... 9.2.2. 2. Sam A .. 3 .28 OS 3%”an
uenu.:clh acuuoauou
.ucum 23.58 2.3.. . 533?». 9. «me 02:52
.3: .on< -263 :33 as: a N 3:22: 2 :68 S» 933
case
.uaoouo> aoouoa
ouauuaa sown-Houuou . . . us 0cm .
7n .Nné 23 33.85 mm o coo Too 08 N 530:2 25 A 5.5
muowuuu
:0 an ocuonuua
3 (Ann vac: 9:30: awn-.3 ham 8m «Bum
.20 o~ navan saw: Iuosoou luau uuauuao us ecu .
Ou leﬂ Hwﬁuuuﬂu vdﬂwnﬂco n HON OOH?" hQOHusz 08 H §m<
.6 3
cu <Hnn Scenes
.29 3 5:33.30 . 3. 3m owns":
ou mnua can Hauuuocu coo N unoausz on» :OA<
:0 ¢~
3 <7...
.zu o
3 27m...
.5 2 33..qu i 08 <Su5<
3 «nun 33.3.: 52m 8... .3332 084 gm
_ mason
.
uuuuuuum sounaa E ex «new» no and: uawz

yoguuwo mucuvaao .uvauuu~< wcauuu ..xmz waxy m Luann;

vmonunz

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Close air combat missiles began to be received
for use in the middle of the 1960's and then
modernized considering the experience of the
Vietnamese War. The Sidewinder and Hagique are
among these missiles.

The following demands were made upon the close air
combat missiles: the possiiility of launching
from a minimum distance; autonomy of operation ex-
cluding the need for extended tracking of the tar-
get before launching and extended guidance of the
fighter after launching; independence from the
fighter systems. in particular the radar systems;
an increased area of possible launches ensuring
the carrying out of attacks from many positions;
broadening the range of G-loads at the moment of
launching and during flight to ensure the tactical
freedom of the carrier and the possibility of hit-
ting a maneuvering target.

The Sidewinder AIM-3 missile is in series produc-
tion and has nine modifications. The last modi-
fication of the missile. the AIM-9, has a
fragmentation-HE warhead with an active photo-
electric proximity fuze and an infrared homing
head which ensures the attack on the target at any
angle of approach.

The basic carriers of this missile are the F-6,
F-lh, F-lS and P—l6 fighters which can carry two-
four missiles.

The aiming and launching of the missiles in close
air combat are to be carried out using helmet-
mounted sights.

The Hagique R-SSO missile is used by the French
Air Force and is designed to hit highly maneuver-
able airborne targets in close air combat. The
missile has an infrared homing head. For detonat-
ing the warhead it comes with an impact fuze and a
radar fuze.

The basic tactical and technical data for the air-
to-air guided missiles are given in Table 2.4.

2.3.1. Space Systems

The 0.5. military political leadership has devoted

great attention to developing and employing
various-purpose earth satellites. At present,
CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060063-2

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Hum owuudx _ venouunu ~.uo>o
Hum away“: s.~
.uwswan unvau o>wuouﬁaoa
.HHH ennui: no vouuuuau
Hum away“:
.uwswan .
.Hun owwuu: o>uuouaaoa havqx n c
¢Im uuomuw n.~
.nalh :3!“— IHAQ vouuuucu
oal<
.~-< .wanm
.oH-m .nHIm ouau : .
.qaum .e.m ' v u H n N
mung
o> you sow um
.ednm .eum « ﬂ com 0
calm
o> uun om pm
.2.“ :l g E .5. a
o>uuum can .
<31... "033.353 :33 m N
uucuuuu< _ a . .
yoguumu m Euuuam uucnvqaL I z .vuuam Ex uwcam"
n.~ m~DMH

   

 

NH
:oﬁwuaoauuum ca
5N
vex no
couuaucoauwum mod
on
coauaucoemaum oo~
nu
mzncouuwucoa cm
.a.:
QNN
mom
own
wx .uz m xx ..u3
ouxh umonumz m zucsmq

omnlm
oscuwa:

onnnm

cmmlx
uoaam

altn<
uuvcazuvum

mauzu<
nouaﬁauvgm

msnxu<
acuumam

mnlz_<
aouuwam

<anuzam
xﬂcocsm

wawz

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CIA-RDP82-00060R000600060053-2

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reronnaissance. communications, navigation, targeting, Heather and other satellites
have been developed and are in use.

Along with the development and operation of support satellites, the United States
is also developing the reusable Shuttle manned spacecraft.

The LASP satellite is designed for conducting scanning and detailed photoreconnais-
sance. it is equipped with photographic and TV devices.

The Samos—H satellite is used for detailed photographing of individual areas and
objects detected previously by scanning reconnaissance satellites. The data (photo-
graphic information from the satellite) is recovered by a return capsule.

The Ferret satellite is used for radar reconnaissance. with the aid of such satel-
lites, data are secured on the tactical and technical characteristics of radio elec-
tronic equipment and its location.

in addition, the U.S. Air Force is neveloping and testing new reconnaissance systems
which should obtain reconnaissance data on a close-to-real time scale.

Communications satellites are employed for the operational control of the U.S. Armed
Forces located on overseas territories. The communications satellite systems
possess the great advantage of ensuring stable communications under the conditions
of the effect of nuclear explosions on the ionosphere. This is an important factor
in a nuclear war.

The Transit navigation satellites are designed to ensure precise navigation of the
nuclear missile subs, surface vessels and later on also strategic bombers. The
system consists of three or four satellites and ensures the carrying out of the set
missions. A global satellite system is being developed for determining location
using the Navstar satellites.

The geodesic satellites of the Secor type are employed for mapping areas of the
earth's surface and clarifying the shapes and dimensions of the earth. This will be
employed primarily for the effective use of ICE" and missiles launched from nuclear
subs.

The satellites of the meteorological space system are designed to provide the armed
forces with weather data.

The reusable (up to 100 flights) Shuttle space (orbital) vehicle is being developed
in the United States for carrying out the following missions: putting into orbit

and returning satellites to earth; inspecting and intercepting satellites; transport
and rescue operations; conducting reconnaissance.

23

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. PRINCIPLES IN THE THEORY OF DESIGNING AIR DEFENSE WEAPONS SYSTEMS

3.1. Characteristics of the Air Space Environment and Its Influence on the
Propogation of Electromagnetic Oscillations and Aircraft Plight Conditions

3.1.1. Characteristics of the Earth's Atmosphere

Th. rdufh's atmosphere is a gaseous shell with a total weight of 5.25-10'5 tons,
which is less than one-millionth of the earth's weight. Up to altitudes of H I 80-
100 km, the chemical composition of dry air is homogeneous. As one moves away from
the earth's surface. the following basic layers of the atmosphere are differentiated:
troposphere, stratosphere, ionosphere and dispersion sphere (exosphere).

The troposphere is the area of the atmosphere next to the earth with an altitude
from 7 to 18 km which increases as one moves from the pole to the equator and con-
tains 0.8 of the atmosphere's mass.

The stratosphere is the portion of the atmosphere from the upper edge of the tropo-
sphere to altitudes of 80-90 km and characterized by strong and constant winds and

by significant temperature changes.

The ionosphere is the portion of the atmosphere located above the stratosphere to
altitudes of 800 km and characterized by the presence of free positive and negative
charges formed under the effect of solar and cosmic radiations.

The Jispersion sphere (exocphere) is the area of space above the ionosphere which
gradually changes into near-earth space. The theoretical boundary of the atmosphere
is 28,000 km above the poles and 62,000 km above the equator.

The stunhznd atmosphere is a model of the atmosphere's structure representing the
result of averaging observations and measurements over many years for such atmos-
pheric parameters as atmospheric pressure, density, temperature, relative humidity,

chemical composition of the air, the cloud cover and jet streams.

Aun)apheric pressure is the pressure which the air has on a body located at a set
point in space, H/mz:

P - Poe , (3.1)

5f;

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
whore

FOR OFFICIAL

I’o--pressure at sea level;

g--acceleration of. free fall. In

H—-current reading of altitudeé
R-287--gas constant for dry air, n

T=t°+273 . lS'--air temperature . K.

USE ONLY

lsecz;
II, kn;
lsec 'degree;

For simplifying the computations, atmospheric pressure can be approximated by the
following ratio:

P-Poe

"0

where H - 8000T/T°--hypothetical altitude of "honogeneous" atmosphere;

T--tenperature, K.

The value of P0 is the pressure above sea level (in the USSR, above sea level at

Kronshtadt) Po - 1013 what - 760 m Hg - 1.013.105 H/nz.

phcric pressure upon altitude is shown in Fig. 3.1.

P. n/u'
1.0!: 10'

0.9”
0.80
0. 709
0.500
@507
a“
0.”!
am

am
0

Fig. 3.1.

air density upon altitude

The dependence of atnos-

WW"
I. 27

I, M
LO!
0.59
0. 7‘
0.63

0.5!

0.38

0.254

0.!"

- 0
5 '0 I5 20 25 50 .IS ”4550”."

Dependence of atnospheric pressure and

Air density is the mass of air contained in a unit of volume, kg/m3:

P

O'ﬁf-he

I!
-1'7.

(3.2) .

where no - POIRT - l.27--the density of dry air at sea level, kg/In3. The dependence
of air density upon altitude is shovn in Fig. 3.1.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFK1AL.USEIONLY

Air temperature is the degree of its warming as measured in degrees according to the

Kelvin thermodynamic scale (K) or by the loo-degree Celsius scale (°C). The mean
air temperature for standard atmosphere depending upon altitude for the northern
hemisphere is shown in Fig. 3.2.

mm Relative air hunidity no is the ratio of water vapor

50 pressure so at a given point to the vapor pressure £0

,5 saturating the space with the set temperature t°C over
to a flat surface of pure water:

:5 e

m R. -- 75.:JM*' (3-3)

5 where w-

-\——- If. - G.l . l0""‘ H‘,

'60 40'70 0 '70 (.17

Absolute air humidity is the quantity of grams of water
Fig. 3.2. Dependence of vapor in l m3 of air:
air temperature upon .
altitude a. - 2l6.7 T“ (3.4)

The chemical coupositian of air characteristic for altitudes up to 100 km from the
earth's surface is determined by the presence of nitrogen (78.09 percent), oxygen
(20.95 percent). argon (0.95 percent), carbon dioxide (0.03 percent) and others.

High clouds (over 6 km) are cirrus, cirrocumulus and cirrostratus and consist of ice
crystals.

Middle clouds (from 2 to 6 km) are altocumulus and altostratus.
Low clouds (below 2 km) are stratocumulus, stratus and nimbostratus.

Vurtical development clouds are all types of cumulus clouds the formation of which
is related to atmospheric convection within the limits of up to 10-11 km.

The number of clouds is expressed in fractions of the sky surface covered by them
at the given moment. Completely clear skies have a point of 0 and completely over-
cast have 10 points.

Jet ctr-mm are areas of the troposphere within which constant high-velocity flows
of air are observed. They are ordinarily found in the latitudes between 25 and 70'
in each hemisphere. The maximum velocities of the stream lie at altitudes of 9-

16 km (the jet stream axis). The length of the jet streams reaches several thousand
kilometers while the width and height are hundreds and several kilometers. respec-
tively. The distribution of the wind velocity scalar V‘, is:

v
’o'u ' )NKHHV- for the northern hemisphere st altitudes to 25 km above
sea level as shown in Fig. 3.3.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0—_a__

5 '10 v5 20 25mm 0 mo zoo 350];

Fig. 3.3. Distribution of wind velocity Fig. 3.6. Dependence of refraction
scalar for northern hemisphere index upon altitude

Influence of Atmosphene on Propagation of Electramgnetic Haves

The effect of the atmosphere's lower layers (the troposphere) and the upper layers
(ionosphere) on the propagation of electronagnetic (EM) waves is expressed in the
form of the bending of the propagation and absorption trajectory.

Rejruction of EM waves is the bending of the EM wave propagation trajectory leading
to the appearance of errors in determining the position of an aircraft.

The refraction phenomenon is caused by a change in the dielectric constant c and.
correspondingly, in the refraction coefficient n of the medium. since n - JET.

In practice, a refraction index is used N - 106 (n-l) indicating by how many nil-

lionths the refraction index n >1. At the earth's surface no - l.00026-l.00066 or
an average value of No - 325. with a drop in pressure, temperature and humidity,

the refraction index declines with altitude according to a linear law.

The gradient (rate of change) dN/dH - -6~10'2. l/m. Correspondingly. the change in
N depending upon altitude,will equal N - (No-6'10'7'H) and changes according to a
linear law (Fig. 3.4).

vquutcphoriu refhaction is the curving of the EM wave trajectory with their propaga-
tion in a medium with a variable refraction coefficient. The change in the refrac-
tion coefficient An (or AN) with altitude leads to a change in phase velocity AVp -
c/An and this causes the curving of the trajectory.

The nature and alount of refraction depend upon the value and sign of the vertical
refraction index gradient (Fig. 3.5).

27

l!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USEiNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3.5. Dependence of
refraction upon value and

sign of vertical refraction around the earth's surface.
index gradient

Type of refraction

Normal
Critical

Superrefraction

Table 3.1

     
   
 
  

 

Curve radius for
beam EH waves.

  

dN/dﬂ. l/m

     
   

-a-1o-° on - 25.000
-o.1s7-10'6 ac - a. - 6.371
<-o.157~10'6 p. < Re

With dN/dﬂ>*0 there is a negative refraction (the de-
flection of the beam upwards) and with dN/dﬂ‘<0 there
is a positive one (the deflection of the beam down-
wards) accompanied by the bending of the EM waves

The types of refraction

and the average values of the curve radii are given
in Table 3.1.

The superrefraction phenomenon sakes it possible to detect aircraft beyond the

limits of direct visibility.

Errors in tropospheric refraction.

The refraction of EH waves accoapanied by the

curving of the path causes an additional time lag and this leads to the rise of
range errors AD and to an increase in the values of the target's elevation, that is.

to the rise of errors As. The values of the errors of AD and Ac depending upon
range and elevation, are shown in Figs. 3.6 and 3.7, respectively.

A”. u

I“, /—-e'0.2’
/ ..--—— C" 7.
50 A C‘J.5'

’Ili;"' t-s‘

///’-——_e-n‘

10 f—

///—_—"2"

J b c-ST'

1—;

10 JD 100 m woo m1"!

 

Fig. 3.6. Errors in tropospheric
refraction for distance

e'n7‘
54 e-L7'
e-if'

I0 "‘
£"12’
&4 5-25'
1 6-52'

Q34

  

10 30 I00 800 moo SWIM“!

Fig. 3.7. Errors in tropospheric
refraction for elevation

The maximum values of the errors, including the errors in neasuring the doppler
frequency. can be approximated thus (AD, m; Ac, " min.; aid. hertz):

AD I 0.007Nocos c:
AC - 0.0034Noctg e; (3.5)
Afd - fd(n-1) - ran-10".

28

IN)R‘0F11(JAI.1EH£(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ionnspheric refraction is the curving of the EM wave trajectory with propagation in
an area of ionized gases.

The refraction coefficient for an ionized median is:

u n V I—NJ 81;. (3.6)

where Ne--concentration of free electrons, eUn3;
f—frequency of Bi waves. hertz.

Hith a steady diminishing of n with altitude in a certain layer of the ionized tr
gion there occurs the total internal reflection of the in waves at an angle equal

to the angle of incidence 00.

This phenolenon is used for detecting various types of aircraft beyond the linits of
the horizon (over-the-horizon radar).

The condition for the reflection of the D4 waves of the given frequency (hertz) is:

Van—.3”.
I ~ W' (3. 7)

where eo--angle of incidence of electromagnetic waves on lower boundary of iono-
sphere calculated fron the normal to it.

 

The value fcr' lea—0.81:3 is terned the critical frequency.

The absorption and attenuation of FM waves in the troposphere occurs in the oxygen
and in the water vapor of the troposphere as well as due to dispersion by hydro-

meteors .

In calculating the operating range of locating equip-lent (systems), this phenonenon
is taken into account by introducing a coefficient for the absorption and attenua-
tion of DI waves depending upon the frequency and characteristics of the nediun.

The operating range of radars considering the absorption and attenuation factors is
(in kn):
D In 0.0.04'm' (3.8)

where nonoperating range of radar in free space, In;
n—-sbsorption and attentuation coefficient of Bi waves in troposphere,

decibels per Inn;
L-path of D1 waves in absorbing Iedius, kn.

The averaged value of the a coefficient depending upon frequency is shown in the
graph (Fig. 3.8).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dab/u - The sharp increase in the value of the o

l coefficient at the frequency f - 22.2
gigahertz lies in the area of the water
vapor resonance absorption.

0.2
The absorption of EM waves in the iono-
sphere is caused by the phenomenon of the
a colliding of free electrons with neutral
1” nolecules and gas ions.
The absorption coefficient is deter-ined
0.2%., in decibels/kilouter:

LIG-l" ‘
a -. -———

I' ‘Nco (3.9)

‘ 300 {0003000 mwmm {.m' where w-frequency of colliding of
electronc with neutral atone,

. . hertz:
Hg. 3.8. Averaged value of attenuation Ne--concentration of free electrons,

COL-f f icient depending upon frequency eat/03

3.l.2. Flight Conditions for Various Types of Aircraft

Physical flight conditions are the aggregate of the physical properties of the at-
mosphere and the physical phenomenon arising during the flight of an aircraft.

These conditions are significantly altered depending upon altitude, speed and tra-
jmttory of motion. upon the design and purpose of the aircraft, upon the time of

your or day. upon the area of the flight and other factors. The significant de-
velopment level of aerodynamics and the advances in developing propulsion units and

new high-strength materials have nade it possible to obtain high performance for
modern aircraft.

'i'hr fort-c of gravity P is a force in H in which a body weighing n at an altitude II
is attracted to the earth:

'“ 4 I0" "
F " (Rum? " ' (”“70“ (3.10)

where ,-6.67-10"‘--gravitation constant. n3/kg secz;
H-6-102“--the weight of the earth, kg;
Rc-637l-103--radius of the earth. a.

than-Inﬂation of free failing body at earth '8 surface g--acceleration under the ef-
fect of the earth's force of gravity.

As .1 consequence of the daily rotation of the earth. the amount of acceleration for
n free falling body (m/secz) depends upon geographic latitude

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

g-g.(l + 0.0WOIn'v). (3.11)

where go-O.78~-acceleration of a free falling body at the equator. n/sec2;
o--geographic latitude, degrees.

Depending upon height, the acceleration of a free falling body changes according
to the law

& 2
su-s (m) ' (3.12)

conditions of aircraft fiight in earth's field of gravity without considering infin-
ence of atmosphere. According to the known value of 3“ it is possible to determine
the circular velocity Vc1 of an aircraft (satellite) flying in a circular orbit at
altitude H:

V...- - Vxnwu 77) . (3.13)

In part icular, with 8-0 and gH-g. we obtain a value of orbital velocity V! -
4§CIE 7.9 km/sec, and this is the limit for aircraft in flights in circunterreatrial
space.

Correspondingly, escape velocity Vz- JEgRe =ll.2 km/sec.

The trajectories for the movement of bodies in the field of the earth's gravity at
velocities lying between the orbital and escape velocities will be an ellipse the
near focus of which coincides with the earth's center.

Flight conditions of aerodynamic vehicles. The relationship between the required

speed of flight for aerodynamic vehicles, atmospheric pressure P and air density p
at a given altitude is established by the energy equation (the Bernoulli equation):

V‘ (3.11.)

p T!- + P- coast.

Consequently, with an increase in altitude (with a reduction in the values of p and
P) for maintaining the flight of the given type of aerodynamic vehicle. it is essen-
tial to increase the speed of flight in accord with equation (3.16).

In formula (3.16) the first component has received the name of the velocity head q:

v2
9'92—

s

31

FIHICHﬂﬂCJAI.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fur-ova Effect-tug the Aircraft

W-hzl awrndynamic Ibrce R is the resultant of all the forces of pressure and fric-
tiun vffccting the aircraft in the process of flight:

2
R-c,s£§—, (3.15)

where CR-coefficient of total serodyna-ic force;
S--wing area.

Lift Y is the projection of the total aerodynamic force on the perpendicular to the
speed of the air flow:

V2
r - c,s 15-. (3.16)

where Cy--lift coefficient.

Drug Q is the projection of the total aerodynamic force on the direction of the
speed of the free-flow street and directed against the notion of the aircraft:

V0
o—c,s 'T. (3.17)

where Cx--drag coefficient being the total of the drag coefficients in the absence
of Cx0 and in the presence of 6,1 of lift.

The values for the coefficients 6; and Cy and the relationships between the forces
are shown in Figs. 3.98 and b and 3.10. respectively.

‘1
c... 0
am y no-
anz .

  

45
0.0: f

oj’m 1.2 if“ M

d“ a
a b

 

Fig. 3.9. Values for coefficients Cx (a) Fig. 3.10. Distribution of
and Cy (b) forces operating on aircraft

Any motion in essence is reactive as it is based upon the ejecting of mass in a
direction which is reverse to the motion (the propellers of an aircraft eject air,

a ship propeller ejects water and so forth).

32

FOH.OFFH3A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OH‘KIAI. USE ONLY

Huvcvcr. only the movement of a jet aircraft does not require the presence of a sur-
rounding medium (with the exception of an air-breathing jet engine) as the ejected
mass of the propulsive mass is carried on the aircraft.

The thrust P is the basic value characterizing a jet engine as an element of an air-
craft power unit: '

0 + (i G
P-%V.—7‘V. (3.18)

where 63, Gr-the second weight expenditures of air and fuel. respectively, H/sec;
vc, V--gas exhaust velocity and aircraft speed. respectively, n/sec.

The aerodynamic quality of an aircraft is the ratio of life Y to drag Q (the ratio
of the lift coefficient to the drag coefficient):

K..L_c_', (3.19)
o c,

In the process of flight for an aircraft possessing a weight n. its structure is

effected by the geometric total of the external forces t? causing the resulting ac-
celeration a, m/seczz

The occurrence of acceleration is accompanied by the presence of the forces of in-
ertia. The amount of the force of inertia J(H) depends totally upon acceleration
and direction is always opposite to the direction of acceleration JI--ma.

Aircraft g-Loads are a dimensionless ratio of the amount of the resultant of all
forces effecting the aircraft to the amount of its gravity:

tP a l (3.20)
“‘F‘T'-?-

Here {P - ma; 6 - mg; J - -ma.

The resultant of all the forces I? can be broken down into components using the axes
of a body-axis system (xl. y], :1), that is. [lez thI; £Pgl.

For the values of these components, the longitudinal and transverse g-loads of the
aircraft (“Y1 and n11) are calculated:

l’ -.
2 " L—.9-longitudinal g-load;

"I: —(i_- (I

n, . E%T‘ --normal g-load;

I‘
".,“"33L -lateral g-load.

33

FIHICJ11C1AI.USE!0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thr thcrrul barrier of an aircraft is the aggregate of design and operational limitah
tions related to a rise in the temperature of the aircraft skin and its individual
parts with an increase in flight speed.

Air 1109 deceleration is a drop in the local air velocity to zero in the boundary
zone on the forward edge of the body passing through the flow.

7%” dymmnic temperature of the aircraft's surface is the rise in temperature due to
the conversion of the kinetic energy of the air flow into potential energy with its
deceleration:

2
4rd,“ . (1+ 273°)[1+“?], ' (3.21)
where H--the ratio of flow velocity to the speed of sound;

I4-273°--absolute temperature of surrounding air.

The theoretical dependence of dynamic temperature upon aircraft speed is shown in
Fig. 3.11.

The decline in the relative strength of modern aviation materials, including stain-
less steel, depending upon temperature is shown in Fig. 3.12.

    

 

 

re
rt ‘ e
590 ML
‘°° é”
a Elektrun
5 Dural
mo §ﬁo
-o
:i
0 '"hnb'"7mw me'nnn/ " n no ﬁﬁ'ﬁﬁT'TﬁTit
Fig. 3.11. Change in dynamic Fig. 3.12. Relative reduction
temperature depending upon in strength of materials with
aircraft speed rise in temperature

The flight conditions of aerodynamic vehicles are determined by a number of con-
straints which influence the nature of their combat employment (Fig. 3.13).

The upper limit is determined by the tolerable pressure in the air intake ducts and
the lower one by the structure's strength limit. The dotted line shows the extremal
temperatures for various materials of the aircraft structure.

The static ceiling Hat is the greatest height for horizontal sustained flight of an

aerodynamic vehicle in which the condition determined by the energy equation (3.14)
is fulfilled.

3b

FORiOFFﬂJAl.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0NI.Y

Mininnun allamble speed is the lowest speed Vain of sustained flight at a given alti-
tude excluding the stalling of an aerodynamic vehicle:

26
Vmin all 'Vé—Ej—l—i - (3.22)

Maxim allowable speed is the greatest speed Vm of sustained flight at a given
altitude under the maximum or after-burner engine operating conditions ensuring safe

flight of the aerodynuic vehicle:

me all 3/ 2‘3“ ~ (3.23)

where qannextremal amount of velocity head for given type of aircraft.

 

Qualitative characteristics of Vmin all and Van): all for aerodynamic vehicles are
shown in Fig. 3.16.

Mia
47
J‘ p’./.'
m /// /’
/// // 1”.7
74 /// 1’ /,/’
l /
'5 / / / /
'2 M'C 100012 13001:
6

 

'—l—-.—m——-A- —|_I—|—A——‘—l—

0!2.»455/nsmur7u
Fig. 3.16. Allowable values

Fig. 3.13. Constraints on aircraft flight for flight speeds of aero-
conditions dynamic vehicles

Principle of Jet Propulsion for Aeroballistio and Ballistic Missiles

In jet propulsion a jet reaction is employed as the propulsive force. The theory of
jet propulsion for a point of variable mass moving rectilinearly in an air-free
space in the absence of external forces was worked out by K. E. Tsiolkovskiy in the
form of a first problem and for upvards vertical motion as a second problem.

The first Tsiolkovskiy problem is the speed of point v1 at the end of the combustion
process with an initial velocity V0:

v,--2,3V.Ii:(| 4 73;). . (3.2“)

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Vr--relative partical exhaust velocity;
H--ejected mass of fuel;

Hs--mass of point at end of jettisoning process.

VVu-nrunnd Tsiolkovskiy problem. The total height H for the lift of the point will
consist of the active leg 83 covered during tine t1 and the inactive leg 51 covered
by the point with a fixed mass Hs'IHo-H and with a velocity equal to the velocity
V. at the end of the active leg:

"'1' Vz‘l V:
”-8.05 'V"|"—T+‘T"'H' (3.25)

where u--specific fuel consuaption;

V1 I V0 - gtl +0Vrtl.

Flélht Characteristics of Aeroballistic and Ballistic Missiles

Acroballictic missiles are jet aircraft traveling along a ballistic trajectory on
the basis of the laws of aerodynamics.

The length of flight

 

VI sln20
L _.__?___; (3.26)
maximum trajectory altitude
V’.|'I
11-”, I. '1'" ; (3.27)
duration of [light
7 _ H%‘_ﬂl. (3.28)

where Ho--flight altitude of carrier (aircraft) at moment of launching missile;
Vr-speed of flight at the moment of shutting down engine;

6--angle of departure;
g--acce.‘-.eration of force of gravity.

The characteristics of the trajectory are shown in Fig. 3.15.

Ballistic missiles (BM? are vehicles
the trajectory of which consists of an
active leg with a firing engine during
which the device gains a reserve of
kinetic (speed of flight) and potential
(altitude of flight) energy and an in-
active leg when motion occurs according
Fig. 3.15. Characteristics for trajectory to the law of a freely thrown body,

of aeroballistic vehicle that is, according to a ballistic

curve.

 

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The trajectory of a ballistic missile can be broken up into three characteristic
legs (Fig. 3.16).

The active leg is the portion of the trajectory fron the launch point A to the end

of the engine's operation (point K) over which there is an increase in velocity Vk
to the required amount and direction.

The free flight leg is the portion of the trajectory (froa point It to point 8) over
which the vehicle flies along a ballistic curve.

The terminal leg is the portion of the trajectory (from B to point C) during which
the vehicle moves in the dense layers of the atmosphere.

    

2

n 15 so 45 so 75 0.3."
Fig. 3.16. Trajectory of Fig. 3.17. Basic ratios character-
ballistic missile's flight izing ballistic missile flight

A projection of the total distance for the flight of a m onto the earth's surface
is:

1— ' LA+LB+LC .

where LA. L3, Lc-respectively, projections of the active, free-flight and terminal
legs of the trajectory.

Since 1.3» LA+Lc, for a rough approxination it is passable to disregard the values
LA and Lc, that is,

L = Lg- zone,

where ¢--central angle. radian;

Re--radius of earth. or L=lllo.6 Ref;
(¢°--neasured in degrees).

The dependence between the velocity Vk, the angle of its incline relative to the

horizon 9k: the altitude of the active leg lip and the angular range of the flight
2*? is expressed by the formula

I— 2!
v: -—£‘_— ,_ ‘°‘ . (3.29)
[E cot‘.e— Cam-‘0‘“.- I

37

l-OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where [1- 7He(y-egravitation constant, He-mass of the earth);
'k = Huddle.

The connection between the projection of the range Lg of the 3H flight on the
earth's surface. the velocity Vk at the end of the active leg and the angle of de-

parture Up is shown in Fig. 3.17 (in the diagram the points with the minimum angles
of departure 0k are circled).

3.1.3. Laws of Motion of Aircraft

ﬁbtion is any change encompassing all processes occurring in the universe. while
the motion of matter as a whole is not restricted by anything, it is absolutely in-
evitable and indestructible, the motion of any individual body is limited in space
and time and for this reason can be determined only by a relatively concrete system
of reckoning (a system of coordinates).

To the degree that real motion always occurs simultaneously relative to a number of
reckoning systems, a number of methods for assessing it are possible. The choice
of the reckoning system is dictated solely by the conditions of expedience and sin-
plicity of description.

The law of'motion of an aircraft is an analytical or graphic dependence of the air-
craft's coordinates upon time for the given reckoning system. The representation of

the aircraft's motion is possible due to such physical phenomena as speed, accelera-
tion and the other higher derivatives of speed.

For a spherical system of coordinates. in a general form an aircraft's laws of

motion for distance and angular coordinates can be represented in the form of time
series:

 

 

.. A
. . on "(I 1 n'nlln
mn— m0) e-m | T + —3- p- .. 2' m ;
£20
. 'Iq'p ~- N‘ pun ,-
au>-- “on an -—.;—- nag-+0..— 2, m . (3.30)
l=°
N

. :l‘ U?’ 7; c
utI)—ouI)+nH-—2-I “3'1... ' .4 "‘

where 0(“), 3(“), e(“)~-values (n-x) for the derivatives from the distance, azimuth
and elevation, respectively,
N--thc number of terms in the series.

The laws of motion for an aircraft in terms of distance, azimuth and elevation de-
termine the operating conditions for the tracking range finder and angle-measuring

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systems, respectively. Here for the tracking systole with a known magnitude of
astatisn, the values of the derivatives tron range and angular coordinates deter-
mine the aaounts of the dynaaic errors and, consequently, the accuracy of measuring
the aircraft's coordinates.

An aircrafw'a Law of motion fbr range is an analytical or graphic representation of

the change in the aircraft's range coordinates relative to a specific reckoning
system.

A u-

 

Pig. 3.18. Model of horizontal flight (s)
and law for change in distance (h) of an aircraft

For practical purposes it is advisable to represent the lav of notion as a depend-
ence upon the aircraft's asi-uth.

A model of an aircraft‘s horizontal flight with a constant speed relative to a
ground tracking system (point C) is shown in Fig. 3.18s. The law for the change in
distance relative to the tracking systel is shown in Pig. 3.18b.

The analytical expressions characterizing the law of change in range and its deriva-
tives depending upon the aircraft's asinmth are given in Table 3.3.

Fig. 3.18 and Table 3.2 have employed the following ayabols: V--aircraft speed:
P-paraneter relative to the start of the calculation; u-aircrait altitude; 8, c-
aziauth and elevation of aircraft relative to start of reckoning.

Graphs for the change of 5(8), 6(8) and 5(8) are shown in tig. 3.19.

 

Fig. 3.19. Graphs for change in Fig. 3.20. Graphs for change in
derivatives for range derivatives for aaiauth

39

FUR(NHNEJAI.USE€NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.2
Caracas":- ssuas was... assures- assesses! heme-w Asa-n
1 sea-sen 2 mm slaps“ s ape-assent! 3 roses- 6 escape-yes

 

m... - man—gym “5+” M"
D-t-D ﬂ-oﬁ F-I‘r
hdm b") VP COB V 3-0’; D-IO‘
velocity. II! ' .1 P‘—+ F's-uni o 3.90-
.. vuP' + H') new v' in”
Ac leration -
a]? m” D (5+ ”IN-'37 7 F +5
0 ﬂ-oﬁﬂ-IIP

Key: l-«Coeponent of lav of notion; 2-Analytical representation
of aircraft' a range and derivatives; 3-Batrenal values;
b-ozxtrenun aziluth

An aircruj2's log motion for azimuth is an analytical or graphic representation for
the change in the aircraft' s arinuth coordinates relative to the specific reckoning

systen.

The nature of the change in an aircraft's aziluth and the derivatives from the azi-
nuth (Fig. 3.18s) is shown in Table 3.3.

Graphs for the change in 5(8). 3(8)..§(8) are shown in Fig. 3.20.

An aircraft’s la.) of motion for elevation
is an analytical or graphic representa-
tion of the change in the aircraft's
elevation coordinates relative to the

specific reckoning systen.

The nature of the change of the air-
craft's elevation and the derivatives is
shown in Table 3.4.

The graphs for the change of C(s), C(8)
and €(B) are shown in Fig. 3. 21.

 

Fig. 3.21. Graphs for change in The ratios given in the tables and graphs
derivatives for elevation lake it possible to assess the amounts of
the dynamic errors in tracking and guid-
ance systena as well as deter-ine the areas of space in the tracking and guidance
(kill) zone where these errors are narinal and to take measures to cospensate for
then.

60

FIIIIJFIIC1A1.lEiE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. 3

 
    
 

  
    

Caren-m a... ham ammun- em

8am ‘ Mn,"
2 any-um naopn I am:

elemen-

V
‘ 3m - mac '73-'17;-
I
I

' 0.5 :-180'
mum in» - x N" ° "
velocity. III

V b”‘
7'
All ular ac- .. W'cooﬂaln'. V‘ hump-1;?
i7 sration. N!) - ——F"— 10.5511
8

Key: 1—Coaponent of law of motion; Z—Analytical representation
of aircraft's azimuth and derivatives; 3-Extrelel valuea;
b-Miauth of extrema

Table 3.6

 

      
 
    

mnem- W emu-t "- m
lumen-u- 2 meme-amount“:

’ u 0'; 9. - lw‘
Elevation. ’_ 90’
rad.
An 1 r . W! ecu-aw. :t 0.38VHIP‘ ﬂ - 55'. ”3'
wage}; . . (F) - + ala' (P > H)
U' in” not new
(P «C H)
"‘8th 1‘” .. — V'H'IP’ i - 90'
11:73:“: on. d?) - H' .p p n)
W” tla'l(2—~3ala"—;rﬂo‘i) m,” {m a.”
' "_—_T_"—- (P < H)

.o- (I + Fall")

Key: 1—Coqonent of lav of action; Z—Analytical representation
of aircraft'a elevation and derivatives; 3-Extreaa1 values;
b—Axinuth of extrem-

61

FOIOFFKJALUSIONLY
FOI¢0FFHJAI.USE(MVLY

3.2. Principles for the Designing of Detection Systems Against Enemy Air Heapons

3.2.1. Systems of Coordinates Employed to Solve the Problems of Detecting and
Determining the Location of Aircraft

The position of an aircraft in space can be determined only in relation to certain
other bodies which are termed reckoning or reference bodies.

As reckoning bodies it is possible to employ. the sun, the center of the earth, a
certain point on the earth's surface. the center of mass of any aircraft and so
forth. A certain system of coordinates is linked to the reckoning body.

For solving the problems of determining the location of aircraft, their guidance and
hitting in circunterrestrial space it is possible to employ earth (stationary rela-
tive to the earth), body-axis and wind-body (moving relative to the earth) coordin-
ate systems.

Earth coordinate systems

Geocentric rectangular (X; Y, Z) and spherical (F; o, 1) systems. As the origin of
the coordinates 0, the center of the earth's mass is employed while the OY axis of
the rectangular system is directed along the earth's axis of rotation, the 0} and
02 axes in such a manner as to form a right-handed system.

In a sperical system, the position of
the aircraft is determined by the
radius vector r and the geocentric
latitude O and A (Pig. 3.22s).

The relation between the geocentric
rectangular and spherical coordinates
is:

 

X - rtoavsisl;

' "““W (3.31)
Fig. 3.22. Geocentric (a) and surface (b) Z-rcoucml.

coordinate systems

Surface rectangular (a; y, s) and spherical (ii 8, e) systems. As the origin of
the coordinates o a certain point of the earth's surface is accepted, the oy axis
of the rectalineer system goes vertically upwards, the ox axis runs to the north

(or to a local object). and the oz axis in such a manner as to obtain a right-
handed coordinate system.

In a spherical coordinate system, the aircraft's position is determined by the
slant range D and by two angles 8, c deternining the direction for the vector of
the slant range D.

The angle s between the vector and its projection to the horizontal plane is termed
the elevation; the angle 3 deteraining in a horizontal plane the direction of the
projection of D relative to the start of the readout (the ox axis) is called the
azimuth (Pig. 3. 22b) .

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The relation between the eurface rectangular and epherical coordinate ayateae in:
D-v’x'+y'+t';

I—artlg 3—; (3.32)

a - am; Thu
1' + a

Moving (Relative to the Earth) Coordinate Suntan

The body axis coordinate system (:1, y), 81). tor the point of origin 0 (Fig.
3.23a). the aircraft'e center of naee ie enployed; the or; aria ia directed along
the aircraft'a longitudinal axis, the oy; aria to the plane of the vertical aria
and the or] axie to the plane of the aircraft'a horieontal eection ao ae to obtain
a right-handed coordinate ayeten.

The angle between the aircraft'e
longitudinal axle and ite projection
to the horizontal plane in tened the
pitch angle a.

The angle between the projection of
the aircraft'a longitudinal axia to
the horizontal plane and the ox axle
ia terned the heading (yaw) angle 9.

The angle between the vertical plane
running through the ox; axia and con-
necting the oyl axie ie called the
bank angle 1.
Fig. 3.23. Body axie (a) and wind body (b)

coordinate ayateae rig. 3.23a above the reciprocal poai-

tioning of the body axis and earth co-

ordinate eyeten with the lining up of their center.

 

The anglee w, 0 and y are for-ed by aucceeaive turna: l--around the y angle to
angle 0; 2--around the :' axia to angle 0; 3--around the :1 axie to angle 1.

The mind body coordinate eyetan (:rc, ye, ac). The center of aaeeee ie taken ee the
point of origin 0; the oxc axie coincidee with the velocity vector, with the oyc
and ozc axes lying, respectively, in the aircraft's vertical and horizontal planea
of eyt-etry (Fig. 3.2%).

The position of a wind body coordinate ayeten relative to a body aria one ie deter-
nined by the anglee of attack and elip.

The angle of attack a ie the angle between the projection of the velocity vector V
to the aircraft'a vertical plane of may and the 0:1 axis.

The slip angle 8 is the angle between the velocity vector and the aircraft'e verti-
cal syI-etry plane.

63

NIOFF'ICIALUSIZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The choice of each specific coordinate system is determined by the conditions of the
combat mission to be carried out by the given weapons system. by the requirement of
design simplicity for the antennas and launchers, by the demands of reducing the
dynamic errors, by the simplicity of the calculations made and by other factors.

In a general form. the transition from one system of rectangular coordinates to an-

other is carried out using the formulas of analytical geometry and direction cosine
tables.

Table 3.5

An example of the transition from the
system (:1, y;, 21) to the systea (x.
y. s) and vice versa is given in

Table 3.5. where for simplicity the
cosine values have been replaced by

   
   
   

coordinate re-
coord - calculation formulae

3 - a.x. + s.y. + 1.8.:

I "u‘u I'bsyl 'I’ 53$]
3 " ‘r": "I' ‘JI + ‘03.

   

”-0.: +b.y+ M:

 

letters .

The values of the direction cosines
between the body axis and earth coordi-
nate systems are given in Table 3.6.

.r, — 41.x + b.) + at; }

n-aa+bu+¢a

 
  
      
    

The values of the direction cosines be-
tveen the body axis and wind body co-
ordinate systems are given in Table 3.7.

Table 3.6

coord .

ox cos O-tos v " cos insla votes 1 1- us win 1 cos you Mn: 1 + sin 1 ~tos 1
oy an a to: O-cos1 ~cosO-sln1
or —sln ‘g-cos 0 cos Voila 1 + an (pals boron cow-cos 1 —sln +~sln 0. slut

Table 3.7

_—_____—-———————

coord . | on I 0h | ”h

M, cosmcos! —cos p-slus slap

1.", sin a to: s o

4-2. -- cos a «lap sln s . sin a (ma
lob

Various modifications of the coordinate

systems can be employed for solving in-
dividual specific problems.

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(NULV

3.2.2. Physical Principles Underlying the Obtaining of Information on Aircraft

The detection of aircraft in the process of their flight can be ensured only by re-
ceiving the energy returned from the aircraft's surface or emitted by the aircraft
itself. It is also possible for a detection to he made by establishing changes in

the surrounding medium and related to the process of the aircraft's motion in this
medium.

Consequently. the physical phenomena comprising the objective basis of detection
can be divided into three groups.

1. 1%3 nefleotion of energy is a physical phenomenon ensuring detection due to dif-
ferences in the reflecting properties of the aircraft and the surrounding medium.

For this reason the active detection of an aircraft is possible if it can be radi-
ated by a flow of electromagnetic energy, the energy of sound waves or by a flow of
particles moving at a high speed and the return signals picked up. Here it is pos-

sible to use the solar energy reflected from the aircraft as well as energy from
other -pace sources.

2. 7he emission of energy is a physical phenomenon ensuring detection by the vari-
ous types of emission from the aircraft themselves in the flight process (the emis-
sion of inflight sources, thermal radiation in the heating of the aircraft body,
the emission from the jet engine glow and sonic emission). These phenomena ensure
the creation of passive inflight aircraft detection systems by radio and in the
optic and sound wave bands. Carriers of nuclear weapons are sources of very weak

nuclear radiation the detection of which is virtually possible only at very short
distances.

3. Parturbation of the medium is the physical phenomena accompanied by changes in
the surrounding medium during the process of the aircraft's flight (the change in
the chemical composition, the ionization of the earth's gravitational field. the
earth magnetism field and so forth). These phenomena can potentially be employed

to solve the problems of aircraft detection under the condition of realizing methods
to record these phenomena.

A classification of the physical phenomena which in principle can be realized for
solving detection problems is shown in Fig. 3.24.

Of all the listed phenomena for detecting an aircraft in flight, the most widely
used is the phenomenon of reflected energy employed in active and semiactive radar
location and the radiation phenomenon which comprises the basis of passive location.

secondary radiation. The wave falling on the aircraft's surface is termed the pri-
mary one while the reflected or scattered wave is the secondary and the phenomenon
of reflection or dispersion is known as secondary radiation.

The radar cross-section (803) of targets. If on the surface of a point target
which is the distance D away from the source of radiation a flow density is created

with a power St for the primary wave, then as a result of omnidirectional secondary
radiation of the target, at the receiving point combined with the emitter a signal
will be received with a power

65

PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR'OFFKJAI.USE(HNLY

p - aunzs",

vhere S,¢--density of power flov at receiving point, vatts/IZ. .-~

  

Physical phenomena
used to detect
aircraft in flight

    
   
     

Reflection
of energy

 
 

Perturbation
of medium

Change in
air chemical

composition,
gravity and
magnetism

field

Radiation
of energy

IR range

 
  

    
  

     
  
   

  
 
  
 
 

Radio waves

   
 
 
 

Radio vaves

Sound

Fig. 3.24. Classification of physical phenonena used in
detecting aircraft

    
 

The radio of this power to the density of the primarx vave's flow is termed the
radar cross-section of the target or echo area at, m :

s
at - é - 61:02 5;: . (3.33)

Real targets (or a group of targets) according to
the patterns of secondary radiation can he reduced
to a model of group emitters.

 

A model of two emitters. The total RCS of a model
consisting of two emitters with the RC5 of each of

Fig. 3.25. Model of secondary th“ ”1 ‘“ °2 1‘ (“5' 3‘2”:

radiation from two emitters

.3-.0+.e+2/mcu(‘1‘—lﬂ..). (3.34)

66

FOI‘OFIHCJAI.USE10N1Y
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY

The phase shift between the signals returned from the enitters 01 and oz:

2A 4s!
v-W-QII-g-TIIIO.

where indistance between sitters;

Guangle between normal to the plane of the emitters‘ location and the
direction of radiation.

The total RCS of a model of n emitters is

2- 2M2 2‘, (imam. (3.35)
0+:

(II

where sir-phase shift between emitter i and j.

a

The RCS of bodies which are small in relation to the wave length (L: < X) is approxi-
mately expressed by the formula

‘ -
qt-‘I‘ 'g'. (3.36)

The RCS of bodies the dimensions of which are cot-ensurate with the wave length
(it 3 1/2) is:

kgoaimp'smm'. (3. 37)

(In all the designated instances as L; we have e-ployed a certain equivalent to the
dinensions of a real target.)

Of special interest are the netth for calculating the 303 of targets the dimen-
sions of which significantly erceed the wave length at» A). In this instance the
resulting RCS of the real targets. on the basis of the superimposition principle,

is calculated as the total of the RC5 of flat and convex surfaces.

An analysis of the adopted nodels indicates that the secondary radiation diagram for
real targets is of a lob-shaped nature. A change in the aircraft's position in the
process of flight relative to the receiving point leads to a change in the intensity
of the returned signals. This phenomenon characterizes the ROS as a random value.

The density of the distribution of the RC5 as a random value with single-frequency
fl(oc) and two-frequency f2(oc) radiation of the targets is:

s (3.38)

47

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where no and otumathulatical expectation and current value of target RCS. respec-

tively.

Fig. 3.26 shows the values of the R08 distribution densities for f‘(ot) and f2(o¢).

 

M00
1
0b
I
6n
a
Fig. 3.26. Distribution density

of radar cross-section with
single-frequency (a) and two-
frequency (b) radiation of target

The dispersion of the target's 308 with
single-frequency radiation 01-03 and with
two-frequency Dz - 06/2. Consequently. the
use of two-frequency (multifrequency) radars
leads to a reduction in the deviation of the
308 as a rendom value from the mathematical
expectation do. This corresponds to in-
creased range and probability of detection.

Table 3.8 gives the values for the mathemat-
ical expectation of the R08 for bodies of
varying configuration.

The mathematical expectations for the return
surfaces of various aircraft are given in

Table 3.9. The lower limit for the values

of the RC8 corresponds to a target below a zero aspect angle and the upper one be-

low an aspect angle of 45°.

        
    
   
   

Body design

Metal sphere with radius r

Ellipsoid (paraboloid) with curve
radii of r1 and r2

Conducting reflection surface with
side parameters a and b

Metal cylinder with base radius r and
generatrix 1

Metal cone with base radius r and
angle at apex a

Medium boaber
Fighter

Cruise missiles
m4 warheads
Spacecraft

Type of aircraft

Strategic bomber

Table 3.8

  

Calculated ratios for determining BCS, m2

00 - u? (with r an)

ac - nrl-rz (with r; and 2:22. A)
a-b 2
Go ' (OI[T (with a, b» X)

0°.m.£2

A [with 33» 1]

A

"2th g- (with rick)

Table 3.9

   

10-20
8-15
1-2

0 . 1-1

0. 001-0 . 01

1-2

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIWCJAI.USE(MVLY

3.2.3. Radar Detection of Aircraft

Radar is a sector of radio electronics which determines the position of objects and
obtains information on them by the receiving and analysis of radio waves.

Radar targets are radar objects, that is, physical bodies (for example, aircraft)
information on which is of practical interest.

Depending upon the area of radar's application, targets can be: aerodynamic, bal-
listic and space, ground and surface or they can be targets of natural origin (ion-
ized formations and trails, clouds, the accumulation of hydrometeors and so forth).

Radar infbnnation is the aggregate cf information concerning the targets as obtained
by radar methods.

Radar sets are technical devices used to obtain radar information.

The unified process of obtaining radar information can be conditionally divided into
the following stages: acquisition or detection, the measuring of the coordinates
and parameters of motion, the clearance and identification of the targets.

Detection is the process of taking a decision on the presence or absence of a target
in the given area of space by receiving and statistically processing the total value
s(t) of radar signals and interference n(t), that is, y(t) - s(t)-+n(t).

The taking of a decision occurs with two mutually exclusive conditions.

A1--target present; Decisions Af--target present;

Conditions Ao-no target. A3"“° target.

Consequently, there are four possible situations for the coinciding of the events of
the "condition" and "decision" which are expressed by the conditional probabilities:

(ml; Ag/Al; Af/Ao and Az/Ao.

The possibilities for the occurrence of these situations are characterized by the
probabilities of the correct and incorrect decisions (Pcd-the probability of cor-
rect detection, Pcn-the probability of a correct nondetection, Pfao-the probability

of a false alarm and Pn1--the probability of missing the target).

The total of Fed and P.1 forms the total group of incompatible events, that is Pcd"
Pu - l (Pcd - 1-151). Analogously an+Pcn - 1 (Pk - l-Pcn). These ratios in-
dicate that among the probabilities Pcdv P51, Pf‘ and Fcna only two are independent
and for this reason the probabilities Fed and Pf. are used for describing the detec-

tion devices (and the radar as a whole).
The statistical nature of signal detection is determined by the values for the den-

sities of interference distribution P1 and the mixture of signal and interference
P31 which for a normal law have the appearance:

69

lNDIiOFIﬂClAl.lEﬂB(MVLY
run Ul'flLlAl. 03!. URL!

9‘10) - 7&7: 6;

_!z—s)‘ (3.39)
POL 00-37%. ' ,

where o--nean square deviation.

Hith a known threshold value yo for the receiver

    

ram Pu- - SP4. 0"!
h

/ , hi .
///g/// "" Pit-Show.

E‘Tt‘..~..’/////’////// .

    
 
 

Fig. 3.27. Graphic represen— Graphically the values of Fed and Pf. are shown in

tation of probabilities of Fig. 3.27 (shaded areas).
correct detection and false
alarm The probability of correct detection Fed is the

probability of taking a decision on the presence
of a target by isolating the signal against the background of interference under the
condition that the target is actually present in the given volume of space, that is
Pcd - [Raﬁ/Al). 0f practical significance is:

pd .. +[: + e (Lj-L)] -o.s-—o.so. (3.40)

l

1'
where om- 735:3 e T a: -error function the graph of which is shown in Fig. 3.28.

um: y - OPcd - P“; vith y - yo?“ - 0.5; with
Y’Yo-Pcd"1-

Probability of false alarm Pf, is the probability
of taking a decision on the presence of a target
under the condition that a target is absent in the
given volume of space. 0f practical significance
is:

 

| y
pﬁ-T[|_O(—:-)]_lo-4+lo-'. (M1)
Fig. 3.28. Graph of error

function The threshold value yo is deter-ined by the value
of optimization and the task being carried out by

the detector .

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORi0FFKJAl.US£13NLV

Detection optimisation are the regular solving rules for taking a decision on the
presence or absence of a target under interference conditions.

in detection theory the following criteria are employed: Minim- average risk, a
maximum of the liklihood ratio, the ideal observer, Reyna-Pearson. successive ob-
server and others.

The most general optimization criterion for a detection system is the minimum aver-
age risk criterion which can be reduced to a so-cslled veighted criterion:

Pea-LOP“ - max. (3.42)

where Co—a weighted multiplier determining the amount of the observer's threshold
whereby a maxim value for the ratio of (3.63) is obtained.

The maximum liklihood ratio criterion is the corollary of the minimum average risk
criterion '

P ,( _ a'- 0
1m- 0:) -e 57L. (3.43)

The dependence of the liklihood ratio upon the amount of the total signal is shown
in Fig. 3.29 where the value {(y) >10 is equivalent to the value y > yo.

   

Fig. 3.29. Dependence of Fig. 3.30. Detection curves
liklihood ratio upon amount
of total signal

If it is necessary to choose the threshold value directly for the set level of P“,
then the Neysan-Pearson test is employed.

The detection pmneter q is a dimensionless ratio of the energy E from the effec-
tive signal to the spectral density No of the noise:

(3.610)

The value of the detection parameter determines all the basic tactical characteris-
tics of radars such as range and detection probability. the false alarm probability,
the accuracy of measuring the coordinates and so forth.

51

“MUSEONLY
FOR 0!1ﬂ(]Al.US£GDNLY

The relationship between the values Pcd and Pf; is determined by the ratio

2
p4 - P37. (3.1.5)

A graphic representation of this dependence is called the detection curves (Fig.
3.30).

An analysis of the detection curves indicates that an increase in the correct de-
tection probability can be obtained either by increasing Pf‘ with q I const.. or by

increasing q with Pf. . const.. and this corresponds to increasing the radar's
potential. .

An Optimum receiver is a receiver which. with other conditions being equal, ensures
a maximum value for the ratio of the effective signal energy to the noise spectral
density Qmax.

The total signal on the output of an optimum receiver is described by:
1.; (l) - S )0) 8(l-')ll. (3.106)

where y(t)--the received signal;
s(t-r)--expected signal;
1--time shift between received and expected signals.

The physical sense of an optimum detection operation is that the multiplying of the
receivable signal y(t) by the expected one s(t-r) ensures the suppression of the
noise not coinciding with the expected signal in time or in frequency.

The right-hand side of formula (3.b6) is called the correlation integral. The cor-
relation integral is solved by the constructing of either a correlation receiver or
a receiver with an optimum filter.

A correlation receiver is a receiver which ensures the receiving of the correlation
integral of (3.b6) using a correlator, integrator and threshold device (Fig. 3.31s).

A receiver with an optimum filter is a receiver ensuring the receiving of the corre-
lation integral of (3.56) using an optimum filter, a detector and threshold device
(Fig. 3.31b).

Here s(t-r) is the filter's response to the incoming effect in the form of a short
pulse (the 5 function) representing the mirror image of the probe pulse shifted by
the arbitrary time 1. The advantage of the correlators is their flexibility and the
possibility of rapidly shifting to various signal shapes and for this it is merely
necessary to alter the s(t) function received by the multiplier's input.

An optimum filter is matched only with a certain shape signal and requires a sub-
stantial change in the circuitry for matching with another signal. However, the

energy capabilities of these receivers (from the viewpoint of obtaining qnax) are
approximately the same.

52

I!!!(lﬂﬂ(1kl.USEiNﬂLY
FOI¢OFFKJAI.USIZONLY

V“,

 

1)) him 3

Fig. 3.31. Diagran of correlation
receiver (a) and optilul filter receiver (b)

Key: l--Ihreshold device; 2-Deciaion;
3-Threshold; b--0ptinul filter;
5-Detector

An automatic detector is a device ensuring the taking of a decision on the presence

or absence of a target as a result of the corresponding processing of the signal
and noise mix on the receiver output.

Autonatic detectors are classified by their functional purpose.

Binary detectors are devices ensuring the taking of a decision on the presence or
absence of a signal fro: the target.

Multiple alternative detectors are devices ensuring the taking of a decision on the
presence or absence of signals from targets in each of the k clearance cells for the
given volume of space.

In thin instance the total nulber of possible decisions will equal 2k.

sequential detectors are devices ensuring the obtaining of the set probability of a
correct decision with the least neen nuaber of observations by introducing two
thresholds: yo and ’1' The threshold levels are chosen in relation to e likelihood
maxi-um:

’ l—Pel .
° iii“ (3.1.7)
W725

If the signal level lies between the limits between yo and yl. a retesting is aade.

Discrete Processes in Signal Detection

In practice. particularly with the use of electronic computers. often discrete
processes are elployed which can be divided into two categories: the formation of
discrete sanples and quantizing.

S3

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢M¥LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The foaming of discrete samples is the selecting of discrete values of a continuous
process with a limited spectrun eating it possible to represent this process in the
tern of an expansion into a series for the nonrandom functions ek(t) with randon
coefficients yk (the Kotel'nikov theorem):

rm - 2 mm). (3.48)

where yk - y(tk)--the values of y(t) in discrete equidistant eonents of tine tk -
kAt (with k - 0, 11 t2...). Pig. 3.32s. h;

Ate-discretization interval, At - 1/2f..x;

vk(t)--functions of the type sin x/x reciprocally shifted for tine At,
that is,

u. gun/mud n (3.69)
“(0- Iss(‘-'-; '

The restoring of the initial process y(t) using the discrete samples is achieved by
the convoluting of the yk values with the ek(t) function (Pig. 3.32c).

Thus, a discrete representation of continu-
ous commands is provided for transmitting
them to the aircraft and restoring these
conmands using the onhoard equip-nut.

control signal

    

Guantisation is the process of encoding the
sanplee in a digital form. Quantization is
carried out for the level (the size of the
signals) and for time (for example, for the
tine of the signal delay, that is. for
range). Moreover. special converters are

introduced for the angular coordinates and
these convert the shaft rotation angle into

a figure.
Fig. 3.32. Representation of In all instances the sire of the signal. the
continuous process in discrete fore: time interval or the angular values are ex-
a--control signal; h—-charscteristics pressed in a discrete fora. for example. as
of sa-ples; c-restoring of signal binary numbers and this lakes it possible

to calculate then on conputers.

For carrying out a quantization operation. to the output of the receivers (Fig.
3.31) there are connected devices which transforn the signal levels into a number
and also s second threshold device which generates a decision on the presence of a

target is the number of signals m exceeds a certain value no detersined by a cer-
tain criterion. Thus, a discrete detector performs the evaluation operation n:>no.

56

FOI‘OFFIJAI.U§E(HVLY
Binary encoding is the process of converting individual samples or continuous sig-
nals into a binary code.

Any physical value expressed in fractions N can be converted into a binary code:

I
N - ‘0'?+"’2.+‘.0r + ‘.',+ so. - 2 0",. (3.50)

‘2.

where a1-coefficients assuaing the value 0 or 1 depending upon the aaount of l.
i - 0. 1, 2, 3,..., n.

For exasple, n - 10 - o-2°+1-21+o~22¢1-23 - 0191. Here .0 - 0. a1 - 1. a2 - o.
83 - 1.

Consequently. the various physical values (aircraft coordinates, control col-ands,
characteristics of an aircraft's notion and so forth) can be represented in a binary
code and the various operations of the calculation can be done on a conputer.

Radar Signals

The nature and quality of infornation received by a radar depends upon the structure
and properties of the probe signals. Depending upon the radar's purpose, the probe
signals provide: the required radiation energy for detecting aircraft at the set
range with the subsequent neasuring of their coordinates and paraneters of action.
the required resolution of the aircraft and the corresponding neutralization of
various interference.

The probe signals are characterized by a nunher of energy paraneters. including:

Instantaneous active power P(t) or the current power reading (watts) averaged over a
period of tine To for the enitted oscillations P(t) - u(t)i(t). vhere u(t) and i(t)

are the instantaneous values of voltage and current averaged for the high frequency

period To:

’5
I
"0'77: "M“ (3.51)

The greatest value of instantaneous capacity is terned the peak, that is, P.,x(t) -
P
v»

Pulse power is the power averaged over the duration of a pulse r1:

,
e
I

P;- 7: mad... (3.52)

For rectangularly-shaped pulses. the values of the pulse and peak powers coincide,
that is 91 - Ppk.

55

FOI‘OFNKJA1.USE(MVLY
DUN UPI-Elli. USE. ONLY

Pulse energy 81 in joules:

5‘- S punt-App (3.53)

Pav - E - 3 . (3.54)

where Q - Tp/11--relative pulse duration.

All the basic characteristics of radars related to the structure of the probe sig-

nals are generalized by the ambiguity function of these signals and this determines
the capability of the radar to resolve [identify] an aircraft as well as for the
accuracy and uniformity of measuring aircraft coordinates.

The ambiguity function (AP) of probe signals is a two—dimensional autocorrelation
function 9(1’. f) of the signals, simultaneously representing their structure both
in terms of the tine and spectral areas (Fig. 3.33).

S s(l)s(l—1)e”"‘ll . (3.55)

l
ph.l)- 75‘

 

The narrower (sharper) the relief of the ambiguity function in the corresponding,

direction the greater the accuracy and resolution for range or speed. The cross-

section of the AF along the frequency axis is the spectra of a single pulse uhile
the cross-section along the r axis is its correlation function.

   

Fig. 3.33. Two-dimensional Fig. 3.34. Cross-section Fig. 3.35. Cross-section
autocorrelation function of of two-diaensional auto— of two-dimensional auto-
radar signal correlation function of correlation function of

pulse signal Lm signal

Simple signals are radar probe signals the product of the length n of which by the
width of their spectrum Af approximately equals one. that is, rich: 1.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consequently, an increase in the duration of such signals leads to a reduction in
their spectrum in an inversely proportionate dependence and vice verse. A drawback
of such signals is the fact that an increase in radar range, in requiring an in-
crease in 11 (for increasing energy) worsens the range resolution.

Moreover. such signals do not ensure (without the taking of special measures) the
speed resolution of an aircraft.

A cross-section of a two-dimensional correlation function for a rectalinear pulse
signal in the forn of an ellipse is shown in Pig. 3.3a. It can conditionally be
accepted that the differences in the range and speed of two or several aircraft can
not be detected if the signals returned fro- th- hit within the ellipse.

The principle of ambiguity in radar is a principle asserting that there is a certain
asbiguity in the sinultaneous deternining of range and speed. that is. a gain in
range resolution and accuracy is achieved at the expense of a worsening of these
characteristics for speed and vice versa.

in altering the signal paraneters it is only possible to redistribute this aﬁigu-
ity, that is, to alter the shape of the ellipse without reducing its area.

Couple: signals are radar probe signals the product of the duration 1 of which by
the width of their spectru- Af can be significantly greater than 1, that is, rtdf’l.

This is achieved by introducing in—pulse nodulation of frequency (frequency nodu-
lated signals) or phase (phase nodulated signals).

A merit of these signals is that with a long duration of ti chosen to ensure great
detection range, it is possible to provide the required range resolution by "car

pressing" the signal on the detector's output by the anount deter-lined by the con-
pression coefficient Kc. I uAf.

[ninearly frequency modulated (LPN) signals are signals the frequency of which dur-
ing the pulse duration changes according to :- ‘inear law. that is,

I
1(0- 1.4- M}?
The analytical expression of the signal is:

w) - 3.». [-4 + ——’— r ] (3. 56)

where fouinitial frequency;
Af--frequency deviation over signal's duration.

The signal compression coefficient Kc. - 11“.

Consequently. the energy of a probe signal with a pulse power P1 equals 3 - ’i‘i-
joules. while the signal's duration on the output of an optimal receiver is:

1'
- ii . 5 . (3.57)
57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 3.35 shows the cross-section of an anbiguity function for a LPN signal the
boundaries of which on the tine axis deter-inc the size of the "conpression" sig-
nal Tout.

Phase-code manipulated (POM) signals—signals for which a broadening of the spec-
trm is achieved by manipulating the phase according to a certain rule.

A P01 signal consists of N rectangular discretes with a duration d coabined into
a single signal with a duration of t1 and having an analytical expression

(4-1
«0- 2‘, (— Irma - “l—a‘nn'u. (3.58)
(I.

where the umbers K-0, 1, 2,.... N- 1 fan a sequence of zeroes and ones and this
determines the phase alternation sequence.

The structure of a PCH signal. the fora of recording the phase code and the cross-
section of the A? are shown in Fig. 3.36.

Here for a 1'0! signal, the following equali-

t' ties I_ar_e valid:

  

r43" ' _ l
NIMIHIUHHI'mIlollllm.ﬁ .4... WV. w-.-“
I0 I I I
' 1‘ As a result of optima processing on the
: filter output an output signal is obtained
I 1: equal to Your - Td (Fig. 3.36).

' The phase of a PO! signal can be altered by
, skipping either 6 - 0 (code 0) or i - 1'
(code 1). However, a maxi-m value q.“ -
F 18- 3.36. Cross-sect ion of two- 23/110 is achieved if an optiaun code is C.-

diuensional autocorrelation function 2:03,,“ ‘36:: phase 1. altered from zero
for a 1‘0! signal 0 eq
N~l

e.-e—atttos(m . (3.59)

If one takes an arbitrary initial nuaber of a binary signs, then the total nulber
of discretes of a PO! signal equals 20-1 - N (with n - 3N - 7; with n - (0N - 15
and so forth).

The rule for obtaining an optinua code is:

Kn-KI—n9Ko-u (3.60)

where Kr-code of phase n+ l, n+2...., N discrete of PC“ signal;
O--the logical total of binary signs whereby 000 - 0; 001 - l; 101 - 0.
For example, n - 011, that is. three signs. we obtain 23- l - N - 0111010,
and this corresponds to the signal shown in Fig. 3.36. The signal has
N - 7 discretes and a phase shift according to the law 0111010.

58

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FINIG)FF1C1AI.US£:(HNLY

in the interests of increasing detection range. it is possible to provide the con-
tinuous emitting of a sequence of PCH signals whereby it is essential to solve the
problem of eliminating the ambiguity in a certain range.

A pulse sequence (cluster) is the basic
55” type of space probing in pulse radar.
Periodic pulse modulation by the frequency
of the train of pulses P. alters the struc-
ture of the spectrum and the tyre of corre-
lation function the values of which are
shown in Fig. 3.37 where the following
symbols have been used: rc-oduration of
Fig. 3.37. Time (a) and spectral (b) pulse cluster; ti-duration of individual
representation of pulse sequence pulse; T.-period of train of pulses equal
to T‘ - l/Fae

"blin
Mt) speed“
a tea

  
  

   
 

Fig. 3.37b shows the physical sense of "blind speeds" and which leans that the
Doppler frequency coinciding with the signsl's intrinsic spectrum lines cannot be
isolated at these points. It can be isolated in the intervals between the spectrum
lines and this is the basis for designing coherent-pulse radars with selection of
moving targets equipment.

3.2.6. Operating Range and Basic Characteristics of Ground and Onboard Radar
Systems

Ground and airborne radars which solve the problems of detecting and measuring the
coordinates of aircraft comprise a single class of rsdioelectronic systems. varia-
tions of which are shown in Fig. 3.38.

with a certain combination of these devices

together with their lines. we will obtain
systems for various purposes: an active
radar system with the second and third com-
munications lines; a passive radar system
with the third communications line; a semi-

active radar system with the first and
third communications lines; a response radar
system with the fourth and fifth comunica-
tions lines; remote control system with the
Fig. 3.38. Ground and airborne radar fourth coamunicstions line.‘

systems
thhr range is one of the most important
tactical characteristics ensuring the carry-
ing out of the combat mission to detect,
track and measure the coordinates of air-
craft.

Key: a--Radiation source; b--Trans-
mitter; c-Receiver; d--Radar;
e--Responder

Range in free space for pulse radars with modern receiving and transmitting anten-

nas in meters is: .

P: "5
T—p———R 3.61
0.- ('0' s. “I. . ( )
S9

FOI‘OEiWClAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vhere P1--pulse power, vatts;
(Er-antenna gain;
l-wave length. neters;
otnradar cross-section of target, n2;
Pu “Ir-receiver sensitivity, vatts;
q--detection paraneter;
K--resulting loss coefficient.

The system’s loss coefficient. The loss coefficient K takes into account various
losses in the radar transnitting and receiving channels. In a general fun the

resulting loss coefficient can be represented as the product of K - L Kt. where
t-l
K1--partial coefficients describing losses in various radar alenents.

Calculating the loss coefficients of K4 is a specific task which takes into account
the particular features of each specific radar set.

However, for practical purposes it is possible to lake an approximate quantitative
assesseent of these coefficients:

Kr-loss coefficient considering the nisnatching of the radar receiver pass
band with the spectrum of the probe signal; approxinately K1'0.9 decibel
(K1 3 1.23);

K2--coefficient considering fluctuation losses related to a fluctuation in
the return signals K2 =l.5 decibel (K2: 1.6!.) under the condition of pro-
viding a correct detection probability Pcd - 0.5;

[Cr-coefficient considering losses of postdetector integration (noncohsrent
integration):

K3 - 10(1-7) log n,

where y-coefficient characterising integration quality;
n--nunber of integrated pulses.

Under the condition that v 2'0.8. K3 - 2 log n. If the amber of integrated pulses
n - 10, then K3 - 2 decibels (K3=l.58).

The detection coefficient qn obtained by postdetector integration of n pulses is ex-
pressed by the coefficient for detecting a single signal qlz

qn - qanJ.

K..--a coefficient considering losses due to the accumlation of noise on the

indicator screen; K4, - f(p), where p - L?- (n, n-the numbers of noise
and signal samples, respectively).

'dith n - n - 10, In. - 0.5 decibel (K4. 8 1.22).

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Thus. considering the listed factors the total decay coefficient, decibels:
K ' K1+K2+K3+K~ 3 ‘.9,

and this coincides to a resulting value for the loss coefficient K - K-l K2 K3 the
3.16.

In substituting the value of the resulting loss coefficient K in equation (3.61) we
obtain a calculation fornula asking it possible to determine radar range consider-

ing the probability of detection q >1 (see Fig. 3.30). With q - 1, equation (3.61)
provides an opportunity to deternine the maximun detection range with a correct de-
tection probability Pcd =0.5.

All the given ratios are valid under the condition that the losses in the transmit-
ting path are considered by substituting into equation (3.61) the values of the
enitted power on the antenna output, that is PR0“. Here Pout - Pgn. where P --
the power on the output of the radio-frequency generator; m-efficiency of ant nna-

feeder path (n < l). The method of calculating the losses by incorporating the re-
sulting coefficient K can be employed with various nodificstions of the range equa-
tion (3.62), (3.63).

Considering the decay coefficient of the electronagnetic waves in the atnosphere a
(decibel/kn) in the interval of passing through an absorbing medius t (In), formula
(3.8) assumes the form

6
n .. Vﬂ%_i ﬁns-'5". (3.62)

The operating range of a continuous wave radar is:

C
7509- acme
Dc - V—W.lr.'~‘, (3.63)

where E - Pavr - Pav/Afp--the amount of energy emitted into space, joules;
Afr-receiver pass band, hertz;
Paw-average radiating power. watts;
"(r-noise spectral density, watts/hertz;
G", cry-gains of trensnitting and receiving antennas.

Operating mnge considering attenuation of D! mves in the ionosphere is deternined
by fornulas (3.9), (3.62) and (3.63).

A diagran of the pulse and continuous-wave radars is shown in Fig. 3.39s and b.

Radar operating range considering pmbability of detection can be determined by the
probability distribution function shown in Fig. 3.40:

I.
- A
[”0
ND) - e .

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where D--current range value changing fron zero to Dunc-3‘
D°--deternined by formulas (3.62) and (3.63).

In Fig. 3.60, curve 1 corresponds to the distribution function with single-frequency
illumination and curve 2 with double-frequency illumination of the target.

The values of D} and I); describe the detection range for a certain type of aircraft
with the probability Pcd - 0.9 for single- and double-frequency target illumination.

 

Fig. 3.39. Schematic diagram of pulse (a) and Pig. 3.100. Graph for radar
continuous-wave (b) radars operating range considering

Key: l--Transmitter; 2—Antenna switch; probability of detection with

single-frequency (l) and
3--Receiver; lo--Synchronizer; 5--lndicator; _
6--Antenna duplexer double-frequency (2) illumina

tion
The values of these ranges are determined by the threshold level (Fig. 3.00).

The radar operating range considering the earth's influence vith low elevations is

I
I at” Pang
- ' ‘ ‘
""’ ”VT l/mypg..." - (3.64)
where h and lip-height of radar antenna and target over earth's surface, actors

[for renaining values, see formula (3.61)].

Line-of-sight range Dzauthe maxim distance for the detection of aircraft by
ground radars considering the earth's curvature, km:

1);, - thunk/IE , (3.65)

where h--height of antenna, a;
lip-target height, I.

Operating range of systems with response (radio communications equation):

_ l [Pictrcre
De I" Pre ninql‘a ' (3'66)

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(N§LY

where P1 and ctr--pulse power (watts) and gain of sending radar;
Pre .1“. q, Gr¢-receiver sensitivity (watts), detection parameter and
antenna gain of receiving radar;

h-nhhnhucuﬁuum;h=L2qupl.

Methods of Measuring Range to Boise sources

The triangularion method is a method of range finding for noise sources consisting
of two or more separated receiving points (Fig. 3.61) one of which is located at
point 0 and the remainder in points A and B.

   

Fig. 3.41. Triangulation method for Fig. 3.62. The different range
determining range method for determining distance

The distance to the noise source is:

‘5
D'cos-icosp—uairtgm' (3'67)
where ‘ E--the base between points 0 and A. m;
c. B. Bl--elevations and azimuth of source measured relative to points 0 and

A.

The angle and different range method is a method based upon measuring the angular
directions to the noise source and the difference in the ranges between the target
and point 0 and the target and point A (Fig. 3.61).

The distance is:

9—50:
ovum. (3.68)

where AD.--the difference in determining distances to the noise source between
points 0 and A, m.

The different ﬂange method is a method based on measuring the difference in the
distances between the noise source and points 0 and A (Fig. 3.42).

The distance is:

2£'—AD:—so: 3 69
D'mawoo” (' )

63

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OI-l-li'lAl. LSI'." ONLY

whore £--the base between points 0 and A, m;

Ava, ADb--differences in distances to noise source between points located at
points A and B. m.

For the second and third methods. the difference in the ranges ADa and A05 is de-

tcrmined by setting a special correlator at point 0 which considers the significmuz
of the base (E) between the points and the time lag rd, that is, AD - rad-B.

Basic Radar Units and Performance

Transmitters are single- or multiple-stage devices which shape and generate high
frequency probe signals with set values of shape and output power.

Transmitters are classified by the type of generating devices, including: tube.
magnetron. amplitron, klystron. platinotron and others.

A diagram of single- and multiple-stage transmitters is shown in Fig. 3.43. In

shaping the signals with in-pulse modulation, transmitters include elements for en-
coding and phase and frequency control.

1 In. . . _ .. '-'_ _2‘ arms-u 2K «um-
.. 2;;..E‘...;’i'.l|-.S.’..-
{sat’JkL-rblsﬂ"
-:-- an}: '
J.-- "I’L—

 

6 [Eff-“4‘1 [$7.241

Fig. 3.43. Schematic diagram of single-stage (a)
and multi-stage (b) transmitter

Key: l--From synchronizer; 2--To antenna;
3--Driver device; 4--Hodulator;
S--Radio-frequency generator; 6--
Interlocking device; 7--Power source;
8--Haster oscillator; 9--Power ampli-
fier (I-IV)

1 0m amncuuu 2 K «(mm FINN”

 

Fig. 3.44. Schematic diagram of super heterodyne-
type receiver
Key: l--From antenna; 2-—To terminal; 3--Input;
4--High-frequency amplifier; S-Nixer;
6--Intermediate-frequency amplifier;

7--Detector and low-frequency amplifier;
8--Heterodyne

64

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Receivers are devices which separate signals of a certain frequency and shape with
their subsequent amplification and transformation into a type required for the
operation of the terminal.

A diagram of a super heterodyne-type receiver is shown in Fig. 3.54. Depending
upon the purpose of the radar and the type of probe signal, optimum detection
devices can be located on the receiver input or on the miner's output.

Receiver sensitivity (Pre Ilug-“the minimum value (watts) for the average signal
power on the receiver input which ensures a ratio of signal strength to noise
strength equal to one:

Pre sin ' KNToAfp. (3.70)

where K'-1.38'10'23--the Boltzmann's constant, joules/degree;
N--receiver noise factor;
fp--receiver pass band, hertz;
To--temperature.

In practice the concept of threshold sensitivity is used, that is, the sensitivity
which ensures the receiving and detection of the returned signals with the desig-
ated probability:

Pthr ' Pre min'q' (3'71)
where q--detection parameter [see formula (3.66)].
The sensitivity P:e min is usually expressed in decibels:

Prl

Pre min ' 1° 108 Pre min

where Pr(-the value of the power corresponding to the read level, wgtts (for ex-
ample, with Pr; - 10"3 watts and Pre min - 10"“ watts, Pre .1“ a 110

decibels).
The recalculation formula is:
a
_ Pre min
Pre .1, - 2,510 1° . (3.72)

Antennas are devices providing directional radiation and the receiving of the elec-
tromagnetic waves. The antennas possess the property of reversibility and are
classified in the following types: single-reflector, multiple reflector and anten-
na arrays.

Single-reflector antennas are a design consisting of a reflector and a feed (Pig.
3.45s). As a reflector it is possible to use a parabolic cylinder, a truncated

paraboloid and so forth and as the feeds the individual elements or line arrays
which consist of dipoles, slots and horns.

65

IIJR‘OFFICLAL lEHE(MNLY
FOR OI-‘FK'lAL USE ONLY

The position of the directional pattern (DP) is controlled by the mechanical turn-
ing of the entire antenna or within a limited sector by altering the position of
the feed.

Hulti-reflector antennas consist of large (parabolic) and small (hyperbolic) re-
flectors (Fig. 3.45b). Electromechanical scanning of the DP with a stationary
antenna can be provided by turning the feed or the small reflector providing a ‘
scanning which surpasses by 2-2.5-fold the turning angles in a single reflector
antenna.

The phased antenna arrays (PAA) are a system of feeds (elements) in which the DP
is moved in space by introducing variable phase shifts between the signals emitted
or received by the individual elements.

@

 

a) b)
Fig. 3.65. Single-reflector (a) Fig. 3.46. Phased antenna arrays designed
and multi-reflector (b) antennas according to the pass-through (a) and

return (b) systems
A distinction is made between three basic types of PAA: with passive elements,
with active elements and of the matrix type. A PAA with passive elements can be
constructed according to "pass-through" (Fig. 3.b6a) and return (Fig. 3.46b) systems.
A PAA with active elements includes a system of oscillators, phase shifters and
feeds controlled by a computer.

Hznic ratios in single-reflector and multi-reflector antennas. dith a set wave
length A and antenna dimensions L, it is possible to determine:

The width of the directional pattern 0 in the planes of the azimuth OB and eleva—
tion 0‘, rad.:

A l
o’..K-L—’-,0.--K'Z.-. (3.73)

where L3, Lc--antenna dimensions in the azimuth and elevation planes;
K--proportionality factor (K 30.88).

Antenna gain 60

hISef
60' A! 3 . (3.7a)
sef ' Kasgeom'

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when: Sef, 83.0.. Ka—the effective and geouetric areas and the utilization factor
of the antenna's area, respectively.

For the various types of antennas Ita I 0.5-0.7.

The relationship of gain to the directional pattern:

31: 40000 25000
0" wzkw~ﬁr (3.7:)

where e . G‘s-width of directional pattern, rad.:
6s, OC-Width of directional pattern, degrees;
Kauaccepted as equal to 0.6.

Basic mtioa in phased antenna armya. With the set width of the scanning sector
in the azimuth act and elevation ecu planes, it is possible to establish the basic
dependencea in the antenna arrays.

The distance between the array elements is usually chosen as equal to one-half the
wave length: d I U2.

The total number of active (passive) elements in a flat array is:

. ~ “I'm (3- 76
’* ~ W:- ’

The width of the directional pattern in the corresponding plane is:

h

where a—the angle between the perpendicular to the arrey's plane and the position
of the DP at the given accent.

If one assumes the possibility of broadening the DP with a 2-fold deviation from
the perpendicular to the plane. then l/cos a I 2. that is. a I 160'. *

Consequently, the seaming sector act I Zn I 120°.

For practical calculations the normed D? of an antenna, as a function of an angle in
the corresponding plane. can be approxilated by the ratios:

”in" ' for half-power level;
up , (3.78)
rm - e ‘ - for field directivity.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKIAL USE ONLY

Indicators (1U) are devices which provide the observance of the air situation, the
detection and measuring of coordinates of an aircraft. The composition and type of
indicator are determined by the radar's purpose.
The following types of indicators are recognized:

Plan position indicators (Pig. 3.67s. b);

Azinuth--range sector indicators (Pig. 3.b8a);

Range-speed indicators (Pig. 3.68c);

H--D and e-D altitude measuring indicators (Pig. 3.68b);

Seniautouatic plotting indicators;

’Indicators with linear and circular scanning (Fig. 3.69s, b);

Digital indicators or displays.

 

Fig. 3.47. Plan position indicators:

a--Circular node; b--Sector node (1, 2, 3, b--respectively, the scale
marks 6. D and the blips from a group target and terrain features)

      
        

Asuzuoa
. new 1‘ n '-
‘3‘” ﬁgumgw
Ifamimw
. . b) 'l!
:2) o .)1 f

Fig. 3.68. Sector indicators:

a--Azinuth--range (1. 2--correspond- Fig. 3'49' Indicators:

ingly, the scale marks of a andEDz; a-Hith linear scanning; b--Hith circular
b--Elevation—-range (1--equal ersva- scanning; l-«Tsrget signal

tiun lines); c-—Range--speed (l,\2--

respectively, the scale marks of D and V)

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The effect of the indicators on detection range is determined by the value of the

q coefficient which has been given the name for the particular case of the dis-
crimination factor (formula 3.“).

For the normal operation of an indicator it is essential to provide a valms of
q - 2-3.5. The linear dimension of the target blip on the indicator is:

z - of 4.. (3.79)

where Use—gradation of scale on screen;
LP-—linear dimension of scan;
d3--diameter of spot on screen.

Radar resolution considering effect of indicators is the capacity to provide
separate observation and measuring of coordinates for two nearby targets.

Range resolut ion is:

C(‘l’ +At D
1 ) + -—‘£ 4,, (3.80)

”"7ch L,

where cum wave propagation velocity;
:1, At--duration and amount of expansion of return signal;
Ker-signal compression coefficient at output of optimum receiver (for
pulse signals without in-pulse modulation Kc.- 1).

Resolution for angular coordinates (for azimuth and elevation):

'0-°p+%f4.:
h-..+‘1?‘3.

(3.81)

where Bsc- taco-the sector amounts for azimuth and elevation, degrees;
LP--linear dimension of azimuth (elevation) scan.

Height resolution is the minimum measurable difference in the heights of two targets
located at the same distance and under the same azimuth:

. .-
m-—’£+£{—;a.. (3.82)

where sac, t--amount of elevation sector and current elevation value.

Radar resolvable volwne--a part of space in the radar's viaw zone limited by dis-
tances equal to the resolutions for D, 8. e. that is,

5V - 025D6858. (3.83)

69

”MUSEONLY
F1)! OFFIC1AL USEZCHULY

The principle of'measuring target heéght. Considering the spherical earth. the
height of an aircraft (target) over the earth's surface depending upon distance D is

H-Duuo + 1%, (3.86)

where c-target elevation;
Be =8500—effective radius of earth. ha.

The second component increases with an increase in distance and for this reason for
calculating height on the range-height indicators. nonlinear graphs are applied
which reflect the dependence of (3.8a).

The radar detection zone is an area of space on the boundary of which targets with a
certain RC8 are detected with a set probability.

The boundary of the detection zone is detersined by the resulting directional pat-
tern and the view linit (circular or sector).

The cross-section of the detection zone in a vertical plane not considering the
earth's influence 0(a) - Dr(t), where P(t)-the antenna's directional pattern in
plane t.

Considering the earth's influence. a radar antenna receives signals returned fro-
the target s1 and iron the earth's surface s2, here:

I. - ”F‘s -a,);
t. - 3M0 + 1,),

where p--nodulus of reflection coefficient;
t. to--respectively the current value of the target's elevation and the slope

angle for the saxinnn DP to the horizon.
According to the theorem of cosines. the total value of these two signals having

the phase shift 0:
5.. V 3.! + :5, + 23.13039 - 8.15.

where Fe . JP2(c-to)-902F2(e+to)-+29P(c-eo)P(e+to)cos o-the resulting DP for the
receiving antenna in a vertical plane considering the earth's influence.

with to - 0 which corresponds to the condition of the positioning of the directional
pattern saxinun parallel to a horizontal surface whereby the influence of the earth
is felt, we obtain

.5- no «W (3.85)

In the general instance. the phase shift is:

. ' °x+.09

70

FIHICHHHCJA1.USE(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where or-phase shift due to difference in the path of the direct (from the target)
signal and the signal returned free the earth;
eonphase shift with the reflecting of B! saves fros the earth.

For a aster-band radar with horizontal polarization with all angles of e fro. zero
to 90', p I l, 908:, we obtain

Fa - Harm-1t.

With a set antenna height h, the phase shift is:
'g-‘zé-a‘lﬁ

Consequently, F. - F(c)o(t), where 9(a) - 2 sin (Zr/l h sin c) is teraed the earth
multiplier. '

For saall angles of c, the obtained value of the earth's aultiplier is also valid
for vertical polarization.

Formla (3.85) notes it possible to calculate the detection zones for the condi-
tions of an even earth surface while consideration of the effect of an uneven sur-
face is carried out using a special nethod or by a radar overflight.

Target identification is the putting of a detected target in a certain class (type)
on the basis of analyzing the features inherent to the given target.

As the features it is possible to use the target's dinensions, configuration, the
nature of the cross-section. the characteristics of the jet engine, the law of

notion. the type of radiation from the onboard systeas and so forth.

The listed features are assessed by analyzing the aggregate of the returned signals
and the laws of action of the aircraft.

Identification probability P14. If it is necessary to solve the problem of identi-
fying two detected aircraft from K features, each of which is neasured n tines, then

the identification probability is:
Pu. -+[I “(55:23 (3)]. (3.86)

where Ill, lag—sathenatical expectation for the value of the feature of the first
and second targets;
ol—nean square error in assessing feature;
n--n®er of neasurenents of feature;
K—onusber of feature;
O(x)-—error function (see Fig. 3.28).

The dependence of identification probability upon the masher of features is shown
in Fig. 3.50. There is an optima m-ber of specific features which ensures a taxi-
m- value of the identification probability.

7].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.2.5. Target Detection by Optoelectronic
Equipment‘l

Optoelectronic equipment (058) is equipment
utilizing the optical band of the EM wave
spectrum for receiving and transmitting in-
formation and various electronic devices for
converting the information.

The basic types of 033 are television (TV),
infrared (IR). optovisual (0V) and laser
(Ls) O

 

l 3 5 7 s n '3 ,5 n The detection of targets using 088 is based
upon the principles of active radar location
for lasers and passive location for the re-
maining types of the 053. The operating
range of the active and passive radar OBE
depends upon their technical data, the
characteristics of the returned or emitted properties of the targets and the condi-
tions of optical band wave propagation.

Fig. 3.50. Dependence of object
identification probability upon
number of features

Operating range of active GEE; meters:

1- 1295...; --;-u (3.87)

 

where Prp. Odp--emitted power (watts) and width of directional pattern, rad.;
Sre--area of receiving aperture, m2;
ot--target radar cross-section, m2;
Pb--power of background radiation, watts;
q--detection parameter;
y--radiation attenuation factor in atmﬁsphere, decibel/km;
£--path traveled by beam in dense layers of atmosphere, km.

Thcnmal radiation of an aircant in flight, in the infrared (IR) band, occurs as a
ccasequence of the aerodynamic heating of the structure. the running of the jet en-
gine and the effect of solar radiation.

The distribution of radiation intensity Jri for an absolutely black body is deter-
mined using Planck's law. watts/cm :

r. I (3.88)
,(i-‘rL,

 

 

* From materials of the foreign press.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where the constants c; - 3.7&°10’12 watts cmz. c2 - l.‘ cn°Ks T-abaolute tempera-
ture of heated body, K.

The radiation intensity of real bodies is:

J ' CJr1. (3009)

where r-spectral radiation coefficient (c =0.7 for a nickel alloy in the min:
radiation area).

The dependence of J upon vave length is shown in Pig. 3.51a.

 

J. v/cu’ distance fron
O! axisym'
400 G5

K
ans
0.04 5001!
002 400K
Mum
0 4 G '2
a)
Fig. 3.51. Intensity (a) and indicatricea (b) of target thernal

radiation

Radiation indicatrix is the geonetric place of points in space characterizing the
radiation levels of uniform intensity.

A vertical cross-section for the thermal radiation indicatrix of a jet aircraft is
shown in Fig. 3.51b.

Operating range of paasive IR eystans:
I
Tm; “1'“
D“ " V 1%,. ' (3.90)

where Stuarea of target's projection; .
er-spectral density of background radiation, watts/ILA av;

wry-receiver field of vision angle. av;
J“. c. q have been determined in for-ulna (3.88). (3.89), (3.“).

Operating range of TV systems:

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Bx--spectral density of target surface radiation st as a consequence of its
illumination by the sun, watts/IZ-K av;
rt--target reflection coefficient;
Pb--power of background radiation. watts.

The variables given in foraulas (3.87)-(3.90) have the values:

Pb - 10'17 watts. Q; - 3010'2 watts/(cmz-mcm-av)-
for a daytime sky;

Q) - 10'B watts/(cnzsmcm'av)-—
for a nighttime sky:

q - 2-3; B; - 10’2 watts/(cmzomcmcav); rt -0.2—0.8.

Range resolution. Only the active 083 operating in a pulse mode possess range reso-
lution.

The value of range resolution. like for radar, is determined by the amount of the
signal length ‘c which is considered in the estimate:

Pb - navhv‘c,

where nav--average number of photons in the signal;
h--Planck's constant;
v--radiation frequency.

Resolution for angular coordinates 69:
For active systems 698 - edp;

For passive IR systens 68p - “he;

9
For TV systems 6°tv - E'dso

where 9--field of vision angle for transmitting tubs;
b--target width of transmitting tube;
ds-diameter of scanning beam (spot);
orp--half-angle of oscillator beam.

3.3. Methods of Determining Coordinates and Parameters of Motion for Air Attack
Weapons

3.3.1. Distance Measuring Devices
Determining the distance and angular coordinates of objects is based upon the recta-
linearity of radio wave propagation and their constant velocity. Distance to a tar-

get can be measured by radar and optical devices. For this the time is determined
for the signal to pass from the source of radiation to the target and back:

76

FOR OIIICIAI.lEﬂE(ﬂ§LY
at - 329-9 . (3.92)

where c-propagation velocity of electromagnetic energy;
tpd--tine for signal to reach target and return (signal delay time).

The tiae tpd can be measured from the delay in the pulse return fro- the target,

fron the amount of the change in transmitter frequency and from the amount of the

change in the radar signal phase. Because of this, three methods of determining
range are distinguished.

Measuring distance by nadar means

The pulse method is a method whereby a radar sends toward the target a short-

duration, high-frequency pulse. The moments of sending and receiving the pulse are
recorded on the time scan of the indicator (Pig. 3.52s). During the time the pulse
travels to the target and back, the bean of the CRT draws on the screen a line the

length of which is proportional to the target's range and this can he read off fron
the mechanical or electronic scale of the indicator.

transmittew f f” ,.,L

  

pulse I
,/’ [7 return ’6'," 9
x / l
‘k___+b_ 1.,_4Mh ,
tau I f- I ‘ e ‘\~ It

7s b)
.5

 

Fig. 3.52. Methods of measuring distance:

a--Pulse; b--Frequency; c—-Phase

with the pulse sethod. radar range resolution is:

ao-E‘fhuog, (3.93)

where t1—-duration of transmitter pulse;
HD-—sca1e of indicator range scan;
dg--diameter of CRT electron spot.

The range of the uniform determination of distance 0: max - cTP/Z, where TP-the
transmitter pulse repetition period.

The minimum target distance measurable by a pulse radar is:

75

FOR OlﬂﬂClAl.USIZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C(ti + tr)

Dt min - 2 s

where t,--the receiver sensitivity recovery time.

The merits of the method are: the possibility of measuring distance and identify-
ing many targets, comparative simplicity; the shortcomings are: the impossibility
of measuring short distances and the high radiation pulse power.

The frequency method is a method whereby the delay time of the signal returned from
the target is measured by the amount of transmitter frequency change. The trans-
mitter sends electromagnetic energy with a linearly changing frequency for the
high-frequency oscillations (Pig. 3.52b). During the time the radio waves travel to
the target and back to the receiver, the transmitter frequency will change by the
amount:

2D:
Aft I “p 7 , (3.94)

where np--the rate of change in the frequency of emitted oscillations.

The signals received from the target and the high frequency transmitter oscillations
go to the receiver mixer. where a difference frequency is isolated:

(OM-Dc
CT-

 

Arp - rt- fre - . (3.95)

where AFm--frequency deviation of emitted oscillations;
’ Tm-—repetition period of transmitter modulating frequency.

Target range is:

 

cF,T,.
0t - W: . (3.96)
Range resolution is:
or, r.
‘0) W- ' (3.97)

where ”Em-the width of the receiver filter pass band.

The range of the unif '1: distance measurement is:

D: m < _;_‘,' (3.98)

The minimum distance determined by the radar is:

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I
annex? 0-9»

The merits of the method include: the possibility of measuring short distances and
the low radiation power; the drawback is the complexity of simultaneously'meaauring

the range of numerous targets.

The phase method is a method whereby the delay time from the target signal is de-
termined by the amount of change in the phase of modulating oscillations used to
modulate the signals emitted by the transmitter (Pig. 3.52c). Over the signal de-
lay time, the phase of these oscillations will change by the amount:

A0 - ZIP-tpd. (3. 100)
where P.--modulstion frequency of high frequency oscillations.

The distance to the target is:

De-mﬂv- (3.101)

The range for the uniform measurement of distance is:

tin-+7.3. (3.102)

The merits of the method include the high accuracy of range measurement and the
drawback is the nonuniformity of the measurement and the absence of resolution.

The structure of a device for measuring target range depends upon the adopted method
of measurement. They can be analogue and digital.

A device for measuring range with a pulse method of masuremsnt (a pulse range-
finder) includes (Fig. 3.52s) a synchronizer 1. a transmitter 2, a receive-send
switch 3, a send-receive antenna 6. a receiver 5, an indicator 6, and a range-

measuring system 7.

The high frequency pulses from the transmitter thrOugh the receive-send switch go
to the antenna and are sent toward the target. The return signals are picked up by
the antenna and sent to the receiver. After amplification and conversion into
video pulses, they go to the indicators and automatic tracking system.

An analogue-type automatic rangeetracking system with the pulse method includes a
time discriminator, a voltage amplifier of the error signal, an integrater. a vari-
able delay circuit, and a range pulse oscillator (Fig. 3.53).

The target video pulses from the radar receiver are sent to the time discriminator
(TD) which also receives the tracking strobes.

77

F0I10€FHJAI.U884NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

lantern-ensue
3 uunynM:

Fig. 3.53. Functional diagram of an automatic
target range-tracking system

Key: a-Pulse from target; b--Time discriminator;
c-Voltage amplifier of error signal;
d-lntegrator; e-Variable delay circuit;
f--Range pulse oscillator; g-Hetering
pulse; h--Strobe

The time discriminator is a metering element and most often uses a coincidence
circuit. As a result of comparing the time position of the target pulse and the
tracking strobes, the TD generates an error signal voltage uc.° - K t (K—-propor-
tionality coefficient. t--the time mismatching between the energy center of the
target pulse and the middle of the tracking strobes). The voltage polarity corres-
ponds to the sign of the time mismatching. The graphic dependence of uc.o - f( t)
is termed the discrimination characteristics (the characteristics of the discrimin-

duc.o

dt At-O
determines the accuracy of range measurement. With an increase in the steepness,
accuracy rises.

 

ator). The steepness of the discrimination characteristics 53 -

The voltage amplifier for the error signal is a linear element and is used for am-
plifying uc.o to a level which ensures the stable work of the integrator.

The integrator performs the role of a servoelement. It converts the voltage of “c.o
into a control voltage “con which is used to control the time position of the track-

ing strobes. The presence of an integrating element in the circuitry gives it the
property of astatism.

A Irvine for measuring target distance with the frequency method (a frequency range
finder) has (Fig. 3.52b) a modulator l. a frequency modulatable generator 2, trans-
mitting and receiving antennas 3, 6, a mixer 5. a low frequency amplifier 6. a fre-
quency meter 7, and an indicator 8. The mixer. the L? amplifier and the frequency
meter comprise the rangefinder receiver.

The modulator generates a modulating voltage and under the effect of this according
to the set law (linear or sinusoidal) the frequency is changed in the generator's
high-frequency oscillations.

The high-frequency signals are sent from the transmitter to the antenna and are sent
out toward the target. The return signals through the receiving antenna are sent to

the mixer where a small portion of the power from the transmitter's high frequency
osvillstions is delivered. As a result of the mixing of the oscillations of the ft

78

FORTOFIICIAI.IJSEI(NVLY
and ire frequencies. different frequency oscillations are generated and these pass
through the amplifier and go to the frequency meter. For measuring the frequency
F , it is possible to employ spectrum analyzers which are a set of filters tuned to
the set frequency values. Target range is read off an arrow or digital indicator.

A device for measuring target distance with the phase method has (Pig. 3.52c) a.
transmitter l, transmitting and receiving antennas 2, 3, a receiver 6. and a phase
difference meter 5.

The high frequency signals from the transmitter are beamed cut by the transmitting
antenna. The signals returned from the target are picked up by the receiving anten-
na and then sent to the receiver. After signification the received signals go to
the phase meter where simultaneously high frequency oscillations from the transmit-
ter are received. As a result of comparing the phases of these oscillations, a
voltage is generated which is proportional to target distance.

Digital devices fbr measuring distance employ converters of the "time--digit" type
making it possible to obtain range values in a digital code. In the device (Fig.
3.54), the signals returned from the target, after the receiver, are sent to the
detection device and then to a flip—flop. Here also is received a start pulse which
coincides in time with the moment of sending the transmitter's probe pulse. The
flip—flop generates a rectangular pulse the length of which equals the time required
for the probe pulse to travel to the target and back. This pulse is sent to an AND
gate which also receives pulses from the standard repetition frequency of the pulse
generator.

 

Fig. 3.50. Diagram of digital device for
measuring target range

Key: a-—Pulse generator; b--Counter; c--Dc register; d-Stop; e--Plip-flop;
f-—Start pulse; g-Synchronizer; h-Signa1 detection device:
i-eProm receiver; j--AND

Under the effect of the range pulse and the frequency pulses Fe, the gate opens
and through it passes a certain number of standard frequency pulses. Their number
will equal

2nt

Ne - tpdfe - 7 Fe-

For counting these pulses. an i-discharge flip-flop counter has been used on the
output of which a number is given in a binary code. The number is read by the

79

FOR 0FFF“‘I.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

potential-pulse output circuit on gates AND}, ANDZ. ...ANDn in a special range
register. The moment of reading is determined by pulses sent to the gates from the
delay line Lzl.

The target's range is:

Dt ' New ' Ne % , (3.103)

where Te - 1/F3--the pulse repetition period for the standard repetition rate.

Distance is measured discretely with an accuracy up to one pulse repetition period

of the standard frequency. For increasing accuracy two-scale counting methods are
enployed.

With a variable repetition rate of the radar probe pulses. it is possible to employ
a device,for measuring range with the gating of the range sections (Fig. 3.55). In
such devices the output signals and noise after the receiver are sent to a threshold
amplifier-~limiter and then to the gates ANDl, ANDz, ..., ANDk.

For gating the range sections, pulses of the time markers are formed and these are
sent from the appropriate generator to a shift register where pulses are generated
following with the range discretization frequency. The number of digits in the
register equals the number of elementary range sections AD falling on Dt max-

  
 

Dudso- W
8 mnnonu
annou-
cuuusa

Fig. 3.55. Diagram of device for measuring
target range with the gating of range sections

Key: l--Synchronized pulses; 2-Time marker generator; 3-Shift register;
b--Signal detector; 5--Signs1s of targets; 6--Control unit;
7--Threshold amplifier-limiter; 8-Video signals from receiver

The pulses generated by each discharge of the shift register go to the correspond-

ing elements of the coincidence circuit AND . AND2 and so forth. Here also is re-
ceived the Output voltage from the threshol amplifier-limiter and containing the
receiver noise and the target signals. "hen element AN01 is activated by a pulse
from the 1 digit of the register and the receiver's output voltage, the element
opens passing to the 1 signal detection device (YOC) the voltage from the receiver
output corresponding to the given moment in time.

80

FOR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY
The YOC store the received infatuation from the receiver over several (for exanple,
l) repetition periods Tp. With the receiving a signal-noise mix, the YOC performs
the operation of detecting the target signal for all the L periods. If in m peri-
ods a target signal is present in the nix (here m <1 for the whole number of peri-
ods TP)' then the YOC puts out a target pulse. In detecting a target signal in a
number of periods less than n, the target signal is not put out by the correspond‘
ing YOC as the YOC generates a target signal under the condition of not less than n
observations of the signal from L sample values.

Each signal of the YOC has its own number corresponding to a certain interval on
the target range scale. This provides an opportunity to determine the range from
the target signal generated by the YOC:

0: - man. (3.104)

where i-number of YOC;
AD--range section gated by i-m channel.

The signals from the outputs of the YOC can also be used to measure other target co-
ordinates. For reducing the time for scanning maximum range, it is possible to em-
ploy systems of sequential and parallel-sequential search.

Measuring Range by Optical Devices

The measuring of target distance in the optical wave band is carried out by optical
rangefinders. Distance is determined by the time lag of the signal emitted by the
rangefinder generator and returned from the target. For this, the emitted oscilla-
:ions of the generator are modulated for amplitude and phase. In accord with this

a distinction is made between three methods of measuring range: pulse, phase and
phase-pulse.

With the pulse method, the target is illininated with short-duration pulses. The
transmitter contains a laser, a modulator, and a radiation control generator (Fig.
3.56). At certain moments of time, the laser generates short pulses which are sent
to a semi-transparent mirror. The basic portion of the pulse energy passes through
the mirror into the transmitting optical system and is directed toward the target.
A small portion of the pulse energy is diverted to the reference photoelectronic
amplifier (PEA) and then is sent to the time lag measuring unit, in fixing the
monent of emitting the probe pulse.

a . a.
1 My"? 33cm“! Mum, Fig. 3.56. Schematic diagram of pulse laser

‘ “cm“ 6" rangefinder
“ Key' l-Hodulator; 2-Laser; 3—-Hirror;

1ﬂmcuunu 6-0ptical transmitting system;
°'""""°"°’ S—Radistion control generator;
6-Reference PEA; 7-Receiving Optical
llxmhuounp System; 8-Signal PEA; 9-Amplifier;
10-—t3 measuring unit; ll-Indicator

 
    
 
     

81

FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The signal returned from the target passes through the receiving optical system
and goes to the signal PEA and then to the signal amplifier. After amplification
the received signal goes to the time lag measuring unit, in fixing the moment of
its arrival. The direct and returned signals can be sent to a CRT indicator on
which a range reading scale has been applied.

with the phase method, the laser generates a continuous signal which has been modu-

lated for amplitude according to a sinusoidal law. In passing through the semi-
transparent mirror, the direct signal goes to the optical system and is directed

toward the target. The return signal passes through an optical system and is sent
to the PEA which also receives a portion of the direct signal's energy.

After passing through an amplifier. the direct and return signals are sent to a

unit which measures the phase difference A0 of the modulating oscillations and this
makes it possible to measure target range. Moreover. this unit can also measure

the rate of change of 6% and hence there is the possibility of also measuring target
speed. In coming out of the unit measuring A0 and NW, the corresponding signals are
sent to the distance indicator and the target speed indicator.

In the foreign press it has been pointed out that the accuracy of measuring range
with the designated system can be several centimeters.

with the phase-pulse method, the oscillations emitted by the rangefinder are modu-
lated for amplitude and phase and this makes it possible to measure the target's
distance and speed:

at - 85*, (3-105)
where a--proportionality coefficient.
3.3.2. Devices for Tracking the Direction of Targets

The possibility of tracking objects in terms of heading is based on the use of the
property of radio waves to propagate rectalinearly. Here there is the possibility
of measuring the target's angular coordinates. that is. elevation and azimuth.

The following methods are recognized for determining angular coordinates (Pig. 3.57»
maximum, minimum and equisignal zones (the integral method and the method of instan-

taneous equisignal zones).

The maximum method is a method

c ’ c _._a whereby the direction to the target
' is determined from the direction of
r’ I the antenna beam corresponding to

target signal (Fig. 3.57m).

 

._ .lllll..- S, @ the moment of receiving the maximum
1

' The minimum method is a method
whereby the direction to the target
is determined from the minimum sig-
nal received by the antenna which
forms two beams (Fig. 3.57b). The

Fig. 3.57. Methods of determining target
angular coordinates:

a-—Haximum; b--Hinimum; c--Bquisignal integral
zone 041th conical beam scan)

82

IN)! 0FI‘CLAL.USEIMVLY
forms two beams (Pig. 3.57b). The beam maximums are displaced relative to one
another by a certain angle.

The merits of the method are the high accuracy in determining the direction to the
target while the drawback is the short range of target tracking. It is employed in
radio navigation systems with direction finding employing powerful emitting sources.

2he methods of equieignal zones-othe direction to the target is determined from the

equality of amplitudes (phases) of signals returned from the target and received by
the antenna which forms two (four) overlapping beams. A distinction is drawn be-

tween methods with the amplitude total-difference processing of the signals and the
phase method.

Methods involving the amplitude processing of the signals can have integral and in-
stantaneous equisignal zones.

The method of an integral equisignal zone is one whereby the equisignal zone is
created by switching or turning (scanning) the antenna beam (Fig. 3.57c). In beam
switching devices the target signals are.received by the antenna in positions I and
II of the beam. If the target is not in an equisignal direction, then the signals
will have different amplitudes. The operator or the tracking system rotates the
antennas in such a manner that the signal amplitudes u] and uz are equal. The beam
switching time should be such that the target does not go out of the antenna beams.

The method of instantaneous equisignal zones with amplitude total-difference signal
processing. With this method the direcrion to the target is determined from the

equality of signals received by an antenna which forms four overlapping beams
(Fig. 3.58s).

A comparison of the signal amplitudes is made at the same moment of time and because
of this the method has gained the name of instantaneous BSZ [equisignal zones]. In
the event of the target's deviation from the RCH [equisignal direction] by the angle
66. a difference occurs in the amplitudes of the received signals:

6“ - l.—I.-2”.R("a)K-M “309‘. (3.106)

where Uo--signal amplitude with the locating of target on RC8;
R(vo)--antenna gain;
Kn--steepness of antenna rangefinder performance;
wc--signal cyclical frequency.

The voltage Au is employed in the an-
tenna position control system. Under
the effect of the control voltage,

the antennas are turned in a direction
to reduce the amount of A6 and as a
result of this the target is in the

Fig. 3.58. Methods of instantaneous RCH'

equisignal zones: .
“'"1§h aﬂplitudc total-difference signal The t°t'1 ‘13“‘1 “I ' “1"“2 does 30‘
processing; b--Hith signal Ph'OO processing carry information on the deviation of

 

83

l1)I!0WIﬂ(1Al.UEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the target from the RCH and is used in devices for measuring target range and
speed.

The merits of the method are the high accuracy of target tracking. the low values

of fluctuation errors in measuring angular coordinates; the shortcomings are the
lack of information on the targets outside the limits of the narrow antenna beams
and the complexity of the "total--difference" unit. The method is employed in auto-
matic target tracking radars.

The method of instantaneous equisignal zones with phase signal processing is a
method whereby the direction to the target is determined from the equality of the
phases of the signals received by two antennas located on a certain base d (Fig.
3.58b). With a deviation of the target from the RC8, the difference in the signal
phases ul and u; is:

2“ 2nd

5, - T sln ”as T”; (3.107)

where \n-operating radar wave length.

For measuring the phase difference. waveguide ring bridges, phase detectors and so
forth are employed. Voltage proportional to the amount of A0 is employed for con-
trolling antenna position with automatic target tracking for direction.

The merits of the method are the high accuracy of measurement; the drawbacks are the
nonuniformity of determining the value of A8 and the dependence of measurement ac-

curacy upon the state of the radar waveguide transmission line.

Devices for the automatic tracking of targets for direction. The design of such de-
vires depends upon the method employed for determining the angular coordinates.

with the maximum method and the linear displacement of the antenna beam, automatic
target tracking devices are an analogue or digital tracking system. An analogue
system consists of a discriminator, an error signal amplifier, an integrating ele-
ment, a comparison circuit and a circuit for forming angular pulses (Fig. 3.59).

"an

       
   
     
   
   
  
 
     
 

1 2 3 4

—'—1
Ana'up'ul. I“ Ycummu. “Hump. an"
-'L ‘-- "- mmp (I, a - mop

canal-cm!
f l 7 ﬁrm :Fup

    

 
 
 
  

Key: 1-Discriminator; 2--False signal
amplifier; 3--lntegrator; 4--
Voltage comparison circuit; 5--

5 Comparison pulse; 6--Hetering

mans;
mcmm

  

 

8 ,
lummb ﬁgﬁwmﬁf pulse; 7--Circuit for forming
:muyncosmcpnm ‘ . angular pulses; 8--Ga¢e
. enuu
A uMnyncﬁ n

Fig. 3.59. Functional diagram of a target
tracking system with linear displacement
of antenna beam

84

FOR 0511(1A1.USE(NNLY
INJR 0513(1AL USEZCN§LY

The antenna beam in-moving in a certain sector for elevation (azimuth) forms clus-
ters (bunches) of pulses returned from the target. The cluster maximum corresponds
to the moment of coincidence of the antenna beam maximum with the direction to the
target. After passing through the receiver and after rectification, the cluster
pulses go to the discriminator where the tracking gates or strobes are also re-
ceived.

The discriminator compares the time position for the energy center of the pulse
cluster with the middle of the tracking strobes. As a result an error signal volt-
age uc,o is generated the amount and sign of which corresponds to the amount and
sign of the time discrepancy t between the energy center of the cluster and the
middle of the tracking strobes:

u .0 ' At, (30108)
c
where K°--proportionality coefficient.

The error signal voltage after the discriminator goes to an integrating circuit
which transforms this voltage into the control voltage u¢0n.

Tracking the direction of a target in one of the planes is carried out by the con-
tinuous alinement of the strohea with the target pulse cluster. The speed of the
shift of the strobes in a system with one integrator is proportional to the voltage
uc 0. Thus, the tracking error increases with an increase in the rate of change of
the target's angular coordinates and this .s a drawback of the designated device.

With the method of an instantaneous equisignal zone with amplitude total-difference
processing of the signals. the tracking device contains a target tracking system in
the vertical plane and a tracking systen in the horizontal plane. In accord with
this the antenna forms four beams the maximums of which are displaced by a certain
angle relative to the R0“.

The signals received by the antenna go to the "total-—difference" device which can
be a double hybrid circuit (Fig. 3.60). The different signal is taken off the out-
put of the "B“ leg and the total signal from the output of the "H" leg.

Fig. 3.60. Functional diagram of a target
tracking device using the method of
instantaneous equisignal zones with the
amplitude total-difference processing of
signals

Key: l--Difference signals receiver;
2--Hetering unit of; 3--Total sig-
nals receiver; b-Hybrid circuit

 

The voltages of the difference and total signals are sent to the receiver where
they are amplified and converted into intermediate frequency signals. After the re-
ceiver. the voltage of the different signal is used in the antenna position control

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lZSE ONLY

circuit while the voltage of the total sig-
nal can be used to measure target range.

The current values of the target angular co-
ordinates are read by sensors placed in the
appropriate planes on the antenna rotation
axes.

A tracking device with the phase method is
analogous to the one examined above. Its
difference is in the principle of obtaining
Fig. 3.61. Detenmining target angular the difference signal which is proportional

coordinates in radar with PAA to the difference of the phases from the
signals received by the antennas.

 

re measuring of angular coordinates in radars with phased antenna arrays [PAA] is
carried out by determining the angular position of the antenna beam at the moment of
receiving the signal returned from the target (Fig. 3.6L):

‘t-'l+“:} (3.109)
’c'pa'i'h.

whore ca. Sa--elevation and azimuth of electric ox axis of antenna;
'h- Bb--elevation and azimuth of antenna beam relative to antenna axis.

The current values of 63. Ba are provided by the antenna rotation angle sensors

while “b and 3b are calculated through the phase ratios provided by the phase con-
verters of the PAA. Since their values are proportional to the control currents of
the phase converters, the phase ratios are calculated from their values provided in

a digital form. Digital computers are employed for determining the angular coordi-
nates.

Determining the direction to a target is carried out by the method of instantaneous
equisigual zones. The time for determining the coordinates of one target is frac-
tions nl a second and for this reason by using one radar it is possible to determine
ihv coordinates of a large number of targets with a sufficiently short period of in-
fnrmatlun updating.

The measuring of angular coordinates using optical deVices (television and optical
sights) is carried out by automatic or manual tracking of a target observed through
an optical sight or on the screen of a television-optical sight indicator. The an-
gular coordinates are read by sensors mounted on the sight's rotation axes. Their
Values can be produced in an analogue or digital form.

5.3.]. Devices for Tracking Target Speeds
The high frequency signals returned (emitted) by moving objects produce an increment

in tho Doppler frequency Pd the amount of which is proportional to the radial compo-
nent Vr of their speed of motion:

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2vr

Pd - T , (3.110)

where A--radar wave length.

Hence,

Vr - — o (3.111)

The measuring of the radial component of target speed comes down to measuring the
Doppler increment in the frequency of the received signals. For this it is pos-
sible to employ analogue or digital meters.

An analogue-type device for measuring speed has a system of Doppler filters, a mul-
tiplexing switch. a speed scan voltage generator and an indicator (Fig. 3.62). The
target signals are received from the antenna by the receiver and after conversion
go to resonance filters each of which is tuned to a certain value of the Doppler
frequency. As a result a signal having a frequency of Pdl passes through filter 91.
a signal with a frequency Pd; goes through filter 02 and so forth. With the known

number of filters and their resonance frequencies it is possible to determine target
speed Vr as

rdx

Vrt ‘ NE T . (3.112)

where Nf--filter number.

Automatic devices for the tracking of target
1 Cthcuotkwmuws- speed are based on the principle of tracking
‘1"' ?"V‘"u”° the Doppler frequency of the signals. The
target signals. after passing through the
receiver. go to a mixer where also there is
delivered a voltage of an AC frequency Fdin
(Fd1n--instrument Doppler frequency). As a
result of mixing the oscillations of Pd: and
Fdin' a difference frequency signal is pro-
duced:

 
    

M’d - Pa: - Pain- (3.113)

Fig. 3.62. Diagram of device for

measuring target speed The voltage of the frequency AFd goes to

the signal voltage forming unit which pro-

Kcy: l--System of Doppler filters; duces uc,o - KdAPd. The voltage “c.o is
2--Hultiplexing switch; 3-- then converted into the control voltage
Amplifier; é--Scan voltage which is used for controlling the frequency
generator; 5--Receiver of the generator Fdin- As a result. the

frequency of this generator is changed
toward a reduced difference frequency. Thus, in the tracking process the condition

for the equality of frequencies Fdin - Ed is net. The speed Vt: is read off a digi-
tal or arrow indicator which receives a voltage proportional to the current value of
the instrument Doppler frequency.

87

FKHI()FFICJAL USIZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The obtained values for the speed V“ can be used for solving the problems of guid-
ing missiles and fighters to air targets.

3.-%. Principles for the Control of Antiaircraft and Air-Launched Missiles

3.6.1. information from Aerodynamics

Aerodynamics is a science concerned with studying the laws of motion of bodies in
the atmosphere. The outstanding Soviet scientists N. Ye. Zhukovskiy, I. V. ﬂesh-
cherskiy and K. E. ‘l‘siokovskiy contributed greatly to the development of aero-
dynamics.

The flight of air—launched and sntiaircraft guided missiles occurs in the earth's
atmosphere (in the air) which is a mixture of gases characterized by their regular
laws.

GasLauc

The Boyle-Mariocte's Law. With a fixed temperature and mass of the gas. the prod-
uct of the numerical pressure and Vollllle values is a constant amount:

PV - const. (3.111.)

Consequently, with a reduction in gas pressure by a certain number of times volume
will increase by an equal number of times.

7hr: ng-Lussac's Law. with constant pressure the volume of a given mass of gas is
directly proportional to its absolute temperature:

v .. .v.r... 1573:. (3.115)

where V--gas volume at temperature '10- 273.15 K.
a - inf-volumetric expansion coefficient.

The given law states that the ratio of a certain gas volume to gas temperature is a
constant amount with fixed gas pressure and mass:

¥ - const. (3.116)

0n the basis of these two laws. a general gas law has been deduced or the equation
for the state of a gas' for a given mass of gas. the product of its volume by the
pressure divided by the corresponding absolute temperature is a constant amount:

a - 3’11 or w - RT, (3.117)

where R--gas constant the numerical value of which for the air equals 29.26 kg per
meter/kg per degree.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL (‘SE ONLY

The gas constant is viewed as the work of pressure forces applied to 1 kg of gas
with a change in its temperature by 1’.

The Mendeleyev-clapeyron equation:
H. (3.118)

where H--arbitrary gas mass;
3- R/u--specific gas constant depending upon molecular weight of gas.

Basic Laws of Aerodynamics

In studying the laws of motion of bodies in the air. the principle of reversibility
is employed, that is, the motion of a solid relative to the medium and the motion

of the medium relative to the solid will create an equal force effect if the veloci-
ty of the body's motion relative to the air in either instance is the same.

The motion of air can be steady or unsteady. Motion whereby velocities at fixed
points of space do not depend upon time is termed steady. But if air speed in
fixed points of space changes over time then motion is termed unsteady. These def-
initions also apply to other parameters of air flow (to pressure, density and temp-
erature).

ln aerodynamics, in studying the laws of motion of air, a flow is considered steady
and concepts of airstream and stream flow are employed.

Here, airstresm is the name given to a line the tangent at each point of which co-
incides with the direction of the speed at this point at a given moment of time.
Air flowing inside a tube the surface of which is formed by airstreams is called
the stream flow. Through the side walls of the stream flow there is no air current
and the stream flow can narrow. widen or adapt itself to the form of the body being
flowed around. The air current is represented as consisting of individual stream
flows.

The equation of the constancy of consunption (the continuity equation). The flow
rate of an incompressible fluid (gas) in a stream flow is inversely proportional to
the area of the cross-section of the stream flow (Fig. 3.63):

V S
l 2
_ . .... (3.119)
v2 51
or
Vls1 - V282 . VS - const. (3.120)

Fig. 3.63. On the deriving of
Bernoulli's equation

 

89

INJI‘OFFICIAI.lEﬂE(NﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'lu- t-quallun (3.120) is termed the equation for the constancy of mass consumption or
the tuntlnuity equation expressing the law of the conservation of mass as formulated

by .‘1. V. Lomonosov.

The energy equation (Bernoalli's equation) expresses the law of the conservation of
encrgy for a moving ideal fluid medium.

A flow of gas is examined with arbitrary cross-sections s, and $2, with the corres-
ponding parameters in these sections (P1. 1'). pl; P2. 1‘2. p2) and velocities V1, V2.
The total energy on the gas having a weight I: consists of the potential energy of
position l?state]. the intrinsic energy and the kinetic energy.

The potential energy of position characterizes the ability of the gas to perform
work with a change in the position of the center of gravity of gas weight relative
to a hypothetical level

59 - nlghl.

The potential pressure energy is the work of the pressure forces 9,51 on a path over
a unit of time equal to the velocity Vl:

up-rsyv P-m

The intrinsic energy characterizes the capacity of the gas to perform work with a
change in temperature:

Ein ' CVTLNISI.

where (ﬁr-specific heat of gas with constant volume:
Tl--ahsoiute gas temperature.

The kinetic energy describes the capacity of a moving gas to perform work:

"I.I’:
F: ——n.

The tut-11 specific energy possessed by a unit of gas weight in section 1 and ii is:

1- l" 1- v’
’2' HI. : 3-" “4-1,; : .— -- pk. : -- Irv/W .--? (3.121)

The expression (3.121) is termed Bernoulli's equation or the equation of the conser-
vation of energy.

In .‘u't't'pllng h. - hz (compressibility of the gas is absent: p1 -p2 -p; Cv'i'l -CV‘12 -
CVT), Wu obtain

| ‘ V" o
if} I ,.. , "_1 F ,.. or 21“.” m... (3.122)

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where oV2/2—-velocity head or dynamic pressure.

For an incompressible gas. the total of the static and dynamic pressures in any
cross-section of a steady flow is a constant amount. In practical terms this means
that any increase in the flow rate leads to a drop of pressure in the flow and
vice versa.

The equation of motion. The product of a body's weight by its acceleration equals
the force applied to it:

mg - P (3.123)

Ol‘

F" ll.V.—M.V. " "'s(Vv—VI)- (3.12“)

where ng--the weight of the air repelled by the body in 1 second;
V--vclocity of air flow.

If the flow velocity V] prior to impacting with the body was greater than after the
interaction with it. then the force F checks the body's motion.

With the compressibility of a gas. a change in the speed of motion leads to a change
in the intrinsic energy of the gas. Compressibility is also characterized by the
speed of sound. with flow velocities more than 0.5-0.6 the speed of sound, gas com-
pressibility increases. As the criterion for assessing the compressibility of a
gas, the ratio of the rate of flow to the speed of sound is used (the Mach--
Hayevskiy number M):

V
a u z , (3.125)

Hith the motion of a body in an air medium at a speed equal to the speed of sound.
leading-edge shockwaves arise and as a result of this the nature of the flow of the
body through the current is abruptly changed.

The flow is called subsonic if Hi<l and with H:>l the flow is called supersonic.
Correspondingly a distinction is made between subsonic and supersonic speeds of
flight.

Air Flow Around Bodies

The flowing of air around bodies is accompanied by the introduction of disturbances
into the (low and these are transmitted in all directions as small changes in the
density and pressure in the designated medium. The rate of propagation of the

ninor disturbances equals the speed of sound.
Hith V <a (Fig. 3.6ba). the sound wave is able to escape forward from the body and
at a certain distance from it causes a deformation in the jet stream. If VI-a.

the disturbances will not be propagated ahead of the body and the flow ahead of the
body's motion is undisturbed.

91

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hith V >a (Fig. 3.64b), a cone of small disturb-
ances is formed and this is an envelope of sound
waves. Inside the-shock cone there are changes

in pressure and density but beyond it the flow re-
mains undisturbed. The angle at the apex of the

shock cone depends upon the flow velocity and the
speed of sound:

9 - slum -$- - ntsln 7:7. (3. 126)

 

With the flowing of a supersonic flow around
. . . f
Fig 3 6“ b031:8:1°u around bodies, in representing an infinitely large

a--Hith speed < speed of sound; quantity of material points, shock waves occur.

--H l > s d f s, d
b it' speed >0e 0 can A shock wave is a concentration of sound waves a

short distance away from a body. Ahead of the body an area of increased tempera-
ture is formed in which the local velocity of sound is greater than in the undis—
turbed flow. As one moves away from the body the concentration of sound waves is
reduced and the shock wave turns into a boundary wave of small disturbances. The
thickness of the shock wave is around 10'5 m. In the wave, velocity is reduced
while density and pressure grow. The change in the parameters of the wave leads to
the rise of an area of compressed air behind it (a shock wave). The form and posi-
tion of the shock wave depend upon the shape of the head of the body (Fig. 3.65).

In terms of shape, a distinction is made

' .29 V- , n W b between normal (lines a, b) and oblique
; ‘E- ._-.. ——- shock waves. A normal shock wave is
2;: @__- positioned perpendicular to the flow.
7:23" "2" The flow velocity V1 ahead of the shock
W a and behind the shock V2 is related by

the dependence:
Fig. 3.65. Dependence of shape of shock

wave upon shape of head of body: vlvz - air, (3.127)
a--Normal shock wave; b, c—-0bllque
shock wave where acr-critica1 velocity of sound.

Beyond a normal shock wave V <a, for an oblique shock wave Vi <acr (Vﬂ--nornal
velocity component of oblique shock wave).

The speed of flight at which local shock waves arise is termed the critical speed
and the H number of flight "cr' The occurrence of shock waves leads to an abrupt
increase in drag and to vibration in the aircraft.

Forces Effecting a Missile in Flight

In analyzing the forces effecting a missile in flight, wind-body and body-axis co-
ordinate systems are used (Fig. 3.66). Here it is assumed

v-0+a, ($13)

92

FOR 0F11C1A1.USIZC”ULY
FOR OWTWCJAL USIZCNHLY

where v——missile pitch angle;

e--slant angle of velocity vector;
a--angle of attack;

0 " B+¢. (3.129)

where o--yaw angle;
B--slip angle;
¢-heading angle.

A missile during flight experiences
longitudinal acceleration

.d_v

 

w, dt (3.130)
and normal acceleration
an - év. (3.131)

Fig. 3.66. Missile wind-body and body- where 0-d8/dt.
axis coordinate systems

Hith normal acceleration, the missile's
trajectory will have a curve radius of:

”'T'ﬁ (3.132)

or a trajectory curve

(3.133)

A missile's translatory motion occurs under the effect of force 5 created by the
rocket engine. This force is called the reactive force or the thrust of the rocket

engine. It is directed along the longitudinal axis ox of the sissile (Fig. 3.67).

Thrust is the reaction (counteraction) of the gases escaping from the nozzle of the
jet engine to its walls and is manifested in the form of pressure fo’ces. Its
amount is determined by the resultant of out-of-balance forces on the surface of

the combustion chamber. The dependence of thrust upon the properties of the rocket
engine and the external conditions is:

P - % V8+ (pc+phls¢), (3.131.)

where Gn-second gas consumption;
V8-velocity of gas exhaust on cross-section of engine nozzle;
g--acce1eration of free-falling body;
Pc--gas pressure in nozzle cross-section;
ph--atmospheric pressure at altitude a;
sc--are of nozzle outlet section.

93

FOI(HHNCLALIIHEOBHJ'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The amount of thrust determines the range and speed of the missile's flight. The

desire to control the range and speed of flight leads to the controlling of thrust
and this represents certain technical difficulties.

Specific thrust is the ratio of the rocket
engine's thrust to the fuel flow rate:

9."- .5? (3.135)

Specific thrust indicates the effective use
of fuel in the given rocket engine (an in-

dicator of fuel quality and the advanced
engine design).

 

Fig. 3.67. Forces effecting missile
_in flight: _

F¥-thrust; G --gravity; R--tgtal _
aerodynamic orce; Q--drag; Y--lift; Engines which operate during short time in

-_ _ tervals, instead of specific thrust are
2 cross wind force characterized by a specific impulse of

thrust equal to the product of the thrust

by the engine operating time. The thrust is considered as the average over the
fuel combustion time.

The fbrce of gravity is the force of the rocket's attraction for the earth. This

equals the product of the rocket's weight by the acceleration of a free-falling
body:

GP - mpg. (3.136)

For the range of altitudes of air-launched and antiaircraft missiles, the amount of

g can be accepted as constant and equal to 9.81 m/secz. Then. at any moment of
time,

I
Gram—.50. (1m, (3.137)

where cp.0--the initial missile weight (the nissile's weight at launching);
t--operating time of missile engine.

The direction of the force 5} Coincides with the direction of the earth's radius
drawn to a given point while the force of gravity operates in a vertical plane.

Thrust and force of gravity are applied to the missile's center of mass (CH [in the
diagrams [of I).

The motion of the missile through the air causes the appearance of an aerodynamic
force which depends upon the parameters of the medium. the speed of flight and the
missile design features. The appearance of an aerodynamic force is caused by the
resistance which the air medium puts up to the missile's motion.

94

FORi0FFﬂ]Al.USE(NHLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ON! ‘t’

The total aerodynamic force 3 is the resultant of all the aerodynamic forces effect-
ing each element of the body's (missile's) surface. It is applied to a point called
the center of pressure (CP) [in the diagrams ]:

2 . (3.130

where p--air mass density;
V-speed of body's motion relative to the air;
s--ares of body's surfaces

cR--dimenaionless (aerodynamic) coefficient depending upon angle a and other
factors.

The direction of R depends upon the shape of the body and the a and B angles.

with the motion of the rocket at a certain angle to an incoming flow (with the
presence of the angle of attack a and the slip angle 8), the total aerodynamic

force can be broken down into three components which are directed along the axes of
the missile's bodybaxes coordinate system.

Drag is a component of the total aerodynamic force operating in an opposite direc-
tion to the on axis:

0-Cl-W'I2-S. (3.139)

where Cx--dreg coefficient (a dimensionless value which depends upon the niesile'a
shape and its speed of flight);

S--the area of the greatest cross-section perpendicular to the incoming flow
of air;

DV2/2--velocity head.

From formula (3.139) it follows that drag changes with a change in the velocity
head. Hith VI-const.. the amount of Q changes with the altitude of the missile's
flight.

The coefficient 6, depends basically upon the K number, the angle of attack and the
slip angle. The greatest change in Cx occurs in the range of H- 1.

Lift is a component of the total aerodynamic force and is perpendicular to the mis-
sile's velocity vector and is directed along the ox axis:

y .. cry-[2.8. (3. 160)

where Cy--1ift coefficient.

The amount of the Cy coefficient is a function of the H number, the angle of attack
and the missile's control-surface angle GP. With 6-0, the coefficient cy-o. An
increase in a causes increased lift. This occurs until a critical value of the
angle of attack ocr is reached and after this there is a flow breakaway and the
above-indicated dependences are disrupted. In the area of flight angles of attack
the dependence Cy(s) can be considered as linear. Then:

95

I‘IICIﬂﬂClAI.lEﬂB(N'LY
FOR OI-‘HCIAL USE ONLY

0, - ntgn,

where tg n--the steepness of the change in the amount of cy with a change in angle
c. Having designated tg n-Cy. expression (3.160) can be written:

VI
”lg—Sm (3.11.1)

The presence of lift causes the flight of an aerodynamic vehicle in the air and de-
ternines its naneuvering properties. The anount of lift is controlled by changing
the angle of attack. with o-O, lift-0. The minimum amount “min whereby hori-
zontal flight of the missile is possible is:

""“ V" .57.; ' (3.1‘2)

With the maximum possible angle of attack for horizontal flight. a missile should
have a velocity:

"2'6“
5—96-

V-In\ 4 l’/_

In practical terns the flight of air-launched and particularly antiaircrsft ais-
siles occurs with a clinb in altitude and this requires that “Minin-

‘l‘he cross-wind force is a component of the total aerodynamic force directed perpen-
dicular to the missile's velocity vector V along the or axis:

z-c.$’-'s. ' (3.143)

where (Ir-the coefficient of the cross-wind force.

For axisyrnmetrical missiles. Z is determined by factors analogous to lift. The
cross-wind force changes with a change in the heading angle.

From Fig. 3.67 we can see that the center of mass (CM) is located closer to the
missile's nose than is the center of pressure (CP). Such a position of these points
creates the misaile's stable equilibrium. With a change in the angle of attack. the
po=ition of the center of pressure changes. With an increase in a, the center of

pressure comes closer to the center of mass and this makes stability worse.

The forces effecting a missile in flight create conditions for controlling its nove-
ment for heading and pitch. For controlling a nissile's motion along a curvalinear
trajectory, it is essential to apply to the missile a certain control force which
creates an acceleration "clo directed toward the nissile's closing with the Itine-
u_aatic trajectory (gig. 3.68). The components of this acceleration are the nornal
"n and tangential "r accelerations:

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wclo ' "11""?

The component U, is directed along the velocity vector V and does not cause a change
in the direction of the missile's motion. The component “n operates normally (per-
pendicularly) to the velocity vector. Being applied to the missile's center of
mass. it causes a change in the direction of motion. The control of the missile'a

flight comes down to controlling the amount of Ru:

vn-vé.

yhere é - de/dt--the angular rotation rate of the missile's velocity vector. Since
6 - V/Rt (R,--the curve radius of the kinematic trajectory), then for moving along
the set trajectory the missile should have:

V2
"n reg ' i; . (3.110(0)

Over a certain time of motion, the missile will cover a distance:

' z
I, - 5 Fl... am,

   

Fig. 3.68. Components of closure Fig. 3.69. On determining the total
acceleration aerodynamic moment and its components

In knouing the required normal accelerations. we can determine the required normal
g-loads:

"n.
np.req ' __1f25 ’

The values of the required g-loads depend upon the adopted guidance method and the
nature of the target's motion. They are the greatest (for the adopted guidance
method) with rapid rates for a change in the target motion coordinates. It has

been established that for guiding a missile to a maneuvering target, the normal 3-
loads should exceed the target g-loads by at least double. A missile develops the
maximum possible g-loads at a maximum speed and the maximum possible control-
surface angles. These g-loads are called the available g-loads. Control of the
missile's flight is possible under the condition that nn_.v ’“n.req'

97

FOI'OFIICIAI.USEGMNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ala-mlymunic Moments

Fun-m; uffcrting a missile in flight and applied at points not coinciding with the
u-uLt-f “1 names (CH) cause the appearance of moments. in investigating the laws of
motion of a missile, the movement of its CH and rotation relative to the CH are ex-
amined (Pig. 3.69). For this the total aerodynamic force R is assumed applied to
the point of the (m and its action causing the rotation of the missile relative to
the CM is called the moment:

V.

2 sn. (3.11.5)

 

Mam-4:. '

where h-—the arm of applying force R the amount of which depends upon the II number,
the angle of attack and other factors. '

'I'otal aerodynamic ment is a moment created by the total aerodynamic force. In
considering that th/L-m and there is a coefficient of total aerodynamic moment.
while (“a certain constant characteristic line to which the m coefficient is re-
lated. it is possible to write: -

M - mlg‘l.

The total aerodynamic moment can be represented by the components
.ﬁ-- 7%.. + My. I Ju.-..
where Mn, N“, Hzr-the moments of roll, yaw and pitch, respectively.

The moments are considered positive if the direction of the moment vector coincides

with the direction of the axis of the coordinate system and negative with the oppo-
site direction.

Each of the components of total aerodynamic monent is represented by the total of
the stabilizing, damping and control moments

M,_ — M',’_ + Mr" 4. up... my;
M" - u: + Mg“ 4- M35“. (3-146)
Mh~ A424 M‘f" + Me“.

The stabilizing (righting) mnent is the name given to the moment working to turn
the missile toward a reduction in the angle of attack (slip, roll) caused by ex-
ternal disturbances.

The damping (extinguishing) momenta are dynamic moments arising with the appearance
of an angular missile rotation rate. Their amount depends upon the conditions of
the missile's flowing through the external air stream and the conditions for the

flowing of fluid and gases inside the missile, in accord with which a distinction
is made between the external and internal momenta.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Skewed airflow mt is a ascent arising with the nonsylletrical flow of the missile
through the air stress. The basic reasons for its appearance are various conditions
of wing flow, flow wash on the control surfaces, the blanketing of one of the wings
and so forth:

v.
’-
MS. "M ITS“ (3.141)

where sxlkmuserodynanic coefficient for skewed airflow nosent.

Control mnts are moments created by the niesile controls relative to its center
of sass. 0n air-launched and sntiaircraft sissiles. aerodynamic control surfaces
serve as the controls. In the saving of the controls fron the neutral position by
a certain angle 69, a control surface lift Yp arises (Fig. 3.70) which with the
presence of the an ‘9 creates a control nonent:

a?“ - YPLP.

Since

'V’ Vs
r0"cy,stO " ‘C.’ ”'1‘,”

where Cénaerodynuuc coefficient for control surface lift;
Sr-control surface area, hence,

m-qnl‘glsu, (3.148)

Control nonents can also be created by
7 interceptors [spoilers]. by pivoted
" chubere and control nozzles.

Stability and Controllability of Missiles

A missile steady flight node is charac-
terized by a static equilibriu- whereby
the total of the nonents effecting the

missile equals zero. liere the angles of
attack, slip and roll have fixed values.

 

Fig. 3.70. For deter-ining control
mount

Static stability is the niasile's ability
to recover a disrupted equilibriu after
the halting of the effects of disturbances.

A distinction is nade between pitch stability (longitudinal stability). heading
stability (directional stability) and roll stability. The degree of stability de-
pends largely upon the reciprocal position of the Di and CP.

The condition of stability is:

6m. - .21 < o 0’ 7.- - sl' 4 0. (3.1109)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A missile is stable if with the effect of disturbances the increment in the angle
of attack and the increment in the coefficient of stabilizing moment have opposite

signs.

Controllability of a missile is the ability of a missile to respond to a deviation
of the controls from a neutral position. By a missile's controllability one some-
times understands the ability of a missile to travel along a kinematic trajectory.

In controlling a missile there is a change in the control surface angle and this
leads to the appearance of the control moment

COD

“:1 - uglss.

As a result the missile turns by a certain angle whereby it comes into equilibrium
so that:

Mg} + age" - o.

The angle of attack whereby the missile is in a state of equilibrium is called the
balanced angle of attack mg, while the dependence °6 and “8 is the balance depend-
ence.

An increase in controllability is achieved by an increase in the control moment and
a reduction in the stabilizing moment. For this the various aerodynamic systems of
the missiles and the corresponding controls are employed.

3.4.2. Missile Guidance Methods and Control Systems

The guidance of a guided missile to a moving target is a continuous process of the
automatic control of its flight. As a result the missile is brought to the target
impact area and destroys it. Control is provided by the guidance (control) system.

in controlling a flight. a certain condition (law) is set which determines the tra-
jectory for the missile's motion. As such a condition, for example, it is possible
to use the equality of the missile's angular coordinates to the target's angular
coordinates; the absence of angular rotation on the missile--target line and so
forth.

The condition or law for the closing of the missile with the target is generally
termed the guidance nethod. The guidance method imposes certain demands on the
nature of the missile's morion or, in other words. establishes a connection between
the law of motion of the missile and target. The trajectory along which the missile
moves in carrying out the requirements of the guidance method is called the kine-
matic trajectory.

In the process of the nissile's flight. under the effect of a large number of fac-
tors and with a change in the airborne target's position in space, there is a dis-

ruption of the given law of closing and the missile moves off the kinematic trajec-
tory.

100

FOR Ol-‘ﬂCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

The disruption in the relationships imposed by the guidance method on the law of
the eissilc's motion is called the mismatch parameter (the control parameter). In
accord with the given definition, the mismatch parameter is:

A(t) - A(t) - 3(t). (3.150)
where A(t). B(t)--the set and actual laws of the missile'a motion. .

The guidance system measures the mismatch parameter and generates control commands
for the missile's flight. Under the effect of the control commands the control sur-
faces of the missile are moved and as a result the missile changes direction to re-
duce the mismatch parameter.

The type of the mismatch parameter depends upon the adopted guidance method. Uith -
certain methods the mismatch parameter is the difference in the angular coordinates
of the missile and target, and in others the linear deviation of the missile from

the target's line of sight. It can also be the angular rotation rate of the
missile--target line and so forth.

1f the requirements of the guidance method are met in guiding the missile to the
target. the mismatch parameter equals zero and the missile moves along the kinematic
(calculated) trajectory. With the nonfulfillment of these requirements. a guidance
error occurs which reduces the probability of a target hit.

The mismatch parameter is the input action of the guidance system. The mismatch
parameter is measured by the ground or onboard devices. As a result of measuring
it. a mismatch signal is generated in an analogue or digital form and this comprises
the basis of the control commands

uA(t) - KB(c). (3.151)
where K--proportionality factor.

The adopted guidance method and, as a consequence of this. the mismatch parameter
determine the structure of the guidance system.

The best is considered to be a guidance method whereby the trajectory of the mis-
sile's motion has the smallest curve and the instrumentation for the guidance sys-
tem is the simplest; the required range of fire is provided with the given accuracy.

Depending upon the conditions imposed by the guidance method on the misaile's posi-
tion in space. a distinction is made between two- and three—point guidance methods

(Fig. 3.71).

Two-Point Guidance Methods

Two-point is the name given to guidance methods whereby the reciprocal position in

space is determined for two points, the missile and the target. These methods are

applied in homing systems. They include: the iirect guidance method, the stern
chase method and the methods of parallel and proportional approach.

101

FOI.0F11CIAI.USE1MNLY
FOR‘OFTNCJAL.US£IMNLV

 

m

Lead
Methods

     
 

Parallel
Approach
Method

Direct Stern
Guidance Chase
Hethod Hethod

          

Method
with

Variable
Lead
Factor

     

Fig. 3.71. Classification of guidance methods

The direct guidance method is a method whereby in the process of the notion of the
missile to the target. the condition is net that the sissile's longitudinal axis is
constantly directly toward the target. This condition requires an equality of the

aissile's pitch angle‘oto the slope angle e of the nissile--target line:

v ' c. (3.152)

Prom formula (3.152) and Fig. 3.72 it follows that the aisaatch para-eter with this

nethod is:

Av - C- Va (30153)

In the process of nissile guidance there sust he a constant change in the aaount of

the angle Av. that is, the angle between the direction of the niasile‘s ox; axis
and the P-T (siasile--target) line. For this it is possible to employ an onhoard

neter (seeker) which generates the nisnatch voltage

uA - KAAv. (3.151.)

where K -proportionality coefficient.

102

FOI‘OITWC]AI.USE¢DN&N
F0R1OFF1C1AI.USEZ(MVLY

   

Fig. 3.72. The obtaining of the mismatch Fig. 3.73. The mismatch parameter with

parameter with the direct guidance the direct guidance method with a fixed
method (a) and a diagram of its measuring lead angle
design (b)

For guidance using this method on the missile a tracking seeker is employed and its
oxk axis is lined up with the P-T line. The the appearance of a tracking error 5v
in the seeker's tracking system a voltage is generated which is sent to the device
controlling the position of the sensitive element (the antenna or optical system of

the seeker) causing the oak axis to line up with the P-T line. In this manner the
direction to the target relative to the ox] axis of the missile is determined.

A voltage proportional to the Av angle can be taken from the moving contact of a
potentiometer located on the missile's housing (Fig. 3.72). The moving contact is
mechanically connected to the sensor of the Av angle located on the rotation axis
of the seeker's metering element.

The voltage uov is sent to a computer where it is employed in generating the mis-
sile control cot-ands. Under the effect of the control consands. the control sur-
faces turn to a certain angle and as a result of this the missile alters course so
that its longitudinal axis coincides with the direction of the missile-target line.

With the direct guidance method, with the approach of the missile to the target, the

reguired g-loads increase greatly. After reaching the maximum possible angle of at-
tack the missile goes off the kinematic trajectory. As a result there is a signifi-
cant error.

1he method of direct guidance with a fixed lead angle requires a fixed lead angle
for the missile's longitudinal ox axis and the missile-~target line (Fig. 3.73).
The given condition can be written thus:
q - q°° (3.155)
where q--the current value of the angle between the missile's longitudinal axis and
the misaile--target line;
qo--the set lead angle.

With a disruption of the equality of (3.155) there is a mismatch parameter

Aq - QO-q. (3.156)
103

FOI‘OF11C1A1.USE1DNIY
fOR‘OFFNJAl.USEZONLX

Its value can be measured by the tracking coordinator which lines up the oak axis
with the missile--target range line. The voltage uq which is proportional to the
value of this angle is taken off the moveable contact of the potentiometer mounted
on the missile housing. For obtaining the voltage uA(t) it is possible to employ a
voltage level comparison circuit which receives the voltage uq lIaq and the voltage
uq(t). As is seen from formula (3.156), the mismatch voltage s:

“WVW«—um-Mm-um. OJW)

where a--proportionality coefficient.

The voltage obtained in accord with formula (3.157) can be sent to a computer for
obtaining the control commands. Under their effect the missile's control surfaces
are moved to certain angles and as a result of this the missile develops normal ac-

celerations and comes out on the kinematic trajectory. Here an equality of the
angles q(t) -qo is established.

The direct guidance method with a fixed lead angle ensures the missile's moving
along a trajectory having the smallest curve.

The stern chase (pure pursuit) method is a method of guiding a missile to a target
whereby in the process of the missile's flight its velocity vector coincides with
the direction of the missile-~target line 9- c (Fig. 3.7“). From a definition of
the method it follows that the angular deviation of the missile's velocity vector
V from the direction to the target represents the mismatch parameter:

q, - c-e. ' (3.158)

where 0—-slant angle of missile velocity vector.

   

Fig. 3.76. Mismatch parameter with Fig. 3.75. Mismatch parameter with
stern chase method parallel approach method

As is seen from Fig. 3.74, for guiding a missile using this method it is essential
to measure the current value of the q angle. Its measurement requires a knowledge
of the direction of the V vector which can be determined by the power featherer

which orients the oxk axis of the coordinator for the incoming flow (for the vector

106

FORiOFﬁKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of :he missile's air speed). The coordinator forms an equiaignal zone anere the
direction of the equisignals is the oak axis.

In the nissile's flight, the coordinator measures the target deviation angle from
the equisignal direction and generates a voltage

a. .- u" -a 5%. (3.159).

Under the effect of the commands, the missile moves in such a manner that the mis-
match angle equals zero and the condition of ideal contact is satisfied.

The stern chase method with a fixed Lead angle requires a motion of the nissile
whereby its velocity vector anticipates the miesile-target line by a set constant
angle (a lead angle qpo). The equation of ideal contacts is:

‘Ipo - e-e. (3.160)

For realizing the method, like the stern chase method. it is essential to determine
the position of the misaile's velocity vector.

with guidance using this method. the missile develops smaller normal accelerations
and this increases dynamic accuracy. however. inherent to this method are the same
drawbacks as for the stern chase method.

The method of parallel approach is the name given to one vhere the missile-target
line in the process of the flight of the missile toward the target moves parallel to
the initial position. In other words, the method requires a missile position where
the angular rate of rotation of the missile--target line should equal zero. that is,

i - 0 or 3D - 0. (3.161)
The expression (3.161) is an ideal contact equation. From Fig. 3.75 it can be seen
that the given method is a lead method. In the process of the target's movement

toward the target, its velocity vector anticipates the missile--target line by the
angle

“1 - arcsin [2% sin qt], (3.162)

where qt--the angle between the target velocity vector and the direction of the
9-? line.

The mismatch parameter can be:
Aé I c;
A o (—600; (3.163)

Vt
Aq - ‘11 -arcein 7 sin qt .

105

FOR OFFlChkLIﬁEEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The simplest for instrumentation would be a variation whereby the mismatch parame-
ter is the angular rate of rotation of the missile--target line. For measuring

the amount of c the missile carries a tracking coordinator which constantly lines up
the coordinator's oxk axis with the direction to the target. "ith the appearance of
an angular rate of rotation of the P-T line, the coordinator generates a mismatch_

voltage:

. \
u.'K.g.
l I

(3.166)
where Ké--proportionality coefficient.
The voltage ué is sent to a computer for generating the control cmmunds.

The method of proportional approach (proportional navigation) is a method where the
angular rate of rotation of the missile velocity vector 0 should be proportional to

the angular rate of rotation c of the missile--target line:
6.. KJ, (3.165)

where K--proportionality coefficient (navigation constant).
The nonfulfillment of condition (3.165) leads to the rise of a mismatch parameter:
Ai -—K¢'_o'. (3.166)

Realizing the method (Fig. 3.76) requires measuring the values of E and 5. The
first of these can be measured by the missile's onboard tracking coordinator which
in the process of tracking the target generates a voltage ugI-at (a—-proportionality
coefficient). The measuring of the amount of 0 directly necessitates the carrying
of a featherer and this leads to large mistakes in measuring the angular rotation
rate of the missile velocity vector. The amount 6 can be measured indirectly.

Since

wvav, hence a- if}. (3.167)

Thus, for obtaining the value of 5. one measures the amount of the missile's normal
acceleration and with the known value of missile speed this makes it possible to ob-
tain the voltage:

W
“a - Oi"- (3.168)

where 8--proportionality coefficient.

The amount of H" is measured by the linear acceleration transducer (LAT).

The mismatch voltage is:

U“ - K“; —I‘ . (3.169)

106

FOI.0F1i(1Al.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This voltage is part of the control nomad in moving the missile control surfaces
in such a manner that with the appearance of a rate of turning in the missile—
target she. the missile changes direction whereby the velocity vector is turned at
a rate -K;_.

but: I s,

n.

0?,

   
   
   

Fig. 3.77. Kinematic trajectory with
- matching-curve method

In guiding the missile by the given
Fig. 3.76. Mismatch parameter with the uthod, guidance errors occur caused by

proportional approach method (a) and a . the influence of the missile's weight,
diagram of the device used to generate the nose' cone and the longitudinal ac-
the control co-nands (h) celerations. For compensating for them

the voltage u' incorporates the appropri-

Key: lnCoordinator; 2—Hissile housing ate c ents

The normal required g-loads of a missile are:

.525}; (3.170)

The proportionality coefficient K is considered equal to several units. Its amount
changes depending upon the direction of the attack. with a head-on attack the
amount is the greatest and with an attack in the rear hemisphere. the least.

From (3.165) it follows that with K-l. the method of proportional approach corres-
ponds to the stern chase method and with K--° to the parallel approach method .

Three-Point Guidance Methods

Three-point guidance methods are those where the reciprocal position of three points
(the guidance point, the missile and the target) is determined in space. Among
these methods are the matching curve method and the lead methods.

The matching curve method (the line-of-sight method) requires a movement of the
missile whereby the missile at any moment of time should be on the line between the
guidance point and the target (on the target's line of sight). From Fig. 3.77 and

the definition of the method, it follows that the coordinates for the points of the
kinematic trajectory 5k- 8k for any moment of time should be:

6k ' ec
} (3.171)
at ' 3tv

107

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 5‘, Bt—-target elevation and azimuth.
with the deviating of the missile from the OT line, a mismatch parameter arises:

AC - Ct-ep; (3 172)
AB - 8c- ﬁe

For determining the mismatch parameter, it is essential to measure the current
values of the target and missile angular coordinates. This problem is solved by
the elevation and azimuth target and missile tracking devices as which radars and
optical sights (including television-optical ones) can be employed.

The measured values for the coordinates cc. :9. at and 8P can be put into a deduc-
tion device as a result of which the mismatch voltages are obtained:

“As I cht; -
(3.173)
“A8 I KgAB.

Under the effect of the voltages ubc, udg there is a moving of the pitch and heading
surfaces and the missile comes back to the guidance point-~target line. however, as
is seen from Fig. 3.77, this does not ensure equal precision of aiming the SAM
[surface-to-air missile] with various firing ranges. With an increase in missile
range with the same value of As (A8), the significance of the missile's linear de-
viation from the OT line increases, that is, guidance accuracy deteriorates.

For obtaining equal firing accuracy regardless of range, the mismatch parameter is
represented as the missile's linear deviation from the guidance point--target line:

ha; - DP sin At;

(3.176)
hAB ' DP sin A3.
Since AC, AB are very small, the expression (3.175) can be written as:
Ms ' 01;“;
(3.175)
has 3 DPAB.

In accord with formula (3.175), the mismatch voltages are formed and these comprise
the basis for the control commands of the SAN flight.

The control commands incorporate components to compensate for the guidance errors
caused by the influence of the missile's weight, by the inertia of the control sys-
tem and so forth.

Moreover, sometimes a damping signal is a command component as this improves the
process of bringing the missile back to the kinematic trajectory.

As follows from formula (3.176), missile guidance using the matching-curve method
does not require the measuring of target range and this is a plus for it.

108

FOR‘OFFEJAI.US£(M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lead methods are methods where the current point of the kinematic trajectory is
ahead of the guidance point—target line by a certain angle. The amount of the
lead is proportional to the rate of change of the target angular coordinates. In
controlling 'he miesile's flight in two reciprocally perpendicular planes, the lead
angles are (in a polar coordinate system):

‘1 " at‘clo‘
. (3.176)
31 ' (3t c0“ ethcloo

where tclouthe missile-target closing time.

AD

Dt-D .
Considering that tclo - 4A1) - “(Am-the rate of change of the missile-«target
distance). we can write:

5:
It. -—. ADD;
‘ so "
--—""§'" 500,.

ha‘ an

In a linear form, the amount of the lead equals:
'1
“ ~ ’ ab '
a, - moo.
AD

From formula (3.177) it follows that the amount of the lead is yroportional to the
missile-target distance and with AD-O it equals zero. Thus. the kinematic tra-
jectory with the lead method runs through the target's location point.

(3.177)

5 Mg
if) '6': :15 'C" 1" ”9'933100 (3.177) are called the lead coeffi

cients. A distinction is drawn between methods for leads with variable and fixed
coef f icients .

The mult ipl iera

The lead methods can be realized by using ground (onbosrd aircraft) radar and opti-
cal range finder devices (sights) as with the matching-curve method. The values of
‘t' 8c and AD can he obtained by the differentiating of the corresponding amounts.

Hith missile guidance using the given methods, the trajectory curve is reduced and
this increases range and accuracy of firing.

Control Systems

The control systems for air-launched and antiaircraft missiles are an aggregate of
elements ensuring the preparation. launch and guidance of the missiles to the tar-
get. The guidance system which controls the missile's flight is a part of the con-

trol system. A distinction made between the following systems is recognised:
co-uand telecontrol. teleguidance, homing and hybrid (Fig. 3.78).

Conn-and telecontrol systems are those in which control of the nissile's flight is
carried out by co-snds generated at the control point and transmitted to the mis-
sile over the co-and radio line.

109

[-0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Control Systems of Antiaircraft
and Air-Launched Missiles

    

 

   

Comand Telecontrol
Systems

TY-I
Systems

Fig. 3.78. Control systems for antiaircraft and air-launched missiles

Depending upon the method of obtaining information about the target, a distinction.
is made between the com-and telecontrol systems of types I and II (TY-I. 11-11). In

the TY-l system, the target coordinates are metered by devices located at the con-
trol post and in the TY-II system, -onboard the missile (Fig. 3.79).

g 7e The TY-I COIIIIM system. The equipment
\ '34! ‘ 741' of the control post using target desig-
of“ ,"' nation date or independently detect the

‘ (f: targets. In the process of automatic or
M .4‘ manual tracking, the target coordinates
x i /i}4 [I are measured (more often in a spherical
. " , coordinate system). The metered coordi-
, Ligfﬁ s [:1 , |ﬁ s nate values are sent to the coated
--_ j [1;] _ 55 generating unit (0611). Using these data
a ; the moment of the missile's launching
can be determined. The uissile locks on
Fig. 3.79. Diagrams of comnd systems to automatic tracking and as a result its

type I (a) and type II (b): current coordinates are calculated the

l--Target tracking unit; 2-Hissile values of which are sent to the 060.

$233323“; 3--CGU; ('"M; The 060 is an analogue or digital type

5 computer. Its task is to determine the
moment of the missile launch and to generate the control commands and single com-
mands.

The cal-sand radio link (KPY) is a multichannel cousunications link used to convert
the col-sands into radio signals and transmit them to the missiles being guided to
the target. In simultaneously transmitting a large nun-her of comands in the radio
link there can be the converting of the co-and voltages and encoding. As a result
each of the transmitted con-ands has an identification digit (safety digit). The
equipment for converting and encoding the conands is located at the control post
(the transmitting line) while the decoding equipment is onboard the missile (the
receiving path).

110

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The operating range of the KPY depends upon the technical parameters of the equip-
ment in the transmitting and receiving paths:

1', .00)

Tim” > on"... (3.178)

where Pt.k --power of KPY transmitters;
cl. EZ--directivity factors for antennas of KP! transmitter and receiver;
xkpy--operating wave length of KPY;
Pre nin--sensitivity of onboard receiver of command transmission link;
Dctp max--maximum firing range.

After decoding in the onboard equipment, the control commands go to the missile
autopilot and control surfaces. controlling their position.

The merits of the TY-I command system are the possibility of realizing the matching-
curve method and the lead methods. the sufficient guidance accuracy in firing at
short and medium ranges, the possibility of guiding several missiles to a single
target and the comparative simplicity of the onboard equipment; the drawbacks are
the poor guidance accuracy with an increase in firing range and the large amount

of equipment at the control center.

The TY-II command system differs from TY-I in the fact that the device for obtain-
ing information on the parameters of the target's motion (the coordinator) is lo-
cated on the missile. The target data after preliminary transformation and process-
ing by the onboard equipment are transmitted over the radio link to the control
center and are fed into the CCU. Here also are received the missile coordinates
measured by the control center sights. The further process is analogous to control
in the TY-l system.

The merits of the TY-II system are the high accuracy of guidance which does not de-
pend upon firing range. the process of target selection and identification and the
possibility of guiding several missiles simultaneously to one target; the drawback
is the more complicated missile-carried equipment.

Teleguidanoe systems are missile control systems in which the missile control com-
mands are formed on the missile. Their amount is proportional to the deviation of
the missile from the equisignal direction created by the radar sights of the con-

trol center (Fig. 3.80). Such systems are sometimes called radio-beam guidance
systems. They may be single- or double-beam.

Homing systems are systems in which control over the missile's flight is carried
out by control commands generated onboard the missiles. Here the information
needed for generating them is produced by the onboard equipment (coordinator).
Such systems employ homing missiles where the control center is not involved in
controlling their flight.

In terms of the type of energy utilised to obtain information on the parameters of
the target's motion, active, semi-active and passive homing systems are recognized.

lll

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘-

   

Fig. 3.80. Diagrams of teleguidance Fig. 3.81. Diagrams of homing systems:
systems:
a--Single-beam; b--Double-beam;
l--Unit for tracking target and
guiding missile; 2—Launchers;
3--Hissile guidance unit

anActive; b—Semi-active; cnPassive;
l--0nbosrd coordinator: 2-Computer;
3—Autopilot; A—Target illuminating
radar; S—-l.aunchers

Homing systems are termed active when the source of target illumination is located
on the missile. The signals returned from the target are picked up by the onboard
coordinator and are used to meter the parameters of the target's motion (the mis-
match parameter). Fig. 3.81s.

In the semi-active homing systems. the source of target illumination is located at
the control center (Fig. 3.81b). The signals returned from the target are used by
the onboard coordinator for measuring the mismatch parameter.

Homing systems are termed passive when the energy radiated by the target is em-
ployed for metering the parameters of the target's motion. This can be thermal
(radiant). light or radio thermal energy.

The homing systems include devices which meter the mismatch parameter. a computer.
an autopilot and a steering system. The operating principle of the homing system
comes down to the following (Pig. 3.8lc).

When the missile is on the launcher. the coordinator is aimed at the target desig-
nated for destruction. As a result the target is automatically locked on for auto-
matic tracking. Here the target coordinates or the mismatch parameter directly
are measured and this depends upon the adopted guidance method. After the launch.
the coordinator continuously meters the amount of A and generates a mismatch volt-

age uA which goes to the computer for generating missile flight control comlands.
The control over the quality of guidance can be visual or by radar and TV-optical

equipment located at the control center.

Hybrid control systems are system in which the missile is guided to the target
sequentially by several systems. These can be employed in long-range complexes.
This can be a combination of a comsand telecontrol system on the initial leg of the
missile's trajectory and homing on the terminal; or radio-beam guidance on the ini-
tial leg and homing on the terminal one. Such a combination of control systems

ensures the guidance of the missiles to the target with sufficient accuracy with
long firing ranges.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.6.3. Elements of Missile Control Systems

The component elements of a standard control system for air-launched and antisir-
craft missiles are: the guided missile as the object of control. the ground (air-
craft) equipment for metering the target and missile coordinates. unite for generat-
ing control consands, the comaand radio links for transmitting the commands to the
missiles. the onboard coordinators [seekers] of homing missiles, the launchers and
the missile fighting equipment.

The Guided Missile

A guided missile is an unmanned aircraft with a jet engine used to hit airborne tar-
gets. All the onboard equipment is carried on the miseile'e airframe.

IZHMDI7S 54J21
‘-

22 Iﬁfj‘ﬁiﬁilb 1e) 0 ‘ m

I -
zero a age sustainer stage N
Fig. 3.82. Diagram of design of

hypothetical guided missile: e) S
l--Hissile housing; 2--Proximity fuse; %
3--Control surfaces; (onwarhead; 5-. d)
Tanks for fuel components; 6—Auto—

pilot; 7--Control equipment; Savings;

    

9--ln-flight electric power sources; Fig. 3.83. Aerodynamic diagrams of
lO--Sustainer-stage rocket engine; guided missiles:
ll--Zero—stage rocket engine; 12-- a--Normal; b-"'l‘ailless"; c--"Canard";
Stabilizer fins d-"Tilting wing"

The airframe is the bearing structure of the missile and consists of the housing.
fixed and moveable aerodynamic surfaces. The housing of the airframe is usually of

cylindrical shape with a conical (spherical or ogival) nose. A possible version
for the design of a guided missile is shown in Fig. 3.82.

The aerodynamic surfaces of the airframe are used to create the lift and control
forces. These include the wings, the stabilizer fins (fixed surfaces) and control
surfaces. In terms of the reciprocal position of the control surfaces and fixed
aerodynamic surfaces. the aerodynamic designs of the missiles can be: normal,
"tailless," "canard" and "tilting wing" (Fig. 3.83).

The engines of guided missiles are divided into two groups: rocket and air-
breathing jet.

A rocket engine is one which employs fuel which is completely carried on the mis-
sile. For its operation oxygen need not be taken in from the surrounding media.
In terms of the type of fuel, rocket engines are divided into solid propellant
rocket engines (SPRE) and liquid propellant rocket engines (LPRB).

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As the tuel in the SPRE rocket powders and mixed solid fuels are employed as these
can be filled and packed directly in the engine combustion chamber.

The advantages of the SPRE are the simplicity of design, constant readiness for im-
mediate launching. high operating reliability and simplicity, high specific weight
and the possibility of obtaining strong thrust with a small engine weight; the
drawbacks are the dependence of the thrust and the pressure in the combustion cham-
ber upon the temperature of the charge (the temperature of the surrounding medium),
the smaller specific thrust in comparison with the LPRE and the difficulty of regu-
lating the thrust.

The SPRE are employed as boosters in launching the missiles as well as in the sus-
tainer stages.

In the liquid propellent rocket engines, a single- or double-component fuel is em-
ployed and this includes an oxidizerand the fuel. The fuel is stored in tanks out-
side the combustion chamber. The LPRB include fuel tanks. a combustion chamber, a
fuel supply system. and units for controlling and regulating the firing. Fuel is
delivered to the combustion chamber under pressure which exceeds the pressure in
the chamber. In accord with this. a distinction is drawn between the LPRE with ex-
pulsion and turbopump-feed systems.

The expulsion system creates in the fuel propellent tanks a pressure that exceeds
the pressure in the chamber and as a result the fuel is expelled. For this com-
pressed air (gas) containers (CAC) are employed. The air (gas) is contained in
tanks under a pressure of 250-300 kg per cm2 (2.650—2,960 N). Sometimes for expel-
ling the fuel from the tanks use is made of the burning combustion products in the
gas generators operating on a solid or liquid propellant.

The turbopump system creates a pressure using pumps driven by J high-speed gas
turbine. The gas generator, turbine and pumps form the turbopunp unit (TPA).

The liquid monopropellent fuels are a nonhypergolic mix of an oxidizer and fuel in
the necessary ratio for combustion. Honopropellants have gained limited use.

Liquid bipropellants are a combination of fuel and oxidizer in a ratio ensuring
combustion. These fuels can be hypergolic and nonignitable. The former are ig-
nited in combining the fuel and oxidizer in the engine combustion chamber and the
latter in employing additional igniting agents. The advantages of liquid fuels are
that they create a greater specific engine thrust than do the solid fuels, they pro—
vide thrust control with simpler means and make it possible to shut down and restart
the engine. The drawbacks include the need to store and keep the fuel and oxidizer
inummweuumusndmohausﬁuymuu“inunnuduaﬁluuu
the fuel and oxidizer.

The fuel for the liquid bipropellants can be substances in which carbon and hydrogen
are the oxidizable chemical elements. Hider use is made of hydrocarbons (kerosene,

amines. hydrazines and others). Liquid oxygen, nitric acid, hydrogen peroxide.
florine and others can be employed as the oxidizers.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FWJIICHHH(JAI.IJSEI(NVLY

Air-breathing engines (ABE) are engines in which oxygen collected from the surround-
ing air serves as the oxidizer. As a result the aircraft carries only fuel and
this makes it possible to increase the fuel range. The drawback of an A38 is the

impossibility of operating it in the rarified layers of the atmosphere. These en-
gines can be employed on aircraft operating at altitudes up to 35-“) km.

In terms of design features, the A3]! are divided into compressor and compressorless.
In the compressor engines. the air entering the cowustion chamber is compressed by
compressors (turbocoamressors, turbofans). In the compressorless ABE the air is
compressed solely by the velocity head of the incoming air flow.

As a fuel the A38 can employ liquid mixes of hydrocarbons obtained in oil refining.

The operating principle of a jet engine. The basic part of a jet engine operating
on a chemical fuel is the combustion chamber with its nozzle. In a SPBE the solid
fuel is carried in the combustion chamber while in a LPRB the fuel components are
kept in separate tanks and introduced into the combustion chamber under a pressure
exceeding the gas pressure in the chamber (Fig. 3.86).

when operating the fuel is burned and as a
m result gases are fomd which represent the
engine's working medias. If the combustion
"0 comb.‘chambar nozzle chamber was closed. then the combustion
a) exhaust gases products would create a certain pressure
”a __." equally distributed over all the chamber
._ ________ :2 walls, and as a result of this no thrust
thrust I: would occur. with a nozzle. the gases
b) which are pressurized in the chamber rush

out through the nozzle at a high speed the
Fig. 3.84. Diagram of the operation amount of which increases as the gases ap-

of a jet engine: proach the nozzle cross-section. As a re
a--Combustion chalber closed; sult of this, the pressure along the com-
b-—Combustion chamber with nozzle 'oustion chasber and the nozzle will change.

In the nozzle cross-section it will be min-
imal, while at the head wall inside the combustion chamber opposite the nozzle
cross-section it will be at a maximal. A portion of the pressure forces is out of
balance and this creates the engine thrust.

An autopilot (AP) is employed to stabilize the angular motions of the missile rela-
tive to the center of mass. Moreover, the AP is a component of the missile flight
control system and controls the position of the very center of mass in space in
accord with the control col-ands. In the first instance the AP performs the role

of a missile stabilization system and in the latter instance the role of a control
system element.

For stabilizing the missile in the longitudinal. azimuthal planes and in motion
relative to the missile's longitudinal axis (for roll), three independent stabili-
zation channels are employed: for pitch. heading and roll.

The sensing elements of the AP measure the missile's angular deviations a. v, 1, its
velocity V and velocity head pV2/2. Thus, with the effect of external disturbances

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(under the effect of wind and changes in air density, missile asymetry and so
forth). there is, for example. the turning of the missile to a certain angle 1
around the longitudinal on axis. that is. roll occurs. The presence of missile
roll with certain control systems can lead to s situation where the rudders will
alter the missile's pitch position while the elevators will alter the heading, and

this will lead to a disruption of the control system.

With the appearance of the angle 1, the sensing element in the missile's roll
stabilizing channel measures the amount of the angle and generates a signal pro-
portional to the amount. After amlification and conversion into the required form.
this signal is sent to the controls which turn, for example, the ailerons to a
certain angle. As a result. the rolling of the missile is halted and the roll
angle will be eliminated. After this the ailerons assume a neutral position. His-
sile stabilization for the oyl and 021 axes is carried out in a similar manner.

The missile stabilization systems can employ as sensing elements gyroscopic meters,
linear acceleration transducers (accelerometers) and ram air-pressure sensors.

A gyroscopic meter is based on a gyroscope, a rapidly spinning fly-wheel (rotor) held
at the ends of the rotation axis in a frame called the gyroscope gimbal. The rotor
is driven by an electric motor. '

Linear acceleration transducers (LAT) are a solid of a certain weight (an inertia
body) suspended on springs the ends of which are fastened to the transducer's body
and weight. A damper is used to eliminate oscillations of the body. The moving
contact (slide) of a potentiometer has been fastened to the weight's axis of move-
ment.

Hith missile acceleration equal to zero. the weight stays in the middle position.
With the appearance of missile acceleration, the weight moves along the axis by an
amount proportional to the amount of acceleration. As a result a voltage propor-
tional to the amount of acceleration is taken off the potentiometer's moving con-
tact. The LAT can be employed for measuring longitudinal and lateral (normal) ac-
celeration. In the first instance the LAT is placed so that its axis is parallel
(lined up) with the missile's longitudinal axis ox). while in the latter one the
LAT axis should be directed along the oy; or on axis.

For measuring the velocity head, sensors are employed which meter air pressure in
running into the air stream. As a result. an electric signal is produced propor-
tional to the amount of 9V2.

The converter and amplifier units of AP are usually electronic current and voltage
converters. For this magnetic and transistorized amplifier-converters are employed
as these possess high operating stability and dependability under the conditions of
the missile's vibration and g-loads.

The AP servomechanisma are used to move the missile's control surfaces. They can be

pneumatic. hydraulic and electric motor. Their purpose is to convert the electric
energy of the control co-ands into an angle of the missile control surfaces. Often

these devices are called actuators.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Preset devices are devices for controlling the missile's flight on the autonomous
leg of the trajectory. Their task includes altering the operating conditions of
the onbnard equipment according to a preset program.

The onboard missile fTight control equipment is a component part of the control
system. Its design is determined by the adopted control system employed in the
antiaircraft and air-launched missile control complex.

In command telecontrol systems. the missiles carry devices which comprise the re-
ceiving path of the command radio link (KPY). They consist of an antenna and a
receiver for the command radio signals, a co-and selector and a demodulator. As a
result, the received command signals are amplified. detected in the receiver and
after passing through the selector go to the demodulator. The demodulator converts
the command signals as presented by the adopted code into slowly changing voltages
which are sent to the controls of the missile control surfaces. The single commands

used to control the operating coaditions of the onboard equipment follow an analo-
gous path.

In the second type of telecontrol command systems, the missiles carry a coordinator
which measures the parameters of the target's movement and a transmitter for trans-
mitting them in the appropriate code to the control center located on the ground
(in controlling antiaircraft missiles) or on an aircraft.

In the teleguidance and homing systems. the onhoard control equipment includes a
target coordinator and a computer. The coordinator measures the mismatch parameter
and sends to the computer a mismatch voltage of the corresponding amount and sign.
The computer generates the control commands which include the components to compen-

sate for the guidance errors. In coming out of the computer, the control commands
go to the AP for controlling the missile's control surfaces.

The coordinators employed in homing systems can be radar and optical (light and in-
frared).

A radar coordinator contains an antenna, transmitter (in active type coordinators).
a receiver. an autoselector, a terminal. a mismatch processor, a receiver and an
antenna for the synchronization signals channel. The coordinator shown in Pig.
3.85s is a tracking one. The coordinator's org axis, in being the electrical axis
of the antenna, continuously lines up with the direction to the target. In track-
ing a target. its position relative to the oak axis can be determined by the coord-
inates: by the mismatch angles 9 , o; in the longitudinal and transverse planes;
by the mismatch angle 9 and the p as angle 0; by the phase angle and by the tar-
get's linear deviation A from line org; by the target's linear deviations by. A:
from the coordinator's axis (Fig. 3.85b). With accurate tracking of the target,
the values of these coordinates should be close to zero and the target should be on
the direction of the oxk axis.

The target is locked on to automatic tracking by the coordinator before or after
the launching of the missile and for this it is first aimed at the target by the
original setting commands (KEY) which are received from the control center. Here
the switch 51 is in position 1 and switch 52 is open. The comlmnd voltage passes
through the amplifier to the gyrodrive of the mismatch processor which controls the

117

FOI‘OFIICIAI.IEEE(HVLY
F0“ UH'ILIAL Dbl. UhLl

antenna position. As a result the oxk axis is lined up with the target and the
target is in the antenna's beam. The signals returned from the target are caught
by the antenna and pass through the duplsxar to the receiver.

1 2... 3 ‘_ I l.

 

Fig. 3.85. Diagram of a radar coordinator (a) and
its coordinate systes (b)

Key: l—-Transmitter; 2--Autoselector; 3-Receiver of synchronizing
channel; 6--Synchronizing signals from moving target selector;
S--Dup1exer; 6--Receiver; 7-Terminal; 8-Computer; 9--Auto-
pilot; lO-Amplifier; ll-0riginal setting commands

Uith sufficient power of the return signals, on the terminal output a control volt-
age appears the amount and sign of which correspond to the amount and sign of the
target's deviation from the oxk axis. After this switch 82 moves to position 2,
closing the feedback in the target course tracking system. The coordinator shifts
to the automatic course and range (feed) tracking mode. After this switch 82
closes and a mismatch voltage proportional to the mismatch parameter goes to the
computer for generating the control instructions.

For the internal synchronizing of the autoselector's work it is possible to use
synchronization signals received from the control center. In individual instances
such signals can be generated also onboard the missile.

Course tracking of a target can be done using the method of integral and instantan-
eous equisignal zones. The latter is considered most preferred as it ensures a
higher tracking accuracy. With the method of instantaneous equisignal zones, it is
possible to employ both amplitude total-difference and phase processing of the

radar signals.

Hith amplitude total-difference processing the signals (see Fig. 3.60) received by
the antenna beams are sent to the "total-difference" device and as a result a dif-
ference no and total u; signals are formed:

a. - 2mm, K. to! .. I;
(3.179)

.. - exams-.1.

118

FOI.OF11C1AI.LEHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Uo--signa1 voltage corresponding to the direction of the antenna beam maxi-
mum to the target;
Km--steepness of rangefinder characteristics;
K--conversion coefficient;
u—-signal carrier frequency.

with phase processing of radar signals, there is a coupa.ison of the phases of the
high frequency oscillations from the signals returned from the target and received
by the antennas. As a result a voltage is formed which is proportional to the
phase difference Ag:

2-! 2n!
n- “9“" TAR—Till”. (3.180)

where d--distance between phase centers of antenna (base);
X-operating wave length of coordinator;
AR—-difference in path of radio waves reflected from target and received by co-
ordinator's antennas;
K¢--conversion coefficient.

The mismatch voltage passes through switch 51 and the amplifier (see Fig. 3.85) to
the torque motors of the gyro-stabilized platform. in controlling the antennas'
position.

As a result the target is lined up with the oxk axis of the coordinator.

The mismatch processing devices of the coordinators are the servomochanisms of the
tracking system. They are in the form of a gyrodrive which stabilizes the antenna
and controls its position.

Optical coordinators are mounted on short-range missiles. They are more compact and
weigh less. Such a coordinator includes an optical system located beneath a trans-
parent nose cone, an analyzer of the target image field, a radiant energy receiver,
a photocurrent amplifier, a terminal and a mismatch processing device (Fig. 3.86).
In terms of the principle for measuring target coordinates, optical coordinators

are divided into frequency, amplitude, time-pulse and others.

In a frequency coordinator. the analyzer of the image field is a spinning disc
divided into :ransparent and nontransparent areas. Here the number of such areas
on the external ring is less than on the inner one. The disc is so placed that the
point of origin of the coordinate axes is lined up with the division line of the
wheels.

The target's flux of radiant (light) energy passes through the optical system and
is focused at a certain point on the disc in accord with the target's position
relative to the coordinator's axis. with the spinning of the disc there is a modu-
lating of the flux and as a result on the output of the photoreceiver photocurrent
pulses are produced the repetition rate of which will be determined by the position
of the target's image on the disc surface. With the deviation of the target to the
left of the oxk axis, the pulse frequency increases and with a deviation to the
right, it declines. Thus, after amplification of the photocurrent there is an

119

FI”!(NWW(1AI.USE‘ONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transparent missile alternating current of a certain frequency

““99 hgusing corresponding to the position of the tar-

get's image relative to the exp axis.

The terminal contains electrical filters
tuned to certain frequencies. After sep-
aration and conversion of the photocurrent,
a mismatch voltage is formed which goes to
the mismatch processor. As a result there
Fig. 3.86. Diagram of optical is a change in the position of the optical

coordinator: system and the target is lined up with the
coordinator's axis.

 

l--Reflector optical system; 2—-1mage
field analyzer; 3--Photoreceiver;
6--Photocurrent amplifier; 5--Terminal;
6--Hiamatch processor

Other types of coordinators differ in the
pattern of the modulating discs and termhuﬂ
design. A majority of the optical coordi-
nators are tracking ones. In the process
of target tracking they generate a voltage proportional to the angular rotation
rate of the missile--target line and this is essential in emp10ying the method of
parallel and proportional approach.

As sensing elements in the photoreceivers of optical coordinators it is possible to
employ photoelectric cells with an intrinsic photoeffect. Their merit is the short
time constant (10' -lO' sec.). For increasing integral and threshold sensitivity.
the photoresistors undergo profound cooling.

The nghcing equipnent of antiaircraft and air-launch missiles is a combination of
the warhead and fuze.

The warhead has the explosive charge, a detonator and a housing. In principle the
warheads can be fragmentation and fragmentation-HE. According to data in the for-
eign press, certain types of SAM can also be equipped with nuclear warheads (for
example, the Nike-Hercules SAN).

The damaging elements of a warhead can be the shrapnel as well as the prefabricated
elements located on the housing surface. As explosive charges high explosives are
employed (trotyl, mixtures of trotyl. hexogen and others).

Missile fuzes can be proximity and contact. Proximity fuzes, depending upon the
location of the source of energy employed for activating it. are divided into active.

semiactive and passive. Moreover, proximity fuzes are divided into electrostatic,
optical, acoustical and radar fuzes. In foreign missile models, most frequently the
radar and optical fuzes are employed. In individual instances, an optical and radar
fuze operate in parallel and this increases the reliability of detonating the war-
head under the conditions of electronic neutralization.

Radar principles underlie the operation of a radar fuze. For this reason such a
fuze is a miniature radar which generates a detonate signal with a certain position
of the target in the fuze antenna beam.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In terms of design and operating principles, fuses can be pulse, Doppler and fre-
quency.

In a pulse fuse, the transmitter generates high frequency short-duration pulses
which are emitted by the antenna in the direction of the target. The antenna beam
is matched in space with the warhead fragmentation area. when the target is in the
beam, the return signals are received by the antenna, they go through the receiver
and reach coincidence stages where a gate pulse is also received. with their coin-
ciding a signal is given to explode the warhead detonator. The duration of the
gate pulse determines the range of the possible fuse activation distances. The
minimum activation distance is:

CT
0.1“ - —2—‘ . (3.131)

The Doppler fuzes are most often used in a continuous transmitting mode. The sig»
nals returned from the target and received by the antenna go to a mixer and as a
result the Doppler frequency is isolated:

z"r
I’d - T . (3.182)

where Vr--the radial component of the missile and target approach rate;
X--operating wave length of radar fuse.

With the preset values of Vrv the signals of the Pd frequency pass thrOugh the fil-
ter and go to an amplifier. With a certain amplitude of oscillations for this fre-
quency, a detonate signal is given.

Contact fuses can be electrical and percussion. They are employed on short-range
missiles with a high firing accuracy and this ensures the detonating of the warhead
with the direct hit of the missile.

For increasing the probability of target kill with warhead fragments. measures are
taken to coordinate the areas of fuss activation and fragmentation pattern. With
good coordination, the fragmentation pattern area, as a rule. coincides in space
with the target area.

Ground (Aircraft) Units for Measuring Target and Missile coordinates

The given devices ensure the measuring of current. routine coordinates. They are
employed in telecontrol systems. As such radar, optical and television-optical

sights are employed.

A radar sight is a target course and distance tracking radar. As a result the cur—
rent coordinates of a target are measured in the adopted coordinate system (more
often spherical). The principle of their operation has been examined earlier.
Analogous radar sights are used for tracking targets and measuring their current
coordinates.

An optical sight is made in the form of hairline columns or an optical sight making
it possible to visually observe the target and track it manually. Such sights are

121

FOI‘DFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
INJR 0FF1C1AI.USE(MVLY

employed in short-range antiaircraft missile complexes. Their range is within lim-
its of 10-15 km.

A television-optical sight is a television system consisting of a television trans-
mitting camera and a video monitor. The target image in the television transmitting
camera is transformed into electrical television signals which are sent over cable
to the video monitor, creating an image of the target on the TV screen. As a re-

sult there is the possibility of manually tracking the target and measuring the cur-
rent values of the angular coordinates.

In the television-optical sights provision is also made for automatic tracking. in-
cluding for targets aimed at the missile. For obtaining dependable tracking, the
missiles carry tracers which are sources of light and infrared radiation.

Devices for Generating control commands

These units are designed to obtain electric voltages the amount and sign of which
correspond to the amount and sign of the missile's deviation from the kinematic tra-

jectory. The structure of a C30 [control command generating unit] depends upon the
adopted missile guidance method and the method for compensating for guidance errors.
Thus. in generating control commands with the matching-curve methods, the CCU should
have a unit for generating the voltages UhAco UhAg which are linearly proportional
to the mismatch parameter as well as devices for obtaining the voltages of the damp-
ing signal and the voltages of dynamic error compensation. In representing the ex-
pression of the voltage of the control command in the form of:

“k ' "hA+uc.d+Uk.d. (3.183)

where “hA - aghg;
uc.d--damping signal:
uk.d-dynamic error compensation signal, we will have a structure of the 060
(Fig. 3.87).

In guiding a missile using lead methods the
, hnos 060 should incorporate a unit for generating
5:21. ﬂﬁng'?— a lead signal uhg. The structure of this
"n _ signal should correspond to the expression
(3.177). This device should carry out mul-

tiplication and division operations and for

this reason can be called a divide and mul-

Flg. 3.87. Standard diagram of a CCU tiply unit.

in realizing the matching-curve method

Key: l--Voltage generating unit In addition to the designated tasks, a C60

also performs other ones: it determines
the missile launch moment, it generates control signals for the launchers, it pro-
vides instructions for controlling the operating modes of the onbosrd equipment and
so forth.

?hr control amnnand Hudiolink

The control con-land rsdiolink [IG’Y] is a multichannel conunications line designed
for the conversion and transmission of control commands. The number of line

122

INDR‘OFFICIAl.lEﬂi(HNLY
F03¢NﬂﬂKﬂAl.USE(NNLY

channels corresponds to the number of commands to be transmitted with the simultan-
eous control of several missiles.

The converting of the control commands into radio signals is carried out. as a rule,
in three stages. In the first of them the slowly changing command voltages are
converted into the voltages of the subcarrier frequencies according to the adopted
method; in the second stage they are given their identifying feature and in the
third are converted into high frequency radio signals.

In the first stage for converting the commands methods with pulse and harmonic suh—
carriers can be employed.

Methods with pulse subcarriers are:

The amplitude-pulse method (AP!) where the command voltage ukﬁt) is converted into
voltage pulses the amplitude of which changes in accord with the change in the cOIF
mand voltage;

The frequency-pulse method (PPR) where the command voltage is converted into volt-
age pulses the repetition rate of which changes according to the law uk(t);

The time-pulse method (TPH) (phase-pulse or PPM) where the command voltage is con-
verted into voltage pulses the t;me position of which in relation to the reference
pulse changes in accord with the change in the amount and sign of ut(t);

The width-pulse method (97H) where the command voltage is converted into pulses the
width (duration) of which changes in accord with the law of voltage change uk(t);

The code-pulse method (CPU) where the voltage uk(t) is converted into voltage pulse,
which are a digital (more often binary) code.

Methods with harmonic subcarriera:

The amplitude-frequency method (AFN) where the frequency of the subcarrier oscilla-
tions changes according to the law of the change in the amount of the command volt-
age;

The phase-frequency method (PP!) where the command voltage is converted into harmon-
ic oscillations the phase of which changes in accord with the voltage uk(t).

In the second stage the commands are encoded. Pulse combinations, harmonic oscilla-
tions and others can be employed as the code.

In the thind stage. the subcarrier voltages go to the KPY transmitter where they are
converted into high frequency oscillations and sent into space through the antenna.

The missile carries the equipment of the receiving path containing an antenna, a re-
ceiver, selector and demodulator. As a result the received command signals are con-
verted into the form of the voltage uk(t) and are sent to the autopilot.

123

FOIIOFIICJAI.IEH!(HNLY
- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. RADAR TROOPS

6.1. Weapons Systems of Radar Troops

The weapons systems of the RTV [rsdar, lit. radiotechnical troops] include: detec-
tion systems (radar complexes and sets. radar altimeters, radar identification sys-
tems). automated control systems [ASUi (complexes of equipment for automating the
collection. processing and display of data at the RTV command posts and for troop
control)and in addition radar data transmission systems.

6.1.1. Detection Systems

The RTV radar detection systems are designed to conduct radar reconnaissance (scan-
ning the air space, detecting aircraft. measuring their current coordinates and
radar identification and determining the fighting strength of the air targets) and
radar support for controlling the firing complexes of the ZRV [antiaircraft missile
troops] and IA [fighter aviation]. A classification of the RTV detection systems
is shoun'in Fig. 6.1.

The radar reconnaissance complexes (sets) are the basic source of information on the
air situation in the AD troops. For detecting and tracking aircraft which are not
sources of active jamming (SAJ). active pulse radars are employed. The measuring of
distance to the target is based upon the pulse method and the measuring of azimuth
on the maximum method. Analysis and processing of the current target coordinates
make it possible to obtain the horizontal speed of the target and heading and to de-
tect the start of a maneuver.

An analysis of the shape and structure of the echo signal provides a notion of the
combat strength of a group target.

For detecting and tracking a SAJ, complexes of passive radar are employed (triangu-
lation or base correlation).

Radar identification is based upon a combination of the principles of tuo-vay auto-
matic radio communications and radar. Radar complexes which support firing com-
plexes differ from reconnaissance radar in the higher accuracy of measuring the
current coordinates and in their better resolution.

A classification of detection systems (Fig. 6.1) is not devoid of ambiguity as
certain reconnaissance radars under definite conditions can be employed for radar

124

liJR‘OFIiCIAl.II§Ei(HVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

1 W cram mmrm

 

2 TOKMUVCCKUC ﬂDUJNGKU 3Tﬂlﬂﬁxl0€ 0’03””!

 

Fig. 6.1. Classification of RTV radars:

Key: l--Radar detection system; 2--Tactical features; 3--Technical
features; b-—Tactical purpose; S-Number of metered coordinates;
6--Haneuverability; 7-.Have band; 8-Types of transmitted signal
modulation; 9--Reconnaissance of air targets; lO--Support of
firing complexes; ll--Determining (clarifying) target height;
12—-Determining identity of radar targets; l3-Unidimensional
(altimeters); lb-TVo-dimensional (rangefinders); lS-oThree-
dimensional (radar complexes); l6-Stationary; l7-Hobile;
18—Hotor vehicle; l9—In trailers; 20—Ship; Zl—Centimeter
band; 22--Decimeter band; 23-Heter band; 26--Pulse; 25-Pre-
quency pulse; 26- Combined

support of firing complexes and. conversely. the support radars can carry out re-
connaissance. Altimeters, within certain limitations, can perform the functions of

three-dimensional radars.

Radar nangefinders provide detection of aircraft and the determining of their plan-
nar coordinates (azimuth and range). A diagram of a rniar rsngefinder is shown in
Fig. 4.2.

The probing of the air space by pulses of electromagnetic energy is provided by the
transaitter and antenna-feeder units of the rangefinder. the receiving of the re-
turn signals is carried out by the antenna-feeder unit and receiver. The received
signals are displayed on the indicators of the radar or A80.

The transmitter generates the radio pulses with a duration of 11 from units to tens

of microseconds. The RTV radars employ smooth, linearly frequency modulated and
phase-code-pulse modulated transmitted signals. Using a microwave feeder path.

the energy of the transmitted pulses through the antenna switch is carried to the
antenna and transmitted into space.

125

F0.:0‘1ﬂ(1h1.USE¢MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       
   
   
 
  

1

ncpedovocucc ycmpodcmeo
mop

new”:
‘cuuxpouu-
aouua

 
 
    
 

7 [Zia-«me
ycmpodcmoo
( unduxomopu)

ch dam
to AS" 9conpg°mcnus

Fig. k2. Schematic diagram of a pulse radar rangefinder

Key: l—‘rransmitter; 2—Synchronizer; 3—Antenna switch; loanternal
synchronization; S--Receiver; 6--Antenna rotating mechanism;
7.-0utput devices (indicators); 8--Signal processing devices;
9-Connector unit

The width of the directional pattern in a rangefinder antenna in the horizontal

plane is unite or fractions of degrees. The scanning of space in the vertical plane
is within limits of from -1 to 60°. The designated limits are realized by employing
several antennas (antenna channels) or by slanting the antenna in the vertical plane.

The basic aethod for scanning space in the horizontal plane is even circular scan-
ning which is provided by turning the antenna or azimuth. The rate of antenna rota-
tion is chosen proceeding from the required discreteness of inforaation receiving
and the obtaining of a sufficient number of pulses in the echo cluster for normal

data processing:
1.!
"0‘ iN-la ’ ((0.1)

where na-antenna rotation rate. RPM;
03--width of directional pattern in azimuthal plane, degree;
Pp-pulse repetition rate. hertz;
H.1n-minimum number of pulses in echo cluster needed for normal excitation of
CRT screen.

The basic paraneters of the transmitter and antenna-feeder unit characterizing the
capability of the rangefinder are: pulse power of the microwave generator P1 (an-

tenna gain 60). the pulse duration-r1, the type of modulation of the transmitted
pulses, the width of the directional pattern in the horizontal and vertical planes.

The returned signals received by the antenna are transmitted through the antenna
switch to the receiver input where their frequency selection and amplification are
carried out. Subsequent signal processing (neutralization of noise. pulse

126

FIII(Hﬂﬂ(1A1.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

compression and so forth) is carried out in special processors from which the“
processed signals go to the indicators or other output devices and the connecting
units with the A80.

The basic parameters of the receiver-indicator path are: responsiveness of the re-
ceivers [(3.61). (3.71.) and (3.75)], the subnoise visibility coefficient (the noise
neutralization coefficient). the pulse coqaression coefficient. dynamic range and
handling capacity of the output units.

The synchronizer generates triggering pulses which coordinate in time (synchronize)
the moment of sending the transmitted pulses of the transmitter and the start of
the indicator scan as well as the work of the other radar systems. For increasing
the probability of the target detection by increasing the umber of pulses in the
blip cluster and reducing the discreteness of information receiving, the pulse rep-
etition rate PP is increased. however, in pulse radars the significance of the
repetition rate is limited by the demand of detecting targets at the designated
ranges. For this reason the maxim repetition rate of the transmitted pulses can-
not be more than:

’v-n‘mﬁ—J; (4.2)

where c--propagation rate of radio waves;
bur-required maxi-n radar detection range; _
Kr-reserve coefficient (in calculations it is set within limits of 1.15-
1.25).

Por detecting targets with a set probability it is essential to receive from the

target and process the required number of pulses over a scan Run. This condition
determines the lower limit of the repetition rate for an altimeter (10.3) and for a

rangefinder (10.10).
Nahe‘. (6.3
fps“) 7“ . = )

r,...>Tlﬁ:-. (5.4)

37,-:

where A8-—azimuth scan sector;
Ac--elevation scan sector;
63. ee-width of directional pattern for level of half power in the azimuthal and
elevation planes, respectively;
‘l‘sc—scanning interval;
Nam-antenna rotation rate. rpm.

Radar altimeter-s are designed to determine the height of an aircraft above the sur-
face of the land and the sea. Host often these are autonomous radars which have
equipment for being connected to rangefinders, co-unications equipment and A50.

In individual instances altimeters are made in a nonautonomoua version and are a
component part of a three-dimensional radar complex.

127

M OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F!1(]Al.lEﬂE(NVLY

The principle for determining altitude by the maximum method comes down to measuring
the slant range D, the elevation of the target t and solving the altitude equation

(3.84). High-precision altimeters solve the equation with a correction for refrac-
tion in kilometers:

I
H—Dslns+&+dﬂd+h.

(6.5)
where Re--earth's radius, 6,368 km;
Aﬂgef-altitude correction for radio wave refraction, km;
Ha-oheight of altimeter antenna electrical center, km;
m -4.Io-v o 2 .
no .O-T-IO- r... (Ii—so)”. (5.6)

where Ter--equivalent reduced temperature determined by pressure. humidity and
temperature of medium on radar--target path;
H, D--altitude of aircraft and range to it.

A uniform correlating of information on the height of targets being tracked by a
rangefinder is achieved by sending the altimeter target designation signals (for
range and azimuth) from the rangefinder which for the given altimeter is the leader;
for this in the altimeters provision is made for a system of measuring (displaying)
target azimuth and range. This makes it possible in individual instances (in track-
ing a small number of targets in circular scanning or in operating in a narrow azi-
muth sector) to utilize an altimeter for measuring three coordinates.

Three-dimensional radars measure the three current coordinates of a target. Charac-
teristic of them is a simple technical solution for correlating altitude information
with the target's planar coordinates and this increases the informational capabili-
ties of the radar to simultaneously track a large number of targets.

The identification system is designed to determine the state affiliation of detected
aircraft. A diagram of the identification system is shown in Fig. 4.3.

The ground portion of the identification equipment is called the ground radar in-

terrogator (GR!) and can be coupled to a radar over circuits for synchronization,
antenna rotation and the indication (display) of the reply signal.

The OR] transmitter forms a coded interrogation signal which through the antenna
switch is transmitted by the antenna toward the aircraft to be identified and which
carries the in-flight part of the equipment.

The interrogation signal is received by the antenna of the onboard transponder, it
is amplified in the receiver and decoded. In accord with the interrogation signal
of the established code. the reply signal encoder and the transmitter are activated
and the latter generates a coded reply signal which is sent by the antenna of the
onboard transponder.

The reply signal picked up by the GRI antenna is amplified in the receiver and
sent to the identification signal decoder where the match of the reply signal code

is checked. In the event of a code match. the decoder sends to the signal mixer a
signal which is displayed on the indicator.

128

Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1kl.lEiE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 4.3. Schematic diagram of identification system

Key: l--0nboard transponder; 2-Decoder; 3-Reply signal encoder;
k--Antanna switch; 5-Interrogation signal receiver; 6-Trans-
hitter; 7-—Ground radar interrogator; 8--Receiver; 9-Signal
decoder; lO-Encoding device; llv-Antijnmming protective device;
12-Signa1 mixer; l3o-Radar; lb-oIndicator

combat capabilities

The combat capabilities of radars are quantitative and qualitative indicators char-
acterizing the capability of a radar to perform the combat niseions inherent to it
under the specific situational conditions over the established time.

Combat capabilities depend upon the technical characteristics of the radar. its com-
bat readiness and the selected operating modes. upon the terrain where the complex
is deployed. the target radar cross-section, the electronic situation. the composi-
tion and training level of the combat crew, meteorological conditions and other
factors. A change in the situational conditions leads to a change in the combat
capabilities of the complexes. Combat capabilities are assessed in terms of the
specific combat missions and the conditions for carrying them out.

The indicators of radar combat capabilities for radar reconnaissance: the detec-
tion zone; radar antijamning capability, information capability. capabilities for
identifying targets, accuracy of information and time required to bring to a state

of combat readiness.

Indicators for radar combat capability for radar guidance support: zone of guid-
ance support, the number of simultaneously supported guidances (this depends upon
the number of guidance indicators and the discreteness of presenting all three co-
ordinates). The accuracy of the provided information determines the probability of
radar guidance support within the guidance zone.

129

FOIIOFFKJAI.U§E(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The guidance support zone is an area of space in which continuous tracking of the
targets and the fighter is provided, as well as the measuring of their current co-
ordinates with the required accuracy and confident radar identification.

Indicators of combat capabilities fbr radar support of target designation fbr anti-
aircraft missile complexes is the zone of target designation support (an area of
space in which target designation information is provided) and the number of simul-
taneously provided target designations. The quality of the target designation in-
formation depends upon its accuracy and is characterized by the probability of no-
search target designation. The quantity of simultaneous target designations depends
chiefly upon the set discreteness of providing coordinate information.

The Letectian Zone

The detection zone of a radar complex (radar set) is a spatial indicator of radar
capability for radar reconnaissance of airborne objects.

The detection zone is an area of space within which radar targets with a designated
radar cross-section (R38) are detected by the radar in each scan with a probability
no less than the designated.

In a majority of operational and tactical calculations for describing the detection
zone. the RC8 is set as equal to l m2 and the detection probability is 0.5. A
knowledge of the designated zone and the availability of simple mathematical pro-
cedures given below make it possible to easily determine the radar detection zone
for any other values of the RC8 and the detection probability. This makes it pos-
sible to evaluate the capabilities of the equipment in terms of a specific enemy.

A detection zone can be represented in the form of a table of values of the detec-
tion range D of an aircraft with a given RC8 at various altitudes H over the surface
of the earth; as a half section (a family of half sections) of the zone in the ver-
tical plane as constructed in the B-D coordinates on the given azimuth (azimuths)
considering the curvature of the earth (the detection zone in the vertical plane);
as a section (family of sections) of a zone with spherical surfaces parallel to the
earth's surface at a certain fixed height or at a number of fixed heights (the de-
tection zone in the vertical plane).

In areas with medium rugged terrain at altitudes of over 2 km the effect of the re-
lief on the dimensions and shape of the detection zone becomes nonessential and the
spherical sections assume a regular shape.

With the tabular presentation of the detection zone, in addition to detection range
at various altitudes, the values are also given for the minimum and maximum eleva-

tions Cminu tug“. the maximum altitude of continuous target tracking and the radius
of the blind cone Rbc at the maximum tracking altitude (Fig. 4.4).

The radar detection zone in the centimeter wave band is:
om - n...r(c). ' (4.7)

where nagx--maximum target detection range with given kcs at;
F(t)--normed directional pattern of radar antenna in vertical plane.

130

FOR OFFICIAI.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”I“ a... vr n‘ 11' 10' s’ a‘ 7' 6‘ 'u‘ 4' 3.5'
u ( '. l I r .~ ‘ r , ‘
2‘ ”A.__ ~ - . 1 r . 3.
. V ' ’ \.
\

 

Fig. 6.4. Half section of radar detection zone

The dependence F(€) is ordinarily given in the technical specifications of the
radar or is derived by the well-known nethod using the radio emission of the sun.
The radar detection zone at low altitudes depends substantially upon the amount of
the clearance angles which limit detection range in the direction of a terrain
feature which creates the clearance angle. The denand on the acceptable clearance
angles is the basic one in selecting the position for the radar. Maximal detection
range at low altitudes which can be realized with various values of the clearance
angle '1 is given in a graph (Pig. 6.5). For increasing target detection range at
low altitudes the electrical center of the antenna is raised with the sinultaneous
inclining of its focal axis to a certain negative elevation. For raising the an-
tenna, prevailing heights. special rovers, nests and other structures can be em-

ployed .

1, mm
50

  

Fig. 4.5. Graph of dependence of naxiaun
‘0 50" possible target detection ranges at
"’0“ low altitudes upon clearance angles

80
(under conditions of standard refraction)

0 The potential capabilities of radars to de-
"0 '30 72° W m 3-” tect aircraft range at low altitudes with

"0 normal atnospheric radio wave refraction

-20 are determined by the fornula, kn:

M n, . 4.12.K(.’3{+u"u2). (lo.

«a where K-aradiohorizon utilization coeffi-
cient;

lip-aircraft altitude, m;
hr-height of raising antenna e-lectrl
cal center, a.
131

FOIOFF‘CIALUSEONLY
FOR OﬁWﬂCJAl.USEZ(HULY

The dependence 0 . mac, 11.) with K- 1 is
shown in Fig. 4. .

For the decimeter and meter wave hands, the
radar directional pattern is formed by the
adding of the energy direct bean and the
energy falling at various angles on the un-
derlying surface and reflected in the direc-
tion of the direct bean. The relief and
aineral coaposition of the underlying sur-
face substantially influence the reflection
of electroaagnetic energy. The radar direc-

tional pattern of the meter and decimater
bands is:

D“) ' Dc?c(€)7(€), (6.9)

where D¢-maxinum target detection range
with given RC8 t in free
space;
P¢(e)--norned directional pattern of
radar in free space;
F(e)-~interference nultiplier (earth

 

 

multiplier).
50 “” “0 W” Bell The clearance angles for the radar complex-
es in these ranges also create a shadow ef-
Fig. 4.6. Graph of dependence of feet at low altitudes and should be taken
potential radar capabilities to detect into account in calculating the detection
targets at low altitudes zones. The additional desands on the 9081-

tions of these radars include: the accept-
able incline (rise) of the position, the minimum platforn area around the radar,

and the height of the position's unevenness which should not exceed the values of
Aha. The radius of the level area should he:

"
hams—{- (6.10)

With Ila/"t «0.25.

(In not fulfilling this condition, the radius of the area is

I: -¢.I2l 27155:...21 y X,
U

the unit of measurement for all values is the aeter) while the tolerable amount of
unevennesses is:

I
“Kn—1... - (4.11)

where 0--the angle of incidence of the energy from the antenna's electrical center
to the point of the unevenness.

132

Ft”!(”ﬁﬂ(lAl.U§li€HVLY

IN)R 0F¥ICJAI.IJSEL(MﬁLY

dimensions of the blind areas at various altitudes, a vertical section of the de-
tection zone is constructed for the given azimuth.

In a similar manner the calculated detection zone is constructed for the other azi-
muths. in constructing the calculated detection zone for radars of the meter and
decimeter bands, one must adjust for the amount of the position's slope 15v by
shifting all the points of the zone by the slope angle ygv on this azimuth.

The calculated values 90- th. ask are checked out by an overflight. The overflight
is made for one or several azimuths depending upon the various slope angles on the
different azimuths. This makes it possible to clarify the actual value of the radkr
horizon utilization coefficient K of the given radar as well as the influence of the
position's slope. The amount of the deviation of the calculated detection range
from the overflight one

an - Dov - no (4.13)

is incorporated in the overflight azimuth and the other azimuths for which the posi-
tion's slope equals zero or is close to the slope angle of the overflight azimuth.

The horizontal sections of the detection
zone for the set values of the aircraft's
altitude (Fig. 4.8) are constructed on a
map (blank) with a scale of l:500.000.
using an azimuth circle on which are
plotted the points corresponding to the
adjusted values of the detection range
on each of the azimuths. Having con—
nected these points with a free-form
curve, we obtain the external limit of
the radar detection zone at the given
altitude. In an analogous manner the
blind areas created by the shadow effect
in the detection zone are found.

The constructing of a radar detection
sane at median and great altitudes. For
constructing a detection zone at medium
and great altitudes it is essential to
have a normed directional pattern of the
radar antenna for the given position and
the true value of detection range for a

target with the given RC8 at one of the altitude values at.

 

Fig. 4.8. Radar detection zone in the
horizontal plane

A nurmed directional pattern is taken by an astronomical method (from the sun‘s
radio frequency radiation) or by using a special generator tuned to the carrier fre-
quency of the radar the antenna of which can be moved in altitude and set up at a

distance of at least

d > ﬁf—z , («.11.)

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the elevation ‘1") -1° - 100 km. According to the graph (Fig. 6.10) Boy-1.010, B-
l.10 (with 5| -1°, D1 - 100 km). then u-B/Bov-l.10/1.0lo-l.058.

The detection range at :1 'q is taken as equal to DI 0o-100~1.058-105.8 Inn.

The constructing of a radar detection zone at maximum high altitudes by the poten-
tial dip method. The potential dip method is employed for clarifying the radar de-
tection zone at altitudes exceeding the aircraft service ceiling.

In this instance the overflight is carried out at tolerable altitudes while the po-

tential of the radar complex is artificially reduced. The dip in the potential is
equal to the even compression of the detection zone along the constant elevation
lines:

a
n _ _
Kc- - % 10 “o. (6.19)

where 00v and D—-detection ranges with reduced and normal potentials, respectively;
N—-degree of potential dip. decibel.

The degree of the potential dip is selected in such a manner that the height of the

aircraft making the overflight exceeds the altitude of its continuous tracking in
the "nar rowed zone . "

From the results of the overflight. in using the above-described procedure. a nar-
rowed radar detection zone is constructed (Fig. 4.11) and then the real detection
zone corresponding to the normal radar potential.

For converting points a, b, c, d of the narrowed zone into their corresponding
points A, B, c, D of the real zone. the ratio is employed:

N
n - novlo‘o'ﬁ . (5.20)
The line connecting points A, B, C, and D is the boundary of the detection zone.

Recalculating the detection sons fbr another
value of the RES relative to the given one.
In practice, the need arises using a known
detection zone calculated for one value of

, the R65 01 to obtain the detection zone for
targets with a different R68 02.

For the conversion at medium and great alti-
tudea, the formula is employed:

 

0,-0.1, 7. with e - const. (4.21)

Fig. 4.11. Radar detection zones with

reduced and normal potential For the conversion at low altitudes. the

change in detection range caused by the
change in the R08 is calculated, km:

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where d--the distance between the antennas of the radar and the generator._p;
£—-naxinun linear dimension of radar antenna. I.

The true value of the detection range is disclosed by an overflight of the radar at
the given position.

For recalculating the norned directional pattern into a detection zone, one deter-
nines the value of the conversion factor (the directivity factor) K0 for elevation
‘vid for which the true detection range is deternined according to the overflight:

c - arc sin i - 02°"
vid Dov 17.000 '

 

(6.15)

In knowing the value Evid using the normed directional pattern it is possible to de-
tcrnine the value K0 (Fig. 6.9). The values of the detection range D1 for other
elevations are:

Di ' KDinhax- (“'16)
where Kpi--value of conversion factor for elevation 1:
”max - n+3- - (5.17)

For considering radio wave refraction attenuation at the given elevation, the value
of 01 must be multiplied by the coefficient a:

0-—

30v , (4.18)

where B--attenuation factor at angle 61;
Bov--attenuation factor at angle evid-

 

M?4 5 smnuvcnzonuzn'

 

Fig. 4.9. Radar directional pattern Fig. 6.10. Graph of values for refrac-
tion attenuation factor

The values 8 and 80v are determined from a graph (Fig. 4.10). The value of B is de-
termined for ranges D1 and their corresponding angles :1. Bov-for the range Dov and

Evido For exa-ple. cvid - 2°, Dov' 200 in and the calculated value of the range at

135

Fill(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an - md. H (b.22)

where n--- Icing-:7”. at. d «1.1-2. 3-;
V?

f--radar carrier frequency, megahertz.

The obtained value of AD is added to or subtracted from (depending upon the sin of
AD) D. The newly obtained points are connected by a free-for- curve which is the
external boundary of the detection zone with the new Rcs value.

In conclusion the two parts of the detection zone constructed for the ranges of low
and medium altitudes are joined together.

Recalculation of the radar detection sons for a given value of the target detection
probability. The range of target detection D with a given probability P is related
to the known detection range Do and its corresponding probability Po thusly:

D-D./:rp'. (6.23)

Ordinarily the external boundary of the radar detection zone is constructed for

values Po' 0.5. Under this condition for recalculating the detection zone it is
possible to use the formula

C
o- 1.350.;vl—hl I' (4.21.)

The probability of target detection by several radars. The resulting probability
Pres of detecting the given target by several radars conducting reconnaissance
simultaneously and providing intonation to a single collection point is:

\

pm- I —l'[(l -—P.). (6.25)
(II

where n--the nunber of radars conducting target reconnaissance;
P1--probability of detecting the target by radar i at the given point.

as 1—-"‘ ‘ n 0').
-°. - .
I" .- c '.. u '0 I:

‘ (6.26)
where Dr-range to target detection of which is provided with probability 1.

Radar Antijamring Capability

The capability of the RTV radars to conduct reconnaissance under passive interfer-

ence is judged by the amount of the joining visibility coefficient K v of the anti-
jaming equipment. In conparing its anount with the real ratio of t a signal power

137

MOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of‘the passive interference to the power of the blips which is characteristic for
the area. a conclusion is drawn on the radar's capability to conduct reconnais-
sance in passive interference under the given jalaing situation.

The capabilities for defense agath active damning are characterised by the
amount of the detection zone conpression coefficient for oonja-ing targets outside
the effective neutralization sector and by the amount of the effective neutraliza-
tion sector for janing targets (sources of active ja-ing [SAJ]).

The conpression coefficient for the radar detection zone for nonjanning targets is:

 

D I
M-ﬁ-K—W' (4.27)
V'” m;

where o--spectral density of jamming power, watts/aegaherts;
Cre--receiver antenna gain;
fb--the level of the side and back lobes in the directional pattern of the
radar antenna;
X--wave length, cm;
N--receiver noise factor;
RjL--distance from radar to jet-sing line, kn.

For a specific type of radar, the ratio (6.27) can be represented in the fore:

I
Ara—’- (“e28)

'
1+ A-r
1/ I9

For the convenience of calculating lea. it is possible to construct a graphic de-
pendence Kcn' f (1111) with fixed values of p.

 

The effective neutralization sector is leasured by the angle in the azimuthal (or
elevation) plane in which the SAJ provides a cover for itself and a screen for the
covered targets. The width of the effective neutralization sector depends upon the
spectral density of the noise power 9, the distance to the SAJ, the station's poten-
tial, the width of the directional pattern of the radar antenna and the level of the
side lobes.

Radar Capabilities for Providing Information and Determining the (Imposition of
Group largets

The potential information capabilities of the RTV radars are:

I—n I
"9" '—"—_‘_’(D- um; MW - (6.29)

where Deans 0.1n--operational limits of radar for range;
A8. Ac-radar scanning sectors for azinuth and elevation, respectively;
GD. 68. 6c--resolutione for coordinates.

138

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NULY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The actual realization of these capabilities is restricted by the productivity of
the data taking equipment. In this regard the infatuation capabilities of radar
depend upon the method of collection, the number of parallel data taking devices.
the methods of realizing target indication as well as the space scan rate. In the
simplest instance, with autonomous operation of a radar, the information capability
for producing the corresponding coordinate is:

tdisc i
1—

Ni-Kon tci

with tdisc 1 ) TO. (4.30)

where Kp--coefficient considering the reduction in information capability due
to overlapping of the taking sectors and the redistribution of these
sectors;

m1--the number of devices taking component i of information;
tdisc 1--the discreteness of taking component i of information;

tc 1-time spent in taking information and realizing target designation;
T°--space scan rate.

The capabilities for determining the composition of a group target and the moment of
its splitting are characterized by the resolutions of the radars and are assessed
using formulas (3.80). (3.81) and (3.82).

Radar capabilities to carry Out support Tasks fbr Antiairuraft Missile Troops and
Fighter Aviation

Radar support for the combat operations of firing complexes of the ZRV and the
fighter aviation comes down to the prompt providing of information which ensures
continuous target designation for the missile guidance station or the guiding of a
fighter to a point from which it can detect and intercept a target with the onboard
radar or detect it visually.

The quali;y of the radar support of a target designation and guidance radar depends
upon the mistakes in taking the primary information coming from the radar complex.

Mistakes in measuring target coordinates in terms of the patterns of their occur-
rence are divided into systematic and random. Random and systematic errors in
measuring target coordinates by radar complexes in terms of the reasons of their
occurrence are divided into bearing, instrument and dynamic.

Bearing errors arise under the influence of radio wave refraction. the reflection of
them from the terrain, the distortion of signal shape due to the dispersion proper-
ties of the environment and a change in radio wave propagation rate.

Instrument errors appear due to the inaccuracy of forming the electric scale, errors
in interpolating the position of the blip relative to the electric scale line, in-
accuracies in lining up the marker with the blip, inaccuracies in the topographic
locating of the station and a number of other factors.

Lynamic errors of measurement depend upon the heading and speed of the target's
moving as well as upon the method of taking the information:

139

FINI<MHHC1AI.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

xdyn ' Vx(t1"'t2). (6.31)

where Vx--speed of target in direction of measured coordinate;
t1--tine of generating blip on indicator screen;
tzutine spent on taking inforution for given coordinate.

The systematic components of all the listed errors groups can be determined and then
accounted for and comensated for. For this reason, the accuracy of measuring tar-

get coordinates basically depends upon the tendon errors the distribution law for
which is considered normal.

Random errors can be judged by the amount of the nean square error a, the median and
maxim error or by the error in 80 percent of the measurements.

“1/ +‘2ng. (4.32)

where x1 Iai -x-the random error of measurement 1;
ai—the result of measuraent i;
Xuthe true value of the measured coordinate;
n—the number of measurements.

The Mean Square Error

If we know the mean square errors 01' a2, .... °n caused by various independent
sources. then the total mean square error is:

.p-VC:+O,+...+C.. (6.33)

The probability of the mean square error P(o) -0.683.

The probable or median error is the name given to that value the appearance
probability of which P(xp) -O.S:

2
“'7" (10.35)

The maximum error is the greatest error which is possible under certain leasuring
conditions:

x.“ a 3a. (4.35)

For comparing the capabilities of the RW radars for accuracy performance often the
errors in 80 percent of the measures are employed and these are deternined in test-
ing by the collecting of statistical data. The converting of them into mean square
errors is carried out by the formula:

x” - 1.3a. (4.36)

140

F‘OROFF'ICIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Accumcy of Measuring Target Range, Azimuth and Altitude

The mean square error for neasuring distance is:

00 ' V 03 bear * 0D inst * 0n dyn' (6.37)

The bearing error on bear ordinarily does not exceed several meters and in a aajor-
ity of calculations need not be regarded with the visual taking of infatuation.

The basic reasons for the appearance of instrment errors are:

a) A change in the lag time for the passage of the blip through the paths of the
radar coaplex (radar set) deter-iced by the operating node of these conplexes;

b) The inaccuracy of determining the blip's position relative to the range electric
scale lines (with the visual nethod of taking the intonation) or the inaccuracy of
lining up the marker with the clip (with the autonated aethod of taking the infor-
nation);

c) An error in the range electrical scale;

d) An error in determining the position of the start of the blip caused by the in-
fluence of background noise and the end thickness of the range scan.

Since the change in the lag time of the blips in the paths of the radar couple:
(set) with tuned equipment ordinarily does not exceed fractions of a nicrosecond,
the error caused by this factor can be disregarded.

The instrument error consists of interpolation errors 0!) interp» the inaccuracy of
forning the range electrical scale 09 sc- the presence of background noise on n,
and the end thickness of the range scan line on .. The nean square values of the
designated errors are judged:

 

 

 

D
n I111
OD interp ' 3o 3 (5.38)
an ac ' fit: 3 (‘39)
ct
on n . f' ; (5.1.0)
6(3
u
as
an 3 I m (6.51)
where Du nin"the distance between the scale marks of the minimal gradation in range
units;
fA—Enthe relative frequency drift of the reference generator;
re

1101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tfr-the duration of the blip fronts;

gnthe signal--noise ratio;
n
dg--the diameter of the spot focused on the CRT screen;

mouthe scale of the range scan, ulh.

Having assessed the individual coqonents of the instruant error, it is possible
to determine its resulting value

I
n m: - 2-4.,- (ma)

 

The dynamic error with a normal distribution of target headings relative to the
radar complex is:

v c
on dyn - —' 3‘“ . (0.1.3)

where ‘read“‘h° time lag in reading the information.

Hith the visual and semiautomatic methods of reading information in a complex air
situation. the dynamic error exceeds the instrument one and even more so the hear-
ing error.

Hi th the automatic method of reading intonation the determining error is the in-
strument error and the bearing error is co-ensurahle with it.

The accuracy of measuring target axilmth depends upon the horizontal refraction of
the radio waves. the curvature of the propagation trajectory under the influence of
terrain unevenness (the bearing error). errors in orientation. errors in transmit-
ting the antenna azimuth to the indicator. in the forming of the azimuth scale and

in the line-up of the marker (instruaent error), as well as the moving of the target
along the azimuth over the period of forming and reading the information (the dy-

namic error). ,

The bearing. instrument and dynamic errors are determined by a formula analogous
to formula (4.1.2). The total mean square error of measuring azimuth is produced by
an expression analogous to expression (10.32).

The reasons for the appearance of errors in measuring target elevation (altitude)
are the same as in measuring target azimuth and for this reason they are assessed
by an analogous procedure.

6.1.2. Automation of Radar Data Processing

The process of processing radar data for the purposes of constructing opti-n
processing algorithms can be divided into the following stages: primary data proc-
essing (POP); secondary data processing (SDP); tertiary data processing (TOP).

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8y primary processing one understands the processing of radar signals coming in
from the output of the radar receiver in one scan of space (detecting return signals
from the targets, measuring target coordinates and their encoding).

The data obtained on the target coordinates as a result of the primary processing
in an encoded form (in the form of a binary code) is stored in the computer's mem-
ory. Regardless of optimum methods for detecting the signals returned from the

target, due to various types of interference it is impossible to assert with a
probability close to one that with PD? signals returned from a target have been de-

tected and not noise. The need arises for subsequent (secondary) data processing
based on the relationships of the blips belonging to the same targets.

Secondary processing is the name that has come to be given to the processing of
radar data coming in from the sane radar in several scans and which has undergone
primary processing. In the process of secondary processing the tasks of detecting
and tracking the target routes are carried out. This is done using the appropriate

algorithms by computer installations. After secondary processing the data on the
current coordinates and motion parameters is given to the users.

The same target can be observed by several radars which are a varying distance
apart. These radars operate out of synch and provide data on the target coordinates

relative to their position. All of this necessitates the next (tertiary) processing
of the radar data.

By the tertiary processing of radar data one has come to understand the process of
identifying the routes of targets tracked by several sources.

The examined stages of automated radar data processing must be distinguished from
the tactical concepts of primary and secondary radar data processing. In tactics,
by primary processing one has come to understand the processing of radar data which
is provided by the combat crew employing the primary indicators, and by secondary
processing the work of the secondary indicators.

Primary Processing

It is possible to have automated and automatic methods for primary radar data
prucessing.

Thu automatedtmethad is a method whereby the operator detects the target visually
while the coordinates are measured using the read-out equipment. Here the encoding
of the coordinates is done by the equipment without the participation of the oper-
ator. The automated method is preferable in detecting targets under the conditions
of jamming. It makes it possible to have the selective reading of data displayed on
the indicator screen.

The automatic method is a method which envisages the complete exclusion of man

from the process of solving the problems of target detection and measuring the co-

ordinates. Automatic primary processing of radar signals is carried out by a spe-

cialized computer (a specialized PDP computer) which includes devices for detection
and the measuring of coordinates.

143

INJI‘OIWWC1A1.lEHE(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The detection device. The optimum method for detecting effective signals against a
background of interference (noise) is accumulation. For this reason the detectors
employ analog and discrete (digital) storages. For primary digital processing it
is essential to convert the voltage received from the output of the radar receiver
into a discrete amount expressed in a binary code. This conversion is performed by
a quantizer. Then the detector processes the quantized signals by one of two meth-
ods: by the quasioptimum or the weightless processing method.

The quasioptimum methods for processing quantum signals are difficult to realize
and in practice more often simplified target detection algorithms are employed using
the weightless processing method.

This method is based upon an analysis of the density of units within the width of
the radar antenna directional pattern. Naturally, the density of units in the tar-
get area is alvays greater than the density of units in the interference area.

The decision of detecting the start of a blip cluster is taken using the criterion
2 out of m and the end of the cluster in recording K misses. The logic of the work
carried out by the program detector of the start and end of the return signal clus-
ter is usually written thus: "£lm--K."

The unit for measuring the target coordinates for range DI, azimuth 5t and elevation
ct. The measuring of range can be carried out by a special range measuring unit or
by a special computer in the process of detecting the target. The measuring of
range is based upon measuring the time interval from the moment of sending the
transmitted pulse to the moment of receiving the return signal by the radar receiver.

with the weightless processing of quantized signals, the measuring of target azi-
muth at comes down to calculating the azimuth of the middle of the return signal
cluster.

The measuring of target elevation ct is carried out in an analogous manner.
ScuMuLuy Processing

The coordinates measured as a result of PDP characterize the target's position in
space at the moment of its radar location. The determining of the parameters of
target motion by processing radar data coming over several scan cycles is carried

out in the secondary data processing. For constructing optimum algorithms the
secundary processing is usually divided into two successive stages: the detection

of target trajectory and the tracking of the trajectory.

Depending upon the degree of the operator's involvement, each of the designated
stages can be manual, automated or automatic. Automatic detection of a target tra-
jectory is termed autolock-on and automatic tracking is known as autotracking.

The solving of these problems is based upon the principle of a scan-by-scan linking
of the target blips the essence of vhich is that the position of the blips of each

target received in the next scan cycles is determined by the nature of this targeﬂs
motion.

164

- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFIJCJAL USIZCHNLY

The movement of the target is characterized by the parameters such as heading,
speed, acceleration and so forth and these can be calculated from data on the co-
ordinates during the preceding scans. From the parameters it is possible to deter-
mine (construct) the target's trajectory. Thus, with the steady and rectilinear
motion of a target, its trajectory will be a straight line. For this reason, in
the next scan cycle, the blip from the target will appear not in an arbitrary

point of space but rather in a certain area which has moved in the direction of

the target's motion over a distance determined by the radar's scan interval To and
the target's speed.

In the stages of detecting and tracking a target's trajectory in the secondary proc-
essing algorithms usually the following operations are established: calculating

the parameters of the target's motion (heading, speed or the components of the
velocity vector); the extrapolation of target coordinates; strobing or establish-
ing the zone of the probable target location in the following scan cycle; collation
or comparing the coordinates of the blips selected by the strobe and selecting one
of them for continuing the trajectory.

azlculacing the parameters of the target's motion. The parameters are determined
on the basis of data on the target's coordinates over n scans of the radar. Since
the coordinates are measured with errors, for improving the quality of the data the
need arises to smooth out the motion parameters and this can be done by the least
square, weighted mean and exponential methods.

Extrapolation of target coordinates. In the general instance. by extrapolation one
usually understands the extension of results obtained from observing one portion of
a phenomenon to another portion of it. In the extrapolation of coordinates, one
studies the law of the target's motion in the time interval over n radar scans and
this is extended beyond the interval of observation, for example, to n-tm scan.

The extrapolation of coordinates can be carried out by the least square method and
using the parameters of target motion. In extrapolating the coordinates using the
parameters of target motion, one assumes a hypothesis on the steady and rectilinear
motion of the target.

:ﬂyvbing. Due to the presence of measurement errors and the extrapolation of co-
ordinates, as well as the possible maneuvering of a target. in a general instance
the extrapolation points in the next scan may not coincide with the current target
blips. The current blip in the next radar scan will appear around the extrapola-
tion point. The area of the probable appearance of a current blip in the next scan
has come to be called the strobe.

The shape of the strobe can vary. In strobing one calculates the area of the prob-
able appearance of a target and selects the targets which have fallen into the
strobe. It is considered that a current blip belongs to the route of the target
being processed if the difference for the modulus of the same coordinates of the
current blip and the extrapolation point does not exceed the allowable amounts.

The ellipsoid is the optimum shape of a strobe in operating in a rectangular coord-
inate system.

(bIZation. In the general case it is possible for several blips to fall in a strobe
and of these one will belong to the route of the processed target (the remaining

145

FOR1OFFKJA1.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

blips are spurious from noise or other targets). The blip of the actual target dif-
fers from the spurious ones that have fallen into the strobe only by the distance
from the strobe center (the extrapolation point). Both for the spurious and for the
true blip. this distance is a random amount. But the statistical characteristics of
these random amounts differ and this is employed in selecting the blips in the
strobe.

The deviation of the true target blip from the strope center is subordinate to a
two-dimensional nornal distribution law. The probability density for the appear-
ance of a true blip is increased in approaching the extrapolation point while the
distribution of the spurious blips within the strobe is even.

Depending upon the values of the mean square deviations ax, 0,. the selection of the

true blips can be carried out by the method of minimal elliptical deviations if 0;!
a" or by the method of minimum linear deviations if o‘on-o.

Yertiary Data Processing

A command center can receive information on the same target from several sources and
each source submits reports at arbitrary moments of time.

On the basis of the reports from the sources. in the process of tertiary processing
it is essential to make up a general report and for this it is necessary to reduce
the information to a uniform start of the count in space and time; to identify the

reports belonging to the same targets; to calculate the metric coordinates of the
general reports .

The reducing of information to a unifonm start of the count in space is carried out
by performing the operation of coordinate conversion and to a uniform start of the
count in time by performing the operation of extrapolating the coordinates to the
moment of processing time. The solution to the problem of converting the coordin-
ates into tertiary processing algorithms depends upon the coordinate system in which
the information is exchanged. The simplest are the formulas for coordinate conver-
sion for a rectangular system.

The coordinates can also be extrapolated by the same methods as in the secondary
processing algorithms.

Identification of reports. The problem of selecting the reports which belong to one
target but which have been received from different sources is the basic and most
labor-intensive one in the tertiary processing process. The process of selecting
the reports is broken down into rough and precise identification.

Rough identification comes down to assessing the difference in the same target co-
ordinates. Two reports relate to the same target if the difference of the same co-
ordinates does not exceed the acceptable amounts. For the purpose of formalizing
this process, a coincidence feature is introduced for the metric coordinates of two
reports .

0n the basis of the coincidence feature, the A group of reports is formed and these
in the general instance can belong to different targets.

146

POI:0F1I(1AI.USE(MVLY
FOR 0F1ﬂC1Al.USEioNLY

Precise identification is carried out on the basis of logical rules and analyzing the
metric properties of the space of the reports which have fallen into the A group.

For an analysis of the reports in the A group, it is possible to employ the logical
rules: a, b, c, d. '

Rule 3. If the A group includes reports from one source, then these reports relate
to different targets and they must not be considered identical. This rule stems from
the impossibility of receiving two reports on one target in one scan.

Rule b. If the A group includes one report from each source, these reports are re-
ports on one target and they may be considered identical. This rule is based on the
fact that it is improbable that one of two nearby targets would be observed by one
radar and the second by the other.

Rule c. If the A group contains a uniform number of reports from each information
source. then the total number of targets in the group is determined by the number of
reports from each source.

Ruic d. if the A group includes a varying number of reports from the sources, then
the most reliable situation is given by the information source which transmits infor-
mation on a larger number of reports. The logical rules c, d designate variations
of report identification. In the cases of the designated logical rules (c, d) there
is the subsequent analysis of the reports on the basis of the metric properties of
the reports' space.

4.1.3. The System of Taking, Transmitting and Displaying Information
The System for Taking and Feeding In Information

With the automated processing of radar data, the task of detecting the target and
measuring its coordinates is carried out by an operator using information taking de—
vices and the method of selective electronic sighting which is based on the princi-
ple of converting the observed coordinates of the target blips into an electrical
signal. The system for taking information includes an indicator, sensors and a com-

putcr.

The Data Transmission System

The exchange of information in an ASU [automated control system] is made up of the
transmitting and receiving of discrete messages. The transmission of messages over
the communications channels is carried out by special signals which are information
carriers. Uniform Dc pulses usually serve as the elementary signals.

rurjbymnnce of data transmission systems. The operating quality of data transmis-
sion systems is usually described by the following indicators: data transmission
rate, communications capacity and reliability of message transmission.

The message transmission rate characterizes the amount of information which can be
transmitted in a unit of time.

167

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I

My ihr capacity of 3 communications channel one understands that quantity of infor-
mation which can be transmitted in a unit of time with the required degree of trans-
mission accuracy. Communications capacity is the maximum possible transmission rate.
Communications capacity in transmitting binary messages can be estimated by the num-
ber of elementary pulses transmitted per second, that is, in bands.

The reliability of message transmission describes the degree to which the received
messages conform to the transmdtted ones. Quantitatively this can be assessed by
the probability of correct reception PC or the probability of false reception Pf of
the information. The designated probabilities are related by the ratio Pcl-l-Pf.

For increasing the reliability of message reception correcting codes are employed
which improve reliability by introducing redundancy.

The data transmission system consists of a telereceiver, a teletransmitter and a
tclcx communications channel.

The teletransmitter converts the binary code of the messages received from the auto-
mated equipment into signals suitable for transmission over the communications chan-
nel. it has switching and channel equipment.

The switching equipment stores the binary code of the messages while the channel
equipment converts the code into signals, for example. into phase modulated ones
which are transmitted over the communications channel.

The relereceiver carries out the conversion opposite to the teletransmitter.

my

inn {u:a Ffsplay System

This system provides the contact between the commander (the personnel of the combat
crews) and the ASU computer complexes. It makes it possible to create an information
modvl of the process being controlled. Here the following are provided:

A visual reproduction of the information on the air enemy, on the combat readiness
and combat actions of subordinate and cooperating troops, the results of the machine
decisions and monitoring of the control process;

Thw display of the terrain map and the battle formations of the controlled troops;
The receiving and inputting of information into the computer complexes and into the
communications channels and the electronic (digital) exchange of information between
the personnel of the combat crews both at the given and cooperating command post
(cunt rol center) .

The information is displayed in the form of digits. symbols and signs. -

A display system includes: computer complexes. various types of displays and coup-
lers tor the radar equipment and communications channels. The computer complexes

following the corresponding algorithms and on the basis of information stored in
their memory form the information model.

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Displays are Classified as Follows:

in terms of the method of use, including individual and collectively used displays;
the individual displays are designed for equipping automated work areas for the mem-
hers of combat crews at command posts (control centers); collectively used devices
display the air situation for a certain group of persons in a combat crew of a com—
mand pest (control center) and their uniform understanding of the air situation.

By the type of information displayed there are primary and secondary displays; the
screens of primary displays show the primary and secondary air situation. while the
screens of the secondary displays show the secondary situation; by the primary air
situation one usually understands the situation received from the radars and as the
secondary the situation received from the computer complex and communications chan-
nels.

According to the methods of digit formation there are displays which realize the
following methods: small-sized television screen, functional and matrix.

With the method of a small-sized television screen. the sign is formed by the point
mosaic method. with the functional method the sign is drawn by a beam on the screen
of a CRT. and with the matrix method the sign is printed on the CRT screen. For re-
alizing the matrix method, special printing tubes of the charactron type are em-
ployed.

For reproducing the signs on the screen. electronic. electroluminescent and opto-
electronic elements can be employed. Information on the situation can be repre—
sented on indicators and panels. The P?! [plan-position indicators], altitude in-

dicators, electronic plotting boards and large screens are employed as indicators.

nvnformance of the data display system. The functional quality of data display sys-
tems is usually evaluated by information and technical performance. Among the in-
formational performance of a display one could put the information capacity. the
specific information capacity and the speed and reliability of information display.

information capacity “(0) (binary units) describes the maximum amount of information
whivh can be displayed on the display screen:

me) - uspiogzxs. (4.44)

where Nsp--number of sign places on the screen;
Ks--number of signs generated by display sign generator.

The specific information capacity 1 (binary units/sign place) describes the amount
of information per sign place. This is determined:

j - logzK,. (6.45)

The information display speed R0 (binary units per second) describes the quantity of
information displayed on the indicator screen per unit of time:

so - % logzks, (4.46)

149

FOR 0FFKJAL.USE¢DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL PSE ONLY

where z--number of simultaneously filled sign places on display screen;
ls--writing time of one sign.

The reliability of information display describes the degree to which the reproduced
signs ronform to the sign which should be reproduced. Numerically this is assessed
by the probability of the false Pf or correct Pc reading of the sign. Under the

conditions of interference, the specific information capacity (binary units/sign
place) is:

P

j . log2K3+ (l-Pf)log2(1- pf)+pfiogz[rfl . (4.47)

Among the technical characteristics are resolution, brightness and contrast, screen
size, playback time, operational reliability and others.

4.2. Combat Capabilities of Radar Troops
4.2.1. Definitions and Quantitative Indicators of Combat Capabilities

By the combat capabilities of the RTV one understands their ability to carry out the
missions of radar reconnaissance, radar support for fighter guidance, target desig-
nation for the ZRV and radar support for control and cmmmand.

Combat capabilities are assessed by a system of indicators which describe: the di-
mensions of the space for receiving radar information (using radar equipment) cor—
responding in terms of its performance to the requirements of carrying out the tasks
of combat control as well as the information capacity of the system involved in the

processing and providing radar information and any of the system's elements.

The combat capabilities of a radar subunit the radar eQuipment of which is deployed
at one combat position are characterized by the information zone of this subunit;
the information capabilities for the output of the command post (information channel)

is described by the number of simultaneously tracked targets with the set discrete-
mess .

1he information zone is an aggregate of the detection zones of the subunit's radars
and represents an area of space in which are provided the measuring of the three co-
ordinates, identification and the determining of other tactical characteristics of
the radar targets.

The combat capabilities of a group of radar subunits or radar units are character-
ized by the area of the existence of a radar field of information and which is formed
by the aggregate of the subunit information zones. For evaluating combat capabili-
Lics. the basic interest is in the area of the existence of a solid radar informadon
field within which continuous tracking of the detected targets is ensured.

The information capabilities of the command posts of a group of radar subunits,
radar units and command posts are also assessed by the quantity of simultaneously
tracked targets in observing the discreteness permissible for successfully carrying

out the specific mission of radar support for control of the firing complexes or
troops.

150

FOR OPTICJAI.USEIJNLY
POI 0511(1AI.USEioNLX

The capabilities of a group of subunits and units to detect SAJ [scurce of active
jamming] are judged by the triangulation zone and field.

By the triangulation zone one understands an area of space in which the coordinates
of the SAJ are determined with a preset accuracy. The aggregate of the triangula-
tion zones of three and more radar subunits forms a triangulation field under the
condition of processing the bearings to the SAJ from any of the subunits in the giv-
en group at a central cammand post.

The detection zone of radar equipment and the information zone of a radar subunit
are limited by the following: the minimum and maximum elevations, the maximum range
and the extremal altitude of detection. The rangefinding zone of a passive radar
complex (set) is limited by the minimum and maximum elevations for obtaining a bear-
ing to the SAJ. These parameters are ordinarily given in the technical specifica-
tions for the specific radar equipment.

The solid active radar zone and the triangulation zone of a group of radar subunits
or a unit is restricted by the following: the outer limit of the field at the given

elevation, by the elevations of the lover and upper limits of the solid radar field
(triangulation field).

The limit of the solid radar field (triangulation field) at a given altitude is the
continuous line formed in the intersecting of the field of an imaginary surface
equidistant in all its points from the surface of the earth (sea).

The height of the lower limit of the solid radar field (triangulation field) is the
name given to the minimum altitude for continuosu tracking of a target (SAJ) flying
a course of terrain following. The height of the upper limit of the solid radar
field (triangulation field) is the name given to the maximum altitude of continuous
tracking of a target (SAJ) flying horizontally.

4.2.2. Methods of Evaluating Combat Capabilities

7%0 infbnnation zone of a radar subunit is constructed from the overflight-tested
detection zones of the subunit's radar equipment (5.1).

The information zone is a family of horizontal sections at different altitudes and
vertical sections in the sectors of the expected actions of an air enemy. The verti-
cal sections indicate the minimum and maximum elevations Gain, 0.3x, the maximum
range Dmnx and the extremal altitude “ext of detection.

The choice of the number of the family section and the computational values for the
altitudes of an air enemy are determined by the set combat missions and by the rug-
gedness of the terrain.

The effect of active interference on a subunit's information zone is considered by

the compression coefficient and the sector for the effective neutralization of the

detection zones for the radar equipment of this subunit.

The parameters of a solid radar information field of a unit or group of radar sub-
units are found by analytical and graphic-analytical methods.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The analytical method is employed for an approximate determination of the parameters

for the solid radar field in the stage of planning combat operations. The employ-
ment or this method presupposes the following assumptions:

a) Radars of the low-altitude (type I) and high-altitude (type II) types are in-
volved in forming the radar field;

b) The positions of the subunits do not distort the radar detection zones;

c) The subunits are positioned at equal distances apart (in terms of the vertices
of equilateral triangles).

For calculating the parameters of the radar information field using this method it
is essential to know the area of the territory of combat operations stert the number

of existing subunits “sub and the standard information zones of the type I and type
II radars Ui-f(D)).

The height of the lower limit Hg is determined for the information zone of the type
I radar and for this the minimum detection range of radar targets is calculated for
which the radar field is solid:

/ ster
Do I m. (4 . (08)

The target altitude corresponding to the found minimum detection range 00 is the
lower limit Hz of the solid radar field.

For the upper limit of a solid radar field, the extremal height of the information
zone for a type II station is employed under the condition:

2“extllctﬁ cmaxII ‘ K1-73Do ‘ DmaxII"“extIl°t8 ‘mstI (“'49)
where K- 1, 2, 3-integer depending upon the ratio of the number of
type I and type II radars in the given battle forma-
tion;
“extll; ‘maxII‘ DnaxII--psrameters for the information zone of the type II
radar.

The graphic-analytical method is the basic one in calculating the parameters of a
solid radar information field. It makes it possible to consider the influence of
real positions on the detection zones of radar equipment and to determine the detec—
tion and tracking area for radar targets employing terrain following.

The initial data for calculating the field's parameters using this method are the
battle formation of the radar unit (group of radar subunits) plotted on a map with a
3L3]? of 100,000 or 200,000 (depending upon the ruggedness of the terrain), a family
of horizontal sections for the subunit information fields at various altitudes
relative to sea level. The use of this calculation method provides for breaking the

positions of the subunits in a radar unit into quadrants. For simplifying the cal-
culations it is advisable to use the reference grid x, y found on the map.

152

INJI‘OFFICJAL USEZCNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In each quadrant one puts the total of the altitudes of the highest point of the re-
lief above sea level and the selected target altitude over the terrain Bzg'in meters.
At the same time on the map are depicted the sections of the information zone of the
radar subunits at different altitudes ($0. 100 and so forth. in meters) and to which
is assigned an altitude relative to sea level by adding to the position's altitude
Hdet and then the quandrants are selected which meet the detection condition “it >
“det‘ The aggregate of these quadrants forms a section of the radar information
field at the selected target altitude. The minimum height of the section is chosen
as equal to the minimum possible altitude of an air enemy employing terrain follow-
ing. and the number of sections is determined depending upon the ruggedness of the
terrain. The minimum and maximum altitudes of the target at which the section of
the radar information field is solid are taken as the height of the lower and upper
limits of the solid radar field. '

The information capabilities of the RTV command posts depend upon the information
capabilities of the incoming information channels of these command posts and their
capabilities for processing and putting out information (the technical devices and
the combat crew). The informational capabilities of an information channel which
are assessed by the number of simultaneously tracked targets with the set discrete-
ness are determined by the information capacity of the links forming this channel.

153

FOR‘OFIWC1A1.USIE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. FIGHTER AVIATION

5.1. The Weapons System of AD Fighter Aviation

5.1.1. Design Principles of an Aircraft Hissile Complex
Structural Diagmn of the Couples:

An aircraft missile complex (AHC) is a complex of air and ground devices used to de-
stroy manned and unmanned aircraft in the air.

An AMC includes: an all-weather manned fighter armed with air-to-air missiles and
cannons and carrying an onboard radar system for locating the air target, for aiming
and weapons control; a complex of ground or airborne control and guidance equipment.

.Fighters are employed in the AD Troops for hitting airborne targets chiefly at the
distant approaches to the defended installations. Here they can operate individual-
ly or in groups and when necessary autonomously, outside of contact with the ground
control centers in independently searching for and destroying airborne targets.

The contents of the Intercept Problem

By an interception one understands the stage in the fighters' flight toward the
airborne enemy carried out upon col-ands from the control center up to the moment
the enemy is detected by the onboard equipment or visually.

In the general instance the intercept problem consists in determining the fighter'a
laws of motion which ensure its rendezvous with the airborne target at the extremal
value of any characteristic of the fighter's motion. As such a characteristic one
can adopt. for example. fuel consumption expended on the interception, the time of
the interception, the place (point or line) of the interception and so forth.

0f the greatest significance are the tasks of determining such laws of fighter
motion whereby either a maximum distance of the intercept line is obtained or a minr
imum flight time to the interception.

An essential condition for bringing the fighter to the point of impact (intercept)
with an airborne target is the continuous or discrete control of its flight by pro-

viding the pilot with the appropriate commands produced on a basis of information
on the current position of the fighter and the target and the kinematic characteris-
tics of their relative movement.

154

FIIICIHNC1A1.USE(MVLY
lntumctiun of the Couple: in the Equipment

The Interaction of the equip-en: of the complex in destroying an airborne target
(viewing the entire flight by the fighter as a complex process conditionally con-
sisting of several successive stages) consists in the following (Pig. 5.l)-.

M In the first stage there is the
ground (distant) guidance of the
fighter to the airborne target using

. __-...______.z...4 4 the ground (airborne or ship) control
,I \ ’4 I sys tan.
\ / l o
,’\/ ,4“ Ground guidance ensures the bringir _, of
/ ‘/ ,3; the fighter into a tactically advan-
I,"’ ’ 9 tageous position relative to the air-
g’ borne target at a distance of target
—--———’.; visibility using the onboard detection

 

equipoent or visually .

Fig. 5.1. Interaction of equip-cut in
an aircraft missile complex
[Roman numerals designate stages of flight]

The stage of ground guidance is pre-
ceded by the detection of the airborne
target and the notifying of the con-
trol centers of it, the adopting of
the conunder's decision to destroy this target and the issuing of it to executors.

The ground guidance of the fighters to the airborne targets is carried out by the
crews of the control centers with the aid of equip-eat by giving guidance co-ands.
by telling the pilots the flight node and transnitting infomtion on the target's
situation.

The second stage is honing (close guidance) in the process of which the fighter in-
dependently closes with the airborne target using the onboard equipment (or visual-
ly) for executing the attack.

In practical terms honing comences after the detection of the target by the fighter
and ends with the employing of the onboard weapons. The crew of the control center
in the honing stage should be constantly ready to provide the pilot with the neces-
sary help even to the point of issuing the cot-sand to break off the attack.

The third stage, the breaking off of the attack. is executed by various nethods de-
pending upon the type of weapons elployed by the fighter. For exalple, if the
fighter employs aissiles with passive heat-sensing heads. then the breaking off of
the attack can be executed inediately after their launching, while in employing
nissiles with seniactive radar honing heads, for ensuring control over the Iissile's
I' light it is essential to "illininate" the target with the onboard radar and pull
out of the attack after the target has been hit.

The fourth stage or the guiding of the fighter to the landing airfield. is carried
out using the ground and onboard radio navigation systens. Guidance can be carried

out both to the airfield where the aircraft took off or to any of the previously
chosen airfields located in the target intercept area. In the latter instance. the

155

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distance of the intercept line can be significantly increased in comparison with
the returning to the take-off airfield.

Thus. a significant number of personnel and equipment is involved in carrying out

and supporting the intercept flight and this requires the organizing of clear co-

ordination and the all-round training of all the persons participating in and sup-
porting it.

Fighcwr Guidance Methods

For guiding fighters to an airborne target in a horizontal plane it is possible to
use the following basic guidance methods: "pursuit.“ “interception" and "maneuverJ'

The choice of one or another guidance method depends upon the tactical situation and
the characteristics of the weapons system and the fighter being guided to the air-
borne target.

 

‘t”'1

Fig. 5.3. The "interception" guidance
Fig. 5.2. The "pursuit" guidance method method

Ch. "ruluuit" guidance method provides for the pursuit of the target by the fighter
along o pursuit curve the essence of which is that the fighter's velocity vector at
any moment of time is aimed at the target. The fighter's flight trajectory in the
horizontal plane with the "pursuit" guidance method can be approximately constructed
tron the set values of the target's and fighter's speed proceeding from the adopted
discreteness of dividing up the time axis (Fig. 5.2).

An important positive property of the "pursuit" method is the simplicity of its re-
alization since in guiding the fighter to the target it is sufficient to know only
the coordinates of the target's current position. Moreover. the given method is
littlo sensitive to maneuvering by the target at great distances as well as to
errors in measuring target coordinates.

One or the drawbacks of the "pursuit" method is the fact that in guiding the fighter
to the target from the rear hemisphere. a sufficient excess of fighter speed over
target speed is required while in guidance from the forward hemisphere the curve of
the fighter's trajectory rapidly increases in approaching the target and as a conse-
quence of this the g-loads are increased and it is possible that the target may
deviate from the kinematic guidance trajectory.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

A tactical drawback of the "pursuit" aethod is that it does not provide an oppor-
(unity to intercept a target at a set line or a aininization of the fightsr's tiae
and distance in intercepting the target.

Due to the designated positive and negative properties, the given nethod can be em-
ployed on the terminal stage of guiding the fighter to the air target after the
fighter has first been brought to the target's rear hemisphere.

The "interception" guidance method consists in bringing the fighter to a certain
lead point on the target's flight trajectory (Fig. 5.3). The lead point is selected
on an extrapolated target trajectory under the assu-ption of the even and recti-
linear movement of the target. In guidance by the "interception" method the
fighter--target line of sight shifts in the guidance plane parallel to itself.

The advantages of the given method consist in the possibility of bringing the fight-
fighter to the point of inpact with the target in a minimum time and that it in Iany
instances makes it possible to provide guidance to airborne targets the speed of
which exceeds fighter speed.

The drawbacks of the "interception" nethod are in the relative coaplesity of realiz-
ing it and the necessity of measuring the parameters of the target's notion as veil
as in the high sensitivity of guidance errors to errors in neasuring the coordin-
ates and parameters of the target's motion. Moreover, using the given method it is
impossible to bring the fighter to an airborne target to a definite, preset posi-
tion relative to the target.

The "interception" method can be employed in the initial guidance stage for rapidly
closing with the target.

Ihe "maneuver" guidhnce method is a com-
bined one and brings together the ad-
vantages of the designated aethods.

For bringing the fighter to a certain posi-
tion relative to the air target, the
"maneuver" method provides three stages:
closing, turning and coming in on the tar-
get (Fig. 5.6).

In the first guidance stage, the fighter
flies along a rectilinear trajectory from
the initial guidance point or airfield up
to the point of commencing the turn.

 

Fig. 5.6. The "maneuver" guidance
method In the second guidance stage, the fighter
turns along an arc with a variable curve
radius to the required angle for bringing the fighter to the set aspect angle to the
target.

In the third guidance stage, the fighter flies along a rectilinear trajectory to the
lead point. In this stage there is coapensation for the guidance errors in the pre-
vious stages, the search for and detection of the target by the onboard radar and

157

FOI‘OFFICIAI.U8510NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preparations for the attack. Upon the completion of the third stage, the fighter
should be the set distance away from the target. From this moment guidance is car-

ricd out by the "pursuit" method and this brings the fighter to the curve for aiming
and attacking the target.

Technical Realization of Guidance Methods and the Fighter Control Loop

Technically one or another guidance method in an automated control system can be
realized by employing analogue or discrete computers which using the appropriate
algorithms calculate the fighter control commands for heading, altitude and speed.
The commands generated by the computers are transmitted over the radio link to the
fighter and are displayed on the piloting and navigating instruents (Fig. 5.5).
Moreover, the ground guidance equipment generates individual fighter control com-
mands and target designation commands which ensure the possibility of the automatic
target lock-on by the fighter's radar. These conmands are also sent over the com-
mand radio link to the fighter, they are fed into the appropriate systems and are
employed by the pilot for searching for. detecting and attacking the target.

 

Fig. 5.5. Fighter Control Loop

Key: l--Information source; 2--Indicator; 3--Pighter controller;
4--Conputer; 5--Te1econtrol radio link; 6-Encoder; 7-Trana-
mitter; 8~-Controls; 9-Autopilot; lO—-Pilot; 11--Decoder;
lZ--Flight instruments; 13--Receiver; 14-Receiver of command
radio link.

5.1.2. Technical Realization of Weapons in Aircraft Missile Complex

Requirements on Fighter Aircraft and Bossibilities of satisfying Them

For a fighter to successfully carry out the combat missions of destroying airborne
targets. it should possess a number of properties and in designing definite tactical
and technical demands are made on it. In a completed. ready-for-action fighter, the

tactical and technical requirements are embodied in the tactical and technical char-
actcristics.

158

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All tactical and technical demands on a fighter aircraft can be divided into two
groups:

a) Tactical requirements: combat readiness, speed and altitude, maneuverability,
range and length of flight, take-off and landing properties, the weapons system,
equipment, autonomy of actions and so forth;

b) The technical requirements: strength, rigidity, dependability and survivability
of the basic structure, propulsion unit, assemblies and equipment, convenience in

operation on ground and in the air, economy, production cost and so forth.

The experience of the designing, operation and combat employment of fighters shows
that a majority of the tactical and technical demands made on them are interrelated

and contradictory. For this reason only the basic demands on a fighter could be
satisfied best. Here in a number of instances compromises had to be made in select-

ing the basic requirements, considering the specific purpose of the actual type of
fighter.

Let us briefly examine some of the designated demands and the possibilities of satis-
fying them. Here the demands on the weapons system of an AD fighter and the possi-

bilities of satisfying them will be examined separately.

ﬁxatical requirements. High combat readiness of fighters is achieved chiefly by a
high level of automating the fighter systems and equipment, by employing special
maintenance equipment and by the training level of the flight and maintenance per-
sonnel.

Fighter speed and altitude are characterized by the range of speeds and altitudes of
steady horizontal flight from their maximum values to the minimal ones.

Advantages in maximum speed over the enemy aircraft make it possible for the fighter
to catch up with the target and impose battle on it as well as escape from enemy
attack. Moreover, great maximum speed increases the total energy of the fighter and
as a consequence of this the range of its dynamic altitudes is broadened and climb
performance is improved.

Huwevcr, in the combat employment of fighters of great practical significance is not
unly the maximum speed but also the entire range of speeds in which a fighter can
provide steady flight. For this reason a fighter's minimum speed should also be of
relatively small [sic] significance.

The range of speeds is broadened chiefly by reducing fighter drag and increasing its
thrust-to—veight ratio and net wing loading. However, the latter should not be
achieved by increasing the fighter's weight as with the given engine thrust this
leads to a reduction in the thrust-to-veight ratio.

Increasing a fighter's altitude of steady horizontal flight is achieved by increas-
ing its dynamic qualities and engine thrust and by reducing aircraft weight. The

minimum flying altitudes are determined by the conditions of the fighter's combat
employment and by flight safety.

159

FOI¢OFFKJA1.USE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fighter maneuverability is one of its most important flight tactical characteristics.
An advantage in maneuverability makes it possible for a fighter to anticipate the
air enemy in taking up a tactically advantageous position for the attack, to seize

and keep the initiative in air combat and to promptly escape from enemy attack.

High fighter maneuverability is achieved with optimum values for such parameters as
the thrust-to-weight ratio, the net wing load and the wing-sweep angle as well as in

employing high-lift devices needed for obtaining the required maneuverability at
subsonic speeds of flight.

The distance and length of fighter flight characterize the depth and time of their
effect on an air enemy. High values of flight range and length for AD fighters pro-
vide them with an opportunity to hit the enemy at the distant approaches to the de-
fended installations and to select the optimum method of combat operations under the
specific conditions of the combat situation. They also ensure the possibility of
retargeting the fighters in the course of combat operations.

Thedistnnce and length of fighter flight depend chiefly upon the fuel supply. aero-
dynamic qualities, engine economy. speed and altitude of flight. For a majority of
modern fighters the maximum distances and durations of flight are reached at alti-
tudes of 9.000—12.000 m and with subsonic flight speeds.

The take-off and landing qualities of fighters determine their basing conditions and

are characterized by the lift-off and touch-down speeds and by the lengths of the
take-off and landing runs.

The basic methods for improving the take-off and landing properties of fighters are
to employ high-lift devices, assisted take-off units, wheel braking, landing brake
parachutes and engine thrust reversing.

The relatively high take-off weights of fighters lead to the necessity of basing
them chiefly at airfields with a man-made surface and significant dimensions of the
runways. The use of effective high-lift devices and other methods for improving the
take-off and landing properties make it possible to base the fighters at airfields
with shorter runway length and at dirt airfields.

Fighter equipment. The successful carrying out of combat missions by anAD fighterto
destroy the air enemy under various conditions of the tactical and meteorological
situation, at any time of day and over the entire range of altitudes and speeds,

can be carried out only due to the employment of a range of equipment (radio-
tcchnical, flight-navigation, high—altitude and so forth). The advanced equipent of
modern fighters ensures the fullest and most effective employment of their tactical
flight properties in carrying out various combat missions, including in conducting

autonomous or semiautonomoua combat operations. The automated flight control sys-
tem is an inseparable part of the equipment of modern fighters.

Thuhnical requirements. The satisfying of the technical demands placed upon AD
fighters is related to satisfying the tactical requirements and is determined chief-
ly by the general level of airframe construction and by the expenditures on the de-
signing and modernization of modern aircraft. Here the increased cost of a modern
fighter is substantially influenced by the increased need to employ a large amount

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of expensive radio electronic equipment and by the significant increase in the
amount of exploratory, scientific research and experimental work. In a number of
instances a tendency can be noted for a decline in certain tactical and technical
requirements which, without substantially reducing the aircraft's combat qualities,
make its development less expensive. ‘”

The demands on the strength and rigidity of modern fighters with their relatively
low weight are achieved by employing combinations of materials from special steels,
aluminum and titanium alloys and plastics.

The extensive use of titanium alloys and plastics in modern airframe construction
has been caused chiefly by the fact that they possess a comparatively low specific
weight and high mechanical strength. Thus, titanium alloys are 2- or 3-fold strong-
er than aluminum ones, 4- or 5-fold stronger than magnesium alloys and even surpass
certain alloyed steels in strength.

Increased survivability and reliability of all systems are a characteristic feature
of the new generation of military aircraft generally and fighters in particular.

The demand of increased survivability is met by employing special materials and
methods for constructing the airframe, the propulsion unit and the systems which en-
sure the carrying out of the mission and the safe return of the fighter to the des-
ignated airfield with the failing of individual technical devices or the presence of
demure.

High fighter reliability manifested in the form of the trouble-free operation of all
its systems is determined by the quality of the materials employed in manufacturing
it. by the improved manufacturing methods for the technical devices, by the skills
of the flight and engineer-technical personnel as well as by the advanced technical
and organizational methods for operating, servicing and overhauling the aircraft
equipment.

lemnuuke on the Fighter weapons system and the Possibilities of satisfying Them

By the fighter's weapons system one must understand its weapons (chiefly guided
missiles as well as cannons) designed to hit airborne targets and the sight system
which cnSures the searching for the airborne target, aiming and control of the
weapons.

The basic tactical and technical demands made upon a fighter weapons sytem are:

the possibility of employing the weapons over the entire range of fighter altitudes
and speeds and in conducting close maneuvering air combat, the all-angle capability
of the weapons system, the high fire capabilities, concealment of attack, the possi-
bility of creating various types of interference for the enemy and high antijamming
capability.

The all-angle capability of a weapons system presupposes the possibility of attack-
ing the target from any direction. However, satisfying the demand of all-angle
capability complicates and increases the weight of the weapons system. With other
conditions being equal, this leads to a deterioration of the fighter's flight per-
formance. For this reason the all-angle capability of the weapons system as a re-
quirement must not be considered categorical for any type of fighter. For example,

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hritish military specialists consider it extremely complicated and irrational to
provide guidance of light missiles under the conditions of close maneuvering air
combat in attacking on head-on or collision courses.

High fire capability of a fighter can be achieved by employing the largest possible
number of powerful weapons. However, considering the negative influence of the ex-
ternal suspension pods and the weight of the weapons system on the fighter flight
performance, it is essential to select an optimum variation of the weapons composi-
tion proceeding from the basic purpose of the given type of fighter.

In the opinion of foreign specialists. such a variation would be a range of weapons
consisting of short— and long-range guided missiles and a cannon.

Concealment of attack is a most important condition which determines the probability
of destroying the enemy.

5.1.3. Combat Capabilities of an Aircraft Missile Complex (AHC)
The Concept 01"MMC Combat capabilities”

By AHC combat capabilities one understands the expected result of the AD fighter's
carrying out of the set combat mission and which can be achieved in a certain space
over a certain time under the specific situational conditions.

The basis of the concept of "AHC combat capabilities" is the expected result of the
AD iightcr's carrying 0i of the combat mission set for it. However. the expected
result alone does not provide a full description of the given concept. as it does
not answer the question of in what space and over what time this result can be re-
alized. For this reason, a complete description of the concept "AHC combat capa-
bilities" can be provided only by an aggregate of indicators which describe both the
expected result as well as the space and time required for the AD fighter to carry
nut the combat missions set for it.

(insuffiazcion of Indicators fbr AMC Cbmbat capabilities

The indicators describing the AHC combat capabilities can be divided into three
groups:

n) The probability characteristics which describe the expected result from the
flghter's carrying out of the combat mission;

b) The spatial indicators describing the space within which the fighters are cap-
able of carrying out combat missions;

c) The time indicators describing the time required for the fighter to carry out
a combat mission.

The probability of destroying an airborne target is the basic probability indicator

for the combat capabilities of individual AD fighters if one proceeds from their

chief specific purpose. From the amount of this indicator it is possible to assess
the effectiveness of an individual AHC both with the fighter's operation against an

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

airborne target with ground guidance as well as in operations with independent tai-
gcl hunting.

The basic spatial indicator for the combat capabilities of an AD fighter is the
distance of the line for destroying an airborne target in terms of the fighter's
fuel supply. The position of the destruction line can be set relative to the fight-
er take-off airfield.

Among the basic time indicators of an AD fighter, are the time required to carry out
the combat mission and the time required to prepare for a second sortie.

The Basic methods fbr Determining the Indicators fbr AME combat capabilities

Ihn probability of destroying an airborne target (in viewing an interception as a
complex process) 18:

Pde ' Pg Pat 9h, (5.1)

where Pg--guidance probability, that is, the probability that the fighter will be
brought to a certain space relative to the target from uhence a success-
ful attack is possible;

Pac--the probability of attack, that is, the probability of bringing the
fighter into a certain space relative to the target from whence an aimed
missile launch (firing of the cannons) can be carried out;

Ph--the probability of a hit, that is, the probability that after the missile

has been launched (the cannon fired) the charge will hit in the target
kill area.

The probability of destroying an airborne target by an AD fighter with independent
search can be determined in an analogous manner but instead of the guidance proba-
bility one should consider the probability of target detection by the fighter equip-
ment or visually.

The inllucnce of the dependable operation of the AHC elements and enemy counter-

munsures on the effectiveness of fighter operations can be considered by determining
the designated probabilities considering these factors or by an additional calcula-
llnn of the corresponding probabilities.

lid/rmln'ing the maxim line for destroying an airborne tanget in terms of fuel
:quiul is carried out by the method of the engineer-navigator calculation (ENC) of
the fighicr's flight.

The initial data for making the ENC are the flight profile and conditions, the con-
ditlons for carrying out the flight mission and the calculated aircraft fuel supply.

The basic guide in the ENC of a flight is the instructions on calculating flight
range and duration for the given type of aircraft and these are an official document
and contain all of the necessary materials for making the ENC.

The calculating of the destruction line in terms of fuel supply is carried out in
the following sequence.

163

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Fuel consumption is determined for the set flight profile:
cpro ' cgr + Gcl +ccr +Gac +6at + cre + cla.

where Gsr--fuel consumption on the ground;
cc1--fuel consumption in taking off and climbing to cruising altitude;
Gcg--fuel consumption on cruising leg of flight;
Cac--fuel consumption in accelerating to a certain flight speed;
Ga‘—-fuel consumption in closing in and attacking the target;
Cxe--fuel consumption in returning to original airfield;
Gla-—fuel consumption in the landing approach and landing.

2. The difference is determined between the calculated fuel supply for carrying out
the mission and the amount of fuel spent in flying the designated profile. that is,

no - Ccal ‘ cpro-

If AG <0, then the flight mission with the designated flight profile cannot be car-
ricd out, but if Ac-IO. then the mission is possible with the designated fuel supply.

With AG >0, there is surplus fuel which can be employed to increase the legs of horde
zontal flight toward the target and in returning to the base airfield. This is
tantamount to increasing the so-called balance leg of the flight which can be de-
termined by the formula:

AG (5.2)

L - ----- ,
bal chl + ‘Icrz

where qcrl, qcr2-kilometer fuel consumption on the cruising legs of horizontal
flight in flying out to meet the target and in returning to the
base airfield, respectively.

3. The maximum distance of the destruction line is determined for fuel supply as
the algebraic total of the projections of the legs of the flight onto the earth's
surface:

”9! ' (cl+£cr +£ec+leu (5.3)

where (c1--the leg in climbing to cruising altitude;
(cr1--the leg in cruising flight toward the target considering the balance leg
of the flight;
tac--the leg in accelerating to a certain flight speed;

lat--the leg in closing in and attacking the target considering the distance
covered by the missile (shells) to the moment of hitting the target.

Iﬁe time for carrying out a combat mission by a fighter in destroying an airborne
target includes the passive and flight time, that is,

tctn ‘ tpa + ‘fl'

166

FORlOFFKJAL.USE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The passive time in an interception is spent mainly on readying the fighter for the
sortie. '

The flight time equals the total of the flight times on all legs of the adopted

flight profile up to the moment of hitting the target and is determined, like the
target destruction line. by the ENC method.

7he time required to prepare fbr a second sortie for a single fighter equals the
total of the times spent on performing operations which are no- coincidental in time
by engineer and technical personnel (that is. operations which cannot be performed
simultaneously on an aircraft due to safety considerations and so fdrth) in readying
the fighter for a combat mission.

The aircraft preparation time depends basically upon the type of aircraft, the com-
baL mission. the characteristics of the aircraft maintenance equipment as well as
the number and training level of the engineer and technical personnel.

5.2. Principles in the Combat Employment of AD Fighter Aviation
5.2.1. Tactical Principles for AD Fighter Air Combat

Aii'-xndu£ is an armed clash in the air of individual aircraft or groups (subunits.
units) combining maneuver and fire for destroying the enemy or repelling its attacks.

Air combat is the chief type of combat activity for the AD fighters. It is conducted
for decisive goals. that is. to destroy the air enemy or cause him such harm as to
force him to abandon the carrying out of a combat mission.

Air combat starts after the fighter has detected the airborne target using the air-
craft equipment or visually.

Thelmist important conditions for achieving victory by the fighters in air combat
are: an offensive nature of actions during the entire engagement; decisiveness of
closing in and surprise of attacks; skillful employment of maneuver in combat; the
ability to quickly destroy the enemy, as a rule. in the first attack; the use of

tactical procedures which consider the strong points of one's aircraft and the weak
pniuLh of enemy aircraft; coordinated actions and reciprocal support among the
fighters in group air combat.

Success in air combat is achieved only by offensive actions with the seizing of ini-

liuiivv and the maintaining of it during the entire engagement. 0f crucial impor-
idnvc are the high skills and combat morale qualities of the flight personnel.

For Svlzlng the initiative, a fighter pilot should have a perfect knowledge of air
combat tactics. in the process of the engagement he should correctly determine the
possible type of enemy maneuver, he should carry out the most effective maneuver,

quickly aim and fire at ranges ensuring the highest probability of a target hit.

The actions of pilots in air combat should be decisive even in encountering a super-
ior enemy. indecisive actions lead to the drawing out of the engagement and to the
loss of initiative.

165

F0.‘0FFNJM1.USE¢MULY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

In the process of air battle. the fighters carry out combat maneuvering and employ
tariirul procedures for conducting combat.

combat maneuvering is the name given to the shifting of the fighters (groups) in air
space for taking up a tactically advantageous position or for maintaining coopera-
tion between the fighters (groups).

Combat maneuvering in air combat can be offensive and defensive. Hith offensive
combat maneuvering the fighters carry out actions which ensure a successful attack
on the enemy aircraft and in defensive maneuver the fighter actions ensure an es-
rape from the attack with the subsequent taking up of an advantageous tactical posi-
tion for continuing the engagement.

A tacticai procedure is the name given to the actions of the crews (subunits) for
destroying an air enemy or for escaping from its attack by utilizing the combat
capabilities of one's airplane (airplanes) and employing the weak points of the
enemy aircraft and the situational conditions.

”feation of air engagements. Depending upon conditions. air engagements can

/. Firth":

be classified by types:

n) In terms of the number of fighters participating in the engagement, into indi-
vidual or group air engagements;

h) According to altitudes into air engagements at maximum low. low. medium and
grrni altitudes and air engagements in the stratosphere;

c) In terms of time of day. into daytime air engagements and nighttime sir engage-
ment 5;

d) In terms of meteorological conditions, into air engagements under visual condi-
tions and under instrument conditions;

c) In terms of the type of air target, into air engagements with tactical fighters.
bombers, reconnaissance planes. air transports and helicopters;

f) In terms of the presence or absence of visual contact with the enemy, into close
and distant air engagements.

“V a group air engagement one understands the coordinated actions of crews (sub-
units) following a single plan to carry out the combat mission. Success of a group
cuv.lnoments depends upon the ability of the commander to promptly take a decision
corresponding to the situation. to seize and retain initiative, to impose his will
on th' tnemy and to make a surprise attack against it, employing the enemy 's tacti-

(ill errors.

Group combat is carried out according to a previously elaborated plan.
A distant air engagement is conducted in the absence of visual contact with the

rncmy. In the process of a distant air engagement the fighters close with the enemy
.nnl this can lend to the development of distant combat into near or close combat.

166

IN)! 0W“ﬂ(1Al.lﬂSEZCNVLY
FOR<0FFK3AL.US£1DNLY

A (lune air engagement is conducted, as a rule. with visual contact with the enemy.

In [hr absence or surprise, such an engagement with tactical fighters assumes a
sharply expressed maneuvering nature.

Jrlguu cf Air Combat

Air combat includes closing, one or several attacks, maneuvering between attacks and
disengagement.

ﬁlnsfug is the maneuvering of a fighter carried out from the moment of detecting
the target until taking up the initial position for the attack. In closing condi-

tiuns are created for achieving surprise attack, for continuously observing the tar-
get and simple execution of the maneuver for going over to the attack.

if a lighter at the moment of detecting the enemy is in a position relative to it
from whence the attack can be cammenced immediately, then there will be no closing

as a stage of an air engagement and the engagement will start directly by an attack
on the target.

In closing the fighter pilot identifies the air target, assesses the situation, takes
a decision and assumes the initial position for the attack.

Assessing the situation in the stage of closing includes the following elements:

the type of enemy airplane (helicopter), altitude, speed and heading of its flight,
composition and combat formation of the group, the reciprocal spatial position of the
target and one's fighter, the time available for the air engagement, the presence or
absence of enemy countermeasures (fire, electronic).

The closing in can be carried out by the following methods: along the pursuit curve;
along a straight line on parallel courses; with a lead angle; with a lag angle.

The choice of the method of closing in will depend substantially upon the time which
the fighter has available in this stage of the engagement. The time of closing in

is:

1)s clo ' I’s at

, 5.‘
vclo ( )

tclo '

where De clonthe distance for starting the closing;
on nt--the distance for starting the attack;
Vclo--the rate of closing with the target.

clnsiug along the pursuit curve is carried out by constantly directing the fighter's
longitudinal axis toward the target. The method is employed in closing with a tar-
get from the aft and forward hemispheres. In the process of closing along the pur-
suit curve from the aft hemisphere, the target's heading angle constantly increases

and the fighter comes out at a range for starting the attack at an angle of approach
equal to 0/4.

in the process of closing along the pursuit line from the forward hemisphere, the
increase in the heading angle leads to the arrival of the fighter at a distance for

167

IWJI OFFICIA1.lﬂﬂB(NULY
FOR OFF“ 1“. US}: ONLY

ntnrttny the attack at an angle of approach significantly greater than at the start
of the closing. with a sufficient closing time. the target's angle of approach at
the range for starting the attack can be close to 4/4.

The method can be employed in an air engagement with nonmaneuvering and maneuvering

targets in detecting the target at a distance close to the distance of starting the
attack.

Closing along a straight line on parallel courses is carried out from the aft hemi-

sphere by catching up with the target. Here the fighter follows the target at an
interval of the initial position for the attack.

in the process of closing the target's angle of approach constantly increases. The
method can be employed in detecting the target at great ranges and at small angles

of attack, if the attack must be executed at an angle of approach greater than in
detvrting the target.

Closing with a lead angle is carried out by the flying of the fighter to a point
located ahead of the target.

The method can be employed in closing both from the aft and forward hemispheres of a
nunmnneuvering target as well as in closing with a maneuvering target.

Depending upon the amount of the lead angle 0. the nature of closing with the target
is determined.

In a flight with a lead angle of:

V
am 5'4. - VE- tln q

(q--tnrget heading angle;, the fighter will close with the target at a fixed lead
angle and target line of approach along a line connecting the fighter and the tar-

get. The target's line or eight in this instance will move parallel to itself (a
parallel closing).

With an 6nitial lead angle greater than with a parallel closing, that is, with

sin a; >V% sin q, the fighter will close with the target at a constantly increasing
target angle of approach.

With an gnitial lead angle less than with a parallel closing, that is. with

sin n; (V: «in q, the fighter will close with a constantly decreasing angle of
approach to the target and lead angle.

(Inning with a lag angle is carried out by having the fighter fly to a point located
behind the target. The method can be employed with closing from the aft hemisphere
for reducing the angle of approach by the moment of starting the attack in the

event that the angle of approach at the moment of detecting the target is great.
that is. does not ensure the effective employment of the weapons. In closing with

168

II)! OFIHCJA1.USE(M‘LV
FIHRCNNNCJAL USHECNVLY

a maneuvering target. the given method is employed on fighters having limitations
for the maximum flight g-load or for missile launching.

The designated methods of fighter closure with a target, depending upon the type of
weapons to be used, can be employed both in distant and in close air combat.

Depending upon the tactical flight data of the fighter, the capabilities of its
weapons system and target altitude. the fighter' s can close in on the same altitude
with the target as well as in descending or rising relative to the target.

The attack is the crucial stage of an air engagement in the process of which the
air enemy is destroyed. This consists of the maneuver toward the target. aiming,
launching the missiles (firing the cannons) and disengagement.

The maneuver toward the target starts from the moment the fighter reaches the ini-
tial position for the attack and ends with the coming out on the aiming curve.

The initial position for the attack. the nature of the maneuver for coming out on
the aiming line and the aiming are determined by the method of closing prior to the
attack. by the conditions for launching the missiles (for firing) and by the closing
speed.

In closing along a pursuit line, the going over to the attack is carried out without
any additional maneuver by the fighter.

In closing on parallel courses the initial position for the attack is characterized
by an interval and a distance between the fighter and the target.

In closing with a lead (lag) angle. the initial position for the attack is charac-
terized by an angle of sight and distance to the target which should ensure the exe-
cution of a maneuver toward the target for coming out on the aiming line. This
range depends upon the speed of closure and the sighting angle to the target.

The launching of the missiles (the firing) is carried out at angles of approach and
at distances which ensure the effective hitting of the target. The hitting of the

target is possible if the fighter has entered the area of possible launches and fir-
inn.

If a fighter employs several types of weapons in one attack, then the sequence of
their employment is determined by the properties of each type of weapons as well as

by the situational conditions under which the air combat is carried out.
Disengagement is carried out in such a manner as to ensure the possibility of a
second attack and safe disengagement. Here it is essential to endeavor not to fall
under enemy defensive fire and to ensure safety against colliding with the target.

The safe range for disengagement is:

2!
D ' D _—_ -‘ (5-5)
dis clo ‘ Vn:_' I Ins.

 

169

FOI‘OFFICLAl.lﬁﬂI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where l--safe interval in disengaging;
g--free-fall acceleration;

ny--Eighter g-load in disengagement;
tlas--time lag in pilot's actions.

Mbneuvering between attacks in an air engagement is carried out by turning away

from the target in climbing or descending or on the same altitude as the target with
the subsequent turn toward it.

Breaking off the engagement is carried out upon the coemender's decision after carry-
ing out the mission or as a consequence of the impossibility of continuing it. The
break-off from the enemy is carried out by turning from it on head-on courses or by
performing an energetic curvalinear maneuver in climbing or losing altitude.

The reciprocal position of the fighters and enemy aircraft has a great impact upon
the development of the engagement and its result.

If by the start of the air engagement the fighters have been brought to a tactically
advantageous position relative to the enemy, then they, as a rule, are the first to
detect the target and maintain tactical superiority over the enemy during the entire
engagement. A surprise attack on the enemy is one of the methods for maintaining
tactical supremacy.

Surprise makes it possible to catch the enemy unaware, to attack it, to be first in
maneuvering and attacking, to seize initiative in the engagement and to create
favorable conditions for achieving success even over superior enemy forces. Sur-
prise is achieved by deceptive and rapid actions by the fighters.

ln deceptive actions a portion of the fighters usually draws the enemy's attention
while the basic forces attack it from another direction. Speed is achieved by clos-
ing in and attacking at a high speed, on head-on or collision courses.

If the fighters are in disadvantageous conditions, then they undertake a defensive

maneuver for the purposes of thwarting the enemy attack with the subsequent seizing
of initiative in combat.

For this reason, regardless of in what position the fighters were at the start of
the engagement, the result of its is largely determined by who was the first to de-
tect the enemy. For ensuring prompt detection of the enemy, in anticipating an air
engagenent the fighters constantly search for it.

Depending upon the altitude at which the air engagement is conducted, it can have a
number of particular features.

At low altitudes it is difficult for the pilot to conduct visual orientation or
visual and instrument detection of airborne targets against the background of the
terrain; due to the proximity of the ground the fighter's maneuvering capabilities
in the horizontal plane are restricted. The constant observance of the ground and
flight conditions places a great strain on the pilot. This impedes the executing of
the closing. attack and maneuver, particularly under instrument flying conditions
and at night. A low altitude attack can be executed against a target at the same
altitude with slight dive and pitch-up angles.

170

FIIICIHHC1A1.USE(MVLY
Particularly complex is an attack on airborne targets flying at maximum low alti-
tudcb. The proximity of the ground impedes the pilot's actions and restricts
maneuVers in the horizontal and vertical planes and for this reason the aircraft's
movus are performed with large radiuses while the attack on the target is carried
out from above with a slight dive angle. The effectiveness of an attack on a target
at law and maximum low altitudes is significantly increased if the fighter has a
weapons system which can carry out the attack from above downwards against the
background of the earth. Such an attack is carried out from a position above the
target. The amount of the height advantage and the particular features of executing
the attack are determined by the combat capabilities of the fighter and by the air
combat cond it ions.

In the stratosphere, there are substantial changes in the aircraft piloting condi-
tinnx related to the deterioration of flight performance due to the lower pressure
and mass density of the air. This is manifested in a reduced range of fighter
speeds. lower maximum g-loads and poorer acceleration and deceleration performance.
For this reason, in the stratosphere, as a rule. it is possible to carry out only
one attack. The direction of the attack (in the forward or aft hemisphere) depends
upon the method of ground fighter guidance to the target. An attack on an airborne
target in the stratosphere is carried out with a vertical separation relative to the
target and the amount of this depends upon the fighter's tactical flight data and
lhv capabilities of its weapons system. One of the particular features of a strat-
nsphcrIC attack is its rapidity caused by the high closing speeds. This particular
feature to a greater degree is apparent in carrying out the attack in the forward
hemisphere of the target.

In destroying unmanned air attack weapons (air-to-surface cruise missiles and un-
manned aircraft). the AD fighters employ the same methods as in air combat with
nmnncd aircraft considering the characteristics of the given unmanned device.

The particular features of unmanned devices as objects of fighter operations are the
wmtll sizes of the vehicles and the small radar cross-section. As a rule. theirs is
a tectillnear flight without defensive maneuvering. These particular features de-
termine the basic types of attacks employed by the fighters in destroying unmanned
dvviccs. These include: attacks in the target aft hemisphere and attacks at a
Rival angle of approach. The vertical separation above (below) the target in exe-
.ntinp the attack is chosen depending upon altitude just as in air combat with man-
ned a l rc raf t .

5.2.2. Combat Capabilities of AD Fighter Aviation Subunits and Units
iwlﬁnnlnra for the Combat capabilities of the AD Fighter Aviation Subunits and Units

the combat capabilities of the AD fighter aviation subunits and units analogously
to the combat capabilities of the AHC, are characterized by probability. spatial
and time indicators. A knowledge of the combat capability indicators makes it pos-
slhlu for the commander to take a sound decision for the combat operations of the

AD lighter aviation subunits and units, to give them realistic combat missions and
to employ them most effectively in the course of combat operations.

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic probability indicator for the combat capabilities of the AD fighter avia-
tiun subunits and units is the mathematical expectation of the number of destroyed
nirhnrnu targets. Moreover. as the probability indicators for combat capabilities
it is possible to employ the capacity of the fighter guidance system and the re-
quired detail of fighters for destroying individual and group airborne targets.

The basic spatial indicator for the combat capabilities of the AD fighter aviation
subunits and units is the combat effect area (CEA) which is the space within which
it is possible to destroy an air enemy.

The dimensions (boundaries) of the CEA are determined by the values for the air tar-
get destruction lines which can be preset (required) and calculated (available).

The preset destruction lines are set proceeding from tactical considerations of de-
fending certain installations, while the available ones are calculated from the
available radar information on the air enemy and from the available fighter fuel
supply.

Moreover. as spatial indicators for combat capabilities it is possible to utilize
the lines for committing the fighters to an engagement and the fighter scramble
lines.

Among the time indicators for the combat capabilities of the AD fighter aviation
subunits and units are the sortie time of the fighter group, the time required to
ready the fighter group for the first and second sorties, the combat stress as well
as the time it takes for the subunit (unit) to carry out the combat mission.

Itinvukuvljbr Determining Indicators for the Combat capabilities of AD Fighter
XviuL9un :mbunits and Units

'i'ih‘ n'xz'ccmticm of the nwtber of destroyed airborne targets in the general instance
is:

N
"I ' { Pdel' (5.6)
1'1

whore Nt--the number of targets against which the fighters operate;
Pdei-—thc probability of destroying target 1.

In the particular instance. when the probabilities of destroying all the targets
against which the fighters are operating are the same and equal Pde, the expectation
of the number of destroyed targets can be found by using the formula (5.7):

"t I Nthe. (5.7)

if the fighters operate against the targets withort retargeting, the number of
[inhtors N1 is equal to or less than the total number of targets and the probability
of destroying each attacked target is the same and equals Pdco then i\:-N1 and the
cxpvctntinn of the number of destroyed targets will be obtained on the basis of the
formula (5.7):

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ht - Nipde° _ . (5.8)

Formula (5.8) is frequently employed for approximately determining H; in one sortie
by a fighter group. Here it is essential to bear in mind that for a group consist-
ing of different types of fighters (with different values of the destruction prob-
ability). H; is determined separately for the fighter types and then the results are
added up. Moreover. if not all the aircraft of a unit (subunit) are involved in a
sortie, then this reduction in the number of fighters is considered by a coefficient
of their combat employment and the expectation for the number of destroyed targets
is:

"t - Kceuipde. (5.9)

In the event when the probabilities for the destruction of all the attached targets

are the same, the fighters operate without aiming, the distribution of the fighters
tn the targets is even but the number of fighters is greater than the total number

of targets, Mt can be determined by the formula:

“1
E
at - “tr; - nt 1- (1-Pde) . (5.10)

where P1--the probability of destroying each target by all the fighters assigned to
it calculating with the assumption that the probability of destruction.
depending upon the number of fighters, changes according to an exponential
law.

A particular feature of formula (5.10) is that it is accurate in those instances
when one and the same whole number of fighters occurs for each individual target.

1ha capacity of the guidance system for fighters to air targets is characterized by
the number of fighter guidances over a certain interval of operating time for the
guidance system and is approximately:

t
"32,.

(5.11)
tcg

“su sc'

whore tgu--the set time interval for the operation of the guidance system;
[cg--the duration of one fighter guidance cycle;
n8¢--the number of guidance channels in the guidance system.

Thv zwquired fighter detail for destroying one air target with a set probability
Pde set can be determined by the formula:

13(1‘Pde set)

no — p“) ' ‘5'”)

N1 .

With the practical utilization of the given formula, the obtained value of N1 is
rounded off to the closest larger integer.

173

INJI‘OFIGCIAI.USIICHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The required fighter detail for destroying a set portion of a group target consist-
ing of N: of uniform targets can be calculated by the formula:

18(1 ‘ l‘set)

"1 ' 1“ 18(1-Pde) ’

(5.13)

where uset--the set share of individual targets to be destroyed from the group
target.

Formula (5.13) is analogous to formula (5.10) precisely in those instances when
there is the same whole number of fighters assigned to each individual target from
the group target. The values of N1 obtained by formula (5.13) are rounded off to
the closest larger whole number.

The distance of'the dbstruction Zine fhvm the available radar infbnnztion on the
air enemy with a flight of targets toward the fighter airfield in a majority of the
practically employed instances can be determined from the following formulas:

Dd; - ﬁ (nu-vtczmlz): (5.1a)
Ddl I Dri-Vttg, (5.15)

where Dr1--availab1e distance of radar information on air enemy;

vt--speed of target flight;

t£--tota1 passive time, fighter flight time under unsteady conditions and
missile flight time to moment of target kill;

n--ratio of target flight speed to speed of steady rectilinear horizontal
fighter flight;

£2--algebraic total of the projections of the fighter flight legs under
steady conditions and the leg of the aissile flight on the direction of
the target's movement.

A characteristic feature of the amounts t: and £3 is that for specific values of
target altitude and speed. for the specific type of fighters, their initial position
and the chosen intercept program. they have constant and known values. These values
are determined (as an example) as follows:

t; - tpa+ tc£+ tac n... + t“;

it ' £c£+£ac+tma+£av

where tel, t¢£--the distance and time for climbing to a certain altitude by the

' 1hter;

lac, tac--the distance and time for the acceleration of the fighters to a
certain speed;

(as, tna--the distance and time for the maneuvering of the fighters for coming
out in the set position relative to the target prior to the moment
of its detection;

ﬁne. tae--the depth and duration of fighter air combat considering the distance
and time of the missile's flight to the moment of hitting the target.

174

roe omcw. use only
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The amount of it according to the given formula is determined when the entire inter-
cept flight is carried out directly toward or in pursuit of a target. If, for ex-

ample, the climb. horizontal flight and acceleration are carried out directly toward
the target and the maneuver and air combat are in pursuit of the target, then

Li'tc£+lac"ma'lae° "
The physical sense of formulas (5.1b) and (5.15) consists in the following.

Formula (5.16) corresponds to instances when the target is detected before the
fighter airfield and is destroyed before the airfield (with Dd£>’0) or after it

(with cum).

Here in the intercept program there is a leg of steady rectilinear horizontal flight
during which the movement of the fighters is directly toward the target. with the
actual use of the given formula it is essential to bear in mind that it is valid in
meeting the condition Dr1-Vtt;> £2, regardless of the sign of both parts of the
given inequality.

Formula (5.15), like formula (5.14), corresponds to instances when the target is de-
tected prior to the fighter airfield and is destroyed before the airfield (Dd£1>0)
or after it (Dd£<0). but in the intercept program there is no leg of steady recti-
linear horizontal flight. The given formula is valid in meeting the condition
:Dr1-Vttxls £3. Here the amount £5 can have only non-negative values.

The procedure for calculating the destruction lines for the available fuel supply of
the fighters for the AD fighter aviation subunits and units is analogous to the pro-
cedure for calculating the same lines for an individual fighter as examined above.

7hr dimensions of the combat efYEct area (GEM), as was pointed out above, are de-
termined by the values of the available (or the available and preset) destruction
lines for the air targets. Here this means that the capabilities of the guidance
equipment (their operating range) do not impose limitations on the dimensions of the
CEA boundary. If the operating range of the guidance equipment does impose limits
on the CEA, then the dimensions of the latter should be determined considering the

dimensions of the guidance field.

Subsequently, by analogy with the names of the destruction lines, those parts of
space where the enemy can be destroyed in terms of the available fighter fuel supply
and the available radar information on the enemy, for the sake of brevity we will
designate. respectively. the combat effect areas for fuel supply and for information,
while that portion of the space where the enemy should be destroyed in accord with

the set destruction lines will be the set CEA.
let us examine certain methods for determining the boundaries of the designated CEA.

1he boundary of the set CEA is known, as it is determined by the configuration of
the set destruction lines.

The boundary of the CEA in terms of fuel supply is determined by the method of the
engineer-navigator calculation and for the given altitude actually represents a

175

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LSI'.‘ ONLY

rlrvlu (with the landing of the fighters after the carrying out of the mission back
4! thv humc airfield) or an ellipse (with the sortie of the fighters for the mission
lrnm nnr airfield and the landing back at another).

Calculating the boundaries of the CEA for information, when the targets are spread
out nlnng the front flying parallel toward the fighter airfield and the line for the
start uf providing information on the enemy is a straight line perpendicular to the
direction of flight of the targets (Fig. 5.6). can be carried out using the formulas:

_ . 1. +__n .
Ddl. - Ddlo “cos 9’ (5.16)
1
”at ' Ddlo co, 0 . (5.17)

where DdKIf‘Lhe destruction line in flying toward the fighter airfield and which for
formula (5.16) is calculated by formula (5.14), and for formula (5.1?)
by formula (5.15);
a-—the angle between the line of the target's path running across the
fighter airfield and the direction of the fighters' flight to the point
of impact with the target.

v For calculating the current values of Dd!
using these formulas it is essential to set
a number of values for the angle 0, having
first calculated ”dio-

  
 

The physical sense of formulas (5.16) and
(5.17) with ¢-0 is analogous to the physi-
cal sense of formulas (5.14) and (5.15).
respectively.

With 0 >0. formulas (5.16) and (5.17) have
‘ a number of constraints on their employment
caused by the kinematic possibilities of
executing an interception. For example,
formula (5.16) does not have solutions with
n- l and 0' 180°, and for formula (5.17)
with o - 90° .

  

. "‘0
Dr" W- a - cons!

-f.
.‘.

Fig. 5.6. Diagram for determining
hunnddrics of combat effect area

A characteristic feature of formula (5.16)
is that the destruction line calculated using it, depending upon the amount of the
Vcinvilv ratio n is either a hyperbola (with n <1), or a parabola (with ni-l) or an
t‘llipst' (Viill n >1).

lhc uuunduries of the total CEA are determined by comparing the CEA for fighter fuel
supplv. the available information on the enemy set by the CEA and the guidance field
Inr the specific situational conditions. 0n maps (plotting boards) this comparison
is made by superimposing the designated CEA and the guidance field on one another.

As a result of such a comparison. the forward. flank and rear boundaries of the total
ChA can havv a different appearance determined by the configuration and by the ratio
or the dimensions of its component parts.

176

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.lﬂﬂE(NNLY
The iiuu Jbr committing fighters to an engagement is the line on which the air enemy
is at the moment of commencing the air engagement.

The dLstance of the available line for committing the fighters to an engagement with
the targets flying toward the fighter airfield and the presence of a leg of steady

rectilinear horizontal flight in the intercept program, can be determined from the
formulas:

In attacking in the forward hemisphere of the target:

1
chlfh I m [DI-1-Vtt;fh+n(£th+dfh)]; _ (5.18)

In attacking the aft hemisphere of the target:

1
chlah - “a [0'1-vttzah+n(tzah-dlh)l’ (5.19)

where drh- dah--the set distances for directing the fighters relative to the target

in attacking the forward and aft hemispheres;

tth, tzah--total passive time and flight time of fighters under unsteady condi-
tions until the moment of bringing the fighters to the set distance
relative to the target in attacks in the forward and aft hemisphere;

(xfh' (rah--the algebraic total of the horizontal projections for the flight
legs of the fighters under unsteady conditions in attacks in the
forward and aft hemispheres but without the leg of the air combat.

For tactical considerations the set distance of bringing the fighters relative to
the target should be considered equal to the target detection range by the fighter
equipment in attacking the forward hemisphere and the average missile launching dis-
tance in attacks in the aft hemisphere under the specific conditions.

Determining the required lines for committing the fighters to combat according to
the set destruction lines is:

chlfh ' Ddt4'vtcaefh; (5'20)

chtac ' Dd£'*vttaeah. (5.21)

where laefh- taeah--the duration of air combat considering the time of the missile
flight to the moment of hitting the target in attacks in the
forward and aft hemispheres.

7he fighter scramble line is the line at which the air enemy is at the moment the
crews are given the command to start the engines.

Hith a set destruction line. the flight of the targets toward the fighter airfield,

the presence of a leg of steady rectilinear horizontal flight in the intercept pro-

gram and an attack in the forward hemisphere, the fighter scramble line is determined
from the formula:

177

FINI(HWH(JAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dist“, ' at<1+n)+Vctth-nlm. (5.22)

where txfh--the total flight time of the fighters under unsteady conditions, the
missile flight time to the moment of hitting the target in an attack in
the forward hemisphere and the passive time not counting the time spent
on transmitting information on the enemy, assessing the situation and
taking a decision for the interception;
fh--the algebraic total of the horizontal projections of the fighter flight
legs under unsteady conditions and the leg of the missile's flight to
the moment of hitting the target in attacking the forward hemisphere.

‘1;

The formula for determining the fighter scramble line with an attack in the aft hem-

isphere has the same appearance as formula (5.22) but other values for the amounts
t}; and (2.

Formulas for determining the lines for the commitment to battle and for scrambling.
with the flight of targets toward the fighter airfield and with the absence of a
steady rectilinear horizontal flight in the intercept program. can be obtained from
the appropriate formulas for calculating the designated lines with the presence of
such a leg in the intercept program, considering in thwart-0 (hypothetically).

The nature and significance of the time indicators for the combat capabilities of
the AD fighter aviation subunits and units are analogous to the spatial indicators,

however they to a greater degree describe the dynamics of combat operations and the
organization of fighter control in combat.

7hc sortie time for a group of fighters larger than a two-plane element, flight or

squadron. proceeding from the standard sortie times of a two-plane element, flight
and squadron, is:

£308 ' tsol + ntOAttO' (5.23)

where tso]--the sortie time of the first two-plane element (flight. squadron);

ntontt°--the number and time interval for the take-off of the following groups
or individual aircraft .

70u: time for readying a group of fighters for the first and second sorties is:

top. (5.21.)

where N1--the number of fighters being prepared for the first (repeat) sortie;

Ng--the number of engineer and technical groups performing the most labor-
intensive operation in readying the fighters;

tnP--the required time for performing the most labor-intensive operation on one
fighter.

Ckmﬁut stress is characterized by the number of combat sorties per crew, subunit or

unit in a certain period of time (day. night, 26 hours. month or period of carrying
out a combat mission).

178

FOIfMﬂﬂCIAl.USE(NNLY
The combat stress is set by the senior chief and depends upon the combat mission.
the conditions of executing it. the training level and physical capabilities of the
crew, upon the number of combat-ready aircraft, the base conditions and the possi-
bilities of maintaining and readying the aviation equipment for flights.

7%u time fbr carrying out a combat mission by an AD fighter aviation subunit or

unit is determined analogously to the time of carrying out a conbat mission by indi-
vidual fighters, but the component parts of this time have different values corres-

ponding to the subunits and units.

179

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. ANTIAIRCRAFT MISSILE TROOPS

6.1. Antiaircraft Missile Weapons Systems

6.1.1. Combat Characteristics, Classification, Structure and Operational Principle
of Antiaircraft Missile Systems (SAKS)

Classification and combat Characteristics of SAMS

Anliuiycruft missile weapons are among the surface-to-air missile weapons and are
designed to destroy enemy air attack weapons by surface-to-air guided missiles [SAM].
They are represented by various systems.

A system of antiaircraft missile weapons (an antiaircraft missile system) is an ag-
gregate or the antialrcraft missile complex and the equipment supporting its combat
.mpioyment.

The untiaircraft missile system (SANS) is the aggregate of SAM, the systems and
equipment which ensure the preparation of data for the filing, the launch, the
guiding of the missile to the target and the hitting of the target. In accord with
this the SANS include target acquisition and tracking equipment. equipment for gen-

crating and transmitting commands. launchers and the SAN which carry the warhead to
the target.

The SAM control system comprises the technical base of the SANS. Depending upon the
adopted control system. a distinction is made between the following types of sys-
tems: teiecontroi of the SAM. homing of the SAM and combined control of the SAM.
Each SANS possesses certain combat characteristics and particular features the ag-

grega:o of which can serve as classification features making it possible to put it
in n -crtain type.

AMnng the combat pruperties of a SANS are: all-weather capacity. antijamming
capacity, mobility. universality. the degree of automating the combat work processes,
reliability and so forth.

Ail-weather capability is the capability of the SANS to destroy airborne targets
under any weather conditions. A distinction is made between all-weather and non-

nil-weather SANS. The latter destroy targets under certain weather conditions and
at certain times of day.

180

ﬂ0I¢OFFKJAl.USE(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Antliamming capability is the property ensuring the capacity of the SANS to destroy

airborne targets under the conditions of interference created by the enemy for
neutralizing electronic (optical) equipment.

Mobility is a property manifested in the transportsbility and the time for convert-
ing from a march to a combat position and from the combat back to the march posi-
tion. A relative indicator of mobility is the total time needed to change the
‘aunch position under designated conditions (a certain type of transporting, dis-
tance. the condition of roads and so forth).

Haneuverability is a component part of mobility.

The most mobile is a system which possesses greater transportability and requires
less time to carry out a march. Mobile systems can be self-propelled. vehicle-
carried and portable. Non-mobile SAHS are termed stationary.

Universality is the property characterizing the capability of the SAKS to destroy
airborne targets in a large range of distances and altitudes.

in terms of the degree of automation. the SAKS are divided into automatic. semi-
automatic and nonsutomatic. In the automatic SANS, all operations involved in tar-

get tracking and missile guidance are performed by automatic devices without human
interference. In the semiautomatic and nonautomatic SANS, man is involved in carry-
ing out a number of tasks.

Reliability is the capacity to function normally under the designated operating con-
ditions. .

In addition. the SANS differ in terms of the number of target and missile channels.
Systems which can simultaneously track and fire on one target are termed single-
channel and those which do this for several targets are known as multichannel ones.

In terms of firing range, the systems are divided into long-range (LR), medium-range
(HR). short-range (SR) and close-range (CR).

Jam-warm and Composition of SANS

in accord with the missions to be carried out, the functionally necessary elements
of a SANS are the target acquisition and identification equipment, the target and
missile tracking equipment, the equipment for generating control commands. the
equipment for transmitting the commands (the control command radiolinks), the
launchers and the SAM. Each type of SAHS has its own particular design features
and this determines the composition of its elements (Fig. 6.1).

thu<nnion equipment and methods. In the SAHS with telecontrol of the SAM. radars
and optical devices are employed as the means for target detection.

Target detection can be carried out by scanning space by an adopted method: pano-
ramic scanning or spatial scanning in a narrow sector.

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFIWCJAL USEIJNLY

 

 

 

Antiaircrsft
Missile
System
f"“"""“"""’ﬂ
Target acquisition E Control :
and identification command 3
equipment : rediolink :
L.. 9
Equipment for Equipment for
measuring generating
mismatch control
parameter commands

Fig. 6.1. Typical Structure of SAHS

With panoramic scanning, space is scanned for azimuth by 360' (Fig. 6.2a). The
scnn time is:

 

e
TPO . 3:: I (60 1)

where ud--angular antenna rotation rate.

The merit of the method is the possibility of scanning space in the entire upper
hemisphere while the drawback is the long scan time.

Among the methods of spatial scan in a narrow sector are the line method, the
method of linear sawtooth scanning and the spiral method.

Fig. 6.2. Possible Scanning Methods:

a--Panoramic; b-Line; c-Linear sav-
tooth; d-Spiral (helical)

 

with the line method scanning is carried out by a narrow beam moving back and forth
in two mutually perpendicular planes in a set sector (Pig. 6.2b). The scan time is:

182 '

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HHLY
’"v ‘ .4 ° (6.2)

where 0;, OE--the width'of the sector in vertical and horizontal planes;
0;--width of beam (width of antenna directional pattern);
ug--antenna beam rate.

The moving of the beam in space can be carried out mechanically or electrically.
The merit of the method is the cooperatively short scan time while the drawback is
the complicated design of the beam moving system.

with the method of linear sawtooth scanning, space is scanned in the designated
sector by one or two mutually perpendicular blade-shaped beams (Fig. 6.2c). The
speed of movement should be such that in a cluster at least the set number “.1“ of
pulses is obtained. The sector scan time is:

C
.r N.“

 

The given method makes it possible to determine the relative coordinates of all
targets in the scanning sector.

With the spiral scanning method, the antenna beam moves in a spiral. The method is
employed for antenna beam search and guidance for tracking target heading (Fig.
6.2d).

Target identification equipment makes it possible to determine the nationality of
a detected aircraft and put it in the "friend or foe" category.

Identification equipment can be combined and autonomous. In combined equipment the
interrogation and reply signals are sent (received) by the radar equipment. In
certain types of close-range SAKS (the portable Red Eye type). an identification
device is lacking. The targets are identified by the operator-titer from the air-
cruft's silhouette.

Target tracking equipment can be radar. optical and television-optical. They pro-
vide manual and automatic tracking.

Manual tracking (HT) is when the operator tracks the target by lining up the radar
blip (image) of the target with the sight mark. Manual tracking can be for posi-
tion. speed or for position and speed. Manual tracking for speed means the moving
of the sight mark (the antenna or optical system) proportionally to the turning of
the mark control wheel. Manual tracking for speed (semiautomatic tracking) means
that the rate of moving the sight mark (the antenna or optical system) is propor-
tional to the turning of the tracking wheel. Tracking for position and speed means
that the amount and speed of moving the sight mark (antenna or optical system) are

proportional to the turning of the tracking wheel.

Automatic tracking (AT) is target tracking without the intervention of an operator.
Tracking is carried out for each of the measured coordinates and for this the cor-
responding tracking systems are employed.

183

FK”l(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Combined tracking (CT) involves the tracking of the targets automatically for some
coordinates and manually for others. This can be employed in the event of the im-
possibility of automatic target tracking for one or several coordinates.

The radar devices for tracking the targets and the missiles for direction (for angu-
lar coordinates) can be autonomous and combined (Fig. 6.3).

—‘-—- -—‘ The merits of the autonomous devices are
the independence of operation from the re-
ciprocal position of the target and the
missile in space and the comparatively
great range of steady tracking; the short-
comings are the complexity of realization
and the large errors in measuring the dif-
ference of target and missile angular co-
ordinates.

The merits of the combined equipment in-
clude the high accuracy in measuring the
difference of the target and missile angu-
lar coordinates and the comparatively

 

Fig. 6.3. Target and missile radars:

a--Autonomous (l--Target tracking smaller volume of the equipment.
radar; 2-—Missile tracking radar);
b--Combined Optical tracking devices are employed in

short- and close-range SANS and can be in
the Iorm of sighting columns [2donkey ears] and sights. In the tracking process the
operator lines up the target image with the sight mark. The merit is the high accu-
racy of tracking with slow rates of change in the target angular coordinates; the
drawbacks include the short tracking range, the impossibility of measuring target
distance and dependence on weather conditions.

\

The television-optical tracking devices can be installed in the short- and medium-
range SANS for tracking the target and the missiles. In certain systems such de-

vices are an integration device and are employed for intense electronic jamming.
Thc range of their operation depends upon the weather conditions.

iva~x:jbr generating commands are made in the form of analogue and digital com-
puters. Their task includes generating the control commands and the one-shot com-
mands, the preparation of firing data and generating the control signals for the
ground and onboard equipment.

awnnznd tnansmiesiom devices (the control command radiolinks) are used for convert-
ing the control commands and single commands into radio signals and transmitting
them to the missiles being guided to the target.

Launchers provide for the preparation and launching of the missiles. Depending upon
the type of SAHS. these can be stationary. semistationary and mobile; with vertical

or slant launching and providing the simultaneous launching of one or several mis-
silos.

Stationary launchers are made in the form of launch tables and guides mounted on a
reinforced concrete base.

184

FOITOFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
90R OFFIC1A1.US£Z(MNLY

Semi-stationary launchers are set up at previously prepared positions. These can
have a vertical and slant launch.

Mobile launchers are employed in mobile SANS and can be self-propelled, vehicle-
transported and portable. Self-propelled launchers are mounted on tracked or wheel—
ed mounts. These provide a quick transition from a travel position to a combat one
and have a slant launch with a variable elevation angle.

Vehicle-transported launchers are mounted on tracked or wheeled non-self-propelled
chassis and are pulled by tractors.

Portable launchers are made in the form of launch tubes in which the rocket is in—
serted prior to launching. The launch tube can have a sight device for preliminary

aiming and a launch mechanism. Such devices are employed in close-range SANS and
these are based upon homing and telecontrol systems. In the latter instance, the

launch tube has devices for tracking the target and the missile.

AnLiaircraft guided missiles [SAM] are classified by flight speed, by the number of
stages, by the aerodynamic system, by the method of guidance and by the type of war-
head.

Speeds can be sub- and supersonic.

The missiles can be single-, two- and three-stage. A majority of the foreign-
produced SAM is single- and two-stage.

In terms of aerodynamic design. there are SAM made according to the normal system,
the "tilting wing" and "canard."

In terms of guidance method a distinction is drawn between homing and telecontrol
SAM. A homing SAM is a missile which carries equipment for guiding its flight.
Telecontrolled missiles are those which are controlled (guided) by ground control
(guidance) equipment.

In terms of the type of warhead, abroad the SAM are differentiated into those with
conventional and those with nuclear warheads.

Ckwruting Principle of a SANS, the Launch and Kill Zones

According to the data of external target designation or independently, the system
searches out and detects an air target. After identification the target is turned
over for tracking and as a result of this its current coordinates, direction and
speed are determined. These are the initial data for determining the missile launch
moment, for selecting the type of fire and so forth. During the time these data

are prepared, the target will travel a distance Ad'lvttre.

The missile is launched upon reaching a certain range of the target relative to

the position of the SANS. Here the missile is launched at a target range whereby
the rendezvous of the first missile with the target will be within the range

dctp min‘dr‘dctp max- The launch range is:

185

FIIRCHHHCJAL.USI§(HNLY
FOI'OFEKJAI.USEGJNLY

at t’, p “as nu F V‘Uu 1' lb". + II: _

where dccp nax—-the maximum possible firing range;
dPl--the flight time of the first missile to the maximum firing range;
tcc--miseile launch time.

The launch zone [firing bracket] is an area of space through which the target passes
and during which time the missile can be launched. Here the rendezvous of the mis-
sile with the target will occur in the so-called kill area.

The kill area is an area of space in which the probability of hitting the target has
a value at least equal to the set one.

8)‘Nb The launch and kill areas are limited by

the maximum and minimum values of the dis-
tances and altitudes which form the bound-
aries of the kill and launch areas. In ac-
cord with this a distinction is drawn be-
tween the distant and near, the upper and
lower boundaries of these areas.

From Fig. 6.4 it can be seen that the
launch area has been shifted relative to
the kill area toward the greater target
ranges. Its position in space depends upon
Fig. 6.4. Combat areas of SAHS the position of the kill area and the tar-
get's speed.

 

Key: a--Detection line; b--Lsunch

area; °"K111 area Distances to the far and near limits of the

launch area are:

du- - dzf+vt(tct+tpl); }

dln - dzni-thcc‘rt ).
Pn

(6.6)

where dzf, dzn--horizontal distances to the far and near boundaries of the kill
area;
tct--missile launch time;
tPl' tpn--the flight time of the first missile to the far boundary of the kill
area and the flight time of the last missile to the near boundary of
the kill area.

Tho upper and lower boundaries of the launch area with the target's horizontal
flight correspond to the upper and lower boundaries of the kill area. With the tar-
get descending in altitude, the upper limit of the launch area exceeds the upper
limit or the kill area by an amount:

d“

186

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For SANS which fire in any direction, the launch area. like the kill area, occupies
in space a position corresponding to the direction toward the target.

The far boundary of the kill area has a range determined by the maximum possible
firing range for the given SANS. Sometimes the far limit of the kill area is a
surface formed by the geometric locus of points for the end of the maximum firing
range vector. In certain instances it is represented by a more complex surface.

The near limit of the kill area has a range:
Dzn - Vtr, (6.6)
where tr--the time for bringing the missile to the kinematic trajectory.

The shape of the near limit depends upon many factors and for this reason it has a
complex configuration.

The upper limit of the kill area has an altitude determined by the operational
range of the missiles and the survivability of the target and by the ratio of the
available and required SAN g-loads. With a change in altitude the survivability of

the target changes and this causes a change in the probability of target kill.

The lower limit of the kill area is determined by the capability of the SANS to de-
tect and guide the missiles to low—flying targets.

The depth of the kill area LS:

Mzk " dzE-dzm (6.7)
where dzf. dzn--horizonta1 distances to the far and near limits of the kill area.
The amount of Adzk for the given SANS is measured by altitude and depends upon the
type (survivability) of the target. In destroying targets the kill probability of
which is low. the depth of the kill area is reduced.

The required amount of the depth of the kill area Adzk re which ensures the firing
on the target with the set number up of missiles with a firing rate tc is

Adzk re ; vtccmp- 1). (6.8)

In the process of guiding the missile to the target, commands are generated for con-
trolling the position of the missile's control surfaces. As a result the missile

fullows a trajectory close to the calculated one.
6.1.2. Combat Capabilities of the SANS
ﬂy combat capabilities one understands the ability of the SANS to destroy airborne

targets under various situational conditions. These depend upon the principles re-
alized in the system as well as the purpose and composition of the equipment.

187

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among the combat capabilities are the capability to destroy the targets at various
ranges, at various altitudes, the capability to destroy targets flying at different
speeds, the capability of destroying maneuvering targets. the capability for suc- '
ceasive firing on targets and the capability to destroy targets under EC! conditions.

The capability to destroy targets at various distances are characterized by the
range of target destruction distances.

The capability to destroy targets at various altitudes is the ability of the SAHS
to ensure the destruction of targets within a certain range of altitudes. These
capabilities depend upon the speed of target flight, the energetics of the SAM and
other factors.

Capability to destroy targets flying at different speeds is determined by the range
of speeds for destroyable targets. This is determined by the target detection
ranges and the available missile g-loads.

Capability to destroy maneuvering targets is characterized by the capacity of the
SANS to destroy targets maneuvering with certain g-loads. The basic factors which
determine this capability is the available load factors and the inertia in the SAM
flight control system.

The capacility for successive firing on targets is the capacity of the SAHS to de-
stroy targets successively entering the launch area. The time intervals between the
targets serve as the indicators of this capability. They depend upon the number of
target and missile channels of the SANS and the firing cycle.

The capability to destroy targets under ECH conditions describes the ability of the
system to destroy targets with the presence of jamming. The intensity of jamming
whereby the probability of destroying the target has a value of at least the desig—
nated can serve as the indicator of this.

An analysis of the combat capabilities of the SANS to destroy specific types of tar-
gets requires an analysis of the capabilities for detection, identification and
tracking of targets. the capabilities for guiding the SAM and the capability for
hitting the targets with the missile warhead.

awkxbilizg to Detect and Identify Targets

ikzcuiinn capability is the ability of the SANS to detect the target in the desig-
nated volume of space over a certain time. The quantitative indicators for detec-
tion capability can be: target detection range Ddev detection altitude Hde max-
Hde m1", detection time tde. resolutions for range, angular coordinates and speed
AD. AB. At. AV. and the target detection probability Pde-

inn required target detection range which provides a rendezvous of the first missile
with the target at the far limit of the kill area is:

I)de re > V (dd " Vim. "' H1, ' (6.9)

188

FOIiOFFMJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where t; - top+tzo+tre+tct+tp (top, Clo- t". tct. tpl—the tine required to
identify the target, tracking Inc -on, preparing firing data, launching and guiding
the missile with the point of impact at the far limit of the kill area, respective-

iv).

The possible target detection range by radar is

.
_T',(I.U.I'3 — 0.1m n '
l)de pos ‘5 I/ m)‘ r... ... 1,— ' " " (6. 10)

where PP. 0., 62. A, Pre .1n--sending power. coefficients for directional effect of
transuitting and receiving antennas, operating wave
length. radar receiver sensitivity;
YP--coefficient of discrimination;
Ya--coefficient for absorption of radio wave energy in
atlosphere;
at-target radar cross-section.

Target detection range under SCH conditions is:

). 1/7777 “-1“

where Pj--jaming power on input of radar receiver.
The maxim- possible target detection range (the radius of the open zone) for a tar-

get traveling under the cover of active jaming (detection under the condition Pc I
P ) is:
J

I

I' a 0'."
”3e Ilax < I/ («QIIJI P“... ' (6-12)

Detection range is linited by the line-of-sight range
Dde .s D‘s - I..12(.4E+ m), (6.13)
where H“. Hr-radar antenna height and target height, III.

Target detection range by an optical sight is:

 

.-"€'-'.i.1.('c.’e,:“_t___; '- 14‘s,). (6 1")

ode op J" I'l .Fch

where C1- - 5.67-10-5 erg-cn'zos'lodeg'“;
n1. n2--cnergy absorption coefficients in atmosphere and optic;
ct. ctr-darkness factors of target and background;

189

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1‘, Tb--temperature of target and background;
5:, Sb--areas of target and background;
Fth--thveshold value of power flux.

Target detection altitudes depend upon radar properties; detection range, maximum
and minimum elevations of antenna beam, beam width:

Hde ‘ Dde 31“ st; 1

(6.15)
Hde max § Dde max 31“ ca max. I
where Ea max--maximum possible elevation of antenna beam;
”(3 /_ 2
Hde min ’ 27:5 ' “a . (6.16)

Target detection time is the time required on receiving and processing the target
designation ttd’ launching tg and observing cob the target:

tde 3 ttd+t£+tob. (6.17)

The target observation time is the time of the varified observation of a target sig-
nal on the indicator screen. For obtaining a set probability for correct target de-
tection, several scan intervals are observed: tab-Insctz.

The amount

18(1 ' Ps de)

“5‘: > (6.18)

18(1 ' P] de)

where p3 de--the set probability of target detection;
p1 dc--detection probability with one scan interval.

Resolutions in target detection are: for range

w— 5% u M,.:I,. (6.19)

v*ero 11--duration of transmitter pulse;
HD--distance scan scale of indicator;
ds-—diameter of electronic spot on indicator CKI;

For azimuth (elevation)
53“" ~‘ (9") + Mﬂqudﬁ' (6.20)

where H3(c)--indicator scan scale for aximuth (elevation);

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For azimuth in observing targets on PPI

All. >- I: I MM»: (6-21)

For speed

APfX
2 . (6.22)

 

AV, >

where AFf--vidth of pass band for target signal fine selection filter for Doppler
frequency (it is assumed that AFape'an, that is, the spectrum of the
Doppler frequencies is less or equal to the width of the filter pass
band);
X--operating radar wave length.

Target detection probability is the probability of exceeding signal power on the
radar receiver input by a set number of times over the noise strength whereby the
target is detected:

PQ-P(P¢> {pPo‘eﬂ-J- (6.23)

Since the auount PC - £(ot. Dt, ...), detection probability with all other parameters
depends upon target type and range. If target detection probability for one obser-
vation equals Pl de, then with an. its value is:

Pde - 1-(1-91 de)nn- (6.21.)

Target identification capability describes the capacity of the SANS to identify tar-
gets in the designated volume of space over the established time. As a result of
detection the aircraft can be categorized "friend or foe."

The required identification range is:

Did req ’ Dde max.

The technically possible identification range is:

when; ./ 15.0.0.1!

(4‘)! ’1‘: W (")e 19" R e (6 e 25)

Did ‘

whore P1", Pre--the strength of the interrogation and reply transmitter;
cl, 62, 63-—coefflclents for directional effect of interrogator and responder

antennas;
x1“, Are-~1nterrogator and responder wave length;
Pre 1“. Pre re--sensitivity of interrogator and responder receivers, respectively.

The resolution of the identification device is the ability to recognize [or resolve]
the targets being identified in terms of distance and direction.

191

FORfHﬂﬂCIAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kunm- roanlut ion is:

C(i1 fAt'f-tcod)

Abid > 2 ,

(6.26)

where ri--duration of radar transmitter pulse;
At--time lag in reply pulse (code pulse) relative to target blip on indicator
screen;
tcod--length of code (reply pulse).

Direction (angular coordinate) resolution is:
For an autonomous identification device

mm.» '2“ r M. n.4,; (6.27)
For a combined identification device

51‘1““) > 9., 1‘ 'I Mug, e; 4g. (6.28)

where 0; id' 0; ra--width of beam (directional pattern) for antennas of identifica-
tion device and radar to which given device has been coupled;
HC(g)--elevation scan scale for air situation displays;
ds--diameter of spot of electronic beam of CRT.

The reliability of identification is the probability that the given target has been
classified in the appropriate category. The numerical value of the probability p14
depends upon the selected code of the interrogation and reply signals, the jamming
situation and the advanced nature of the identification device.

HwnprL Tnzcking capability

The capability for tracking targets and determining their coordinates characterizes
the ability of the SANS to provide automatic (manual) tracking for various types of
targets with the possible flight speeds and the measuring of their coordinates with
acceptable errors.

TLe quantitative indicators for this capability are: maximum range of steady auto-
matic (manual) target tracking, minimum target tracking range, the boundary values
of the angular coordinates, distance and speed of the targets and their derivatives
whereby tracking is on the boundary of stability. the acceptable tracking errors and
the probability of dependable tracking.

Tin-gm. ifrmge Tracking Capability

The maximum possible tracking range is the one starting from which the device

tracks the target dependably (without breaks). Its value depends upon the ratio
Ps/Pn. the nature of the target's movement and the properties of the tracking device.

The required range of steady tracking whereby the maximum possible firing range for
the given SANS is realized is:

192

INJI‘OFFICJAI.IJSIZ(MHLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Dc ,eq > VII”... 1- mt", +t.. H“)l'+ Hz. (6.29)

The technically possible steady tracking range with the set ratio Pgan on the input
of the tracking device is:

d
Ia as‘
be at ‘ Vm) hum; (6.30)

where yc--the given signa1--noise ratio.

The minimum possible target tracking range for distance is:

In a pulsed radar:

n. u. >- i“‘—{—'£‘—. (6. 31)

where r1tr--durstion of transmitted pulse and sensitivity recovery time in receiver
path. respectively;

Onboard radar tracking devices:

V‘ sin “— V sin 1,

 

D. nlm > v (6 e 32)

’0 no

where Vt. V--:peeds of target and missile;
qt. tar-angles between velocity vectors of target, missile and missile-target
distance line;
39 peg-maximum permissible value of angular rotation rate of missile—target
distance line.

7bryet Tracking capability for Angular Coordinates:

For elevation:

‘r<'s.‘“:

‘.e< ‘;.pf ; , (6° 33)
For azimuth:

B nth. ;

.° . "' I (6.3:)

Bc<h.,n.

where Emper’ 334,“. am“. amper-permissibls values of antenna elevation, azi-
muth and their rate of change.

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘Oll OFFIFIAL USE ONLY

Vvuznx! Tnacking capability fbr Speed:

vr t max {—2 . (6.35)

where Fd mar-maximum value of instrument Doppler frequency.
Errorm in unrget tracking nmeasuring coordinates) due to reasons of occurrence can

be fluctuation. dynamic and instrument; in terms of nature they are random and sys-
temntic.

Random errors are more often assessed by mean square values ac.

Range Th.cking Errors:

 

our-V ':i"'°:\+.31‘:] ' (6.36)
‘cn-l‘gJ 4""61'

where “£0 01", odynumean square values of random fluctuation, instrument and dy-
namic errors, respectively;
sdyn, 61n--«vstematic components in errors of target range measurement.

The maximum error in measuring target distance is:
‘n-l‘c-rni+3°enc (6.37)

The values of the amounts aft, °dynv Gin depend upon the properties and nnture of
motion of the target. the weather conditions, the quality of operation and the oper-

ating. stability of the equipment, the adopted method of measurement and the proper-
ties of the tracking system.

The permissible errors in tracking a target for range are those -rrors which when
exceeded cause a failure of automatic track! 4.

For analogue systems with time discrimim .al’B

a",
< .—,

4,,"

where tel --du'.'ation of tracking strobe.

P
A Mi lure in AT occurs with (for systems of the first order of astatism)

[3' :ﬁVt D (51”.o- 3‘1)" )KV-
Ernvrs in target tracking for angular coordinates (elevation. azimuth) depend upon

the adopted method of measurement and the properties of the tracking system and the
target.

194

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JL.

Random errors in measuring angular coordinates are caused by random changes in the
shape of the return signals as well as by random deviations in the technical parame-
ters of the tracking systems from the rated values and by external random disturb-
antes.

The mean square value of the measurement error for an angular coordinate is:

'un - V“: '* “3+ '0,» (6.38)

where ofl--error caused by presence of angular and amplitude noise and by the
signal--noise ratio determined as:

.;\'- g 4-0:“ +0}... (6.39)
Here ,

2 “.355:

“n 'u» “W (6.40)

1.t 2
where 6 = 0.5- (L --characteristic linear dimension of target, Dt-target
an D t
t distance);

AFe--equivalent band of closed tracking system;
can--an amount depending upon type of target.

The reason for the appearance of angular noise (an) is the shift in the effective
center of the signal's return along the length of the target.

Amplitude noise (mu) is caused by random changes in the intensity of the electro-
magnetic field at the signal receiving point.

Systematic errors:

5..." Hun-ad" Huron" (6.61)

where 63(€)1n--systematic component of instrument error;
63(u)dyn--systematic component of dynamic error.

The dynamic error is caused by the system's properties and by the nature of the tar-
get's movement.

For a system of first-order astatism
- it ‘
.uf‘~Kav' (0.1.2)
For a system of second-order astatism

“$713. (6.63)

195

IN)RIOI1NC1AI.IE“I(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

wlu-rc (cl, h'turate and acceleration of change in target angular coordinate;
Kuv. Raw-gain factors for target tracking system for angular coordinates.

A tnilure in target AT will occur (in a systsn of first-order astatisu) with

i.(3.)<m......I-3-u.)xw- ‘6'“)

Hence

[I'mli-a‘u >an- (6.45)

The permissible target tracking error with the method of instantaneous equisignal
zones is:

e.
~P<+' (6.106)
Target tracking is possible with
. o,
'.<(T—3°«)"v"' (6.1.7)

Errors in measuring the radial component of target speed are caused by external and
inivrna] factors. The potential mean square area in measuring speed is

‘ v: (6.68)
Wm "12;- ——-}-’——'.
N.“

where Auradar operating wave length;
TL'-duration of radar pulse.

Target tracking errors with manual tracking depend upon the adopted tracking method
and the operator's training level.

In using a mechanical scale the mean square error of the calculation is

on a 0.15%,

wlwn‘ Al.--diatance between adjacent scale division;
Msnscaie for given coordinate.

In using an electronic scale
01“ = (o.os*o.1)am,. (6.49)

In using an electronic sight lined up with the target mark

a = a2 +0 +02 , (6'50)
in an 1 it

196

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'Ml. USE ONLY

whvrr nun--Lhc error caused by the instability of the electronic sight;

u€.--error of lining up sight with target blip equal to fractions of the
diameter of the CRT spot;

nit--error of interpolation in reading the sight setting on the scale of the
device.

The probability of stable target tracking is the probability that the tracking error
dncs not cxcevi the permissible value

Pc 3: - HA»: Aper)'

The amount of the probability depends upon the properties of the target. the range
and speed of flight, and the properties of the given tracking system. Its value can
be determined for the given conditions.

Manual target tracking errors in television--opticai sights are

Ave-57’3”: (6.51)

where Lt--linear dimension of target in mirror plane.
SAM Guidance capability

The capability of the SANS to guide SAN to the target is the ability of the system
to bring simultaneously the determined number of missiles to the target with an ac-
curacy not less than the set with the possible firing ranges. This depends upon the
number of missile channels, the properties and nature of the target's movement and
the properties of the control system. The quantitative indicators for this capabil-
ity are the number of missile channels, the errors in guiding the missile to the
target and the probability of guiding the missile to the target with an error that
does not exceed the permissible.

The number of‘ndssilea needed to hit the target is:

Ig(l —-P
n,>TEa—_—F?))—. (6.52)

where Ps--the set value of target probability;
P1--the probability of hitting the target with one missile.

Hith jamming:
- lg(l —P
"3' >WT—e; P.) ' (6.53)

where CJ--the coefficient for the decline in probability P] with the presence of
interference.

Ebmura in guiding the missile to the tanget describe the guiding accuracy. These
can be random and systematic and are caused by errors in measuring the mismatch
parameter, the nature of the target's movement and by the properties of the control
system.

197

FIN!(MHH(1A1.U§E(M¥LY
I'D“ UI’I'I‘ IAI. I-hl‘. UNI.‘

Ihr mrnu .qnnrc value of the guidance error is:

. 7 .
()g l Jqf£+01n+02yn . (6.510)

The nmnunt of 0ft is basically determined by the fluctuation error of the mismatch
pumme ter:

0
0ft - ill , (6.55)

v’ﬁ
where K{--fiitration coefficient for control loop.

The dynamic cumponent of the error depends upon the nature of the target's motion
and the external disturbances operating on the missile.

The systematic guidance error is:

As ' Adyn + Am + An. (6.56)

where Advno Aln-systematic components of dynamic and instrument guidance errors;
Am--error in measuring mismatch parameter.

,Q. r" h,pﬁ/ity u;‘destruu1ion, With the presence of guidance errors, the probabil-
ity ul hitting the target with one missile is:

,.._._"__ . =("*",'). (6.57)

.'|
whcrv .n K, y”b;;'--the parameter of the law of destruction numerically equal to a
miss whereby the probability of destruction has a set value
(Kv--the target survivability coefficient. Quh--the weight of
the missile warhead).

(unsidvrinn that the systematic errors can be compensated for, the permissible
valuvs nl guidance errors for obtaining the set probability of target destruction
slumld he:

‘,P/C§%§ -L

,__....-.-._ (6.58)
n I il|(«' I 'il

0g P01”
“a Per

whrrv rtau) -().95--cumponcnt of probability of hitting target with one missile
caused by the presence of systematic guidance error. The maxi-
mum vaiue of the guidance error is:

45-" " iﬁJi-ihplbtl I-Ih‘dwa,

198

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
Thr uyslvmﬂtlc component of the dynamic guidance error in a general form can be ex-
prmssml as

u i r u ‘x' ‘0
5“.“ -C.l',. (I)... C.—E‘(—) + -;- C. __%_) + ... .|.C. ————$‘ , (6.59)
where C.--!:%§%éC!.--error factor of (k+l) term. the error transfer function.

From expression (6.59) it follows that for determining the dynamic guidance error
it is essential to find the error transfer function Lo(P) by which the relationship
or the current guidance error is correlated to the input effects x1n(t). The ap-
penrnnce of Lo(P) will depend not only upon the type of system but also upon the
adopted guidance method.

The number of components in expression (6.59) depends upon the type of guidance sys-
tem. In static systems, the dynamic error equals the total of all the components of
expression (6.59). In first order astatic systems. the error equals the total of
the components without the first term of expression (6.59), and in second order as-
lulir systems. it equals the total without the first two components and so forth.

tlut is, for first order astatic systems the coefficient CoI-O. and for second order
:Islnt iv systems Co - C1- 0 and so forth.

The current value of the dynamic error in the first and second order astatie sys-
tems with Dp- D: will be determined by:

I d'
%'K:Toﬁfd1l'+mn'o*ﬁ' (6.60)

where Kn--guin of control loop;
nn--roefficient depending upon the nature of the target's motion and the prop-
erties of the guidance system.

With the movement of the target at a fixed speed at a certain angle 9t to the hori-
zontal plane. the dynamic error in a first order astatic system is:

| .
5a,. -7. gt... (6.61)
where :1 IV; sin qt (qt--target heading angle).

With the target's horizontal flight (0;;-0), the amount

A‘ﬁ‘_ V sins ._ (6.62)

The fluctuation guidance errors in homing systems are insignificant as with short
distances between the missile and the target, the power of the returned (transmitted)
target signal is sufficiently strong and the signal has a steady form.

Considering that the instrument and dynamic errors are small and can be compensated
for while fluctuation errors are insignificant. the resulting guidance error can be
considered:

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run vrl'tyuu. you uutu

r- -L’—“'—- (6.63)

uhvn- ¢D—-rntc of rotation of missile--target line at which automatic target track—
ing by coordinator would fail;
muff-minimum failure range;
war-relative rate of nissile's closing with the target.

The ilmmmt $1) depends upon the speed and direction of the target's motion relative
tn the missileutarget line and upon the speed of the missile's movement. With the
moving of the missile in a vertical plane

Vg sln g—V 3|: 0,

._ D . (6.66)

 

where «u. q "target and missile heading angles;
Bumissileutarget distance. -

The greatest value of ct with a change in target motion will occur when qt -90°.
'I'ht-n

, V -V I
I — —‘——b’—n—q' (6.65)

Assuming D= ”win. we obtain

, Vc-V an o,
I '- ——D‘. .

In substituting the obtained expression in formula (6.63) we obtain:

, (V: -- Mac.) 03.... (6.66)
- _‘,____m .

h..'. l'rim-iplos of Firing Antiaircraft Guided Missiles
ta.;’.l. Tasks and Essence of Firing Antiaircraft Guided Missiles

llu- process of a combat crew in an antiaircraft missile subunit from the moment of
.-I.I.xlnlm-. the firing mission to destroy the airborne target to the exploding of the
SAM unrlwml by the target has come to be called firing.

'I‘In- task of each individually taken firing is to destroy the target. For carrying
an: this husk it is essential. in the first place, to have the missile close with
tln- target with the required accuracy and, secondly, when this closing has occurred.
tn «la-Innate the missile warhead in such a manner that its destructive elements cover
llu- lurgul. Consequently, SAM firing includes: imediate preparation of firing.
the Linn-'II and the guidance of the missiles to the airborne target.

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lnmwdiate Preparation for Firing

Immediate preparation for firing starts the moment the firing mission is received to
destroy the target and ends the moment the subunit is ready to launch the SAM.

The firing task includes target designation (instructions on the location of the
target in space), the command to destroy the target and when necessary instructions
on the procedure for firing at it.

The basic content of immediate firing preparations is:
a) Studying the firing task and assessing the air situation;
b) Searching for the target using the target designation data and its detection;

c) Locking on the target with the tracking radar and the changeover to precision
tracking for angular coordinates, range, and if possible, also speed;

d) Solving the SAM launch problem and preparing the initial data for firing;

e) Target guidance and lock-on by the GSN [?homing head] (if this operation is
carried out in the homing system before launch while the SAM is on the launcher).

Simultaneously with the performing of these operations the launchers are also pre-
pared to launch the missiles.

Missile Launch and Guidance to the Airborne Target

When the target has reached a certain range relative to the SANS the SAM are launch-
ed. After the launch of the SAM its closing with the airborne target that is con-
stantly moving in space is carried out by the control system by which one under-
stands the aggregate of devices determining the reciprocal position of the missile
and the target and generating the control commands and guiding the missile to the
target during the entire time of its flight until the rendezvous with the target.

The required trajectory for the missile's closing with the target is set by the
linkage equations which determine the missile's motion depending upon the coordi-
nates and parameters of the target's motion.

The type of linkage equations determines the method of guiding the missile to the

target. Missile control in the foreign SﬁHS is provided only for direction. The

concept of the required range to the missile is not introduced. Consequently, for
guiding the missile it is sufficient to set a linkage equation for the angular co-
ordinates, for example. for t and B.

The measure of linkage disruption in each guidance plane can be termed the control
parameter or the mismatch signal. This parameter is proportional to the deviation
of the controlled amount from the required value. that is, it is an error of the
control system. The control system, in altering the direction of the missile's
flight, should eliminate this error and maintain it within limits which ensure the
set accuracy of the closing of the missile with the target.

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run VA'A'ayanu our. mu”

The real trajectory will differ from the required. According to the guidance fea-
ture, it can be divided into three legs: the initial leg, the lead leg and the

guidance leg.

The initial leg is the leg of the trajectory for the missile's unguided flight
after the launch. The necessity of this leg is caused by a number of circumstances:
missile control becomes sufficiently effective after it has reached a certain speed.
control should be carried out after the dropping of the boosters and so forth.

At the end of the uncontrolled flight. the missile's position may not correspond to
the selected guidance method and to the target's position. The leading of the mis-
sile to the required trajectory is considered complete if its deviation does not
exceed a set amount determined by the effective action of the SAN warhead against
the target.

The leg for leading the missile to the required trajectory is the trajectory leg
intermediate between the initial and guidance legs.

In viewing the maximum SAM firing ranges, the trajectory leg from the point of the
missile launch to the obtaining of a permissible error in its position is frequently
understood as the lead leg.

The guidance leg is the trajectory leg over which the missile is guided to the tar-
get according to the set guidance method.

The decanacing of the missile warhead in
the area of the point of impact can be car-
ried out by two methods: using a proximity
fuse and by cosmmnd from the ground.

target
trajectory ﬂ _

     

An overall diagram for firing a SAN is
shown in Fig. 6.5, where the points Ttd-
To, TL and Tr designate the positions of an
airborne target, respectively, at the
moments of receiving the target designation
n data, the detecting of the target by the
missile guidance station, the launching of
Fig. 6.5. On determining the essence the missile and the rendezvous of the mis-
of SAM firing sile with the target: 1 and 2--the re-
quired and actual SAM trajectory; Pp--the
point on tho trajectory where the missile warhead is detonated.

During the time the target moves from point Ttd to Tg, immediate firing preparations
are carried out and from point Tl to Tr--missile guidance.

6.2.2. SAM Guidance Errors

The accuracy of missile guidance is assessed by the characteristics of the guidance
error law in a picture or any other characteristic plane near the target.

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A plane perpendicular to the target's line of sight is called a picture plane or
plane of projection (Fig. 6.68).

In a theoretical analysis of firing effectiveness, as a plane for assessing missile
guidance errors it is possible to use a plane perpendicular to the vector of its
relative speed (Fig. 6.6b).

 

trajectory

3)

 

Fig. 6.6. Planes for assessing guidance errors
(a--Picture plane, b-Plane perpendicular to Vrel)

The Nature and Reasons fbr the occurrence for SAM Guidance Errors
In terms of their nature, guidance errors can be systematic and random.

systematic errors are those errors which in firing remain constant or change accord-
ing to a completely determined law. A systematic error can be disclosed and elimin-
ated by introducing the corresponding corrections. If the amoung of the systematic
error depends upon the parameters of the target's movement and which change largely
in firing, then in a number of instances a precise compensation for such an error
will be difficult.

The amount of the systematic errors yo and 20 determines the position of the center
of dispersion for the points of intersecting the actual trajectories relative to the
target in the picture plane (Fig. 6.6).

Random errors is the name given to those errors which in each missile launch can as-
sume different values of amount and sign and precisely which ones cannot be pre-
dicted beforehand. These errors cause random deviations in the intersection points
of the actual trajectories with the picture frame relative to the center of disper-
sinn.

It can be considered that the random missile guidance errors are subordinate to a
normal distribution law, that is, they can be described by a probability density oi
the sort:

_ |_v_- In; (I —r.|‘

__ + ____

7 '2
1(1-3)’Tj%'.._¢ h' 2" . (6.67)

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNL!

Hhrrr y, z--Lhe annual of SAM deviations from the target 1nd the corresponding guid-
ance plane;
°y' oz--mean square errors of the deviations.

The mean square error a of a random amount is the characteristics of the dispersicn

of the random amount's values relative to its mathematical expectation. The square
of the mean square error is called the variance

e‘|.\'| -. mu -'"x)‘l. (6.68)

where X--random amount;
mx--expectation of random amount;
H|(x-mx)]--expectation of deviation of random amount from exnectation.

The Statistical variance of a random amount is:

1
(x -1} '
2‘. ' " (6.69)

7
o"|X| -

h—

where xi--observable values of random amount;
xpP--statistica1 average of random amount.

In artillery practice, in assessing the dispersion of random amounts subordinate to
a normal law, instead of the mean square error frequent use is made of a numerical
characteristic which has been termed the mean error or the mean deviation.

The mean deviation is the name given to one-half the length of a sector which is

symmetrical relative to the dispersion center the hit probability of which equals
0.5. The mean error E is related to the mean square error a by the ratio EII0.6750.

The dispersion of a r' *om value in practical terms keeps on the sector 130 or 248.
The scale of the me. 1are and mean errors of a normal law is shown in Fig. 6.7.

The guidance errors accompanying the firing of missiles, according to the reasons

for their occurrence. have come to be divided into dynamic, instrument and fluctua—
tion.

litﬁpuuqin error in guiding a missile to the target is the name given to the deviation
tion of the missile from the target arising as a result of the effect of incoming
signals from the moving target on the guidance system in the processing of these
sngnuls by the missile as well as signals caused by the longitudinal movement of the
missile. if the target does nc; saneuver then the incoming effect changes slowly

and the loop operates without transfer processes. The errors corresponding to such
operating conditions in the guidance system are termed steady dynamic errors. With
abrupt maneuvers by the target. transfer processes arise in the control loop and
these lead to increased errors in guiding the missile to the target.

In firing on a nonmaneuvering target, the dynamic guidance error will be:

204

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hd - To . (6.70)

where Unt--normal acceleration of missile moving along required trajectory;
Ko--gain coefficient for open control loop.

The required trajectory along which the missile should move in its closing with the
target in a general instance is rectalinear. The gain of the control loop is not
infinite. Consequently, the missile can move along a curvalinear trajectory only
in the presence of its error rtlative to the required position at each moment of
time. The greater the trajectory curvature with the set gain in the open control
loop the larger the error amount should be. The error characterizing the required
amount of the mismatch parameter for realizing the required movement of the SAM is
usually called the dynamic error of the guidance method (Fig. 6.8).

1; Le
"4m
46 do -o )0 o 29 so
'noz' an ".34 0.34 au'aoz' ' ' 2
«5-5: -25 -r‘ a r 2: u 4:
ha: Waulazs'azslam'am'em'
Fig. 6.7. Scales for w and E Fig. 6.8. Illustration of error Hdm:

Of a normal law l--Kinematic trajectory; 2--Dynamic

trajectory

The amount of the gain K whicu includes as one of the comultipliers the missile

gain K characterizing its maneuvering properties, depends upon the SAM speed and

altitu e. If the available missile g-ioads become less than the required (ng< “k)'
u

then the missile will leave the required trajectory and travel along a circ ar arc
with a radius:

t... " 7...?- (6.71)

Consequently, the missile control loop is an automatic control system with limited

capacity due to the restriction on the available missile g-loads. The limited man-
euverability of the SAM leads to an increase in the dynamic error of missile guid-

ance (Fig. 6.9).

The maneuvering of the target in direction or speed leads to an abrupt change in the
parameters of the SAM required trajectory and to a rise in the mismatch signal on
the input of the control system. The dynamic error for missile guidance to a man-
euvering target in the area of the point of impact depends upon the ratio of the g-
lands developed by the target and the missile. the inertia of the control loop and
the time of the start of the target's maneuver relative to the moment of impact.

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thv lurnrt's manochr does not lead to an abrupt rise in the guidance error if the
rulin of available g-loads np/nt >1.5-2. The most effective is a maneuver by the
target which is executed several seconds before impact.

A sharp rise in the input signal caused by a transfer process can be a consequence
of a change in the target tracking method or the guidance method in the process of
the missile's flight, of gas dynamic disturbances in a loop and so forth.

The possible ways for reducing the dynamic error in guiding the missile to a target
are: a low curvature in the required SAM trajectory particularly in the area of the
point of impact, its dependence upon the target's maneuver. a high quality of con-
trol loop and the incorporation of compensation adjustments into the control com-

mands.
l.

   

required 0
missile //a§tu?i p
. m ‘
”lb 9 té .e
/ 9
Fig. 6.9. Occurrence of error with Fig. 6.10. Instantaneous miss of
nav < nt homing missile

PVac'uation aurora in their essence are random and are caused by amplitude and
angular fluctuations in the signal returned from the target, by the intrinsic
noise of the equipment and by other random disturbances operating on the missile
control loop.

The amount of the fluctuation guidance error in telecontrol systems, as a rule, de-
pends upon the type and parameters of the airborne target's movement, the method of
its tracking, the guidance method. the type of target countermeasures as well as the
meteorological conditions and the nature of the underlying surface (in firing on
low-flying targets). With an accuracy sufficient for practical use it can be con—
sidored that this error is proportional to the fluctuation error of target tracking

0E - Km: c. (6.72)

Homing systems which employ bearing taking devices with instantaneous equisignal
directing are insensitive to amplitude fluctuations in the signal returned from the
target. The angular fluctuations of this signal influence the accuracy of determin-
ing the mismatch parameters. being the basic source of fluctuation errors.

!usL:wmunL errors is the name given to errors caused by design and production flaws
in the control equipment. by the imperfection in the employed methods of measuring

the target and missile coordinates and generating the mismatch parameter and control
vnnmundﬁ, hy the limits for introducing compensation corrections and so forth.

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A guidance instrument error can be also introduced by the operators if they are an
element in the missile control loop or participate in determining the coordinates
and parameters of the target's movement.

The resulting instrument error has syntematic and random components within it.

The miss of a harming missile r (Fig. 6.10) as caused by an error in the position of
the missile velocity vector V relative to the point of impact at a moment of fail-
ure in the SAM homing is:

0;: 0L?
r .ﬁs—ﬁfl. (6.73)

where Dam-«he missile-target distance at the moment of failure of tne missile's
homing;
Orr-the rotation rate of the missile-target line.

The Probability of Hitting the Circle of the Set Mitts

Hith the known expectation yo, no and the mean square error 0y, 0: for the disper-
sion of the missile trajectories around the target and a normal law of SN! guidance
errors. the probability P for the hitting of the missile in a circle of a set radius
R is calculated in the following manner.

The first case. The systematic guidance errors are absent (yo -zo-0) and the
guidance errors are subordinate to a circular law (03, Iaz-o):

l’(r «‘Ie) l-..--. (6.710)

where

The formula (6.76) also makes it possible to solve the inverse problems, that is, to
determine the mean square error a from the set probability of hitting the circle of
a set radius.

Ewnplc. Let yo-zo-O, ay-oz- 10 In. To determine the probability that in guiding
the missile to the target it will deviate from the target by not more than 25 m.

Solution.

Sc-nond case. The guidance of the missile to the target involves systematic errors
(yo #0 and to #0). The random errors are subordinate to a circular lav (ay-oz-a).

The solution to the problem related to the probability of hitting in a circle of a
set radius is carried out by employing equal probability curves in the SIR and roll!
coordinates as shown in Fig. 6.11.

207

FOR 0F; JIM. USE ONLY
PUK UPPLLIN. UDt URL!

They make it possible:

a) Using the known values of the syste-
matic error of guidance to the target

'AIIIII
I’ll-I
III-II
III-'1.
II”.-

5,.
6:
i-

Ill-IIIIIIIIIIEE'

ro - v‘yg-fzﬁ and the mean error E, to de-
termine the probability of the missile'e
hitting within a circle of a set radius R.

AIIIMIII

III-III!

E
,a
a
a
a
I

For obtaining an answer it is essential to
calculate the Elk and talk values and from

the curves to find the probability value.

1
J35;
:uiE

E

:12”

(I'll.

n
\

W’

  

Vie“ an“: ‘ b) From the known values of the systematic
I 5.3". ”a a error r0, the msan error E and probability

‘ I ‘ﬂﬂl '. I P, to determine the size of the radius for

‘1' |I1l|l I the circle in which the missile will hit.
'IIIHIllll I
II II“ I I For this the ratio is calculated:
a 0.5 1.5 5.
—°- and the angle than t3 59-
Fig. 6.11. Family of equal probability E E ‘

curves ’

From the origin of the coordinates. a line
is drawn at angle a to the abscissa axis. The intersecting point of this line with

the set probability curve determines the coordinates Elk and talk. From the ratio
E/R or ro/R. the radius of the circle R is calculated within which the missile will
hit with the set probability.

c) From the known values for the probability of the missile hitting in a circle
with a radius R and for the values of the mean error E or the systematic error r0,
to find. respectively, r0 or E.

Thu third case. Systematic guidance errors are absent (yo-zo-O) and the random
guidance errors are subordinate to an eliptical law (av-oz).

The probability of the missile's hitting in a circle with a set radius is deter-

mined from Table 6.1. The inputs into the table are the values a and b calculated
in the following manner:

R "
.3, -
1) With Ey<£l 5" ['33: ." '_E'.'
’5:

R
2) With ’5,>I'-'. aid-E, su- |-F .

hinmtplr. Let yo -zo-0; 53,- 10 m. 82- 15 m. To determine the probability that the
missilc's miss in guiding it to the target will not exceed 30 s.

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 6. 1

 

 

3MW.I ”2%. M NH“ .... ”58m “WWSWV 54030 123W an «aim
.. I.“ In] .I .I . WNW.” «HS. \ .l 3
..Wu..... ......JWW. WW... W. L» WW W W WWW... WWW... . WWWW .
00.000 00000 00000 0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.00.0 000.00. 1.0000
llllllly II I..
w ...wmaw 3mm». 9 snum us Baum namsn ....u .0. J
WWW .u WJWWW W. . . . WWJWWWW. ..WW .WWWW WWWWW WWWWW.
I0.l0.00.0. 00000. 00.000 000.0.0.0000 . 00000 0000.0 0000.

 

WIWIWWW WWWWW WWW WW..WWJWWWW WWWWW WWWWW WWWWW

0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.0.0.0. o.o.0.0.o.0.o.o.o.o. 0.0.0.00. 0.0.0.0.0. twins...

 

 

 

 

' VI —r57 -o.14.

-?
v
0.5

I:
h

 

 

0.!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

..../

Proa Table 6.1, P(r<30) 80.72.

R
-13..

The inputs into the table:

 

Solution.

 

 

Wm . .u. .WJW. .WWWWW .. W.WWJ.J..W.WW . : W. WWW... WWW . ..W.
0.0000 00000 00000 0.00.0.0.00000 0.0.0.0.0. 00000 0000.).
W W 0 £3.33 mm .W 53%

om m wmmmmw «Wmmma . :07... . 9: Mm . “amour wwwmw
0.0.0.0.0. 0.00.00 00.00.0 0.0.0.0.0..0.00.00. 0.0.0.0.0. 00 000 00000
«.2 0535 J W 2 m 9mm" m .... «Wag
omwm mmmmm mmmou WWWWW .m..mm. . may...” WWW ..JJ. .3me
0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.0.0.0.00000 00000 000 00 00000

 

WWWWW WWWWWW WWWW . WWWWWW :WWW. WWWWW WWW. WW
”0

W WWW. WWW. .. WW 0%

IIII2 ”I, 4055-o

 

 

...................................

 

 

3. .1. ..I ....mlun. 92%y w 914 . W? KID
wwvum .wun mmwxm amuwwwommwlw ......wm -.Wm

.........................

 

 

 

00000 00000 00000 000000.0.00.0. 00.0.0.0. 00000 0
3|- ! \OII. .1 h 2.1 M. .3. ”Nun-no.4.
mmmmw mmmmm nmmwum. wmwm mwmmmm Mswm 7..mm.m..am. «$9..me
0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.0.0.0. 0.0.0.0.0.0.000.0. 00000 00:000. 00.000
Ill. 3 "mum... mm... 93.. 7 mum.-.

WWWWW WW--. WWWWW ..WWWWWW .WW WWWWW ....J WW .WWWW
......................... lmﬂhu

00000 ”0000 00000 ooooowoooo- 00.00.” 0000

 

1.234.... .h..\90 12305.0.15901230suﬁwjumgoo 4.4.030 ...-sf. $0.

rdinate to an elipticsl low on a
given radius, due to the complexity

rained graphically using a circulsr

209

The guidance of the nissile to the target is accoapsnied by systematic
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

errors (yo {:0 g! 0) while the tendon errors are suho

plnnc (0y I oZ f 0).
of the analytical calculations, can also be dete

The probability of hitting within a circle of a
dispersion grid.

Fourth .‘xwe.
FOR Ufl‘lLiAL Ubl'. URL!

6.2.3. The Coordinate Law for the Destruction of a Target
The Effect of the SIM Cbmbat Ehuipment on the ﬂarget

In terms of the method of effect on the target, the SAM warheads are divided into
high explosive, fragmentation and shaped-charge. In the foreign SAKS, the most
widely employed are the nonisotropic fragmentation warheads.

In the exploding of the SAN. the target can be destroyed by: the destruction of the
aircraft's structure; by knocking out its vitally important sections; by igniting
the fuel on the aircraft and so forth. '

The radius of the effective high explosive action of the SAM combat equipment de-
pends primarily upon the weight of the explosive and the target's height. In terms
of its amount it is relatively small.

The fragmentation action of a warhead can lead to the mechanical destruction of the
aircraft's structure, to the damaging of vulnerable compartments, to the igniting of
fuel and to the knocking out of crew members.

An indispensable condition for hitting a target is the blanketing or straddling of
the target by warhead fragments. This condition with the set values of target and
missile speed, the angle between them and the angle and velocity of fragmentation
determines the moment for detonating the SAH warhead. ~

A contact clement impacts with a target if at the moment of detonating the warhead
the target is on a line coinciding with the relative velocity of this element Vrelre
(Fig. 6.12).

   

Fig. 6.13. Static fragmentation area
of nonisotropic warhead (a--Symmetri-
Fig. 6.12. Relative velocity of contact cal relative to the missile's longi-

element tudinal axis, b-Directed also in a
radial plane)

 

If a target is within a certain area of space around a missile at the moment the
missilc's warhead is detonated and the target's vulnerable compartments are blanket-
ed by the stream of fragments, this area of space is termed the area of a possible

target kill.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The position of this area in firing does not remain constant. The speed of airborne
targets changes within broad limits and the missile speed on the trajectory is also
not constant. The angle of the missile's impact with the target (the angle between
the directions of the target and missile velocity vectors) depends upon the coordi-
nates and parameters of the target's movement and the initial SAM launch conditions.
Consequently. choosing the moment for detinating the warhead should be done con-

sidering the specific conditions of the impacting of the missile with the target.

Hith a symmetrical static fragmentation area relative to the missile's longitudinal
axis (Fig. 6.13s), the area of possible target kill is a volume bounded by two coni-
cal surfaces with the vertex at the warhead detonation point and with axes coincid-
ing with the missile's relative velocity vector. The relative trajectories of the
fragments are distributed within the given volume. Such a shape of the area of pos-
sible target kill makes it possible not to consider the direction of the missile's
miss in selecting the moment for detonating the warhead.

If the static fragmentation area is characterised by an amount of the fragmentation
angle relative to the missile longitudinal axis “ct and an angle of fragmentation in
a radial plane th (Pig. 6.13b), then in controlling the detonation of the warhead.
one considers not only the amount and direction of the target and missile velocity
vector but also the direction of the SAM miss. Prior to the detonation of the war-
head, the missile turns on its longitudinal axis corresponding to the direction of
the miss.

The detonation of a missile warhead in the area of the point of impact can be car-
ried out by two methods: by the giving of the command to detonate the warhead from
a ground control center when the missile is near the target and by a proximity fuse
on the missile.

The first method in selecting the moment for detonating the warhead does not make it
possible to consider the conditions of the missile's impacting with the target. In
employing nonisotropic uE-fragmentation warheads on the missile. this method is em-
ployed in firing in special cases.

The second method is the basic one. Of all types of proximity fuses in the SANS of
foreign armies, radar fuses have become the most widespread.

By the rudhr fuse activation area one understands the spatial area around the mis-
sile determined by the geometric locus of the missile's hypothetical centers at the
nonent of activating the radar fuse. that is. the detonating of the missile warhead.
The probability description of this area is the law of radar fuse activation u(x, y,
z). This describes the distribution of the warhead detonation coordinates in the
area of the point of impact:

..(.. My /.(-,;j',)I-U. 1). (6.75)

where fl(x/y. z)-distribution density of coordinate x for activation of fuse with
set guidance error y, s;
f?(y. s)--probsbiiity ofradar ﬁne activation against target depending upon
guidance errors y, z.

211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PUB vrriuuu. Ubl‘. URL!

The radar (uze activation area should coincide with the area of the possible target
kill. If this area coincides. then it is said that the radar fuss is matched with
the warhead. With the noncoinciding of these areas, one observes one or another
degree of mismatching between the fuze and the warhead and a decline in the proba-
bility of a target kill with the set amount of miss.

Possible methods for matching the radar fuse and the missile warhead include:

a) A discrete or continuous change in the slant angle of the radar fuse direction-
a1 pattern to the longitudinal axis of the missile depending upon the conditions of

the impacting of the missile with the target (target speed. missile speed, position
of point of impact and so forth);

b) Changing the angle of slant in the static fragmentation area relative to the
missile's longitudinal axis depending upon target speed and firing conditions (this
angle can be changed by choosing the appropriate points for triggering the warhead);

c) Selecting the moment of activating the radar fuse using Doppler velocity meters.

The detonating of the missile warhead occurs at ranges to the target corresponding
to the amount of miss. A restriction on the operational range of a proximity fuze
is imposed in order to exclude the possibility of its activation by a target not be-

ing fired on. that is. a target located outside the radius of effective action for
the warhead's contact elements.

A Quantitative Representation of the Coordinate Law of Target Destruction

The hitting of a target as well as the damage caused to it in the detonating of the
SAM warhead depend upon the following random aggregate of factors: the values of
the coordinates for the SAM detonation point relative to the target, the degree of
blanketing the target with a current of warhead contact elements, the mass and
shape of the contact elements, the speed of the elements at the moment they hit the
target and their density. the effectiveness of the high explosive action of the war-
head. the vulnerability of the airborne target and the conditions of the impacting
or the missile with the target (the height of the point of impact. the values and
directions of the missile and target velocity vector and so forth).

With the given SAM combat equipment and the characteristics of the airborne target,

the probability of hitting it depends basically upon the coordinates of the missile
explosion point and the conditions for the impacting of the missile with the target.

An integral function C(x. y, z) determining the amount of the target kill probabili-
ty depending upon the coordinates of the missile's point of explosion relative to
the target is termed the coordinate law of target destruction.

The function C(y. z) detenmining the probability of target kill depending upon the
crrors in guiding the SAN to the target can be called the conditional coordinate
law of destruction:

 

+ 'II‘
th.:lw S 0(r.y.:)/.( vi: )41. (6.76)
-'Ill .
212

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where the values “Xmax. +¥max determine the possible dispersion interval of the mi_s-
sile warhead detonation points along the trajectory (Ixmaxl' 30x)

Graphically, the conditional coordinate law for the hitting of a target can be rep-
resented by a family of closed equal probability curves (Fig. 6.14) and these make
it possible to determine the probability of target kill for any set values of y and
z. in the general instance, these closed curves are not even circles. that is. the

target kill probability depends not only upon the amount but also upon the direc-
tion of the missile miss.

Y‘ With the given characteristic: for the SAM

combat equipment, the parameters of the
target ki11 conditional coordinate law of destruction
probability depend upon target vulnerability and the
conditions of the missile's impact with the
target.

 
 
  

By the vulnerability of an airborne target
one understands the degree of its sensi-
tivity to destruction with the detonating
of the missile warhead under the given con-
ditions of impacting with the target. As-
sessing the vulnerability of enemy proba-
Fig. 6.16. Graphic image of conditional ble targets is done indirectly by a general
coordinate law for target destruction analysis of their design and a comparison

with the vulnerability of the standard
sections of target aircraft.

Target vulnerability depends upon the conditions of its impacting with she SAH (the

altitude. speed and orientation of the target relative to the point of the explosion
and so forth).

The zone of certain target kill is directly adjacent to the aircraft. With the ex-
ploding of the SAM in this zone the aircraft is destroyed with virtual reliability
as a consequence of the general destruction to the structure caused by the high-
explosive effect of the warhead combined with the fragmentation action of the solid
stream of contact elements.

with the detonating of the warhead outside the zone of certain target kill, the tar-
get is destroyed as a result of the fragmentation or incendiary action of the indi-
vidual contact elements against the vulnerable sections of the aircraft. Target
vulnerability in this instance is determined by the number of vulnerable sections

of the first and second groups and by their area projected to a plane perpendicular
to the vector of the relative shrapnel velocity.

In the sections of the first group one usually puts the elements of an airborne
target the knocking out of which entails its destruction (pilot's cockpit, the en-
gine of a single-engine aircraft, the bomb bay and so forth) and in the second
group, the elements the knocking out of a certain number of which in a certain ag-

grcuate (a combination of damaged sections) leads to the destruction of the air-
borne target.

213

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL Ubﬁ UNI-7

Amliytfrully the enmlitimul Law of target destruction can be represented by a func-
liuu whirh depends upon two independent variables: the size of the miss r and the
direction of the miss 9. Hith the given characteristics of the missile's combat
equipment, the density of fragments X is determined by the amount of the miss r,

while the reduced vulnerable area of the aircraft svul is determined by the direc-
tion of the miss 6 and by the amount of the miss r:

(70.9).- |_¢‘“’“w "a". (6.77)

With the experimental determination of the conditional law of target destruction,
the dependence (6.77) is represented in the form:

:3.»
an(’.')*'—CT. (6.78)
where 60(6)--the parameter of the conditional law of target destruction depending

with the given missile combat equipment upon the type of target, the
firing conditions and the direction of miss.

With an approximate estimate of the effectiveness of SAM firing, a two-dimensional
conditional law of target destruction is replaced by a circular conditional law of

target destruction (Fig. 6.15). An approximation of the law is realized by an aver-
aging of the parameter 60(0): '

7:
s.-- .128 wm. (6.79)
0
Then
'3
o.‘r,__._c'7. (6.80)

The parameter of the conditional law of target destruction 6° numerically equals

the size of the miss r whereby the conditional probability of target kill is 0.632,
since

G.(r ~- 6.) - I —c-' - 0,639.

Other approximations are also possible for the conditional law of target destruction.
for example: '

,I

1
m
(i. (r) — c °

(6.81)

where Rn--parameter of the conditional law of destruction; it is numerically equal

to the size of the miss whereby the conditional target kill probability is
0.606; can - R0) - e'°°5 - 0.606.

21“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.2.4. Quantitative Indicators for the
Effectiveness of SAM Firing

The Probability of Hitting a Single Target
with One Missile

 

: The hitting of a target by a SAN can be
___ “ ._.... _ IQ. _ 5 represented in the form of a couple: random

event consisting of two other tendon events
Fig. 6'15' Nature °f d‘P°“de“°° 60") occurring sequentially in time (Fig. 6.16).

The first random event consists in the fact
that the missile varhead exploded precisely
at the given point in space with coordin-
ates x. y, a relative to the target. The
probability of this event is determined by
the law of errors f(x. y. z) accompanying
the firing.

The second random event consists in having

the contact elements of the missile warhead

which has exploded precisely at the given

point with the coordinates x, y, 2. hit the

target. The probability of this event is

Fig. 6.16. On determining the target determined by the coordinate law of target
kill probability destruction C(x, y, z).

 

Consequently, the probability of hitting a target with one missile is:

he +Im +n

I’u"S S Sl(x.y.:)G(a.y.:)dxdyd:. (6-82)

—--og-p-

The function f(x. y, z) differs from zero only in a certain (noninfinite) volume
around the target. Integration also occurs in this volume.

The dependence (6.82) is represented in the form:

4.:

,.
I’.-S S l(r.z)l.(y.:)0.(y.:Wydt. (6.83)

where f(y, z)--the lav of errors in guiding the missile to the target;
f,(y, z)——thc dependence of the probability of proximity fuse activation upon
guidance errors;

C(y, z)--conditional coordinate law of target destruction.

The procedure for calculating the integral (6.83) depends upon the type of subinte-
gral functions.

215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urrauuu. var. vmu

'."h.- first .rwtu‘. T110 guidancv errors are subordinate to a circular luv (0,, - 01- u).
the dispersion center coincides with the target, that is. the density of the miss
distribution probability is:

,0
f _ 10‘

[01-70 . (6.86)
A circular-type law of target destruction is:

_ a:
a.m— l—c '7‘”. (6.85)

The radius for the activation of the proxisity fuze surpasses the maximum value of
the guidance error. Then

 

(6.86)

 

 

Table 6.2
0.0 0.5' 0.07389 5.0 0.004015 7.5 0.0002653
0.1 9. ‘ o 5 0.01-.529 5.] 0.015619 1.6 00112383
0.2 | 4.7700 5;, 0,05". 5,2 0.00239 7.1 0.0002141
0.3 3.050 1-3 0.051" 53 0.002900 7.11 0.0001924
04 : 21m 19 0.0.529 5.. 0.002597 7.0 0.0001720
0.5 1.13st 3.0 0.04015 05 0.002326 3,0 0.0001556
0.0 1.3028 3.] 0.03553 5.3 0.002083 8.1 0.0001396
0.1 1.0600 3_2 0.00161 5,1 0.001866 8.2 0.000125
031 0.6615 33 0.013312 53 0.001673 6.3 0.0001123
0.9 0.7105 3.4 0.02500 5.9 0.001499 8.4 0.0001014
10 I 0.6019 3,5 0.02%.: ' 5,0 0.001344 8.5 0.00009120
1.1 0.5090 3.6 0.01919 6.1 0.001205 8.6 0.0000820)
1 3 0.43“. 3.7 0.01763 6.? 0.001001 11.7 0.000073“
1 3 0.3725 3.8 0.0191 6.3 0.0009691 5.8 0.00006631
<1 0.3206 8.9 0.01400 6.6 0.0006690 8.9 000105964
1.5 0.2174 4,0 0.01248 6.5 0.0110799 9.0 0.0000536:
1_:'. 0.2101; 4.1 0.01114 6.6 0.0006996 9.1 0.0000405
1.7 0.2001 4,2 0.009933 6.? 0.0006280 9.2 001001.140
1.‘ 0.11‘5 4.3 0.008572 6.! 0.0115636 9.3 0.0000390!
1.9 0.1.297 | 1.4 0.007923 6.9 0.0005059 9.4 0.0000351?
2.0 0.1399 4.5 0.007078 7.0 0.0001612 9.5 0.0013160
2.! 0.121 4.6 I 0.015335 7.1 0.0001015 9.6 0.1»00543
2.. 0.1079 «1.7 | 0.00565! 7.2 0.000566? 9.7 0.1013559
923 0.09199 4.9 I 0.005055 7:! 0.0010299 9.3 0.1010230:
2.1 0.007: 4.9 ; 0.001521 74 0.00093: 0.9 | 0.1331031»
5 10,0 1 0.0000196:
I
216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The letter x in Table 6.2 designates 560/0.

Pimple. To calculate the probability Pl, it oy-oz- 10 n and 60-25 In.
Solution: x - ﬁ-zs/10-3.sa.

According to the table Kl(3.5[6) -0.021; Pl-l-3.56°0.021-0.926.

The second case. The laws of the guidance errors and the activation of the proximi-
ty fuze are the sale as in the first case.

The target destruction law is described by a function of the type:

53. (6.87)

G (I) ~-. 0
Then

I
I'. -—,—-- (6.88)
l I (I?)

I-Lrwnplc. To calculate the probability P1, if oy-az- 10 -, R0- 30 n.

Solution:

I
’3— '“ 15-" m9.
l+w

The third case. The missile guidance errors are subordinate to a circular law (ay-
01 = o), the dispersion center does not coincide with the target (yofo and 20 *0),
that is, the probability density for the distribution of misses is:

m)- J..." ‘7" ,. (L) (6.89)

where

The target destruction law is described by the function:

,I

‘77?
um“.- ".

The law for the activation of the proximity fuze is unlimited. hence

 

_ 'l R. )
: lo 1..
,,., ..."n {2. ( wiu' , (6.90)

I61; 4 .'

Maple. To calculate the probability P1, if ay-az- 10 n, R0- 30 II, ro- 15 In.

 

Solution: 3), _ Ifo' ('_ an )
"u-mc "'°‘ 9*" -o.eo.

217

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK 0"].th Uﬁb VIM-l

'l'hr fuurth case. The laws of guidance errors and the activation of the proximity
fuze are the same as in the third case.

The target destruction law is of a circular type:
2
‘u

”.7.—

(3(r) -l—c

Hence

 

as 3 3
' M
I'l "J %'~' 2.. ’0 (5:;{ (l-C-T) I”. (6.91)

The dependence (6.91) is calculated by numerical integration methods.

The fifth case. The guidance errors are subordinate to an eliptical law (03, < Oz),

the dispersion center coincides with the target. that is. the probability density
for the distribution of misses is:

(Jul)
2' .

-'."ﬁ— 7 3- 2
lm~ ' o “"' “(—M’ .' ).

 

o a 7 I
y l 10,0.

(6.92)

The target destruction lav is of a circular type
’0

1
G(f)-e "In.
The radius for the activation of the contact fuze is limited by the amount tnax’
Hence 2
0
I, '_-l_ J I a
- Han-2»; “K v (6.93)
'y '7 I
where a... -.—; 4,... 75;;
l—af

Juno-ge"l.(K.!)dl-tabular function given in Table 6.3.
5

Evaluate. To calculate the target Itill probability if oy-S In; 03-10 In; run-20 n;
R0 - 30 II.

Solution: a] =5/10 - 0.5; a} = 0.25; a2 - 5/30 - 0.166; a; - 0.027.

I —0.25
K ' "IT 07m *2'-o.m‘7"°-5773

218

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I 1 0.2!. .- 2-0.0”

t - [Jr—aw - 5.2“.
2-0.5
According to Table 6.3, Je -.l.175, hence P1 - W1 - 1.175 I 0.90.
Table 6.3

 

0,0 0 0 0 o 0 o

0.2 0,1103 mm: 0.18" 0.IBI5 0.11110 0,1310
0,4 0.3?97 0.33198 0.3303 0.33" 0.311?) 0.3131
0,0 0,15” 035]? 0.453) 0.4554 0AM» 0,4029
0,1! 0,5501 0.55“? 0.5545 0.559;! 0,!111'1‘1I 0,5709
1,0 0,0321 0,6337 0,0300 0,0468 0.155114 0.0736
l.2 0,0910! 0.70l'2 0,7("3 0.1209 0.73% 0.7020
1,4 0,1514 0,1301 0,1009 0,1011 0.110119 0,1111:
1,1. 0,110100025 0.11151 0,3301 0.11112 0,110.1
LR 0130 0JHOI 1Laam 1Lmﬁo 09mg "ﬁKE
2,0 0,1M7 0,1171? 0.11910 0,9255 0,0700 l,0l‘.'l'.
2.2 0.1019) 0.1008 0,9201 0,0007 1,0217 I_I0'5
2.4 0,110.11 “.9!” 0,94“; 0,90”. 1,011.!) l,l0r.'
2,0 0,0251 0,9054 0.91355 1.0"“ [,11I1I 1,2113
2,11 0,!!!” 0,9199 0,9113] ””24 LIMS 1.21m
3,0 0,0102 0,0018 0,9919 1,0035 1,1001 1,319.6
.12 0,0110 0.91111 1.0110 1,0022 1,1931 1.010.»
3,4 0,0110 0,9111!) 1,0220 1,0900 1.2223 1,01:
0,1. 0,0111 0,0000 1,0014 1.1131; 1,211.5 1,4510
3,5 0,0711; 0.91125 1,0304 1.121111 1.21011 1,501o
4,0 0,9107 0,9971 1.0063 1.13111. 1.2920 L54!!!
4.2 0.9100 1.0010 1,0522 1.1492 1.8“!) 1.5109
4.4 0.9877 ”1043 1.0574 l.l587 1.3320 ”037
1,1. 031101110110 1,0010 1,1019 1,3499 1,0125
4,11 0.11901 1.00:: 1,111.51 l.l149 1.3106 1.706
5.0 0.91111 1,01" 1,0090 1.11110 1,3193 H.170
5,4 0,011.16 I,0|40 1.0143 ”907 um um!»
5,11 0,1er 1.0100 1,0703 L20.“ 1.1319 1.111116
0,2 0.001111 1,0114 1.01114 1,21“ 1.4500 1,9152
0,0 0.09110 1.01111 1,011.11 1,2100 1,4192 2.0101
7.0 0.9991 1.0I90 1.11154 L223“! 1.1112 2.0?!)

'I'Iu- Probability of flitting :1 Missile with n Missiles

In calculating the probability of hitting a target with n missiles, one must take
into account the nature of the target fro- the viewpoint of the possibility of the
accumulation of dsmge as it is successively fired on by SAN.

If there is no nccmulntion of damage and the probabilities for the hitting of the
target by each missile are the same, then the probability of hitting the target by
n missiles is:

1'. .0 1-41-15”. (6.94)

219

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL UbE URL!

The amount of P“, with the various values of Pl and n is given in Table 6.4.

Table 6.1; From the table it can be seen that. for

——_____——-—

,, example, with P1 - 0.7, the launch of a
second missile increases the target kill
probability by 21 percent, for the third

 

"JO ‘,'9 027 0;“ 0A! 0J7 missile by 6.3 percent. and for the fourth
0J5 o'xzn 0.39 0.4:: 0.5:; 0.62 missile by just 0.1 percent.
0,20 0,34; 0.49 0,59 :97 33
)2! .' .f . ~ .
him; 83,: 8:3: 33': 03:1 0.3; The number of missiles ensuring the set
3.}: 3.2: 3.3,; 3.3 3°33 3.325 target kill probability P“ is calculated
a l a V a O l - . O 0
0,45 0,10 on 0.91 0,95 0.91 by the “nut
0;." 0,15 0.3: 0.3.4 32; 3.33
IL!’ (LN) or 0,; ,. , ' .
«45; a,“ 0.94 0.91 0.99 0.995 ,. .7 JE“—’,"_’, (6. 95)
0,an o_m 0.91:: was 0,995 0.998 '80-! .)
0,70 0,910 0,973 0.9!?) 0.99“ 0.999
3-3;; 3-31) 3%“? 8'33: 83%., 0.9990 With the acculaulation of damage
02m 039m 02991 0.999
3:33: 8.397” g:% I’MI‘.’ P..- a --- > "n.o> I'm:
(the second figure below the P1 index des-
ignates the sequence of the missile launch)
Hence
"a“‘-(|-l'...)0-l‘...)---('—”n.n)- (6.96)

It is very difficult to determine with sufficient accuracy the value of the proba-

bilities 91.2...1’1 n for the given type of targets and firing conditions. In calcu-
lating the target ‘11]. probability by using n missiles, as a rule. formula (6.96) is
employed and the accumulation of damage is considered by correction factors.

The probability of the normal functioning of the missile system for carrying out its
combat mission (in firing) is usually termed the coefficient of combat work relia—
bility Kw.

Considering this coefficient:

1"11 ' ch tatll'U-Kcu “Pﬁnl. (6.97)

where Kev tot and K“, rcuthe probability of normal functioning. during the firing,
of the general-channel systems of the missile system and
the elements of one missile channel. respectively.

The number of missiles which determine the given target kill probability is:

 

r.
SAL—£1). (6 98)
m (I — Kw; I'.) ' '

n .

220

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬂnum:h'. Cnven: Pl . 0.8: Kcv tot I 0.98; Kc" rc - 0.96. To determine the number
of missiles for hitting a target with a probability Pd - 0.95.

Solution:

0.95
"2 ("‘ 5.98—
" ' m 4.4%: missiles.

Mathematical Ehpectation of Number of Hit 1hrgsts

In firing at a group of individual targets, the mathematical expectation of the

number of destroyed air attack weapons equals the total of the kill probabilities of
the individual targets fired on:

N
‘
u. _ 2 pt, (6.99)
I'rl

If the kill probabilities P1 are the same, then

Hc ' NtPI (6.100)

An assessment of the kill probability of at least m or precisely I out of Rt indi-
vidual targets comes down to calculating:

with the same target kill probabilities-the corresponding terms of the binomial
factorization

Puma-0.6;t [ﬂu—”'9‘"; (6.101)
”e
Pu>-)- 2 Caro—WE" (6.102)
[:1-
01'
l-I
I'(/,--~;~ 1— 3c- [-u_,.,~.--. (6.103)
l'.‘ % .

With different target kill probabilities--coefficienta for a generating function of
the type:

N‘ N
P [(1—00 + r,2| - 2 I',zl. (6. 10!.)
II.

In]

221

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Esunpic. The number of targets fired on N: - 3. The probability of hitting the
first target P1 - 0.7, the second target P2 - 0.5 and the third target P3 - 0.9.

To determine the probability of destroying exactly two and no less than two targets.

Solution: [(1-P1)+P]Z][(l-P2)+P22][(1-P3)+P32] - (o.3+o.72)(o.s+o.52)(o.1+o.92) -
0.0190.1852+0.48522+0.31523; 9(1-2) - 0.485; P(J>2) - o.ass+o.315 - 0.8.

In firing at a group target, that is, a group of aircraft observed on a radar indi-
cator in the form of a single blip under the condition that the lock-on by the
tracking radar or the GSN for one or another aircraft in the group is equally prob-
able and with the detonating of a SAM near the given aircraft the destruction of
other aircraft in the group is excluded:

1' -
““”["("W’) I (6.105)
Example. If n - 3. n x 6. v; - 0.9, then He - 3[1-(1-o.9/3)51 - 2.64.
On Estﬂnziing Firing Effectiveness with Cbuntenneasurea from the Airborne Target

Firing effectiveness with countermeasures by the airborne target (electronic jal-
mlng, maneuvering) can be reduced as a consequence of:

a) Increased guidance errors and reduced effectiveness of the SAM combat equipment:

9- +4.:

PI‘S S l“!-:)/;(!.t)0'(y.:)dvd:

(6.106}

(tho asterisk designates the corresponding laws under the conditions of target
countermeasures);

b) A disruption of the normal functioning of the missile system's elements (the
halt in the reception of information on the coordinates and parameters of the tar-
get's movement in the guidance loop, the breaking of the SAM guidance loop. the
false activating of the radar fuse and so forth); the probability Pf of the system's
normal functioning:

r4 , ._ P (1-,! mun. (6.107)
I I

where K-—the number of channels exposed to the effect of electronic jamming in
the guidance and detonating of the SAN by the target:
Porg--ptnhabllity that interference will be organized;
Prc--the probability that interference will be received by the receiver in
the SAM channel to be neutralized;
Pm--the probability that the power of the jamming will be sufficient to
disrupt the normal functioning of the guidance loop;

c) The leaving of the impact zone by the target by the time of the missile's
arrival.

222

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Assessing the target kill probability by n missiles is carried out considering all
the above-listed factors

6.2.5. impact and Launch Zones, the Capabilities of SAHS to Successively Fire on
Targets

The SANS [Epcot Zone

The impact zone of a SANS is the name given to an area of space within which an air-
borne target is hit with a set probability. Considering the effectiveness of fir-
ing, it determines the missile system's range for altitude, distance and the heading
parameter. The impact zone is displayed in the parametric system of coordinates and
is characterized by the position of the far, near, upper and lower limits. A typi-

cal sectioning of the impact zone by a vertical hisector plane and a horizontal
plane with forward firing is shown in Fig. 6.17.

The position of the limits of an impact zone is de-
termined by a large number of factors related to the
technical performance of the individual SAHS elements
and the control loop as a whole: by the firing con-
ditions and by the characteristics and parameters of
the air target's movement. For the given SANS, the
dimensions of this zone depend upon target speed, its
radar cross-section. the firing conditions (the pres-
ence of electronic jamming, maneuvering by the target)
as well as upon the selected guidance method, the
type of SAM and so forth.

The position of the far limit of the impact zone pre-
determines the required range for the operation of the
target tracking radar

dreq a ' dr+Ve<tre+tr). (6.108)

where df--horizontal distance to far limit of impact
zone;
tr¢-the firing preparatory time;
tf--the flight time of the SAN to the far
limit of the impact zone.

 

9 If with any values of the radar cross-section, target
speed and altitude the realized operating range of the
radar is less than the required (d;.‘<dreq a). then
this leads to a reduction in the computed impact zone
of a SANS. that is, to a reduction in the maximum firing range.

Fig. 6.17. An impact zone

The position of the realizable far and lower limits of the SANS impact zone can also
depend upon terrain. Fig. 6.18 shows that the maximum firing range for a low-flying
target (under the condition of its limitation by the D value) is a function of the
target's altitude and speed, the position's coverage angle and the firing prepara-
tory time. Obviously the lower the altitude of the target the shorter the range at
which it can be fired on.

223

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WK Ul'flblAL Ubl’. UNI»!

Helm-ting the .‘MM Launch Mrmrml.

In order for a missile to impact with the
target in the impact zone, the missile must
be launched ahead of time considering the
target and missile flight times to the
point of impact.

 

Fig. 6.18. Maximum firing range with The launch zone is the name given to an
limited radar operating range area of space through which the target
passes at the moment of launching the SM!

and the missile will impact with the target in the impact zone. For determining the
limits of the launch zone from each point of the inpact zone it is essential to lay
off in a direction inverse to the target's course a segment equal to the product of
the target's speed Vt by the missile's flight time to the given point. In Fig. 6.19
the most characteristic points of the launch zone are respectively designated by a'.
b'. c', d' and e‘.

The guaranteed launch zone is the name
given to an area of space within which the
target remains at the moment of the mis-
sile launch and the missile impacts with
the target in the impact zone with any

missile-evasion maneuver by the target.
The boundaries of this zone are determined

by the condition t1 - t: "q. where C1--
the flight time to the point of impact;

tt ref-the time required for the target to
Fig. 6.19. The launch zone escape by an abrupt maneuver outside the
limits of the impact zone.

  

For each point of the guaranteed launch zone t1( t; req'
SAMS Capability for Successive Firing on Targets

The capability of a SANS to successively fire on targets entering its launch zone is
determined by the duration of the firing cycle and by the time required to reload
the launchers and ready the missiles to launch.

Th.- j'irmg cycle is characterized by the time occupied by the target channel of the
system in carrying out one firing at a target with the designated nuaber of mis-
siles. The time ‘l‘c includes the firing preparatory time T, and the time necessary

(or firing on the target Tf:

Tc I Tp + Tf, }
(6.109)
Tf ' ti + tn + tev'
whore tn--the total of the time intervals between the missile launches in the
series;
t --the evaluation time of the firing results.

CV

2210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The time of loading and readying the missiles for the launch ‘1' influences the
capability of the target channel for the successive firing on a target, if

Tm >2:- Tc. (6.110)

where Np—the number of missiles per launcher for the given specific channel;
np--the number of missiles in a series in firing on the targets.

The capability of a SANS target channel for refining at the sane target vith n mis-
siles is determined by the condition

where le--the time the target renains in the launch zone.

The time T12 is a function of the target's altitude lit. the course paraneter Pt and
its speed Vt° it exceeds the time the target remains in the impact zone T1: by the

difference of the nissile's flight times to the far and near limits of the impact
zone:

In - r1, + (q - tn). (6.112)

The shifting of fire to the second target is possible if the tine interval between
the targets being fired on (Fig. 6.20) is:

Us.s>u|,s-hu- (To..+r ,s +l ,s’-TCL‘. (60113)
6.2.6. Basic Concepts of Firing Rules

Firing rules determine the procedure for preparing and conducting fire at airborne
targets under various situational conditions. The race-endations of the firing
rules, as a rule, include the procedure for assessing the air enemy, one's own
weapons and the choice of targets to be destroyed, the choice of the aethod and pro-
cedure for preparing the initial data. the combat conditions. the guidance methods.
the error compensation laws. the choice of the type of fire, the purpose for using
the nissi les. the determining of the methods for firing on the targets and the SM
launch moments. evaluating the firing results and so forth.

The vorlring out of the given recon-ends-
"t p. . - "a . ._. “1-3"! tions is done on a basis of assessing
firing effectiveness at an airborne tar-
get with different variations of conbat
work. The variation uhich ensures the
greatest reliability and economy of fir-
ing is considered the optiau variation.

 

Fig. 6.20. On determining the capability The clasatftoation of airborne targets in
of a single shift of fire the firing of SAM is carried out by a
number of features: according to type
such as bomber, fighter bomber or

225

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
I'UI‘ Ul‘l‘lblﬂb UDL URI.“

air-tn-surface missile; by altitude such as low-flying and high altitude; for speed
and so forth. Airborne targets are also divided by the nature of their blips ob-
served on the radar indicator screens.

Radar targets are divided into individual and group targets as well as groups of
targets.

An individual target is an aircraft or other air attack weapon observed on the in-
dicator screen in the form of an individual blip.

By a group target one understands a group of aircraft (air attack weapons) which
cannot be resolved by the radar and are observed on the indicator screens in the
form of a single moving blip. The ability to distinguish group targets from indi-
vidual ones is achieved by operator experience and by the characteristic features of

the target blips. Characteristic of a group target is an increased fluctuation and
increased dimensions of the blip, an unique type of blip fluctuation, an increased
detection range and so forth.

A group of targets is the name given to several aircraft or other air attack wea-
pons observed on the radar indicator screen in the form of individual blips.

iWu Louie means of countering SMM firing is to jam the radars as well as other elec-
tronic equipment of the SANS and execute an evasive maneuver.

An evasive maneuver by a target in terms of the time and place of execution is
usually divided into a maneuver against control and a maneuver against firing.

A maneuver against control is carried out prior to the launching of the SAM with the
task of complicating fire control by the SANS as well as the direct preparations for
firing by the subunits, thereby reducing the number of firings at the airborne tar-
gets and their effectiveness. This type of maneuver can be executed both by indi-
vidual targets and particularly by a group of aircraft the actions of which are
synchronized in time.

A maneuver against firing is executed after the launching of the SAM in the task of
avoiding it and reducing firing effectiveness.

lhc type of target. its composition, the coordinates and parameters of movement,
the counterprocedures and their effectiveness predetermine the choice of combat
operating conditions for the SANS as well as the method of target tracking. the
guidance method, the type of fire, the number of missiles to be used and the choice
of the SAM launch moment.

in the destroying of a target by a SAM, two types of fire are possible: with indi-
vidual mISsiIes and with a series of missiles.

The llrinu of individual missiles is a type of fire whereby the launch of each suc-
cessch missile against the target is done after assessing the firing results of the

previous missile. This can be employed if the target remains long in the launch
zone and there is no need to shift fire to another target.

226

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The firing of a series of missiles is a type of fire when the firing on the target
is done by a designated number of missiles with a set pace. The missile launch pace
excludes the possibility of a preliminary assessment of the firing results by each
missile.

The time a target remains in the impact zone of a SANS is extremely limited. For

this reason the airborne target should be dependably destroyed with the first series
of missiles.

Firing effectiveness depends substantially upon the degree to which the procedure
for its preparation and execution conforms to the situational conditions, that is.
the ability to apply the basic recommendations of the firing rules in destroying the
air enemy.

6.1. Tactics of Antiaircraft Missiles Subunits

6.3.1. Principles in the Combat Employment of Antiaircraft Missile Subunits

combat 7bnka of Subunits

The combat task of antisircraft missile subunits is to destroy the air enemy in the
aim of protecting the defended installations, covering the troops and preventing the
air attack weapons from flying through the fire zone. They carry out their tasks by
combat.

Cbmbat is the organized repelling of an enemy air strike and the basic content of
this is firing to destroy the air attack weapon in the aim of carrying out the com-
bat task. Combat is conducted with the wide employment of the maneuvering of fire
and resources. Combat is exceptionally rapid. dynamic and decisive. It starts with
the moment of opening fire against the air enemy and terminates by the enemy's de-
struction or by the ceasing of fire.

The carrying out of the task of not preventing the enemy to attack the defended ob-
ject is achieved by destroying the airborne targets on the approaches to the instal-
lation before the mission accomplished line.

By the mission accomplished Zine (HAL) one understands a line having reached which
the air enemy can hit the installation with weapons not destroyed by the antisir-
craft missile subunits. The distance of the HAL from the boundaries of the instal-
lation is (Fig. 6.21)

Lmal ' Rue + A. (6.114)

where RVc--the radius of effective action for the weapons employed by the enemy
against the installation;
A—-bomb drift (the launch range of a missile not destroyed by the SA! and
the required range for destroying a cruise missile).

The amount of bomb drift depends upon the height and speed of the aircraft as well
as upon the ballistic properties of the bomb itself. within the range of possible
altitudes for modern aircraft, the amount of bomb drift varies widely. The bomb

227

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 6.21.
accomplished line

On determining the mission

run Urfibuu. “or. lll‘hl

drift for a certain characteristic time
(the time of the bomb's falling from a
certain altitude at a certain speed) is
shown in Table 6.5.

The system of Antiairenaft Missile Fine

The strength of defenses is determined pri-

marily by a skillfully organized fire sys-
tem.

By a system of antiaircraft missile fire
one understands the combined firing of the
antiaircrsft missile subunits which has

been planned and organized for carrying out the combat task under various situation-

nl conditions.

The fire system should consider the possible variant actions of the

air enemy. the particular features of the defended installation, the area of combat
operations and the terrain, the tasks and capabilities of the cooperating men and

equipment.

Table 6.5

 

I 000 3.45 4.05 4.35
2 000 4.70 5.35 5.70
3 0“) 5.56 6.35 6.55
4 000 6.35 7.15 7.75
5 000 7.00 1.95 8.60
6 000 7 .65 6.56 9.35
7 000 5.30 9.20 10.1»
8W0 5.80 9.50 10.65
9 000 9.25 10.35 11.25
IOWO 10. I0 10.90 11.”
15W ll .90 14.55 15.65
20W 14.3) 17.0) 19.”
22” 15.70 18.75 22.00
25W» - -— -
$0M» - - -

ssaaéthéhE"
lllllllll

.—
Jo
.

§3
‘8‘818 5

.—
g
.-
0|
3”""'""'""
(O
.—
.

21.60
29
34.|0

%
2

8%

I’g'glllllllllll

81
1‘1 1 I 1 l I I I I 1 I I 1

age
NIOO

F
0

Thv vrvnliun of n fire system is achieved by deploying the subunits on the terrain.
by carrying out a range of jobs to ensure effective firing by each of then and by
organizing fire control of the subunits.

The basic characteristics of the fire system are the dimensions of the zone of anti-
nircraft missile fire. the amount of overlapping in the realized impact zones u,

[ire density Dfi, the number of firings up to the deai

fectiveness of the firings P“.

228

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gnated lines "ctp and the ef-
The fire zone is the name given to an area of space within which the subunits de-.
ployed in battle formation can hit the airborne targets. The dimensions of the fire
zone are predetermined by the dimensions of the SAM impact zones and their recipro-
cal position. For a graphic determination of the dimensions of the antiaircraft
missile fire zone, for the given altitude it is essential to plot the impact zone

realizable by each SAKS and fit them into a common external and internal configura-
tion (Fig. 6.22).

The overlapping factor of the realised in»
pact zones describes the capability of con-
centrating antiaircraft missile fire for
destroying airborne targets at one or an-
other point of the fire zone.

The density of antiaircnaft missile fire
is the number of firings per minute which
can be carried out by the subunits in re-
pelling an enemy air attack.

This is calculated for directions and alti-
tudes:

 

a
Fig. 6.22. A zone of antiaircraft Dfi . :Ef Df11’ (6'115)
missile Eire

where Df1--fire density created by the SANS;
Df11--fire density of SAHS i;

Kpn-—the number of SAHS participating in repelling the enemy air attack from
the given direction in the given range of altitudes.

The number of firings to the set lines is assessed in terms of directions and alti-
tudes:

“an
”up ‘ 2: New]. (6.116)

Ial

where “ctp 1--the number of firings conducted up to a set line by subunit 1.

Hith the entry of the targets into the fire zone simultaneously, the number of fir-
inga is a function of the depth of shifting the impact zone of the SAHS beyond the
given line “1» of the firing cycle Tc and target speed.

The mlssile's flight time and, consequently, the time of the firing cycle depend
upun lhr position of the point of impact of the SAM with the target in the impact
zone. A second firing by subunit 1 against a target is possible (Fig. 6.23) if the

h

i
lilnht lime of the target in the impact zone up to the given line is V: > Ttig2'

229

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ Ul'l'iblhl. UDI‘. Ul‘hl

:nn-I .. third flrlng is possible if — ’Tciﬂ 4- 11.1.3 ,

where T¢1.2 = ‘re 1+ [1' 2;

Tci,3' tre 1+ t1, 3:

tre-the firing preparatory time (the work time of subunit 1);
t 2, t 3--the missile flight time to the point of impact in carrying out second
i. i,
and third firings, respectively.

With an overflight length to >0, the number of firings is:

'o 'l 79:: 0: 6.117
Ntll‘l - (' I T)<zn ( )

where Tsunthe time the targets remain in the SAHS launch zone;
01--the number of rockets which can be used by the subunit in repelling the
attack; .
np-—the consumption of missiles in one firing;
Tc1--the average value of the firing cycle.

Firing efﬁectiveness describes the relia-
\..’ bility of destroying the airborne target
and is determined by the probability of
hitting the target during the diring under
various situational conditions. Its value
is a function of the probability of the

   

   
 
     

if; g'iwku a: "I n. hitting of the target with one missile and
* ' ' "xi" missile consulption in the firing.
/l——l . - with a graphic representation of a system

of antiaircraft missile fire, on a map
(diagram) one plots the expected routes of
flight for the air enemy, the location of
the subunits and their realizable impact
zones; in terms of each route one establishes and visibly depicts the subunits which
can participate in repelling the attack as well as their total fire densities and
number of firings. Other data characterizing the fire system are also plotted on
the map (diagram).

Fig. 6.23. On determining the number of
firings thpi

Imll'chm-a: for the Combat Capabilities of Subunits

k1 cUMLUL capabilities of a subunit (unit) one understands the ability of the sub-
unit (unit) to carry out the combat tasks under various situational conditions.

Combat capabilities are determined by the composition and manning levels of the sub-
unit (unit). by the tactical-technical performance and combat properties of the

wmpuns. by the level of political, combat and moral-psychological training of the
personnel and by the quality of measures to support the combat operations.

230

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Combat capabilities are determined by an aggregate of indicators: by fire capabil-
lty, by cover capabilities. by the time capabilities for preparing for combat, by
maneuvering capabilities and so forth. " '

Fire capabilities are the ability of a subunit deployed in battle formation and
ready for combat to destroy the air enemy under various situational conditions. A
generalized indicators of fire capabilities is the expectation of the number of de-
stroyed air attack weapons during an overflight of a given length ch, while the
particular indicators are the number of firings and their effectiveness:

”alt
'\
Mk' 2’ P.,, (6.118)
I=|
whore Nvtp t-'the number of air attack weapons which can be fired on by the subunit

(unit);
Pnj--the probability of fitting the air attack weapon in the firing.

The amount Mfc is calculated for directions and altitudes and depends upon the num-
ber of SANS involved in repelling the attack and their fire productivity.

With a given variation of an attack by an air enemy, the number of firings “ctp t
and the mathematical expectation of the number of destroyed air attack weapons ch
are determined by "drawing" the target routes through the zone of antiaircraft mis-
sile firing in evaluating the possibility of the subunits firing on them sequential-
ly in time.

Fire capabilities characterize the potential capabilities of a subunit (unit) to
destroy airborne targets. The degree of realizing these capabilities depends upon
the quality of the effective activities by the commander and staff in organizing and
conducting combat operations.

Thus. an assessment of the fire capabilities of subunits (units) includes a determkr
ing of their potential values and the degree of possible realization under various
situational conditions.

The amount of losses caused to the air enemy is:

M: - KPH“. (6.119)

(Inuw':aqx1bilitiec is the name given to the ability of a subunit in deploying into
battle formation to create a solid zone of antiaircraft missile fire with one or
another overlap factor for the kill zones.

As an indicator of cover capability one may employ the maximum value of the cover
sector of an installation up to a given line w of the length of the solid cover line

Loo.

The maximum value of the cover sector is:

+- 51212 (6.120)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUK Ul'l'lClAl. Ubt. UNL)

Vlu'rl' K,"--tlu- numbrr nf SANS In the subunit (the SANS are usually considered as
single—channel for a target);
..--the overlap factor of the impact zones;
Zomax--maximum cover sector of an installation by one SANS.

The amount of the angle 20mm: is a function of the spatial dimensions of the SANS
impact zone and the distance of the designated line from the installation (the
radius le and the depth of shifting the impact zone beyond this line h).

A completely definite distance of the SANS position from the center of the installa-

tion R33 corresponds to the value of the angle um. The angle “max can be calcu-
lated using the following dcpendences.

The first case. Horizontal distance to the far limit of the impact zone is greater
than the radius of the mission accomplished line: df >R.a1+r°b, where rob—the

rad lus of the installation. Hence a SANS located around the limits of the installa-
tion is capable of destroying airborne targets up to the set line with enemy attacks
against the installation from any direction, that is. me -360°. This is illus-

tratml by Fig. 6.2!. in which the SAHS impact zones and their extension beyond the
HM. are shown for overnight directions 1 and 2.

The second case. The horizontal distance df is less than the radius of ﬁnal but
greater than a certain amount equal to Rmal cos 1],“. that is, R,“ cos quxsdf <

R11ml '

hence the maximum amount of the cover sector is achieved in locating the SANS on the
middle of a chord 2dr long in a circle with a radius “ml (Fig. 6.25). Consequently,

2r... - 2atcsln 75:: (6. 121)

   

Fig. 6.24. “max =- 360° with Fig. 6.25. Value of angle 29." with
df>Rmi+rob Rm1 008 smx<dt<Rna1

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here

R33 ' " Rial'dg- (6.122)

The third case. The horizontal distance dfasknalcos qmax' Hence for the overflight
direction 1 (Fig. 6.26) at point a (the intersection of the target's course with the
HAL) it is essential to lay off the angle qmax and on this straight line the segment

ao equal to df. Point 0 determines the position of the SANS and the leg ob-the
maximum parameter of the impact zone.

      

defended
object
Fig. 6.26. Upon determining 2¢max with Fig. 6.27. Conditions for firing on a

df <R'a1cos qmax target according to the balance of time

From the geometric ratios:

kng

9... — atcclg (W7; —¢'R 4m“ 3 (6. 123)
3;, - 8%. (6. 121.)

The procedure for assessing the maximum cover angle will not change if a certain
condition is imposed on the minimum amount of extending the impact zone beyond the
mission accomplished line. In this instance in the calculation formulas the amount
of the radius Rmal must be increased by the corresponding amount.

With a different configuration of the battle formation, the length of the solid
cover line is:

KS
Lco - {IZPfop (6.125)
[-

HIth an increase in the overlap factor of the impact zones (with p >1), the length
of this line Lco will correspondingly shorten.

The fire and cover capabilities of a subunit (unit) in their aggregate determine
the capability of creating a system of antiaircraft missile fire.

233

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Time nupabiliLieo Jhr preparing jbr combat characterize the time required for a sub-
unit to move from a given state of combat readiness to readiness to launch the mis-
31198 Tlrc

The condition necessary for firing on a target at the far limit of the impact zone
(Fig. 6.27) is:

T1r+tf < tapp- tde. (6.126)

where tapP--the approach time of the air enemy (the flight time of an airborne tar-
get up to the far limit of the SAHS impact zone from the moment of its
detection by the forward radars);

tde--the time lag in transmitting data on the detection of an airborne target
to the subunit.

Maneuvering capabilities of a subunit are characterized by the time required to pre-
pare for a march formation, to carry out the march, to deploy in combat status at
the new position and prepare for firing. These are determined by the technical spe-
cifications of the SANS and the transport as well as by the training of the crews,
the position and the march conditions.

Battle Formations of Subunits

For carrying out combat tasks. the antiaircraft missile subunits are deployed in a
battle formation.

A battle formation is the configuration of the subunit on the terrain for conducting
combat.

The battle formation of an antiaircraft missile subunit should ensure:

a) The complete employment of the technical capability and combat properties of the
weapons in repelling enemy air strikes from any direction;

b) The best employment of the terrain. concealment of the position and engineer
organization and camouflage of the position in the aim of maintaining the battle-
worthiness of the subunit and personnel, the weapons and equipment;

c) The possibility of maneuvering.

The position of an antiaircraft missile subunit is usually called a launch position.
The battle formations of antiaircraft missile subunits comprise the basis of a unit's
battle formation and the basic parameters of this are the distance of the launch
positions from the defended installation and the intervals between them.

The destruction of the enemy at the approaches to the installation before reaching
the mission accomplished line is achieved by so deploying the antiaircraft missile
subunit relative to the installation's limits that the destruction of the enemy is
ensured before reaching the designated limits.

234

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The intervals between the launch positions I are chosen considering the creation of
the designated fire density and other denands on the battle formation.

The calculation formulas for the values of I are:

For the condition of creating the required fire density Df1 re:

 

. (6.127)

where bur-average fire density up to the HM. by one antiaircraf t missile subunit;

For the condition of reciprocal fire cover of the subunit:

1 - df - at“ +vt1), (6.128)

where ﬂay-the distance of the mission accomplished line with the distance of the
enemy in terms of the launch position;

t--the tine required for firing the designated number of nissiles against
the target.

6.3.2. The Elaboration and Adoption of a Decision by the Cot-sander for Combat
Operations

The preparation of combat opemtions includes: the elaboration and adoption by the
contender of a decision for combat operations; planning, the issuing of conbat tasks
to the subunits; the creating of a fire plan. the organizing of reconnaissance and
control; the organizing of cooperation; organizing support for combat operations;
exercising control and providing aid to the submits in preparing for coﬁat opera-
tions.

The process of elabomting a decision or plan is organized in the following se-
quence: analyzing the given task; calculating the tine and issuing preliminary
orders; evaluating the situation; working out an overall concept for the decision
for combat operations; carrying out tactical calculations and analyzing possible
variations of the antiaircraft missile fire plan; the taking of a prelininary deci-
sion using a map; reconnaissance of the terrain; adopting the decision.

By an analysis of the set task one understands an analysis of the overall concept of
the senior co-amier's decision and one's own task and determining the role and
place of one's own subunit in the codaat operations as organized by the senior con-
nander. As a result of analyzing the task. one establishes: what should be done
by what tine and what results nust be achieved by one's subunit.

Assessing the situation includes an assessment of the air and ground enemy, the de-
fended installation. the terrain and area of combat operations, the condition and

capabilities of one's own subunits and cooperating resources as well as other ele-
nents which can influence the carrying out of the combat task.

235

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
I'UA UerDLM 0.3L um”

An air enemy is assessed by analyzing the data received from the superior staff; by
studying the effective strength, basing and combat capabilities of the opposing
enemy; by analyzing its tactics.

As a result of assessing the air enemy and other elements in the combat situation,

the following are determined: the possible effective strength of the resources
which the enemy can employ for attacking the defended installation as well as the
battle formation; the basic directions and possible configuration of the attacks;
the speed and altitude of the air attack weapons; the most probable routes of at-
tack at low and maximum low altitudes; the expected densities; approach time; pos-
sible countersctions and their effectiveness.

The conclusions from the assessment of the situation can also contain a forecast of
the most probable variations of the air enemy's attack against the defended instal-
lation.

Assessing a ground (sea) enemy is carried out in anticipating the possibility of a
direct contact with it, firing against the battle formations as well as the landing
of airborne (amphibious) parties or sabotage groups.

As a result of assessing the ground (sea) enemy, measures are outlined to prevent a
surprise attack, to repel enemy strikes. to increase the survivability of the sub-
units and to protect and defend the positions and command posts.

Assessing the defended installation includes determining the nature and dimensions
of the installation. its vulnerability to attack by various weapons, the relative
importance of the various elements of the installation, the position of the defended
installation relative to other installations and so forth.

As a result of assessing the installation, the most probable methods of enemy ac-
tions are determined along with where the concentrating of enemy efforts is possible
and what weapons might be employed against the installation. In assessing the ter-
rain and area of combat operations. the commander studies the presence and condition
of roads, the conditions for the deployment of the subunit into battle formation.
engineer organization and camouflage, the influence of the terrain on organizing the
fire plan, the organizing of reconnaissance as well as ground defenses, the possible
actions of an air enemy at low and maximum low altitudes and so forth.

As n result of assessing the given situational element, it is determined to what de-
gree the terrain features and the area of combat operations influence the carrying
out of the combat task and what measures must be carried out to fully utilize the

combat capabilities of the subunits.

Assessing the state and capabilities of one's own subunits consists in clarifying
the composition, manning level and training level of the combat crews and determin-
ing the capability for creating a fire plan, organising reconnaissance and control,
ensuring the survival of the battle formations and the maneuvering of resources.

As a result of assessing his own subunits, the commander outlines measures which
should be carried out in the aim of most effectively carrying out the set combat

task.

236

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In assessing cooperating forces it is determined to what degree the adjacent sub—
units and units will contribute to carrying out the set combat task and what meas-
ures must be carried out to organize cooperation with then.

Having analyzed the set combat task and having assessed the situation, the commander
determines the possible nature of the air enemy's operations, the overall concept
for combat operations, the possible variations for the configuration of the fire
plan and the measures to support combat operations.

The overall concept is the main part of the decision or plan which determines the
goal of combat operations and the basic idea for carrying it out; this is a decision
expressed in the most general outline.

The overall concept determines the installations and sectors where the basic efforts
are to be concentrated for defense, the overall nature of the fire plan and, conse-
quently, the subunit's battle formation; the most characteristic variations of con-
ducting combat and the measures to support combat operations.

The carrying out of tactical calculations is done in the aim of ensuring the feasi-
bility and clarifying the overall concept as well as for selecting the most rational.

variation of the antiaircraft missile fire system and for organising reconnaissance
and control.

The commander's decision for combat operations includes the overall concept of com-
bat operations; the battle formation. the combat tasks for the subunits and the
times they are to be ready; the organization of reconnaissance and control; measures
to restore the fire and control system and so forth.

The preliminary decision which determines the subunit's battle formation is adjusted
in the process of reconnoitering the terrain and the elements of the battle forma-
tirn.

Reconnaissance is conducted by a reconnaissance group (groups), the composition and
tasks of which are determined depending upon the reconnaissance goals and the avail-
ability of time.

Having clarified the decision for organizing and conducting combat operations in the
field, the cot-lander reports it to the senior co-ander for confirmation after which

he issues instructions to the chief of staff for working out the operational docu-
Icnts.

6.3.3. Support of Combat Operations

Support of combat operations is a range of measures conducted by the commanders and
staffs in the aim of preventing an enemy surprise attack and providing an opportun-
ity for the subunits in a prompt and organized manner to go into combat and carry
out the task under any conditions.

The basic types of support for combat operations are: combat, special, technical
and rear.

237

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFiCiAL USE URL!

Chmbat Support

Combat support includes: reconnaissance and warning, camouflage. protection against
weapons of mass destruction, EC", engineer support, self-defense and security and so

forth.

For the antiaircraft missile subunits, the most important component of reconnais-
sance is reconnaissance of the air enemy.

Reconnaissance of the air enemy ensures control of the subunits and firing in de-
stroying the air enemy.

The basic demands on reconnaissance of the air enemy are:

1. Detection of airborne targets at ranges which ensure their firing on by the
antiaircraft missile subunits at the far limit of the impact zone:

dye ' df+Vt(Tc DBX+Tcp)s (6-129)

where Tc nax--maximum firing cycle of the SANS:

tcp--the working time of the command post which controls the fire of the
subunits.

2. Determining the coordinates and parameters for the movement of the air targets
with an accuracy ensuring the effective carrying out of the fire control problems of
the subunits and firing against the air enemy.

3. The availability in the information of data on the overall air situation in the
area of the subunits' combat operations making it possible to determine the number

and type of targets, their composition. intervals and distance between them, battle
formation, the countermeasures as well as to discover the overall plan of actions
of the air enemy.

4. Reliability of the reconnaissance data, including in determining the nationality
of the aircraft.

Identification of the aircraft is the most important task of the reconnaissance
equipment and the promptness and reliability of carrying out this task determines
the flight safety of friendly aircraft and the possibility of cooperating with
fighters.

The organization of reconnaissance of an air enemy includes: the selection and prep-
aration of positions for the reconnaissance equipment. organizing the obtaining of
data on the air enemy and organizing control over the reconnaissance resources.

The positions of the reconnaissance and target designation stations are chosen on

the basis of a careful analysis of visibility zones using a map and directly in the
field in conducting reconnaissance and taking up positions. For adjusting the visi-
bility zones the radars are overflown by friendly aircraft.

The data of radar reconnaissance are supplemented by other types of reconnaissance.

238

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The organization of control of the reconnaissance resources consists in determining
the procedures for conducting reconnaissance and transmitting data on the air enemy
to the cormsnd post under various conditions, as well as in organizing control and
cooperation comunications.

Camouflage is one of the most important measures relating to the combat support of
the subunits. This is carried out in the aim of concealing from the enemy the true
position and actions of the subunits and to confuse it on their costat formation,“
stute and tasks being carried out.

Camouflage should ensure surprise antiaircraft missile firing and impede the new
in organizing and carrying out countermeasures against the control of the SM firing.

Defense against weapons of mass destruction is organized in order to exclude or max-

lumlly reduce the exposure of the subunits to nuclear. chemical and biological wea-
pons and to keep them ready to carry out the combat task.

Electronic countsmeasunes is a range of measures carried out in the preparations
for and during combat to ensure antijalmling capability in the fire and control sys-
tem with enemy electronic countermeasures. The most inortant among these measures
are: the correct choice of the elements of the battle formation and the position of
one's equipment on the terrain, the observance of the requirements of radioelactronic
camouf lage. improving the skills of the combat crews in working under ja-ing condi-
tions as well as destroying enemy radioelectronic equipment.

E‘ngimmr support for the combat operations of antiaircraft missile subunits include
the engineer organization of the battle formation with shelters for the personnel
and material, camouflage work to shelter the battle formations using available and
regulation camouflage gear. simple work to repair roads and reinforce bridges using
available equipment in the area. equipping the elements of ground defense and the
immediate cover, carrying out fire safety measures, eliminating the consequences of
an enemy attack and so forth.

The scope of these measures is predetermined by the tasks to be carried out by the
subunits and by the conditions.

Self-defense and security are organized under any situation (with the location of
the subunit at its position, on the march or at rest) and are aimed at excluding

an enemy surprise attack. preventing its reconnaissance and sabotage groups from
penetrating into the subunit's position and to ensure the prompt engagement of the
subunits and the repelling of the enemy.

The ground defenses of a position are based upon the early organized fire plan con-
sist ing of firearms and various obstacles. The fire plan is so organized that there
are no areas of terrain which cannot be seen or fired on in the approaches to the
position. When necessary weapons and observers are moved forward beyond the limits
of the position's territory. In the most dangerous sectors, machine gun fire is
planned for; in the remaining sectors, fire from submachine guns and carbines. The
antiaircraft machine guns are readied beforehand for firing both at air and ground

targets.

239

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P'UK UrflLlAL U5: UNLI

Tron.hvs are built for each weapon and shelters for the personnel.

Ehmcial and Yechnical Support

The most important types of special and technical support for the antiaircraft mis-
sile subunits are topographic and engineer-missile.

prngraphic support is a system of measures to provide the combat operations of the
subunits with the necessary data for fire control and for firing at airborne tar-
gets as well as for studying, evaluating and using the terrain in the interests of
carrying out the combat mission.

Engineer-missile support is a system of measures to maintain the weapons in constant
readiness for combat employment and to ensure the full utilization of their combat
capability in the course of battle.

The-requirement and supply of a subunit for missiles are figured in units of fire.

A unit of fire is the number of missiles per weapon unit (per antiaircraft missile
system).

6.3.h. Principles in Controlling the Fire of Subunits in Combat
';"I;.- F:l.’lc’il'f.‘ 0," Control

Control over the fire of the antiaircraft subunits is a most important component in
the control of their combat operations. Fire control includes: analyzing the re-

ceide task to destroy the air targets, assessing the situation, taking a decision

to destroy the air enemy, assigning the fire tasks to the subunits, supervising the
fulfillment of the set fire tasks and assessing the results of combat.

Antiaircraft missile combat is exceptionally rapid and dynamic. For this reason,
fire control is carried out under the conditions of extremely limited time and can
be organized by combining centralization and independent firing of the subunits.

By analyzing the set task one understands an analysis of the overall concept of the
senior commander's decision to repel the enemy air strike, one's fire tasks and role
in the combat operations.

As a result of analyzing the task it is possible to establish what airborne targets
must be destroyed independently and in cooperation with other an resources.

An unnuooment of the situation in fire control includes an assessment of the air
situation (the air enemy and the actions of friendly aircraft), the condition and
capability of one'a own subunits, cooperating forces and the firing conditions.

An assessment of the air enemy includes, in the first place, determining its overall
character and attack plan, the possible duration, effective fighting strength. basic
sectors of the attack. the missions to be carried out and, secondly, an assessment
of each air attack weapon as a target for the antiaircraft missile subunits, includ-
ing: the composition of the target, its importance, altitude and speed, the heading
parameters relative to the launch position, the approach time and the methods for

240

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
parameters relative to the launch position. the approach time and the methods for
countering control and firing.

An assessment of the state and capabilities of one's own subunits is made by analyz—
ing information continuously received from them (reports and briefings) on the con-
dition and combat activities based upon the cosmander's profound knowledge of the

combat capabilities and performance of the weapons under various conditions and the
combat crew training level.

An assessment of cooperating forces is made by analyzing information received from
the superior command post. from adjacent subunits and one's own intelligence.

The firing conditions (the firing season and time of day, meteorological conditions,
the presence of natural and artificial interference and so forth) are assessed from
the viewpoint of their effect on firing effectiveness. the position of the feasible

limits of the impact zones, the possible firing density of the subunits and the
methods for firing on airborne targets.

The “ecision to destroy the air eneny is taken by the commander on the basis of
analyzing the set task and assessing the situation. To take a decision means to
determine the importance of the airborne targets and the overall concept of the en-
gagement, to solve the problem of allocating fire to the targets, to clarify the
methods of cooperation with other AD resources and particularly with the fighters
and to outline measures to support the subunit's combat operations.

The choice of the variation for allocating the fire of the subunits to the airborne
targets is the basis of the decision in fire control.

By the setting of fire tasks the commander's decision is given to the subunits. A
fire task can include target designation (determining the target's location in
space), the command to destroy the target and instructions on the procedure for
firing. A maximum reduction in the time for transmitting the commander's decisions
to the subunits can be achieved by employing signals or brief instructions for giv-
ing the fire tasks and by maximum utilization of automation.

1n supervising the execution of the given fire tasks. it is essential to make cer-
tain that the lock-on of the SANS assigned to destroy the targets has been correct.
This can be achieved by comparing the target designation coordinates and the coord-
inates of the target detected and tracked by the system at the command post.

The assessing of the situation. the taking of the decision and the giving of fire
tasks to the subunits in repelling an enemy air attack. as a rule, are carried out
continuously and simultaneously for various air targets and in terms of the particu-
lar features of antiaircraft missile combat at one or another moment in time.
Ihwnnds PLaced on Fire Control

Eﬁfhctiveneao is the basic demand on the control of fire by the subunits. Control

should ensure the carrying out of the combat task by causing maximum losses to the
air enemy considering the importance of the targets.

2&1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A Seneral indicator of the effectiveness of fire control can be considered the ratio
of the number of destroyed air attack weapons “dest in repelling an enemy air attack
to the number of air attack weapons u.., which could be destroyed in making maximum

use of the fire capabilities of the subunits considering the importance of the tar-
gets:

 

. . 6.130
1‘4 "I” ( )

The importance of the targets is taken into account by weight factors.

The effectiveness of centralized fire control is predetermined by the following:

the optimality of the adopted variation of allocating fire against the airborne tar-
gets. by the accuracy of issuing target designations and by the promptness of giving
the fire tasks to the subunits (the efficiency of control).

The optimum variation of allocating fire is the one which ensures the highest effec-
tiveness in carrying out a combat task.

The optimality of the distribution of fire is characterized by the coefficient Kc;
which is the ratio of the correctly allocated air attack weapons NC, to the number

of correctly allocated air attack weapons no t which could be with the complete
utilization of the fire capability of the su units:

"ca
Kca “on. (6.131)

 

A target is considered correctly allocated if it is fired on by the SANS in the im-
pact zone. if its importance is taken into account and the capabilities of the sub~

unit assigned to destroy the target most fully conform to its characteristics and
parameters of motion. '

Formula (6.131) can also be represented in the following forn:'
N -n-an
. _°Pt__'__2. (6.132)
Kca no” :

where nl--the number of air attack weapons not fired on by the subunits due to the
non-optimality of fire distribution from the command post;
n2--the number of air attack weapons fired on by the subunits with the incom-

plete utilization of their fire capabilities due to the same reasons;
a--weight coefficient.

The accuracy of giving the target designation predetermines the probability of imme-
diate detection of the target assigned to the given SAKS for destruction. If the

value of this probability is close to one, then fro. the target designation data the
target is detected without a search and the working time of the subunit is.determin—

ed by the tine needed to prepare for firing. This also excludes the possibility of
the confusing of targets by the subunits.

When it is necessary to search for the target, the time spent on its detection de-
pends upon the search capability of the target tracking radar.

2&2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The directness of fire control describes the promptness of decision taking and issu-
ing the fire tasks to the subunits, that is, the possibility of carrying out the
tasks in terms of the available time.

The demand of the directness of fire con-
trol determines the positions of the ex-
treme lines for setting fire tasks for the
subunits (the target designation lines).
The distance of this line from the sub-
unit's position equals (Fig. 6.28):

for engaging the target at the far limit of
the impact zone

 

dtdf I df+Vt(twk+tf): (6.133)
“mound ,
”'“3 for engaging the target at the near limit
of the impact zone
dtdn - dn+Vt(twk+tn), (6.131.)
Fig. 6.28. Target designation zone where d;(db)--distance to the far (near)
Key: a--Target designation zone; limit of the impact zone;
b--Launch zone; c--1mpact tw -working time of subunit;
zone with forward firing tf(tn)--fiight time to far (near)

limit of impact zone.

The directness of fire control is achieved by creating the required depth of radar
reconnaissance; by the correct organization, smooth and precise work of the command

post crew whereby minimum time is spent on the control cycle; by reducing the work-
ing time of the SAHS by raising the accuracy of target designation from the command

post and by increasing crew skills.
The required distance of target radar reconnaissance is
dreq - dtd+Vt(tlag+tcp)- (6.135)

where tcp——working time of command post which controls fire of subunit;
tlag--time lag in target information (time from the moment of detecting the
station by the reconnaissance and target designation station to the

moment of displaying the information at the command post).
The requirement of directness of control does not mean the advisability of the pre-

mature issuing of fire tasks to the subunits. The giving of fire tasks to the sub-
units beforehand increases the possibility of counteractions by the airborne targets

[0 control and firing (maneuvers. jamming and so forth).
{Mining the Problems of Distributing Fire to the Airborne Targets
The distributing of fire against an air enemy comprises the basis of the commander's

decision to destroy the enemy. This should correspond to the degree of importance
of the airborne targets.

243

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In distributing fire. calculation methods are employed for assessing the situation
and solving the target allocation problem as well as previously elaborated princi-
ples and particular rules of fire control, the logical thinking, experience and in-
tuition of the commander. The use of electronic computers for working out recom-
mendations for the conmmnder provides a significant effect in solving the fire dis-
tribution problem.

The ahgorithm of target distribution in all instances includes an evaluation of the
following:

i. The possibilities of the entry of each target into the impact zone of each
SANS,,that is. the determining of the subunits which could fire effectively against
one or another airborne target. "“'

The engagement of target 1 by SANS j is possible if:

I’ti ‘ Pfor j and Hmin j {“ti‘umax 3’ (6'1”)

The fulfilling of the condition in (6.136) is determined by comparing the altitude

and heading parameter of the targetfs movement with the maximum values of the impact
zones of the antiaircraft missile complexes or by looking to sea what lead target
route crosses the flat zones of what SANS at the given altitude.

2. The possibilities of engaging the target considering its speed characteristics.
The effective engaging of a target by a given SANS is possible if:

":1 <Vm j.
where Vmax j--the maximum capabilities of the SANS in terms of target speed.

3. The possibilities of engaging the target by the given subunit in terms of avail-
able time. Engagement is possible if:

Tapp 13 V ttd 13 + tux j + tn 5. (6.137)

where Tapp 1J-approach time of target 1 to near limit of impact zone of SANS j;
Ttd 13--time for giving fire task for target 1 to SANS j.

6. The combat readiness of the subunit assigned to engage the target and the non-
engagement in carrying out a combat task against another target.

If it is assumed that subunit i is to be involved in destroying target 1 with a
shift in fire, then the possibility of such combat work is verified in terms of the

time balance.

Having information on which of the targets can enter the impact zones of what sub-
units and in what sequence, it is essential to find the optimum variation for dis-
tributing fire against the airborne targets.

In taking the decision consideration is given to the condition of the subunits, the
availability of missiles and the training level of the combat crews.

246

FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
The Setting of Fire Thsks jbr the Subunits

A fire task includes target designation, the order to destroy the target and, when
necessary. an instruction on the firing procedure.

Possible methods of target designation (TD).

Automatic beam guidance (bisectrix of the sector of view) from the guidance station
for the missiles to the target assigned for destruction.

The method provides for the giving of target designation without time losses and
with high accuracy. The accuracy of giving the TD is determined by errors in meas-
uring target coordinates by the radars, by the errors of their reading and feeding
into the control system.

By grid squares. Target designation is provided by transmitting the number of the
square in which the target's projection is at s given moment. A grid is plotted on
the plotting boards and indicators of the sender and receiver of the target desig-
nation. The grid squares are numbered in a certain manner. The accuracy of giving
TD for indicators is limited by the value of the small square and for plotting
boards-depends also upon the time lag as well as the accuracy of depicting the air
situation data on them.

By transmitting the azimuth, range and altitude of the target. The transformation
of the target designation data, as a rule, is carried out by the receiver of the TD.

By fixing a uniform number to the air target blip on the indicators of the transmit-
ter and receiver of the target designation or by giving a code sign to the indicator
of the receiver of the ID.

The method is employed if the corresponding display and data transmission equipment
is available.

From the reciprocal position of targets. The method comes down to indicating the
position of the given target's blip relative to the blips of other targets observed
on the indicator screens. Confusion of targets is dependably excluded only with a
relatively short distance between the transmitter and receiver of the T0 or in con-
sidering this distance in the display of the air situation.

6.6. Antiaircraft Artillery

6.6.1. The Essence of Firing at an Airborne Target and the General Characteristics
of Antiaircraft Artillery Systems (Mounts)

Basic concepts of Antiaircraft Artillery Firing

The essence of antiaircraft artillery firing at airborne targets comes down to solv-
ing the problem of the meeting of the projectile and a rapidly moving target at a
certain point of space and at a certain moment of time and consists in sending off

rounds (salvoes) each at new initial settings for a new target lead position calcu-
lating on hitting and destroying the target.

245

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The gun is aimed not at point Ab (Fig. 6.29) where the target is at the moment of
the round but rather at the lead Ay at which, according to the calculations. the
shell should encounter the target. The triangle OAbAy is called the azimuth predic-
tion triangle in which the path of the target AbAy equals the target's velocity by
the Shell's flight time (prediction interval). SI-Vct, Oh and Dy--the slant ranges
to the present position (the point where the target is at the moment of the round)
and to the future position, respectively.

a .5'“ -— A.

     
 
  

 

In modern antiaircraft artillery systems
(mounts), the prediction problem (determin-
ing the settings for firing) is solved con-
tinuously and virtually instantaneously by
computers or the vertical aim-off mechan-

.

shell
trajectory/

   

5 a isms.
_ //{_-.——'”” For solving the prediction problem, the
”a I; m following shOuld be set: the geometric co-
ao. ordinates of the present position; the
parameters of the target's movement; the
Fig. 6.29. Diagram for solving the hypothesis on the target's movement; the
prediction problem gun system, the shell and the fuze.

The preparation of the rounds includes:

1. Determining the coordinates of the target's present position and its parameters.
2. Determining the target's position at the moment of the round.

3. Solving the prediction problem which consists in determining the coordinates of
the future position and the gun and fuze settings, in transmitting and receiving
the settings (aiming the gun), in loading and getting off the round.

The present coordinates of a target which has been detected and assigned for de-
struction are determined as a result of its tracking by the fire control radar (FCR)
or optical instruments. Determining the amount and direction of the target velocity
vector. solving the prediction problem and determining the gun and fuze settings

are carried out continuously by the antiaircrsft fire control system (AAPCS) in-
struments. The obtained settings-~the future bearing. the elevation and the number
of fuze marks (for medium and large-caliber antiaircraft artillery)--are transmitted
continuously by synchrotransmission to the guns which thus are always aimed at the
future position. The guns are loaded and the rounds gotten off.

In the firing of medium- and large-caliber batteries. the target is destroyed by be-
ing struck by fragments of the projectile which explodes when the fuze is activated.
The ruze setting conforms to the coordinates of the future position on the target's
course. A hit can be achieved with an entire shell (percussion action) or by its
blast effect. but the probability of a direct hit on the target and the exploding of
the shell directly next to the aircraft is slight.

In the firing of small-caliber batteries, the target is hit, as a rule, as a result
of the direct impacting of the shell in the target (percussion effect).

246

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
Hypotheses on the movement of an air target after a round.

The general hypothesis: over the prediction interval the target will move as it
had prior to the round.

Particular hypotheses: 1) over the prediction interval a target moves rectilinear-
ly. steadily and horizontally; 2) over the prediction interval a target moves rectiO

linearly and evenly in any plane; 3) over the prediction interval a target moves
rectilinearly in an inclined plane with constant acceleration; 6) over the predic-

tion interval a target moves at a fixed speed horizontally along a circular arc.

The choice of the hypothesis is determined by the technical performance of the AAFCS

and by the actions of the airborne target. Other particular hypotheses are also
possible.

Each hypothesis involves error since the actual movement of a target may not coin-

cide with the assumed or hypothetical. The mistakes will be greater the longer the
prediction interval.

.1!

:un swivfug of the prediction problem comes down to finding the geometric coordi-
natesof the future position and consists in matching in time t the path of the tar-
get and the shell with their various velocities.

The geometric coordinates of the future position are found by the combined solution
to a number of dependences between the elements of the azimuth prediction triangle
in an inclined or horizontal plane.
From (Choabay (Fig. 6.29), it can be seen that the future horizontal range is:

4,- Viz—l. (var —2T.V‘l cos 1].: (6.138)

the aim-off into the azimuth is:

sum...l’s$‘b.; (6.139)
V
the future bearing is:
ﬂr- thdn (6.140)

The shell's time of flight t is a function of the future range and altitude, that
is:

I [on.rln. (6.141)

The dcpcndenccs (6.138) and (6.141) together cannot be solved by ordinary procedures
since d and t cannot be expressed one relative to the other. For this reason the
solution to the prediction problem in the AAFCS and automatic sights is carried out
by the successive approximation method.

In a number of instances (the preparation of barrage fire. theoretical research and
so forth), the inverse problem can be solved, that is, from the set coordinates of

the future position and the parameters of the target's movement to determine the

267

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
present position. In this instance, from the coordinates of the future position it
is possible to immediately find the time of flight t and the aim-off AgAy.

Gun laying is the name for giving the barrel the required position for firing. Lay-
ing for deflection and laying for elevation are done separately and independently
of one another, although simultaneously.

Direct and indirect laying are employed in antiaircraft artillery.

Indirect laying consists in giving the gun the necessary direction for azimuth and
elevation on the basis of data determined in the AAFCS or by calculation. The
amount of the future bearing By is read off relative to the oriented stationary part
of the gun, while the elevation o is read relative to the stationary leveled part of
the gun.

Direct laying is the name given to laying whereby the gun is aimed using the sight
gear by direct sighting to the target.

Hith direct laying the target itself is the aiming point and the barrel is given a

certain position relative to the target's line (considering the gun elevation o and
the lateral lead angle AB) by setting the slant range to the target and the parame-
ters of its movement on the sight.

In aiming the crosshairs of the collimators
at the target and in feeding the input

data into the sight for firing, in space
two triangles are constructed (Fig. 6.30):
the azimuth prediction triangle OAbAy and
the ballistic triangle OCAy. The axis of
the bore is lined up along the line 00.
Here consideration is given not only to the
location of the future position relative

to the present position but also the shell's
decline in flight under the effect of the
force of gravity:

 

,-.m+“+'-‘a+'-

Fig. 6.30. Solving the prediction
problem with a sight

Artillery systems (mounts) have various
sight gear and firing with direct laying
requires consideration of the particular features of their design.

Antiaircraft Artillery weapons

Many armies are armed with antiaircraft artillery systems and multibarrel rapid
firing antiaircraft mounts predominantly on self—propelled chassis (ZSU) as well as

antiaircraft machine guns (2P0).

An antiaincnaft artillery system includes antiaircraft cannons, a fire control
radar (FOR), AAPCS equipment and power units.

248

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The antiaixcraft cannon is designed for
hitting airborne targets with shells
within given altitude and range limits

as well as ground and surface targets.

,¢ -- Firing at airborne targets by large- and
( ﬁﬁw, medium-caliber antiaircraft cannons is
F"' carried out with a small-caliber time-

fused HE shell. as a rule. with projec-
tiles having a percussion fuse. The
system includes several guns of l cali-
ber (from 4 to 8).

 

. :L'Snl . ' ;
.'§ v_ ,ﬂ_.,l . . _ ‘ ,
- v “ “ *--u“"7‘-"hﬁ’“-“‘* The fire control radar is used for de-

tecting airborne targets. determining
Fig. 6.31. Composition of an antiaircraft the coordinates of the target selected

artillery system (for a 57—mm battery) for engagement and transmitting these to

Key: a--Central distribution box; the AAYCS.

h"P°"e' unit The AAFCS, using data received from the

FCR solves the prediction problem. The prediction problem is solved in terms of the
selected hypothesis on the movement of the airborne target after the round. In com-
ing out of the AAFCS the lead coordinates are sent to the cannons and they are auto-
matically aimed at the future position.

The FCR and AAFCS together are called a radar instrument system (RIS).

in 1945-1954. 100-. 57- and lJO—Im antiaircraft artillery systems were developed and
introduced.

The composition and disposition of a 57-amlantiaircraft artillery system are shown
in Fig. 6.31.

Anbiaircrufl guns and mounts include automated small-caliber antiaircraft cannons
and autonomous radars and computers. These provide effective fire at a halt and in
motion under any weather conditions.

The basic characteristics of certain models of such AA guns and mounts are given in
Table 6.6.

6.4.2. Firing at an Airborne Target
The tasks in the firing of antiaircraft artillery include:

a) Destroying the aircraft. cruise missiles, helicopters and targets dropped on
parachutes;

b) Destroying tanks. armored vehicles. sslf-propelled artillery mounts, infantry
and other ground targets;

c) Destroying landing personnel. launches, pontoons, barges and other surface tar-
gets in coastal areas.

249

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

20-... 6-barrel Mc 0.12 |050 2.0 5.4 3000
Vulcan
USA
4 l d alf-
' P%;.cxx8 id 0.96 l 515 4.3 9.9 240
0.1:. | to... Mcmzo ; 0.12 | uoo l 2.0 | 7.0 | m;
40.....MCM39133 | 0.9 | 523 | 3.2 | 10.0 g 120
Fun“ 30.“ coupled self- I 0.39 men 3.0 10.: I :34»
pron. MC mat-51 }
PRO 33-“ coupled self- I 0.53 1115 5.5 ”.0 I uw
prop! AAC Gepard I ‘

 

Antiaircraft artillery can also fire. as a rule, for self-defense at ground and
surface targets.

Zones of Antiaircmft Guns

For a gun with any elevation there is a certain limit range of fire. Each gun can-
not fire accurately at near vertical angles, it has a nasinun elevation and as a

consequence of this an inner zone is for-ed called the dead zone.

The impact sons of a gun is the space within which a given gun can throw a projec-
tile. It is liaited by the gun's range curve. the dead zone and horizon. The
range curve is the geonetric locus of points corresponding to the naxinua slant
ranges with different elevations.

The engagement zone is the name given to the portion of the impact zone within
which a proximity burst or direct hit is possible (in the firing of small-caliber
antiaircraft artillery, the iapact fuzea for ensuring the safety of friendly troops
and installations on the ground are equipped with self-destruction devices).

The flat engagement zone [engagement zone related to height of attack] is a circular
zone obtained as a result of sectioning the engage-ant zone by a horizontal plane at
a certain altitude (Fig. 6.32). The dinensions of the flat engagenent zone are
characterized by the radius R which with an increase in altitude is reduced, as well
as by the dead zone radius r which increases with an increase in altitude.

The diaensions of the flat engagenent zones of a 57-II antiaircraft cannon are given
in Table 6.7.

250
Y Lame u. I
dead spot-

  

 

alt., n '~' “"

5m 25 mm
1000 50 um
I500 75 WI)
mm too 62m
29” I25 “”0
3000 150 5000
3500 115 3.00
4000 200 52m
4500 230 000
5000 260 4200
5:00 000 :m)
ww aw 2000

Fig. 6.32. Zones of antiaircrsft guns

For opening fire at the far limit of the engage-ant zone, the required target de-
tection range for the FCR is:

dreq a R+Vt(tfcr+tbat+tf), (6.162)

where tfcr--the time for detection. identification and taking up the target for
tracking by the FCR;

tbsp-the tine for readying the battery to open fire after the taking up of
the target for tracking by the FOR;

tf--the ahell's tine of flight to the far linit of the engagement zone.
Preparation of Firing

Preparation of firing is divided into the calculation of initial errors and direct
preparations.

The calculation of initial errors for firing using a Mycs is carried out prior to
receiving the target designation or before detection of the target at the battery
and includes determining the deviations of firing conditions from the tables, the
calculating of the total corrections and the considering in the AAFCS of those cor-

rections (deviations) the incorporation of which does not depend upon the target's
flight conditions.

Direct preparations are carried out after the obtaining of the target designation or
after the target has been detected at the battery and includes the following:

a) The search, detection and identification of the target;

b) The choice of the method for determining the firing data using the AAFCS (for

example. according to the data of the FOR, the data of the rangefinder. the FCR and
rangefinder);

c) Setting on the AAFCS the data for considering the base depending upon the chosen
method for determining the firing data;

d) Deternining and assigning target altitude;

251

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0) Setting on the MFCS the data for considering ballistic and meteorological con-
ditions (after determining target altitude);

f) Setting on the AAFCS the observing interval, that is, the time for evaluating
the parameters of the target's movement for determining its extrapolated trajectory
in accord with the assumed hypothesis on the movement of the air target sf ter the
round;

8) Designating the type of fire.
Firing Methods, Mes and Conditions of Fire

Depending upon the situation, the particular features of the target, the conditions
of its observation and the capabilities of the antiaircrsft artillery systems
(mounts). the following methods of firing are employed: with a MPCS (MS), with
a sight (an optical sighting collimator), for routes and with barrage fire.

Firing with a MPCS (R18) is the basic firing method, it ensures greatest effective-
ness and is employed both against visible and invisible airborne targets.

Depending upon the method of fire, the particular features of the target selected
for engagement. the firing range. the capability and condition of the equipment of
the guns (machine guns) and the availability of ammunition. the following types of
fire are employed: single round. volley fire, rapid fire. short bursts. long
bursts and continuous fire.

6.4.3. Combat Employment of Antiaircraft Artillery

Operational-Tactical Principles for the Combat anloyment of Antiaircraft Artillery
in the Great Patriotic War

The combat tasks carried out by the AD sntiaircraft artillery can be reduced to the
following groups:

a) Antiaircraft artillery defense of major administrative-economic centers;

b) Antisircraft artillery defense of important industrial centers, cities and in-
stallations (large power plants and so forth);

c) Defense of the lines of communications and. primarily. railroad stations.
bridges. ports. piers and crossings;

d) Defense of other important installations, such as: military dumps and depots,
sit-fields of long-range aviation, conunications centers, hydraulic engineering

projects, individual towns and population points which had temporarily assumed im-
portant military significance.

The grouping of the antiaircraft artillery in defending a large installation of the
nation was organized according to the principle of all-round cover with reinforcing

of the sectors for the most probable enemy raids. The grouping was also to satisfy
the demand of causing decisive damage to the enemy which had broken through to the

252

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ncar approaches to the installation before the enemy had reached the probable bomb-
ing line (PBL), that is, before it carried out its combat mission. For this reason
the basic portion of the medium-caliber antiaircraft artillery batteries (and in the
postwar period the large-caliber ones) was deployed in a ring in front of the PBL,
on the so-called firing line. Internal firing lines were created to combat enemy
aviation which had broken through the basic firing line.

In the course of the entire war, the principle of all-round defense and defense
echeloned in depth remained unchanged. In keeping with the quantitative growth of
antiaircraft artillery. only the density of antiaircraft fire wts increased by
shortening the intervals and distances between the batteries. The qualitative de-
velopment of aviation moved the question of the combined employment of different-
caliber batteries to the forefront.

During the various periods of the war, from 13 to 32.6 percent of the medium-caliber
antlaircraft artillery, from 26.‘ to 56.3 percent of the small-caliber sntiaircraft
artillery and 27.6-60.6 percent of the antiaircraft machine guns were emloyed for
antiaircraft defense of the lines of co-unications. The most important railroad

junctions and bridges were covered and in the combat zone all stations without ex-
ception.

For escorting troop trains on the move use was made of mobile antiaircraft groups
(small-caliber antiaircraft artillery and machine guns) mounted on railroad flatcars
as well as armored trains. Armored trains escorted the troop trains in a full con-
813: or with individual armored flatcars. Here platoons of antiaircraft artillery
were located at the head and tail end of the train and a machine gun platoon was in
the middle of the train.

Combat Employment of Modern Antiaimmft Artillery

Small-caliber antiaircraft artillery with its mobility, simplicity of maintenance
and reliability in combat remains a weapon against low-altitude airborne targets.
Such subunits can fire at the air enemy while on the move or from brief halts and
carry out combat tasks related to AD of the troops on the march, on an offensive, on
the defensive, while remaining in their battle formations.

In addition to covering the troops, these subunits are employed for antiaircraft
defense against low-altitude enemy air strikes against friendly air bases, ammuni-
tion and fuel dunps, bridges across rivers, railroad stations, control centers and
other installations.

The commder of an antiaircraft subunit, having received the task of air defense of
an installation, conducts reconnaissance and selects the firing position. Upon ar-
riving in the area of the installation to be defended, he clarifies the missions,
the position and the degree of its vulnerability, he studies the terrain, he de-
termines the possible and most probable routes of concealed approach for the avia-
tion to attack the installation and after this plans the battle formation of his
subunit.

The choice of alternate positions is made in such a manner that the moving of the
subunits in these positions would not reduce their fire capability in the most prob-
able sectors of air operations against the installation.

253

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. cannot srsmts ’

7.1. General Characteristics of Control Systems and the Process of Control

7.1.1. Definition, Structure and Classification of Control Systems
The Definition of a system

For carrying out the given combat tasks by the units and subunits of the branches of
the AD Troops, control systems are created and organized on the appropriate levels

of control. In the general instance military control systems reflect the T02 struc-
ture of the troops.

A control system in the broad sense is a systematized aggregate of interrelated and
interacting subsystems (elements) which naturally form a single whole with the task
of achieving the set result in the process of operation.

Any control system consists of subsystems and is in turn a subsystem of the higher-
1eve1 system encompassing it.

A subsystem is a portion of a control system which has been isolated according to

certain features (properties or functions) and performs one or several functions
inherent to the given system.

For example, in the control system created in a unit of the ZRV [Antiaircrsft His-
sile Troops], it is possible to isolate several subsystems which perform various
functions: the reconnaissance subsystem, the communications subsystem, the missile
support subsystem and so forth. In being viewed oh a different, lower level of con-

trol. a subsystem can be seen as an independent system solving a strictly determined
problem.

A system element may or say not possess relative independence (as. for example, a
subsystem), but it performs one of the system's functions independently or in an
aggregate with other heterogeneous elements of the given control system.

A control system from the viewpoint of its operation consists of the controlling
subsystem (the controlling organ) and the controlled subsystem (the controlled ob~

ject or objects). There should be one controlling organ in a system but. as a rule,
there can be several controlled objects.

256
* Wsmopu oncwucil cpsdu

u «muons-
"Mf'" Irma man I
r-- _._..._. _______

""'1

  

7 Wu ynpourws curate-ed '

  
  

 
 
  

l
S : |
Men yn- l
your l 9 hsynnsm
may I _ : agglome-
m; man ynpos- um sm-
mn, . '-' “I"! mm» M 1
0:0"- | dads-IN s

w- mm
cum-mo I c Meson sods-
ypous) ‘ wed )
l
I

Fig. 7.1. General diagram of a control system

Key: l--External factor; 2--Ene-y; 3--Adjacent units; 6-Natursl
and climatic conditions: 5-Ain of control (combat task set
by higher-level systa; 6-Oontrolling subsystem or control
body (commander, staff); 7--System control parameters;
8--Controlled subsysten or controlled objects; 9-Result of
system's functioning (effectiveness of combat operations in

accord with the coabat task)

The controlling ongan is that part of the control system where information is col-
lected, processed and generalized on the internal state of the systen as a whole
and on the external state and on this basis control actions (commands, instructions)
are produced which are transmitted to the controlled subsysten.

The controlled subsystem is that part of a control system where the control actions
are actually implemented for achieving the basic goal set for the system as a whole.

In terms of units of the branches of AD Troops (ZRV, IA [fighter aviation] and R11!
[Radar Troopsl), the controlling organ is the headquarters (the deputies. staff or
services) of the unit headed by the counsnder while the controlled objects are the

subordinate T03 and attached subunits headed by their commanders.

For the quartering of controlling organs. command posts are organized and equipped
and from here the unit commanders in the branches of the AD Troops control the con-

bat activities of the troops.

Gannon {hatures of control systems. Inherent to control systems are a number of
features which are cos-on to all varieties and levels of systems having any nature

and complexity.

The most essential of such features are: a specific set. that is, the system's
purpose for carrying out one task or a group of defined tasks; the organized nature

255

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nf the system. that is. the presence of a certain structure; complexity; the pres-
ence of the control act (the process of control); dynamicness; the presence of con-
trolling parameters inherent to the given system; the presence of the system's am-
plification properties.

Distinguishing features of AD Troop control systems. The control systems employed
in the AD Troops. in comparison with the other military-end systems. have a number
of characteristic features:

a) A large number of multifunction controlled objects (or an aggregate of control-

led subsystems) of varying nature and complexity as well as broad purpose which, in
turn, gives rise to intensive flows of information which is diverse and heterogene-

ous in terms of composition and encoding methods;

b) The high speed of such systems which derives from the demand of maintaining the
systems in constant combat readiness to repel massed, surprise and brief attacks by
an air enemy;

c) A broad range of change in the system's states in maintaining the given struc-
ture and the great dynamicness of the change in these states;

d) The systems operate on a real time scale and over large spatial scales;
e) The AD control systems are in the category of variable-structure systems;

I) In the AD control systems, as a rule, there is the simultaneous solving of a
set of combat tasks in a certain spatial volume (the guiding of fighter-interceptors,
the firing of the SAHS. the firing of antiaircraft artillery and so forth), utiliz-

ing the automation of these systems.

Types of links in the control system. In each normally operating control system.
there is a material, energy and information exchange between its control organ and
controlled objects. In accord with this in a system there really exists the follow-
ing types of links: material (the exchange of material); energy (the exchange of
energy); information (the exchange of information).

In the AD Troop control systems, extensive use is made of all types of links, as a

rule, in their aggregate but the information links comprise a significantly larger
amount. The primacy of one or another type of link in the system is determined by

the system's purpose and by the scale of the tasks carried out by it, that is, by
the system's level.

The Structure of a system

The structure of a system is a stable order of internal links between its subsystems
(elements) determining its functional purpose and interaction with the external en-
virunment. The structure is the material foundation of the system, its basis. with-
in which the control process is carried out.

The inner basis on which the system's operation is organized is its structure re-
flecting its organizational form.

256
In essence a control system is an organizational form which unifies the principles,
equipment, procedures and methods of control as well as the personnel taking deci-
sions on the scale of the given system and in accord with the overall aim confront-

ing the system.

The structure of the AD Troop control systems is determined by their purpose, by the
nature and scale of the tasks carried out, by external factors and so forth.

The structure of troop control systems (TCS) reflects the T08 structure of the
troops (the units and subunits of the branches of troops), while the structure of
the weapons control systems (HCS) shows the structure and particular features in the

organization of weapons systems.

The characteristic features which influence the structure of control systems are:
the overall number of same or different-type subsystems (elements); the qualitative
characteristics of each subsystem from the view of the functions performed; the in-
teraction between the elements (subsystems) in the process of operating; the separ-
atencss of the individual subsystems or groups of elements and their influence on
the OVerall effectiveness of the system; the spatial reciprocal positioning of the
subsystems (elements) in the given control system considering their internal and

external links.

Among the typical structures of control organs in control systems are: patriarchal,
line or linear. functional; line-staff (line-functional) and committee.

The structure of control organs in control systems is shown in Fig. 7.2.

1 (3:3:f-l level'
2d

/ i:\\ level
I3 mks m

executors level

  

  
  

 
 

Imu’ -¢
1 I010!) lull

  

3 Olevel -‘ ’ 9' SUE
direct b executors

 

!-—~—..__._1

. . ' .
9
h N1w|1:c.w--'-cscm
'0'?" .4 1c 1 sun

5 I O. c ”H.106.“ caucus-us
rucncuu

 

c executors d executors

Fig. 7.2. Typical structures of a control organ in a control system;
a--patriarcha1; b--line; c-functiona1; d--line-staff with centralized

leadership

Key: IL-Commander (chief); 2-—COmmander; 3--Specialists; b--Subunit; 5--A, B, 0--
Functions carried out by system; 6--Punctionsl specialists; 7--Inferior
commander

257

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the AD Troop control systems, as in a majority of the military-purpose control
systems, an important place is held by the line-staff structure of control organs.
This is a combination of elements of the line and functional structures whereby all
control is exercised in parallel by the line (commander, chief) and staff apparatus
(staff, functional services).

The given structure provides the following: the realization of the principle of
one-man leadership; the control of complicated systems (elements) of varying nature
(heterogeneous in terms of their functions) with a large number of problems in em-

ploying specialists (specialist groups) of the staff apparatus; a rather high effec-
tiveness of control on any level of command.

There are two varieties of the line-staff structure;

The line-staff structure with centralized leadership whereby the giving of all con-
mands and instructions through any communications channels to the controlled objects

is carried out only through the line leaders while the functional specialists of the
control organ are just the assistants (experts) of the line leader for the corres-

ponding function of control;

The line-staff structure with limited functionalism whereby the individual func-
tional specialists (groups) are given the right to issue instructions to the con-
trolled objects for certain control functions in bypassing the line leadership.

The last variety with the correct and rational organizing of the system's control
organ ensures higher effectiveness of control in nonplex multilevel hierarchical
systems, particularly with the requirement of the system's high speed.

Principles. The principles of the creation and operation of control systems are in
the category of specific principles and do not contradict the basic principles of
military art.

Among such specific principles of control. one might put the following: goal-
oriented (the principle of a system's goal); centralization of control; feedback;
integrated solving of problems in the system (the system of interaction); adapta—
tion (the combining of centralized control with the granting of the right of inde-

pendence to the controlled objects); variability (the capacity of the system to
alter or reorganize its structure in the process of operation); a unified informa-

tion field (base); a step-by-step nature; new problems (the principle of prospec-
tiveness); the necessary diversity of both the control organ as well as the con-
trolled objects in the system in solving control problems; the functional linking of
the given control systems with other systems of the same or different levels; ef-
fectiveness.

The CLassifYcation of Control Systems

Control systems including those employed in the AD Troops can be classified by vari-
ous, most characteristic features which largely influence the realization of troop
combat capability with the use of the given system. Naturally any classification in
a certain sense is of a hypothetical nature.

258
Control systems are divided as follows:

a) In terms of the nature of the object of control-~into weapons control systems
(HC5) and troop control systems (TCS);

b) According to interaction with the external environment--into open and closed
control systems;

c) According to the scale and nature of the problems solved--into single-purpose
and multipurpose control systems;

d) According to the particular features of the control processes occurring in the
systems--into probability and determined;

e) According to the degree of automating the control process--into unautomated,
automated and automatic control systems;

I) According to the nature of the processing and utilization of information on the
system's output--into information, information-control and combined;

3) According to mobility-~into stationary and mobile control systems.

A weapons control system is a system in which the aggregate of subsystems (elements)
provides direct control of weapons in using them against enemy installations with
the task of knocking out or fully destroying these installations.

HCS are characteristic for such tactical fire subunits as a SAM battalion or a SAM
battery of the AD antiaircraft missile troops. A classic example of a HCS is the
control system created in a SAM battery which is armed with an antiaircraft missile

system or an antiaircraft artillery system. Analogous UCS are also created for
guiding fight-interceptors to airborne targets. The "CS are organically part of

the troop control systems and are their subsystems or elements. In being examined
in terms of the level of the hierarchy, the "CS hold the lowest level of control.

A troop control system is a system in which all the subsystems and elements compris-
ing it are unified by a common overall plan and carry out combat tasks in coordinat-
ing actions from a single center (control organ) in the interests of the overall
combat task with maximum effectiveness in employing the troops and weapons.

Depending upon the scale of the combat tasks to be carried out, the TOE structure
of the AD Troops and the level of co-Iand. the TCS have a definite hierarchical
structure. The lowest level in this structure of the T08 is the system created on
the scale of a unit of a branch of the AD troops for controlling subordinate sub-
units in combat.

The TCS and ROS can be open. probability, single-purpose and integrated. They can
also be mobile and stationary. The ucs can be automatic and automated while the
TCS, as a rule, are automated.

259

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.l.2. The Control Process and Its Characteristics

The presence of the control process in a system is its chief property and the basic

condition of its existence. The control process is a continuous technical organiza-
tional process carried out with the aim of various methods and equipment for achiev-
ing certain results in the course of the system's operation with its given internal

state and external conditions.

A control process in a system represents a natural, successive and continuous change
in the system's states over time, that is, a transition of it from one state to an-
other in aceord with the system's aim and program.

Any control in any dynamic system represents a process of converting information on
the state and operating conditions of the objects into signals (commands) which pro-
vide either for maintaining the state of the objects or bringing them into a condi-
tion in accord with the system's set goal and program.

in the control systems employed in the AD Troops. along with physical and energy ex-
change, information exchange predominates on all levels of control and this is de-
termined by the specific features of preparing and carrying out combat operations by
the subunits and units of the branches of AD Troops. For this reason, in such sys-
tems the control process can be characterized as an information process in which the
collection, processing, storage and transmission of the information comprise an ex-
ceptionally important place.

Control in an organized control system can consist of: a change in the system's
structure; a change in the operating modes of the elements, subsystems and the sys-
tem as a whole; a reallocation of functions between the elements and subsystems

within the system itself; the using of the system's reserve capacity.

The essence of eontrol within a TCS consists in the continuous collection, process-
ing and analyzing of data on the situation in the system's control organ (the inner
state of the entire system and the external factors) and in producing control ac-
tions (signals, commands or instructions) for the controlled subsystem in the aim
of achieving maximum effectiveness in troop combat operations under the given situa-
tional conditions and in accord with the combat task received from a superior level
of comand.

In a TCS a control process can be divided into several phases (stages) in each of
which a certain particular control problem is solved:

a) The collection, processing and generalization of data on the inner state of the
control system and the external factors (the air, ground or sea enemy; natural, cli-
matic and meteorological conditions and so forth):

h) The receiving and analysis of the combat task from the control organ of the sup-
erior level of command;

c) Assessing the situation, that is, an analysis_and synthesis of the generalized

information and the preparation of data for taking a decirion in the control organ
of the control system;

260
d) The taking of the decision to employ the weapons and the combat operations of
the troops in accord with the overall plan for combat operations coming from a

superior commander (defining and formulating the specific combat tasks for each con-
trolled object and for the subsystems of the given control system);

e) The giving of combat tasks to all the elements and subsystems in accord with the
adopted decision;

I) Supervising the carrying out of the given tasks and when necessary the correc-
tlon and adjustment of a previously adopted decision;

g) A report to the control organ of the superior control system on the results of
combat operations.

A typical scheme of the control process in a TCS is shown in Fig. 7.3.

    
  
 

 

a
zuvwn, ‘%;:;3: Fig. 7.3. Typical diagram of control
I b norm-1.04M"! k—gugm-t' process carried out in troop control
_ _ _ systems
. __1 ”-1L::____1
_‘ héﬁﬁm.! mswmnagﬁgwwr 1 Key: a--From the superior level control

' IJI' _.._J1 system; b--Receiving of combat task;
.« . _ ,. c--Analysis of received combat task;

 

c--Evalustion of situation and prep-
aration of data for the taking of a
decision by the commander; e-Taking
of decision by commander for combat
actions in accord with overall plan
of superior commander; f--giving com-
bat tasks to subordinates; g--Super-
vision of carrying out of received
combat tasks; h--Collection, process-
ing and generalization of situational
data; i--0n the actions of the air.

"urn" «Nun-mun J
u nut-nonhu- I'm-nu '
' d dn Hui-I'lllul’l [Ir-«'-
mm Mums-hume- --
e nil-mum» rrmrnn-I
Inn-"Murm- am I».
not nhn emu-1 I! run.-
nrmtmnuu r mum."
li-AI Mun- I nuns-.1 1!
”mu-mum

I l' .Ir-nnmuu I
i m-n.-‘.u---~.n_
1 -l‘-'th.‘n

I In".

L_____ial

 

   
     
    
 

  
 
 

 

"I'W'm

 

L—-____.-____

(I annulus-‘-
length-1 1-. M
‘- 4." II An. Ml.

J- m Ina—urn .
In m-m l TI
1

Na- [lulu-mun nurse"
.‘ml-H manhunt-unnu-

""_'L.1L_-..'.

4

  
 
  
 

 

F.
b.-_l I.-__.a

inflate... :TW'RKTSJ'ZI" ground (sea) enemy; j—On the combat
one «inﬁll—J M and. 8 readiness. combat capability and com--

bat actions of one's own troops; k--
0n the nature and results of combat
operations by adjacent units.

The procedure and sequence of solving these problems are characteristic for any
troop control system including for a T08 of the AD Troops.

A control cycle. The control process in control systems with a closed process cycle
always has a cyclical nature and for this reason the entire course of the process on
a time scale can be described by a control cycle.

A control cycle is an interval of time during which control tasks are successively
carried out from the moment of receiving the combat task in the control organ until
its complete execution within the given control system.

261

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Generally speaking. this consists of the following components:

ch - re, pr+gpro+tsw+cdt+rgc+tew (7.1)

where ch—-duration of control cycle;
ten p,--the time during which the combat task is received from the superior com-
mander and it is analyzed in the system's control organ;
tpro-—the time during which information is collected, processed and generalized
on the situation from various sources and needed for carrying out the
given combat task;
tsev--the time needed by the commander (combat crew, staff) for evaluating the
situation and preparing data for taking a decision;
tdt--the time spent by the commander on taking a decision (an operational
plan) with the formulating of specific combat tasks for the troops (units,
subunits) comprising the given control system;
Tuc--the duration of the cycle of the effect of a certain type of weapons in
their carrying out of combat tasks;
tev--the time during which the co-ander (combat crew) evaluates the results
of the action of the weapons against the enemy in their carrying out of
the combat task.

Usually the aggregate of components in the control cycle, without the time of the
cycle of the action of the weapons Twcv is termed the operating time of the system's
control organ.

Infonnation used in control systems of any sort should possess two basic properties:
it should be tailored to solve a certain range of problems characteristic for the
given type of control system; it should have certain sources and corresponding con-
sumers with a unified encoding system.

By information one should understand the aggregate of data needed for forming the
system's goal and program and for characterizing the states of the controlled ob-
jects and the external environment.

Information is the actual carrier of all the transformations carried out in the
system and without it the control process is impossible.

The classification of information employed in the T68 and "CS of the AD Troops can
be made according to the aggregate of distinguishing features depending upon the
particular features of the receipt, processing and purpose of the information.

The most essential features by which information can be classified are the follow-
ing (Fig. 7.6): the nature of the change; the sources of receipt; the purpose and
procedure of use; the presentation (display) of information; composition; quality;
value; the state of the system's controlled objects; the degree of priority; the
nature of employing the information and others.

The information support of the TCS and “CS is the aggregate of measures aimed at

acquiring and generalizing information on the situation from diverse sources of its

acquisition by the given system and other systems and the providing of this infor—
mation to the users.

262

FOR'0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
0832». H9330 moons Q a.“ you: 53333 no guacauuunnao 3K .38

 

 

               
               

   
     

    

   

3.330: .3223
unploo :3.- no
no 8.33385 .e 0.33 no 2.8 .n
.3333»: 2393:
so 8031385 .n 603-533 =33:
093:3 5.38 .c 53333 ugh—.50 .n 5.“: 339—3
9.3.3.5 uni—co .n nae-co 33385 aloud no 309 .N
3.5 uni—00 .« so c0338..“ .N 5.30.3." .N no.3 _ _
3.8.3 30:232— huuiuu: leakage «one _
Iauono 23608 921.8 5303.3.— uo neon-a: .
p.330: asp-.8 .n 533583 2— no 53.335 :— u no on: so 33 1" _
300 no no." 3.3.3 33>

 
  

Inouunoo no 33m . «o 0053 . 532585
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a control system the information sources can be: all types and purposes of
radars. the data of visual observation as located on all the elements of the sys-
tem. the air reconnaissance data of other systems and so forth. The basic sources
of information on the situation are radar reconnaissance equipment which possesses
high information capability for scanning the air space in minimum short times and
the providing of information to the system. For this reason the obtaining of in-

formation from all types of radar reconnaissance equipment is termed radar support
of the control system.

The basic demands placed upon information circulating in the AD control systems are:
promptness and continuity of receipt, updating with an established discreteness,

providing a high accuracy in taking and receiving the information, the completeness
of data in terms of composition, simplicity of encoding, the possibility of process-

ing by various methods and equipment of the given system and other systems, a short
time lag and so forth.

The degree to which the information satisfies the designated requirements determines
its quality as a whole and has a decisive impact on the effectiveness of troop
(weapons) control in the given system.

7.2. Automated Control Systems

7.2.1. ACS Elements

An automated troop (or weapons) control system is a man-machine system which pro-
vides the automated collection. processing and display of information needed to op-
timize troop (weapons) control in the aim of their most effective employment.

The ACS can include the following elements:

a) Information sources (radar reconnaissance equipment; connecting equipment; con-
necting equipment for other A05 to exchange information and so forth);

b) The system's set of automated equipment (8A8) located at the position of the
command post (control organ);

c) Connecting equipment for the controlled objects.
A structural diagram of an ACS is shown in Fig. 7.5.

Among the data sources in an ACS are diverse equipment but the basic role is played

by various types of radars located at all command posts comprising the system and
transmitting information on the situation to the corresponding command posts of the

given system or to the command posts of another adjacent ACS. In addition, infor-
mation can be received at the system's command post (control organ) from superior
and adjacent command posts also equipped with SAE over the automatic communications
channels. The connecting equipment provides the functional connecting of the
sources with all the system's elements and with the other ACS.

The set of automated equipment is an aggregate of equipment ensuring the collection,
processing, display and output of recommendations to the combat crew of the command

266

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Rut-4AM

T ”M
u “an! ¢.¢‘

M 1m-
ass sum
It.“ ‘00“.

        
 

lulu-vac b
snoop-sass

Ancmsm

MC sass-o-

ssul 2

A maul..-

roman?

 

wall “as“.
MI W I
.."""“'.... mam '
M :

I

. aéeeee emf}
L __________________________

Fig. 7.5. Structural diagram of an automated control system

    

Key: a-Command post (control organ) of higher-level control system;
b--Information sources; b1-Detection radar; b2--Identification
radar; b3-Radio direction finder; b‘--Primary (secondary) data
processing device (computer); c-Command post of cooperating
control systems of the same or different levels; d-Colmmnd post;
e-System control organ; f-Bquipment for data display and data
input-output; g--Group displays; h--Large screens; i-Boards;
j-Individusl displays; k-lnformation for the collection, ,
processing. conversion and storage of information; l-Connecting
equipment; m-Computer (installation); n--Computer; o--Honitoring
and operating equipment; p--Power supply equipment; q--Receiving
and sending equipment; r-Connecting equipment; s--Controlled
object; t--Controlled objects of system (SAM batteries. fighter-
interceptors)

post in accord with the established control algorithm and the issuing of combat
tasks to the controlled objects (troops) on the scale of the given system.

The SAE includes: an electronic computer or computer installation consisting of

two or more computers; data display equipment; receiving and sending equipment (RSB);
power supply equipment. The basic portion of the SA! is located at the system's
command post while its individual elements can be located at the inferior command
posts of the given system.

The equipment for data display and data input-output is designed for the visual pre-
sentation of information to the combat crew at the command post in solving the prob-
lems of troop (weapon) control. The basis of the equipment is the data display
units (DOD) and the units (panels) which provide for the inputting of control com-
mands into the computer (computer installation) from the work areas of the operators
(the men of the combat crew).

265

FOR4OFHKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The data receiving and sending equipment (388) is used for the automatic sending and
receiving of information both within the system between its elements and also for
exchanging information between other systems with which the given ACS is functional-
ly connected. Various means of communications are employed for the exchange of in-
formation between the elements.

The power supply equipment is used to ensure a source of power for the entire SAB of
the system's control organ.

The connecting equipment for the controlled objects is designed to ensure the func-
tional connecting with the automated equipment of the controlled objects. This
equipment is located, as a rule. at the positions of the given objects.

The electronic computer as the basic part of the control system's SAB is an elec-
tronic device (an aggregate of devices) designed to automate data processing and
calculating according to a certain algorithm. with the aid of a computer the SAE
equipment can elaborate certain recommendations within the limits of the designated

conditions on the combat employment of the weapons (troops) controlled from the sys-
tem's command post.

All existing computers can be classified according to the following basic features:
according to the method of solving problems; according to the form of processing
the submitted data; according to computer capacity; according to the degree of uni-
versality of data processing; according to the circuitry and structure of the com-
puter.

According to the problem solving method, a distinction is made between computers
with an analogue solving method, program-controlled and combined.

The analogue method is based on the theory of mathematical modeling which in turn is
based upon the similarity of the mathematical descriptions of the object and its
model.

The program controlled solution method is based upon the employment of numerical
methods of mathematical analysis and consists in the fact that for a certain mathe-
matical dependence there is a corresponding definite sequence of performing simple
arithmetic operations or the computation algorithm achieved as a result of the in-
terrelationship of the individual units and devices which changes in the course of
the solution. '

Both these methods in a certain combination are employed with the combined problem
solving method.

In terms of the form of processing the submitted information. computers are divided
into three types: continuously operating computers or analogue computers (AC) which
process data submitted in an analogue (continuous) form; discrete-action computers
or digital computers (DC) which process data submitted in a digital (discrete) form;
hybrid computers which process the information partially in a discrete and partially
in a continuous form.

Digital computers have been most widely employed in the HCS and the TCS.

266

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 7.6. Siaplified structural and functional diagraa of a
digital computer

Unarithmetic unit; 03y—aain memory; Uncontrol unit; Units: 03--
operating unit; BHY--local control unit; BSY-extarnal nelory; YBs.-
input unit; YBum.-output unit; 53" (BBﬂ)-data "ricer (reproducer);
SﬂH--data retrieval unit; BYO--operations control unit; PK-comland
register; CK--con-and counter. Signals: V3--control pulses; Jj--
control signals to operations unit; n¢--overflov signal: nu--conditional
transfer signal; AK--oparation end signal. V; 2 3 ...-signals for
completing three-address con-and with direct addressing.

In terms of computer power, digital computers are hypothetically divided into
large, medium and small.

Large digital computers possess high speed (from several hundred thousand to several
million operations per second) and a large storage capacity (up to a million bytes
in the working storage and up to several million bytes in the external storage).
These also have the capacity of operating under multiprogra-ming conditions and

(or) under tine-sharing conditions in serving several users simultaneously. There
are also superpowerful digital computers which have a speed on the order of scores
of millions and even hundreds ofsullions of operations per second (the Illiac-IV in
the United States).

267

FOR OII1C1AI.USE(NQLV
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The medium-sized digital computers possess a speed on the order of several tens of
thousands of operations per second and a storage capacity of tens of thousands of
bytes and in the external storage millions of bytes. The given class of digital
computers are most widely employed in the T05 and "CS.

Small-sized digital computers have a speed of hundreds and thousands of operations
per second and a working storage capacity of several tens of thousands of bytes.

The small digital computers operate according to a single program and serve one user.
The given type of digital computer is employed in the "CS.

In terms of the degree of data processing universality. all digital computers are
divided into universal and specialized.

Universal digital computers are general-purpose computers which are designed to
solve a broad range of problems and have a diversified operational system, a hier-
archical memory structure and a developed data input-output system.

Specialized digital computers are designed to solve one problem or a comparatively
narrow range of problems. The specialization of digital computers rigidly defines
their structure and makes it possible to consider the particular features of solving
the given type of problems. This sharply increases the effective use of the digital
computers (the shmplifying of design. the reduced problem solving time, increased
speed and accuracy. better serviceability, that is. the simplicity of operating the
machine for a human. display and presentation of data. reduced cost of the digital

computer. simplified software and input (output) units for the digital computers and
so forth).

The specialized digital computers in terms of the particular features of employment
are often divided into control and simulating or modeling. Control specialized
digital computers are employed in the T65 and wcs. As a rule, these operate on a
real time scale in a closed loop with the object (objects) of control (control over
the guidance of the fighter-interceptors, fire control of the SAM batteries, control
of the radar data sources and so forth).

In terms of the structure and circuitry of computers. they are conditionally divided
into several generations: first generation with vacuum tubes and a speed on the
order of tens of thousands of operations per second; second generation or the tran—
sistorized or solid-state computers with a speed on the order of hundreds of thou-
sands of operations per second; third generation or computers with integrated cir-
cuits and computer installations with a speed on the order of millions of operations
per second; fourth generation or nultiprocessors employing large integrated circuits
with a speed on the order of tens of millions of operations per second and more.

Data display equipment in an 403 includes: data display units (DDU), devices (pan-
els) for operator input or output of information to the computers or computer in-
stallation. equipment for connecting the DOD to other elements of the system.

Data display units are the basic elements in the display equipment. They are set up
at the AD command posts on any level of command.

268

FOR OFFKJAI.USIZONLY
Devices (panels) for inputting and outputting data into the computer (installation)

provide for the data inputting (outputting) for display on the appropriate units
(indicators).

The equipment for connecting the DDU with other system elements provides for normal
operation of all the data display equipment under combat conditions.

All the DDU of the ACS in terms of design and engineering are subdivided into three
basic types: projection, panel and CRT indicator DDU.

The projection DDU are designed for obtaining an oversize image. These operate ac-
cording to the principle of projecting the image onto a screen for general viewing.

Such DDU include an input unit, a sign generator. a recorder, a projector and a
screen.

Panel DDU are designed to display information on a matrix screen of specific size
using electroluminescent, opticomechanical or gas-filled elements. The panel DDU
are employed both for group and individual use.

The CRT indicator DDU are designed to display a more detailed situation in receiving
data directly from the sources (radar reconnaissance and other) as well as in em-
ploying information over the communications channels within the given control system
or from other ACS.

In terms of the use and particular features of data display on the screens, all DDU
are divided as follows: by purpose, by the type of displayed information and in
terms of the methods of forming the signs on the DDU screens.

A classification of DDU is shown in Fig. 7.7.
In terms of purpose. DDU are divided into group and individual devices.

The group DDU are designed for reproducing an information model of the general air
(ground) situation within a certain area of combat operations, the state of combat
readiness of one's troops and so forth. 0n the basis of such a model a quantitative

evaluation of the situation is made and data are prepared for the comander to take
a decision.

Among the group DDU are large screens and electronic boards which are designed to
provide information for the entire combat crew.

The large screens display dynamic and status information on the general situation,
on the nature and directions of air enemy operations, on the disposition of one's
troops, the terrain, geographic markers and so forth. All the information is dis-
played on a definite scale. The dimensions of the screens can reach several meters.

Electronic boards are designed to display information on the combat state of the
troops, their combat capabilities, the course of combat operations at the given
moment of time. on the results of combat operations and so forth. The boards serve

as a complement to the large screens and they display information with a certain
dvxrvu of detailing for individual questions.

269

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
coupon

>P audio
saw: nausea
oucouuooum

 

..l

mu: a :« ouuaa anuaauv nuav no couuuoumqooaao

               

douucoo lion coouoo coauoavoua _!
auscuuocau >H “Hula Iou xuuuoi
sud: condo; an“: oven: sud: quad:

            

uuaouuooau

  

/

nouooaoov mecca

/. .
manhoocuwco can undone mo oauou

Illlll

_ Aaanv onus: auaaoav auaa

r|ll|h

uumuaouvau
Abovuooom

.5.“ .ugu

        

accouou >9
Hanan saw:

aneuauuvcu on

an

  

souuuoo
lion naaoau“
nuasu sun).
ouuﬁuaulzﬁm

  

cucuuogvad
and-«uh
individual DDU are designed for more detailed and complete display of data in a
certain area in receiving the data from the primary (radar reconnaissance) and
secondary (AC5) data sources. Among the individual DDU are the primary and second-
ary indicators and boards which selectively display information designed for cer-
tain members of the combat crew. Here the primary indicators display the informa-
tion received directly from the system's radars while the secondary indicators give
data from the ACS data processing equipment in a converted form. In individual in-
stances indicators can be employed which simultaneously display both primary and

secondary information received from several sources (combined or integrated infor-
nation).

The displaying of information on the screens of the 000 indicators is formed from

two types of elements: sign groups made up from digits, letters and standard
(special)symbols; lines of nonstandard length (the image of the configuration of the

troop positions, the terrain, the specific position of troops, characteristic lines
and zones and so forth).

Sign presentation or display assumes the creation of definite systems of symbols
in the form of different geometric shapes, figures and letters.

The aggregate of these symbols reduced into certain groups characterizing the state

and change of the state of one or another object (or several objects) is termed the
data form. Using the data forms it is possible to display on the DDU screens the
data on airborne targets. data on one's own fighter interceptors, data on the state
and combat operations of the SAM or antiaircraft artillery batteries (battalions) and
so forth.

The position of the data form on the DDU screen is strictly determined and describes
the position of the objects (one's own and the enemy's) and their state.

Thus, in the American Sage ACS the target data form consists of nine signs (three
lines with three signs in each). In other ACS the image is given only in a symbolic
form (the 0.8. Missile Monitor AC5).

For depicting information in a symbolic form, most often geometric shapes of a sim—
ple and complicated configuration are employed.

The triangle, rhombus. rectangle. circle and square possess the greatest ease and
accuracy of perception.

Moreover. it is possible to employ typical and specialized symbols which have
mnemonic and associative significance (a bomber or fighter. a command post. SANS and
others).

7Wv requirements for the DDU are determined by the factors of three basic groups:
technical factors which describe the display system, the unit and methods of display;
information factors which reflect the nature and particular features of the informa-
tion to be processed; psychophysiological factors which consider the capabilities of
the human operator in handling the 000.

271

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first two groups of factors describe the display system as a whole from the
technical viewpoint while the third group involves the operator or group of opera-
tors (the combat crew).

The basic demands made upon the DDU are: promptness in the display and presentation
of information to the control system's combat crew at a pace equal to or less than
the pace of combat operations; ease of viewing; completeness; accuracy; contrast and
brightness of the image.

For evaluating the operating qualities of the DDU. it is possible to employ the fol-
lowing indicators: infatuation capacity, information content or specific informa-
tion capacity; the data display rate; resolution; operating reliability and dura-
bility.

The information capacity of a DDU characterizes the maximum quantity which can be
cisplayed on the screen. The information capacity of a DDU depends upon the number
of sign positions on the indicator screen and upon the number of signs in the alpha-
bet of the sign generator. The larger the number of sign positions and the larger
the alphabet of the sign generator the greater the information capacity of the DDU
indicator screen.

Information content or the specific information capacity of an indicator is the
amount of information per sign position. Information content is determined solely
by the alphabet of the sign generator.

The data display rate is characterized by the amount of information displayed on an
indicator screen per unit of time. Naturally the planned data display rate should
not exceed the psychophysiological capability of the operator to read it.

The full data reset time Tfr is the interval of time during which all the sign posi-
tions on the D00 indicator screen are filled. This depends upon the method of form-
ing the signs and the method of filling the sign positions. With the sequential or

parallel filling of the sign places, respectively,

Tfr ' “san;
(7. 2)

ns
Tfr ' .321r8,

where NBP--number of sign positions an indicator screen;
Tr3--write speed of one sign;
m--number of annultaneously filled sign positions.

Generally speaking. the maximum data display rate is directly proportional to the
information content if the indicator and inversely proportional to the sign forming
rate in the display system.

The reliability of data display characterizes the degree to which the perceived
signs correspond to the signs which actually should be displayed.

Quantitatively data display reliability can be judged by the probability of the cor-
rect perception of the sign's information Pc or the probability of the incorrect
reading of a sign Pu.

272

FOI'OFFKJA1.USE20NLY
With a certain degree of approximation, the data display reliability can be ex-
pressed by the average value of the probability of correct or incorrect reading:

xs
1
P .— ;
c ‘p 15: Pc(‘i)
(7.3)

where pc(x1), pu(x1)-the probability of the correct and incorrect reading of sign
x1.

Generally speaking, the probabilities of the correct (incorrect) reading of differ-

ent signs vary and depend upon the shape of the signs and the methods of forming
them.

The resolution of a DDU is one of the basic indicators for the effectiveness of its
operation. This is viewed together with the physiological capabilities of the human
operator. As a rule. the resolution of a 000 is set proceeding from the resolution
of normal human vision and is determined by the dimensions of the signs (linear or
angular) and their distance to the viewer's eye:

San I 2:,“ (8%, (7.6)

where Ssn-the linear size of the sign;
ran-the distance to the sign;
n--angu1ar dimension of sign.

The optimum size of a sign which ensures the most rapid and accurate reading equals
40 min (for height). Hith larger signs the rate and accuracy of reading virtually
do not change. The least permissible sign size is 20 min.

After determining the size of the sign for height it is also possible to determine
the other sign dimensions (width. boldness of face. distance between signs).

The most preferred ratios between these sign parameters are approximately as follows
(light signs against a dark background): width--3/S the sign's height; thickness--
12 percent of height; distance between signs-i/2 the sign width.

Operating reliability characterizes the degree of operating efficiency of the D00
and is assessed by the probability of dependable work over a determined service life
or average service life.

In determining the dimensions of the operations rooms of the AD command posts where

they intend to place group DDU (large screens or boards), consideration is given to
the distance between operators and the viewed surface of the screens:

273

FOR 0‘11C1AI.US£GMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N

 

'—

m, 3 ' (7.5)

where r—-distance to the «('een;

U--screen width;

O--angle of view (in the calculations it is usually set within the limits of
SO-60’; the maximum value of the angle should not be over 90° and here 0 in
the vertical plane is taken approximately equal to one-half the angle in
the horizontal plane).

quality chanmaasristics of A65 operations indicate the degree of the given system's
efficiency for effectively solving the control problems. Among such characteristic
one should put the following: combat readiness, efficiency. throughput capacity,
antijamming capability, capacity, invulnerability, mobility, effectiveness and
others.

The combat readiness of an Acs is assessed by the time required to convert the sys-
tem's automation equipment from one degree of readiness to another, higher one.
Using the given characteristics one can assess the system's adaptation in terms of
the time of solving control problems under various combat conditions.

Since the TCP and "CF are designed to increase the effectiveness of troop combat
operations and the effectiveness of the combat employment of weapons, the time of
converting ;he A05 to combat conditions should not exceed the time for converting
the weapons (SANS, fighter-interceptor, antiaircraft artillery) to readiness for
combat and the converting of the troops (ZRV, IA, RTV and so forth) to a higher de-
gree of readiness.

The efficiency of the ACS describes its speed, that is, the system's capacity to re-
spond to a change in the combat situation. Quantitatively a system's efficiency can
be assessed by the time outlays of the system's combat crew in solving a control
problem (working time). The less time a commander (combat crew) needs for effec-
tively solving control problems the higher the efficiency the system possesses.

This time depends upon the degree to which the solving of control problems has been
automated. It should not exceed the time the air targets are in the weapons impact
(intercept) zones or in the fire control (guidance) zones of these weapons.

The quality of solving control problems characterizes the ability of the AC5 to
solve the set control problems with the required accuracy. Quantitatively it can be
assessed by the amount of errors in solving specific problems or by the probability
of a correct solution of a certain problem. For example, the quality of radar data
processing in an ACS is characterized by the mean square errors of tracking the tar-
get trajectory while the quality of solving the target designation problem for the
weapons is assessed by the probability of the immediate lock-on of the target by

the weapons guidance radars.
The throughput capacity of an ACS characterizes its information capability and can

be assessed by the maximum number of tracked and processed targets information about
which can be received, processed and presented to the users (fighter-interceptors,

SAN batteries and so forth) in a unit of time with a set discreteness and accuracy.

274

FORlMﬂHC1Al.USE¢DNLY
The untijamming capability of an ACS characterizes the ability of the system to ef-
fectively solve troop (weapons) control problems under the conditions of interfer-
ence, as the presence of various interference can complicate the system's operating
conditions and lead to a decline in its throughput capacity. The system's anti-
jamming capability is determined by the jam-proofness of the radar information
sources and the means of communications and by the quality of the data processing
algorithms in the system.

The capacity of a system characterizes the maximum capability of the A68 to solve
control problems. it can be assessed by various criteria for the individual. spe-
cific control problems.

For example, the capacity of an A63 in data processing is characterized by the maxi-
mum number of targets for which the information can be received, processed and trans-
mitted. The capacity of an ACS can be assessed by the maximum number of guidance
channels or by the number of SAM batteries to which a task can be given automatically.

The invulnerability of an ACS is determined by its capacity to carry out the control
problems assigned to it under the conditions of enemy fire in conducting combat oper-
ations. This is composed of combat stability and operating reliability. The invul-

nerability of an ACS is determined by the invulnerability of the most vulnerable
elements in the system, for example. the data transmission equipment or the recon-
naissance radars.

Combat stability characterizes the capacity of the system to resist enemy fire and
is assessed by the probability of the uninterrupted operating of the system with the
failure of its individual elements.

Operating reliability of an ACS is assessed by the probability of the system's de-
pendable operation over a certain (set) interval of time under typical conditions.

The mobility of a system is characterized by its ability to be trans|orted by all
types of transport: motor vehicle, rail and air. The existing foreign models of

ACS are mounted on truck-pulled or self-propelled chassis and also can be placed in
special containers.

The effectiveness of a system is determined by the increase in the indicator of
troop combat effectiveness (the effectiveness of weapons employment) in using the
given ACS. In general terms this is determined by the expression

Eacs ' 5*

a“ - . 100:. (7.6)

EICS

where EaCS--effectiveness indicator characterizing the realization of the combat
capabilities of the troops (weapons) in employing the given AC5;

E*--effectiveness indicator characterizing the realization of the combat

capabilities of the troops (weapons) in the absence of the given ACS.

In utilizing the above-indicated characteristics it is possible to evaluate the ACS
for any level of command and purpose.

275

FOR 0' 1“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I.2.2. controlling SAMS Fire Using an ACS

The AD system of individual installations is an aggregate of the groupings of dif~
ferent branches of troops deployed in battle formations. The composition of the
groupings is determined by the scale of the tasks to be carried out, by the nature
of enemy air operations, by the combat capabilities of the weapons systems, the con-
trol systems and the support of the troops (SAMS, ARKP [abbreviation unknown], Acs,
radar and EU forth) and by the particular features of organizing and providing coop-
eration with adjacent units (subunits) of the various branches of the AD Troops.

The SAMS fire control system reflects the TOE structure of the antiaircraft missile
troops. Fire control is carried out on a level of the created SAMS grouping con-
sisting of the battle formations of the SAM batteries, the SAM battalions and the
artillery.

The SAMS groupings can be of the same type (for example, just the Improved Hawk or
SAM-D or other SAMS) or mixed (different types of SAMS).

The ACS used for controlling troop combat operations in terms of the particular fea-
tures of combat employment can be single-purpose (Missile Master, Missile Monitor,
Missile Mentor, Missile Minder and others) for controlling SAMS fire in mixed group-
ings and multipurpose or integrated (Florida and others) for controlling the com-
bat operations of the SAMS and fighter-interceptora.

A single-purpose ACS of the Missile Monitor type is designed for controlling the
SAMS fire of an artillery group (brigade) which is part of a field army in the
theater of war (United States).

In terms of structure this is a three-tier hierarchical control system in which
there are three command posts: the coulmnd post of the system (one), the command
posts of the SAM battalions (for the number of battalions comprising the group) and
the command posts of the SAM batteries (for the number of SAM batteries comprising
the SAM battalion). Each of the command posts solves the control problems inherent
to its functions in the general control system of the SAMS grouping.

The most general problems (coordinating the basic efforts of the SAMS grouping in
the main sector of the enemy's air attack, cooperation with the fighter aviation and
other AD resources) are solved at the system's command post. The problems of direct
fire control of the SAM batteries under the given battalion are solved at the bat-
talion command post. At the command posts of the SAM batteries firing is carried
out against one target (the Nike Hercules SAMS), against two targets (the Hawk SAMS)
or six targets (SAM-D).

In considering the expected nature of enemy air operations, the capabilities of the
reconnaissance equipment of the control system as a whole and the particular fea-
tures of controlling the fire of the SAMS under the most complicated conditions of
the air situation, it can be pointed out that the most effective fire control can
be provided from the command post of the SAM battalion which may include several
SAM batteries.

A structural diagram for the SAMS fire control in the Missile Monitor ACS is shown
in Fig. 7.8.

276

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mag-2:... ' """"" 6‘.

. ._q

I n: new! I l
a urn-ram

 

Fig. 7.8. Structural diagram for controlling the fire
of the Hawk SANS in the Hissile Monitor ACS

Located at the launching position of the SAM battery are: I—the launcher;
II--illuninating radar (AN/HPQ-Zii); III—radio ranget’inder; lV--hut with
equipment for controlling the fire of the SM battery; V--radar for detect-
ing low-flying targets (AN/HPQ-M or AN/KPQ-Sl); VI—radar for detecting
high altitude targets (AN/W35). Located at the position of the SAM bat-
talion cos-land post are: VII--equipnent for controlling the fire of the
SAM battery (AN/HSQ-ls); VIII—radar of the SAM battalion co-and post
(AN/TPS-lG).

Located at the position of the systal's co-and post are: Iii—equipment for
data processing and controlling (coordinating) the fire of the SAM battalions,
for the functional connecting and transmission of data in the systel created
in the for- of two centers (the radar data processing center and the fire
control center); x—a three-dinensional radar of the Freeacanner type
(MUMPS-23) .

In the system there are the following links between the elements: l--the
exchange of information between the system's co-and post and the superior
and adjacent comnd posts; 2--data on the air situation from the radars of
the systel'a col-hand posts; 3 and lo—the exchange of infatuation between the
battalion comnd posts and the system comand post; 5--data on the air situ-
ation fro- the radar of the battalion comand post; 6--the exchange of infor-
uation of the battalion col-and post with the conand posts of adjacent SM
battalions and battery; 7--exchange of information of the SM battalion
cons-and post and the SAM battery con-and post; 8—-data on target detection
by the reconnaissance radars of the SAM battery comnd post; 9--comand to

277

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Fig. 7.8 continued]

launch the SAM; lO--data on the state of readiness of the SAM on the launcher;
ll--data on target tracking; 12--target designation to the illuminating radar
from the battery command post; 13-data on the target's azimuth; 14--data on
the precise range to the target; lS--request for precise range to target;
16--signal that the missiles are ready to launch.

Key: a--Launching position of SAM battery; b--Position of SAM battalion
command post; c--Position of system command post

The SAMS groupings of the Missile Monitor type of ACS provide the solving of the
following control problems:

a) The receiving, processing, displaying. storage, converting and transmitting of
data on the situation received from various sources both within the system among its

elements as well as between other systems of different levels;

b) Analysis, generalization and selective presentation to the command post crew
(the system or SAM battalion) of the essential information for taking sound deci-
sions on the combat employment of the SAMS;

c) Controlling the fire of the SAM batteries from the SAM battalion command post
(coordinating the fire of the SAM battalions with the system command post) while
they maintain the right to independently choose the targets for destruction in cer-

tain sectors or within the range of altitudes within the limits of their SAMS impact
zone;

d) Centralized warning of all the SAM batteries on the actions of the air enemy and
on the combat activities of the SAM batteries (on the scale of the SAM battalion) or
the entire system;

e) Monitoring the combat activities of the SAM batteries from the battalion colnand
post or the system comand post.

The automated equipment of the command post in the Missile Monitor system makes it
possible to coordinate the fire of 32-35 SAM batteries (through the battalion com-
mand posts) armed with Hawk SAMS or others with a simultaneous attack by up to 130-
160 enemy aircraft (missiles) from different directions.

Controlling the fire of the SAM batteries is carried out from certain lines and with-
in rcrtain zones and here in each zone a specific particular control problem is
solved aimed at destroying the enemy aircraft (missiles) within the SAM battalion

f i to zone.

Fig. 7.9 shows the reciprocal position of the control zones and lines on the scale
of a Hawk SAM battalion.

The control lines and zones are directly related to the tasks carried out by the SAM
battalion command post in controlling the fire of the SAM batteries. Such tasks in-
volving the use of the SAE of the ACS can be: the collection and processing of in-
coming information and the information logical problems, the encoding and decoding

278

FOR 0511C1AI.USEGDNLV
.L ll: I
1.) ‘ -Kr: damapcu YP

_;. . I
I
m duao¢gtw__LL _ _____ . J’s Ic.@£__.I._"t.‘¢_..|._“t£E!———R$ﬂ

  

Fig. 7.9. Control lines and zones in a SAM battalion
in controlling the fire of the Hawk SAN batteries

Zones: A--the zone of action of the SAM battalion with centralized control
from the system command post; 3-- zone of action of SAM battery with central-
ized fire control from the battalion consand post; l--inIpact zone of SMS;
II--1aunch zone of SAHS; III--zone of giving missions to SAM battery; 1V--
zone of evaluating situation and taking decision to destroy target at SAM
battalion command post; V--zone of detecting the targets by the battalion
reconnaissance equipment and processing information for taking a decision
using the automation equipment of the SAN battalion command post; VI--zone

of receiving combat task from the system command post to repel air enemy
attack

Lines: 1--line for receiving combat task from the system command post;
2(2"--far (near) line for detecting targets and processing information on
them using automation equipment; 3(3')--far (near) line for allocating the
fire of the battalion's SAM batteries against the airborne target; b(h')--
far (near) line for setting tasks for SAN batteries to destroy targets;
S(S')--far (near) limit of SAHS launch zone; 6(6')--far (near) limit of SAHS
impact zone; a-SAH battalion command post; b--SAH battery contend post

of information, the storing of it in a converted form and preparation for use in
solving various problems; assessing the combat state and combat capabilities of the
SAN batteries and the particular features of their employment under the given spe-
cific situational conditions; solving the problems of target allocation, that is,
the most rational allocation of fire by the SAM batteries against the airborne
targets considering their importance with the maximum realization of battery fire
capability under the given situational conditions; the giving of the combat tasks

to the SAM batteries for destroying the targets in providing target designation and
other additional data on the situation; monitoring the fulfillment of the set combat
task and when necessary adjusting the decision within the zone of setting the tasks.

in examining the control process on a time scale there is a repetition of actions by
the commander (crew) of the command post in working on each next airborne target.
The control problems solved for one target (flow of targets) and expressed continu-
ously and successively in time can be characterized by a control cycle.

279

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

1111- mntml rycle of the SM battalion cot-sand post is the interval of tine during
whi. I. [luv rualumdcr (I‘I’L'V) carries out all the tasks of controlling the fire of the
SAM lulltorlcﬁ from the moment of detecting the given target by the reconnaissance
equipment up to the moment of destroying it:

ch - tcp 4» Tc, (7.7)

where rep-time of control cycle, seconds;
tCP--working time of SAM battalion conand post, seconds;
Tcnfiring cycle time of SM battery against given target, seconds.

The components of the control cycle are shown in Fig. 7.10.

 

Fig. 7.10. Control cycle and its components

The working time of a command post is the interval of time from the moment of de-
tecting the target by the equipment of the battalion (or SAM battery) co-and post
to the moment of setting the task for the 8!)! batteries to destroy it considering
reports on the firing results at it under the condition that all the operations
(with the exception of the last) are carried out continuously and successively:

tcl) ' tPro + tev + tdt + tct + tevf (7.8)

where tpronthe time required to detect the target by the reconnaissance equipment

and to process the data on it at the battalion con-land post, seconds;

tevnthe time spent by the comnder (fire control officer) on analyzing the
task and evaluating the situation, seconds;

tdtuthe time needed by the cos-lander (fire control officer) to take a deci-
sion to destroy the given target (with the obligatory solving of the
problem of fire allocation for the SAM batteries), seconds;

tcv-the time needed by the coinander (fire control officer) to set the com-
bat tasks for the SAM batteries. seconds;

twp-the time needed by the co-ander (fire control officer or other members
of the crew) to evaluate the firing results at the given target, seconds.

The detection and processing of information on the targets can be carried out by
automated or automatic methods by several members of the command post crew and for

this reason does not have a significant influence on increasing the working time of
the con-and post.

280

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The The most complicated and labor-intensive operations are evaluating the situation
and taking the decision and a large portion of the time is spent on this. In deter-
mining the maximum throughput capacity of a canand post it is advisable to consider
only these two components. The time spent on giving the tasks to the SAN batteries

is insignificant and this operation can be carried out by the commander and several
crew members simultaneously.

The time spent on evaluating the firing results may not be considered in carrying
out the calculations for the lines. as this evaluation is always made in the firing
zone of the SAM batteries or even after the targets have left this zone.

In using the components of the command post working time it is possible to calculate
the lines and zones for controlling the SAM battery fire relative to the positions
of the {AH batteries and their zones of impact.

Thus. the line for setting the tasks for the SAM batteries for a given altitude (or
range of altitudes) is calculated from the formula

dlst f(n) ' df(n)"’Vt'Tc maxumin)- (7.9)

where df(n)--horizonta1 range to the far (near) limit of the impact zone, km;
Vc--calculated speed of target. km/sec.
Tc max(m1n)--maximum (minimum) firing cycle of SAH battery, seconds.

The distance equal to the difference of the far and near limits is called the depth
of the task setting zone. The depth of the zone to a significant degree depends
upon the configuration of the SMS impact zone in space as well as upon the speed
and altitude of the targets.

With low values of the distances to the far limit of the SANS impact zone and with
values of target altitude (from several km and higher) it is advisable to determine
the slant range to the task setting line:

 

dist f(n) - "(40m . ‘Ig'lfpeultmlalf I ”I' (7.10)
where Dir-calculated target altitude, km.

The line for allocating the fire of the SAM batteries against airborne targets is
determined considering the expenditure of time needed by the commander (fire control
officer or other crew member) on evaluating the situation and taking a decision to
destroy the airborne target. This is calculated relative to the task setting line

dfa f(n) ' dlst f(n)+vt(‘ev+tdt+tct)- (7-11)

The value (tev+ tdt" tct) is a variable amount and depends upon a large number of
factors. For this reason for the specific ACS. these time components are determined
experimentally and are set as a time standard characteristic for certain conditions.
Within the limits of the fire allocation zone bounded by its near and far lines, the
commander has an opportunity to soundly take a decision, to adjust or adopt a new
decision to destroy the targets under the difficult situational conditions.

281

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The required target detection line for the reconnaissance equipnent of the SM bat-
teries (or the SM battalion) is calculated relative to the fire allocation line:

dtle req ' dfaf‘H’r, tipro. (7.12)

The aggregate of the required target detection zone for the reconnaissance equip-
ment, the zone for situation evaluation and decision taking (the fire allocation
zone) and the zone for setting the tasks for the SM! batteries is deternined as a
whole as the fire control zone of the SM batteries fro. the SAN battalion conand
post.

The spatial diaensions of the control zone are substantially influenced by the con-
ponents of the conand post working tins. For this reason the greatest possible re-

duction in the working tine in maintaining high quality control is one of the ways
for increasing the effectiveness of control.

282

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8. ELECTRONIC COUNTERHEASURES
8.1. Equipment and Methods for Conducting Electronic Countermeasures
Electronic Countsrmsaaaa-es

Electronic countermeasures (BO!) are a group of measures conducted in the purposes
of reconnaissance and subsequent electronic neutralization of enemy radio electronic
equipment (REE) and systems as well as the radio electronic defense (RED) of one's
own REE and systems. The 504 measures are conducted together with the. destruction
of the REE, particularly radiation-homing weapons.

In the armies of many capitalist nations new systems have appeared which include
signals intelligence. ja-ing, false targets and weapons against the RBI-2. Jaming
equipment is being developed to neutralize the operation of all types of REE. in-
cluding radar, laser and infrared, satellite conunications and radionavigation.

Radio electronic neutmlisation includes measures and actions by the troops to de-
tect, identify and prevent the operation of enemy R33. For carrying out these
tasks. in the opinion of foreign specialists, the following methods can be employed:
the development of active and passive jaming of the REE. the use of false targets

and decoys, reducing the radar, thermal and optical contrast of one's objects,
changing the electrical properties of the medium and the conditions for the propa-

gation of electromagnetic waves and transmitting false information for the enemy
reconnaissance equipment.

The objects of radio electronic neutralization are radars, radio couunications,
radionavigation and other [(33 conprising the basis of modern control and reconnais-
sance systems. Radio electronic neutralization was widely ewloyed in world war II
and in subsequent local wars.

Radio electronic defense is a group of organizational and technical measures to en-
sure the concealment and dependable operation of the RE and control systems of
one's troops and weapons.

The radio electronic defense measures envisage defense against being hit by weapons
which home on sources of electromagnetic waves, defense against electronic jaming
and ensuring electromagnetic compatibility.

283

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. "NIX

Thp basic methods of radio electronic defense. as foreign specialists fuel. can be
thr integrated use of REE. rigid regulation of radiation, the maneuvering of fre-
quencies and the use of protective equipment against enemy electronic jamming and
homing weapons.

Electrical intelligence (ELINT) is intelligence carried out by special REE in the
aim of obtaining data on the type. purpose and position of enemy REE. ELINT is
carried out using special equipment located at ground installations. on ships and
aircraft.

The tasks of signals intelligence include the intercepting and analysis of signals
sent by enemy REE. This makes it possible to determine the parameters of the sig-
nals being sent, the type of modulation. the spatial characteristics and operating
conditions of the R88.

Among the parameters of the emitted signals are: carrier frequency (the frequency
of the high frequency oscillations) fc and sending power PP . The type and parame-
ters of modulation characterize the structure of the emitted signals and this pro-
vides an opportunity to determine the purpose of the REE and the content of the
transmitted information. Modulation of the carrier oscillations can be amplitude.
frequency and phase.

Hith pulse-amplitude modulation, the signals intelligence equipment can determine
the repetition rate Pr and the duration 11 of the pulses, the structure of the pulse
series and their shape. In the case of amplitude modulation by harmonic oscilla-
tions the law of change in the modulating signals can be determined.

With the frequency (phase) modulation of the carrier oscillations. the frequency Pm
and the form of the modulating oscillations and the deviation A?- of the carrier
frequency are determined.

Among the spatial characteristics of the REE are the direction of propagation and
polarization of the radio waves, the shape and width of the antenna directional pat-
tern and the method of scanning space. The opeating conditions of the REE are char-
acterized by the type of carrier oscillations, by the duration of work in time and
so forth.

For conducting signals intelligence it is possible to employ ground, surface and on-
board (aircraft) equipment. Earth satellites (for example, the 0.5. Ferret) can be
employed for this same purpose.

you bauipment

A typical signals intelligence installation (Fig. 8.1) has a wide-band channel for
receiving and analyzing the si nals and 9 ?Et direction finding channel. The sig-
nais received by the broad-ban antenna A] pass through the broad-band antenna am-

plifiers l and through the antenna switch 2 to the receivers 3 which have certain
frequency selectivity. As a result frequency selection of the signals is provided
and their isolation against the background of obstructing signals. After amplifi-
cation and preliminary conversion the signals from the output of the receivers can
go to the channel separation. demodulation and decoding equipment 4, to the analy-
sis equipment 5 and to the indicators 6.

286

POI‘OFIWC1AL.USEZ(”NLY
The channel separating. demodulation and

wide-hang channel decoding equipment provides the separa-

r. i:?::: r4‘6 L.L_7 | tion of one or several channels of multi-
\[-;_;-L- 2 E: J , Fzrﬁ “ channel REE and converts the signal into
._-_. L_ 5;;4 '¥~1 5 | a form convenient for recording. After
7 J r::; this the signal goes to the recording de-
A; iTJ 1_ﬁJ vice 7 for recording.

radio tearing chann

The analysis equipment provides the analy-
sis and separating out of the content of
useful information. It can include spec-
trum analyzers for the oscillations emit-
ted by the REE and this makes it possible
to determine the values of the carrier
and modulating frequencies and the sending power.

 

Fig. 8.1. Structural diagram of a
typical signals intelligence installation

Indicators are used to convert the electrical signals into sound of visual ones and
this makes it possible to establish their presence and determine certain parameters.
The converted signals can be recorded on photographic or magnetic tape or directly
viewed by an operator.

Recording equipment provides for a documentary recording of the intercepted signals
and thereby an opportunity is created to reproduce their content for subsequent
analysis.

The direction finding channel contains a high-directional antenna A; and a radio
receiver 8 which form the radio direction finder. The signals of the REE hre picked
up by the antenna. they pass through the receiver and go to the recorder. The equip-
ment of the direction finder provides an opportunity to determine the direction to
the source of radiation. With two or more direction finders it is possible to de-
termine the point coordinates of the REE.

Direct£ng Finding Meshods

The maximum method is a method whereby the direction to the source of emission is
determined from the maximum signal on the output of the intercept receiver corres—
ponding to the direction of its antenna to the source of transmission. This method
is employed in the bands of centimeter and decimeter waves using high-directional
antennas. The accuracy of direction finding is:

tied - (on-0.25”; . (8.1)
where 0;--width of directional pattern in receiver antenna.

The minimum method makes it possible to determine the direction to the source of
transmission from the minimum signal on the receiver output. .Here the antenna

directional pattern has two lobes which are placed at a certain angle. Such a
method is employed for direction finding of powerful sources of radiation in all
the radio wave bands. This provides high accuracy of direction finding, however the

operating range of the direction finder is less than with the maximum method.

285

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l‘QE ONLY

The rquiulgnul method provides accurate determining of direction to the radiating
sunrru by the equal amplitude of signals received by the antennas forming an equi-
signai direction. For this two antennas are used which form two overlapping beams
with the directions of their maximums spread at a certain angle apart. The method
possesses high direction finding accuracy with comparatively long operating ranges
of the receiver.

with the phase method, determining the direction to a radiating source is achieved
from the equality of the signal phases on the receiver output. n: realizing the
method two antennas are employed located on a certain base and forming two beams
with the directions of their maximums parallel to the equisignal direction. The
method provides high accuracy of direction finding.

The scan methods in direction finding can be circular and sector.

With circular scanning, the receiver antenna directional pattern turns in a circle
at a rate:
(r,
/ _—__

“a‘-”L~I-0 (8.2)

where 0;--width of directional pattern in receiver antenna;
Fr--pulse repetition rate of intersected REE:
n; nin--minimum number of pulses needed to analyze the signals transmitted by the
REE.

With the operating of the intercepted REE under continuous sending conditions:

“i (8.3)

'n ‘

where tn-the necessary time for observing the signal whereby its amount on the re-
ceiver output reaches a set amount:

 

uin'“ou 1
tn) ln[ “1“ IMP" . (8.6)
where uin, uou--amounta of input and output voltages;
APre-—width of receiver pass band.
The probability of detecting a signal in n turns of the antenna is:
Pn - l-e‘“Pl, (8.5)

where p1--thc probability of signal detection with one turn of the antenna.

Hith sector scanning. the directional pattern of the receiver antenna moves at a
fixed speed in a certain sector. Here its angular velocity should not exceed an
amount determined from the expressions (8.2), (8.3).

286

F0!¢0FF“JAI.USE(NVLY
in intercept stations having antennas with a circular directional pattern, nonscan
reconnaissance methods are employed. These provide the receiving of signals from
any direction and instantaneously determine the hearing.

The range of ELINT in the US" band (not considering the attenuation of radio wave
energy in the atmosphere) is:

 

777w
“Hg-la

 

I’int ' T"; l/

1.. (8.6)

where Pd. X--radiating power and wave length of intercepted REE;
Pre IIImusensitivity of receiver of intercept station;
cc, Gp--coefficients for directional action of antenna in receiving and trans-

mitting signals at angles 9c» 0P relative to the maximum;
yP--coefficient considering the wave polarization misalignment of the
signal and the receiving antenna;
n--coefficient for the excess of the signal over noise.

The maximum possible intercept range in receiving the transmitted signals of the REE
(Fig. 8.2) does not exceed the line-of-sight range Dls‘

om ‘ 01, - 4.12(/ﬁ+ IE). (8.7)

where Hr, Ha--height of REE antenna and receiver, m;
Dint--intercept range, km.

The signals intercept sets and installations. as has been pointed out in foreign
sources, provide interception of the characteristics of the means of communications,

radar equipment and other devices transmitting radio signals.

The radio electronic neutralization or jam-
ming equipment is equipment which creates
interference for the BBB, false targets and
decoys, and equipment which alters the elec-
trical properties for the medium of radio
wave propagation.

 

The equipment for creating jamming for the
REE (Fig. 8.3) creates radio signals which,
Fig. 6.2. On determining radio in passing through the receiver of the REE,
intercept range reduce the effectiveness of its reception.
This includes equipment for creating active

and passive jamming.
Antiwr,ﬁvmming is created by special jamming transmitters tuned to the operating
frequencies of the REE to be neutralized and sending electromagnetic energy. A

distinction is made between two types of active jamming: screening (neutralizing)
and simulating (disinforning).

287

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600060053-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hﬂuu-udo HGQQH MO gﬂUQO#UHODUHO Oﬁbdonom < oM.Q .Nﬂm

     
   
 

nomad»
manuauocow
yum:
couch

 

 

wcucoouoo
vouwuucu

‘ucuaauavu onuuuov vouuuuuu m

           
     

cucuouuuou
cocoa

a £92

uncuoonuou
3..an

     

  
     

owcuunoo
uuvnuaua<

_ unannouom _

_ acuanaavo unwalan o>uauum

ououuuu
madam

     

_ mcuuaﬁaaum

     

 

— wcuuuo>ua _
.IIIIIIIVLVLIIIII

_ 9.3.3.3.. _

 

_ wcunnuxm

a
73

_ Aucwuuoa

wcacoouom”

 

unuaauauo wcaaian o>auq< ;

288

FORINHWCLALlEE1MVLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP02-00860R000600060063-2
m. [he surucus of the KI-iI-l to he neutralized, screening jamming creates a background
on which it is difficult to distinguish the target blips (Fig. 8.4a, b). For cre-
ating this jaming transmitters are used which generate signals which are voltage

modulated according to a random law (noise). A distinction is made between barrage
and spot frequency jamming.

Barrage jaming is the name given to jaming the spectra: width of which is compar-
able with the tuning range of one or several REE operating on one or several fre-
quencies. For creating barrage jsming, a precise knowledge of the REE operating

frequency is not required. This jaming is employed for neutralizing REE the paran-
eters of which are not sufficiently known.

Sput jaming has a spectrum width close to the passband width of the receiver of the
REE being neutralized. This sakes it possible to concentrate the ja-ing power in a
narrow range of frequencies and increase the effectiveness of its action. Its cre-
ation requires a knowledge of the operating frequency and passbsnd width of the REE.

 

Fig. 8.4. Appearance of radar indicator screens:

a--ln the absence of jaming; b--with active screening jsming; c-with

return-pulse Jamming (1--signa1 from real target); d—with passive jaming
(in-blip of jamming source; 2--b1ips from aircraft covered by jsmfng)

The signals from screening jming can illuminate certain areas of the REF: screens
in the direction of the main and side lobes of the antenna directional pattern and
worsen the ['3an ratio impeding the isolation of useful infatuation.

289

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

The transmitters of the active screening jamming can send continuous high-frequency
oscillations which are modulated by the noise voltage or direct-noise jamming. Such
jamming is called active noise jamming (ANJ). It possesses a broad spectrum. The
energy capability of the transmitter is determined by the power density, watts/mega-
herbs:

- P161
DJ At“ 3 (8.8)

where Pj, GJ--power and gain of jamming transmitter antenna;
Afj--width of jamming spectrum.

Skipping jamming (quasibarrage) is screening jamming which has a comparatively nar-
row spectrum with a rapid change in the carrier frequency. It is created by a jam-
ming transmitter with a tunable sending frequency. In having a high-powered density.
skipping jamming in its effect is close to spot ja-ing.

Simulating (disinforming) Lnterference is radio signals sent by a jamming transmit-
ter in response to the transmitted signals of a radar.

The simulated signal is created with the operating frequency of the radar and has
parameters close to the parameters of the radar signals returned from the targets.
The jamming signals received by the radar create false target blips on the indicator
screens complicating the radar picture. For each pulse of the radar the jamming
transmitter can send several jamming pulses simulating several targets (Fig. 8.4c).
Such jamming is called repeater. The jamming transmitters can send jamming pulses
the recurrence frequency of which does not equal the frequency F; of the radar
pulses. Such jamming is called pulse unsynchronized. 0n the radar screens this
creates moving signals which impede the determining of the true target positions.

For creating screening jamming transmitters are employed which have elements shown
in Fig. 8.5. The intercept receiver picks up the signals of the radar to be neu-
tralized. it determines and remembers the radar's operating frequency and sends a
control voltage to the frequency tuning unit of the microwave generator and for this

the foreign jammers employ magnetrons, barratrons, traveling wave tubes and backward
wave tubes.

Al A2

 
 
 
  
   
 

 
  
   

Frequency
Tuning
Unit

 
   
  

Microwave
Generator

 
        
  
  

Intercept
Receiver

   

Noise
Generator

  
 
 

Modulator

Fig. 8.5. Structural diagram of a jamming transmitter

290

FOR OfiﬂC1A1.lEﬂ!(NﬂLY
The microwave generator produces high frequency oscillations that have a frequency
equal to the operating frequency of the radar to he neutralized. The input of the
high frequency generator receives a modulating voltage produced in the modulator.
A noise generator can be employed as the driving source of the modulating voltage.
After amplification these oscillations are transmitted by the antenna A2 in the
direction of the radar to be neutralized.

A1 A2

  
 
  
  
 

 
  
 
  

  
      
  
  
    

   
   

Intercept M ry Microwave
Circuit
Receiver f Generator
c

  

Pulse
Series
Generator

Fig. 8.6. Structural diagram of a transmitter of
return pulse [repeater] jamming

Return pulse [repeater] jamming can be created in a transmitter which contains a re-
ceiving A] and transmitting A2 antenna. a frequency storage circuit fc of the REE,

a generator of a series of modulating pulses and an amplifier (Fig. 8.6). The sig-
nals from the REE picked up by the antenna A1 go to the frequency storage circuit
and to the circuit of the modulating pulse generator which generates a certain num-
ber of pulses with preset parameters. These pulses go to the input of the high fre-
quency generator which is frequency controlled. As a result the antenna A2 sends

out return pulse jamming signals.

Fhasivc jamning is hindering signals created by the reflection of radio waves by
solid bodies. As such bodies it is possible to use dipole reflectors, angle re-
flectors and so forth. The radar signals returned from a cloud of dipole inter-
ference creates a background on the indicators screening the target blips. The sig-
nals returned from angle reflectors can simulate target blips. For this reason
passive jamming is divided into screening and simulating (see Fig. 8.3).

Screening joining can be created by half-wave dipile reflectors which are metal-
covercd filaments of nylon, fiberglas, metal-coated paper and so forth. A cloud of
dipole reflectors has an effective scattering surface of:

co - Nod. (8.9)
where N--number of dipoles in cloud;

od=-0.17A2--amount of effective scattering surface of one half-wave dipole
(A--radar wave length).

291

FOR‘OF‘1CJAL.USEI0NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For creating a returned signal close in power to the target signal, it is essential
to have s number of dipoles

N . _ , (3.10)

where Sef--target radar cross-section.

The rate of dropping the dipole clusters from the aircraft tc whereby the interfer-
ence screens the target blip on the screen of the pulsed radar is:

C‘i 0c
‘c ' 2 vcxnsef'

(8.11)
where r1--radar pulse length;
ac--effec:ive scattering surface of the dipole cluster;
Se{--ts:get radar cross-section;
Vc--speed of aircraft flying under jamming cover;
Kn--neutralization factor.

Antiradar coatings are a means of csmouflaging the targets. These are divided into
absorbing and interference. Absorbing materials can be applied to the surface being
camouflaged in the form of multilayer coatings and this significantly reduces the
reflection of radio waves and creates a great absorption of their energy. Interfer-
ence coatings attenuate the energy of the reflected wave by several-score-fold. sig-
nificantly reducing the target radar cross-section.

For simulating targets it is possible to employ angle reflectors dropped from the
jamming aircraft on parachutes. These can be reflectors with triangular. rectangu-

lar or sector sides. Their maximum reflecting surface is determined from the ex-
pressions:

_ 4 n.
hek'x’ T'T“; '
u'

8‘”,- I2x‘fr; } (8.12)

a‘
SC'h "2'.i:' |

where a--length of reflector rib;
A--wave length.

With comparatively small sizes of the sides (tens of cm). an angular reflector with
A - 3 cm can create a more intensive blip on the'radar screen than a bomber.

Another means for creating false blips on radar screens is the Luneberg lens. The
radar cross-section of such a lens is:

C.
San. - 6:3 :55 . (8.13)

where R--lens radius.

292

FOR 0FF1C1AL USIZCN‘LY
There is a number of lens modifications which provide intensive reflection of the
radio waves and create intensive blips on the indicator screens. A Hide-band
reflecting antenna array can be used as one of the means possessing the property
of strong reflection.

Abroad the possibility is being examined of employing flying bombs as false targets.
Such flying bombs can be launched from carrier aircraft. In possessing a signifi-
cant radar cross-section. the decoy bombs can create blips on the radar screens

that complicate the radar picture. It has been pointed out that a 8-1 bomber can
carry 25-30 false targets.

The decoy flying bombs can also be used as a "lure" for antiaircraft and air-
launched missiles. Some of them can carry a nuclear charge.

Ebuipment fbr countering infrared devices (cnboerd passive missile seekers) can be
divided into false heat-generating targets and screening devices.

False heat-generating targets (infrared decoys) are pytotechnic devices which cre-
ate intense thermal radiation in the infrared wave band.

Jannirg for ground radars can be carried out both by specially assigned jammer air-
craft as well as by all the groups in a combat group. Here the jammer aircraft can
remain in the air patrol zone creating jamming in a certain direction.

With the second method the jamming can be created by individual jamming aircraft
which are part of the assault group or by all the group's aircraft equipped with the
corresponding devices.

Equipment for the fire neutnalisation of R58 includes the antiradar homing rockets
(for example, the 0.8. Shrike). Such rockets have a passive radar homing system
which guides the rocket from signals transmitted by the radar. As a result of the
detonating of the warhead, the rocket can knock out elements of the station.

Nadia electronic defense is an aggregate of organizational and technical measures
which ensure the continuous operation of the REE under the conditions of the crea-

tion of radio jamming by the enemy. This includes passive and active measures to
combat signals intelligence and radio electronic neutralization.

Among the equipment for radio electronic defense are the jamming signal compensation
devices, the devices for frequency, structural and spatial selection of target sig-
nals and devices for time and frequency control of the REE.

For countering enemy intelligence equipment it is possible to employ various angular
reflectors and sources which emit misinforming signals or absorb the electromagnetic
energy of the medium.

8.2. Ensuring Electromagnetic Compatibility of Radio Electronic Equipment

The development of modern radio electronics has been accompanied by two contradic-

tory factors. 0n the one hand. the continuous increase in the amount of radio elec-
tronic equipment (REE) and on the other the limited opportunities for utilizing the

293

FOR‘OFF1C1AI.US£GDNLY
FOR (WFK'IAI. USE ONLY

radio-frequency bands which has led to the rise of the Ptobll-JI of electromagnetic
cmpatibllity (an) in operating various REE.

Electromagnetic cospatibility is the aggregate of properties of the REE and their
operating conditions whereby no interference arises disrupting the operation of
other REE and at the same title ensures normal operation with a limited noise level
fro. various radiating sources (Table 8.1).

table 8. 1
—- ______—_————-———
c I'p-ulus Issuer-us
¥ 'wl- "NW ______...——-
. ‘ noes
swan-I: ‘mb d 00min:- 9 n.”

 

 

        
    
  
  
 
  
 

I Kpanlmc ulune 3—30 l'u(f Immo—
sanum (KW-l) IOM ll
'1 (Zn-pxmmuc u- 30—3!” l‘u moon-
cwm (GIN) low xu

ti llnqupamlnxuc u- (In-INN l'u soon—loo“

(1mm (MIN)

4 (Mom. unz-«uc sa- Jc—IW If“; lm—l" H

(mm (Ull'l)

5 llmxnc escrow IO—l xv
(IN)

1'. Cllcmmc tut-tom woo—1m .-
(0|)

1 Iiucomc ucwm lN—IO .0
(IN)

H chm. IIMCOIIK‘ IO—I II

we rum (nlc‘l)

'J Vamps-mos»;- Ilw—Jﬂl’ Mi] lilo-I0 cu
unmu (Yli‘l)

N) IZm-pmucusuc qa- IO—l cu
(mm ((Zli'l)

il Kpnnuc uucoew: (”4” [Tu w—I nu

sac mm (KWI)

l'.’ l'umlmumuw «so :m-woo I'll 1—0.! as
Cloud (l'li'l)

Key: B“Mnd number; b--Nal|e of band; c--Limits of band; d-oFor frequency;
e--For wave length; fuller-ts; g--Kilohertz; huﬂegahertz; i--Gigahert:;
luburenely low frequencies (ELF); 2--Super-low frequencies (SLP);
J--lnfra-lov frequencies (ILP); lo--Very low frequencies (VLF); 5"!“
frequencies (LP); 7--High frequencies (HF); 8—Very high frequencies
(VHF); 9--Ultra-high f requenciea (UHF); lO—-Super-high frequencies

(SKY); ll--Extresely high frequencies (EIIP); 12--Hyperhigh frequencies
(HE?)

2910

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 8. 2

‘ —-

 

 

 

 

 

' I c fol-nae Milanese-s
M Gall-O-
H"... Hausa-muse con-sums -
a I b d vucms l 0 louse. scans
I IMMIKNCMIR sysu “swam nos- 4-30 ‘l’l‘n (f ION-IO“ s
nuances
2 linopupuuws syn Nansen) 30.400 Tl‘u ION-0.16.10“ s
nouuumous
3 Suzanne ayes «ll-750 Tn; (0.76—0.0-10“ u
4 Yssrpsouoaetosue ayes dsumue- 150-3000 TI‘u 0.4-I0-‘—l0-‘ u
to mummwu
5 Vusrpsouonetosue .1qu namero 3000—30000 Tl‘u I0-'—I0-‘ :-
nouuannoua

Key: a--Sub-band number; b--Sub-band nuns; cuSub-band linits; d--Por
frequency; e--For wave length; f--Tershe'tz; l-Infrared rays of
the far sub-band; 2--Infrared rays of the near sub-band; 3--Visible
rays; lo--U1traviolet rays of the near sub-band; 5--Ultraviolet rays
of the far sub-band

A classification of radio frequencies. The spectra of electronagnetic oscillations
encompasses frequencies fron approximately 10"3 to 1023 hertz. The portion of elec-
tromagnetic oscillations having a frequency below 3-1012 hertz is occupied by the
radio frequencies which are in turn divided into 12 bands.

A radio frequency band is an area of radio frequencies including the an oscilla-
tions lying within certain limits.

Each of the bands is within the limits from 0.3°lOll to 3°10u hertz (where n- l, 2,
3.....12--the band number. By a frequency band one can also understand frequency

areas witl large frequency limits if this is caused by organizational or technical
considerations. The radio frequency bands used in practice are shown in Table 8.1.

The optical band. Hith the shortening of the waves the quantum nature of electro-
nagnetic oscillations becones evernore essential and their wave properties are
ever-less apparent.

For this reason the electromagnetic oscillations of the optical band are called
rays and they are divided into the sub-bands given in Table 8.2. In accord with
the International System of Units there are the following ratios:

295

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. For frequencies:

1 kHz (kilohertz) - 103 hertz;
1 MHz (megahertz) - 10: hertz;
1 GHz (gigahertz) - 109 hertz;
l Thz (terahertz) . lol2 hertz.

2. For wave lengths:

um (micrometer) - 10; 6 .m;
lxm (nanometer) - 10"9 m;
l (angstros) - 10"0
1 pm (picsmeter) - 10"12 m.

The basic ratios for EM oscillations. Electromagnetic oscillations are character-
ized by the following amounts; wave length A, m; oscillation frequency f, hertz;
oscillation period T, c; phase 9; circular frequency w. hertz; rate of propagation
c. m/second.

Between these values there are the following dependences:
X - ct; f - l/T; u - 21f; O - ut(c - 3.108 m/sec.).

Parameters which characterize ENC. These include: operating frequency f0; radiat-
ing power Prad; band width of basic transmitter sending Aftr; modulating oscilla—
tions (depth of amplitude modulation. amount of frequency deviation, duration and
relative duration of pulses and so forth); receiver sensitivity P“ n (in the
operating frequency and nonbasic frequencies); receiver selectivity requency, am-
plitude and time) for the basic and adjacent channels; the minimum value of the
signal/noise ratio q.1n which ensures normal operation of the RBI; frequency stabil-
ity of the radiolink (transmitter and receiver); antenna directional pattern and
gain (considering the side lobes); screening factors for the RB! devices.

The necessary frequency band is the minimum band width for the given class of radia-
tion sufficient for transmitting information at the required rate and quality.

The basic radiations are the radiations of the transmitters on frequencies (fre-
quency) within the limits of the band required for transmitting the given type of
signals (messages).

Nonbasic radiations are radiations in the frequencies (frequency) located beyond
the necessary radiation hand. These are divided into stem and extra-band.

Stem radiation is a broad class of nonbaeic radiations the frequency and levels of
which are determined by randonrnature high frequency processes not related to the
modulation process.

Extra-band radiations are a class of nonbesic radiations on the frequencies adjacent

to the necessary band and arising in the rrocess of modulating the transmitted sig-
nal (message).

296

FOR 0W1HC1A1.USII(NVLY
Harmonic radiations are stcn radiations on frequencies which are multiples of the
basic radiation frequencies.

The amplitude of the harmonic n is calculated through the pulse aaplitude A by the
following ratio:

An'A‘h-

where an--coefficient for the expansion of the periodic function (signal) into a
Fourier series.

For a periodic sequence of rectangular pulses with a period t and a duration 1.
the values of the coefficients are detersined by:

325

""( r ) (8.11.)
$ ‘

Coabination radiations are stem radiations arising in tne foraation of oscillations

or the basic radiation by nonlinear conversions of auxiliary oscillations.

(no-24%

 

Thus. in mixing two oscillations with frequencies f1 and f2 there is a conbination

of totals and differences for the haraonics of these frequencies which can fall
into the receiver pass band:

Iin,linlol-lsi%er

where n and n - l. 2. 3....--integers;
f°--csrrier frequency;
fp-receiver pass band.

Spurious radiations are stcn radiations the reason for which is not related to the
fornation of the basic oscillation (radiations from auxiliary units of the trans-
nitter with the occurrence of self-excitation conditions).

Noise radiations are extraband radiations created by the spurious aodulation of the
voltage of noise arising in the transnitter ale-ants.

Industrial noise is noise caused by the high-frequency radiations of industrial,
scientific and medical equip-ent as well as the noise created by loving transport.
power transmission lines as well as household appliances.

According to the health rules. the naxisua pernissible electric intensity levels
from industrial high frequency units are 20 V {7voltsl per meter (in a frequency
hand of 105-3-107 hertz); 5 8/. (in a frequency band of 3.107-3.109).

The magnetic field intensity should not be more than S angstran per meter (in a
frequency band of 105-3-106 hertz).

The basic receiving channel is a radiofrequency band providing the reception of the
basic radiation and matched with the receiver pass band.

297

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

The secondary receiving channel is a radio frequency band beyond the limits of the
basic receiving channel in which the attenuation o‘ jamming is less than the set for
the given device.

1hc mirror receiving channel is a secondary receiving channel the average frequency
of which is distant from the tuning frequency of the receiver by an interval equal

to the doubled intermediate frequency and the heterodyne frequency is in the middle
of this interval.

Measures ensuring electromagnetic compatibility of the REE. tor solving the prob-
lem of the ENC of various types of radio electronic equipment, technical (design)
and organizational measures are employed. These include: elimination or maximum
attenuation of the nonbaaic radiations, the design isolating of the transmitters and
receivers, the employing of different polarization radiations, optimum signal fil-
tration. spatial and frequency separation of the REE as well as matching the opera-
tion of the REE in time and so forth.

Spatial separation of REE is the locating of REE at a distance apart ensuring normal
operation due to the attenuating of the EM energy over distance. Here two varia-
tions are possible: the first-~spetial separation of the REE having the same car-
rier frequencies; the second-spatial separation of the REE having different carrier
frequencies.

For REE having the same carrier frequencies, the excluding of interference is
achieved by spatial separation the amount of which is in meters:

12:67:20,} 3" (a 15)
L > l/(“rl'ﬂdl '4 R“, ’

where Ptr.--power of transmitter blocking the REE. watts;
ctrn--gain (for basic or side lobes) of transmitting antenna in
the blocking REE;
Grep--gain (for basic or side lobes) in receiving antenna of
operating REE;
Pre "1“ p. qp, Krep--respectively, sensitivity. detection factor and attenua-
tion factor in receiver of operating REE;
A--wave length of blocking and operating REE.

Consequently, the level of the blocking signal Pb, considering the spatial separa-
tion is:

l'er u‘ior uarc p"
—-(-.-...,-.x,.,I.-—- (8.16)

\.

 

Pbs

The ratios (8.15) and (8.16) make sense within the limits of the line-of-sight range
determined by formula (3.65).

If P532 Pre .19 qp, then the signal of the adjacent REE will have a blocking effect
and additional measures will be required to attenuate it.

298

I-OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For the REE having different frequencies, additionally in formula (8.15) one must
introduce a frequency separation coefficient K; the value of which with the com-
plete frequency isolation moves toward infinity and with a coinciding of the fre-
quencies equals 1. that is. 1(‘f".

Here the spatial separation should satisfy the following inequality:

 

 

. "mac. «in»; s 17
L . V (4a)’l'~sun¢vxnevx§’ ( . )

where XPv-wave length of operating R88;
Kf--frequency separation coefficient.

The frequency separation of R85. in addition to enploying different frequencies.
presupposes the presence of frcquency isolating devices. optimun filters as well as
the use of different polarizations. The amount of the frequency isolation is char-
acterized by the frequency separation coefficient If. With Rf * -, frequency-
separated REE can be located directly next to one another [formula (8.17)].

The Kf coefficient is deternined experimentally.

Interference of REE as a consequence of tropospheric scattering. For determining
the possibility of a blocking influence from a source of interference coming to the
receiver input of an operating REE as a result of tropospheric scattering. in for-
mula (8.17) one should substitute the value of the attenuation multiplier Kts as
caused by this scattering.

The values of this coefficient for frequencies from 100 to 6,000 megahertz and dis-
tances from 100 to 700 km are given in a graph (Fig. 8.7).

. _ The distance “in of interference of the
L l,.‘$,% all due to tropospheric scattering will
a-vonom be determined as:

440000“
I / Pg, “0" 41,”):
Din - 3')‘l’~usnp¢KMo' (8'18)

In turn. this distance will be determined
by the values of the height H of tropos-
pheric inhomogeneities fron which derives
the reflection of the EM oscillations and
the elevation for the directional pat-
tern of the blocking REE.

     
   

' “I!

'"O _.__—-._._._—-———-—_-. ..‘- .
'm 700 JM 400 am 600 m 600 1.,“

Fig. 8.7. Graph showing changes in
tropospheric scattering coefficient

The area covered due to tropospheric scat-
tering by the blocking REE (radar) in the location of the operating R22 is:

an, .
s= ....I'. ‘° 1‘”

 

299

FOIiﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

where cc and 08--the width of the directional pattern of the blocking REF. in the
planes of c and B respectively.

Matching the operation of the REE for time. In those instances when it is iapos-
sible to exclude the blocking effect of interference between the BBB due to spatial-
frequency drift, it is essential to natch their operation in tine.

This is achieved by: introducing a tine schedule for the operation of the different
REE excluding the silultaneous operation of the R22 in opposite directions, by in-
troducing a ban on the operation of individual I!!! for certain periods of tine, by
providing reciprocal synchronizing of the BBB cowrising a single grouping and so
forth.

Problems of W. A practical solution to mac is related to solving a whole series
of problematic questions: the elaborating of the M: criteria, noming the REE
parameters, developing instrulents with a reduced level of ates: and extraband radi-
ations, by seeking our technical ways to reduce interference, by working out spe-
cial aetering aethods, by creating a unified BIC theory and so forth.

Providing M of radio electronic equipment is achieved by coordinating various
neasures relating to the target, the tasks, the place and the tine.

END
COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981
10272
CSO: Slim/0651

300

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY