l-‘Ol OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10707

3 August 1982

Translation

SEMICONDUCTOR PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT
By

P.N. Maslennlkov et al.

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHOAL USE ONLY
MTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAOS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SEMICONDUCTOR PRODUCTION EOUIPPENT

Moscow 030W!!! POLUPMVOMIKOVOGO PROISVODSM in Russian 1981
(signed to press 14 Jun 81) pp 2-336

[Book by Pavel Nikolayevich Maslennikov, Konstantin Andreyevich
Lavrent'yev, Aleksandr Davydovich Gingis. v.1. Kononov, I.V.
Kirichenko, V.A. Nazarov, v.v. Rudnev. v.v. Stepanov. 6.1. Khalin and
v.s. Scherbakov, Izdatel'stvo “Radio I Svyaz", 5,000 copies, 336 pages
UDC 621.382.2/.3.002]

momnnsessassasssseseesessssseossesaseessseoseessoeeaaesseaesassees 1
bmordaaasssassee-secesseoesoasoasseoassassssssosasessaaosoesoasasoeo 1

Intmd‘lcdonsseoasssseeseosesssosssaossseesseeoosssseoososssseosoesoeas 3

1-1. m mnlop-nt of Saliconductor hvice Production............... 3

1-2. Sadconduccor Production. Its (Ia-plenty. General

lequiu-nts Placed on the Perﬁor-nce Level of Equip-est
”d Pmducdm O...OOCOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOO0.0000000000IOIOOOOOO 3

1-3. Sedconducmr mucee. Structural (innocents of Sons Mes
of sedmnductor mu“.0000000000000000OOOOOCOOOOIOOOOOQOOOOO0.0 5

1-6. Standard Production Process Sdaens and the 530: Steps in
the Production of Certain Ines of Sesiconductot Devices......... 1.].

Part I. Equip-n: for Fabricating Haters and Producing Soni-
mam”: stmmmOOOIO0...‘OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI.0. 18

Chapter 1. Bquipnnt for lbchmical Pmcassing of Haters.............. 18
1-1. Bquipnnt for Crystallognphic Orientation of "sternum“... 22

1'20 “up“: for “tun“ “umndqur had“................ 26

-a- II-USSR-G-POUO]
MWLIJSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1-3. Bquipmnt for Grinding and Polishing Semiconductor

mten‘hoooeeo'oeeeoeooeooooteoooaoeoeeeooooooeooeoeaoaaeoaeo

Olapter 2. Equip-ant for (he-ital Processing of wafers and
mutton“: meir QwityOOOOOOOOOO00.0.0000...IOOOOOOOIOOO

.
2-1. Equip-en: for Etching Ingota and Hafers......................
2-2. Bquipunt for Cleaning and Drying Valera....................
2-3. Equip-ant for Controlling the Quality of Hafen..............
Chapter 3. Equipmt for Creating p-n Juncuonanunu...............
3-1. (bneral Intonation on the Planar Pmoeao....................
3-2. Difimion Bquipnent..........................................
3-3. Bquipmnt for Ion-Ilplanted Doping Prooeaaea.................
3-4. Bquipnnt for Producing Epitaxial Piln......................
3-5. Bquipnnt for the Production of Alloy Jmctiona..............
Chapter 6. Bquipunt for Film Production..............................
4-1. Vacuum Pil- Deposition Equipment.............................
10-2. Pill. Precipitation Pro. a Ca Phase..........................
(hapter 5. Equipmnt for Photolithography Proceeaea...................
5-1. Bquipmnt for Preparing the Surface of Hafers................
5-2. Equipunt for Producing a Photoaenaitive Layer...............
5-3. Equiplent for Producing klief in a Photoaenaitive Layer.....
5-10. Pattern Matching and Exposure Bquipnnt......................
5-5. Equipmnt for Producing ‘lbpological Relief on a Subutrate....
5-6. Equipunt for Fabricating Photographic hulatea.............

Part II: Bquipmt for the Assetly and Quality Control 0 f
Finished ﬂutes. Finishing Operations.............. ...... ..

Chapter 6. Bquipnnt for Separating Hafera Into 0|ipa.................

6-1. Bquipnnt for Separating Wafers by bane of Scribing. . . . . . . . .

”WWW?

32

38
39
Mo

88

61
72
81

85
100
10 7
112
11!.
118
119
129

136

1‘1
161

1102
6-2 .

Chapter 7.

7-10

7-2 o
7-3 .

7-6.

7-5 .
7-6 .

7-70

(hepter 8.

8-1.
8-2.
8-3.

8-6.
8-5.

(heptet 9.

9-1.
9-2.
9-3.
9-4.

Other Kinds of Bquipnnt for Sepeteting Haters Into

mtwoeeeooeeeeooeeoeeeeooeoooeeeoooeooo.moeeooeeeeeoeeoooeooo

Bquipunt for meubling Semiconductor lbvicee..............

Dhthode of Aseeiling the lbjor Moe of mvicee.
quuireunte Placed on the EquipI-nt..........................

Bouipnnt for Mounting the Clips of Planar mum............
Equipment for the Attaching of leads to Plant Devices........

Equip-at and Cowlemee for lbmting Semiconductor
Devices and Integrated Circuits on e Strip Conveyorunuu...

Bquipmt for the beeﬁly of I’oint Contact mm............
Bquipnnt for the Automated meﬁly of Alloy Diodes..........
Equipment for the buddy of Power nmietors............'...

Equipment for Hemtically Sealing Semiconductor

Devices.....................................................
Bquipnnt for cold Welding....................................
Equipment for Electrical Contact beietance Helding...........
Equipment for Hermetic Encapsulation With Plantice............
Equipmt for Hemtic Sealing by ken: of Soldering..........

Bquipmnt for (hecking the Hermetic Seal of Semiconductor

“ﬂan...o...o.uc...o..o.oo..uoo.-o.o........c..a..u.....

Equipment for noting the Electrical Parameters of
Semiconductor Devices.......................................

“an"-nt mulpnntuu.........-..................-...no..
cmsiftc‘tion Equp‘nteeoooeeoeeeeooeooooeooooooeeeooooeeeec
Automated System Using Cowutere for Permter 'Deeting.......

Contacting Aneeﬁliee for (heaing the Parameters of Semi-
mnducmr uuc”000000COOIOCOICOOOOO0.00UOOOOOOOOOOOOOICOOOI.

-c-

POI OFFICIAL USE (”LY

167

1149

169
152
158

166
171
173
175

181
‘ 81
186
187

189

189

19 3

193
20(‘

206

211
Chapter 10.
10-1.
10-2.
10-3.

Chapter 11.
11-1.
11-2.
11-3.

Part III.

(hapter 12.

12-1.

12-2 .

12-30

124.

Chapter 13.

13-1.

13-2.
13-3.
13-6.
13-5.
13-6.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mt Bqu‘plntOOOOIOIOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOC.0.00.00.00.00...
Equip”: for wd‘mlul mu..00....OOOOOOODOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOO
Equipmt for Climtic Teete..................................

Bquipnnt for Aging and hlidaility testing... ...............
Production Pr roeaa Equipment for the Pinal (parationn. . . . . . .
Equipunt for the Protective Coating of Finished Devices. . . . . .

Labeling Bquipmnt............................................
P.ck1n8 Mup'ntolooOO.909.000000000QQOCOOOOOO000.000.0.0000.

Lines and System for the then Production of Seni-
conductor Devices and Integrated Circuits"...................

me 'lheoretical Principles of the Couprehenaive
lbchanization and Annotation of Seliconductor

Pmductioneoaeeoeeanoonoaeo.ooooooooeooeaooooOoeeooooaaaeeoo

Problem of Oonpreheneive Automation and Specific Paeturea
of Seniconductor Production...................................

‘lhe System Approach 00 the Planning of Aunonted

Production..........u...”no.”noonnnuuunnuH”...

‘lhe Engineering Economic Analyeia of a Technological
and Production Proceee........................................

Some Hethode of Determining the Optimal Parameters of
Seniconductor Production Line: md Syatem....................

Equipment for Purifying lbdia and Providing the
Hicroclinate in the Major Operationa of a Production

Promos-00.000...-tooootoooceooooooaaoooooeooeoooooooeoeoooo

Pequiremnta Placed on Production Process lbdia. ‘lhe
min kmods of Putify1n8 bu‘OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00.0.0.0..0000

Equipmnt for Centralized Water Purification..................
Equipment for Finish Water Purification.......................
Equipment for Gee Purification and Drying.....................
Gas Purity Monitoring Inatrulnnta.............................

Clean Room. Dmtproof madaera and Bones...

-d-

POIOWICIALUEMY

218
218
226
236
241
261
2103

246

249

2109

249

253

257

263

272

272
278
2810
290
2910
297
mapter 16.

16-1.

14-2.

16-3.

Chapter l5.

15-10

15-2 .

15-30

15-“.

FOR OFFICIAL 152 am:

Producdon Process Control Syeeeum and Equipment in
the Production of Diacrete Semiconductor Devices and
In““.t.d mtmtaOOOIOOOOOO...0......OOOOOOOOOOOUOOOOO...

General Intonation on the Control of Production Processes
in Semiconductor Production..................................

(bquters and Intonation Gantrol (biplanes.
Pcnph.rml0.0.00....00.000.000.000000ICQCOOCQ00.00.000.000.

Automated Production Process Control Systems for
Several Production Stops.

Ooqareheneivaly mchanised Production Lines for
Certain Hess Produced lypes of Semiconductor Devices
ad Integrated Circuits....................................

Product Packing and Placement Bardward for the hjor
Steps in the Cowrehansively Hechanizsd Production of
Senioonductor Devices........................................

A Gompnhansively Pudunized Line for the Assembly of
Pulse Diodes.................................................

‘Ihe Coqrehenoivaly Pinch-nixed Asaenbly Line for D226

niod..eeooeeaaseeeossoooeoeeeosesoosessooosesoeessoeesssoseoe

Conrohensively hehanized Lines for the Major Step. in
due Productim of Planar Transistors and Integrated

c1rcuit8......o.............o...o..oa..................oo...o

31b11°8r.phyesoneoeoesooasossooeoooeoeeaooaaaeoaeooeeoooooeo-aosooooessa

FOR OFFICIAL USE MY

300

303

309

313

313

320

322

3210
331
[Text] The structural designs are described ind the major charac-
teristics are given in the book for the most widely used semicon-
ductor production equipment; the requirements placed on the equip-
ment are formulated, and practical recommendations are given for
the major types of equipment for the operational checking of its
good operating condition. The basic principles of comprehensive
mechanization and automation in modern semiconductor production
are set forth. The most characteristic production lines and pro-
duction systems are described.

The book is intended for engineers and scientific workers involved
in the production and application of semiconductor devices and
integrated circuits.

Foreword

The fast pace of growth in the production of discrete semiconductor devices and
integrated circuits poses one of the major problems in the sector: the contin-
uous refinement of production process and instrumentation equipment, comprehen-
sively mechanized and automated lines as well as systems as the major basis

for their mass production. Because of the qualitative changes which have taken
place in the production technology for devices in recent years, the demand for
literature devoted to semiconductor production equipment is felt especially
sharply.

The most characteristic domestic and foreign equipment used in the production
of semiconductor devices is described in this book. The greatest attention is
devoted to production process equipment for manufacturingmsssproducedtypesof
transistors and semiconductor integrated circuits. the development of which is
based on planar technology.

F0310IIKJA1.UBIINNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The three concluding chapters of the book are devoted to comprehensively mechan-
ized lines and systems for the mass production of semiconductor devices and
integrated circuits. Some of the general questions of conprehensive automation
and mechanization of semiconductor production are treated here. including
questions of the systemic approach to and optimization of the Iajor parameters
of comprehensively mechanized lines end systems when planning automated produc-
tion processes, as well as questions of automation of transport operations
between process cycles and control of the technological process and production
of semiconductor devices.

Working with the book presupposes the faniliarity of the reader with the funda-
mentals of semiconductor production technology. For this reason. questions of
technology are not treated in the book and are touched on only in individual
cases: in connection with the necessity of more completely explaining the
operational principles or the structural design features of the equip-ant

being described.

The book, in the opinion of the authors, will be useful both to equipment design-
ers, production process engineers and other workers in the seniconductor indus-
try involved with its operation, as well students in the higher educational
institutes and technical schools in the appropriate specialties.

The introduction and Chapter 12 were written by P.“. Haslennikov; Chapter 1 by
1.V. Kirichenko and P.N. Haslennikov; Chapter 2 by 1.V. Kirichenko and K.A.
Lavrent'yev; Chapters 3 and 6 by V.V. Rudnev; Chapter 5 by V.V. Stepsnov;
Chapter 6 by V.A. Nazarov; Chapter 7 by V.A. Nazarov and 6.1. Kholin; Chapter
11 by 6.1. Kholin; Chapters 8 and 13 by v.5. Shcherbakov; Chapter 9 by v.1.
Kononov; Chapter 10 by K.A. Lavrent'yev and v.1. Kononov; Chapter 14 by V.V.
Stepanov and A.D. Cingis; Chapter 15 by P.N. Haslennikov, V.A. Nazarov and
0.1. Kholin.

The authors would like to express their gratitude to the reviewer. candidate
of the technical sciences and lecturer 1.8. Rubtsov and the editor. candidate
of the engineering sciences, Professor 0.3. Zvorykin for the detailed analysis
and valuable comments on the nanuscript, as well as to all persons who rendered
assistance in the selection of the materials for the book.

The authors will gratefully accept all renarka and proposals by readers directed
towards the elimination of all possible deficiencies in the book, which they

ask be sent to the following address: 101000, Moscow. Chistoprudnyy Boulevard.
2. Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 Svyaz'".

- 2 -

POI OFFICIAI.1EHECNHLY
INTRODUCTION

1-1. The Development of Seniconductor Device Production

The development of electronics has taken on a special role in the age of the
scientific and technical revolution. The most important achieve-eats of science
and engineering are related to the use of electronic products. and primarily
to the use of seniconductor devices (PP) and integrated circuits (In) [10].

In being one of the youngest sectors of industry, the semiconductor industry
has developed at an exceptionally fast pace. The development and industrial
production of semiconductor devices necessitated the creation of a large number
of new technological processes and techniques. The methods developed at the
dawn of the development of solid-state electronics for producing p-n junctions
made it possible to set up the production of extremely simple point junction
and later also alloy junction gernanium devices. However. silicon technology
was the basis for the nodern semiconductor industry [1, 6]. The creation of
diffusion techniques for producing p-n junctions end epitaxial methods of
fabricating semiconductor files was of especial importance for the development
of silicon semiconductor device technology. The develop-ent of oxide masking
and photolithography. which comprise the basis of planar technology, made it
possible to create integrated circuits [5].

The further developnent of semiconductor production was related to the continuous
improvement of the techniques and equipnent for planar epitaxial technology.
directed towards substantially reducing the dimensions of components and
increasing the level of integration of the devices being fabricated. The
techniques of electron and x-ray lithography. ion—plasna and plaamochemical
processing make fundamental inprovements in silicon device technology. The
indicated techniques opened up the possibility of developing the so-called
subnicron technology, which in the immediate future should become the basis

for the production of devices with an increased level of integration.

[-2. Seniconductor Production. Its Complexity. General Requirements Placed
on the Performance Level of Equipment and Production

Modern semiconductor production is a conplex of complicated operations, from the
input quality control of the raw materials to the final assenbly of the finished
device, its tasting and packaging. When manufacturing semiconductor devices,

it is necessary to perform tens and hundreds of production process and test

and measurement operations. which require the use of special equipment. Thus.
to fabricate a relatively simple technological type of semiconductor device,

a silicon diffusion diode, it is necessary to use more than 80 pieces of

special production process equipment, not counting the general purpose and
typical hardware used in manufacturing operations. With the transition to the
fabrication of more complex semiconductor devices and Ic's. as well as the
comprehensive mechanization and automation of production. the quantity and
complexity of special equipsent are also rising [b].

The majority of the processes known to nodern engineering are used in the fabrics-
tion of aaniconductor devices: netsllurgical. chemical, electrophysical, thermal

- 3 -

FOR OITWCJAI.USIICH‘LY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY

and mechanical metal treatment, welding. soldering, precision assembly: vacuum,
electron, ion-beam, as well as diverse monitor, measurement and test equipment
is employed to apply various kinds of coatings; electrical and non-electrical
measurements, internal flaw detection techniques, etc.

The high requirements placed on the technology and equipment are determined by
the specific features of the semiconductor device as a product'. The most
important of them consists in the fact that the entire fabrication process for
the device is performed on a single chip and within its volume, in which layers
are produced having special physical properties, governed by the various con-
centrations of the doping impurities. A deviation from the specified production
process modes in one of the operations can lead to the final rejection of the
device as a whole. The fabrication complexity of a semiconductor device is also
due to the extraordinarily small dimensions of the components. For example,
when producing high frequency semiconductor devices, it is necessary to solder
and weld electrode leads 8 to 10 um in diameter to pads with dimensions of

20 x 70 um, without disturbing the layers in this case which are located under-
neath them, the thickness of which is 3 to 5 um.

It is specifically these features which primarily dictate the exceptionally
high requirements placed on the overall technical level of the production: the
purity of the raw materials, the stability and reproducibility of the production
process parameters, on the organisation of production, and as a result, on the
equipment with which the semiconductor devices are manufactured. For example.
germanium to satisfy the reguirementa of semiconductor production should con-
tain no more than 0.2 ‘ 10' 2 foreign impurities, while pure silicon should
be of a purity 1.000 times greater. The precision with which the temperature
is maintained in diffusion furnaces during the heat treatment process of the
original semiconductor material (at a level of 800 to 1,300° 0) should be no
less than 10.5' C over the entire length of the working zone, etc.

The same high requirements are also placed on the purity and stability of the
composition of the microclimate in which the devices are fabricated. For example.
the dust content in gases should be no more than 2 dust particles per liter;

the dust content of ordinary air amounts to about 20,000 dust particles per

liter with a size of 0.5 um or more. When fabricating devices, more than 10
kinds of energy vehicles are needed (nitrogen, argon, helium, dried air, hydrogen,

hot gas. etc.).

The exceptionally high complexity of semiconductor production technology and
the necessity of meeting the requirements cited above and many others are
responsible for the need to create fundamentally new methods and tools as well
develop and introduce a large number of types of special equipment. frequently
custom-made equipment having no counterparts in other sectors of industry.
Thus, the average precision in the fabrication of semiconductor equipment is
two to three classes higher than in general machine building, and in a number
of cases, exceeds the precision of the equipment used, for example, in watch

 

*See the following for more details on the specific features of semiconductor
production (Chapter 12, s lZ-l).

- 4 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
making. The microscopically small dimensions of semiconductor device components
have necessitated the use of special optical instruments and devices, which make
it possible to execute and observe micromotions with a precision of down to

0.5 to 1.0 pm end less. thraordinarily complex problems have been solved in
the design of equipment to carry out numerous chemical :ngineering processes
related to the use of especially corrosive chemical reagents such as hydro-
fluoric. nitric, sulfuric, hydrochloric acids, hydrogen peroxide, etc., as well
as the use of various gases and mixtures of them.

High requirements are placed on the level of automation, and reliability of
semiconductor equipment (primarily on the reproducibility of the production
process parameters) as well as the stability of its operation. These require-
ments are substantially increased because of the problems of comprehensive
mechanization and automation of the production of mass produced types of semi-
conductor devices and 10's.

1-3. Semiconductor Devices. Structural Components of Some Types of Semiconductor
Devices

Each kind of device. which differs from another in its structural design and

even more in its technology, requires the creation of a specialized set of
production process and monitor and measurement equipment to set up industrial
production. A schematic of the classification of semiconductor devices in terms
of structural design and technological criteria is given in Figure 1-1. Although
it is not exhaustive. the indicated schematic assists in showing the manifold
character and diverse nature of the complexes and groups of equipment used just
for the production of semiconductor diodes and transistors.

Semiconductor devices consist of a number of elements which are common to prac-
tically all types in terms of their function. The major component of a semi-
conductor device is the chip of either a rectangular or more rarely a circular
shape with the p-n junctions formed in it. For protection against external
exposure and to improve the heat sinking, the chip is housed in a hermetically
sealed package, the structural features of which are governed by the type

of device, or it is sealed in plastic. The devices have internal and external
leads for the electrical connections. The chip is either soldered (or glued)
directly to the socket base or to the crystal holder.

He shall briefly deal with the configuration and structural features of the
most widely used types of semiconductor devices.

Diodes. The most widespread groups of semiconductor diodes are point and sur-
face contact (slloy and diffusion) types. The group of point contact devices
includes high frequency and microwave diodes, as well as pulse and converter
diodes based on germanium and silicon. The group of surface contact diodes
includes low frequency rectifier and pulse diodes based on germanium and
silicon, silicon zener diodes, varicaps based on germanium and gallium arsenide
as well as tunnel diodes based on germanium. silicon and gallium arsenide.

- 5 -

F0! 0FF1C1A1.USEGDNLY
FOR UFFICIAI. USE ONLY

A
N
A
N
g
e-
W“!

can-e Alloy
<2)—

  
 

WI
' “03 Its
“M0 .2:-

’o

37

3
"ﬁsh's

~oaa s‘-9

Figure 1-1. The classification of semiconductor devices.

Key: 1. Alloy diffusion;
2. Hess diffusion;
3. Epi-planar;
a. Epitaxial;
5. Elionic [sic];
6. Epitaxial.

Point contact diodes have become widespread because of the technological simpli-
city of their fabrication and low cost. Typical structural designs for point
contact diodes are shown schematically in Figure 1-2. The diode consists of

the germanium or silicon chip 2, which is sealed to the crystal holder 1, the
contact electrode 3 in the form of a thin sharpened metal needle and capsule h.

The housing (capsule) for D2 and 0106 type diodes take the form of a glass tube
with Fernico inserts 5 sealed to it in the end faces. The semiconductor chip
is soldered to the massive nickel crystal holder, which is inserted in the
capsule and soldered to the Fernico insert using low temperature solder. At
the opposite end, a similar electrode is sealed in the capsule. which supports
the contact needle. The external leads 6 are usually circular, and sometimes
ribbon shaped; they are fabricated from nickel or platinite.

- 5 -

INDR¢OFIWCJAI.IJSI:(MNLY
Figure 1-2. Structural designs of point contact diodes.

Key: 3. Germanium type D2;
b. Silicon type DlOb;
c. Germanium type Db.

In the all-glass D9 devices. the chip is usually soldered using low temperature
solder directly to the end face of the platinic lead which is located inside
the capsule. Sometimes, a very fine Fernico washer is placed between the chip

and the end face of the lead to match the temperature coefficient of linear
expansion. The second electrode takes the form of a platinic lead which is
fused into the glass of the capsule.

 

Figure 1-3. Structural designs of alloy diodes.
a. The germanium D7 type;
b. The silicon 0202 - 0205 types.

Alloy semiconductor diodes are fabricated by melting alloys containing acceptor
or donor inpurities into the original seniconductor. Electron-hole junctions

are produced in the overwhelming majority of cases in germanium surface contact
diodes by nelting indiun into n-type germanium, while junctions in silicon alloy

- 7 -

FOI‘OFHKJAl.lEﬂE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

devices are fabricated by melting aluminum into n-type silicon or an alloy

of tin and phosphorus (or gold and antimony) into p-type silicon. Structural
designs of germanium and silicon allc; diodes are shown in Figure 1—3. The
germanium diode chip 7 with the fused in indium electrode 6 is soldered to the
stamped steel chip holder 8. To protect the p-n junction against external
exposure, the germanium chip is housed in a metal-glass capsule, consisting of
the Pernico housing 5, glass insulator a and the Pernico tube 2 for the internal
lead 3. The external leads 1 are connected to the chip holder and the Pernico
tube.

The structure of a silicon alloy diode has much in common with the germanium
diode. The chip 8 with the fused-in electrode 7 in the form of a small aluminum
column is soldered to the copper base 9. The junction is housed in a capsule
consisting of the Pernico housing 5, glass insulator 6 and Fernico tube 2. The
interior lead 3 is connected to the aluminum column. External lead 1 is brazed
to the Fernico tube. To improve the heat sinking, the diode is fastened to
metal chassis 10, to which the current is fed by means of a threaded contact.
The electron-pole junction is protected with varnish 6.

Transistors are one of the most widespread components in electronic systems.
The advantages of silicon planar transistors [6] exerted an especial influence
on the expansion of their wide scale applications in electronics. The first
semiconductor triode, which was proposed in 1968 by Bardeen, Brattain and
Shockley, was a point contact device. The point contact transistor is prac-
tically not used at all at the present time; the major type of transistor is
the surface device. Field-effect transistors have been finding wide scale
applications recently.

In terms of the maximum power dissipation, transistors are broken down into tho
groups of low (up to 0.3 watts). medium (from 0.3 to 3 watts) and high power
(more than 3 watts) transistors; in terms of the maximum working frequency,
they are broken down into low frequency (up to 3 MHz), medium frequency (from
3 to 30 MHz), high frequency (from 30 to 300 H32) and 5“? (more than 300 “32)
devices.

Surface contact transistors are broken down into alloy, diffusion, planar and
epitaxial types according to the methods of fabricating the p-n junctions.
Variants and combinations of these methods are also widely used (see Figure 1-1).
Transistors are also broken down according to the material used (germanium,
silicon).

without going into the structural design of alloy transistors, we shall move
directly on to epitaxial planar transistors; this book is primarily devoted to
the equipment for the production of this type of transistor.

The structural designs of the mass produced types of low power planar transistors
are shown in Figure I-A: transistors encapsulated in metal and glass as well

as in plastic.

F0! OFHCIAL USE ONLY
———‘—-1

x“

. :leIV/{gW/a'
" r ' . 1.

f. (‘1 1')

 
   

 
   
 

' - l. Sll‘fﬂllfll’

I‘. vi): I

       

(a)
I)
Figure 1-6. Structural designs of low Figure 1-5. Structural designs of
power planar transistors. high power planar tran-
a. In a natal-glass pack- sistors.
age; a. In a metal-glass
b. In a plastic package. package;

b. In a plastic package.

For transistors having a metal-glass package (Figure 1-4. a). the chip with the
p-n junctions l is soldered to the mounting base 5 and connected by the leads

2 to the cross-ties 3. The capsule S is either resistance or cold welded to
the mounting base b.

The structural design of transistors in a plastic package is the one most suited
to the requiresents of mass production (Figure 1-6, b). The chip 1 is connected
to the exterior flat leads of transistor 2 by wire leads 3. The advantage of
such a structure consists not only in the low coat of the hermetic sealing
plastic a, but in the reduction of the labor intensity of the assembly operations,
which are accomplished on a single traveling belt carrier, including the sealing
operation, sonething which makes it possible to automate the assenbly process.

High power planar transistors are shown in Figure 1-5. A considerable power is
liberated in the collector junction during the operation of such transistors,
because of which it is necessary to improve the heat sink so that the temperature
of the transistor components does not exceed the permissible level for the
naterial being used. For this reason, a considerable nassiveness of the package
elements. the sounting base 1 and the capsule 6. a greater cross-section of the
emitter. base and collector leads 3 as well as a special structural design for
the feed-through insulators 2 are characteristic of power transistors (Figure
1-5, a). The base of the package is made of copper or a copper insert is used.
The bottom surface of the package is usually not painted so as to reduce the
thernal resistance and inprove heat removal free the package to the chassis or
heat-sink.

Power transistors usually also have differences in the geometrical shape of the
p-n junctions as compared to low power devices so as to not excessively increase

- 9 -

IIIICHHHCIAI.USEIHVLY
roe OFFICIAL Us: ormr

 

Figure 1-6. Structural designs of integrated circuits.

a. In a flat metal-glass package;
b. In s circular metal-glass package;
c. In a plastic package;

Key: 1. Semiconductor chip;
2. Internal lead;
3. Package;
b. External lead;
5. Mounting base.

the emitter current density and at the same tins, not increase the base resis-
tance. Couples configurations of the junctions are used, making them in the

forn of strips or rings.

A power transistor in a plastic package (Figure 1-5. b) differs from a low power
type also in the special structural design of the collector lead and the complex

configuration of the junction.

The external appearance of sons sass produced types of integrated circuits is
shown in Figure 1-6. It is easy to see that the structural packaging of
integrated circuits in circular natal-glass and plastic packages is a natural
development from the sinilar structural design variants of transistor packages
described above. Thus, chip 1 in the to in Figure I-6b is mounted on base 3
and connected by leads 2 to its cross-ties 6. The hermetic sealing of the

- 10 -

FOI»0l1ﬂ(1Al.USB|DNlﬂ’
device. i.e.. the connection of the cap 5 to base 3 is acconplished by resistance
welding. The integrated circuit in the plastic package (Figure 1-6, c) is in
practice a structural design variant of the transistor shown in Figure I-bb,

but with a higher degree of coaplexity in accordance with the functional couples-
ity of the device. The detailed design of semiconductor diodes. transistors

and integrated circuits is described in [1-3, 6].

I-h. Standard Production Process Schemes and the Major Steps in the ksoduction
of Certain Types of Seuiconductor Devices

The technological production processes for seaiconductor devices include a large
nunber of operations which are executed in various sequences and can be repeated
several times, forming a complete fahrication cycle. Standard production process

(A)

Issues dual Ma s rpm.

 

Figure 1-7. The technological production scheme for point contact
diodes.

Key: A. The section for the sssenbly of the holder and the ch1p;

B. The section for the assembly of the holder and the
contact spring;

- 11 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFFKJAI.US£(NVLY

Key [cont.]: C. The section for the assembly and production process testing
of the diodes;

1. Chip; 22. Static parameter testing;

2. Holder; 23. Capsule;

3. Solder disk; . 25. Solder washer;

A. Degressing, chemical treatment 25. Holder with contact spring;
of the parts; 26. Thernal cycling;

5. Soldering the chip to the 27. Static parameter testing;
holder; 28. Hechanical tests;

6. Degreasing. chemical treatment 29. Static parameter testing;
of the holders with the chip; 30. Moisture immunity testing

7. Protective coating of the chips; of the diodes;

8. Drying the coatings; 31. Static parameter testing;

9. Welding and shaping the contact 32. Degreasing of the diodes
spring; prior to painting;

10. Electrolytic sharpening of the 33. Painting and drying the
contact spring; diodes;

1). Washing and putting together 36. Marking and drying the
the holder with the contact diodes;
spring; 35. Tinning the leads;

12. Aluminiaing the contact spring; 36. Check 13;

13. Hashing the holders with the 37. Static parameter testing;
contact spring; 38. Checking the external

14. Quality control rejection based appearance.

on external appearance;

15. Holder;

16. Assembly of the holder with the
chip and the capsule;

l7. Alignment and electroforming of
diodes;

18. Quality control rejection based
on external appearance;

19. Static parameter testing;

20. Heat conditioning;

21. Current burn-in;

schemes for typical semiconductor devices (Figures 1-7 - 1-10) are given below.
Thus. the technological production scheme for point contact diodes using the
example of the 018 diodes is given in Figure 1-7; given in Figure 1-8 is the
scheme for alloy diodes using the example of the 0226 and 0816 diodes. Further
on, the production process scheme for planar epitaxial transistors using the
example of the 2T-312 device is shown in Figure 1-9. The major production
process operations for planar epitaxial technology using photolithography are
also employed in the production of semiconductor lc's, something which can be
seen in Figure 1-10.

It can be seen from the schematics given here that the methods of fabricating
various semiconductor devices are extremely diverse. However, in all cases the

semiconductor chip is subjected to a number of cos-on basic production process
operations.

- 12 -

FINICIHHCJA1.USE|N'LY
Section for the Production of a p-n Junction

new. sea)".- p-n moss

  

Figure 1-8. Technological scheme for the production of alloy diodes.

Key:

12.
13.

16.
15.

Gold washer;

Aluminum electrode;
Chemical treatment of the
junction parts;

Alloying of the junctions;
Chemical treatment of the
junctions;

Application of a protec-
tive costing;

Drying the coating;
Checking the parameters;
Soldering the junction

to the crystal holder;
welding the electrode
lead;

welding the capsule to
the fitting;

Vacuum drying;

Cogging and uelding the
Fernico scrip;

Holding the upper lead;
Checking the hermetic
seal;

17.

20.

16. Thermal cycling;

The section for produc-
tion process testing and
final assembly;
Checking the electrical
parameters;

mechanical tests;
Degreasing and drying;

18.

190

21. Galvanic coating of
diodes;

22. Moisture resistance
testing;

23. Classification of the
diodes;

24. Marking and drying;

25. Checking the electrical
parameters;
Checking the external

appearance.

26.

The production technology for semiconductor devices can be broken down into

several main steps.

The Fabrication of the wafers. This step includes three groups of operations:
mechanical machining of the semiconductor materials, the technical chemical

- 13 -

FOR¢OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NULY

treatment of the wafers and their quality control. The appropriate equipment
is used for these operations.

The Fabrication of Structures uith p-n Junctions. The major operation in this
step is the operation of producing the p-n junction, and for this reason, the
name of the semiconductor device is almost always determined by the designation
of the processing method. Besides the group of equipment with vhich the p-n
junction is produced directly, one can single out two groups of equipment which
participate in the formation of the structures: equipment for producing films,
i.e., for applying metallic, dielectric and semicanductor films to the wafer
when making ohmic contacts, insulating coatings, thin film elements of micro-
circuits, etc.; equipment for the photolithography processes, i.e., for local
etching. directed towards the formation of the microrelief in planar technology.

________ Section for Producing Structures
(1) mam“? 1| ham seam-u may.

_ _—...- .—

 

Figure 1-9. The technological scheme for the production of planar
epitaxial transistors.

Key: 1. The wafer with the epitaxial film;
2. Processing of the wafers prior t: the first oxidation;
3. First oxidation of the wafers;
4. First photoengraving;
5. Treatment of the wafers prior to diffusion;
6. First boron diffusion stage;
7. Renoval of the SSS [7quick setting mixtures?];

- 14 -

FORiOFFMJAl.USE<NVLY
Key [cont.]: 8. Second boron diffusion stage 31. Mounting bases;
with oxidation of the base; 32. Soldering the chips to the
9. Treatment of the plates prior mounting base;
to the second photoengraving; 33. Heat treatment;
10. Second photoengraving (emitter 36. Leeds;
windows in the oxide); 35. Attachment of the leads;
11. Check of the parameters; 36. Visual inspection of the
12. Treatment of the wafers prior mounting bases;
to diffusion; 37. Vsrnishing. drying;
13. First phosphorus diffusion 38. Capsules;
stage; 39. Section for production pro-
16. Second phosphorus diffusion cess tests and final opera-
stage vith the oxidation of tions;
the emitter; 60. Thermal conditioning
15. Deposition of Mo; ‘1. Thermal cycling;
16. Treatment of the wafers #2. Mechanical tests;
prior to the third engraving; #3. Checking the hermetic seal;
17. Third photoengraving; 6k. Galvanic tinning;
18. Check of the parameters; 65. Current burn-in;
19. Treatment of the wafers prior 66. Classification;
to the deposition of Mo; 47. Marking, varnishing and dry-
20. Treatment of the usfers prior ing;
to the fourth engraving: 48. Visual checking of the over-
21. Fourth photoengrsving; all dimensions;
22. Treatment of the wafers prior #9. Checking of the electrical
to the deposition Al; parameters;
23. Deposition of Al; 50. Check of the external appear-
26. Treatment of the wafers prior ance.
to the fifth photoengraving;
25. fifth photoengraving;
26. Treatment of the vefers prior
to the burning-in of the Al;
27. The burning-in of the A1;

28. Check of the parameters;
29. Separation of the wafers;
30. ﬂushing the chips;

The Asseehly of the Semiconductor Devices. This stage of the production combines
three equipment groups: equipment for monitoring the structures on the wafer
and separating the wafers into chips; equipment for mounting the crystal on the
mounting base or strip as well as equipment for nermetically sealing the devices.

Measurement of the Electrical Parameters, Classification and Tests of the Devices.
Besides quality control and test operations, other auxiliary finishing operations
are performed in this stage of the production. including the marking and packag-
ing of the finished device. -

The breakdown into steps cited here most precisely corresponds to planar produc-
tion technology for such devices. where the group method is used to produce p-n
structures on a water. For other types of devices. the composition of the

- 15 -

FOI‘OIFHJA1.USEIIVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pigure 1-10. ?low chart showing the production process for the
fabrication of epitaxial planar structure integrated
circuits with a buried n+ layer.

1.
2.

Key:

3.
5.

5s

10.

11.

production steps changes somewhat.

Group treatment;
Oxidation of the p-type
silicon wafers;

First photolithography
(in 8102);
Diffusion of the
ispurity;
Renoval of the oxide.
n-layer epitaxy;
Oxidation;

Second photolithography
(using 8102);

Fourth photolithogrephy
(using 8102);

Base diffusion of the

p doping impurity;
Third photolithography
(using 810 );
Separate diffusion of the
p doping impurity;

n+ doping

12.

13.

15.
15.

16.
17.

18'
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Enitter diffusion of
the n doping impurity;
Fifth photolithography
(using 510 );
Hetallizat on;

Sixth photolithography
(in metal);

Burning-in the contacts
Hermetic sealing of

the package;
Installation of the
leads;

Mounting the chip in
the package;

Scribing, breaking the
wafers and quality
control sorting;

Probe testing of the
integrated circuits on
the wafer;

Tests of the integrated

circuit.
Individual processing.

The step by step production process schene

for silicon planar epitaxial transistors in a netal package is shown in Figure

1-11.

- l6 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(N§LY
Figure 1-11. the step by step production ache-e for silicon planar
epitaxial transistors in a natal-glass package.

Key: 1.
2.
3.
‘0
5e
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
ll.
120
130
1‘.

Fabrication of the wafers;

Silicon wafer;

Build-up of the epitaxial files;

Silicon wafer with the epitaxial layer;

The forsation of the transistor structures on the wafers;
Silicon wafer with the p-n structures;
Separation of the wafers into chips;

Chips with the p-n structure;

Asseably of the transistor;

Mounting base;

Capsule (cap);

Asseabled transistor;

Classification, testing and final operations;
Finished device.

Besides the Isjor processes, one can single out a number of auxiliary ones in
seeiconductor production which assure the requisite parameters of the production
process Iedia and energy vehicles (deionized water. inert gases and hydrogen.
dust free air. etc.). as well as the preparation of the raw and seaifinished
products in the manufacturing phase of the production (the production of silicon
bars, the fabrication of packages. etc.).

- 17 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4‘

Part 1.

Equipment for Fabricating Wafers and Producing Suiconductor Structures
Chapter 1. Equipment for Mechanical Processing of wafers

The basic electrical characteristics of the device depend on the quality of the
seniconductor wafer (chip). Therefore, the lost important objective of the
technology is to produce substrates which will be as close as possible to the
original single crystals in terns of structure, chemical purity and defect
content. A sonocrystalline ingot grown by the Csochralski process or by zone
melting crystallization is used as the starting naterial. This ingot contains
a negligible alount of impurities, estimated at 10’ to 10 '° percent. The
ingot is in the forts of a rod measuring from B to 150 In in cross section and
from 40 to 500 III long. Refers neasuring has 0.5 X 0.5 to 10 X 10 In and

from 0.0a to l on thick are made from this ingot.

Chips differ in dimensions, accuracy require-ants and quality of the surface,
depending on the type of device and the technological process for fabricating
the chip. The require-ents for the original wafers also differ accordingly.
The strictest technical requirenents are isposed on wafers to be used for
fabricating planar devices and especially integrated nicrocircuits (114's).
large-scale integrated nicrocircuits (End's). etc. [5. 7]. For example. a
silicon wafer 75 mm in diameter must neet the following specifications:

Nonflatness over entire surface, u i 0.5
Roughness, u < 0.05
Deviation of surface of wafer from specified crystallographic

plane . i 1 deg
Thickness tolerance, H:

For m's with dielectric isolation of elegants 3 3

For IH's with concealed layers i 25

The least rigid requirements are imposed on wafers intended for fabricating
alloy pover transistors and diodes:

Nonflatness. u 0 to 20
Roughness. 11

Deviation from crystallographic plane

IAIAI"

l
5
3 deg

From the large diversity it is possible to single out three basic technological
processes for fabricating semiconductor wafers. which are used respectively in
fabricating the three groups of semiconductor devices--alloy, nesaplanar and
planar (fig 1-1). Wafers fabricated according to the first process have ident-
ically treated etched surfaces ensuring the best conditions for the wetting of

electrode materials when they are fused into the chip. Wafers fabricated
according to the second process have one polished surface and another ground

-13-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
surface .

l)

$.11. N

Pi gure l-l.

wafers fabricated according to the third process are polished by
neans of an abrasive paste on both sides and one of the surfaces is treated

additionally for the purpose of removing structural defects created by
abrasive ipolishing. This side of the wafer is called the working side.

Chemical-mechanical finish polishing makes it possible to produce wafers with
mini-us surface defects and the best flatness of the vater's working surface.

Wafers:

 

Sisplified Technological Processes for Producing Semiconductor
s—for alloy and point-contact devices; b--for

mesaplanar devices; cufor 111's and 3114’s

Sizing of ingot in terms of
diameter
Orientation of end of ingot
Cutting ingot into wafers
Grinding wafers
Cutting out chips
Etching chips
Sorting chips by thickness
Orientation of face and
base cut of ingot
Making base cut
Polishing working side of
wafer

- 19 -

11.

12.
13.
16.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
2°.

21.

Chemical-mechanical polishing
of working side of wafer
Variant

Etching wafers

Grouping wafers by thickness
Polishing with zirconium oxide
ﬂaking base cut or marks
Grinding wafer

Polishing both sides of water
Finishing treatment of wafers
Preserving wafers and packing
them in containers

Polishing by means of copper ions

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A number of additional requirements are imposed on wafers for planar devices
for the purpose of ensuring the high-efficiency performance of the subsequent
operations of photolithography and dividing wafers into chips. In particular,
enhanced precision of wafers with respect to diameter (3; 0.2 III), the presence
on the wafer of a base cut or marks in the form of notches indicating crystallo-
graphic line [110], and a high finish for the vafer's surface are required.

For the purpose of fulfilling these requirements the following operations are
provided in the production process for fabricating wafers:

Sizing (cylindrical grinding) of the ingot in terms of diameter.
Crystallographic orientation and making a base cut.
Multistage finishing of wafers.

In addition to the above-named operations, the technological process includes a

number of auxiliary operations: cleaning between operations, washing, drying,
checking, cutting the ingot into billets and packing.

Before an ingot is processed the following alectropbysical parameters are tested:

resistivity, type of conduction, and the diffusion length and lifetime of
minority carriers [8].

Mechanical processing operations-wiring, cutting, grinding, polishing-ears
especially important for the quality of the finished wafer, since when they are
performed the chip is deformed with the formation near the treated surface of

a layer of material whose structure differs from the ideal structure in its bulk.
This layer is called the defect layer [7, 9]. Four zones with typical defects
are distinguished in the defect layer:

The relief, 1; the crack. 2; the dislocation, 3; and the stressed, lo (fig 1-2)
[9].

The grosser the defects, the greater influence they exert on the parameters of
devices. Therefore, the main objective of the technological process of fabricat-
ing semiconductor wafers is the guaranteed removal of the individual defects
originating in mechanical processing. Individual allowances between operations,
which also make it possible to eliminate defects (fig 1-3), are designated in
relation to the depth of the defect layer.

It should be mentioned that the depth of the defect layer is not constant even
for one and the same machine tool and technological process. Slight changes in
the technological procesanthe degree of wear of the tool, the grain size and
concentration of the micropovder, etc.-result in a change in the depth of the
defect layer. Therefore, the allowance must be designated in terms of the
highest value obtained in studying a specific technological process.

-20-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pigure 1-2. Structure of Defect Lsyer in Hechenicslly Processed
Seliconductor

1. Ideal chip

 

Pigure 1-3. Disgtsn of Designation of Allowsnces Between Operations in
Relation to Depth of Defect Leyer: s--cutting; b-qrinding;
c--polishing; d—etchin. or chenicsl-eechsnicsl polishing ‘

-21-

NR OHIO“. USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. equipnent of the noat varied nature is required for fabricating seniconductor
wafers-electrophyaical. mechanical and chenical technology. General-purpose
machine tools are used extensively. such as cylindrical grinding (for airing in-
gots). surface grinding (for asking a base cut), ultrasonic (for cutting out

round chips) and cutting-off (for cutting ingots into billets and for eating a

base cut). ﬂouawer, special equip-ant. Ihich is discussed below. is used for per-
forning key technological operations.

1-1. Bquipnent for Crystallographic Orientation of wafers

Finding a specific crystallographic plane. detersining the angle of disorientation
of the surface of the end of an ingot relative to it and bringing the surface of
wafers to be cut from an ingot into the specified plane with a tolerance. as a rule.
of not greater than one degree (30' for soaa types of devices) are performed with
special equipment by optical or x-ray methods [10. 11].

Optical Method

The operation of this apparatus is based on the nethod of orienting single crystals
relative to light patterns. utilizing the specific features of the surface pro-
duced during cheaical etching of a single crystal in selective etchants. The

etched surface reflects light rays in a strictly specific direction. The reflecting
surface is always in line uith crystallographic plane (111). Deviation of the
actual surface of the and of the ingot fron crystallographic plane (111) results

in deviation of the reflected been on the screen by a certain value of d (fig

1-4, a), characterized by the angle of disorientation, o , of the real surface of
the nicrosection froa plane (111).

Md
1....Quﬂ
2%
pm an]
[M b)

 

Figure 1—6. Diagraa of Orientation of Insot by Optical Hethod (a) and Light
Patterns Obtained Therehy (b)

Key:
1. Ingot (111) 3. Screen
2. Plane of aicrosection

A 3-point star (fig 1-4, h) is a typical light pattern for an ingot grown along
line [111]. and a 5-point star for a [100] ingot.

A bench-type apparatus for orienting ingots hy the light aethod is shown in
fig 1-5. All of the apperatus's units and parts are sounted in a light-shielded

- 22 -

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
case. 8: the optical system, consisting of a light source, 1, separated by a
plate, 6;a condenser, 2; a diaphrep, 3; reflecting mirrors, 6, 5, and 10; a
lens, 7. with sets of gears. 9 and 11. for setting the focus and aperture of the
diaphragm. respectively; and a chip holder, 12, whose design sakes it possible to
install a stage for the oriented cesenting on ingots; a moving plate. 18. which
moves in ball guides; a catch for the moving plate, 19; a goniometer head, 20,
which serves the purpose of measuring the angle of rotation oi the ingot; re-
fleeting sirrors, 10 and 13; a screen, 15. consisting of a frame, a groundglass.

a sheet of acrylic plastic with a scale applied to it and two electric light bulbs
which illuminate the glass with the scale from its ends; and an electrical unit,
22. The screen's axis passes through a slider, lb, which can be saved together
with the screen in the direction of the optical axis. It is possible to move the
screen in this direction by 36 - and this is accosplished from a manual control
by means of a flexible shaft and the drive screw of a lifting nachaniss, 17.

The screen can in addition be rotated on its own axis with its position fixed by
means of a clasp. A mirror. 16. states it possible to observe visually the light
pattern of the reflection produced on the screen. the mirror is set in a position
convenient for observing by means of knob 21.

Orientation is performed in the following manner. By turning the ingot ssnually
on its axis the light pattern is set so that its ray points occupy a sy'I-etrical
position relative to the vertical axis of the scale and .he center of the light
pattern lies on the horizontal axis. The ingot is fastened in this position by
scans of the clawing screw of the chip holder. By turning the knob of the sonic-
meter head, 20. the center of the light pattern is brought to the crosshairs of
the axes and from the head's scale a determination is rude of the angle of dis-
orientation of the end of the ingot from the principal crystallographic plane.

 

Figure 1-5. Unit for Orientimg Ingots by the Light nethod
X-Ray Method

Orientation of chips by the x-ray method is performed on general-purpose x-ray
diffractometers of the nus-50m. DIM-0,5 and MON-2.0 types. The x-ray unit of

-23-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the uns-sont type (its 1-6) hee becone the nest widespread. it consists of a
distributing unit. 1. a bench. 2, a pulse enplification unit. 3. a quantum
counter. 6, a gonioneter. 5, a protective shield. 6. and an zeta)“ source, 7.

The unit is connected to the power line via an input etabilizer of the Sinl type.
The anode of the s-rey tube is protected by name of a naesive netel enclosure
and is water-cooled.

 

Figure 1-6. Type HRS-50m 3-!” Unit

An anode current stabilizer is provided in the unit in addition to the SN-l volta-
stabilizer for the purpose of ensuring high stability of the x-ray tube's radiati‘ n.
Control of the voltage in the tube is stepwise (fig 1-7).

x-rays enitted fro- the vindov of the x-rey tube strike the specimen being studied.
which is instead at the center of the gonioneter. The reflected waves strike the
Geiger counter. A pair of particles—en electron and positive ion—appears in

the counter as the result of the ionizing effect of the x-reys. Rith this a
current pulse passes through the counter. The nunber of current pulses originating
in the counter per unit of time is proportional to the intensity of the reflected
x-rey been.

lionocrystelline ingots of silicon end gemiu ere oriented by Deans of a special
attach-ant consisting of a rotating unit, 1. and an electric control unit, 2

(fig 1-8). The rotating unit is installed on the gonioneter. By means of it the
ingot is claped to the base surface end is rotated annually or by neene of an elec-
tric notor relative to the horizontal axis.

-24-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
26) too-m mun nip-o

/‘,

 

Structural Must-en of ans-son: Unit

.mter
. instrument
botentio-eter
lechenicel counter
ne
.it

in; circuit
mlizer

fPPGI'

tege rectifier
tege
K1

following page]

13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

-25-

P544111 unit

Output nultivihretor l
amplifier

Stage. I to VI

m unit

To m-l
Approxiutely 6 V
Input

Input lultivihretor
free audio signal gene
'ro RV [the relay]
Tile relay

roe omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

24. HSTR-a Geiger counter 29. Control panel with anode current
25. Harker stabilization

26. CUR-4 goniometric unit 30. SN-l stabilizer

27. Specimen studied 31. 220 V

28. Generator unit

 

Figure 1-8. Attachment for URS-SOIM and DRON—0,5 X-Ray Unit for Orienting
Silicon and Germanium Ingots

The ingot is set in a position in relation to the x-ray with which Bragg's law
is fulfilled:

Mame-ml,

where d is the distance between the chip's atomic planes, 8 is the angle of i--
cidence (reflection). m is a whole number and X is the wavelength of the x-radia—
tion.

The base cut is also oriented by means of optical and x-ray apparatus. Base cut
plane (110) is determined most quickly and accurately when using an x—ray unit
and a special attachment for it making it possible to orient the ingot in the
vertical position of its axis. Here the x—ray is reflected from the side surface
of the ingot. which simplifies finding plane (110).

1-2. Equipment for Cutting Seaiconductor Materials

All methods originally used for cutting semiconductor materials——cutting with

saw blades and wire with the use of abrasives--have completely given way to a more
progressive method--cutting with diamond. The advantages of this method consist
in high productivity and better quality of waters.

_ 25 _

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the tool for dis-end cutting is a rings-shaped wheel to whose inside edge have
been applied dienond grains ranging in sire fru an to 60 u.

All existing nodele of cutting nachines can be divided into three types in terns
of the nethod of positioning and feeding the dianond vheel:

nechinss with a horizontally positioned stationary spindle (fig 1-9. a).
Machines with a vertically positioned stationery spindle (fig 1-9. h).

Hachinee with an oscillating horizontally positioned spindle (fig 1-9. c).

a; 7‘1"“ ”e
. l b)

Figure .1-9. Sinified mechanical Diagrens of nachine Tools for Cutting
by bane of Die-and heels with an Inside Cutting Edge

   

In Inchines belonging to the first type the shaft, 2, of the spindle is positioned
horizontally end rotates in hearing elenents. 3, by neens of a V-belt transmission.
1. 0n the shaft is fastened a drun, b. with rings for attaching a disnond cutting
wheel with an inside cutting edge. 5. The ingot. 6, is attached to a holder. 7,
which is.fastened to the eachine tool's carriage, which acconplishes longitudinal—
slong the x-axis—and transverse-«long the Y-exis—feeding. The spindle's shaft
is solid end of ansll dianeter and therefore anall-dianeter hearings are used.

A disadvantage of nechine tools of this type is the wear of the cerriage's guides.
which is responsible for a loss of precision. to addition. there is a restriction
on the length of an ingot which can he cut (76 to 90 n); however. this disadvan-
tage aust be considered tenporery—the sqloynant of a vacuun renover for the cut
wsfer sakes it possible to imrenee the length of en ingot to 500 n and nore.

In aachine tools belonging to the second group the apindle'a shaft is hollow.

The shaft‘s disaster is selected so thst the ingot pesses freely inside it. The
verticsl position of such a shaft ashes it possible to cut ingots of any length.
However, the large dianster of the apindle'e shaft requimes the use of precision
bearings of large size, which involves an increase in linear velocity end. conse-
quently. the intensified wear of bearings. m addition. there ere difficulties in
lubricating the hearinga and protecting than fron the cutting fluid (SOZh). In
nechines'of this type transverse and longitudinal novenent of the ingot ere accol-
plished by saving the carriage along the guides. Therefore. in then intensified

-27-

FOIOH‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wear takes place at the end oi” the stationary guide closest to the cutting wheel,
since the greatest bending nontnt iron the cutting force acts relative to the
edge of the guide.

The design of machine tools of the third type is the beat fron the viewpoint of
operating characteristics. A rotating are, 8, installed on hearings, 9, is used
instead of transverse feed guides. The entire spindle aseenbly with the drma, 6,
and cutting wheel, 5, is festened to it. The are together with the spindle is
rotated around a stationary axle, 10. attached to the bed of the nachine.

Machine tools constructed according to the first design include the 2605,
"Alissa-lo", TS-Zl, 15-23 nodels, etc.: according to the second design, the ASH-10
and 08-350; and according to the third designnthe 3,5x18 and 6,0:(210 and "Alissa-6h!"
models.

Host models have been developed according to the first design. These machines

are organized in the following nanner (fig 1-10). On the upper base of the bed,
10, is installed a cast plate, 8, on which the main units of the nachine are
placed: the spindle, 6, with a head, 5. for attaching the cutting wheel; the
carriage. 12, with a setting nechanisn, 17, a nicroswitch, 15, and a feed control
unit, 16; a feed mechanism. 3, with a reduction gear, 18, a control mechanism, lo,
a brake, 2, and a shift lever, l; the spindle drive, 7; and a protective enclosure.
16, with a system for supplying the cooling fluid. A rotating head, 13, is in-
stalled on the carriage, asking it possible to turn the ingot in the horizontal
and ~ srtical planes, which makes it possible to cut the ingot parallel to a specific
crystallographic plane. The head's scale value is 12‘. A unit, 9, for feeding
the cooling fluid is installed on the lower base of the bed. It consists of a
tank and a centrifugal pump. An electrical equipnent unit, 11, is fastened to the
upper half of the bed behind a panel.

The interaction of nechanisns is illustrated in the mechanical diagram (fig l-Il'
Rotation is transmitted from the notor, 10, through the V-belt transmission, 9,

to the spindle, 8, with the head. 7, installed on it. The carriage, 5, (its top
part) with the rotating head, 6, to which the ingot is fastened, is moved in the
transverse direction under the influence of a weight, 3, along ball bearing guides.
11. The carriage returns to its original position by neans of the shift lever. '
which is driven into oscillating notion by scans of an eccentric, llo, installed

on a can, 36. In longitudinal feeding of the ingot the carriage is saved along the
guides, 12, by the action of the drive screw. 1. and nut, 2, featured to the lower
half of the carriage. The drive screw is driven into notion by a motor. 26,
through a systaa of gears and cranks, 34.

Adjust-ant for the required cutting speed—the longitudinal feed rate—is accon-v
plished by moving sector to, which covers part of the teeth of ratchet wheel 39,
depending on the specified rate. The transverse feed rate is set by scans of a
guide fastened to the franc of an indicator attached to the table. and a rising
device. The nechanisn for controlling the tranverse feed rate operates in the
following nanner. when the table, 5, saves, piston 38 forces oil through the gap
between the body of hydraulic cylinder M and cute 43 into the space of the lower
half of the carriage. 37. The rate of outflow of the oil detersines the transverse
feed rate and depends on the gap. which is set by means of screw 62. when button

-23-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
61 is pressed the yep is expended end. when necessary. the tehle is repidly
delivered to the extras left position. An individual wsfer is first cut iron
the ingot. with which the correctness of rotstion of the ingot is checked for the
purpose of arriving et the specified crystallographic plsne. After the angle of
rotation of the ingot is corrected. s wnfer is cut off end from its thickness the
cutting rate is corrected. These wafers are cut off unuelly and the following
ones autoutically. Lever 25 is eccordingly placed in the 'ﬁhnuel Peed" or "Auto-
astic reed” position.

 

Figure 1-10. General Appearance of Cutting Hechine

In the eenual node cs: 17 occupies s position asking it possible to raise end

hold lever 16 st its top position. With this csrrisge 5 is fixed by teens of stop
15. In order to free the carriage it is necessary to press on pusher 22. "hen
lever 2£.is turned can 21 turns pin 20. Lever 18. following the profile of con 23,
frees lever 19, which is reised by noses of pin 20. Table 5 is returned annually.
In the "Auto-etic reed" position of lever 25. can 17 by Rene of lever 18 fixes
lever 19 'in a position whereby lever 16 is let down slong the profile of csn 36.
The upper half of the carriagewtable S—under the effect of weight 3 is saved in
the trensverse direction relative to the ingot's exis.

Longitudinal feeding at the cutting pace is eccleished auto—ticelly. At the end
of s cut a screw closes the contacts of nicroewitch lo, which turns on notor 26 end
electronepet 30. The electrougnet turns block 29. which spreeds shoes 27 of
brslte drun 28. After shaft 35 turns 360 degrees. can 33 closes the contects of
switch 32. which cuts off motor 26 end electronagnet 30. Block 29 end brake shoes
27 sssuns their original position under the sction of springs 31. One of the eost
idesl nodels of this type-the 125-23 nehine—hse longitudinel feed precision of

-29-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a 0.001- step. This "chine is distinguished by a high level of sutonation:
The autonatic loading or cut waters into holder- is provided for.

 

Figure 1-11. Mechanical Diagran of Diamond-Type Cutting Hschine

Hachine tools designed according to the second type (cf. fig 1-9. h) are distin~
guished by a vertically positioned spindle. This position lakes it possible to
increase the length of the ingot and to renove wafers sutolsticelly through the
center of the spindle. However, increasing the dis-star of the spindle and accord-
ingly the size of the shaft bearings results in rapid wear. One machine of this
type is the nodel ASHIOA from the Ohanoto fins (Japan). This Ischine sakes it
possible to cut silicon ingots up to 99 - in dianeter and 350 I long. The rots-
tionsl velocity of the spindle is 5000 r.p.n. The longitudinal feed range is 0.2
to 2.3 us. The thickness tolerance of waters which can be cut off is i 0.005 II

for s dis-eter of 50 u. The nonflatness and nonparsllelisn of waters is not
greater than 0.005 a.

The Iain disadvantage of nohines of the first two types is the wear of the table
guides, which results in tine in a loss in initial acctn-acy. In order to eliainste
this. in nechinea of the mom. and “Mill-6H" types the transverse feed is secon-
plished by rocking the entire cutting head. instelled on hearings. whose wear is
insignificant even after 10 yenrs of use. A structural diagraa of. nachines of this
type is shown in fig 1-12.

-30-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 1-12. Bloch Diegran of mchine Tool for nigh-Precieion Cutting of
an Ingot into Valera

Key:

1. Block for controlling and in- 10. Drive for turning wheel
diceting tranaveree epeed ll. Vacuu-

2. brive for rocking spindle 12. Cutting wheel
(traneveree feed elenent) l3. Ingot

3. Block for inputing nachine 16. Block for controlling and noving
tool'e operating progrea vacuun sucker

6. Up 15. Longitudinal feed unit

5. Down 16. Longitudinal feed control and in-

6. Longitudinal teed diceting unit

7. _Tranaveree feed

8. Rotational velocity of wheel

9. luber of wafere
The drive end drun with the tightened cutting wheel are fastened to a rotating an
and are rolled in roller bearings inetalled on an axle with preloeding. i.e.. with
zero clearance. The epindle unit to rocked by neana o! a hydraulic drive to accou-
plieh treneveree feed. The tranaveree feed rate ia act by neana of the indicator
of the unit for inputing the aechine tool'e operating prograa. longitudinal feed
of the ingot by a step in acconpliehed by neane of a precieion drive ecrew and
a etepping notor. Control ia accoqliehed by neane of the longitudinal feed con-
trol andi indicating unit. The longitudinal feed in eet end nonitored with a direct
indicator. In inputing the operating progran, in addition to the longitudinal

-31-

POI OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and transverse feed the rotational velocity of the cutting wheel and the number of
wafers to be cut off are set. The machine is outfitted with special rings for
fastening the cutting wheel and for tightening it by means of a special hydraulic
system. The wheel is stretched by means of oil puwed into a special annular
space. Uniformity of tensile stresses and high-quality tightening of the wheel's
fabric are thereby made possible.

All these design features of the machine make it possible to obtain high accuracy
with high reproducibility. Maximum deviation in the thickness of cut-off wafers
on the 4,0)(26 machine is 1 0.007 In. The machine makes it possible to cut wafers
up to 101.6 m in diameter and up to 609.6 - long. The use of long ingots clini-
nates the operations of cutting an ingot into billets and of orienting the faces of
ingots and reduces losses of expensive semiconductor materials on account of kerfs
and on account of the reduction of waste when adjusting the machine for a cut.

The rotational velocity of the cutting wheel can be set from 2000 to 5000 r.p.m.
The machine is furnished with an automatic attachment for removing cut-off wafers
and placing them in a special container with water. The attachment includes a
vacuum sucker and a unit for controlling and moving the vacuum sucker mechanically
connected to the longitudinal foed control and indicating unit. When the ingot is
fed by a step the vacuum sucker moves close to the face of the ingot and is pulled
toward the ingot. After the cutting-off operation the sucker with the cut-off
wafer and ingot is removed from the cutting wheel by a distance of a feed step.
The vacuum is shut off and the flexible elements of the sucker remove the wafer
to bar guides from which the wafer drops onto a conveyer which carries it to the
end of the machine and removes the wafer to a container with water. The automtic
removal of wafers and automatic stopping of the machine when a specific number of
wafers has been cut off make it possible for a single worker to attend simultane-
ously to five or more machines.

1-3. Equipment for Grinding and Polishing Semiconductor Materials

”odern grinding machines are divided into two basic types according to the type of
tool used: machines for grinding with a free sbrssive--an abrasive suspension--
and machines for grinding with a bonded abrasive—abrasive wheels.

Machines for grinding with a free abrasive are in turn divided into two types:

for one-side and two-side machining. For one-side machining wafers are cemented
to heads in the form of aetsl disks with a ground working surface and are mchined
first on one side and then after recementing, on the other. Hith two-side machin-
ing both sides of the wafer are ground and polished at the same time.

With respect to the method of fastening wafers, the distinction is rude between
machines employing cementing, vacuum fastening and free laying in special flat
separator holders [12].

In machines for one-side grinding, e.g.. the V183 type (fig 1-13), rotary motion
is transmitted from a motor, 1, through a worm reducer, 8, to a grinder, 2, with
working heads, lo. installed on it. The heads, supported by roller bearings, 3,
rotate on their own axes, at the same time making possible conditions for even
grinding of wafers. A mixer, 6. with a motor, 7, serves the purpose of mixing the
abrasive suspension in it, which is supplied to the grinder by means of a dropper,
5. at a rate of 60 to 80 drops per minute. Three heads are usually installed on

-32-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the grinder. The grinder is made of cast iron or of glass-«laterals which are
easily ground-and the heads of steel or Duralumin.

Q

7
I
J
O

 

Pigure l-l3. mechanical Diagram of )hchine for One-Side Grinding

A machine for one-side grinding can at the same time serve the purpose of polishing
wafers. For this purpose by means of a surrounding rin a soft fabric, usually

' artificial suede, is attached to the grinder, or artificial leather is cemented on.
A mixture of diamond paste with a grain size of ASH 3/2, ASH 2/1 or A8)! 1/0 with
ethyl alcohol and transforner oil is used as the abrasive suspension.

when using chemically active suspensions consisting of micropowders of rirconius
or silicon oxide, water and an alkali. chemical-mechanical finishing polishing is
performed. In machines created specially for chemical-nechanical polishing, e.g. ,
the SKIN-l and Yul HZ.10$.006 models (fig l-llo). holders with the vafers are
clawed to the polisher by means of special claws, by means of which elevated
pressure is applied to them. The pressure is created by a pneumatic cylinder and
is trenenitted through a rod—~an intermediate mechanical spindle-fastened to
bearing supports. There are no roller hearings in these machines. The model
SKIN-l. Yul 112.105.004 and Speed PMBZ nachines have tables with a larger
diameter—680, 860 and 800 II. respectively. These machines snake it possible to
machine wafers up to 100 - in diameter. Tour holders are installed on these
machines and a great nunber of wafers are polished simultaneously: on the SKhHP-l,
20 wafers and on the Yul [2.105.004 and Speed “332. 28 wafers 75 II in diameter.

Machines for one-side aschining make it possible to produce wafers having one
surface of very high quality. However. the cementing and recementing of wafers
severely worsens their geometry and precision characteristics.

The 10 19006. AL-ZP. SDSh-lOO and SDP-lOO machines for two-side machining are used
to produce wafers with a precise geometry. The main design feature of these ma-
chines is a planetary train which makes possible planetary movement of wafers be-
tween two grinders (fig l-lS), which also mkes possible high plane-parallelism
and planeness of machined wafers. The wafers to be machined. 9, are laid in the
openings of toothed separators, 7, which engage with a center gear. 6, and a
peripheral gear wheel, 10. Gear 6 is fastened to shaft 5. Gear wheel 10 and gear
6 are turned by .1 single drive in the same direction. but with different angular

-33-

FOIOI’HCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

velocities. On account of this the separators move over the grinder and at the
same tine rotate on their own axles. Wafers are installed with the upper grinder

raised. The abrasive suspension is fed to the grinding zone via openings, 3, in
the top grinder, l.

 

Figure 1-16. Machine for Chemical-Mechanical Polishing of wafers

1 .';A J M

     

J . 7 .s

‘. _ ._ .1
V L v ‘.o ‘.l v I.
alwwgzml

. _ _. 4- _J -‘
3‘” .— ‘IIIIII \\x\\\‘- .- v .\\"
ll ' ‘

\ - u‘ \ ."

 
      

 
   
   
 

    
 

   

Mil \j

.' 1. View A, top grinder re-
~ - _ ,‘ moved

Tynan/mum llama ' ’ 2. Mechanical trajectory of
“m" ”""'“”" center of wafer

Figure 1-15. Diagram of Machine for Simultaneous Two-Side Grinding and
Polishing of Wafers

-34-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In machines of the 10 19006 type the top and bottom grinders do not turn. In
spa-100 achines rotation of only the bottom grinder is provided for the purpose
of reducing the wear of the separator's teeth and its deforntion. Special spa-
cers, 2. through which water circulates are provided in the body for the purpose of
cooling the grinders. Machines for simultaneous two-side grinding are also used
for polishing wafers. For this purpose recesses are made in the grinding wheels
and by means of outside and inside steel rings. 4, suede is stretched over then.
There are holes in the suede and in the top grinder for the purpose of feeding the
abrasive suspension to the polishing zone. Protective fabric-based-laminate rings.
8, are used at the edges of wafers for the purpose of eliminating splitting. The
clearance between the protective ring and the separator is 0.6 to 0.8 III and be-
tween the ring and wafer 0.6 to 1.5 -.

Machines for grinding by means of a bonded abrasive are divided in term of grind-
ing method into aschines which operate by the surface (face) grinding method (fig
1-16. a) and by the infeed grinding method (fig 1-16, b). SASh-bzmi, SASh-IOO and
SASh-lSO model machines operate according to the infeed grinding method. SPSh-l.
1611-259, SPShP-l and UPS-11600 model machines operate according to the surface
(face) grinding aethod.

   
 
  

    
  

i"‘-\ jk‘x

     

.1530.) fay-T ‘-~
“SINelxﬂ'

        

 

1) awn—O a) tan—‘- b)"

Figure 1-16. Diagrams of Surface (Pace) (a) and Infeed (b) Grinding

Key:
1. Table 2. Grinding Force

Machines of the SASh-3 and SASh-loZOH type (fig 1-17) are designed for grinding
wafers up to 60 I- in diameter and the SASh-ISO to 150 u in diameter. All these
machine nodels are basically organised according to the sane principle: three
spindles with a rotational velocity of 9000 to 110,000 r.p.n. and a table with
vacuum suckers rotating at a speed of 0.5 to 5 r.p.m. SASh-bZOH and SASh-lSO na-
chines have an intermediate mechanical spindle to whose shaft is fastened an s-

brasive disk of the AChK type. High-frequency generators power the electric
spindles.

The bed is cast and massive and consists of two halves (an upper and lower) fast-
ened to one another by means of a bolted connection. The spindle units and their
drives. the oil film units. counterweights and other units are mounted on the to;
half and the turntable. turntable drive and power supplies on the bottom half.

The turntable is in the form of a flat thrust-type ball bearing with the balls

arranged in three rows. The lower race is installed on four bearings whose height
can be adjusted. The upper race is in the form of a base for installing

-35-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

replaceable housings with vacuum suckers. The working area of the turntable is
covered with a remvable cover made of acrylic plastic.

 

i '{
, .'|
-

Figure 1-17. Type sun-1.20M Diamond-Type Grinding Machine

The spindle is in the form of a cylinder on whose outside surface a trapezoidal
thread has been cut. The spindle's shaft is installed on high-precision radial
thrust bearings. In the lower half of the spindle there is a device for supply'
cooling fluid to the grinding zone through the inside space of the diamond wheel.
Each spindle is driven into rotary motion by high-frequency electric spindles

connected coaxially with the mechanical spindles via a centrifugal-action flexible
coupling.

The vertical feed mechanism for the spindles is in the form of s screw-and-nut
pair. A worm wheel is fastened to the nut. The drive is accomplished via the
worm manually fron hand wheels or automatically from a motor by means of a V-belt
transmission. The spindles are moved vertically along cylindrical bell guides.
For the purpose of reducing axial stresses in the spindle vertical feed mechanism
and for exercising the option of having all clearances in the non-working direc-
tion. the spindles are balanced by means of counterweights with an excess weight
of 25 to 35 kg. The bearings of the mechanical spindles, electrical spindles and
turntable are lubricated by means of an oil film produced in the oil film unit.

-36-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A vacuun unit conaiating of two puma of the W2 type in need for creating a
vacuu in the turntable'e euckere. A trap in the torn of a eealed container ia
provided. for the renoval of water.

\
The electrical epindle drive consiata of a type 12 018-2 high-frequency generator

and a P42 notor inetalled on a aingle panel and connected by neana of a v-belt
tranaeieeion.

The nechine'a unite are nechanically connected in the following nanner (fig 1—18).
Table 9 ie driven into rotary nation by leana of d.c. notor l. by naana of a V-belt
traneniuion and worn gearing. The apindlea. 3. receive rotary notion iron the
electric epindlee, 6. via a centriiugal coupling. The apindle unit is balanced

'by Deane-of a counterweight, 5. The spindles with the abrasive wheel, 2, are fed
vertically by rotation of the hand wheel, 8, which in coupled via a worn gearing
with the drive screw, 7. Auto-tic feed in acconpliahed by neane of a notor, 6.

e

 

Fight-e 1-18. Hechanical Diagran of Type “Sh-420K Diamond-Type Grinding
Hachine

mm M1. of the dieh type (mm. with grits of AS)! 80/60, ASH 1.0/28. ASH

28/20 and ASP! 14/10 are need for grinding on the W420)! machine. Using a fine-

grit ASH 16/10 wheel guarantee. the production of a surface finieh of class 11 to
12.

-37-

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The SPSh-l type machine has two spindles independent of one another whose rota-
tional velocity is 2600 r.p.m. The grinding platforms rotate at a rate of 350
r.p.m. Preliminary grinding is performed with one spindle-with an AS 12 diamond
wheel for silicon or A5 5 for germanium—and finishing grinding on the other.
with an AS“ 60 for silicon or A511 20 for germanium. The wafers are cemented to
the platform. The diamnd wheel lies with its abrasive edge on the wafers.

The wheel is lowered under the influence of the spindle's weight, Psh (cf. fig
1-16. a).

Removable platforms (holders) for cementing wafers are provided for in nchines of
the SPSh-l, SPShP-l end rah-259 types. However. the use of a vacuum table is also
possible in them. In one of the latest models from the Georg Iiiller firm (no).
the M’s-R600, the table has vacuum suckers over its entire area. which mskes it
possible drastically to increase the loading of wafers and consequently the pro-
ductivity of the grinding machine. Hith a table diameter of 600 II, 36 wafers

75 u in diameter or 92 wafers 50 I in diameter are ground at the same tile.

The rotational velocity of the table is 0.8 to 20 r.p.m. The diameter of the
grinding wheel is 300 n. This machine mskes it possible to produce wafers with
deviation from plsneness of 0.002 In, deviation from plane-parallelism of 0.0025
n and a wafer thickness deviation of 0.0025 -.

Machines operating according to the infeed grinding method have become widely used
for grinding off thick (up to 700 microns) polycrystalline layers in the production
of integrated microcircuits with dielectric isolr "on. A layer of silicon 50 to
90 microns thick (cf. fig 1-16, b) is removed by three wheels of different grits
during a single turn of the table. The entire allowance is ground off in 6 to 12
turns of the table. depending on the thickness of the wafer.

Chapter 2. Equipment for Chemical Processing of wafers and Controlling Their
Quality

Chemical processing equipment is designed for performing the production operations
of etching. cleaning and washing wafers [13].

Etching equipment is used for performing the operations of etching ingots and
wafers. which are done for the purpose of removing the defect layer originating
in mechanical processing. Etching the defect layer on wafers makes it possible to
eliminate the buckling of wafers (the hymen effect), to reduce the allowance and
to reduce rejects in the following operation of grinding. '

Impurities are eliminated in the following sequence: mechanical particles--by
cleaning in an ultrasonic bath and by means of various brushes; organic cowounds"
by treatment in boiling solvents of the trichloroethylene, acetone and benrine
type; salts and metals—by boiling in redo: solutions with the conversion of in-
soluble substances into easily soluble ones which are removed with the solution.

At intermediate stages in the fabrication of wafers their surface is cleaned
partially, pursuing one of the following goals:

The removal of inurities which can influence the accuracy of testing the wafer.
The renovel of mechanical particles which are larger than the abrasive used in
the following operation.

-33-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Preparation of the surface of wafers for the possibility of performing opera-
tions sensitive to inpurities. such as chemical etching and chemical-eechanical
polishing.

Cleaning to the full extent is performed only after the final mechanical operation.
The purpose of this cleaning. called finishing. is to reduce the level of impuri-
ties on the surface of wafers to the level of impurities in the original single
crystal.. Usually the concentration of impurities in original single crystals of
germanium and silicon is not greater than 0.0001 percent. This requirement is

the most important for the entire complex of technological equipment.

2-1. Equipment for Etching Ingots and Wafers

for the purpose of etching silicon and germanium wafers. a number of pieces of
equipment are used. the basic elements of which are the etching bath. the rinsing
bath. a wmfer drying unit. a table and a pressurised chamber with an air hole.
Wafers are placed in special containers made of fluoroplastic.

A typical unit for chemical etching of wafers (fig 2-1) consists of three main
parts: a chemical cabinet. 1, a pressurized chamber. 6, and a table, 3. 0n the
rear well of the cabinet there is an exhaust nozzle for the purpose of drawing
off the etchant's vapors and in the top left half of the table, the etching vat.
5. During etching and preliminary rinsing of wafers the vet is hermetically
sealed with a fluoroplastic lid. The etchant is forced by compressed nitrogen
from the cooling vat, 2. into a measuring tank and from there enters the vet
through a hand cock. 7. Nitrogen is fed by means of mechanism 12 when the pedal
is pressed. Containers with wafers are rotated by means of drive 6. After etch-
ing, deionized water is supplied to the vat. Secondary rinsing in the deionized
water takes place in a second vat. 8. Thin vat is supplied with a cover and an

electric heater. The finishing wmshing of wafers takes place in vat 9. made of
acrylic plastic.

The deionized water heater. 10, consists of a quartz tube inside of which have
been placed three electric coils enclosed in quartz tubes. The heater is supplied
with two float switches for checking the upper and lower water levels. The tem-
perature of the water is regulated by means of a contact thermometer. 0n the out-
side the hester is covered with a jacket. In recent times the coil heaters have
been replaced by more efficient quartz heaters with a current-conducting film.

In these contamination of the deionised water by the coil is totally eliminated.

In table 3 there are two electromagnetic cocks, l3, and a mixing tank. ll. The
electromagnetic cocks serve the purpose of draining the etchant from the vat int.
the aiming tank, 11, in which it is diluted with water before being discharged
into a special waste-water disposal system. The front wall of the pressurized
chamber is made of acrylic plastic and has two openings with rubber gloves fast-
ened in them by means of rings. Locks for joining to other units are installed
on the side walls of the pressurized chamber. Purified compressed nitrogen (fig
2-2) is supplied to both locks l and 9 through pipelines 23. 20 and 21 via cocks
I and Xhl. Nitrogen enters 4-way pipe union 32 through pipe 22 and through pipes
30 and 36 enters below the unit's pressurized chamber, and through pipe 31 and
cock VIII, into the blow-through lock. 6. Compressed air is fed through pipe 17.
Passing through the pressure regulator. 13, it is divided into three branches:

- 39 -

FtNl(Nﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(NVLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

15 (or cooling the Iixturc; through
an onglc cock with a pedal control through pipe 18 into canister 12; and through

oter 16 with the etchnnt. Deionized
. Pro. collector 11
gnetic cock IX,
3 through pipe 38,

   
 
 
  
  
 

         

hm

W
1) M m ”nu-97$?!) 9m

Technological Diagram of Unit for Etching Hetero
[Key on following page]

Figure 2-2.

- 40 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

1. Power line 5. Deionised finishing ueter supply
2. Dry eir supply 6. ﬂannel cocks

3. Nitrogen supply 7. llectronepetic cocks

6. Deoinised veter supply 8. brain for recycling

Deionired veter with resistivity of 12 to 15 Iron is supplied to vet 7 for finish-
ing washing of the wafers. M cock I is opened. veter enters through pipe 25
with a water resistivity sensor. 10. Ron the vet the water enters for recycling
through pipe 26. into which is built e second sensor.

The prepered etchent is supplied froe cenister 16 through pipe 63 to eeesuring
tank 2. connected by pipe 65 with electro-petic cock III and by T-joint 66 vith
the etching vet. 3. Air and the excess etchent ere renoved free the neesuring tank
through pipe 66 to eixing ten]: 16. The etchent is drained froe the etching vet
into the siting tenk vie electro-egnetic cock III end pipe 39. The cooling nix-
ture enters the jacket of the cooling vet, 3, through pipe 62 end leaves it through

pipe 61.

Vet 6 is used for renewing the protective coating (was, chemical-resistant lscquer
(KhSL). photoresist, etc.), epplied to the untrutod side of the vefer. A solu-
tion of hydrogen peroxide is supplied to the vet through pipe 19 vie cock V end
heeder 5 for the purpose of renoving the protective costing. not deionized water
is supplied froe the hester through pipe 28 through cock VII end heeder 5. In
washing the vet the veter is dreined through pipes 36 and 37 into the eixing tent.
The solution of hydrogen peroxide is dreined to the use place through pipe 35
vie cock IV. The veter is dreined fro- vet 7 through electro-egnetic cock XI end
pipe 27 into ailing tent 16.

The voters ere loaded into a fluoroplestic conteiner end are pleced in the etching
bath. The vefere ere etched end preueshed eutoneticelly according to e predeter-
eined progren. After prelieinery rinsing it is reco-ended that the vsfers he
held in en et-osphere of purified nitrogen for 2 to 3 min. An inner lock (cf.

fig 2-1) is provided in“ the unit for this purpose. Tron this lock wafers are
transferred to the finishing washing vet. The degree of washing of wafers is
controlled eutoeeticelly by the difference in resistivity of the deionized water
in the vet's inlet and outlet. After finishing veshing the wefers are transferred
into a polystyrene trensit container end are forverded through e connecting lock
for the next operation.

Refers ere loeded into the fluoroplestic conteiner end are transferred to the
trensit conteiner efter etching both nenuelly end autouticelly by lens of
speciel vefer loeding and unloeding unite.

Insteed of the usual etching end usehing vets. in the eutonetic unit for dynenic
cheeicsl etching of wafers (fig 2—3, a) there ere two the-bets: en etching chen-
ber. I. end washing chamber. 2 (fig 2-3, b). Two fluoroplestic screws. 6. which
turn in the use direction are instelled in each chsnber. The etchsnt is pueped
by nesns of e pun into the etching chanber. 1, end is sprsyed hy neens of jets,
3. The teqerature of the initial etchent is held eutoneticelly in the range of
+25 to +50 '0 vith en eccurecy of g S 'C. The wafer. 5, is fed sutonsticslly by
neens of en unloeding unit tron the container into a trey and through e slot into

-51-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the etching chamber. In the chaaber wafers are moved along the threaded grooves
of rotating screws 4 and at the same time rotate on their own axes, ensuring uni-
formity of etching over the water's area. From the etching chamber wafers enter
the screws of the washing chamber where they are washed with deionized water and
then they are dried by hot air and are removed by conveyer 6 to the unit for auto—
matically loading then into containers. The etching process is perfomed couplete-
ly automatically by the continuous-flow method. However, the etching method used
in the automtic unit has an important disadvantage—it is practically impossible
to control and maintain at a specific level and with the required accuracy the
etching temperature over the entire area of the wafer and, consequently, it is
difficult to control the etching reaction.

   

1)

HH'3 .3.

- guru/uni ‘-

     

    

      
  
    

 

' ‘55::
Jim?
ummum;

I :

     
     

     

Figure 2—3. Automatic Unit for Dynamic Chemical Etching of Hafers:
a--general view; b——schematic

Key:
1. Etchant from tank 6. Etching
2. Water 7. Washing
3. Drain into tank 8. Drying
lo. Heated air 9. Unloading
5. Loading

-42-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the etching unit (fig 2-6) the wafers, 1, are placed in fluoroplastic holders.
2. installed on the tluoroplastic gears, 6, of a screw rotator, 3. and are nann—
ally loaded into the vat, S, with the etchant. The screw rotator. 3. is driven
into rotary action by leans of shaft 6 around the vat's axis. The gears, 6, sn-
gage with gear wheel 7 and rotate the holders on their axes. The combined notion
of the wafere—-around their own axes and around the axes of the vat-—is conducive
to producing high-quality waters. The screw rotator, 3, with the waters is trans-

ferred annually from the etching bath to the washing vat, 8. with circulating de-
ionized water.

 

. .
Inhaler: b) ﬂpuulm 3)

 

Figure 2-4. Etching Unit: a-general View; b-schenatic

Key:
1. Etching 3. Vashing
2. Hater

Another variety of this etching variant is loving waters in the etching vat with
their simultaneous rotation around the axes of the vat and a nultipocket holder

which rolls over the inclined conical bottom of the vet. This notion ensures the
most uniform etching of waters.

Good quality of waters is achieved when etching in a unit in which the etching vat
rotates around its axis at an angle of 15 to 20 degrees. Refers are adhered to
fluoroplastic disks by means of wax or chenical-resiatant lacquer and are placed
on the bottom of the vat, called the bell. Hhen the bell turns the disk rolls
along its wall and in addition rotates on its own axis, which makes possible the
uniform and controllable etching of waters. A laboratory-type unit is installed
in a fume cabinet. Wafers are washed in a vat standing alongside it and drying

takes place in a centrifuge or in a drying cabinet with predrying by neans of
filter paper.

- 43 _

m OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to chenical nethods of etching, other methods have becone used ever
more often, such as the electrochaical. thermal. ion and electron bombard-eat
and plasss chemical methods [12. 28]. m these cases specific equipment is en-
ployed which. as a rule. is desiped for carrying out the processes of cleaning
the surface prior to oxidation and diffusion. Therefore. it is discussed in the
appropriate chapters.

2-2. Equipment for Cleaning and Drying Vefers

Specific nethods and the appropriate equipment are used for cleaning wafers. de-
pending on the type of contaninstion of the surface of wafers.

After the diamond cutting of ingots. as well as after grinding by means of free
nicropowders. wafers are cleaned of sludge and abrasive particles in ultrasonic
cleaning units in circulating deionized water. Wafers polished by neens of diamond
paste are cleaned of the paste and sludge in a unit for washing in a washing solu-
tion. After finishing chenical-nechanical polishing. wafers are cleaned succes-
sively in units for washing in detergents, in peroxide solutions and in a unit for
the hydromechanicel cleaning of wafers (a brush washer).

After each washing operation wafers are dried in a centrifuge which as a rule is
a separate unit of the entire washing unit.

The basic elements of ultrasonic cleaning units are a dustproof cabinet, a vet for
washing, a nsgnetostrictor and an oscillator. The msgnetostrictor converts oscil-
lations of electrical current of the appropriate frequency (20 lair). which flows
through the mgnetostrictor's winding. into mechanical oscillations of the core.
The oscillator serves the purpose of producing electrical current of the require:
frequency and power. The negnetostrictor'a core is ads of a permelloy or of
nickel possessing the nsgnetostriction effect.

The operating principle of an ultrasonic cleaning unit consists in the creation of
enormous local alternating-sign pressure on the surface of wafers as the result of
the cavitation phenomenon. which consists in a discontinuity in a liquid on the
surface of a solid and in the fornation end then collapse of cavities. In the
collapse of nicrocevities enormous locel pressure pulses are created. The cyclic-
ity of the effect of these pulses is deternined by the frequency of the ultra-
sound. As a result of their repeated effect on the surface. solid particles
found on it are separated and removed by the liquid medium from the surface of
wafers. The water is -de to circulate for the purpose of removing particles of
contaminants free the vat.

Units for the mechanical cleaning of wafers are the lost effective in removing
solid particles and dust particles fro. the surface. A great nuﬁer of types of
units can be reduced to five basic syste- (fig 2-5):

Cleaning rotating wafers by neans of rotating brushes (fig 2-5. a).

Cleaning rotating wafers by scans of a soft moving tape (fig 2-5. b).

Cleaning wafers laid on a rotating inclined table by scans of a roller nsde of
soft fur (fig 2-5. c).

Simultaneous 2-sids cleaning of wafers by means of rollers made of soft fur (fig
2-5, d).

-‘b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Cleaning wafers laid on a horizontal rotating table by neans of a roller aade
of soft fur in coﬂination with a strong jet or water (fig 2-5. a).

 

ﬁgure 2-5. Schematic Diagrans of Units for Hydroeechanical Cleaning of
Raters: a—brush; butape; c-roller on inclined table;
d-sinultaneous 2-side; e—roller on horizontal tabla

Key:
1. Hater

Either rests or vacuum suckers are used to hold the wafers on the table. In the
case of sinultaneous 2-side cleaning the wafer is in a suspended state between
two rollers. The wafer is fed to the cleaning position along guides.

Universal-type units for the chenical processing of wafers iron the ”Lads-l"
couple: are discussed below. This equip-ant is distinguished by the use of a
uniforn pressurised chanber. l. with a block of filters, 2, naking it possible to

' create alanine: flow of dustfree air iron top to botton, which ukes it possible
to perforn all technological operations of cleaning and controlling waters in a
dustirea=ataosphere (fig 2-6). In these units there are tluoroplastic vats, 3.
(fro- one to three). for processing in corrosive aedia and one polypropylene
cascade vet for washing in circulating deionised water. tor ample. in chenical
processing units of the 0.8 cum-100401 and 0.8 ChlhlI-lOO-OOS type there are
three iluoroplastic and one cascade vat each. The holders with the wafers are
noved auto-tically by arena of a loving nechanisn in the first of these or
annually in the second.

The fluoroplastic vat is furnished with a heater. lo. The aaxinun heating tenpera-
ture is 120 'C and the accuracy of nintsining the teaperature is 1 5 'C. These
units are desipad for washing waters in peroxide-anon“ aixtures. in detergents
and in various corrosive nedia.

The 08 ChUV-OMB-OOZ ultrasonic washing unit is designed for washing waters in an
ultrasonic field. in corrosive nedia, a.g., in nitric acid, and for washing in

-55-

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deionized water. It contains an ultrasonic vet, one fluoroplastic vet with a
heater and a single cascade vat.

 

Pigure 2-6. Diagren of Che-teal Processing Unit

Key:
1. Exhaust

The 08 ChPVS-OIlSOO-OM wafer washing and drying unit consists of a box and a
centrifuge with a turntable for placing holders with wafers on it. It is possible

to load two or four holders simultaneously. Cleaning of wafers with deionized

water prior to drying is provided for. The washing tins of 50 to 260 s and drvin'.
tine of 50 to 260 s, as well as the rotational velocity of the centrifuge of
200 to 1600 r.p.a., are set on a control panel. After terninetion of the required

cycle the unit turns off auto-ticelly.

The MChShch-n/b-OOI eutomtic hydroaachanicel washer consists of four tracks
which operate independently of one another (fig 2-7). Bach track has its own con-

trol unit.

 

Figure 2-7. Diagram of Autonatic aydroaechanicel ﬂasher

-66-

MI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The holder, 1. with the wafers, 2, is placed on the platform of a loading mechan-
ian. by means of a conveyer. 3. wafers are fed one by one to the platforn of a
centrifuge, 6. to which the wafer is fastened by means of a vacuum and undergoes
the operations of cleaning. washing and drying. The surface of the wafer is
cleaned by means of a rotating cylindrical brush, 5, with the simltaneous feeding
of a washing solution or deionised water and with the wafer rotating on its own
aria. Drying of the wafer is accospliahed with a considerable increase in the
rotational velocity of the wafer. The tine for the performance of each operation-
cleaning. with the brush, first washing, second washing, dryingnis set over one-
second intervals over the range of 0 to 99 s. The washed and dried wafers enter
a receiving container, 7, through inclined guides. 6.

The visual inspection unit consists of a duatproof box and an HID-2 microscope.

In addition to the above. the "Lads-l" complex includes a number of units for
serving the cleaning line, in particular, a unit for transporting and supplying
reagents. a unit for heating deionized water, a water purification system, a
water recycling unit. etc.

Units are put together in a cleaning line as a function of the specific purpose and
technological process.

Still greater possibilities for putting together cleaning lines and sections are
opened up with the modular design of units based on a dustproof box. The indivi-
dual washing units are interchangeable and can be latched in one and the sane
pressurized chaﬂ>er (box) in any combination. Por angle, if necessary, the.
first three boxes can be totally made up of ultrasonic cleaning units or can con-
tain all types of units for carrying out the most complicated cleaning cycle.

2-3. Equipment for Controlling the Quality of Hafers

After finishing cleaning, wafers are checked for agreement with technical require-
ments or specifications. Some parameters-«he diameter of wafers, the orientation
of the surface with respect to the prescribed crystallographic plane, the absence
of a defect layer. the length and orientation of the base cut—ere guaranteed by
the technological process. The remaining parameters are checked during a finish-
ing check. Rare thc thickness of wafers, nonplaneness, nonparallelness. buckling.
the degree of cleanliness of the surface, the roughness of surfaces, and the pre-
sence and length of marks. cracks. spots, bruises and chips are checked.

Thickness, nonplaneness, nonparallelneas and the buckling of wafers are checked by
means of clock-type indicators with a division value of 0.001 ms and 5-HT or s-rv
equipment racks. More precise measurements of thickness are made with an rzv-z
optical measuring machine, which sakes it possible to measure thickness with an
accuracy of 1 0.0005 am. For the purpose of obtaining reproducible results. indi-
cators and measuring machines must be checked systematically against end gages or
standard wafers.

In measuring thin wafers of large diameter this method results in considerable
errors and in this case it is necessary to perform measurements on an HIT-lo

microscope. for this purpose a standard. e.g., a mask, is placed on the stage of
the microscope and the microscope is adjusted for a sharp image of the lower

-47-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

surface of the mask. A note is made of the position of the stage's lifting

screw. The mask is removed and the wafer being studied is put in its place.

A sharp image is obtained of the surface of the wafer. The difference in the posi-
tions of the stage's vertical raising screw multiplied by the division value gives
the amount of buckling of the wafer. In measuring buckling on the HlI-é micro-
scope it is necessary to make sure that the direction in which the screw is turned
when adjusting for the standard and studied surface is identical (from the bottom
to the top). The accuracy of measurements of buckling is determined by the divi-
sion value of the micrometer screw and can be brought to :_0.0005 mm. More pre-
cise measurements of the geometrical parameters of a wafer are made on a laser
interferometer of the UKP-Z type, from interference bands [11].

Instruments for non-contact testing of the geometric parameters of wafers have
begun to be used_ever more extensively in practice in recent times. These instru-
ments make it possible to make measurements rapidly with high precision without
scratching and contaminating the working surface of the wafer. Their operating
principle is based on the change in the drop in pressure of air coming out of a
nozzle or the change in the capacitance of an electrode-stage system when wafers
of various thicknesses are introduced into it. For example, a capacitive pickup
is used in the ADB Corp. (USA) model 6033 non-contact instrument for measuring
thickness; the division value is 0.0001 mm and the measurement range is 0 to 1 mm.
The instrument consists of a stage, a capacitive pickup and an electronics section
with digital readout of the measured quantity. The operator places wafers down,
moves them and removes them.

Units for automatically checking the geometrical parameters of wafers are being
used ever more extensively. e.g., the UKTP-l, SPT-l, 51-100, etc.

The quality of cleanliness of the surface, marks, spots. bruises and chips are
checked on units for the visual inspection of wafers. A typical visual inspecriu
unit, e.g., the SA-710 and SA-720 models (fig 2-8), consists of the following main
elements: cassettes, 1, an optical microscope, 2, a stage for the wafers, 3, a
conveyer. S, a manipulator. h, and an electrical unit. 6. A straight-line system
is used for feeding wafers for the loading, sorting and unloading of wafers. A
high-speed belt feed mechanism conveys wafers from the loading position to the
inspection stage and returns checked wafers to the appropriate classification
cassette.

1n model SA-710 and SA-720 units there is one cassette for good wafers and three
cassettes for wafers which must be reprocessed. A counter is provided for each
group of wafers. The capacity of a single cassette is 25 wafers up to 101.6 mm in
diameter. The productivity of these units is 200 to 300 wafers per hour.

In all units visual inspection is performed by an operator by means of an optical
microscope. NBS-l, NBS—2, HBI-ll. Mil-3, Pill-4 and Dim-7 microscopes are used in
domestic units. Foreign firms use the EPY model microscope from the Zeiss and
Nikon firms.

A so-cslled air cushion (cf. ch 5) is often used as a conveyer. Wafers are di-
rected to a cassette by means of an air jet without touching the conveyer, which
eliminates scratching them and contaminating the material of the conveyer. for
example, in the model 5500 unit when the operator presses a foot pedal wafers are

- 43 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
moved on an air cushion from the cassette being inspected to a stage with a
vacuum sucker. The movement of a wafer for the purpose of inspecting its surface
is accomplished by the operator by means of a manipulator. There is an automatic
mode for moving a wafer at two speeds. Upon an instruction from a foot switch,
wafers are returned to a cassette and rejected wafers are moved on the air cushion
to the holding position and are transferred by the operator into the appropriate
individual cassette.

 

Figure 2-8. Unit for Visual Inspection of wafers

Projectors, which considerably reduce operator fatigue, are often used in inspec-
tion units instead of an optical microscope. For controlling the quality of the
cleanliness of wafers a projector is used for the purpose of measuring the wetting
angle. A wafer is put into a chamber. A drop of liquid is applied to the wafer
by means of a dispenser and this is then projected onto a screen. The wetting
angle is measured by means of a scale graduated in degrees. The productivity of

a unit of this type is not greater than 60 wafers per hour.

The amount of microcontsminants on the surface of a wafer can be estimated with an
instrument of the ICh-Z type. This instrument consists of an X-Y stage. a ball—
type sensor. a weight and a traction element. The instrument's operation is based
on the dependence of the coefficient of static friction between two surfaces on
the amount of contaminants. A polished steel ball has point contact with the sur-
face being studied. The traction element links the ball with the core of an elec-
tromagnet by means of which the force of friction is estimated. The amount of
contaminants on the surface is estimated from the instrument's readings and from

_ 49 -

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

s galibrstion curve. The instrument functions in the contamination range of
lO‘tolO’g/cm.

Some surface defects (buckling. nonplaneneaa, cracks, holes. etc.) are checked by
means of laser interferometers-—UKP-l and DIP-2 units for inspecting polished
vafers. The quality of the surface is judged from an interference pattern con-
sisting of black and white lines and bands. However, the productivity of this
kind of inspection is not high-~froe 60 to 100 wafers per hour.

Chapter 3. Equip-en: for Creating p-n Junctions
3-1. General Information on the Planar Process

The planar process is the basis of the fabrication of semiconductor structures.
The planar process's principle is that all processes of the creation of semicon-
ductor devices are carried out on one plane of semiconductor substrates, including
ohmic contacts and protective coatings. The development of photolithography and
diffusion technology and equipment. as well as the discovery of the masking and
passivation properties of silicon dioxide, led to the invention of the planar pro-
cess.

The technological sequence of operations for creating structures of devices is
given in fig 3-1 and the process for producing transistors in fig 3-2 [5]. As is
obvious from these figures, the entire technological process of the creation of
transistors can be arbitarily divided into two groups of operations:

Operations by means of which doped layers are created by the deposition of epitax-
ial films and by the diffusion of impurities, masking and passivating coatings by

oxidation or deposition from the vapor phase. and ohmic contacts by the deposition
of metallic films.

Operations by means of which high purity of the surface of semiconductor wafers to
be processed by chemical and plasma chemical methods is made possible and a pattern
is created in an oxide film and metallic films by means of photolithography.

The subject of discussion of this chapter is the first group of operations (the
second is described in chs 2 and 5). It must be mentioned that the technology for
the fabrication of integrated microcircuits and large-scale integrated microcir-
cuits is of course more complicated than that of transistors and requires addi-
tional operations to prevent stray coupling of their elements and to make possible
the prescribed (necessary) electrical connections. For these purposes regions
electrically insulated from the bulk of the chip. in which active elements are
produced, are created in a chip. The two most widely used methods of creating

the isolation of circuit elements are presented in fig 3-3. They are the method
of isolation by means of p-n junctions and the method of dielectric isolation.

The first method is simpler in terms of technology and it is less expensive. The
second makes possible greater reliability and longevity, as well as enhanced
radiation resistance.

- 50 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
é”

Pigure 3-1.

E:

a?
1) 3) 5)

-m
@-

oaaaaaaaa

%

m
E

Typical Technological Procaaa for Fabricating a Tranaiator
Structure of the 'n-p-n Type

0

Growing epitaxial film 7. Photolithography of contact window
Prilary oxidation . 8. Spraying of alumina
Photolithography of base 9. Pbotolithography of contacts
Cleaning 10‘. brazing of aluminum
Diffuaion of boron ll. Spraying gold beneath collector
Pbotolithography of an‘itter contact

{2727 WI -,>

”-1.1"

figure 3-2. Technological Proceaa for

W

 

hum-qua: aha-0A
2 0- -HI"

'2?
u I:\\‘ -

W/l/l/l

 

-51-

rabrication of n-p-n Planar
‘l‘ran iator: anatarting water
of n ~type ailicon; b—depo-
aition of n-ty-pe epitaxial
fill: c—firat thereal oxida-
tion; d—photolithography of
baae and creation of base by
diffuaion of boron; e-photo-
lithography of. enitter by
dittuaion of phoephorua; f—
photolithography beneath con-
tacta and depoaition of net-
ala

n+-type enitter region

POI OMCIAI. USE ONLY
Figure 3-3.

6.
7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 INN.”

’//////////9

:1 3’

7/
6) n..-

-\ I “Av \“\\' I s‘

2%

   

circuits

Isolation by scans of 8.
p-n junction 9.
Original wafer 10.
Oxidation and photolithography

under separation diffusion 11.
Pocket

Diffusion of boron for forling
isolating pockets

Isolation by dielectric

n-type

    
   
    

'l‘vo )Iethods of Isolating Active Elements of Integrated Micro-

Starting wafer with thernal oxidc-
Polycrystal

Refer with polycrystalline fils
applied to it

tornation of pocket by grinding
wafer off

The nore conplicated technology of febricating integrated nicrocircuits (Di's)
and large-scale integrated nicrocircuits (lm‘s) includes the following technolo-

gical operations:

theml oxidation of silicon wafers; diffusion of inurities

for the purpose of creating doped fills, including p-n junctions (in addition to
diffusion. ion-inplented doping is also eqloyed); epitaxial growing, as well as
the deposition of polycrystalline silicon in creating electrically isolated re-

gions by the dielectric isolation uthod; application of letalisation. including

-52-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
aultilayer and nultilevel; low-tenperature deposition of dielectric files free
the vapor phase for the purpose of isolation in mltilevel netalixation and for
protecting finished structures fro. the influence of the environ-ant.

The planar process for the fabrication of semiconductor devices and 134‘s has been
discussed by using as an steeple the process eqloying silicon uafsrs. since
silicon both now and in the future will retain its doninant position in the elec-
tronics industry.

Thus. in order to create in silicon wafers active structures for discrete devices.
m's end-Dm's. the following equip-eat is required: diffusion furnaces. ion-
iqlented doping apparatus. apparatus for epitaxial growing and apparatus for
applying netsllic and dielectric coatings.

3-2. Diffusion Bquipnent

In the production of ssaiconductors and integrated nicrocircuits a wafer is sub-
jected to a nunber of high-te-perature processes. including: oxidation—for
foraing on the surface of the substrate a file (silicon dioxide). which is used

for the pessivetion of p-n structures. for asking the surface of the seniconductor
froa the diffusion of imritiu. and as a gate oxide for nos [natal-oxide seni-
conductor] devices and integrated nicrocircuits based on than; and diffusion--

for creating doped layers in seniconductor substrates in forming active p-n junc-
tions. isolation between elenents. separating regions. etc.

Diffusion of Inurities

Diffusion is the process. caused by thermal notion. of the transfer of atoms in
any uterisl regardless of its state of aggregation. If stone are distributed
nonunifornly in the substance. i.e.. a concentration gradient exists. then the
directional flow of atom takes place fro. a region with high concentration to a
region with low concentration of the stone of the material in question. Direction-
al flow originates sinilerly to this also in the case of the origin of a tapers-
ture gradient in the neterial. In this case atom diffuse fro. a region with a
higher tenperature (with higher energy) into a region with a lower tesperature.

Processes of diffusion with a concentration gradient with constant tenperature of
the substrate are usually used in the production of ssniconductor devices.

Let us discuss one important diffusion parameter which in fact deternines equip-
nent specifications. This is the diffusion coefficient:

D - D. “a",
(3-1)

where It - 8.63-10.s eV/deg is the Doltuann constant. 1' is the absolute
temperature. and Do and A! are funds-ental diffusion paraneters

-53-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OF‘NCIAI.US£4DNLV

(D0 is a constant corresponding to the value of D with unlimited I and
AB is the activation energy).*

Let us discuss the requirements for the stability of the maintenance of a specific
temperature for diffusion furnaces. If we analyse equation (3-1). it can be ob-
served that a change in temperature of a few degrees can result in a 2- and 3-fold
increase in the diffusion coefficient, i.e., in the depth of occurrence of the
doped layer. For example, the diffusion coefficient increases approximately
5-fold with every 100 'c increase in temperature from 900 ’C.

In designing diffusion furnaces it is necessary to take into account the fact that
the accuracy of maintaining the temperature in the furnace zone must be not worse
than 1 0.5 'c with the condition of triviality of the time for transient tempera-
ture processes when putting wafers into the furnace as compared with the time for
the diffusion process itself. In this case the variation in the depth of occur-
rence of impurities. e.g., of boron and phosphorus in silicon. will be in the
range of one percent. which satisfies the technological requirements for producing
p-n junctions for the complex class of microwave devices for transistors with a
very thin base region (within the range of 0.1 u). variation in which entails
strong variation of the frequency properties of devices.

The need to maintain high temperatures is dictated also by the following facts.
Of course. the solubility of an impurity in solids and. in particular, in semi-
conductors. is determined by the kind of impurity and the temperature of the
process. The higher the temperature. the higher the solubility. In creating an
emitter region for transistors it is necessary to take into account the fact that
the concentration of the added impurity must be on the order of 102° to 1021 cm”.
This concentration can be achieved only with high temperatures (on the order of
1000 to 1300 ’C). Thus. in designing diffusion furnaces it is necessary to I)
guarantee a temperature in the furnace over the range of 900 to 1300 ’C. and 2)
to guarantee accuracy in maintaining the temperature of not worse than 1.0.5 'C
over the entire diffusion temperature range employed.

In carrying out the diffusion process, on the basis of requirements for high
cleanliness in carrying out the process. quartz. alundum and polysilicon tubes
are employed as the diffusion process chamber, having high melting points (higher
than 1300 ‘C). a long operating life under high-temperature conditions, and high
("semiconductor") purity of their raw material.

Tubes made of quartz glass, which have high purity, low internal stresses, a
small number of large bubbles. and also high transparency for ultraviolet and
infrared radiation, are chiefly used for diffusion.

Tubes made of polycrystalline silicon are superior to quartz and alundum in
purity of the material and permeability for alkali metals. furthermore. the

*AE --the activation energy in diffusion-corresponds to A" --the height of the
potential barrier which a particle must surmount in order to go from one position
of equilibrium in the lattice to another. e.g., from one site or interstitial site,
respectively, to another site or interstitial site.

- 54 -

FORiOFFﬂJAl.USEl)NLY
lifetime of a tube made of polycrystalline silicon at a teqerature of 1300 ’C
is almost 5-fold longer than for tubes made of quartz. since quartz crystallizes
at this teqerature and looses mchenical strength. The use of tubes made of

polycrystalline silicon has been haqered by the coqlexity of the equipment for
producing them.

Tubes with a round and, recently. a rectangular cross section are chiefly used
as process chamrs for diffusion processes. Tubes ude of quartz glass are
used chiefly. The size of the tubes' cross section depends on the diameter of
the wafers being processed. h recent furnace models (e.g., of the SDO-lZS/V-ls
type) tubes up to 150 - in diameter can he used or tubes with a rectangular
cross section with a diagonal of approxintely the same site. The substrate
holder (dish) and other elements of the loading unit located in the furnece's
working space are also .de chiefly of quartz glass.

Let us discuss the process of performing the diffusion operation in a furnace in
which. consistent with the above. the tube end substrate holder are made of an
especially pure heat-resistant material. e.g., of quarts glass, end the temperature
in the diffusion tone is ninteined with accuracy of 1 0.5 ’C over the range of
900 to 1300 'C. llere it is necessary to take into account the following negative
factors which met be avoided in designing diffusion furnaces:

Adding to a furnace a substrate holder with seniconductor wafers at room teIwera-
ture introduces a disturbance of the static teqenture conditions of the diffuo
sion furnace. and a considerable time (10 to 15 min) is required for the purpose
of establishing working conditions. During the transition period the accuracy of
maintaining the temperature in the diffusion zone will vary, which will result in
variation in the depth and distribution profile of impurities in the substrate.

In addition, the rapid loading or unloading of wafers from the high-temperature

zone results in the appearance in them of stresses and strains as the result of
thermal shock.

holding the substrate holder and silicon wafers at high temperatures for a pro-
longed period can result in bonding of substrates with one another and with the

substrate holder. This is especially characteristic of tubes and substrate hold-
ers lads of quartz.

The depth and distribution profile of inurities in the substrate vary with an

unstable feed rate of the gaseous diffusant and its uneven distribution over the
tube's cross section.

Shortening the duration of transient conditions in the furnace during loading is
achieved by using a special temperature restoration unit which boosts the fur-
nace's supply power during loading. or by using preheaters (a prechamber) in
which wafers to be loaded are heated to a teqerature 180 to 200 '0 below the
furnace's operating temperature.

Bonding of the substrate holder with the reactor tube can be prevented by s vi-

brating movement of the substrate holder. accowlished by means of an auto-atic
loader.

-55-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Intrusion units have been created for diffusion processes which include. as a
rule, 3- or h-tuhe diffusion furnaces with duatfree cells with laminar flows.
automatic loaders. gas cabinets. and also programmers for a ninicoaputer. If
there are several of these conplexea. then one more cowuter is used for con-
trolling processes in all diffusion complexes, as well as a conveyer used for

the purpose of inking possible transport flows of containers with wafers to

each furnace and fron then to the site of the process flow control station. An
automated lo—tube diffusion system is presented in fig 3-6, consisting of a lo-tube
diffusion furnace of the sno-izsmt type, 9; automatic loaders mounted on a
single base, 7; a dustfree cell with laminar flow, 8; a cabinet for the automated
control of the delivery of gas to the diffusion furnace, l. which in turn con-
sists of a computer interface. 2, a power supply. 3. a peripheral input console.
lo, a programmer. 5. and a signaling unit. 6; and a cabinet for controlling the
system with a programaer and computer interface, 10, consisting of a channel con-
trol unit, 11, a flowrate sensor unit, 12. and a tenperature sensor unit, 13.

 

Figure 3-b. Automated Diffusion System

Let us discuss the components of diffusion equipment.
Diffusion Furnaces

Three- and lo-tube diffusion furnaces are used at the present time in the electron-
ics industry. In order for the diffusion process to be reproducible. a tempera-
ture zone with nonuniformity in distribution of the temperature of t 0.5 ’C is
required. The length of this zone determines the furnace's produtivity and
usually equals 600 -.

Single-zone furnaces with three (the 800-125/3-12 and 800-125/3-15) and four
(the SDO-lZS/AA) thermal nodules are used in the industry at the present time.

Structurally.‘s diffusion furnace has two parts: thermal heating chambers and a
frame-type base with electrical units. The heating chambers are attached to the
frame-type base.

Located in the frame-type base are the units for supplying electric power to the
heating elements and for automatic control of the furnace's operating mode with

-S6-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
untried teqerature controls of the xterm-1 or W-l type. The heating chanber
includes a heater cartridge and a quartz reaction tube. The heater cartridge can
be of two types: with a heating element covered with a thin layer of a cerenic
coating based on pure elundul. and with a heating elemmt without a coating. M
types of heater cartridges are shown in fig 3-5 [6]. A heat-resistant wire 5.! u
in diameter wound into a coil is used as the heating element. “hen electric
current passes through it it is heated to a teqerature nking it possible to pro-
duce in the reaction tube a maxinn teqerature on the order of 1350 'c. In order
to control the teqerature distribution profile over the entire zone. the heater
is ends of several sections. mainly of three. Contacts for connecting to indivi-
dual electric power supplies are led outside from each section by means of wires
node of the same heat-resistant meterial. The coil's winding pitch is deter-ined
by the installation of ceramic insulators. and their projecting ends serve as a
support for a ceranic muffle tube. -

m: l 1) A-A

 

Figure 3-5. Design of lleater Cartridges: a—-with ceraeic covering based
on alundun; b-without covering

Key:
1. Unit I

The center heating section takes it possible to produce uniform heating at the
center of the zone. and the two end ones, equalization of tenperature for the
ends of the center section.

Control of the teqerature in a diffusion furnace is accomplished by means of
platinun - platinum-rhodium thermocouples and a temperature control unit of the
RYePlD-l or "RT-l type connected to the power supply. rive thermoc0uples are
used. The thermocouples are placed at the center of each section and at the ends
of the center section. It is possible to become acquainted in greater detail
with control of the tenperature of diffusion furnaces in [lo], for example.

In order to reduce the area occupied and the nutter of dustfree cells and of
other systens, diffusion furnaces are arranged either side by side or end to end.
In this case the dustfree cells with laminar flow are united into a single one
in vhich auto-tic loaders are used. The gas systems are also united into a
single unit.

-57-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Automatic Loaders

with an increase in the diameter of wafers being produced there was an increase
in rejects of wafers in diffusion operations, caused by the origin of high in-
iternal stresses when loading and unloading wafers from high—temperature furnaces.
For the purpose of eliminating these rejects. as well as rejects associated with
bonding of the quartz substrate holder directly to the quartz tube of the furnace,

automatic loaders are used (fig 3—6) with a reversing mechanism making it possible
to add wafers to the furnace and remove them smoothly.

 

Figure 3-6. General View of Automatic Loader
Automatic loaders perform the following functions:

Putting wafers into a diffusion furnace at a certain speed which can be adjusted
by degrees, e.g., 100 to 200 m per min.

Rocking the substrate holder (dish) in the high—temperature zone (roughly 2.5 ml
/min over a range of 20 m).

Unloading wafers from the high-temperature zone at a certain speed (e.g. , 25 to
100 mm/min).

-53-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In order not to introduce conteninants. the auto-tic loader's pusher rod is
node of quarts of the sale purity as the tube and dish. Thus, the use of auto-
utic loaders drastically reduces rejects of wafers. especially of large dia-
eeter. elininatee error on the part of the operator and reduces the labor inten-
siveness of the diffusion Operation. In addition. the reproducibility of the
characteristics of doped layers fro- batch to batch of wafers is increased.

Dustfree Calls

Dustfree cells are installed at the inlet to diffusion furnace reactors for the
purpose of ensuring cleanliness in transferring wafers fro. a container into
substrate holders end in putting then into diffusion tubes (cf. ch 13).

Auto-stud Gas Cabinets

The auto-ted gas cabinet is designed for preparing. delivering. regulating and
monitoring flows of vapor-gas eixtures in the diffusion and oxidation of seni-
conductor wafers.

As a rule two cabinets are provided in diffusion systeas for delivering to the

quartz tubes mixtures of vapors of the diffusant with argon and for supplying
dried or Ioist oxygen.

Hechanical diagram for diffusion (fig 3-7. a) end oxidation (fig 3-7. b) are
presented in fig 3-7. There are three lines in the cabinet for the diffusion pro-
cess: for supplying inert gas for blowing tubes through end for freeing the. from
tho atnosphere's air; for supplying oxygen; and for delivering to the reactor

a vapor-gas mixture of inert gas and diffusant. Blectronagnetic valves for clos-
ing lines. rotanetere for nonitoring the gas flowrate, flow regulators. and sta-
bilizers for a specific gas flowrate are used in the systen. Liquid compounds,

e. g., as: 3, P01 and P001 , or gaseous. 8H and PH 3, are used as a rule for the
diffusion 3of be and phgsphorus into siiigon. In 3individual cases methods of
diffusion fron a parallel source or fron e deposited surface source—a film con-
taining a diffusant--are used.

The principle of diffusion from a parallel source consists in the fact that the
source of the diffusant and the silicon wafers are placed parallel to one another:
The source is above horizontally lying wafers. A gas nediun flow passes between
then. Vapors of the impurity diffuse through the gas, strike the surface of the
silicon and forn there a surface diffusant source—a file of liquid glass, e.g.,
borosilicate. 3203 8102.

The surface source-a fill containing the diffusant—can be fort-ed by the high-
tesporature deposition of doped film of $123 or by depositing files of a dis-

perser of a similar couposition by the neth of centrifuging followed by vitri-
fication.

The use of single-zone diffusion furnaces with a simlified gas syste- is re-
quired in all of the above-naud nethods.

-59-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3-7. Diagram of Delivery of Gases and Diffusants to Diffusion
Furnaces: a--for diffusion; b-ofor oxidation; RD—pressure
regulator; H--manometer; K—electromagnetic valve; Rnrotameter;
Tpnthermocouple; Nuflow regulator; SM. Blnsotor; Dr-cho|:e

Key:
1. Diffusion unit 9. nanometer
2. Oxidation unit 10. Blectrmgnetic valve
3. Air 11. Rotaseter
lo. Liquid diffusant 12. Thermocouple
5. Tube 13. Flow regulator
6. Vapor 11o. Ibtor
7. Atmospheric air 15. Choice

8 . Pressure regulator

Plasma cheaical methods of cleaning, which have replaced liquid chemical. are
being used extensively in recent years. The equipment used for these purposes has
small overall dimensions and increases the percentage of the yield of suitable
structures. The operating procedure of a diffusion system with a plasma chemical
cleaning unit (fig 3-8) is as follows: The holder with the wafers enters. from
the automatic loader, the plasma cleaning module and through it enters the diffu-
sion furnace. Por the unimpeded travel of holders with wafers from the furnace

to the automatic loader and vice-versa. swing-sway sealing covers have been made
at the ends of a module's quartz tubes.

-60-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It should also he mentioned that also promising for diffusion processes is the
use of radteut infrared heathe- which nuns poaaihie a chart time for the furnace
to were up and a mi" degree of cleanliness in carrying out the process.

 

Figure 3-8. General View of "Plasma-modul' 1"1'" Predifr'us «on Plasma Chemical
Cleaning Module for 3-Tube furnace

3-3. Equipment for Ion-Inplanted Doping Processes

Ion implantation is the introduction of ionized atoms of an impurity into the
surface layer of a substrate as the result of inverting to these atoms high

kinetic energy (fro. keV to Nev). As the ion advances in the substrate it grad—
ually loses energy on account of electronic and nuclear deceleration and ulti-
mtely stops in the substrate at the appropriate depth from the surface. The basic
distinction between the lon-ixwlanted doping method and thermal diffusion is in the
method of imparting energy to impurity atoms: In thermal diffusion it is thermal.
on account of the high temperature (on the order of 900 to 1300 'C), and in ion-
iwlanted doping it is electrical on account of the ionization of vapors of the

-61-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

impurity substance and of their acceleration with the application of a high
potential difference.

The advantages of ion-implanted doping over theml diffusion consist in the
following capabilities:

Doping solid substrates with atoms of any substance regardless of its maximum
solubility.

Doping at any temperature right donn to very low.

Creating in the substrate a concealed layer at some distance from the surface of
the substrate.

Producing non-deep (on the order of 0.1 u and less) doped layers, including
multistage.

Producing a high degree of purity of an introduced inurity.
Doping a substrate through a protective layer.

Controlling with high precision the depth and distribution profile of impurities
in a substrate by changing the energy and dose of introduced impurity ions.

Among the disadvantages can be numbered the conplexity of the equipment and re-
sidual radiation defects in the substrate.

The following are necessary to accomplish ion-implanted doping:
Ionizing the impurity substance.

lmparting to the impurity ion the appropriate energy in order to introduce it
at the prescribed depth in the substrate.

Separating impurity ions by mass from undesirable elements.
Directing ions to the surface of the substrate in order to introduce then.

As is obvious from this sequence of operations, ion-implanted doping apparatus
must include the following main units: an ion source. an accelerating tube.
a nass separator, and scanning and receiving equipment.

Ion-implanted doping units are classified by the method of acceleration (fig 3-9).
If the acceleration of ions is accomplished before the mass separator. then these
units are called units with prmcceleration (A). If the unit is based on the
acceleration of impurity ions alter the mass separator. then this unit is a unit
with postacceleration (B).

If low energy of ions is required (up to 50 keV), then an accelerating tube is not
used in the unit and the acceleration of ions is accomplished on account of an
extraction potential applied in the ion source (C). In these units the magnet and

-52-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
receiving unit are under ground potential. which ensures electrical safety for the
work of operating personnel and work convenience.

 

Figure 3-9. Classification of Ion-Inplanted Doping Units by method of

Acceleration: (Io—ion extraction voltage; (JP—accelerating

voltage
Key:
1. Ion source 3. Scanning unit
2. Haas separator 6. Receiving unit

Units of type A are used for low energies and any ion use. but the weight and
overall dinensions of the electromagnetic separator increase drastically with
an increase in energy. In units of type B the magnet is under ground potential
and they are thus electrically safe; therefore, it is possible to use large
magnets for the nass separation of ions of heavy elenents and, by using an
accelerating tube before the receiver, to accelerate ions to high energies. The
disadvantage of these units is that the receiver is under high potential.

Units of type C are used to produce beans of ions with low mass and high energy.
llere the magnet and ion source are under high potential and the receiver under
ground potential.

Ion Sources

An ion source is designed to ionize vapors of substances introduced into it and
to extract ions of atoms (molecules) of this substance into an ion conductor or
accelerating tube. It consists of the following elements: a discharge chamber
connected by an opening with the ion conductor or accelerating tube. and a unit
for extracting and focusing ions.

with the introduction into the chamber of a gaseous substance. a plasna fares in
the discharge chanber. The ionization of vapors or a gas takes place by the
collision of electrons with atons (molecules) of the introduced substance. 51
discharge in the charter is usually produced at low pressure of '(13 to l)°lO Pa,
in order to make possible the required density of the plasna. The discharge
chamber is usually placed in a nametic field for the purpose of increasing the
probability of the collision of an electron with stone (molecules).

-53..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with respect to the method of creating the plasma. ion sources are divided into
Ion sources with a high-frequency discharge. with discharge from a heated cathode,
and from a cold cathode.

A schematic diagram of a source with a high-frequency discharge is shown in fig
3-10. It is economical and sine in design. However, this type of source is
characterized by a large spread in the energy of ions. its operation becomes un-
stable at high temperatures, it does not make it possible to produce currents of
high density, and it also requires controlling a great number of parameters in the
process of its operation. As a rule it is designed for operating with gases.

The operating principle of a high-frequency source is as follows. A gas discharge
is ignited in the chamber, forming a plasma on account of a high-frequency magnet-
ic field with a frequency of 10 to an ill: created by coil 1. A potential differ-
ence on the order of 3 to 5 kV is applied between the anode in the upper half of
the chamber. 3, and the extracting electrode (the cathode), 2. High-frequency

ion sources make possible low current (hundreds of microamperes to single numbers
of milliamperes), are designed for low power, and are simple in design. °

5

 

Figure 3-10. High-Frequency Ion Source

Key:
1. Gas 2. Ion

A Penning ion source in which discharge with a cold cathode is employed is
presented in fig 3-11. In the discharge chamber of this source a self-maintained
glow discharge is created, originating as the result of the applied potential
difference (on the order of S to 7 kV) between a cold cathode, 6, and an orificed
anode, 6. an of the application of a longitudinal magnetic field created by coil
1. The anode, anticathode. 3, and cathode are electrically isolated by means of
insulators. 5. Aluminum. beryllium, uranium and other cathodes having a low
sputtering coefficient are usually used in order to increase the service life of
the cathode (reduce its sputtering).

The cathode*is coated with an oxide film in order to increase ion-electron emission.
The anticathode, 3. serves the purpose of forming a plasma front and the extract-
ing electrode. 2. in addition to its main purpose, of focusing the beam.

Sometimes the transition of a Penning discharge into an arc discharge in the
absence of a magnetic field is employed for the purpose of producing an arc

- 64 -

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
discharge. with this it is possible to increase the. extrection of ion current
iron the source.

um _ ’\_

Hg \:

Figure 3-11. Structurel Distre- o! Penning Ion Source

Key:
1. Gee

A Nielsen ion source is shown in ii: 3-12. By seens of this source it is possible
to produce ions of substencee iron liquid end solid coqounds. es vell es fro-
seses. It consists of e tungsten hot cethode. lo. en electrougret, 1. en extract-
ing electrode. 3. en enticethode, 2. end insulators. 8. A crucible, 6, with s
heeter, 7. asking it possible to best the crucible tron 170 to 900 ’C, is es-
ployed in order to vsporise liquid end solid eublileting neterisls. Cylinder 5
serves es the enode. By eesns of this ion source it is possible to produce strong
been of gaseous eleoents end chiefly of herd end hish-oelting elensnte including
boron. carbon. elu-inul, silicon. iron and the like. _ ‘

m

1)
‘ . z},
.1?

Rﬁ

\__.

_/
\

t}sgv

Figure 3-12. Nielsen Ion Source

Key:
1. Gas

The scheutic diesren of e nor-om slit-type ion source. by means of which it is
possible to produce ion been of the ribbon type with e circular cross section,

is shown in fig 3-13, e. A thermionic cethode. 3. with e screen. lo, heeted by
e heater, 2. serves es the electron source. An epplied upetic field of

-55-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY

ll 3 100105 All pro-ates the («nation of a bean of electrons loving toward the
anode. 8.

   

figure 3-13. Horozov Ion Source: a—for gaseous substances; b—for solid
substances '

Key:
1. Gas 2. Ion bean

me plasma. 5, form: with the admission of gas through the gas distributor, 1.

In the diagrsn in fig 3-13, h. a crucible. 10, with the substance. which nuat be
vaporized into the discharge zone by needs of heater 9, serves as the anode.

The shape of the ion bean is deternined by the shape of slit 7 and of the opening
in the extracting electrode. 6. by scans of this source it is practically possible
to produce ions of any substance. including high-nelting, as well as nultiply
charged ions.

One of the nost widespread is an ion source of the duoplasnatron type with an arc
discharge developed by Ardenne. Its fundansntal difference fron ion sources of
other types consists in double contraction of the plasna (fig 3-16). i.e., con-
centration of the plssna in the required region of the discharge chanher by scans
of electric and nagnetic fields. 6. of the appropriate configuration. The methods
of forming the plans are as in the preceding source.

 

Figure 3-16. Diagran of Electric and Kagnetic Contraction of Plasns in
Duoplasnstron: a—electric contraction of plasne; b-mgnetic

-66-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An additional anode, 2, of the appropriate shape. the potential across which
differs froa the potential across the main anode. b, is introduced for the
purpose of contracting the plaana by scans of the electric field. As a result.

an additional potential difference is created inside the channel and between the
cathode, l. and Iain anode, 4, an electric double layer. 3, is formed. which
focuses and accelerates electrons into the region of the opening of the nain
anode. Hith this the ionization efficiency is increased. which results in an in-
crease in the concentration of ions extracted through the anode opening and in
the fornation of a distinct plasla boundary. 5. in the outlet fron anode 6.
Electric contraction of the plasna is illustrated scheaatically in fig 3-14. a. and
in fig 3-16, b. aagnetic contraction of the plasma on account of a strong in-
honogeneous aagnetic field. Here the additional electrode, 2, and the Iain anode,
4, are the Iagnet's pole pieces. As a result. the concentration of electrons

and therefore the ionization efficiency are increased. Inserts made of high-
Ielting naterials-—Iolybdenun or tungsten-are fastened inside the electrodes

for the purpose of increasing their heat resistance.

Accelerating Tube

The accelerating tube is designed for accelerating ions and depending on the
type of unit it is placed before or after the uses separator. The additional
focusing of the ion bean is also accomplished by leans of it.

As indicated previously, accelerating tubes are not used in units in which low

ion energies are required (on the order of 60 to 50 keV). since the acceleration
of ions in then takes place on account of the use of an accelerating electrode

at the outlet of the ion source. For the purpose of producing a uniform distribu-
tion of voltage along the length of the accelerating tube, it is usually Iade

sectional by alternating electrodes, 1, with insulating rings, 2, and by eaploying
a voltage divider. 3 (fig 3-15).

 

Figure 3-15. Hultisection Accelerating Tube

Key:
1. Ion been

-67-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJI‘OFFICIAl.lﬂSEI(MNLY

As an insulator are used materials which have a high breakdown voltage and which
do not release and do not transmit gases. since there must be a high vacuum
inside the tube. Porcelain and special epoxy compounds are chiefly used for
insulating rings. The metal electrodes. 1. are made in a shape which reduces
the space charge formed in the dielectric insulating ring, 2, and which changes
the mechanical trajectory of ions.

Mass Separator

In order to facilitate the creation and control of ion beams it is best to intro-
duce the doping impurity in the gaseous state into the source. But it is difficult
to obtain in the gaseous state such substances as phosphorus. boron. arsenic, etc..
used for creating doped layers in silicon; therefore, gaseous compounds of these
substances are used, such as diborene. phosphine, arsine, etc.

The ion beam. which consists of a whole number of impurity elements. must be
cleaned of undesirable elements upon entry into the substrate. Haas separators
are employed for these purposes. They are divided into two types with respect to
operating principle: magnetic separators and electromagnetic filters.

Ions with the same charge and energy will be deflected at different angles in a
transverse Isgnetic field depending on the mass of the substance. By reversing the
magnetic field it is possible to produce beams of the prescribed composition in

the outlet of the sector magnets of uses separators. This method of separating
pure substances is considered the most effective. The relationship between the
parameters of the magnet (radius, r , angle of turn of the ion, 9 . magnetic
induction, 3), the mass of the ion,oH , its charge. q , and the accelerating
voltage, V0 , is presented below:

2
(n/q)uo - KroB ,

where K is determined by the angle of the sector (magnet).

Consequently, if the appropriate value of magnetic induction. 3 . is selected with
constant assigned design dimensions of the nagnet. then in its outlet, with
radius ro . it is possible to separate through the slit an ion beam with mass

of ﬁle .

Magnets of the sector type with an inhomogeneous magnetic field are usually used
for the purpose of increasing resolution. A diagram of an ion-implanted doping
unit with a magnetic mass separator of the sector type. 6 (the sector angle
equals 90‘). and of an ion source. 1, with an accelerating tube. 2, is presented
in fig 3-16. The beam of ions of the doping substance, passing through the col-
limating opening, 3. is scanned by means of potentials supplied to the electrodes,
5, over the surface of the substrates placed in the receiving chanber, 7. The
beam current is measured periodically by means of a probe, 6. The radius of the
magnet is determined by the accelerating voltage and the mass of the substances
used for doping.

ro - liﬁvo7qbz .

- 68 -

IN)! OFFICJAI.US£ZCM‘LY
Pigure 3-16. Deeign of Ion-Iqlanted Doping Unit with Hagnetic thee
Separator

Key:
1. neutral bean

‘l'he deeign of theee naee aeparatore in very eiqle, but for accelerating voltages
of hundreda of IN and for great neaeea of iona of doping inpuritiee (e.g..
phosphorus. araenic and the like) electrougnete with large dinenaiona and heavy
weight (emral tone) are required.

Unite with poatacceleration have begun to be need in recent tines. In this case
the preacceleration of iona before the neon eeparator ia alight (15 to 20 kV);
therefore, the dinenaione of the electron-snot are draatically reduced.

A ainilar effect for the neat separation of an ion bean can be acconpliehed if it
paeoee through a filter in which the nagnetic field acta along the path of the

bean and the electric field ecte orthogonally to the nepotic field and conaequent-
1y to the ion bean. This ia-a eo-cdlled B x 3 filter (fig 3r17).

 

Pigure 3-17. Deaign of Ion-Iqlanted Doping Unit with lines Separator of
the B x h rilter Type

The neao-eeparated bean will continue ite atraight-line notion and the iona of
other naeea will be introduced into the walla of an ion conductor. This ma

aeparator ie einle in deaign: It conaieta of a anall-eire pernanent magnet. 6.
and electrodea. S. The original ion been of doping inpuritiea. 1. paaeing through

-69-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the collimtor. 2, is separated by means of an E X 3 filter, 3. The disadvantage
of this filter is the fact that together with the ion bean. 6, a neutral bean,

8. of undesirable substances passes through it. In order to eliminate this. in
the filter's outlet there is a system for deflecting the ion beam by means of an
electric field. 7. with a collimator. 2. As in the unit shown in fig 3-16, the
ion bean is scanned by neans of electrodes. 9. over a substrate placed in a
receiving chater. 11, for the purpose of producing a doped layer uniform over the
depth and surface of the substrate. A probe. 10. serves the purpose of periodic-
ally checking the ion beam's current. 0n the basis of the use of sass separators
of one type or another. as well as of the convenience of putting together elements
of the entire unit. various designs of ion-inlanted doping units are enployed
(fig 3-18): of the horizontal type (fig 3-18, a and b), of the vertical type
(fig 3-18, c to e). with sector magnet mass separators. 2 (fig 3-18, a. c, d).

and mass separators. 1:. of the B X 3 filter type (fig 3-18, b and e). The ion
sources, 1, and receiving chambers. 3. are selected on the basis of the specific
application of the unit.

.- J i i
I 1‘ I’ 3 ’ f 2 ,
. , ,
m'."
\1
g 2 3 3
b) c) d) e) '

a)
Figure 3-18. Desiyu of Ion-Inplanted Doping Units

Receiving Unit

The receiving unit is designed for loading semiconductor wafers, noving them
beneath the ion bean, doping and heating. The cross-sectional area of the ion
beam is as a rule several square millimeters and the beam is nonuniform over its
area. Therefore, for the purpose of doping vafers with high unifornity it is ne-
cessary to move either the bean over the wafer or the wafer relative to the beam.
The first nethod is used most often—scanning of the bean as in a television tube.
in the doping process, for the purpose of annealing radiation defects which ori-
ginate in uafers. they are heated by scans of heaters to a temperature of 200

to 700 '6.

Additional focusing lenses are employed to increase the intensity of the bean.
Depending on the design of the unit. they are placed in front of the uses separa-
tor or behind it in front of the bean scanning systen. Electrical and magnetic
quadrupole lenses (duplex and triplex) are usually used.

Vacuun Systen

The vacuun system is an important part of_the apparatus. It is necessary to nain-
tain a high vacuun on the order of 1.3'10 " to 1.3'10 ‘ Pa in the vacuum ion
conductor for the purpose of ensuring high purity of the ion been. However, for
making it possible to produce an ion bean of high intensity it is necessary to
introduce into the ion source a high concentration of the doping substance,

-70-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
which is accomplished at a pressure of 13.3 to 1.3 Pa. A differential evacua-
tion system which increases the vacuum in the receiving chamber to 1.3'10 5 to
1.3-10 ‘ Pa is created between the ion source and the receiving chamber. As a
rule the receiving chamber is furnished with powerful high—vacuum evacuation
equipment with freezing or other traps which prevent the entrance of oil vapors
from oil-vapor and mechanical vacuum pumps. or with oilleas evacuation equipment.
chiefly turbomolecular pumps. as well as with metal vacuum seals.

The "Vezuviy-Z" [Vesuvius-2] ion-implanted doping apparatus is widely used in the
series production of semiconductor devices (fig 3-19). The control rack is shown
on the left in the photograph. The postacceleration principle is used in this
apparatus; therefore, the magnetic mass separator has small overall dimensions and
low weight. The preliminary acceleration is up to 20 keV and the subsequent up

to 130 keV on account of the use of a multisection accelerating tube. The total
maximum accelerating voltage is 150 kV and the minimum 20 RV. The receiving unit
is under high potential.

 

Figure 3-19. Ion-Implanted Doping Apparatus of the "Vezuviy-Z" Type

The ion source is of the arc type with a transverse magnetic field. At the outlet
of the accelerating tube the boron and phosphorus ion beam current is a maximum of
100 uA and 300 uA, respectively. The number of wafers up to 80 mm in diameter
which can be loaded at the same time is not greater than 40. Vertical scanning

of the beam is accomplished by means of the electric field and horizontal by
mechanical movement of the substrates. An integrating dosimeter is used to monitor
the doping dose. The apparatus is compact and has small overall dimensions. The
area occupied without auxiliary space is 18 m1. The apparatus is simple and reli-
able.

-71-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1-6. Equipnent for Producing Epitaxial Films

Methods for the deposition of atoms from the vapor or liquid phase onto solid

substrates are employed for the purpose of producing monocrystalline semicon-
ductor films. This process is called epitaxial if crystallization of the de-
posited material takes place on oriented monocrystalline substrates with the

repetition of their structure. The distinction is made between honoepitaxial,
autoepitaxial and heteroepitaxial growing of films. In the first case the de-
posited substance and the substrate are identical and in the second different.
At the present time successes have already been achieved in the deposition of,

for example. silicon monocrystalline films on sapphire and quartz substrates and
substrates made of spinels.

Two trends exist in the epitaxial growing of semiconductors on substrates of

a different substance, including on dielectric substrates. The first is the
deposition of a thin layer of a molten semiconductor with its subsequent oriented
crystallization. The second is the epitaxial growing of layers of a semiconductor
during crystallization from a melt, a melt solution and the gas phase.

Methods of epitaxy from melts, solutions and the gas phase have become the most
widespread in the production of semiconductor devices. Epitaxy from melts makes
possible high structural perfection and purity of films. and by this method it is
possible to produce layers of such materials as indium antimonide and gallium
antimonide, which are difficult to produce by means of gas transport reactions.

Epitaxy from the gas phase includes the deposition of monocrystalline films by the
vacuum deposition method (thermal vaporization. ion-plasma spraying, electrical
firing) and by the method of gas transport reactions.

Vacuum methods make it possible to produce films of very high quality. but they
require a superhigh vacuum and are poorly productive.

The reduction of a tetrachloride (SiCl‘) or a trichlorosilane (SiﬂCla) and the
pyrolysis of a silane are widely used gas transport reaction methods. A vapor-gas
mixture of the appropriate composition passes over a substrate heated to the
appropriate temperature, being deposited in the form of monocrystalline layers

of the substance or compounds in question. These processes are usually accom-
plished in quartz reactors.

The equipment created for carrying out epitaxy by these methods is relatively in-
expensive. uncomplicated and highly productive.

Depending on the composition of the reactive gases, deposition processes can differ
in the type of reaction. which has an influence on the individual designs of
reactors. For example, the basic difference between epitaxy processes for silicon
and gallium arsenide is the fact that in the first case this reaction is endo-
thermic and in the second exothermic.

Therefore. in growing silicon, where its deposition results in the absorption of
energy. for the repeated performance of the epitaxy process without the walls of

reaction chambers becoming overgrown, it is necessary to hold them at a tempera-
ture below the deposition temperature. for these purposes heating. either

- 12 -

POI¢NHHC1AI.USE¢DNLY
high-frequency induction or by scans of infrared leaps, is e-ployed. In the
deposition of galliu arsenide iron chlorides accoqanied by the release of

energy it is necesary to heat the walls for the purpose indicated above. In

these cases it is desirable to use resistive heaters nahing it possible to heat
the walls of chanbers or to seize reaction chaders out of heat-absorbing neterials.

Liquid epitaxy nethods are also used for seniconductor coepounds of the AnIBv
type in the industrial production chieily oi optoelectronic devices.

Equip-eat for Gas Epitaxy

The design of equip-eat designed for epitaxy according to the nethod of gas
transport reactions is characterized by l) the type of epitaxial reactor. 2) the
nethod of heating substrates. and 3) the gas distribution systee.

Epitaxial reactors are divided into three types: horizontal. vertical and cylin-
drical. (A classification of reactors according to other features—the direction

of gas streaes relative to the substrate, heating of substrates. etc.--is given
in [15].)

This division according to type of reactor is based on the difference in the posi-
tion of the substrate relative to the reactor's axis and the direction of flow of
the reaction gas and is traditional.

The three types of reactors are shown in fig 3-20. Horizontal reactors

(fig 3-20, a) are the sieplest and do not have any loving parts inside. The
vapor-gas nixture stress in then is supplied parallel to the surface of the sub-
strate and the axis of the reactor. Usually inside the tube there is a holder
node of graphite, 3, coated with silicon or silicon carbide, which is nounted on
quartz slides or rectangular supports with a certain pitch, a . The quartz or
natal tube, 1. has a circular or rectangular shape. The vapor—snd—gss eixture
in the inlet nozzle passes through a grille. which iorns a turbulent flow, as the
result of which good airing of the working nixture with the gaseous doping sub-
stance is achieved. Preliainary heating of the vapor-gas mixture is carried out
in order not to introduce a disturbance into the reactor's temperature zone. In
the outlet the exhaust Iixture is cooled to 50 ’C and is burned up in an outlet
unit (scrubber). The graphite substrate holder with the substrates. 6. in this
case is heated tree a high-frequency oscillator through a work coil. 2.

In a vertical reactor (fig 3-20. b) a quartz done, 5, is used as the reaction
chader and the substrate holder. 7. node of graphite coated with silicon or sili-
con carbide as in a horizontal reactor, is nounted on a rotating platiorn, 9,

which is driven into notion by a shaft. 8. The vapor-gas mixture enters the
chanber through a rotating tube. 6, and. being repelled by the quartz done. is
directed toward the substrates, L In this case the graphite substrate holder is
heated iron a high-irequency oscillator by scans of a work coil, 2. In this reactor
the vapor-gas nixture can be also supplied directly through the top part of the
dose. In both cases it enters perpendicularly to the substrate and spreads over it.

The cylindrical reactor (fig 3-20. c) consists of a quartz or steel cheater, 5.3
in which there is a graphite substrate holder, 7. The substrates, lo, are placed
in it on an incline, which prevents the. iron falling out of the grooves. As a

-73..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rule. the substrate holder is driven into rotation for the purpose of unifor-
contact between the vapor-gas mixture and the surface of the substrate and of
sizing the mixture; here it is heated by a high-frequency oscillator by leans of
a work coil. 2, separated tron the reaction chaﬁer by scans of a quart: cylinder.

9.

 

Figure 3-20. Construction of Bpitaxial Reactors: s--horizontal type;
b—vertical type: c—cylindrical reactor

Key:
1 . Vapor-gas sixture

The vapor-gas sixture is fed into the reactor either tron below, as illustrated

in the drawing. or fron above along the substrate holder. In sone types of
cylindrical reactors the mixture is fed through a slit inlet perpendicularly to 'E-v.
axis of the substrate holder.

Substrates are heated by nesns of l) a high-frequency oscillator via a work coil.
2) infrared heating by scans of quartz halogen leaps. and 3) resistive heaters.

The heating sethod plays an important role in choosing the type of reactor. A
high-frequency heater is used nost widely, since then only the substrate holder
ssde of highly conductive material together with the wafers is heated. and the
walls of the quartz tube rennin cold. Therefore, the reactor's walls do not be-
cone overgrown with the reaction products of the vapor-gas mixture.

when outside resistive and lamp-type infrared heaters are used. the substrate
holder together with the wafers and the quartz reactor tube are heated. as in
diffusion furnaces. Since a leap-type infrared source has a higher temperature
than an incandescent source. the power radiated by it belongs to a shorter wave-
hand (1 to 3 II). in which quarts glass is practically transparent. This results
in less heating of the walls of the reactor tube.

High-frequency and infrared heating system are less interial than resistive
heaters and easily sake it possible to perform sultilevsl heating cycles of short
duration. All three kinds of heating are approxintely identical with respect to

the unit input of power.

-71.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All three types of reactors are currently uaed in the industry. Epitaxy units
with a horizontal reactor are stapler in design but are distinguished by higher
consulptions of working gases and a greater spread in the thickness and resisti-
vity of deposited fills. Units with vertical and cylindrical reactors are couple:
in design but sake possible a saaller spread in the thickness and resistivity of
deposited films. Cylindrical reactors lake possible the highest productivity and
the lowest consumption of working gases.

The reproducibility of the thickness and resistivity of epitaxial layers depends
basically on the design of the reaction chamber and heating systes. as well as on
the reproducibility of gas and telperature parameters. i.e.. on the gas distribu-
tion systen and the systel for controlling the temperature in the reactor.

A typical systen for supplying gas to the reactor is described in the following
chapter (sec k-Z).

The construction of the reaction chalber of a UNBS-ZP-V unit with a vertical re-
actor is shown in fig 3-21. The bottom flange, 15, is fastened by scans of
clasps, 21. to a plate-type base. 1. Seals 16, 13 and 16 ensure airtightness in
the bottoa half of the reaction chasber. which consists of two coaxial tubes-an
inside quartz tube. 7. and an outside one made of acrylic plastic, 8. Hater
circulates between then for the purpose of cooling the quartz tube, which is
heated by radiation Eros a pyralid-type substrate holder. 10. The upper flange,
6. makes airtightness possible in the upper half of the reactor by scans of seals
2 and 3. A substrate holder Iade of graphite. 10, is fastened to a support. 11.
and a centering flange, 19, and is rotated on a shaft sealed by scans of gaskets,
17. This entire unit is fastened in flange 18.

    
     

 
    
   

 

- 7 71-; —_

 

?igure 3-21. Construction of Reaction Chamber of UNBS-ZP-v epitaxy unit
Key: 1. Discharge 2. Hater

- 75 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A high-frequency induction heater. 9, and the reaction chamber, tightened by
means of flanges 6 and 12, are fastened to a bracket. ’0. The temperature is
measured by means of an optical pyrometer. 5. If the reaction chamber has not
been fastened by means of screw claims, microsvitch 20 blocks the switching on
of the high-frequency heating system.

The substrate holder. 10. is in the form of a polyhedral truncated pyramid.
wafers are fastened to it at an angle of 5 to 7 degrees to the vertical axis.
1: is made of graphite coated with a carbide layer. Uniform heating and equal-
ization of the concentration of the vapor-gas mixture on the surface of wafers

are produced by rotating the pyramid. This mixture is fed from above parallel to
the reactor's axis and is removed from below.

In a UNBS-ZP-V unit it is possible to perform the epitaxial gtoving of n- and
p-type layers, the deposition of films of silicon dioxide, as well as etching
with hydrogen chloride. It is possible to bring heating of wafers up to 1300 'C.

The cylindrical reactor of the UNES-ZP-KA industrial epitaxial growing unit is
shown in fig 3-22.

 

Figure 3-22. Construction of Reaction Chamber of UNBS-ZP-KA Epitaxy Unit

Key:
1. Discharge of reaction gas 3. Hydrogen
2. Water

-76-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The rcsctor's shape-forming parts are a flat upper flange, 1, a cylinder, 2, and
a lower flange. 5. which for- the airtight space of the reactor. inside the
reactor there is a hollow cylindrical substrate holder, 3, with the wafers, 15,
placed on several tiers. The vapor-gas mixture is fed from below through a pipe
connection. 10. and discharging takes place through three water-cooled pipe con-
nections for discharging the reaction gas. The annular zone between the wall of
the reaction chamber and the substrate, 3, is blown through through two pipe
connections. 11. in the lower flange of the reactor. In addition, the annular
spaces between the two concentric rubber gaskets. 16 and 12, of the upper and
lower flanges. as well as the sealing rings, 7. of the rotating shaft. are blown
through with nitrogen through pipe connections 6, 9 and 17 for ensuring the relia-
bility of seals. A quart: bulb, lb. inside of which a high-frequency work coil,
13. is placed. is inserted into the inside space of the substrate holder, 3.

The substrate holder is placed on a quartz support, lo. placed on the flat disk
of a water-cooled rotating shaft. 8. The quartz bulb is sealed by means of a
rubber ring-type gasket. 18, and flange 19.

The temperature profile over the height of the substrate holder is equalized by
changing the spacing of the work coil's turns: a local increase in temperature
by compressing the turns. and a reduction by stretching them.

The WES-ZP-KA unit is designed for the large-lot production of silicon epitaxial
structures. It is possible to perform gas etching in it, as well as to produce

coatings of silicon dioxide and nitride. The operating temperature range is from
900 to 1300 '6.

Equipment for Liquid Epitaxy

Liquid epitaxy has assumed an industrial scale in the last five or six years.

The impetus for this development was the demand for solid-statedasers, light
displays and other optoelectronic devices based on the use of A 3 compounds

and solid solutions based on them. This method makes it possible to produce
heterojunctions. The process occurs with the release of heat, i.e., is exothermic.
As a result, for the purpose of forming an epitaxial film it is necessary to lower
the temperature of the substrate with the solution melt layer on it. The tempera-
ture drop must take place in keeping with a specific law for various substances.
The process can be divided into the following process steps. The elementary
substance--a solid binary or ternary solution—is melted in an appropriate low-
melting substance which is chemically inactive with respect to the solution and
substrate, most often in a metal. Then the solution melt is brought into contact
with the substrate and after the establishment of thermal equilibrium between the
is cooled in keeping with the appropriate law for the purpose of epitaxial deposi-
tion of a film onto the substrate.

For some materials the epitaxial deposition of layers from a solution melt is
performed with the existence of a temperature gradient created along the substrate.
Impurities for producing doped epitaxial layers are introduced into the solution
melt either during preparation of the charge before its melting or from the gas
phase after melting. The excess solution melt is nechanically removed from the
substrate after deposition of the epitaxial layer. Then the substrate with the
deposited layer is cooled to room temperature.

-77-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the basis of this technological process it is possible to formulate require-
ments for epitaxial equipment:

1. The heating furnace must be a quick-response one and have a heating temperature
range of 300 to 1100 'c. making it possible to satisfy requirements for melting

a charge of the various materials used for liquid epitaxy. The accuracy of main-
taining the temperature is i 0.75 'C. For units with a continuous epitaxial
deposition cycle it is necessary to have several temperature zones: a zone for
melting the charge and heating the substrate; a zone for bringing the solution

melt into contact with the substrate and for holding for a certain time; a zone
with a temperature gradient in the temperature reduction direction for making the
epitaxial deposition process possible; and a zone for the cooling,of substrates.

2. A mechanism or device for bringing the solution melt into contact with the
substrate must be provided in the reaction chamber.

3. Before deposition onto the substrate. the solution melt must be produced in
a crucible which is chemically inactive with respect to it.

h. The material of the reaction chamber must also be chemically inactive with
respect to the substrate and solution melt.

5. Cases which are chemically active with respect to the substrate and solution
melt must not be used when carrying out these processes in the reaction tube.
Therefore. in the reactor either a flow of a purified neutral gas is created or
evacuation is created by means of_vacuum pumps.

The last requirement is satisfied by equipment which is distinguished by the method
of creating the appropriate atmosphere in the reaction chamber--of the open or
closed type. In a unit of the open type a neutral gas, most often mixed with
purified hydrogen, enters the reactor continuously throughout the entire process
and this gas, breaking down oxides on the surface of the solution melt, makes
possible the occurrence of a reduction reaction. In units of the closed type a
vacuum is created in the reactors. In some cases, before contact between the
solution melt and the substrate hydrogen is introduced into a reactor of the cln
type for the purpose of breaking down the oxide layer formed on the surface of
the melt, and then evacuation is again performed right up to the final cooling,of
the substrates with the deposited layers.

Reaction chaabers are subdivided into the following types with respect to the
method of bringing the solution melt into contact with the surface of the sub-
strate:

A reactor with an inclined holder (fig 3-23, a), in which the solution melt, 2.
with the substrate. 1, placed in the holder. 3, which is streamlined by a neutral
(nitrogen or argon) or reducing (hydrogen) gas in a quartz tube. 6. are brought
into contact by changing the tilt of the reactor relative to the rest, 5.

A reactor in the form of a rotating cylinder (fig 3-23. b). in which the solution
melt, 2, is brought into contact with the substrate, 1, by turning a graphite
cylinder, 8, 180 degrees from the position shown in the drawing. and by lifting

- 73 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the substrate by means of lifter 7. until it makes contact with the surface of
the solution melt.

 

-l
I
15.1)."
M ‘. e
1:: 5 ,w t _I 2.”
-(( ' - "
‘ .
I}. o ,
a)

Figure 3-23. Reactors for Liquid Bpitaxy: a—esploying the rotating
cylinder uthod [as published]; b—eqloying the rotating
cylinder nethod; c-wloying the wetting method; d—eqaloying
a container of the cylindrical case type

Key:
1 . Neutral gas

A reactor of the vertical type (fig 3-23, c). in which substrates, 1, fastened to
a holder. 9, are insersed by means of a moving rod into the solution melt, 2.
which is in a crucible, 10. This type of reactor is designed for working with
solution melts possessing heightened reactivity for the formation of oxides.
When the substrates are i-ersed into the melt they rupture the oxide film and
make contact with the melt in bulk. .~

A reactor with a container of the cylindrical case type (fig 3-23, d), in which

a pool, 2, is moved along a holder, 3, with substrates, until the solution .nelt
makes contact with the substrates.

All these reactors are put into a quartz tube, It, and are furnished with a heater.
6. making possible the required temperature conditions.

There are also other varieties of reactors which differ in the principle of bring-
ing the substrate into contact with the solution nelt. Reactors with a container
of the cylindrical case type have becoae most widespread in industry. It is

possible to cite as an example the continuous industrial unit for producing epi-
taxial films of car.

-79-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(N‘LY

The reaction chamber, by virtue of the sectional structure of the
heating furnace, has several temperature regions (Figure 3.26s): the region
of fusion of the Ga solvent from room temperature It to the point A; the region
of dissolution and saturation of the melt with polycrystalline GaP (Al); the
region of epitaxial growth of the Ga? layer on the monocrystalline substrate of
Ga? (BC) and after that, the region for substrate cool-down and the removal
of the melt from its surface (CTk).

The installation operates in the following manner (Figure 3.26b): the cylindri-
cal case type containers move from left to right along the quartz guide rails 8,
which are positioned in quartz tube 9; these containers consist of graphite
holder 2 with two substrates 3 positioned in the grooves and graphite tray 1
with the solution-melt 6, which has the ability to move in the graphite holder.
The containers. in passing through the two temperature regions of the furnace
TkA and A3, at point B lock the light beam of laser 5 on light disk 11 through
slot 10 in holder 2. As a result of this, mechanism 6 matches the tray to the
holder so that the melt-solution 4 comes in contact with substrates 3. The
container, in passing through the temperature region (DC), where the Ga?
epitaxial film grows on the monocrystalline GaP substrate, moves the tray to

the initial position by means of return mechanism 7, separating the melt a

from the substrates 3 and removing the solution-melt which has not undergone

a reaction. Then the container is fed into the region for cooling and unloading
the wafers. The epitaxy process is performed in a flow of a mixture of nitrogen
and hydrogen gases, which are cleaned of oxygen and moisture. Tellurium is

used as the hardener to obtain the epitaxial layers of n-type GaP.

Gas screens 3 (Figure 3.24c) are used in this installation to prevent the intru-
sion of atmospheric gas into the reaction chamber. Moreover, dust-free boxes 1

- go -

IKIICIHHCIAI.USE(IULY
are uaed in it. which aaaure the high purity of the air environment in which the
loading and unloading of the wafera and charging with the solvent take place.

A “I00 '6)

 

Figure 3.26. The temperature cycle during the growing of epitaxial
Ga? films (a); baaic achematic of the reactor with the
cylindrical caae containera (b); the continuoua expo-
aure inatallation for the epitaxial growth of Ga? layers
from the liquid phaae (c).

Kev: l. Direction of holder travel.
To increaae the productivity of the inatallation, the loading and unloading
proceaa haa been mechanized and automated by means of devices 2 and S. The

control unite for gaa ayatama 6 and the control and regulation of the tempera-
ture 7 in the reaction chamber 6 are built into the houaing of the installation.

To apply multilayer epitaxial filma, aeveral traya with the aolution-melt are
placed in the container, where theae traya are brought in contact with the

aubatrate in turns for the aequential deposition of the specified layera of
the aubatancea.

3.5. Equipment for the Production of Alloy Junctiona

The alloying technique is uaed at the preaent time primarily to obtain low
frequency aeniconductor devicea and ohmic contacts.

The alloy proceaa takes place in three atepa:
--Local wetting of the aeniconductor aurface with the netal;

--Dlaaolution of the surface layer of the semiconductor in the volume of the
aelted metal;

--The fornation of the junction layer (the p-n junction or the ohmic contact) as
a conaequence of the cryatalliaation during cooling of the aeniconductor
diaaolved in the melt.

- 31 -

INJI‘OIWNCIAI.IJSII(NULY
FOR ONO“. USE ONLY

A furnace with a controlled environment and holders in which the geometric match-
ing of the semiconductor substrates to the metal electrodes being fused in at
that point where it is necessary to produce the alloy region are needed to
produce an alloy junction.

As an example of producing a p-n junc-
tion in germanium chips by means of
melting in indium, we shall consider
the requirements placed on the tempera-
ture profile of a conveyor furnace
(Figure 3.25). To form a flat and even
front edge for the melting-in, it is
necessary to heat the semiconductor--
metal pair and cool them following the
formation of the melt at a definite
rate.

    

(i) a n a . u ~w
ﬂlnutOI As can be seen from the figure. the metal

Figure 3.25. Temperature profile of the is melted during the wetting process
process of melting indium and it flows over the surface of the
into germaniun to produce semiconductor in that part of it where
a p-junction. there is to be an alloy Junction. For

. _ . . this reason. the holder with the wafers
Key. ;: Kegizn gfnhzating and is kept in the furnace for l to 3 min-
wetting' utes at a temperature on the order of
3. Dissolution region; 300' C (100 to 150° C higher than the

melting point). Moreover. the presence
0. Region of '10” cooling. of foreign films and especially oxides.

is impermissible for normal wettability

of the surface. For this purpose. th;
melting-in process is carried out in a reducing medium (pure hydrogen), having
beforehand subjected the internal portion of the heating furnace and holder to
a careful cleaning.

After the completion of the wetting step, the temperature is increased sharply
(up to 550' C) to dissolve the surface of the semiconductor with the metal melt.
In this case. because of diffusion at the boundary of these substances. there

is the formation of a junction layer. The time needed to establish thermodynamic
equilibrium is governed by the dissolution rate of the semiconductor in the
metal and the speed of diffusion of the atoms in the melt. and for the given
case. fluctuates in a range of S to 12 minutes. Following this. the system is
slowly cooled initially with a temperature gradient on the order of 3° C/min
and thereafter at 8' C/min to recrystallize the formed alloy and to form the
p-n junction between the original n-germanium and the recrystallizing p-german-
ium. In the case of rapid cooling, because of the difference in the thermal
expansion coefficients of germanium and indium. the melting-in region can
develop cracks.

Thus. for a periodic exposure installation. the furnace should have a programmer
for the heating and cooling of the holders with the substrates, while in

- 82 -

FOR OFIWCJAI.UGIICMULY
continuous exposure installations, the furnace must be made as a sectional de-
sign, where the temperature is maintained in accordance with the specified
alloying temperature cycle. To obtain germanium semiconductor devices, a
maximum temperature on the order of 700' is needed, while for silicon devices.
the temperature is on the order of l,000° C.

The thermal installations for the production of alloy semiconductor devices can
be classified according to the following parameters:

-According to the working atmosphere - as vacuum and gas installations;

-According to the type of heaters - with direct beating, in which the working
channel of the furnace is at the same time the heater, and with indirect
heating. in which ailite [electrical insulating material] rods, wire and
other heaters heat the reactor tube;

--According to the operating principle - as periodic exposure furnaces, in
which the loading, the process and the unloading are performed after each
input into the working channel, and as continuous devices, for example, can-
veyor installations;

-According to the working temperature - as low temperature (up to 700° C) and
high temperature (up to l,000° C).

 

Figure 3.26. Conveyor furnace for the production of germanium alloy
semiconductor devices.

To obtain alloy devices, primarily low power diode matrices, electron beam
installations are used in addition to thermal installations, in which the
instantaneous local heating and melting-in are accomplished by a focused elec-
tron beam. When this method is used, the depth of the melting-in region
depends on the accelerated electron beam energy, while the geometric dimensions
of the p-n junction are governed by the diameter of the electron beam. However.
the technique of alloying in conveyor furnaces is used more often in industry.
which provides for high output and economic efficiency by virtue of the simpli-
city of the structural design of the installations and their low cost.

He shall consider the structural design of the SK 11/16'10 - 6 conveyor furnace,
intended for producing p-n junctions by means of alloying (Figure 3.26). The
installation consists of a heating chamber 5 and muffle tube chamber b, the gas
feed system for nitrogen and hydrogen 3, the gas screen devices 2 as well as
the charging area 1 and the unloading area 8 as well as the refrigerator 7.

- g3 -

FOIIOFIWCJAL.USEGJNLY
FIIICIWNCIAI.USEIDNLY

All of the assemblies of the installation are mounted in a welded metal housing
made of stainless steel in which the electrical power supply control and tempera-
ture regulation units 9 are contained.

The square cross-section heating chamber is lined (12) with pairs of upper and
lower heating sections 6 made of nichrome, which are faced with porcelain

plates and brick for thermal insulation. The muffle tube 4 runs through the
inside of the heating sections, in which the temperature profile for the heating
at a maximum temperature of up to 700' C is set. Each heating section has its
own temperature regulator, which makes is possible to produce various tempera-
ture profiles along the heating chamber and assure stabilization of the tempera-
ture proflie during the operation of the furnace.

Thermocouples are placed directly in the muffle furnace to monitor the tempera-
ture in the working region. There are gas screens 2 at the edges which prevent
the intrusion of air into the working region of the furnace. An adsorber is
installed at the entrance to the furnace for additional drying. The refrigera-
tor takes the form of a system of water-cooled tubes.

Prior to the start of the process. the muffle tube is flushed with an inert gas.

after which the hydrogen is fed into it. The parts being alloyed are loaded
in cassette holders. Stainless steel is used as the material for the cassette
holders which have dimensions of 40 x 8 x 65 II. The conveyor takes the form
of a net belt. The cassette holders run through the appropriate temperature
zones on the conveyor belt, the speed of which is adjusted by a motor in a
range of 30 to 120 mm/min.

- 85 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CNAPTER POUR EQQIPHENT £95 PILH PRODUCTION

 

 

it is necessary to apply various films which perform the functions of protective.
insulating and masking coatings, as well as ohmic contacts, current carrying
paths. etc. in the production of semiconductor devices and integrated circuits.
Metal, semiconductor and dielectric film serve these purposes, including films

of various alloys. compounds and solid solutions (15). The deposition of these
films is accomplished by means of vacuum deposition, deposition from the gas
phase as well as precipitation from the liquid phase. Equipment for the appli-
cation of films using the first two methods is treated in this chapter.

6.1. Vacuum Film Deposition Equipment

A vacuum installation for the precipitation of films of various materials
consists of the following major assemblies and units:

-The film precipitation unit;
-The vacuum exhaust systems;

-—The electrical power supply and control units.

In turn, the deposition unit consists of a chamber, a vaporizer, substrate hold-
er. substrate heater and sensors for monitoring the precipitation rate or
thickness of the films.

The vacuum exhaust systems include the initial vacuum preliminary exhaust line,
and the high vacuum exhaust line with the cutoff valves and traps for the
oil diffusion pumps.

The electrical power supply and control units for the installation and the
deposition process consist of the power supplies for the vaporizer, the vacuum
exhaust equipment. the cutoff valves and gates, as well as the substrate heaters;
the monitor units for the vacuum system. the control of the mechanisms for
moving the substrate holder and the operating modes of the vaporizer and the
monitoring of the film parameters during precipitation (primarily the thickness
of the films or their deposition rate).

He shall consider a vacuum chamber with a vaporizer. a substrate holder and
sensors for the deposition rate or film thickness.

Depending on their function, vacuum chambers are of the dome type, spherical,
cylindrical or rectangular. The shape of the chamber is governed by the require-
ments for the maximum filling of it with substrates and other devices for
atomization of the material. as well as minimum volume. The greater the volume
of the chamber. the greater the capacity required for’the exhaust equipment.
Installations with dome type and cylindrical chambers are the most widespread.

The vaporizers are placed inside the vacuum chamber. Depending on the method
of vaporization. they are broken down into three types: with thermal heating

- gs -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and vaporization of the material; with the bombarding of the material by ionized
gases and its atomization; and with thermal vaporization and precipitation of
the vaporized material in the ionized state.

He shall treat these types of vaporizers in detail.

Thermal vaporization is accomplished in the following ways:

-heating the material in a resistive type vaporizer when an electrical current
is passed through it;

--Heating the material with electron bombardment;

--Heating the material by passing an electric current through it;
--Heating the material with a laser beam;

e-Radiofrequency induction heating of the material being vaporized;

--By electrical explosion, i.e., by passing a high power electric pulse directly
through the material being vaporized, where this pulse assures explosive
vaporization.

Resistive Vaporizers

Difficultly fusible metals and ceramic crucibles. for example, nitrides. carbides,
oxides, etc., in which the materials being vaporized are placed, can be used
as the vaporizers.

The choice of the materials for the heater and crucible is determined primarily
by the following major requirements:

1. The vapor pressure of the material of the heater should be low at the working
vaporization temperatures.

2. The material being vaporized should, in the melted state, wet the material
of the heater very well, thereby making a good thermal contact.

3. It is desirable to have minimum chemical interaction between the material of
the heater and the substance being vaporized.

Vaporizers with wire or strip shapes, in the for- of small dishes, etc. are used
for the vaporization of low temperature substances and alloys.

The shape of the material being vaporized also has an influence on the struc—
tural design of the vaporizer. For example. one can use a vaporizer, the
structure of which is shown in Figure 4.1a, for finely dispersed (granulated
or powdered) substances. This substance is fed from hopper 2 through the

shute or tube to small dish 3, and being vaporized, is precipitated on the
substrate 1. For a continuous feed of finely dispersed substances to the
vaporizer, the hopper is usually vibrated either electromagnetically or mechan-
ically.

- 86 -

IIMICHHNCIAL.USE(NNLY
““WW‘M‘
a; (b)

Figure 4.1. Thernal vaporizera.

Key: a. For the vaporization of
finely dispersed sub-
stances:

b. For the vaporization of
a wire.

Electron Bean Vaporizers

"hen a substance in the torn of a wire
is used for vaporization, coils with

the wire wound on it beforehand are used
(Pigure $.lb). Such a coil 4, which is
unrolled by leans of a nechanical drive.
brings the wire in contact with the
heater 5 for thernal vaporization and
precipitation of the file.

Drawbacks to resistive vaporizers are:
-Tbe short service life;

-The contamination of the deposited
films with the naterial of the vapor-
izer or the product of the chenical
interaction of the naterial of the
vaporizer with the substance being
vaporized;

-The inposaibility of vaporizing diffi-
cultly fusible naterials.

The electron bean nethod of vaporizing nateriels is beconing increasingly wide-

spread and has the following advantages:

-The capability of producing a high power concentration (up to S - lo8 H/cnz)
and a very high tenpersture. which lakes it possible to vaporize any naterisls.
even difficultly fusible ones at a rather fast rate;

-The capability of noving the heated zone by virtue of deflecting the electron
been with electrical and magnetic fields to vaporize substances having a

large area;

-The long service life of the vaporizers.

Drawbacks to the technique are the conplexity of the structural design and the
high cost of the vaporizer and its electrical power supply.

At the present time. vacuum deposition installations use electron bean vaporizer:
with power levels of fron b to 15 K" with water-cooled copper crucibles.
Electron guns with strip and annular cathodes are the nost widespread.

The structural configuration of an electron been vaporizer with a power level
of 7.5 K" with Pierce optics and a strip electron bean. which produces the

direct heating of the substance being vaporized. The nagnet systen 2 is used
to rotate and focus the electron been 8 on the nolding of the substance being
vaporized S, where-the electrons are emitted fro. thernionic cathode 6. so as

- g7 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to prevent the intrusion of the substance being vaporized into the electron bean.
A tungsten cathode 0.2 m thick and l - wide is installed in the groove of the
focusing Pierce electrode of gun 1. A nassive copper crucible lo has s center
through-hole 35 i- in disaster and is cooled by flow-through water to prevent
the alloying of the copper with the substance being vaporized. It is secured

to the base 3 and lakes it possible to load a nolding [of the substance being
vaporized] with a diameter of 35 - and a length of 75 In. This molding S is
fed into the vaporization zone and autonatically nintained at the specified
height. The nsxinua rate of precipitation, for exawle. of aluminum on the
substrate 1. aaounts to 0.5 un/nin where the distance between the crucible and

the substrate is on the order of 210 II.

  
  

    
 

.. 'I/II -' “

.x\\\\\\\§:l 1 I;

 

  
 

Figure 6.2. Structural configuration of Figure 4.3. Electron bean vaporizer
an electron bean vaporizer with a ring cathode.
with a strip cathode.

In an electron bean vaporizer with an annular cathode, the gun takes the form
of a diode system (Figure 4.3). The ring cathode 2 with a diameter of 15 n

is fabricated from tungsten wire with a cross-section of 0.63 Ill. The focusing
electrodes (the upper electrode 1 and the lower one Io) are nanufactured from
sheet steel 0.7 na- thick. The focusing of the electrons emitted by incandescent
cathode 2 is accomplished by means of the calibrated washers 3, which make it
possible to change the spacing between the upper and lower focusing electrodes,
as well as anode 6. In step with the decrease in the height of molding S. the
electron systen is lowered downward to maintain the initial focusing of the
electron beam. The distance fros the plane of the cathode ring to the plane of
lower focusing electrode is 3 an. A high voltage of 10 IN is applied to anode

6 through the high voltage entrance 7.

Pulsed vac-nus: deposition techniques. those using electrical explosions and lasers,
are favorably distinguished from continuous nethods by the following:

.33.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-They provide for higher film deposition rates;

-The high rate of occurrence of nuclei leads to a reduction in the minimum
possible thickness of solid films, while the energetic excitation of the
condensate atoms leads to a reduction in the temperature for aligned growth;

--They assure the preservation of the composition of the original material when
depositing films of multiple component substances, something which is not
always possible with continuous vaporization.

of satisfactory quality under low vacuum conditions of down to 1.33 - 10‘3 Pa.
In the simplest electrical explosion vaporization scheme. a discharge current
from a bank of capacitors is passed through a weighed amount of the material
being vaporized, as a result of which. the material explodes. The explosion
products take the form of a mixture of vapor and finely dispersed liquid drops
of the vaporized substance. The efficiency of atomization by means of electric-
al discharge depends on a quantity. which characterizes the excess stored
energy, 3/3., where B - cuzr is the stored electrical energy, C is the capaci-
tance of the capacitor, U is the applied voltage and E. is the sublimation
energy of the substance.

      
 
   

  

I z a . At the maximum discharge network voltage
‘ s of 5 KY and a capacitance of 160 uFd, the
egg??? ._._ thickness of the copper film applied with
’*““‘”‘ .__.' one explosion amounts to more than 3 um
g;;;;;» —~.. with a nonuniformity of 1102. Various

  

structural designs and electrical circuits
are possible for the realization of the
electrical explosion. The most effective
is the use of those installations for
local gold plating. A simplified schema-
tic of a device for foil atomization con-
sists of two coaxial insulated electrodes 1 and 2 (Figure 4.b), to which the
foil 3 is pressed, where the foil is fed through a flat glass capillary. When
the high voltage pulse is applied to the electrodes with the closure of dis-
charger P, the energy stored in the capacitance C is discharged through the
foil. as a result of which it explodes and precipitates in the form of a film

on substrate 6. Nozzles of the appropriate configuration. for example. a Laval
nozzle with a small critical cross-section. are placed on one hand, between
electrodes 1 and 2 and the substrate 6 for the gas dynamic control of the flow
of the substance being vaporized. During the process, the nozzle presses the
foil against the end faces of the electrodes. In this case. the portion of the
foil explodes which is bounded by the inside diameter of the nozzle. Then the

Figure 4.6. Schematic of an explosive
vaporizer.

repeated. The weight of the foil exploded with a single pulse usually amounts
to 0.005 g. The condensation rate in the case of an electrical explosion amountc
to 103 - 10‘ um/sec.

The essence of the laser vaporization technique consists in the fact that laser
radiation acts on the substance being vaporized. the energy of which is converted

- 39 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to heat. In contrast to the electrical explosion method, the laser technique

is more suited for production processes, since it is not necessary for it to
specially prepare the samples in the form of wires or foil. The laser beam

is directed from the outside through an optically transparent window onto the
material being vaporized, which is positioned inside the vacuum chamber. In
this case. the vaporization of the material takes place, as a rule, without the
formation of a liquid phase. "hen producing multilayer structures. the sub-
stances being vaporized are placed on a small rotating stand, and they are
exposed to the radiation in a specif ed sequence. A laser pulse with a power of
l to 2 Joules and a width of 2 ' 10' —-3 - 10'8 see is usually employed.

installations have been built for the deposition of dielectric films using €02
lasers with a power of 30 watts. which operate both in CH and in pulsed modes.
An installation has been built for producing metallic and semiconductor films,
which is equipped with three solid-state lasers. In the case of laser vaporiza-
tion of metallic (Mo V, Nb) and semiconductor films, the effective growth rates
are approximately 105 ﬁlmin.

Metallic. semiconductor and dielectric films which are extremely diverse in terms
of structure and thickness can be produced by the laser deposition technique.

To obtain films of easily fusible metals and alloys, the components of which
differ little in terms of elasticity. it is expedient to use laser deposition
only in those cases where it is necessary to provide for very high purity in

the process or to reduce the nonproductive consumption of materials.

Cathode Sputtering Sources

The process of generating films by cathode sputtering differs substantially
from thermal vaporization. Specific features of the cathode sputtering process
are:

--A lower rate of deposition of the films;

--The atomization of the target and the precipitation of the film in the dis-
charge;

--The atomization is done at a lower vacuum of l to 1 ° 10'2 Pa.

The principle of cathode sputtering consists in the fact that a flow of gas

ions accelerated from several hundreds of electronvolts up to several kilo-
electronvolts, which in bombarding it, knock out particles of the material. The
deposition rate which is provided by the diode method is 100 to 500 angstroms/
min. If the medium in which the discharge takes place is a chemically active
one. then when bombarding the target and with its atomization, complex com-
pounds are precipitated on the substrate. Such precipitation is called reactive.

Thus. two conditions are necessary for cathode sputtering:
l. The creation of a plasma from the gas introduced into the chamber.

2. The acceleration and directing on the target of the flow of ions for its
atomization.

- 90 -

FOR 0FT1CJAI.USE10NLY
Ion sources are broken down into diode and triode types according to the type
of plasma creation and target atomization.

In a diode source, the electron flux is formed by virtue of autoelectron emis—
sion. Ionized gas atoms bombard one of the electrodes, the cathode, which is
simultaneously the target for the atomization. The precipitation of the material
is accomplished at the anode. In this case, if the target being atomized is
metallic, then the atomization uses direct current, and if it is a dielectric.
then the atomization uses alternating current. In this case, with negative
polarity the target is atomized, and with positive polarity, the accumulated
negative charge is picked off of it.

A diode system is the simplest one and
consists of a cathode l and anode 2. on
which the substrate 3 is placed (Figure
6.5). The cathode target is the source
of both the material being atomized and
the electrons which maintain the dis-
charge. A vacuum of l ' 10‘3 to l ' 10"
Pa is created in the working chamber
with the electrodes, after which, an
inert gas is fed into it at a pressure of
up to 1.3 to 13 Pa. when high voltage
(1 to 5 IV) is applied to the electrodes,
Figure 6.5. Schematic of a diode a glow discharge is ignited. The posi-
atomization source. tive plasma ions, accelerating in the
region of the dark cathode space, bom-
bard the cathode, atomizing its surface.

 

Key: A. Argon;
B. Vacuum system;

0‘ water f°r °°°11°8' In a triode source. the third electrode

performs the function of a thermionic
cathode, increasing the electron concentration, and this means, also the con-
centration of the ionized atoms of the working gas. In this case, this increase
in the gas ions is possible with a reduction in its pressure, which provides
for purer conditions for film precipitation. Moreover, the presence of a
thermionic cathode makes it possible to bring the target closer to the substrate,
increasing the precipitation rate. In diode systems, the anode to cathode
spacing should be no less than the width of the dark cathode space. If a magnet-
ic field is applied axially to the thermionic cathode in the discharge gap, then
the plasma density can be increased without increasing the concentration of
electrons. This is achieved in that the electrons move in a spiral in the axial
magnetic field. In this case, their path to the anode is increased by several
times, and this means that the probability of multiple collisions of an electron
with the atoms of the working gas and its ionization also increases.

In conventional triode atomization chambers. the target and the substrate are
in the region of the ionized working gas, and for this reason, the temperature
of the substrate can reach several hundreds of degrees. To reduce it, it is

necessary to make the substrate holder water-cooled. This drawback is elimin-
ated in that the ion source is made as a slotted design. fron which the plasma

-91-

FOR1DFFKJA1.USEGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is removed and directed by means of an additional electrode so as to preclude

the immersion of the substrate into the plasma. Such ion sources can operate

at a pressure on the order of 1 ° 10’3 Pa (for comparison: diode atomization is
accomplished at a working gas pressure or no less than 1 Pa, and the usual triode
atomization at 10'1 to 10' Pa).

A triode type ion source with a plasma
ejector is shown in Figure 6.6. Its
operational principle is as follows. A
plasma of the working gas. for example,
argon. is excited in the discharge cham-
ber 3 by means of thermionic cathode 6,
which is usually made of tungsten wire,
and the anode 6. The flow of ionized
gases is removed through a slot in the
discharge chamber by means of the poten-
tial difference applied between the cham-
ber 3 and the collector l. The plasma
is focused and localized close to target

 

Figure 6.6. Schematic of a triode
atomization source.

Key: A. Argon; 8 by means of magnet system 5. As a
B. Oxygen; result of this structural design for the
C. Hater for cooling. ion source, the substrate 2 is not im-

mersed in the plasma, and therefore, its
temperature will be low. The atomization of the target 8 is accomplished by
applying a high voltage to it (100 to 1.000 volts). In order for the atomiza-
tion of the target to take place from the front, which faces substrate 2. it
is placed in shield 7. which covers the rear and side portions of the target.
A provision is made for feeding chemically active gas into the region between
the substrate and the target for reactive atomization in this source. The
reactive application of Pe203 on a photographic template and the Fe target is
shown in the figure.

Sample operating characteristics of the triode ion source cited above are:

Voltage at the anode of the discharge chamber 60 to 60 volts
Magnetic field intensity 26 . 103 A/m
Anode current 20 A

Target voltage 3 RV

Target current up to l A

Working pressure of the gas fed in for the atomiza-
tion (3 to a) - 10"2 Pa

Because of the high power dissipation in the discharge chamber and at the target,
the electrodes and the chamber are water-cooled.

A variant of the diode atomization system is the magnetron source. Discharges
in magnetron sources occur in crossed electromagnetic fields, as a result of
which, high deposition rates of the metals and alloys are attained (on the

- 92 -

INDR‘OFIICJAl.lEﬂ!(HULY
order of 2 um/minute where the distance from the target to the substrate is

60 mm [16]). A magnetron source with a plane cathode is depicted schematically
in Figure 6.7a. The magnetic field applied perpendicular to the electric field
acts on the electrons emitted by field emission cathode l and which move to
anode 2 with the action of the electric field applied between the cathode and

the anode. In crossed electrical and magnetic fields. the path of electron
motion is increased, as a result of which. with the introduction of the working
gas into the source, greatest concentration of gas ions is achieved. With a

gas pressure on the order of l - 10"1 Pa. one can obtain greater ion current
densities (0.2 A/cmz). The ions. subject to the action of the electrical field,
are directed to the cathode. bombard it, atomizing with a considerable intens-
ity. The atomization region 5 is governed by the region of intense plasma
focusing by the magnetic and electrical fields. The substance being atomized

is precipitated on substrate 6. The magnet system 3 is mounted in a water—cooled
housing A. The trajectory of the electron path e in the crossed electrical

B and magnetic 8 fields is shown in Figures b.7b and c in the case of a flat
(Figure 4.7b) and hollow cylindrical cathode (Figure é.7c). The magnetron sys-
tem is used to atomized metals,

   

Figure 4.7. Schematic of a magnetron atomization source.

Key: a. Magnetron atomization source;
b. The trajectory of electron motion in a magnetron with a

flat cathode;
c. The trajectory of electron motion in a magnetron with a

cylindrical cathode and anode.

In the case of the atomization of dielectrics. just as in the-diode systems
described earlier. RF sources are used instead of direct current sources.

The rates in the case of RP atomization amount to approximately 100 X/min, a
figure which is several times greater than the deposition rate in conventional

diode systems.

Ion—Thermal Equipment

Ion-thermal deposition of thin films is a combination of two methods: thermal
vaporization and ionic precipitation. There are several variants of ion-therma
deposition in this case: thermal vaporization with the formation of ions of
the substance being vaporized by means of exposure to an argon plasma and the
high frequency ionization of the substance being vaporized itself; high fre-
quency thermal vaporization with the simultaneous ionization of the vapors of

- 93 -

FOI_OFTNCJAI.lEﬂi(ﬂWLY
I
FOR‘KP'NJAI.USE(MULV

the substance being vaporized. etc. The following three types of ion-thermal
vaporization are the most widespread:

--Resistive and electron beam vaporization of the material with the subsequent
ionization of it by the working gas plasma (in this case, reactive deposition

of films is possible) in dual chamber systess;

--Resistive and electron beam vaporization with ionization of the vapors of the
substance without the participation of the working gas. for example, by means
of RF induction;

--RF thermal vaporization with the simultaneous RP ionization of the vapors of
the substance being vaporized.

In all cases, the ions of the vaporized substance are transported to the substrate
by an electrical field applied between the crucible and the ‘substrate, and are
deposited on it. The substrate potential can vary (0 to 10‘ volts) depending

on the requisite crystalline structure and adhesion of the resulting films. For
example, at low substrate temperatures, it is necessary to increase the potential
so as to obtain satisfactory adhesion of the film to the substrate.

Ion-thermal film deposition sources are pictured schematically in Figure 4.8.

  
  

 

ll I I I All!“
$71.35;“!qu “M {I %:::;a;“unuy
-V a) (a) -v a) (b)

 

I! (granola nun] ’ '0‘” "‘l
‘ 'uuuy II) ”n“, ”I z) (d)

;)(c)

o

Figure 5.8. Schematics of an ion-thermal atomization source.

Key: a. Hith a resistive vaporizer;
b. with an electron beam vaporizer;
c. with high frequency ionization;

- 94 -

FOI10FFKJAI.USEIMVLY
Key [cont.]: d. Rith high frequency atomization and ionization.
A. To the high vacuum pump (3“).

A flow of the substance being vaporized is produced in the chamber (Figure 6.8a),
equipped with upper l and lower 4 flanges, to which the substrate 2 and the
resistive vaporizer 3 are fastened. Its ionization is accomplished by virtue

of collisions with the ionized atoms of the working gas, for example, argon at

a pressure of l ' 10'1 Pa. The preliminary ionization of this gas is accomplished
by an electrical field between the substrate 2 and the vaporizer 3. The action

of this same field also causes the ionic precipitation of the vaporized material.

In the case where an electron beam vaporizer is used (Figure 4.8b), a two-dimen-
sional installation with a stop shield in intermediate flinge b is employed.

The electron gun 7 and crucible 6 are placed in the lower high vacuum chamber in
which a pressure sufficient for she normal operation of the electron beam vapor-
izer is maintained: P g l ' 10' Pa. The electron beam 5 passes through the
diaphragm stop into the second chamber, in which the atomization and precipita-
tion of the film take lace. The pressure in the second chamber on the order

of l - 10'1 to l ' 10' Pa is produced by means of feeding in a gas through an
infiltration flow regulator. The material being vaporized is ionized by the
method described above and deposited on the substrate. The third type of ion-
thermal vaporizer (Figure b.8c) operates using the same principle as shown in
Figure 6.8b, only the ionization of the vaporized material is accomplished by
the RP induction unit 8. A working gas can be fed in only for the reactive
precipitation of thin films.

The fourth type of ion-thermal vaporizer is the simplest one and makes it
possible to operate in a high and ultrahigh vacuum (Figure 4.8d). In it, the
vaporization of the substance from crucible 6, which is positioned on flange 6,
is accomplished by means of RP heating from the induction unit 8. At the same
time, the vaporized material is ionized by means of this induction unit, and
the material is precipitated on substrate 2, which is fastened to the upper
flange 1. Reactive precipitation of films with a complex composition can also
be accomplished in this type of vaporizer by admitting a chemically active gas
into the chamber.

The merits of such equipment are:

-—The fast precipitation rate, which is characteristic of thermal vaporization,
in conjunction with the high energy of the condensing particles, something
which is inherent in ionic atomization methods;

--The homogeneity of the resulting films without additional rotation of the
substrate, since it is surrounded on all sides by the ions of the material
vaporized in the gas discharge.

A drawback_is the considerable complexity of directly monitoring the coating
thickness during the precipitation process.

- 95 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIII(Mﬂﬂ(JAI.USElDNLV

The rate in the case of electron beam vaporization reaches 5 um/min. In this
case, 1001 coverage of relief substrates can be accomplished without the use
of various planetary systems. Moreover, the use of the ion-thermal technique
of deposition makes it possible to deposit films with a complex composition,
including carbides, nitrides, oxides, etc. at high rates without high tempera-
ture heating of the substrates.

Installations for the Vacuum Application of Films

The requirements placed on thin film application technology can be formulated
in the following manner:

-Uniformity of the film thickness over the entire relief of the substrate;

--Reproducibility of the film parameters from batch to batch and from process
to process;

--The capability of applying several layers or one layer of a complex composition.

The first three requirements can be satisfied by such a structural design of

the device inside the chamber that it is possible to move the substrate relative
to the vaporizers by means of planetary rotation, while the latter can be
satisfied by the use of several vaporizers operating simultaneously.

A planetary unit is shown in Figure 4.9 in which the convex hemisheres with the
wafers fastened in them execute rotating motions about its axis and the axis

of the vaporizer. The inclination angle of the hemishere relative to the normal
to the vaporizer is chosen as a function of the step. The greatest angle rela-
tive to the vaporizer axis and the center of rotation of the sphere which is
used is 90'. Such structures are basicly used for thermal vaporization, in
which the beam of vaporized atoms obeys the vaporization law applying to vapori-
zation from a point or a plane.

An important parameter for the use of vacuum installations from the viewpoint
of economic efficiency is productivity. The time expended for auxiliary opera-
tions is curtailed to increase the productivity:

--The time for loading the wafers in the substrate holders and unloading them
following the application of the films;

--The time for getting to the working vacuum from atmospheric pressure and cooling
the substrate down to the temperature which allows for the admittance of the

atmosphere.

These time losses can be eliminated by means of semi-continuous and continuous
exposure installations, where the loading and unloading operations for the
wafers are combined with the thin filh application operations.

Automating the operation of such installations makes it possible to change over
to conveyor type flow lines, which are the most effective equipment in industry,
leads to a reduction in the number of attending personnel, and consequently,

has a positive impact on improving the quality of the applied films by virtue
of eliminating subjective operator errors.

- 96 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
However. it must be noted that although the application of the principle of con-
tinuous deposition of thin films, by virtue of the use of lock type loading

and unloading devices increases the productivity and makes it possible to realize
constant vacuum conditions (the concentration and composition of the residual
gases, thermodynamic equilibrium of the vaporizers and heating devices, etc.),
which leads to an improvement in product quality, semi-continuous and continuous
installations are economically efficient only for large series production. For
small series production, periodic exposure installations are economically effi-
cient.

 

Figure 4.10. Schematic of the vacuum
, . _‘ . . system for a periodic
-- —- ‘ l ' exposure installation
Figure 6.9. A planetary substrate for the application of
holder. films.

 

The vacuum systems can be identical in both types of installations. New struc-
tural components appear in the continuous and semi-continuous units: lock
devices. For this reason, here we will consider the principle structural con-
figurations of the vacuum, vacuum equipment as well as the lock devices and
those inside the chamber.

A schematic of the vacuum system of a periodic installation is shown in Figure
b.10: valves 8 and S serve for switching the initial vacuum exhaust of the
residual gases from the precipitation chamber 9 and the high vacuum pump 6. To
prevent the intrusion of oil vapors from pump A into the chamber, two traps
are inserted between them: one is water-cooled with oil vapor reflector 3 and
the second is cooled with liquid nitrogen, 2. High vacuum cutoff valve cuts
the working pump 6 off from chamber 9 when air is admitted into it through
valve 10 to replace the substrates, load the material being vaporized, etc.
Valve 7 serves to admit air into mechanical pump 6 which is shut down. Such a
vacuum system can also be used in semi-continuous installations which have
individual independent vacuum exhaust systems.

_ 97 _

FOR 0FF1CJA1.USE!0NLY
INJR‘OFFICJAI.1£5EICNULV

 

Figure 4.12. The UVN-73P-l industrial
installation with a
periodic thermal vapor-
izer. -

An example of a periodic exposure vacuum
installation with the unit internal to
the chamber is shown in Figure 4.11.
In this installation, the wafers 2 are
fastened to three planetary hemisheres
17, which are held with levers 18. The
vaporization of the material is accom-
plished by an electron gun with crucible
3. which has a protective shield 4 to
trap secondary electrons. Infrared .amp
15 with a temperature sensor is used to
Figure 4.11. The structural design of heat the substrates before and during

a vacuum installation for the application of the film. A quartz

the application of films. metering instrument 1 is used to monitor

the film thickness. Visual observati. .

of the operation of the Ghits and mechanisms are made through inspection window
16 with a mirror periscope. which prevents it being coated. The unit internal
to the chamber with the dome is fastened to plate 5. The electrical entrances.
as well as the fastening of the diffusion pump 11 to the nitrogen trap and the
water-cooled trap 12 are accomplished through the transition connecting flange
14. The chamber is isolated from the high vacuum pump by blocking valve 6. The
initial vacuum exhaust line 8 with valve 9 for the connection of a leak detector.
as well as trap 10 and ionization nanometers 13 are also shown in the figure.

 

The UVN-73P-l and "Elite" industrial installations can serve as examples of
periodic exposure installations. The first of them (Figure 4.12) is widely used
to apply thin metal films in the production of semiconductor deVices. The
metal is vaporized by the thermal method by means of heating the walls of a
titanium diboride crucible with an electron gun. The working chamber is cylin-
drical with a horizontal arrangement. The wafers are fastened to a drum on the

- 93 -

FOR OFIHCJAL.USE:€HULV
inside. The installation operates in a semi-automatic control mode for the
mechanisms and the process.

The second installation (Figure 5.13) is designed for the application of metal
films of difficultly fusible metals by means of ion-plasma atomization of them.
The reactive atomization method in a chemically active gas medium can also be

used to apply dielectric films in it. A triode type ion source is employed in

the installation. A provision is made for feeding a bias voltage to the substrate
to clean it prior to the application of the films. The wafers are secured to

a rotating carousel. The installation operates in an automatic control mode for
the mechanisms and in a semi-automatic control mode for the thin film applica-
tion process.

An example of s semi-continuous vacuum
system design using an electron beam
vaporizer is the "Elana" installation.
which is depicted in Figure 4.16; a
block diagram of it is shown in Figure
é.lS. The installation consists of
three sections: two lock chambers for
loading 12 and unloading 3 the flat
cassette holders 0 and the working
chamber 8. Each chamber has its own
individual initial vacuum and high
vacuum exhaust systems. consisting of
the mechanical initial vacuum pump 1
with absorption trap 2 and the high
vacuum oil diffusion pump 13 with a
nitrogen trap placed between the pump
and the cutoff valve. The vacuum is
measured in the chambers by means of
thermocouples and ionization sensors
10 with the vacuum gauge 6.

 

Figure 4.13. The industrial "Elita"
periodic ion-plasma stom- The operational principle of the instal-

isation installation for lation consists in the following. The
difficultly fusible metals residual gas is initial pumped out of
and the reactive precipi- the entire installation. and then with

tation of dielectric films. the cutoff.vslve l and slide valve 2
closed. air is admitted thrOugh mag-

netic infiltration flow regulator 1 into loading chamber 12. After the vacuum
is eliminated in it. cassette holder 4 is placed on the guide plates. After a
high vacuum is attained, the cassette holder is moved by means of magnetic coil
5 into the working chamber. The transporting unit 7, which provides for the
uniform travel of the cassette, passes it over heater 11 consisting of infrared
lamps to increase the adhesion of the films being applied, and then inserts it
in the second chamber with two narrow slots for the film application. The pre-
cipitation of the films is accomplished in the second chamber by means of an
electron beam vaporizer with a copper water-cooled crucible 9. in which the
material is continuously fed into the atomization zone in step with the atomiza-
tion.

- 99 -

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 4.14. The “Elana" semi-continuous installation with the
panels removed.

After the application of the film to the substrate, the cassette holder is ex-
tracted by means of magnetic coils 5 from the working chamber and brought into

the unloading chamber.

In the operating installation, a high vacuum is maintained for the entire tic“
so as to prevent the intrusion of atmospheric air from the loading and unloadi.”
chambers into the working chamber. For these purposes, all of the chambers are
separated from each other by high vacuum slide valves, and from the inital
vacuum and high vacuum lines by gate valves. magnetic valves KM, as well as
electrically and manually driven valves, VB? and VRP. Air is admitted into the
chambers and the mechanical pumps by means of the electromagnetic flow regulato‘

N and the manual flow regulators NR.
6.2. Film Precipitation from a Gas Phase

The most widely used techniques for chemical precipitation from a gas phase are
the following:

--Thermal decomposition, or pyrolysis, in which a gaseous initial compound is
broken down and its components are precipitated on the ssbstrate. Depending
on the decomposition temperature, they are broken down into low temperature
(less than 600' C) and high temperature (more than 600° C);

--hydrogen reduction of the vapor of the working compound at an elevated tempera—
ture;

--Reduction with metal vapors (for example, Zn or Mg vapors) to precipitate metals
from their halogenides.

- 100 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.N o>~¢> ouuocu-x .2
an o>u¢> a¢>wuv anaascaz .n
”a non-Hanan
noun coauuuuauunu assent .n
“N o>~¢> au>uuv uudaoauuoonu .n

cowuouaauouu uwvouuonwlon a mo couuuuauuuaou unusuusuum .na.c shaman

_ $85.53.! :~........€.c.=x:_§¥u u 3.33.? 223333253: 5.8.38» axon... guitar—5 .2... .8...

 

”n novaaauou
:oHu coauuuuauucu ”sacs: .0
“n o>~a> unaccun: .m
we o>aa> :o>«uv aﬂuuouuuuouu .u
an 0>Ho> mucuso .n
“a o>a¢> uu0u50 .0
“A o>uu> ovumm .n
«a o>~n> ovuum .<

.uouuuomu> Icon couuuoao an nous

«sou

- 101 -

3.4.3. .

F0! 0I11C1AI.USE10NIN
FOICNHNCJAI.USE(NNLY

The most widespread precipitation technique is a thermochemical reaction, for
example, the oxidation of the monosilane s13“. Doped and undoped layers of
oxides can be applied using this method at low temperatures (200 to 250° C).
This technique makes it possible to attain high rates of deposition: up to
several thousands of angstroms per minute, a figure which is 50 to 100 times
greater than the precipitation rate of an oxide using the pyrolysis of tetra-
ethoxysilane at 600 to 700' c as well as improve the quality of the oxide and
the adhesion of the oxide layer to the substrate.

The method is based on the monitored oxidation of monosilane with oxygen in
dilute mixtures with inert gases, in accordance with the reaction:

Slﬂa + 02 " $102 '0' H20

and provides for the possibility of doping silicon dioxide with boron, phosphorus,
arsenic and other impurities during the precipitation process.

The following processes have been developed at the_present time to obtain passi-
vatlng coatings:

--Precipitation from a gaseous phase at normal pressure;
-Precipitation from a gaseous phase at low pressure;

--Precipitation from a gaseous phase in a plasma.

Types of reactors in installations for chemical precipitation from a gaseous
phase are described in 53.6.

An example of an installation with a reactor operating at normal pressure and
at low temperature (less than 700° C) is the "chain-3" installation. The
structural design of the reactor of this installation which is intended for
the precipitation of silicon dioxide films, both phosphorus doped and undoped
films, is shown in Figure 4.16. Three reactors, arranged one on top of the
other, are used in the installation to increase its productivity. Square
cross-section reactor tube a, which is made from stainless steel or quartz,
has the flanged end secured in head 10 of plate 9 and is sealed with washers
8 and 11 made of silicone rubber. Diffuser 7 with twin gas injection to feed
the working gases from the gas distribution 7 into the working region through
connecting tube 12 is positioned in head 10. The open end of the tube is
secured in the clamping unit by spans of moving clamps 6 with adhesive washers
5 made of silicone rubber.

The clamping device is fastened to the fan ventilation housing 2 of the mounting
stand. The spend gases are exhausted into the exhaust ventilation through the
open end of the tube.

The electric heater 3 is made in the form of tubes 16, which are built into
graphite plate 17 along with thermocouple 15. The quartz plate 13 with the
substrates 15, on which the dielectric layers are applied, is placed on the
graphite plate.

'4 -102-

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Figure $.16. The structural design of the reactor of the "chain-3"
low tenperaturs silicon oxide precipitation installation
with an internal resistive heater.

  
   
    
      

"1 5w,
(1) ./°(1)
° (2)
_,, (2) ‘0
nw(3) nw(3)
" ”Ja,ppr (4)
p 'i' J” Reactor
’7" (7’ henna;

”'3 0;

Figure 6.17. Pnsuaatic configuration of
the gas distribution sys-
ten for the "Oksin-J" in-
stallation.

Key: 1. Filter;
2. Check valve;
3. Ball valve;
6. Gas flow rate regulator;
5. Restrictor;
6. Direct reading flow
aeters;
Pneumatic valves;
9. Gas flow rate regulator.

The temperature in the reactor does
not exceed 600' C.

The gas distribution system for the
input and regulation of the feed of

the working gases into the reactor,

in particular, silane, oxygen, nitrogen
and the doping gas phosphine or
diborane, is shown in Figure 4.17. A
filter F is installed at the system
input to scrub the gases. In the
figure, one line is used to indicate
each gas. Where necessary, one can
increase the nunber of regulated
channels to feed in apprOpriate addi-
tional gases. The gas distribution
cosponsnts are connected to each other
and to the main delivery lines through
pipe filters made of stainless steel.
Gases can be fed into the installation
both free tanks and from a centralised
network. A specific feature of the
operation of the gas systen of the
installation is the capability of the
sinultaneous operation of all reactors.
The gas systes consists of the nitro-
gen, oxygen, phosphine and aonosilane
feed lines as well as the disposal line.

He shall consider the operation of the
gas distribution system. Nitrogen
is fed in through the filter, the check

- 103 -

F0- OI‘I'ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0F11C1Al.USElJNLY

valve K0. which prevents the reverse flow of the gas, and the ball valve KSh,
to the direct reading flow meters R. which serve for monitoring and regulating
the nitrogen consumption when diluting the monosilane and phosphine with it.

A choke Dr is inserted in parallel with the ball valve, where the choke is
intended for providing for the requisite gas rate of flow with the constant
flushing of the reaction chamber.

The phosphine feed line also starts from filter P. Then follow the check valve
K0 to prevent the back flow of the gas, the [ball] valve KSh, the gas flow rate
regulator REG with a digital display. a pneumatic valve (non-return) KP, which
allows or cuts off the gas access to the system. The oxygen and silane lines
are similar. The gas mixture is fed via two separate lines directly into the
reactor.

The installations for film precipitation at low pressures have a number of
advantages over the preceding type. At low pressure (1 to 66 Pa), the free

path length of the molecules of the regulating gas in the chamber is increased.
This makes it possible, by placing the wafers vertically and close to each other,
to increase the productivity of the installation (from 80 to 150 wafers/cycle
when depositing polysilicon with a thickness or 50,000 K or silicon nitride with
a thickness of 1,000 X) and does not require a gas vehicle. The substrate holder
is heated simultaneously with the heating of the quartz tube, according to the
type of diffusion furnace. Dielectric films produced in such systems are dis-
tinguished by their high homogeneity and large coefficient of coverage of the
relief steps of the substrates. The precipitate adheres to the hot wall of

the tube, while the low pressure of the gas does not cause the particles to
circulate in the tube. For this reason, the films are distinguished by a
minimal number of defects (less than two pores in a wafer with a diameter of

75 mm). However, because of the vertical arrangement of the wafers. the gas
flow to the substrates is encumbered and the film deposition rate is reduced.

:clpy.lna
hug-yard
sturmuu

(A)

 

Figure $.18. Structural design of the reactor of an installation
for chemical precipitation from a gas phase at low
pressure.

Key: A. Wafer loading and unloading.

A schematic of a reactor with hot walls, which operates at low pressure. is
shown in Figure 4.18.

- 104 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The reaction chamber is a circular quartz tube 2, heated by the three sone
resistance heater 3. The tube is secured at the two ends by the flanges S.

The substrates are inserted at a spacing of 3 to 5 mm from each other in sub-
strate holder h. which is set in the reaction chamber through the left flange

5, which serves for loading and unloading the wafers, and then the cover is
closed. The chamber is exhausted from the opposite end of the tube by a mechan-
ical vacuum pump. There is an opening in the left flange for the admission of
the reaction gas. the flow rate of which is regulated by pressure transducer 1.

A comparatively new method of file precipitation from a gas phase is the plasma
chemical technique. A glow discharge plasma is usually employed. The chemical
activity of the reaction gases increases in a glow discharge. as a result of
which. for example, silicon nitride films in the reaction of silane with
ammonia can precipitate on substrates which are heated up to 300 to 500 ° C.
instead of 900’ C with the high temperature interaction of the gases indicated
above.

High frequency radiators are used as the
plasma excitation sources. The gas pres-
sure, high frequency radiation power,
plasaa density distribution over the
substrate holder, composition of the gases
and the temperature of the substrate all
influence the uniformity of the thickness
and composition of the films.

   

.1 htyyumvy
Many

(A) One of the major factors which has an

[’316‘3 impact on the uniformity of film thickness
is the homogeneity of the plasma density.
high frequency capacitor type induction

Figure 6.19. Structural design of the units are used for these purposes, where

reactor of a plasma the electrodes in the forms of discs are

chemical precipitation arranged parallel to each other. One

installation. of them (the lower one) is the substrate
holder.

Key: A. To the vacuum pump.

The structural design of a capacitor type reactor for the plasma chemical
precipitation of silicon nitride films is shown in Figure 5.19. The working
chamber is fabricated from stainless steel. Substrate holder h with the plates
is one of the high frequency electrodes and is fastened to shaft 2, through
which the working gas feed system passes. The substrate holder is rotated by
magnetic drive 3 to provide for uniform precipitation of the films on the wafers.
The substrate holder can be heated from heaters l, which are located outside

the chamber, up to a temperature of 200 to 300° C. so as to assure satisfactory
adhesion of the films in the substrate as well as their density. The pressure
in the chamber is maintained at a level of 26.6 Pa, which assures the stability
of the glow discharge. The nonuniformity in the film thickness runs up to S

to 71 and the rate of growth of silicon nitride films is 300 to 600 X/min at

a power dissipation of 0.5 RH. The silicon nitride films obtained in these

- 105 -

FUI!(HNW(1AI.[EHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reactors at low substrate temperatures are used for the passivation end protec-
tion of semiconductor devices. Silicon, silicon dioxide and other films are
produced by the technique of plasma chemical precipitation from the gas phase.

-106-
.9

NB OFI-‘IGAI. USE ONLY
ms :39; mm m Pam-01.1mm rmcasszs

 

Phololithography is one of the major steps in semiconductor production. which
governs the quality of the entire technological process as a whole.

Photolithography includes the following main operations:
-The surface preparation of the semiconductor wafer;
-The formation of the photoresist layer;

-The formation of the photoresist relief;

-The formation of the relief in the oxide or metal;
-The removal of the photoresist layer.

In accordance with the steps in the photolithography production process. the
equipment is classified according to function:

-Por processing the surface of a wafer;

o-Por applying and heat treating the photoresist;

--Por matching and exposing, developing and heat treating;
o-Por the etching operations.

The processes and techniques of photolithography are in the stage of continuous
refinement; this is also related to the diversity of the equipment used for

the same processes. For example. the application of photoresist is accomplished
by means of centrifuging and atomization methods; developing uses immersion

and pulverization methods; heat treatment uses convection and infrared heating,
as well as microwave energy in a vacuum and at elevated pressure (thermal
compression technique).

Besides the direct improvement of the production processes, the level of auto-
mation of photolithographic processes has a direct influence on the improvement
in the quality of processing the wafers and boosting productivity. Problems

of stabilizing the production process modes, transporting the wafers and elimin-
ating operator contact with the wafers are the ones being primarily solved here.

The first stage in the automation of the photolithographic proves. was the
construction of a series of automatic units which perform the individual pro-
duction process operations by the group method in accordance with a specified
program:

~-The photoresist developer unit of the Kulicke and Soffa Industries Company
(0.8.); _

-The five-position installation for applying photoresist, Hacronetics Model 1201
(0.8.): the one and two position units for photoresist application of Plat-
General (0.5.).

- 107 -

FOR OFFICIAI.USEGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. these installations have a serious drawback: the loading. unloading and
transporting of the wafers from the working positions to other operations are
accomplished manually. Domestic equipment of similar type, with which the
"Taran" and "Korund" lines are equipped, also have the same drawbacks. The first
attempt to design a domestic computer controlled production complex was the

APL automated flow line. The photolithographic operations are carried out on
the line using the group method. The photoresist is applied by means of cen-
trifuging from a group drip pan simultaneously for ten wafers, which are located
in the common spindle of the centrifuge (Figure 5.1). The developing is done

by atomization of the developer. The heat treatment is accomplished by the
thermal compression technique, something which has a positive effect: the

heat treatment operation is eliminated and the removal of the photoresist is
facilitated.

However. all of the high prodictivity equipment mentioned above, installations
with group processing of the wafers, do not meet the major requirement of
modern technology: absolute reproducibility of the production process modes
for each wafer in a batch.

Recent years in the field of semiconductor machine building have been character-
ized by the transition from installations which perform individual production
process operations to the development of automated lines and complexes.

Yet another important trend is observed
as concerns photolithogrsphy lines: a
transition from group processing of the
wafers to individual processing, which
best meets the main requirement of the
production process: its reproducibility.

In step with the refinement of the tech-
nology using individual wafer processing,
and as a result of solving questions of
transporting them to the processing
position, it became possible to move on
to the next step in the design of auto-
mated photolithography lines. In 1971.
the Japanese company Toshiba designed
an automated photolithography line in
Figure 5.1. A device for applying which the entire production process is
photoresist coatings by accomplished using a single cassette
means of group centrifuging. holder. The American company Industrial
Modular Systems Co. [39] developed a
system for transporting the wafers on an
air cushion, and automatic units were
designed using this principle for the
application and developing of the photo-
resist, which had a high productivity
and devices for automatically loading

 

Key: 1. Base;
2. Receiver;
3. Vacuum suction fitting;
6. wafer;
5. Cover.

- 108 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The first att
e r52

he holders.
tic industry we:
the wafers on
wafers was used.

I unloading t
aphy lines in done.
inciple of transporting

rating
1 and
liability

In the 9:
both structura

fficient to

a and lines,
taly aatiaf
FORINHHCJAL.USE(MVLY

Key to Figure 5.2: 1. Guides; 15. Support post;
2. Push rod; 16. Hicroswitch;
3. Pneumatic cylinder; 17. Pull bar;
6. Electric motor; 18. Pneumatic tray;
5. Coupling; 19. Photocell;
6. Pusher; 20. Guides;
7. Hicroswitch; 21. Hicroswitch;
8. Pulley; 22. Rod.
9. Belt;

10 . Guide :

11. Motion screw;

12. Pulley;

l3. Hicroswitch;

lb. Pneumatic cylinder;

An important organizational component in the functioning of an automated line

is the set of cassette holders which make it possible to create universal loading
and unloading mechanisms and implement the organizational principle of the
production: the operator works only with the cassette holder. The standard
structural design of such a mechanism from the "Lads-125" line is shown in

Figure 5.2. The photolitnography lines which have been developed by various
companies make it possible to not only curtail the expenditures for manual labor.
but also to optimally limit the intervention of the operator in the production
process.

Hacronetics and the 111 Companies put together a line from modular units for
hydromechanical washing. application of the photoresist. developing and IR
heat treatment. The Cobilt Company produces the Antofab-IV photolithography
line. in which there is rigid coupling between the installations. A cassette
holder with a multi-shelf configuration with'the starting wafers is installed
at the input to this line, and the holder is removed at the output with the
topological figure already on the plate.

Thus, there are two trends in the construction of photolithographic lines:

-The joining of modular units to individual loading and unloading posts for
wafers into holders. which can be rigidly joined in pairs, structurally and
in terms of the power supply [lines of the III Coupany and the Class-1000 line
of the Macronetics Company (0.5.), and the "Lads-elektronika” and "Lads-125"

(USSR)];

--A rigid line in which the wafer loading and unloading posts are located at the
beginning and the end (the "Autofab-IV" line of the Cobilt Company).

The Uniplane h 000 line of the Kasper Company (0.8.) occupies a special position
among those treated here; this line includes centrifuge cleaners. developers

and furnaces. The Uniplane a 000 line is made from modules, each of which can
operate independently of the other under the control of its own microprocessor
or as part of an overall comprehensive system with couplete coupling between

the modules in both the forward and reverse directions [18]. The lines

- 110 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
described here are distinguished by the transport systems for the wafers, which
can be conditionally broken down into three types:

-Hafer transport on an air cushion (Figure 5.3);

--Combination transport (on an air cushion and using a transport carriage)
(Figure 5.4);

-Hafer transport on polyurethane belts in a strictly horizontal plane with a

smooth change in the carriage travel speed at the outset of the motion and
when stopping (Figure 5.5).

I

 
     

\V/S/W " ,.
m
Air Flour

Juiyuuuu
rum).

 

 

Figure 5.3. The wafer transport system Figure 5.6. The carriage and unloading

using an air cushion. mechanism.
Key: 1. Wafer; Key: 1. Sloped tray;
2. Carrying flow. 2. wafer;
3. Cleaner;
The latter principle of moving the wafers 4. Bolder;
being processed is the most expedient one, 5. Loader;
since it precludes shock contact of the 6. Drive;
end face of the wafer and the loading and 7. Centrifuge cartridge.

manipulating devices: the edge of the

cassette holder. the carriage stops, clamps, guides, etc. Such microshocks have
been observed in the first two transport methods and have led to damage to wafers,
the formation of silicon crumbs and dust, and consequently, to the contamination
of the photoresist film. and the fouling and failure of moving mechanisms.

 
 
 

Muullnlll L",

      

Figure 5.5. The transport system in the "Lads-125" line.

- lll -

FOI<0FFﬂJAl.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Key to Figure 5.5: l. Hafer loader;
2. Transport carriage;
3. Carriage drive;
4. Refer throw—off ejector;
S. Transporter;
6. Upper plate;
7. Support stand;
8. Lower plate.

5.1. Equipment for Preparing the Surface of Wafers

The quality of a photolithographic process is governed in many respects by the
preparation of the wafer surface, and for this reason, cleaning is one of the
most important operations in semiconductor technology, on the effectiveness of
which the electrophysical properties and percentage output of good devices

depend.

Surface contamination can be broken down into physical-chemical and mechanical.
Physical-chemical contaminants are ionic or neutral impurities adsorbed on the
surface which form monolayers and influence primarily the parameters and reliabi-
lity of the devices. Primarily chemical cleaning methods are used to remove
them where these methods are based on the desorption of the impurities when the
wafers are treated in solutions, gaseous media and in s plasma [5]. The par-
ticles take the form of clusters of the material with dimensions of 0.1 um and
greater.

The complete removal of contaainants is one of the difficult problems in the
processing of wafers, for the solution of which primarily physical cleaning
methods are employed, which in turn include ultrasonic and mechanical treatment.
0f the physical cleaning methods, hydromechanical washing is being successfully
used of late, which is coming to replace traditional techniques: polishing
with cambric fabric and washing with brushes. The function of a hydromechanical
washing installation is to remove mechanical formations: particles of silicon,
quartz. dust, etc. from the surface of the wafers.

To assure washing effectiveness, it is necessary to use a fluid with a high
degree of purity and to deionize the water, which is filtered through filters
with pores of 0.2 um or less. as the washing medium; the washing is accomplished
directly prior to the process which is sensitive to contamination; hydromech-
anical washing should follow chemical cleaning (in the case where two types of
cleaning are combined), since hydromechanical cleaning makes it possible to
eliminate those contaminants for which chemical cleaning is not effective. The
washing quality and the duration of the production process cycle are governed
not only by the reagents used, but also by the material and the structure of

the brushes. The brush material should meet the following requirements: it
should not change its initial properties in water; it should wash the wafers in
accordance with the production process requirements; it should not introduce
additional contaminants and defects which have an impact on the quality of the
devices; and it should not permit mechanical damage to the wafers being processed.

- 112 -

FOR<0FFKJAI.U$£(NNLY
Individual treatment of the wafers with a
rotating brush. where the wafers are lo-
cated in a centrifuge cartridge, is employed
in the hydtomechanical wafer cleaning in—
stallations of the "Lads-elektronika" and
"Lads-125" (Figure 5.6). The ejection of
wafers from the holders onto the trans-
porter. the transporting and placing of

a wafer in the working position, the
treatment of a wafer, the removal of a
treated wafer and its output - all of these
operations are performed automatically in

a standardized unit for moving wafers,
which is the basis for automatic equipment
for the hydromechanical cleaning, applica-
tion and developing of the photoresist.
Between cleaning cycles, a brush is flushed
with deionized water, washing solution or
another fluid which is used for treating
the wafers. A brush which is shifted with
respect to the center of the wafer and
which rotates counter to the wafer motion is used in washing installations with
brushes of the 1100 SD series of the Solitec Company. A stream of liquid con-
stantly fed from the center of the brush flushes away contaminant particles.

The washing of wafers with cylindrical and conical brushes is shown in Figure
5.7. Along with cleaning wafers with a brush, a number of companies, Macronetics.

  

Fibure . . L:Iu' I - A 1da-125"
hydromechanical washer.

 

Figure 5.7. Schematics showing wafer washing.

Key: a. With a cylindrical brush;
b. With conical brushes.

Cobilt and Kasper. use jet cleaning of wafers. This method is especially
effective when removing contaminants from etched channels. where a brush does
not reach. The spray cleaning system consists of a well protected atomizing
attachment made of tungsten carbide and a stainless steel pump, which delivers

a high pressure. The cleaning solution is filtered, and then fed to the
rotating surface of the wafer as a pulsed jet stream at a pressure 2.75 - 105 --

- 113 -

FOI,OF?1CIAL USE()NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.8. The automated Hacronetica
(0.5.) jet wafer washer.

2.75 - 106 Pa, depending on the adjustment.
During the cleaning cycle. the chamber is
hermetically sealed for operator safety
(Figure 5.8). In the Kasper hydromechan-
ical cleaner. which is incorporated in

the uniplane line. a combination of wash-
ing with brushes and atomization of a
washing solution under pressure is em-
ployed.

5.2. Equipment {0* Producing a Photosen-
sitive Layer

The production of a photoresist layer

is the initial operation of the photo—
lithographic cycle itself, in which the
quality of the photolithographic process
of a hole is established. The following
major requirements are placed on it:
high adhesion of the photoresist to the
surface of the wafer, uniformity of the

photoreaiat film thickness over the wafer and reproducibility of the thickness
from wafer to wafer. a minimal number of puncture holes and the absence of flows

of the photoresist to the back side of the wafer.

 

  

Figure 5.9. Schematic of the unit for applying a photoresist by
means of atomization.

Key: 1. Device for loading the semiconductor wafers;

2. Tank for the photoresist:
3. Chamber for the application of the photoresist;

. Net conveyor;
Wafer washer;

\OQVOU‘L‘
.

Pneumatic cabinet [sic];
Infrared furnace;

. infrared furnace conveyor;
. Receiver for the processed wafers.

-114-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Modern equipnent for producing a photosensitive layer, just as for hydromechanical
cleaning and developing, is based on the nodular equipnent principle and incor-
porates the nodule for applying the photosensitive layer and nodule l for the

heat treatnent of the layer. The existing nethods of applying the photoresist
include: immersion, rolling, atonization and centrifuging; the latter two
techniques are the nest useful in 10 technology.

The nodel 265! unit of the ln-Line Technology (0.8.) Conpany can serve as an
exanple of a unit for the application of a photosensitive layer by means of
atonization. The unit nakes it possible to produce photoresist layers tron 0.5
to 2 un thick with a unifornity of 1px. The unit is equipped with an autonatic
loader and unloader. The loading and unloading positions are protected by a
plexiglass hood, under which a constant flow of air is provided which is filtered
through 0.3 un pores. The atonizer executes a reciprocating notion over the
transporter with the wafers at a variable frequency of up to 60 notions/sin

[19] (Figure 5.9).

Atonization is the scat universal technique for producing a photosensitive layer
and applying it to a wafer is the forn of a finely dispersed aerosol. The
photoresist is broken up into snall droplets by a gas flow, which flows around
the jet as it exits the nozzle of the injector (Figure 5.10).

Figure 5.10. Injector for the atonization
of photoresist.

Key: 1. Pneumatic valve;

2. Feed hole for the atonr
ized jet of the photo-
resist;

3. holes which shape the
photoresist flare with
compressed air;

4. Filter.

a. Solvent for flushing the
injectors;

b. Photoresist;

c. Compressed air.

 

The merits of the technique are the capability of producing coatings in a large
range of thicknesses with rather good reproducibility and a slight scatter in
the thickness. as well as the capability of applying the photoresist to pro-
filcd surfaces. However. the neat widespread nethod of applying photoresist.
as before. remains centrifuging.

During centrifuging. the boundary layer adjacent to the substrate is produced
by means of the equalization of the centrifugal and cohesion forces. With

a certain approximation, the layer thickness is governed by the viscosity of
the photoresist, so that:

- 115 -

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

d - Riv/m (5.1)

where d is the thickness of the photoresist layer; k is a coefficient which takes
into account the concentration of the photoresist; v is the viscosity; and u
is the angular rotational speed of the centrifuge.

The centrifuge run-up time has an influence on the uniformity of the photoresist
layer [5]. To reduce this influence, it is necessary that:

trun < lZ/u (5.2)
For the most useful centrifuge speeds, the run-up time is trun < 0.) sec [20].
The requirements placed on the production process equipment are determined from
the requirements placed on the quality of the photosensitive layer:

--The drying of the wafers with nitrogen or with dried and cleaned air (with
a dew point of -65° C) prior to the application of the photoresist;

--A centrifuging speed stability in a working range of 500 to 6,000 r.p.m. (a
permissible instability of 152);

--Minimal and fixed run-up time of the centrifuge (0.1 to 0.15 sec);
--Constancy of the dosage of the photoresist;
--Stnbility of the centrifuging time.

These requirements are made more stringent for equipment which is intended for
processing large diameter wafers. for which the production of a uniform photo-
resist coating is a problem because of the high linear speed of the edges of
the wafers when they are centrifuged at the specified angular speed [21].

The modern photoresist application
equipment of Hacronetics, III. In-Linc
Technology, "Lada-elektronika" and "Ladn-
125". though differing in the system
for wafer transport, the number of trm
and the diameter of the wafers which can
be treated, execute the processing cyclo
using a common principle: the automatic
output feed of the wafers from the
cassette holders; the automatic trans-
portation of a wafer to the processing
position (centrifuge platform); nitrogen
flushing of n wafer; apportioned feed
of the photoresist to a wafer; centri-
fuging a wafer at a specified speed;
Figure 5.11. The "Lads-125" automated and automatic transport to the next pro-
unit for the application duction process operation. The sequence
of photoresist. of the operations. the time for their
execution and the centrifuging speed
are specified on the control panel of

 

- 116 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lhr automatic unit. The automatic unit for the photoresist application which is
incorporated in the "Lada-IZS" line is intended for processing wafers with
diameters of 75. 100 and 125 mm (Figure 5.11). The readjustment of the automated
unit from one diameter to another reduces to replacing the cutter which provides
for centering the wafers on the centrifuge platform, since the loader is adapted
for operation with any of the three standard dimensions of the holders and

does not require readjustment, while the guides of the transport carriage move

to fit any size depending on the wafer diameter.

The control panel has three buttons in all for simplicity in operating the auto—
mated unit ("stop", "start", "return"). Changing processing modes is accomplished
at the control console, which is covered with a panel and is opened only when

 

Figure 5.12. Infrared treatment unit (German Democratic Republic).

setting up the automated units. The production process operations are carried
out in accordance with the program set on the control console or from a computer.
An important feature of the line is the presence of an upper annular exhaust

at the working positions of the automatic units (bath-centrifuge), which pre-
vents the intrusion of spray and vapors of the production process media to the
wafer during the processing, as well as their contamination of the mechanisms

of the automatic units. All of the equipment units in the line automats are
made from standardized modules and differ only in the use of a particular
assembly which determines their production process assignment. For example,

by hanging a bracket on a unit with a brush drive, we have a hydromechanical
washer; by hanging a bracket with a dropper, we make an applicator; by hanging

a bracket with injectors, we obtain a developer. The control units are the

same for any of the three automated units and differ only in the interchangeable
panel for the switching of the production process modes for treating the wafers.
Optimum productivity is achieved through the functioning of one or two tratzs.

- 117 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Heat treatment operation I, which completes the process of producing a photo—
sensitive layer, has the purpose of removing volative components from the film.
To provide the masking properties, it is necessary that this operation does not
lead to a weakening or to point breaks in the photoresist layer, which can
occur during rapid evaporation of the solvent [5].

Infrared heating is used for the heat treatment in modern photolithography lines.
Infrared lamps (Figure 5.12) [the unit made by the U23 Elektromat Company (GDR)]
and dark infrared radiators are used as the heaters.

 

‘.

Figure 5.13. The "Lada-lZS" infrared
conveyor furnace.

The domestic heat treatment units incor-
porated in the "Lada-elektronika" and
"Lads-125" lines are equipped with
"dark" lR radiation sources in the

form of a thin current conducting film
applied to a sheet of quartz glass.

The heat treatment in IR conveyor fur-
naces of the "Lada" type (Figure 5.13) is accomplished in the relatively short
time of 2.5 to 5 minutes with continuous nitrogen flushing. The duration of

the heat treatment is set by the travel speed of the conveyor. The temperatuv
is maintained automatically in the furnace with an ultimate deviation in the
zones of the heaters of :5° C, which is permissible even for heat treatment ll
of the photoresist, which requires greater precision in the maintenance of the
temperature. Infrared conveyor heat treatement installations, just as all
automatic "Lada-lZS" lines are made in a two track variant. Each track operates
independently of the other. While in the IR conveyor heat treatment unit incor—
porated in the "Lada-elektronika" line the shutdown of the conveyor curtain
means the shutdown of the entire module, in the "Lads—125", with the shutdown

of one track of the furnace, the other can continue to operate.

 

Figure 5.14. The automated "Lada—lZS"
photosensitive layer
developer.

5.3. Equipment for Producing Relief in a Photosensitive Layer

Developing a photosensitive layer is a process on which the precision of the
reproduction of the geometric dimensions of the topological elements depends.

- 118 —

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1n the developing process. because of the different rates of solution of the
exposed and unexposed portions of the photoresist film, a re1‘2f image of the
topology is produced in the developer [20]. The technique of atomizing (or
pulverizing) the developing solution is the primary one in the modern equipment
of both the leading foreign companies (Hacronetics. GCA, III, Kasper) and
domestic industry (“Lads-elektroniha". "Lads-125") (Figure 5.14).

To The pulverization method (Figure 5.15) is
velopsr advantageously distinguished from the
6 ”I"""""‘ obsolete method of inersion developing

(”2.121% .'

in that it makes it possible to speed up
and automate the developing process. The
developing cycle in the "Lads-125" auto-
mated line consists in the sequential
execution of.the following operations:
, v developing; first washing; second washing;
. ‘ ~ 5 and drying.

5

   

The time for the execution of each opera-
tion is adjusted in a range of from 0
Figure 5.15. The pulverization wafer to 99 seconds in discrete steps of 1
treatment technique. second.

Key: 1. Washing injector;
I2.'Developing injector;
3. Nozzle;
a. Hater;
5. Centrifuge holder;
6. Centrifuge.

Provisions are made for operating the
automated units in three modes: automatic.
semiautomatic and manual.

5.4. Pattern Matching and Exposure Equip-
ment

A. Hashing solution I;

3. Washing solution 11; In the execution of the photolithography

C. Air (nitrogen). process, operations of transferring the

inage of the IC components and semicon-

ductor device from the photographic template to the vafer, coated with the
photoresist film, and the precise matching of the image of the 1c components on
the photographic template to the image on the wafer are of great importance.

The main characteristics of semiconductor devices and integrated circuits, and
in the final analysis, the yield of good devices. depend on the quality of
the performance of the pattern matching and exposure operations.

Several methods exist for transferring the photographic template image to the
wafer.

The contact technique: the photographic template. after being matched, is
brought in contact with the wafer. after which the photoresist is exposed with
ultraviolet rays through transparent portions of the figure on the photographic
template. The exposure quality depends in many respects on how complete a
contact is made between the photographic template the wafer, and hov precisely
the images of the photographic template and the vsfer are matched up.

- 119 -

FOR‘0FFKJA1.US£(HVLY
FORtOFFﬂJALIEEIONLY

Photolithography with a constant gap between the photographic template and the
silicon wafer: this method is similar to the contact method. but following the
matching of the images of the photographic tenplate and the wafer, a gap of
from 5 to 20 an is maintained between them which prevents damage to the photo-
graphic template.

The projection technique: the photographic template image is projected onto
the wafer through a special high resolution objective lens.

The electron lithography process for the generation of 1c topology as a result
of the nonthermal action of an electron beam on the resist [sic].

The holographic technique is a process of photographicallv recording the image.
in which case, the wave pattern of the light scattered by the objective is
registered on the photoresist; the capability of reproducing the optical pattern
of the photographic object is assured in this case.

The x-ray radiography is the process of xposing the photoresist with soft X—rays
with a wavelength in a range of S to 50 .

Figure 5.16. Basic configuration of a
contact exposure and match-
ing unit.

   

AV."V‘\“§\\‘

—
(a) a) (b) ‘1

Three methods of image transfer have found practical application in production
at the present time: contact, projection and electron beam exposure.

In light of the high requirements placed on the match-up precision (the error
should not exceed fractions of a micron). this process is carried out on
special precision equipment: image exposure and matching installations which
are complicated optical-mechanical complexes. The installations are character-
ized by the method and precision of matching, the resolution. the contact
quality. the productivity, the service life of the photographic templates (the
wear rate) and the pernissible dimensions of a wafer.

The basic configuration of a contact unit for exposure and matching is shown
in Figure 5.16. The major components of the installation are the microscope

I for visually monitoring the natching process. photographic template 2. at a
definite distance from which 3 (the spacing is less than the depth of focus

of the microscope) wafer a is positioned. During the match-up process (Figure
5.16s). the wafer is moved along the x and Y coordinates and with respect to

- 120 -

FORiOFFﬂJAl.USE(NQLY
Figure 5.17. Basic configuration of a
projection exposure and
matching unit.

according to the nethod of

taneous transfer of the image in the field of the wafer;
plicative transfer of the image; and with sequential
(Figure 5.17) contain the
(annual or automatic) 2. the match-up monitor unit 3, the match-
on which photographic tenplate 5 is placed, which is projecte

ieege. These systems
focusing device

up manipulators 6,

Figure 5.18. Basic configuration of

installation.

generating the inage on the substrate:

 

the angle 0 on coordinate table 5. Aftc
the latch-up has been made with the
requisite precision. the wafer cones in
complete contact with the photographic
te-plste and it is exposed (Figure $.16b
by the high pressure mercury vapor lamp
6 through shutter 8 and condenser lens 7
which provides for the requisite illne-
ination uniformity over the entire sur-
face of the substrate. Projection latch
ing and exposing inatallations make it
possible to avoid contact between the
substrate and the photographic tenplate,
which improves the durability of the
photographic template and promotes an
increase in image resolution.

Projection photolithography syetens are
subclassified as the following types
with simul-
with sequential nulti-
scanning transfer of the
illuminator l. the matching and

an electron been exposure

- 121 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 05‘1C1AL USEGJNLY

Electron beam exposure installations consist of a large number of complex devices
[22]. The typical electron beam exposure unit (Figure 5.18) consists of three
major assemblies: the photocopier or remote copier l, the electron optics column
with the exposure chamber 2 and the video monitor 13. The electron beam from
kinescope 10. in passing through the focusing device. scans the topology on
photographic template 11 and transfers the information to photomultiplier 12.

The information from the photomultiplier is fed to the control unit 1b of the
video monitor with kinescope 15 and controls the electron beam which is generated
by electron gun 8 and electron lenses 7. The electron beam acts on the photo-
resistive layer on the surface of substrate 6. Block 9 serves to control the
beam deflection system and drives 3 and 4 for moving coordinate table 9.

In other types of installations, the control of the electron beam motion is
accomplished by aeans of a specialised computer, into which a program is fed
which provides for the requisite topology on the substrate.

The technique of matching the photographic template and substrate with visual
monitoring of their position relative to each other by means of base markers
(matching characters) has become the most widespread one in microelectronics.
The matching process can be carried out by the operator, who visually monitors
the mutual position of the photographic template and the substrate, and moves
them by means of the micromanipulator until they match. In the case of auto-
matic matching, a photoelectric device analyzes the position of the matching
marks on the substrate and the photographic template. generates an error signal,
which is fed to the micromanipulator drive and causes the substrate to move.
In the case of complete matching, the error signal disappears and the drive is
cut off.

The precision and productivity of matching installations with visual monitoring
depends in many respects on the subjective aspects of the operator also (visual

acuity. etc.).

As a result of refining the structural designs for the major and auxiliary
mechanisms of contact matching and exposure installations using visual monitoring.
a productivity of more than 100 pieces/hr and a matching precision of 0.5 um
(Table 5.1) have been successfully achieved [23].

He shall consider the structural design of contact matching and exposure instal-
lations in more detail as well as the major requirements placed on their com-
ponent assesblies.

The major mechanisms of matching and exposure installations are the following:
--The match-up micromanipulator;

—-Thc mechanism for orienting the plane of the substrate;

--The template holder;

;-The loader;

-The contact exposure unit;

- 122 -

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE‘ONLY
TABLE 5.1. Comparative Characteristics of Contact Hatch-0p and Exposure Equipment
with Visual Monitoring

3832108 PLA-
CA-280 on V23 Blec- CA-2020 CA-300 520A FLA-500A
lH-576 Cobilt tromat Cobilt Cohilt Canon Canon

Parameters USSR 0.5. COR 0.8. 0... Japan Japan
Error in matching 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.125 0.75 - -

the elements of
the phototemplate
and the substrate,
um

Size of the mini— 2 1 1 1 2 0.5 3
mum image element
on the substrate.

um

Substrate dia- 60, 76. up to up to up to up to up to up to
meter, mm 100 100 76 100 76 100 125
Productivity. 160 - 130-150 - - 90-100 100
pieces/hr

Microscope magni- 96. 257, - 200 - - - -
fication, times 208

 

--Hicroscopes for visual monitoring.

The Hatch-Up Hicromsnipulators. The matching process places a number of require-
ments on micromanipulators. the most important of which are the following: a
mlcronanipulator should assure independence of the coordinate motions. sufficient
dimensions of the fields, high sensitivity, a definite algorithm for the motions,
and motions in a plane parallel to the plane of the photographic template.
Because of this. there are various structursl designs for match-up micromanipu-
lators.

One of the first structural designs of s match-up micromanipulator was a rotat-
ing coordinate motion table with guides for rolling and a screw drive. The
sensitivity of the manipulations during the final matching in this type of
micromanipulator depends on the kind of drive and the stiffness of its coupling
to the table. A drive from s micrometer screw transmission is most frequently
used. To assure sensitivity of the microdrive down to tenths and hundredths

of a micron. a two stage drive with a lever transmission for the fine step is
employed [26). A two stage lever drive is also used in micro-anipulstors with
a two-coordinate table. Besides the screw and lever drives. an eccentric drive
is used for rectilinear motions in micromanipulators with s two-coordinate
table on roller guides. A screw mechanism is used in the majority of cases as
the rotation drive in the manipulator, though sometimes a worn gear drive with

power locking.

- 123 -

FOI¢OIIICJAI.IENE(MVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(N%LY

Drawbacks to the coordinate-rotational design of micromanipulator tables are
the complexity, cumbersome nature and difficulty in assuring that the three
motions are parallel in the plane of the photographic template.

In micromanipulators with a flat table and a pantograph drive, the lack of
parallel motions of the plane of the photographic template is reduced because
of the fact that the number of working surfaces is reduced (two). However,
micromanipulators with a pantograph drive do not provide for the requisite
independence of the coordinate motions during the matching [23].

The structural design of a micromanipulator with a magnetostrictive drive is
of interest. A drawback is the small motion field [23].

Manipulators are capable of providing a motion precision of 1 0.1 um. but the
actual precision of a match-up with visual monitoring usually amounts to :_1 pm.

The mechanisms for orienting the plane of the substrate perform two major
functions: they arrange the substrates strictly parallel to the working plane
of the photographic template and move the substrate with high precision when
contacting the photographic template. The major requirements placed on the
orientation mechanism are precision in the vertical motions of the substrate,
the preservation of the working surfaces of the photographic template and the
substrate during orientation. as well as assuring a complete contact between
the substrate and the photographic template and minimal displacements of the
matched substrate when it is contact with the photographic template. In the
majority of the well-known exposure and match-up units, the orientation of
the plane of the substrate relative to the photographic template is accomplished
by means of a small spherical table. Following the equalization of the plane
of the substrate, the position of the sphere is clamped by means of a vacuum.
A small table on three floating supports is also used for the orientation of
the plane, however, the friction in this case between the substrate and the
photographic template and the normal force is somewhat greater than when a
small spherical table is used. The precision of the vertical motions of the
substrate and the displacement of the substrate when in contact with the
photographic template depend on the precision and stiffness of the guides and
the points of application of the resulting force during contact. The result-
ing vertical load vector runs through the center of gravity of a triangle.
drawn through the points of contact of the substrate and the photographic
template, and rarely coincides with the center of the substrate.

The most diverse types of guides are used in the well-known installations:
cylindrical sliding guides, prismatic roller guides with power locking. guides
in the form of a parallelogram with flexible hinges [22, 25, etc.).

The orientation mechanism. following the match-up, presses the wafer against

the photographic template and assures contact between the surfaces. The quality
of the resulting figure during exposure depends to a great extent on how com-
plcte the contact was between the substrate and the photographic template.

The change in the dimensions of the elements and the increase in the photometric
wedge, which occur as a result of diffraction phenomena and multiple light

-124-

FOR‘OFHKJAI.USE‘0NL¥
reflections from the surfaces of the wafer and the metalized photographic tem-
plate. are in direct proportion to the gap between the template and the wafer.

The difficulties of producing a tight contact are due, first of all, to local
uneven places on the wafer with a height of up to l um, which occur during the
polishing process, during epitaxy and even during photolithography itself;

and secondly, they are due to distortions of the wafer because of exposure to
various production processes. especially heat treatment. however, the consider-
able ratio of l/lOO - 1/250 between the thickness (usually 0.2 to 0.3 mm) and
the diameter (20 to 75 mm) imparts adequate elasticity to semiconductor wafers
[25].

To assure contact between a wafer and a photographic template, a provision is
made in a number of orientation mechanisms.for power clamping of it by means
of pneumatic cylinders or a lever mechanism. in which the clamping force is
produced by an adjustable compression spring.

A more refined approach is to press the wafer against the photographic template
using air pressure following the creation of a vacuum between them.

Loaders and Template Holders. In installations intended for working with
emulsion photographic templates, the thickness of which changes little, the
latter are secured to a template holuer on the bottom, to the nonworking sur-
face by means of a vacuum. In installations which allow the use of photo-
graphic templates, the difference in the thickness of which runs up to several
millimeters, mechanical fastening of the photographic template in a template
holder is employed (for example, by means of a bayonet lock).

The wafers are loaded by means of satellites, arranged on the rotating disk

of the installation, or by means of moving from the loading position into the
working zone, and then to the unloading table by means of a push rod. Further
automation of the wafer unloading and loading in pattern matching installations
led to the appearance of a pneumatic transport system with a device for the
preliminary orientation of the wafers to line up with a cut out segment or

a cut out groove [23].

The Contact Exposure Assembly. The contact exposure assembly includes a light
source. an optical device to produce a light flux, a mechanism for controlling
the transmission of the light flux and a housing for holding the light source.

The optical device in a contact exposure assembly is intended for producing a
uniform light flux with a parallel bundle of rays in a definiteurange of wave-
lengths over the entire exposure field. The exposure field diameter in modern
installations should amount to more than 75 to 100 mm. while the scatter in

the illumination over the entire field should not exceed 5 to 102. Such para—
meters can be assured by special systems of quartz condensers, having from

1 to S lenses. Moreover, in order to segregate a particular wavelength which

is most suitable for the photoresist being used from the overall radiation
spectrum of the lamp, it is necessary to have a set of appropriate light filters

- 125 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[22]. Uniform illumination over the exposure field is one of the major require-
ments for a high quality photolithographic process. The illumination system

plays an important part in this case.

 

Figure 5.19. Optical configuration of a scanning illumination
system.

A scanning raster illuminator satisfies this requirement (Figure 5.19) [26].
The light source (a DRSh-ZSO lamp, 2, in the focal plane of spherical mirror

1) projects through the thermal filter 3 with condenser 6 onto lens raster 5;
following magnification by the lenses of raster 6, the mutually superimposed
light spot images of the source (the number of spots corresponds to the number
of raster lenses) are projected through lens 7 to the plane of the photographic

template 9 (close to lens 8).

In this case, the high uniformity of the illumination of the photographic
template is accompanied by a reduction in the influence of spatial and time
instability of the light flux from the DRSh lamp.

The mechanism to control the transmission of the light flux, the shutter, is
needed so as to set the requisite exposure time, which depends on the sensi-
tivity of the photoresist. The exposure time can fall in a range of from 1
second to 2 minutes and more, and for this reason, the major requirement placed
on the shutter consists in the fact that the opening and closing time of the
blind be on the order of 0.05 to 0.1 sec, while the relative actuation error
does not exceed 101. Electromagnetic shutters which meet these requirements

are used in modern installations.

The light, condenser and shutter at; roused in a single block. The block makes
it possible to correctly adjust the lamp relative to the optical axis of the
quartz condenser and protect the operator and light sensitive materials against
the harmful effect of ultraviolet radiation. The structural design of the
housing should assure normal thermal conditions for lamp operation. In the
majority of installations, the housings for the lamps are air-cooled [22].

Visual Inspection Microscopes. The precise mutual positioning of the matched
structures is determined by means of a microscope for the visual observation

and quality control of the matching.

The major requirement placed on the microscope consists in the fact that it
should provide for a clear image of the two structures being matched, which

- 126 -

FOI10FFKJAL.USE(NULY
are located in different parallel planes at a certain distance fron each other
during the match-up tine, as well as during the tine when the quality of the
matching is monitored after the pressing of the wafer against the photographic
tenplate. ln contact exposure and matching installations, the following para-
meters characterize the licroscope: the overall Isgnification deter-ines the
structure image scale; the resolution determines the saallest visible size of
a structural element; the depth of focus determines the working gap during the
latch-up tine; the field of view detersinea the observation area; and the
working distance determines the thickness of the phototesplate glass and the
structure of its holder.

These paraseters are interrelated. depend priasrily on the characteristics of
the objective used and are designed using the laws of optics.

The basic design quantity is the numerical aperture of the objective, which is
estimated fro. the fornula:

A - n sin u

where n is the index of refraction of the Iediun; u is the angle for-ed by

the rays fro. the point source. positioned on the optical axis of the objec-

tive in the first main focal plane. to the ends of the diaseter of the objec-
tive.

The nulerical aperture defines the overall useful resolution of the sicroscope
and the resolving power: with an increase in the aperture, the objective
resolution increases (6 . 0.6lA/A, where A is the wavelength of the light),
but the depth of focus decreases (r - 1bx/2A ). The decrease in the depth

of focus is accoapanied by more stringent require-cuts placed on the quality
of the substrates, on the precision of the positioning of the wafers, the
manipulation of them, etc. Thus. if an objective has an aperture on the order
of 0.5. then the resolution will be about 0.6 us, while the depth of focus
will be on the order to 2 to 3 us, which makes it very difficult to latch-up
actual seliconductor wafers which frequently have a considerable curvature.

To match-up elesenta with dimensions of 2 to 5 an, it is necessary that the
objective have an aperture of at least 0.2, then the useful aagnification will
be 200 x, the depth of focus will be on the order of 10 to 15 us while the
working field will be about 1 to 3 ll. However. such a working field for a
nicroscope is nany tines less than the size of a wafer. For this reason, it
is impossible to check the match-up quality over the entire wafer and it is
easy to allow an angular shift, because of which considerable linear error
occur in the natching of the elenents remote from the working field. This
circumstance has led to the design of special microscopes, which make it
possible to observe in the field of view of the ocular two sections of the
wafer being latched-up at the same tine where these sections are a certain
distance apart. The structural designs of two field microscopes can vary:
with a separate (split) field and with a double field.

- 127 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The images from the two objectives are brought to the field of view of the ocular
independent of each other, where this field is split into two sections so that
the image from the right objective falls in the right portion of the field of
view while that from the left objective falls on the left side. The operator

has the capability of simultaneously observing both portions of the wafer being
matched (split field microscope).

to a rule, microscopes are used which
have a Iagnification which changes con-
tinuously or discretely in a range of
from £0 to 80 8 (survey) to 100 to #00 x
(precise matching); the mini-um image
size is 1 pl.

In step with the miniaturization of
topology, observing using standard micro-
scopes having a magnification up to
£00 1 and a resolution in a range of l
um is made difficult. At the present
time. equipment has been developed in
which the microscope magnification can
be switched in steps to 500. 1.000 and
2,000 x. Such microscopes have a high
resolving power of 0.h5 um. Moreover,
a remote camera is incorporated in one
of the blocks of the microscope-optical
system. which makes it possible to observe the topology on a screen, determine
the presence of dust and defects in it, etc. The operational principle of a
microscope with a built in television camera can be seen from Figure 5.20.
wafer 8 is located on stage 7. where the photographic template 5 with the
topological figure 6 is placed a certain distance from the wafer. The image of
the wafer surface and the topological figure of the photographic template

are perceived by the eye through the objective 9, the field splitting prism 2.
intermediate lens a, beam splitting prism 2 and ocular l. A portion of the
rays is fed through the bean splitting prisn to the vidicon of TV camera 3.
One such exposure and matching installation with a television screen is the

unit made by the American company 111.

 

Figure 5.20. Optical configuration of
a microscope with a
built in TV camera.

It must be noted that units for matching with visual monitoring and with contact
exposure are the most widespread at the present time.

A drawback to the contact technique is the rapid wear of the photographic tem-
plate.

The automated EH-576 unit can be cited as one of the industrial models of a
matching and exposure installation. An automated cassette holder for transport-
ing the wafers and a device for their preliminary orientation are included in
the unit. which makes it possible to use it both independently and incorporated
in automated photolithography lines. The installation lakes it possible to use
both contact exposure and exposure with a gap.

- 128 —

IN)! (NNNCJAI.IISEICHULY
Productivity (without taking the match-up

time into account), wafers/hr 160

Hatch-up error, um 0.5

Hininus sire of the components on a semi-

conductor wafer with contact exposure, um 2

The diameters of semiconductor wafers for

the case of exposure with a gap, as 60, 76.
100

The installation can operate under conditions where vibrations act on it in
a frequency range of l to 5 Hz with an amplitude of no more than S um.

The installation includes:

--A precision manipulator and nstch-up microscope, by means of which a high
precision is obtained in the matching of images on a photographic template
and seniconductor wafer;

-An illuninator. which provides for good reproducibility of the minimal inage
elements over the field of the wafer;

o-An autonated cassette type transport unit for the wafers and a device for
their preliminary orientation;

--lnterchangeable attachments for semiconductor plates and photographic templates
of different standard sizes.

The EH-S76 installation can be used either independently or incorporated in
the equipment for automated photolithography lines.

5.5. Equipment for Producing Topological Relief on a Substrate
The formation of the topological relief on the substrate completes the photo-
lithographic cycle, which contains the following operations:

--Btching (nesting, insulating, protective, conductive and other layers);

--Renoving the photoresist;

--Unshing (prior to diffusion. netsliration and passivation).

These operations can be carried out based on the use of chemical or plasmo-

chemical methods, the specific differences in which are responsible for sub-
stantial structural design and functional differences in the equipment used

for these eethods.

The chenical wafer processing technique is characterized by the following:

--The corrosiveness of the reagents and because of this. the necessity of using
closed working volumes, and corrosion resistant structural naterials for the
functional blocks;

- 129 -

lN)!‘0lﬂﬂC1Al.lﬂ5I2(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Thermostatic temperature control of the working volumes, and because of this,
the necessity of using units for stabilizing and controlling the production
processes;

-The necessity of neutralizing the chemical reagents.

The plasmochemical method makes it possible to perform several, and in the
future even all of the operations indicated above without using liquid reagents.
The wafers are treated in a low temperature oxygen or carbon halide gas plasma,
excited in the working volume of the chamber by means of a high frequency or
microwave discharge.

Plasnochenical etching provides for greater resolution and control of the etch-
ing profile, and reduces lateral undercut etching as compared to chemical fluid
etching. which brings about an improvement in the precision of the geometric
dimensions of the topology. Various plasmochemical processes may be carried
out sequentially in a single chamber. The moment of completion of each process
can be easily registered by means of optical spectrum. mass spectrometry. laser,
interferometric and other physical contactless testing methods. All of this
creates the conditions for the complete automation of the production processes
for surface treatment. Moreover, the plasmochemical method of surface pro-
cessing excludes or considerably reduces the use of chemical reagents. which
not only curtails capital expenditures for the construction of cleaning
facilities. but also eliminates the contamination of the environment by chem-
ical production wastes.

Universal installations which are incorporated in universal equipment for the
chemical treatment of wafers can be used to execute the operations enumerated
above for the formation of topology by chemical means.

The functions of the complex are:
--The cleaning of the wafers prior to the first oxidation;

--The etching of the oxide layers. the boron silicate and phosphorus silicate
glasses;

--The removal of the photoresist both from the oxide layers and from the
metallic surfaces;

--The cleaning of the oxide layers and the metallic surfaces following the
removal of the photoresist;

--The etching of the metal and silicon.
The complex consists of seven independent lines, where the package is put
together depending on the technical function of the installations for the

chemical treatment. washing and drying, processing in organic solvents, ultra-
sonic and hydromechanical washing as well as with quality control units.

The system is filled with reagents from mobile transport blocks and the chemical
reagents and deionized water for washing are fed from ultrapure water systems
with recycling. All of the equipment of the complex is of a modular block

- 130 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
design and can be put together in production process lines which are tied
together with the power supply systems. The number of installations which can

be assembled into a line is governed by the technological processes and the
requisite productivity.

The unit consists of production process
and dust removal blocks.

The water treatment technique is a
cassette holder group type system and
has two standard cassette sizes for
products either 65 or 75 nu in diameter.
Production process block 1 on base 2 is
placed on a support for the mounting of
the dust renoval unit 6. The production
process unit is nade in the form of a
bath made of wood particle board lined
with polypropylene. A perforated grate
8 with holes for the placement of the

production process baths is located on
Figure 5.21. A unit for the chemical the flange edge of the bath.

treatment of wafers.

 

various reagents in teflon bath 6, which has an immersion heater. Teflon baths
4 are equipped with ejectors to exhaust the oxygen after the production process
is completed. Acid diluted with tap water is drained out at the bottome of

cleaning the industrial effluents. The next step is the washing of the wafers
with deionized water and is accomplished in the cascade washing bath 7. The
cassette holders with the wafers are loved manually.

from the production roon, the production process blocks are placed in dust

taneously. pieces 50

Reagent heating tine (volune of 3 liters) to 100° C,

ninutes 30 1 S
- 131 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reagent working temperature, ‘6 +50 to +120, :5
Power consumption. l0! 2.3
Overall dimensions, III 1,915x9lo5xlo70

The remaining units of the complex are likewise of a nodular block design with
maximum utilization of standardized modules.

Plasmochemical Treatment Equipment. The major requirements placed on installa-
tions for plasmochemical processing are [27]:

--High uniformity of the distribution of the electrically neutral radicals, atoms
and charged particles throughout the entire volume of the reaction space;

«The reproducibility of the energy state of the plasma with respect to time
and from process to process;

--High stability of heat and mass exchange in the reaction space;

--Honitoring of the moment of completion of the etching process for one material.

Only when equipment meets these requirements can a high uniformity of surface
treatment be obtained.

To meet the requirements indicated above, plasmochemical processing equipment
should be controlled with respect to many parameters: pressure, gas flow rate.
discharge power. frequency of the RF electrical field and temperature of the
wafers.

A high frequency electrical discharge in a low pressure gas is used to obtain
a low temperature gas plasma in plasmochemical processing units.

Depending on the kind of operation performed, various techniques can be used
to obtain and sustain a plasma as well as various structural designs for the
reaction discharge chambers.

For example, a high frequency electrodeless discharge in a cylindrical quartz
chamber is used for the removal of photoresist, while a low pressure electrode
diode discharge is used in planar metallic reactors for etching.

Plasmochemical processing is carried out with group loading of the wafers, which
are placed in the discharge chamber, which is hermetically sealed with a cap

by means of a vacuum produced by an initial vacuum pump. Upon reaching a
pressure of 1.0 to 60 Pa. while the initial vacuum pump is running constantly,
the variable working gas infiltration is actuated. i.e.. a dynamic vacuum is
produced which is governed by the geometry and structural design of the chamber
and electrodes, as well as the method of excitation and the intensity of the
applied RF electric field.

Reaction-discharge chambers of installations for the electrodeless excitation
of a discharge are shown in Figure 5.22. Planar reactors with a diode excita-
tion system are shown in Figure 5.23.

~132-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The homogeneity and stability of the
plasma in the reaction discharge chamber
depend on the pressure in the chamber
at the working frequency of the RP field

and the structural design of the elec-
trodes [28].

The power of the RF generators in plasma-
chemical treatment units in cylindrical
reaction discharge chambers with elec-
trodeless excitation of the discharge
usually amounts to 300 to 1.000 R. while
in planar reactors with diode excitation
of the discharge, it is 1.5 to 3 K“, and
in some cases, 6 K".

we shall treat the structural design and
operational principle of the domestic
"Plasma-600" plasmochemical unit for
photoresist removal and prediffuaion
cleaning of the surface of semiconductor
wafers (Figure 5.2a) with electrodeless
excitation of the discharge by means of
inductive coupling.

 

Figure 5.23. A planar reactor with an
electronic RP discharge
excitation system.

Key: 1. Vacuum pump;
2. Reatrictor;
3. Hanomcter;
a. Lower electrode and
stage for the wafers;
5. Upper electrode;
6. Wafers.
FINICIWWCJAI.USE¢DNLN

The Technical Data for the Installation

Productivity (per photoresist removal operation),

wafers/hr 300
Simultaneous loading of the reaction chamber,
wafers up to 50
Diameter of the wafers which can be treated, mm up to 80
RP generator:

Output power, watts 600

Working frequency. MB: 13.56 :_11
Working pressure of the oxygen in the chamber, Pa (0.6-1.3) - 102
Oxygen rate of flow. liters/min 0.36

The major assemblies of the installation are (Figure 5.26): the vacuum ex-
haust block 1, the reaction discharge chamber and RP generator block 2, and

the control block 3.

 

Figure 5.26. The "Plasma-600" plasmo-
chemical unit for photo-
resist removal.

The low temperature plasma is formed in
the chamber at a vacuum on the order of
60 to 133 Pa, when a RP voltage is fed
to the indicator placed around the
chamber.

Hafers can be sequentially treated in two
gas plasma media in the installation.
Hhen oxygen is admitted into the chamber
at a pressure of up to 133 Pa, atomic
oxygen and oxygen ions are formed with
the action of the discharge, which have

a high chemical reactivity. They

oxidize the photoresist, forming vola-
tile compounds es a result of the chem-
ical reactions.

The final products of the photoresist

decomposition reaction are 00, CN, 602
and H20, which are exhausted from the

chamber by a vacuum pump.

Hhen freon-lb is admitted into the cham-

ber at a pressure of from 40 to 70 Pa, the action of the discharge forms
atomic fluorine, which as a result of the chemical reaction cleans the surface
of the wafers of oxides and contaminants.

The chamber and generator block includes the reaction-discharge chambers, the
RF gcncrator, the vacuum gauge and the ventilation system for cooling the

chambers and generator units.

- 136 -

FOR 0FFKJAL.USE(NNLY
The chamber takes the form of a quartz tube, which is hermetically sealed in
front with a door. and is connected to the vacuum system at the rear. The tube
is ringed with the RP induction unit coils.

The process is automatically controlled (creating the specified vacuum, feeding
in the working gas, exciting the discharge and breaking the seal). Both
automatic and manual operating modes are provided in the installation using

two programs: with a single gas (photoresist removal) and with two gases
(photoresist removal and prediffusion cleaning).

Installations with planar reactors.
having diode electrode excitation of

l ,2 m the discharge, make it possible to
efficiently utilize the plasma to etch

I:Huhua J “"19h silicon dioxide and aluminum with a
' Frequency high level of rsrefsction. The Plasa-
I I __ Generator fab 3200 unit of the Blectrotech Com-
, l ' pany (England) can serve as an example
‘k"“""w of such equipment. The installation
C001109 is an automated rotor type unit with

a diode system for plasma excitation.
Figure 5°25' ::::::::: ::°:1::.:t:::de The wafers are positioned horizontally

in the reaction chamber. A schematic
Ch'-bet' of a diode discharge in a reaction
chamber is shown in Figure 5.25. Hater
l is placed between the electrodes in a stainless steel vacuum chamber. One
electrode 3 is a water-cooled wafer holder; the gas which forms the plasma
between the high frequency field electrodes is admitted to the chamber through
the upper electrode 2. The active radicals of the dissociated gas react with
the wafer surface. forming a volative compound. Hater-cooled holder 3 makes
it possible to maintain a constant temperature for the wafers and protect the
photoresist against destruction. The productivity of the unit is 200 wafers/hr
with diameters of 76 or 100 mm.

Besides the plasmochenical technique for treating the surface of semiconductor
wafers, another method of precision processing is also being developed at

the present time: ion-chemical. It is distinguished from the plasmochemicsl
method by the higher energy of the plasma beam of ions and the radicals of
fluorine and chlorine containing gases, which is directed onto the wafer being
processed at a pressure of (l to S) ' 10‘2 Pa. This technique has a great
future with the transition to micron and submicron topology.

The development of plasma and ion chemical techniques for precision treatment
of the surface of semiconductor materials makes it possible to create a com-
pletely "dry” photolithogrsphic process.
Quality Control During Photolithography

Checking the quality of photolithogrsphic treatment in the production of semi-
conductor devices and integrated circuits is accomplished visually.

- 135 -

FINI¢INHCJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of optical and mechanical means for monitoring the geometric dimen-
sions of micron and submicron structures is difficult because of the inadequate
resolution and depth of focus of light optical instruments. Thus. the uneven-
ness of the edge of an element of semiconductor structures 1 um wide amounts

to about 0.1 um. The resolving power of the test equipment should be at

least 3 to 5 times greater, i.e., should amount to 0.02 to 0.03 um [30]. When
checking microtopology using a conventional microscope, the measurement error
is i 0.5 um. This estimate shows the unsuitsbility of optical and mechanical
means for quality control of semiconductor structures with micron and sub-
micron dimensions of the elements.

Scanning electron microscopes [31, 32] are being increasingly utilized for this
purpose at the present time. where these microscopes make it posgible to non-
destructively test objects with a resolving power of 100 to 300 A. However.
considering the comparative complexity of electron optical quality control
techniques. it is expedient to perform quality control operations at that

stage in the technology which has the greatest impact on the production process
as a whole. For this reason, it is important to check the quality of struc-
tural elements on the photographic template. Quality control of metalized
photographic templates using a scanning electron microscope makes it possible
to determine the existing distortions of the image. the unevenness of the

edge of elements. breaks and pores in the chromium layer. unetched areas and
other defects, and thereby reduce the number of rejects in photolithographic
operations.

5.6. Equipment for Fabricating Photographic Templates‘

The basic tool for producing spatial topology for semiconductor devices and
integrated circuits in the photolithographic process is the photographic tem-
plate. A photographic template takes the form of a transparent substrate.
coated on one side with a film which does not pass the actinic radiation. in
accordance with the regions which form the specified topological figure. The
substrate can be made from optical glass. while the masking film can be made
from chromium. metal oxides and other materials.

Photographic templates are manufactured in accordance with the following pro-
duction process scheme:

--The execution of the original of the topological drawing to an increased
scale (200:1. 500:1 and more);

-0ne-time or multiple reduction of the primary original;

--The execution of the master photographic template by means of printing the
images on its working surface (multiplication);

 

*The description of the equipment for the fabrication of precision photographic
templates as a support production process goes beyond the scope or the sub—
ject of this book. and for this reason, only some individual explanatory data
are given below based on materials from the literature [23, 33], which contains
considerable material on the question touched upon here.

- 136 -

90R OFIWCJAL USIICNNLY
-The fabrication of photographic copies from the master template (working
photographic templates).

The primary original of the drawing of the topology for the photographic tem-
plate can be produced in two ways:

--By cutting the figure into an opaque varnish film applied to sheet glass;

--By means of phototypesetting using image generators.

In the first case, precision coordinatographa are used, and in the second.
phototypesetters. The intermediate reduction of the original is accomplished
with reduction cameras, while the final reduction of the photographic template
topology and the multiplication are carried out using a scanning camera or
photographic duplicator.

To fabricate working photographic templates, the equipment described above as
well as photolithographic techniques are employed.

Coordinatographs are broken down according to the kind of control of the notion
of the cutting tool. into manual and automatic types, and can differ in the
coordinate system employed (cartesian. polar, mixed), as well as in the pre-
cision of the execution of the boundaries of the topological elements. The
productivity of a coordinatograph is usually related to the precision of

the execution of the topological figures. Considerable precision is achieved
with a comparatively low output productivity (slow motion of the cutting tool).

Originals of a photographic template topology figure with dimensions of 750 x
750 and 800 x 800 mm for a precision in setting the boundary of a figure
element of 1,50 um and a repeat precision of :_25 um can be made on manually
controlled coordinatographs, for example. the EH701 and EM707 respectively.

In automated coordinatographs, the working tool moves in accordance with a
specified program with computer control. Because of this. an automated
coordinatograph contains a set of equipment similar to a production process
automated control system of the first functional algorithmic level (see
Chapter One): data input-output peripherals, a computer, equipment for con—
trolling the motion of the drawing tool. a control console and various indi-
cating instruments. The major functional unit of an automated coordinatograph

is the drawing table.

Primarily low productivity and the cumbersome nature of the equipment can be
numbered among the drawbacks to the technique of fabricating originals using
coordinatographs.

Characteristic Technical Specifications for Automatic Coordinatographs
(Given for the EH-703)

Maximum size of the original, mm 1,200 x 1.200
Minimum step, um 25

- 137 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Drawing precision. um :_50

Repeat precision. un 1,25

Resolution. us 25

Travel speed along the coordinate axes. sm/sec 100

Data input fron punched
tape

Data coding Binary-decimal

Data input rate. characters/sec 1.500

Area occupied. m2 30

Reproduction cameras for the internediate reduction of a photographic template
original are photographic installations for precise photography and contain
the following major assenblies which are characteristic of such installations:
a systen for uniforn illumination of the original. fastening devices for the
original. an optical systen. a cassette holder with the photographic plate and
functional support equipment. The major units of the camera are mounted on

a nassive cast support bed. which is usually mounted on shock absorbers.

Technical Specifications for the EH-SlJ Reduction Camera

Maximun size of the plane table of the original. inure 1.300 x 1.300
Haximun working field of the original. ml 1.200 x 1,200
Dimensions of the photographic plate. II 90 x 120. 60:t90
Original reduction scale 30. 60. 50
Conditions for transilluninating the original:
Screen brightness. Nit 5,000
Brightness nonunifornity. 1 up to lO

ﬁction of the photographic tenplate in the image
plane. in mm:

horizontally 90

Vertically 100
The precision of photographic plate notion. mm :_0.002
The precision of the repeat setting of the original. mm 1,0.1
The precision in checking the image dimensions. in =_0.002
Exposure time. seconds 0.5 to 999
Overall dimensions. III 8.600 x 1.790 x

2.165

Height. kg 2,700

Reproduction cameras. just as coordinatographs. are rather cumbersome.

- 138 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£(MULY
New methods of producing images. which make it possible to replace the
operations of cutting the photographic template original and its intermediate
reduction with a single process are based on the utilization of scanning image
generators or microphototypesetting installations. when generating images by
means of scanning, the light spot moves relative to the photographic plate.

for example, by means of using line by line (raster) scanning and modulating
the light intensity in accordance with a program corresponding to the photo-
graphic template topology. It is expedient to use a laser as the light source.

The realization of a universal scanning image generator involves difficulties
of assuring resolution and operational speed. Because of this. the scanning
method is usually combined with phototypesetting. Thus, the technique of
outline scanning is realized in the form of one of the operating modes of the
EH-S39 image generator [36].

Hicrophototypesetting is based on the sequential exposure of fragments (type-
setting elements) of the photographic template on the photographic plate.
Microphototypeaetters contain an automated coordinate table, program and type-
setting element generator controllers. an optical projection system and a
light source.

Technical Specifications for the EH-Sé9 Phototypesetter

Coordinate table travel, mm 160 x 160
Error in the positioning of the coordinate table. pm 1 0.5
Rotation angle of the typesetting aperture stop. degrees 45
Average productivity, exposures/hr 2.000
Maximum travel speed of the coordinate table, mm/sec 5
Reduction scale 1:10
Minimal width of the image lines. um 10
Maximum dimensions of the square, um 3,000 x 3.000
Deviation of the actual dimensions from the nominal,
um 1
Edge unevenness, um I
Radii at the corners of elements, um 1.5
Exposure time. sec 0.1 to 10
Current Alternating
Voltage, volts 380 x 220
Frequency, Hz 50
Air pressure. atm b to 8
Maximum power consumption, K" 2
Area occupied, m2 20

- 139 -

FOR OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR 0511““. USE ONLY

The master photographic templates are nade using optical or mechanical multi-
plication methods. The former employ lens or mirror raster scans vhile simul-
taneously photographing a large number of reduced inges of the topological
figure of the photographic template. while the latter are based on the sequen-
tial. step by step photographic printing of single images. An example of an
optical nultiplication unit is the Eli-515 scanning photographic camera. The
scanning objective of this photographic camera contains no less than 1,500
short focus lenses. positioned with a step of 0.8 I. The working field of
the screen is 300 x 300 am: and the reduction scales of the camera are 200 x
and 300 x. The camera is used for the multiplication of images with minimum
elenent dimensions of about 20 um.

Photoduplicators based on sequential photographic printing with the moving of
the photographic plate contain an automatic coordinate table. an exposure
assembly (illuninator, optical systen, etc.). measurement instruments, as
well as controls and structural support. He shall give the basic technical
specifications for such photoduplicators using the example of the Ell-522 unit:

Maximum travel of the table. II 80
Positioning precision. um 1 0.2
Positioning reproducibility. an i 0.2
Reduction scale, tines 10
Intermediate photographic tenplate dimensions, n 50 x 50.
70 x 70
Master photographic template dimensions, - 70 x 70,
100 x 100

Mechanical multiplication systems are the best developed and the most universal
at the present tine. However. the development of precision electronic nulti-
plication systems up to the level necessary for industrial applications will
be a reality in the next few years.

-1100-

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PART II EQUIPMENT FOR THE ASSEMBLY AND QUALITY CONTROL OF
EINISNED DEVICES. FINISHING OPERATIONS

CHAPTER SIX Equipsent for Separating Hafers into Chips

The geoaetric shape of the chips used in the aass production of seniconductor
devices is the lost diverse: circular, square. rectangular and polygonal;
however. square and rectangular chips are the lost widely used. The side of
a chip varies froa 0.25 I- up to several silliseters.

The following nethods of separating wafers into chips have found application
at the present tine:

-Scribing with a dis-end cutter;

-Laser cutting;

-$eparation using dis-and disks;

--Separation using cutting arrays.

Scribing with a dis-end cutter is a rather high output operation as colpared
to other types of wafer separation, especially when producing snall chips (in
a range of 0.35 to 1.0 II). The advantages of the technique are also the easy
resetting of the cutter for square and rectangular chips of various sizes and
the servicing siaplicity. However, there are drawbacks inherent in the nethod
of scribing using dis-0nd cutters:

-The difficulty of scribing 8102 and polysilicon;

-The occurrence of dust-like fornations which get on the surface of the
structures being scribed (the dust is the disintegrated cut material);

-The influence of the quality and condition of the cutting edge of the diamond
cutter on the shape of the scriber groove. and as a consequence. on the
quality of the breaking of a wafer into chips;

-The necessaity of perforning a suppleaental breaking operation on the wafers
along the scriber lines;

--The presence of an inproper geoaetrical shape of the cut surface (shear sur-
faces. violation of the rectangular shape. etc.);

--A deterioration of the break quality and an increase in rejects with a reduc-
tion in the ultiaate ratio of chip length to thickness (this ratio should
be no less than 3:1 for gersaniun and 6:1 for silicon).

The expanding use laser cutting of semiconductor wafers in industry is due to
a number of advantages of this technique:
-There is no cutting tool which wears;

-The electronic control of the laser bean makes it possible to adjust the
para-eters of the cutting channel in a wide range: fron producing the shape

.s - - 161 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOIIOFFNIAI.USE10NLV

of a scriber ”notch" to completely cutting the wafers apart and separating
the chips from each other.

Draw backs to this method are the necessity of using complex equipment for the
process and the possibility of droplets and vapors of the material getting on

to the surface being cut.

A promising method of separating semiconductor wafers into chips is notching

or completely cutting them apart using rapidly rotating thin disks, coated

with diamond dust. A merit of the method is the possibility of producing chips
with a good geometric shape and precise dimensions, as well as the possibility
of cutting apart structures on which beam or strip leads are formed. Horeoever.
where a polycrystalline layer is present at the surface of the semiconductor
wafer, cutting with rotating disks yields a more stable and high quality
separation than does scribing.

Separation by means of cutting arrays or wires is less productive than using
the methods indicated above. In all of the latter methods. it is necessary to
provide for feeding an abrasive suspension to the surface of the materials
being cut, something which is extremely undesirable in some cases. However,
gpod separation quality and the capability of cutting apart relatively thick
wafers provide for the rather wide scale use of these methods in industry.

At the present time. wafers of semiconductor materials with an increased diameter
(more than 100 mm) are being introduced into the technological process. The
requirements placed on the precision of the geometric dimensions of chips are
increasing. especially for devices with an increased level of integration. It
must be noted that the most promising method of separating large diameter wafers
into chips is cutting with diamond disks.

6.1. Equipment for Separating Wafers by Means of Scribing

The EH—ZOIA and EH-ZOIB diamond cutter scribers [35] (Figure 6.1) have found
wide applications in domestic industry. The unit has the following technical

specifications:

Range of steps, on 0.01 - 39.99
Discrete setting step, mm 0.01
Maximum feed travel length. mm 75
Length of a scribing run, mm 40 - 85
Number of double runs per minute from 15 to 60
Pressure of the cutter on a wafer. N 0.125 - 2.5
Precision in making lines during a step. Inn

0.01 to 15 II 1 0.005

15 to 30 an i 0.006

- 142 -

FOR OFFICIAI.US£<0NlV
(b) "

Figure 6.1. General view of scribing units.

a. EH-ZOIA;
b. 33-2013.

The scribing installation has the following specific design features. The
scribing speed is set by selecting interchangeable gears. The length of a
working run is regulated to match the diameter of the wafer being scribed. A
correcting linear rule is used in these models which inproves the precision of
the step feed motion mechanism. The nut and screw of the feed mechanism have
forced lubrication. A sophisticated structural design of the cutting head pro-
vides it with a low inertia. A precision nechsnisn for setting the cutter loading
force has been introduced. The cutting head can be rapidly aligned outside the
nachine, where the changeover fron the previously used cutters with a circular
tool post to cutters with a square tool post significantly curtails the setup
tine and iaproves the scribing precision. The EH-ZOIB nodel is provided with

a projector and is recommended when processing large diameter silicon wafers
and sitall [ceramic glass sinilar to pyroceran) substrates. Vacuun suction
provides for the restraint of the wafer being cut. One can scribe wafers held
on adhesion substrates in the installation also: polyrylaxane strip. viniprosa

[sic], etc.

A significant factor which deternines the quality of separation is the manner

of breaking the scribed wafer. The most widespread method of breaking is rolling
a small roller along the scribe lines with the application of a certain force

on the surface of the wafer. In this case, the wafer either moves between two
elastic plastic substrates, or in an envelope (from which one can exhaust the

air and which can he hernetically sealed). or on an elastic base. A nunber of
practical data on scribing and breaking silicon wafers with a thickness of no
more than 0.3 II in the production of chips 0.b5 x 0.65 mm for transistors is
given in [37].

It has been established from production experience that one can obtain a minimal
width scribe groove which makes it possible to have high quality separation of

a silicon wafer into chips using a diamond cutter with a sharpened angle of
150’ and an angle of inclination of the cutting edge to the plane of 5 to 6'.

- 163 -

II”I(HNHCJAI.UBE(NVLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.US£(MNLY

Changing the scribing speed in a range of 10 to 50 double runs per minute has
little influence in practice on the scribing quality.

The orientation of the crystallographic planes of the wafer does not influence
the process of making the scriber groove. but can have a decisive importance

when separating the scribed wafer into chips. The best results are obtained

when scribing wafers grown in the (100) plane along the traces of the (100)
planes. The working of the back side of a wafer (polishing or etching) makes it
possible to improve the breakout quality following scribing. This is explained
by the removal of the surface layer of the wafer strengthened by polishing. Thus,
the determination of the correct combination of scribing modes (speed. pressure.
point angle and setting of the cutter) as a function of the initial conditions
(wafer material, coating thickness, etc.) makes it possible to produce a scriber
groove of minimal width (no more than S um) and depth (2 to 3 um), which assures
effective and high quality separation while preserving the specified geometric
parameters of the chips. The scriber notches are made with minimal destruction
of the wafer surface layer. The stresses are concentrated in the scriber grooves
' and are governed by the boundaries of the next break. '

 

J V -)(a)

   
 

w
,Compredsed
Air

Figure 6.2. A device for stretch ten-

sioning scribed wafers.
1 r
a. Before stretching; .
b. After stretching.

To separate scribed wafers into chips,
an installation for breaking semicon-
ductor wafers can be used which provides
for the oriented separation of scribed Figure 6.3. Device for placing chips in
wafers positioned between flexible a chip holder.

transparent viniprose films, one of

which is the satellite carrier. The breaking is accomplished by rolling a

spring loaded steel roller into mutually perpendicular directions, corresponding
to the scriber lines. The breaking force is uniformly distributed over the
generatrix of the roller. which prevents mechanical damage to the chips. wafers
with diameters of 25 to 60 lﬂlaﬂd thicknesses of 0.1 to 0.3 mm can be broken

apart in the unit, with chip dimensions of from 0.65 x 0.65 to 3 x 3 mm. The
breaking force is adjusted in a range of 50 to 118 N. depending on the wafer and
the chip dimensions. A study of the process of breaking scribed wafers showed
that the quality of a break depends to a significant extent on the roller diameter

and material of the substrate.

- 16b -

FOI’OFFKJAI.USEINVLY
Following the breaking. the satellite carrier with the oriented chips secured

to it is subjected to stretching tension. The film tensioning unit provides for
uniform stretching of the satellite carrier, something which makes it possible
to create the optimal spacing between the chips for their subsequent oriented
loading. The basis for the tensioning (Figure 6.2) is the plastic flow of the
film carrier material with exposure to temperature: the satellite carrier 1
made of viniprose with the broken wafer 2 placed on it is caught in the clamping
device of the tensioning mechanism; the stretching of the film is accomplished
by stage 3 with heater 6 mounted in it, the temperature of which is monitored
and adjusted. The small stage is secured to the push rod of a pneumatic cylinder,
the construction of which makes it possible to adjust the speed of the working
and no load motions. Following of the completion of the stretching, the heater
is turned off and the small stage is cooled by a flow of water fed into its
interior cavity. Cooling is provided to speed up the shaping of the carrier.
Following cooling down to a temperature of 50° C, the film with the chips which
is formed in the shape of a small cup 5 is removed from the clamping device.

The placement of the chips with a specified orientation in multicell cassette
holders is a necessary operation for the subsequent automation of assembly
processes (36!. A desk top unit for placing chips with dimensions of 0.5 x 0.5
am in an annular cassette holder with 180 cells is depicted in Figure 6.3a. An
operator fills a cassette holder in S to 10 minutes (depending on the operator's
skill) using such a device.

In the device, the semiconductor material wafer l is fed to the manipulator
stage 2. The wafer is broken into chips which are separated from each other

and placed on a transparent substrate. The operator orients each chip with
respect to the intersection, which is observed in microscope 6. The vacuum
suction attachment 3, which executes an up and down motion and with lever 5
moves from position I to position 11 (Figure 6.3b). is precisely positioned
relative to the intersection; the suction attachment places the chip in the cell
of cassette holder 8, after which the cassette holder is rotated through the

angle 8.

The device has an electric motor drive 6, a system of drum program mechanisms,
pipes to create the vacuum in the suction attachment when transporting the chip
as well as to feed compressed air at the moment the chips are placed in the
cell of the holder.

To prevent possible vibration when the mechanisms are operating. the entire unit
is mounted on plate 7. holder 8. when being set on the stage of the unit. is
centered in the internal annular groove with the bands of the three wide bearings
9. one of which moves while the other two are stationary. The holder is rotated
through the angle 8 by virtue of the precise pitch of the teeth of the outer

gear ring and the pawl which fits in the slot between the teeth during locking.

The automated all-purpose EH-202A installation is widely used in semiconductor
production for separating a scribed semiconductor into individual chips. The

operating speed of travel of the breaking rollers is regulated in the unit. and
there are interchangeable breaking rollers of different diameters and

- 145 -

FOR 0511(1AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interchangeable holders for securing wafers of various disasters. The major

technical specifications of the unit are:

Haximm diameter of a wafer which can be broken

up, - 60

Diameter of the breaking rollers. - 3. 6. 10. 12. 16. 20
Breaking roller pressure, Newtons 0.49 - 49

Rate of travel of the breaking rollers (con-

tinuously adjustable). Inn/sec 0.8 - 6

The automated Eli-636 unit is used to place chips in s mltirow rectangular
cassette holder. The installation is designed to remove chips which are arranged
with a specific orientation on an adhesive strip, and place them in the cassette
holder where the number of positioned chips is determined beforehand by means

of a photoelectric sensor.

 

Figure 6.4. A laser production process
installation

 

A number of installations have been
designed for laser scribing and cutting
of semiconductor wafers. which differ in
terms of their composition. the kind of
laser used and structural design of the
various devices. A domestically produced
laser production process unit (Figure
6.6) makes it possible to produce clean
square edges of chips, a deeper groove
than even with diamond scribing while
sparing silicon wafer area (the number
of chips on a wafer is increased by 52).

A pulsed yttrium aluminum garnet with
neodimium laser is used in the installa-
tion.

The main technical specifications of the
production process laser installation
are:

Cutting speed, Inn/min 60
width of a cut with the
defect region, ma 0.12
Figure 6.5. Structural design of a
laser scriber which pre- Wafer thickness, as 392:0
vents contamination of the ’
wafer diameter. Ian Up to
wafers. 60
Pulse repetition rate,
pulses/sec 12. 25,
50, 100
- 166 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In accordance with another technique (Figure 6.5) [38]. the laser beam, passing
through optical system 1, scribes the wafer 4; the melted silicon collects in
droplets, which adhere to the plastic film 2. Since the film is fed from
roller 5 and wound on roller 3, the adhering droplets do not fall on the wafer.
Because of the fact that the film is transparent to the laser beam, it does not
create any obstacle to the scribing.

Specialized equipment complexes have been designed for the operations of separat-
ing wafers into chips. One of these complexes is the TAS-lOOO system of the
Teledyne Company (0.5.) [39]. It must be noted that such systems are most appli-
cable where there is a sufficiently large chip production volume, i.e., in cases
where entire plants specialize in the production of chips and these chips are
then sent to other enterprises.

The widely used technique of removing the chips by means of a pneumatic suction
attachment has significant drawbacks: the very small force for pulling a chip
away from the carrier and the necessity of sealing the edges of the suction
attachment and the surface of the chips so that a vacuum capture is accomplished.
The necessity for sealing requires precision methods in the fabrication of the
tip pieces of the vacuum attachments. For this reason, it is of interest to
remove chips following scribing using electromechanical tweezers [61]. To pick
up a chip with electromechanical tweezers, following the scribing the wafer is
placed on an adhesive elastic strip and broken up by a tool moving along the
scribing line which produces the breaking pressure. Then wafer 1 (Figure 6.6)
is placed on prismatic knife 3, from which the chip 2 is removed by the jaws a
of electromechanical tweezers 5. The capture is accomplished by virtue of the
compression of annular spring 6 of the electromechanical tweezers with the action
of solenoid 7. Spindle 8 of the chip positioner has the capability of executing
cyclical turns through a certain angle to accomplish the "biting" when removing
a chip and execute a reciprocating motion to transfer the removed chip to the
placement position.

An advantage of electromechanical tweez-
ers is the capability of producing a
considerable clamping force on the chip
when grasping it and as a consequence,
producing a considerable force to pull
the chip away from the substrate.

6.2. Other Kinds of Equipment for
Separating Wafers into Chips

 

Automated machine tools with rapidly
rotating disks (up to 45.000 r.p.n.)
Figure 6.6. Schesatic showing electro- made of diamond chips in a rubber-like
mechanical tweezers. binder. The disks are assembled into a
composite tool like an agricultural disk
(for group cutting), are easily cleaned and are less inclined to clogging with
silicon dust. when completely cutting through the wafers, there is no necessity
for a breaking operation. The width of the cut fluctuates in a range of 40 to

- 167 -

.‘ 'n'o

IND! OFFICJAI.lEHZ(HVLY
FOR‘OFF"JAI.USE(NVLY

100 pm. The cutting speed runs up to 30 cm/sec (when working with a single disk).
The region of the destroyed layer does not exceed 12 pm. There are machine tools
which make it possible to cut wafers apart with diameters of up to 127 mm. The
securing of a wafer in the case where the cut does not go all the way through is
accomplished by means of an adhesion carrier or by means of a glue-on label. Hith
the installation using several disks. several tracks are out immediately in a
single pass. something which improves the productivity. The service life of a
diamond cutting disk reaches 28,000 cuts when cutting wafers with a diameter of

50 mm to a depth of 0.25 mn. Reinforced disks are used to cut ceramic substrates.

The domestically produced SRP machine tool for cutting wafers into chips using a
wire which forms a grid matching the dimensions of the chip has the following
cutting scheme. Two cutting devices with the wire wound on are mounted on moving
slides. This makes it possible to simultaneously cut two wafers of semiconductor
material glued to a glass substrate. The matching of the wire to the separating
track is accomplished through an auxiliary optical device. The working pressure
during cutting is produced hydraulically. After the wafer is cut apart in one
direction, the wafer carriers are rotated through 90’.

Chemical methods of separating wafers into chips using photolithography techniques
proved effective in some cases. These are especially applicable in those cases
where projections extend out beyond the chip. such as, for example. in some
integrated circuits with beam leads. In this case. the following technology

is employed to place the chips in an oriented manner on a flat disk. The front
side of the wafer is coated with wax. and the wafer is secured to a flat disk
about 0.9 mm thick. The back of the wafer is polished down to a thickness of
50 um and coated with photoresist. Then, the photoresist is removed at those
points where necessary by means of masking. Infrared illumination is used to
provide for matching during the masking. The region from which the protective
layer is removed has the form of a grid, positioned just underneath the beam
leads. Following photolithographic processing, the wafer is etched through at
the points unprotected by the photoresist.

- 168 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER 53va Elm m ASSDIBLING 8911001000103 DEVICES

 

7.1. Methods of Asseabling the Major Types of Devices. Requirements Placed On
the Equipment

The major assembly operations in planar technology are the mounting of the chips
in a package and the connection of the leads. The chip mounting operation con-
sists in seating it in a specified position and securing the chip in the package.

The operation of connecting the leads. or the asking of the connections between
elements consists in creating an electrical path between the contact pads on
the chip and the external leads.

The requirements placed on the equipment are governed by the technical require-
ments placed on the installation of the chips [#2]:

-The stability of the electrical and thermal characteristics of the device at
the maximum operating tenperatures;

--The adherence to conditions which assure the permissible limits for mechanical
and electrical stresses at specified current and voltage levels, as well as
installation nethods, temperature ranges for storage and operation and the
vibration and shock ranges.

At the present time. two methods of chip installation are widespread [43]:

-The connection of the plane of the chip to a contact pad of the substrate or
frame;

--Connection using the inverted chip technique.

The connection can be realized in the following ways:

-Eutectic joining with the formation of an alloy of the two metals;
--Soldering, where a third component is used to join the two metals;
-cluing;

o-Ultrasonic welding [60].

Eutectic joining is widely used when installing silicon chips on a gold plated
bonding pad.

The successful use of soldering depends on the capability of the solder to wet

the metals being joined together and to create strong joints with them. Drawbacks
to the soldering method are the necessity of fluxing the surfaces being joined,
and since fluxes car cause corrosion, careful renewal of the flux following the
completion of the soldering.

Gluing of semiconductor chips is used to mount them on nonmetal surfaces (ceramic.
plastic. etc.). Current conducting materials are sonetines used for the adhesive.
The eutectic fastening, soldering and gluing processes can be intensified by the

- 1&9 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FIN!(IHWC1AL USEZ(NNLY

application of oscillations at various frequencies. all the way up to the ultra-
sonic. The major methods of fastening chips are given in Table 7.1.

The use of ultrasonics to speed up the process is most widely employed when con-
necting a chip using the inverted chip or "flip chip" method, the essence of
which consists in joining the bonding pads of the inverted chip to the bonding
pads of the base (substrate, package. contact frame) with the repeated melting
of the solder from which these pads are made [66]. The flip chip techniques
combine the operations of fastening the chips and connecting the leads. To make
contacts on specified pads. their height is raised up on the chip or package.

The height of such projections is about 25 um. It is possible to connect several
leads simultaneously to a single chip in one batch processing pass by means of
bead and beam projections.

Besides the methods enumerated above for batch assembly of 10's without wires
using beam and bead leads, there are two more to be singled out: the combination
flip-chip and beam lead method and the strip technique, or the contact frame
method. The latter is quite promising, since it makes it possible to use strip
automation technology for the assembly process. Spiderwed leads which are

stamped out or etched out from aluminum foil make the connections between elements
when making batch connections in ultrasonic welding installations.

The most widespread method of connecting silicon 1c chips to package leads is the
welding of wire jumpers. The advantage of the technique consists in the fact
that it does not place stringent requirements on the geometric dimensions; a
drawback is the difficulty of automation and the high cost. Moreover. wire jum-
pers are at times a reason for 16 failure, since the lead often breaks at the
base where with the action of the welding head there is the strengthening of the
wire by work hardening, which is accompanied by the formation of microcracks.
Hire leads are fabricated primarily from aluminum and gold.

Thermal compression is the major method of connection, which provides for joining
two parts by means of heating and pressure. Thermal compression overlap welding
provides for a strong connection of semiconductor materials to leads made of
gold. aluminum. silver and other malleable metals; butt joint welding can be done
only with gold. The combination of plastic deformation and diffusion leads to

a close interaction of the molecules of the parts being joined. as a result of
which there is adhesion. although the joining of the parts is accomplished with
heating up to a temperature below the melting point of the metals being joined.

Ultrasonic microwelding is used both for batch connection of leads and for making
wire connections. It must be noted that it is necessary in mass production to
very carefully select the ultrasonic welding conditions to assure stability of
the quality indicators for the execution of the process. There is information
that ultrasonic welding causes diffusion and recrystallization of the metals
without their melting or with local melting in the contact zone. The formation
of compounds is also ascribed to processes similar to friction welding. The
majority of specialists feel that ultrasonic oscillations of the tool in the
initial welding period destroy oxide films and provide for contact of the

- 150 -

F08‘0FFKJAI.UEE§0NLY
; 353 Major Methods 25 Securing Chips

Material of the
Bonding Pad of

the Substrate

Gold coating

3 un thick;
gold type filn
conductor

A conductor to
which it is
possible to
make a connec-
tion with
solder

A conductor
with a low
contact re-
sistance

Ceramic

Back Side
of the Chip

Clean surface
or with a de-

posited layer
of gold

Metal coating
or deposited
layer

Metal coating
or deposited
layer

The surface
of the seni-
conductor
material

working Tenper-
ature| ‘C

350 - 450

200 - 250

200 (harden-
1as)

600 - 600

Advantages

The capability of
the thermal con-
pression connec-
tion of wire leads.
Good contacts.

The capability of
connecting large
chips. High pro-
ductivity.

Base of process-
ing; low tenpera-
ture process

The capability
of silultaneously
asking connections
to loop leads
POI! WIAL USE ONLY

"juvenile" surfaces. Soldering is used when fabricating high power planar tran-
sistors and alloy devices. while electron beam and laser welding have a small area

of applications at the present time.

The equipment for mounting chips on a bonding pad and for connecting the leads

has many similar structural and design elements, especially in the loading. unload-
ing and transport devices for the products during the process of executing the
operations. visual observation. etc.

The assembly operations when manufacturing mass produced alloy semiconductor
devices can be broken down into the following types: the assembly of the device
components in multiple cell cassette holders; the attachment of the chip holder
to the transition connection; the assembly of the transition connection and its
installation in the device package; the hermetic sealing of the device.

The assembly of the elements of a device in multiple cell holders is used to
improve the productivity of the operations performed by the batch method. for
example. such as melting. group soldering, etc. The connection of the chip holder
to the transition connection and the maunting of the transition connection and

its installation in the device package are the most labor production process
operations. which require high skill on the part of the operators and high pre-
cision actuating mechanisms.

Thermal compression and ultrasonic welding are widely used in the production of
alloy semiconductor devices to join the fine wire leads to the interconnection
electrodes and external leads, as well as in the production of planar devices
[65]. The heat is delivered to the weld region in the following ways: by heat-
ing the mounting base of the device; direct heating of a needle or punch; indirect
heating of the weld region. by passing current through the tool; heating a needle
with simultaneous heating of the mounting base.

7.2. Equipment for Mounting the Chips of Planar Devices

with respect to the kind of product loading and unloading during mounting, a
distinction is drawn between equipment with manual piece by piece loading and
unloading and with automated loading and unloading mechanisms.

With respect to the type of feed of the chips for fastening, a distinction is
drawn between various equipment designs: with cassette holder feed of chips put
in them beforehand; with combined selection of chips suitable for attachment;
and when they are fed in as wafers, separated into chips while preserving their
orientation.

Hith respect to the type of feed for the solder tablets or gold liners (in the
case of eutectic joining). a distinction is drawn between automated equipment

and equipment with manual loading. The semiautomatic FUN-700 unit for soldering
chips to the mounting base, which autonatically sequentially joins the gold liner
and the chips has the following technical specifications:

- 152 -

FOR‘OFFKJAL.US£|0NLY
Productivity (depending on the chip size).

pieces/hr §. 700

Size of chips which can be joined, an 0.5 x 0.5 +
1.5 x 1.5

Connection tenperature. 'C ; 660

Precision in connecting the chips relative to

the center of the gold plated pad. I- I 0.2

Range of connection making tines, sec 0.6 + 3.9

Range of working frequencies of the ultrasonic

generator. KB: 3 60 1 5

Output power of the ultrasonic generator, watts l6 1

Control range for the tool pressure on the elements

being welded, Newtone 0.2 - 2

 

Figure 7.1. The FUN-700 seniautonated unit for sealing chips to
mounting bases.

The soldering of the chips of transistors with a metal-glass package and flexible
leads can be sccouplished on the FUN-700 unit. The functions of the operator
when working with the semi-automatic unit reduce to periodically changing the

-153-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

cylindrical cases with the belt carriers. In structural terms, the semi-automatic
unit consists of the following structural psrts (figure 7.1): the sachine tool

bed 5; the grab type feeder for the products 1; the chip joiner and feed device
3: the foil feed mechanism 2 and the control unit 6.

 

Figure 7.2. The grab type feed device for the products.

The bed takes the form of a welded structure. A plate is fastened on top of the
bed. on which the major assenblies of the semiautomatic unit are mounted.

The grab type feed device for the products (Figure 7.2) serves for the step feed
of the belt carrier with the mounting bases of the devices placed on it. The
device consists of the guides l, which are fastened to two bases 2. the drawbsr 3.
which joins the base and which imparts rigidity to the system; rods 5, which

hold the magazine. The entire system is suspended freely on the springs b from
the frame end is driven by a lever device.

 

Figure 7.3. The feed and sttschsent mechanism for the chips.

The chip feed and attachment mechanism (Figure 7.3) consists of two assemblies in
structural terms: the feed mechanism and the mechanism for attaching the chips.

The transport mechanism 4 serves to transport the cassette holders with the chips
oriented on then to the position for grasping the chip by the working tool. The

- 15‘ -

INJR‘OI1WC1AI.IJSIZ(MﬂLY
mechanism consists of the following components: the bracket 5, platform 6, which
is rigidly fastened to the platforms; the cassette holders with the chips 7,
which lies freely on the platform and takes the form of a ring with teeth about
the periphery, where the chips are placed in nests in an oriented manner, where
the number of nests corresponds to the number of teeth; disk 8, which presses
against the cassette holder and can move in the bell guides along the platform.
The step motion of a cassette holder is produced by a rocking lever, moving
clamp 9 and finger 10. The mechanism for feeding and attaching the chips 11
consists of the carriage l. which moves in the ball guides on the base with the
magnetostrictive transducer secured to it. where this transducer has a vacuum
holder. Both mechanisms are mounted on the common base 2 and are driven by a
single drive 3.

The foil feed mechanism provides for feeding, cutting off and placing the gold
tablet on the mounting base and consists of two assemblies: the foil feed and
cut off assembly; the gold liner placement and connection assembly.

The latter assembly has a structural design and performs functions similar to

the chip feed and attachment mechanism (Figure 7.3). The foil feed and cut off
assembly has a spool with the gold foil wound on it. the feed of which is accom-
plished by two small rollers and the cutting is accomplished by a rocking knife.
The intermittent rotation of the rollers is realised by a ratchet mechanism. The
motion of the knife and the ratchet mechanism is accomplished from the came of
the common drive for the mechanisms. The chip feed and attachment mechanism is
coupled by means of an elastic sleeve to the mechanism for placing and cutting
off the foil.

 

Figure 7.6. Kinematic schematic of the ultrasonic attachment auto-at.

The mounting bases of a device are heated by tunnel heaters with built-in heating
elements.

- 155 -

FOR OIIWCJAI.lEHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In accordance with the kinematic schematic (Figure 7.6), the operation is realized
as follows: electric motor 28 rotates the camshaft 25 through the elastic coup-
ling sleeve 27. The grab mechanism is moved in the vertical plane by cams 23 and
26, as well as by spring 4 through lever 29, the system of levers and connecting
rod 11; the grab mechanism is moved in the horizontal direction by cam 26, spring
30 and lever 21.

The belt carrier 32, which is filled with the mounting bases of the devices, is
moved by the grab mechanism in vertical and horizontal planes and clamped by
catches 33. The carrier moves from the cylindrical case 31 along the plate 51
to the position for the attachment of the foil and chips. where heater ‘2 is
located. Then the carrier goes into case 3, from which it can be transmitted to
the next production process operation.

Toothed belt 2 transmits the rotation from electric motor 1 to camshaft 66. Cam
36 transmits an intermittent motion through the lever and connecting rod 12 to
the ratchet 15, which is clamped by finger lb. The rotation is further communi-
cated through shaft 17 to disk 16, which feeds the gold foil from roller 13 to
the stationary guides 18. The foil is cut off by knife 19, which is driven by
cam 35, the lever and connecting rod 20. The cut-off foil (the gold liner) is
caught by vacuum suction attachment 64 and by means of cams 38 and 39 as well as
springs 53 and 40, a combined oblique motion with the gold liner to the mounting
base of the device is imparted through connecting pull rod 37 and lever 39 to
the suction attachment. After making the connection, the operational cycle is
repeated. Holder 7 with the chips is set on the stage 6 and is pressed by disk
8 and spring 9 against the stationary clamp 5. A stepped motion is imparted to
the cassette holder by lever 10, which receives its reciprocating motion through
the system of connecting pull rods 56 from cam 65 with both end face and radial
working profiles. Lever 10 moves the cassette holder out from stationary clamp
5 and rotates it through one step. "hen the lever moves out to the initial
position. the cassette holder is clamped. The capture and transfer of the
oriented chips from the cassette holder are accomplished by vacuum attachment
54, to which a combined oblique motion is imparted by cams 38 and 48 as well as
springs 47 and 55 through connecting pull rod #9 and lever 51. The pressure of
the vacuum suction attachment on the chips during capture and when making the
connection is regulated by spring loaded levers 52 and 53. Programming devices
50 and 22 are mounted on the csmshafts to synchronize the operating cycle of

the semiautomatic equipment.

A provision is made in the semiautomatic unit for local feed of an inert gas into
the region of chip a *achment.

The loading and unloading of the belt carriers in the cylindrical cases are accom-
plished without shutting down the semiautomatic unit; a stockpile of semi-finished
products can be stored in special magazines, the dimensions of which make it
possible to place them in the pedestals of the machine bed.

During operation of the semiautomatic unit, attention is to be given to the
operation of the vacuum attachments, which can be fouled or wear. In the case

of contamination of the mounting bases of the devices or the back side of the
chips, a reduction in the connection quality is possible.

- 156 -

F02 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Depending on the combination of the material of bead leads of chips and the bond-
ing pads of substrates for integrated circuits, the following methods can be used
to make connections in the EH—43l installation:

-Thermsl compression microwelding or soldering with the capability of constant
heating of the substrate and chip (the working stage and tool). as well as
pulsed heating of the chip (or the tool); '

-oCombination microwelding or soldering (ultrasound with pulsed heating).

The assembly for placing chips of the EH-b3l
installation is depicted in Figure 7.5. An
integrated circuit substrate 2 is placed on
the working stage 1. which is equipped with
a spring holder. The chips are fed into the
unit in ring cassette holder 3 having a
capacity of 180 chips. In contrast to the
structural designs of the chip feed assembly
described previously (see Figure 7.3). the
ring cassette holder is mounted coaxially with
Figure 7.5. The assembly for the the working stage. The spindle A with the

placement of chips in tool 5 executes reciprocating motions from

the EH-bSl unit. the center of the working stage to the peri-
phery of the cassette holder and back.

 

The operator latches the chip up with the bonding pads of the substrates by means
of a micromsnipulator and an optical system. consisting of a microscope and
semitransparent and reflecting mirrors. The installation can be put together
with two types of interchangeable working stages: one is heated; batch instal-
lation of substrates is possible on the other.

The structural design of the MS-ébPZ-l semiautomatic unit for the attachment of
chips is of interest [46]. The semiautomatic unit is used in a set of equipment
intended for assembling multiple chip hybrid integrated circuits. The attach-
ment of chips with tinned leads-stubs on sitall and ceramic substrates is
accomplished by means of pulsed heating of the working tool with additional heat-
ing of the working stage while applying ultrasonic vibrations. Crystals of a
particular type (with dimensions of from 0.7 x 0.7 up to 1.8 x 1.8 III) are placed
in 6 vertical holders with a capacity of 350 to 600 chips each. Selective auto-
mated selection of the chips from any holder is possible in accordance with a
program set on the control console. The specific features of the operation of
the semiautomatic unit are the automatic orientation of the chip on the working
tool and the matching of the bonding pads of the substrate to reference marks on
the screen of the projector. The dimensional tolerance of a chip should be kept
within t 50 um for high quality mounting. The fabrication of the cassette holders
in the form of tubes. in the cavity of which the chips are stacked make it possi-
ble to create more compact feed assemblies than when using the cassette holders
shown in Figure 7.5. The flip chip method of attachment requires the use of
special devices for the observation of the matching of the contact projections

of the chip and the substrate [38]. Several methods of matching are well known:
using semitransparent and reflective mirrors (Figure 7.6).

- 157 -

FOR OFFICIAI.USI2(HWLY
FOIiOFFKJAl.USE(NHLY

 

Figure 7.6. Schematic showing the matching of chips to the substrate.

when a semi-transparent mirror is used (Figure 7.6a). the welding tool, which is
simultaneously the vacuum auction attachment. picks up the chip 2. which is
matched to the figure on the substrate 5 by means of semi-transparent mirror h.
Then the transparent holder 3 is shifted in a horizontal direction, while tool 1
places the chip at the specified point on the substrate with a vertical motion.
Such a method of matching requires that the chip always be located above the sub-

strate.

When using a reflecting mirror (Figure,7.6b). the matching of the chip 2 to the
figure on the substrate is accomplished using the microscope crosshairs and using
the imaginary image of the chip 5. The end face of the tool 1. which has a
suction attachment for the chip, is aligned and guided in accordance with the
same crosshair lines. The chip is arranged on the moving plate 3 of the reflec-
tive mirror a below the projections.

Following matching, the chip is held by auction. the plate 3 is removed. the weld-
ing tool moves it and the attachment is made.

A needle with a special geometry having a central opening to produce a vacuum
over the chip can be used as the tool for catching and attaching the chips. The

needle is made of a solid tungsten carbide alley or special steels.

7.3. Equipment for the Attaching of Leads to Planar Devices

Two types of equipment esist in accordance with the technology for lead attachment:
for wire mounting. and mounting without wire. The equipment for mounting without
wire as a rule, uses the principle of batch attachment of the leads to the chip;

some models of this equipment were described in the preceding section. The
structural design of installations for wire mounting are treated in the following.

- 158 -

FOR OFFIClAl.USEINNLY
The types of therssl conpression welding and the tool used in this case are given
in Table 7.2. Theresl conpression overlap welding provides for a strong joint
between seniconductor saterisls and leads nade of gold. aluminum. silver and
other nallesble astsls; butt welding can only be done with gold. The heating
tenperature in the case of thernsl cowpression welding should not exceed the
tenperature for the fornstion of eutectic alloys of the saterials being welded
and should not lead to the formation of dislocations. The heat is delivered

to the weld region in the following ways:

-neating the mounting base of the device:

--Direct heating of the needle or wedge;

-lndirect heeting of the weld site, by passing current pulses through the tool;
--ﬂenting the needle with sinultsneous heating of the mounting base.

The characteristics of a few nethods of therlsl conpression attachment are given
in Table 7.3.

Besides the kinds of thernal colprsssion welding indicated in Table 7.2, cosbina-
tion nethods are being widely used of late [57]. The execution of the process
using two nethods is shown in the schenstic (Figure 7.7): butt welding of gold
wire to the bonding pad of a device end welding by bonding to the bonding pad of

the substrate.

Ultrasonic bonding of wire leads is sccopplished in two Iain ways at the present
tine: using a wedge with an obliquely positioned opening (Figure 7.8) and with
a capillary. Steps in the process of bonding wire leads using a wedge tool are
depicted in rigure 7.8: -

-The lead wire 1 is fed to the point of its bonding to the chip 2 and clasped
by clanp 6 (Figure 7.8a);

- 159 -

FOR OINNCJAI.USE40NIX
FtIICHWHCJAI.lEﬂE(HNLY

Bead formation (6) (7 )m
””3“”
'0'. "mm
Jun-u m
yawn! (8) t
M wire “alum
.aa-n
nun-mu! WC] Iqu'
(1) alum
0) w“
“m" (5). ”5:00 t (9)
‘” .Jm- gag. '-
unw -
m'...~7"%.~72.=.2'.. 2.27"”

”I“!

 
     

( 1 1 ) r//////////////// / ///////////////////////////
l lama—a1
ammonium "helm-(10)

Figure 7.7. Schematic showing the combination weld bonding of leade.

Key: 1. Capillary welding head;
2. Flame from a hydrogen burner;
3. "Seam" welding;
h. Horizontal notion of the tool forms the "eeam" type connec-
tion;
5. The collet chuck clamps the wire;
6. Welding of the head;
7. withdrawal of the tool;
8. Formation of a "nail head" type bond;
9. The tool is raised, breaking the wire and leaving a small
end;
10. Bonding pad of a flexible circuit;
11. Bonding pad of the device.

--The lead is welded on (Figure 7.8b);

--The tool 3 is brought to the end face of the croaa piece of the lead of the
device 5, the second weld is made, the lead wire is clamped by clamp 6 and
broken off (Figure 7. 8c).

rhe following steps in the process of ultrasonic welding using a capillary are
lifterentiated:

--The attachment of the lead to the chip;
--The attachment to the end face of the cross piece;

--Cutting the wire and simultaneously forming the "whisker".

- 160 -

IKIICNHHCIAI.USE‘0NLY
6) (C)

Figure 7.8. Steps in the process of
bonding wire leads using
a wedge tool.

The PUV-0.8 semiautomatic unit for the
ultrasonic overlap bonding of leads to

the components of devices assembled on
T0-18. TO-S, etc. mounting bases uses the
latter method. The semiautomatic unit has
assemblies for loading. unloading and trans-
porting the devices. similar to those

used in the semiautomatic unit for attach-
ing chips (see Figure 7.2). All of the
operations with the exception of the load-
ing and unloading of the strip carriers
and the matching of the leads to the bond-
ing pads are performed automatically.

The position where the bonds are made is
shown in Figure 7.9. The wire is fed

from spool 1 into the weld capillary 2.
which is secured to the welding head 3.
The strip carrier 6 with the products
secured to it can be fed out in a stepped
fashion. Following welding at the end
faces of the cross piece. the wire load is
cut off by knives 5.

 

Figure 7.9. The lead bonding position of the PUV-O.8 semiautomatic unit.

Brief Technical Specifications for the PUV—0.8 Semiautomatic Unit

Output, welds/hr 1,000
Diameter of the wire leads. um 25 - 125
Welding time. seconds 0.05 - 1
Tool pressure on the elements being welded. N 0.1 - 1.5

- l6l -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

Travel of the manipulator in the horizontal plane. mm 8 x 8
Precision in setting the manipulator. um i 5
Travel of the tool in the vertical plane. mm 10

A provision is made for feeding an inert gas into the region of lead bonding.

The NPV unit for the ultrasonic bonding of leads makes the connection using a
wedge. is of a desk top design. (Figure 7.10) and has the following technical

specifications:

Kinematic productivity. cycles/hr 3,000

Materials which can be welded gold, aluminum

Hire lead diameter, um 26 - 6O

welding tool travel automatic

Tool pressure on the elements being welded, N 0.1 - 0.15

Manipulator travel in the horizontal plane along the

X and Y axes. an 6 x 6

The forming of the jumpers automatic

The Strip carrier feed stepwise.
discrete

The structural design of the unit is executed as follows (Figure 7.10). The
welding head 2 is secured with a screw in bracket fashion to base 3; a camshaft
is mounted inside the head with a drive. a welding mechanism 8, a lever system.
an electrical panel 4 and microscope 7. Ultrasonic generator 1 is maunted on
the welding head. The manipulator 6 is installed inside the table. The worl.uh
stage 5 is installed in the upper plate of the manipulator. The fastening of
the camshaft and programming unit makes it possible to easily disassemble them

for technical servicing.

In accordance with the kinematic schclu
(Figure 7.11), the unit operates as fol-
lows: by pressing the "start" button on
control 2‘ of manipulator 23, electric
motor 1 is started. The rotation is
transmitted from the electric motor
through the V-belt drive 66 to the shaft
with cans 39, 60, 63 and a4. The tool
which is fastened to chassis 9 is lowere
to the first and second weld positions
respectively by means of cans 32 and 40
through levers bl and 52, plate 34 and
rod 30. The tool lift is executed with
the action of spring 29 and is limited b
device 28. The tool executes a complex

>igure 7°10° Overall V19" °f the NPV-l motion in conjunction with the chassis
unit for the ultrasonic

bonding of leads.

 

- 162 -

FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY
Figure 1.11. Kinematic schematic of the RPV-l unit.

9 and bracket 8. The bracket 8, with the chassis 9 which is fastened in it in

a hinged fashion. are drawn up to the stationary plate by spring 33 and have the
capability of moving back and forth by scans of former plate 5, which is secured
with screw 4. and lever 65 and cam 66. rotating relative to roller 32. The wire
being welded is fed and broken off by cramps 16, which are given the following
notions: for tearing the wire, a feeding motion from electronsgnets 11, mounted
on the bracket, which moves together with the chassis 9: when clamping the wire,
it is driven by electromagnet 31. The height of the wire lead when finishing a
weld is lieited by means of can 39 through lever 36 with an adjusting screw.
Screws 36 and 37 are used to adjust the height for the first and seconds welds,
while screws 12 set the amount of travel of the cramps 16 when breaking and
feeding the wire. The load on the elements being welded is set by weights 6 and
7, where weight 7 adjusts the pressing force only when welding on a chip. The
strip carrier loves when the manipulator handle is inclined. In this case, the
electric actor of drive 19 is turned on. Rod 25 with the dog which catches the
strip carrier and moves it by one step is driven in notion by cam 18 through
lever 22. The strip carrier is clasped in the welding position by levers 20 by
nesns of can 21. while the return travel of the rod with the dog is accomplished
by spring 26; in this case, the dog slips freely along the strip. The adjusting
devices 2. 3, 27 and 35 serve to align the corresponding assemblies.

The welding mechanism consists of converter 15. which is sounted on chassis 9 by
means of device 14; bracket 8; the wire feed and breaking device, which consists
of bracket 13, the plate for the electrosagnets 11. the U-shsped retainer 16,
chassis 9 in which the spool with the wire 67 is placed as well as the shaft with
the load 6.

- 163 -

FOR 0F!1ClAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
FIHR(IFIIC1AL.USIZ(NULV

The mechanism operates as follows: bracket 8 is kinematically coupled through
master form plate 5 to the lever system and has the capability of rotating about
the support stops 10, and moving in a vertical plane along with bracket 13. The
lead wire is unreeled from spool #7. passes through the opening in U-shaped brace
16 and is fed under the tool of transducer 17. When a voltage is applied to the
lower electromagnet ll. clamp 16 compresses and clamps the wire. Then the voltage
is applied to the upper electromagnet ll. and the plates which are coupled to

the U-shaped retainer 16 are pulled towards its core, the U-shaped holder rotates
counter-clockwise and breaks the wire off. The stage for securing the strip
carrier or product can be made as a driven unit: for assembling devices in metal-
glass and plastic packages. or without a drive: for the direct fastening of a
product package.

In the process of executing the operation. the stage can be manually rotated
through an angle of up to 360°. When strip carriers are used, the unit can
operate in a single production process line with semiautomatic units for bonding
the chips.

Automated installations using minicomputera have been developed for the thermal
compression bonding of leads [48. 69]. One of them is designed for the mounting
of LS! circuits having a maximum of 62 leads. The L81 chips are mounted in a
framework of leads, which are fed into the unit in the form of strips (tape
segments). The receiving magazine holds #0 such strips and in step with their
use. they are moved to another magazine. The frames for the leads are fixed
precisely on pins in the guide racks. The operator corrects the shifting of the
center of the chip and frame by means of an electrical device. where this shift
runs up to 0.5 mm along the x and V area with an angular shift of up to 5°. The
operator views the chip being mounted on a television screen and by means of

two controls orients the edges of perpendicular pairs of bonding pads with res-
pect to the crossing lines on the screen. One control makes it possible to
rotate the bracket with the frame for the leads fastened in it through a maximum
of 1 5' to correct the angular shift. while the other changes the position of
the thermal compression head by i'0.5 mm in the direction of the x and Y axes to
correct the shifts along these axes. The vidicon which serves for the determina-
tion of the chip position is attached to the thermal compression head. The
controller generates signals proportional to the mechanical displacements and
feeds them to the specialized computer of the system. Calculations are performed
using the data on the position of the bonding pads. which are stored in a pro-
grammable read-only memory, to determine the corrections along the x and V coor-
dinates. This makes it possible for the microcomputer to feed out the corrected
x and V coordinates for the welding points to step motors as signals for the
positioning of the thermal compression head with respect to the X and V coordi-
nates in steps of 10 um. No angular motions are required. Gold wires for the
leads with diameters of 20 to 30 um are bonded by the thermal compression head
with a capillary using a butt joint at a rate of 2 leads per seconds: up to 3
chips with 62 leads are installed per minute.

A great advantage of programmable units for attaching wire leads. including those
using computers. is the capability of setting up multiple machine tool servicing.

- 154 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where one operator works several production process aachinss simultaneously. sone-
thing which achieves a reduction in the labor intensity of product nanufacturing.

  
  
  
  
      
 

  
 
 
 
 
 

  
  
  
  
 

  

23:25 63:2 10°32 ‘0 Is.
28:23.0 703:2 I01z2 40 20
3033.5 903:3 15023 40 25
45:55) may lféti W I)
103:6.0 138:5 210:6 40 50.
[Wt8.0 2453! 300:3 60 70
"0:8.0 150th 420:10 90 IN

    
    

170*IO. {20:125001l0 95
“0:110 «02“ 5|5tl3 IN

Figure 7.12. The main dimensions of hard alloy needles.

Key: 1. Design I;
2. Design 11;
3. Dimensions. no;
a. wire diaseter. an:
S. First variant;
6. Second variant.

The series produced hard alloy nicrowelding tool has a complex nicroprofile for
the contacting working surface. a capillary opening with a dianeter of 0.02 to
0.1 an and is usually fabricated iron netsl-ceranic hard alloys of the VK-B
tungsten group. The capillary holes are produced by using the techniques of
sintering a hard powder alloy using a natal fora into which a suspension of pow-
der and filler is poured under a slight pressure.

- 16S -

I1)!‘0lﬂﬂ(1kl.l!ﬂ£(ﬂVLY
FOI‘DFFKJALI£§EONLY

The basic dimensional parameters of hard alloy needles used in lead bonding are

shown in Figure 7.12:
shows a wedge with a lateral opening.

Figure 7.12s shows a cutting alloy capillary; Figure 7.12b

7.4. Equipment and Complexes for Mounting Semiconductor Devices and Integrated

Circuits on a Strip Conveyor

     
   
 
   
 
   
      
     
 

 
 

(In-Em": :

salons! su-

”undercut
lulu": 1 mm:
a clumsily

”puts mm:

a Mom
‘ quansuol

ftp-(Hausa: ; a
"null!

hulls us
”punks
I n mulls!

Wynn ”mm:
a pvt/nut
lode!

Figure 7.13. The typical sequence of
operations to assemble
diodes using a strip.

Key: 1. Scribing and separation

of the wafers into chips;

2. Attachment of the chips
to the strip;

3. Bonding of the lead to
the strip and the chip;

5. Cutting the strip on the
chip side;

5. Hermetic sealing of the
p-n junctions;

6. Potting or cospression

molding the p-n junctions;

7. Cutting the strip and se-
parating the diodes.

- 166 -

One of the ways of automating the
assembly of semiconductor devices and
IC's at the present time is the use
of a strip conveyor. Equipment is
described below for the installation
of transistors and IC's on s continu-
ous perforated strip.

A typical sequence for the performance
of assembly operations for discrete
devices (transistors, diodes) using a
strip carrier is shown in Figure 7.13.
The ”Patch" comprehensively mechaniied
line [50] finds application in the
production of s mass produced high
frequency transistor for home enter-
tainment electronics equipment (the
KT-315 transistor). A continuous
perforated strip which is simultaneous-
ly also the structural component of
the transistor itself and the means of
transporting it during assembly is
used.

The use of a Fernico strip with partial
local striped gold plating, accomp-
lished by a continuous cladding tech-
nique, has made it possible to attach
chips directly to the strip, without
using additional solder tablets.

The metalized pads for the emitter
and base leads of transistor struc-
tures are made in the form of two
concentric circles. something which
has made it possible to eliminate the
orienting of the chips relative to
the external leads during the assembly
process and to make the bond (thermal
compression) of the two leads sinul—
tsneoualy.

FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
Figure 7.16. The KT315 mechanized flow line for the production of
transistors.

The mechanized flow line consists of units, a portion of which are shown in
Figure 7.1b:

--The automated press for cutting out the perforations in the strip (Figure 7.14s).
It has a nominal force of 105 Newtona, and a unit output of 6,000 transistors
per hour. Several lines can be serviced;

-—The unit for attaching the chips to the strip (Yigure 7.léb). It has a machine
output of 600 connections/hour. A vibrational hopper with a device for iden-
tifying and orienting the side of the chip by a probe head is used for the
automated chip feed. The soldering of the chips is accomplished at a tempera-
ture of 600 to k20' C using ultrasonic generators with a power of 40 watts:

--The unit for attaching leads (Figure 7.16c). A double ruby capillary is used
in it for the simultaneous connection of two leads (two units in a complete set).
The thermal compression is realized using beads at a temperature of 300 to 360°
C. The unit performs two operations. The first operation is thermal compres-
sion of two gold wires. which terminate in beads. to the metalized pads on a
chip; in this case. all of the transitions in the operation are made automatic-
ally; only the precise matching is accomplished manually under a microscope.
The second operation is the automatic connection to external current connectors;
the operation is performed by means of resistance welding without the partici-
pation of the operator. The machine capacity is 300 to 350 devices per hour;

--The unit for preparing for hermetic sealing (Figure 7.1bd). It has two working
positions: for the unreeling of the strip with the transistor assemblies from

- 167 -

FOR OFFKHAI.USE(NQLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

a magnetic drum and loading into a satellite cassette holder for subsequent her-
metic sealing; and for cutting off one of the jumpers on the strip. The capa-
city of one satellite holder is 20 devices. The output of the unit is 700
devices per hour;

--The hermetic sealing unit. It takes the form of a piston metering dispenser
for epoxy compound. which is apportioned by 20 nozzles simultaneously. The
working stage of the unit has a mechanism for automatically moving the potting
forms by one regular step; the shifting is accomplished after each dosage;

--The KT-2-12 semiautomatic classifier. It is used for classifying the transis-
tors; its feed and connection devices have been modernised for the flat plastic
transistor package;

--The automatic marking unit. It is equipped with a vibrating feed hopper and a
spiral volute chamber type drying chamber. The machine output of the automatic
unit is 3.000 devices per hour;

--The devices are packaged in a polyethylene strip in two parallel rows. There
is a vibrating feed hopper. The output of this automatic unit is 3,000 devices
per hour;

--The magnetic storage drum is intended for accumulating the tape in the individual
assembly operations and the subsequent transfer of the assemblies on the strip
tape to the next production process operation. The drum is made of Fernico and
bar magnets. which make it possible to heat treat the devices in an oxygen
3 tmosphere .

For the batch assembly of 10's without wires using the contact frame technique,
a set of equipment is employed in which the method of preliminary embossing of
aluminum foil to produce the outline of the leads with subsequent etching out of
the jumpers is used to produce the contact frames.

Some of the technical questions related to the use of strip carriers. in particu-
lar, additional information on the use of strip technology, known under the name
'ﬁdi-ni-Hod" are described in [51]. This technique. just as the variants of it.
is based on the use of a plastic tape. reminiscent of a motion picture film.

over the entire surface of which frames with leads produced by photolithography
are arranged. A polyimide tape cladded with copper foil is most widely used for
this purpose. The assembly of the 10's consists in the batch attachment of the
chips, made with bead or beam leads. to the external leads of the frame. The
chip is held above a small window in the plate by means of the internal leads,
bonded by a thermal compression head to the bonding pads of the chip. Two narrow
rectangular gaps make it possible to stamp out the exterior leads, removing the
unnecessary edges of the film in this case. Then, these leads can be connected
by the batch method to the housing or to the printed circuit board. The perforated
holes at the edges of the films serve to move the film following the bonding of
the chip and for the precise setting of the frame with the leads underneath the
chip.

The typical process sequence for the group bonding of leads is shown in Figure
7.15. Prior to the start of the welding, the strip is lowered so that the
internal leads formed beforehand match up with the bonding pads of the chip.

- 168 -

FOB‘OFFKJAL.USE(MNLY
sa.umv Ian’- I. 'Jl'"—' r.——..- -v- -- .-

leads by the group method.

Key 1. Contact projection;
2. Preformed internal
leads;
3. Guide films;
6. Chip;
5. Support for the chips;
6. Leads which touch the
contact projections;
7. Layer of was;
8. Current;
9. Bonded chip;
10. Chip in the matrix;
11. Direction of chip

notion.

I
\L__—r) which is glued with wax to the sub-
strate (Figure 7.15s). The chip.
which is observed in a microscope, is

set in the requisite position either

‘6)" l/’ ' r~i(9) manually or automatically. Then the
”'“"” strip is lowered. bringing the internal
(10) ;:3\_ " leads in contact with the contact pro-
; M'H‘W jections of the chip (Figure 7.15b).
W A stream of inert gas protects the weld
(oil (11) “0" “WM" WW". site. The welding head is lowered.
pressing the internal leads against the
pads (7.15c). A pulsed electrical current heats the head, creating the bond. The
liberated heat melts the wax and frees the chip. Following welding, the strip ls
lifted along with the bonded chip (Figure 7.15d), and then shifted to the left,
transporting the next batch of leads into the working position (Figure 7.lSe).
The coordinate stage is shifted to the left. feeding the next chip for welding.
Assembly machines have been designed having a tape winding unit. The machines
are intended for soldering by means of melting a dosed amount of solder; the film
is moved in steps of up to 127 pm at a speed of 38 mm/sec. Each chip is manually
placed under a microscope. The requisite film tension is assured by an induction
motor. The welding head of the machine has an electric drive. It is moved into

the working position for 375 msec. The productivity of the machine is about 1.000
chips per hour.

 

A drawback to the technique consists in the fact that the polyimide strip. after
the bonding of the leads. proves to be practically unnecessary. something which
is not efficient from the viewpoint of material consumption. and moreover. the
plastic tape yields a shrinkage on the order of 25 um, which makes it difficult
for automated equipment for connecting leads to operate reliably. Proposed as

a promising system is the assembly of integrated circuits on a plastic film in
rollers [‘21. Using this method, instead of etching a polyimide film cladded

- 169 -

IIII(MNNCIAI.USE(HVLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 7.16. One of the fastening methods in an integrated circuit
package in a film frame.

with copper. electrolytic and chemical deposition of copper or nickel is used. as
a result of which, high precision is obtained in the figure for the lead layout.
The minimal width of a conductor is equal to the minimum spacing between the
conductors and amounts to 0.005 mm.

The walls of the conductors are vertical, while in circuits fabricated using foil
etching. they are inclined as a result of undercut etching. The new technique
is also favorably distinguished from earlier methods in that it does not require
the use of an adhesive material to join the plastic film to the metal. This
makes it possible to fully utilize the high thermal resistance of polyimide film:
it is capable of sustaining a temperature of bOO' C for 15 seconds, which is
more than sufficient for the mounting of integrated circuits using electrical
contact heating or thermal compression welding. Gold beads or beads of solder
can also be deposited on the original film. The film, which is 16. 35 or 70 mm
wide. with the integrated circuits attached is protected by a special coating.

The packages within which the film frames are hermetically sealed have inspection
windows. and for this reason. when mounting 10's on a transparent polyimide film
using the flip chip technique. the resulting contacts are partially visible
through the package.

Frames of film with integrated circuits can be nounted in packages in various
ways. One of them is shown in the figure (Figure 7.16). The edges of the film
are bent around a rigid dielectric plate, and the resulting semi-finished piece
is inserted in the package so that the conductors on the film make a reliable

- 170 -

FOR OFFIC1A1.lEﬂ£(HﬂLY
electrical contact with the package leads. The gluing of the frame to a dielectric
plate or aluminum heat sink is also practiced. The most widespread method does

not require hermetic sealing of the film and provides the capability of automating
the assembly process. A special machine cuts out the frames with the 16's from

a roller, sets them with their front side down on the printed circuit board and
completes the assesbly by means of electrical contact heating.

7.5. Equipment for the Assembly of Point Contact Diodes

The most widespread type of point diode is the D9 device. The attachment of the
wire by means of welding to the needle holder of the D9 device, the cutting off
of the wire. the forming of the needle. the quality control rejection as well as
the placement of the needle holders with the weld attached needle in a cassette
holder are accomplished on the automatic unit described below (Figure 7.17).
when operated by a single operator, the automatic unit provides for the assembly
of 3.600 to 4,500 devices per hour. It consists of three major assemblies: the
unit for the welding and shaping of the needle 3, the table 1 and the vibration
hopper 2. A pulse counter and other instruments. the readings of which are used
to choose the welding process mode, are arranged on the control panel 6. The
vibration hopper feeds the needle holders to the transport mechanism.

A kinematic schematic of the automatic
unit is shown in Figure 7.18, from which
one can trace the operation of the
assemblies and mechanisms. The nechanisms
are driven by drive 1, which provides
for the motion and rotation of all the
mechanisms. The needle holders which are
loaded manually into vibration hopper 2
are fed via guides 3 and S to the trans-
port mechanism. which moves a needle
holder from one position to another and
consists of a reducer. stationary rack
9 and moving rack 8. The piecewise feed
mechanism 4 is mounted on the reducer,
where this mechanism executes the indivi-
dual feed of the needle holders to the
transport mechanism by means of four
levers, which are driven by a can of the
Figure 7.17. The automated needle weld- transport mechanism. The transporting
ing and turning unit. element of the transport mechanism is
rack 8, which executes a reciprocating
motion and feeds the needle holders from one position to the next. The needle
holders are moved via the rack to the region where the end of a needle holder is
cut off. The cut-off mechanism 13 consists of a guide. and a slide to which the
upper knife is fastened. The slide is driven by a cam, located on the reducer of
the transport mechanism by means of a bearing. The bottom knife is mounted in
the stationary rack of the transport mechanism. The needle holder is clamped in
a definite position by means of a special device which is fastened to the slide.

 

- 171 -

IN)! (MHﬂCJAI.l£5EZ(HNLY
IN)I.0IIHCIAl.l£SEi(NQLV

 

Figure 7.18. Kinematic schematic of the automated needle welding and
forming unit.

The needle holders then move to the next position, where the needle holder is
clamped, the wire is fed in and bonded and the needle is cut off and shaped. The
clamping mechanism 6 consists of a slide, which is moved in the guide by means

of a cam and a tilting bearing. A clamp is fastened to the slide by means of

the chassis and a spring. where this clamps presses the needle holder against the
rack prior to the welding operation. A contact is located on the chassis, which
is used to check for the presence of the product and turn on the electrical power
when performing the welding. The mechanism for feeding and bonding the wire 10
is located on a post. Two guides are secured to the post: the vertical up and
down travel of the slide is accomplished via these guides using a screw. Two
horizontally running guides are fastened to this slide; the rack is moved along
these guides by means of a screw. A bracket is rigidly fastened to the frame.
which also has two guides. along which the slide travels with the feed and welding
heads positioned on the slide. The feeding of the wire is accomplished by means
of a lever, which is driven by a cam of the transport and clamping mechaniss.

The cutting and forming mechanism 7 consists of a bracket, guides and two slides.
The lower knife is secured to one of them, while the upper knife is fastened to
the other. The knives perform the operations of cutting off and shaping the wire.
The notion of the guides is realized by means of a spring and came of the trans-
port mechanism through bearings. By virtue of grooves which exist in the bracket.
on which the cutting and forming mechanism is mounted. it can be moved in a
horizontal plane.

The welding process is accomplished by means of sector 12. which controls the
limit switch. The finished products are fed to the cassette holder loading
position. The final operation is carried out by means of the loading mechanism
11, which consists of a stationary housing and a moving carriage, on which the
cassette holder is placed. The carriage moves along the guides by virtue of the
motion of a stem and lug. which meshes with the toothed rack. fastened to the
carriage. "hen one cell of the cassette holder is filled, the pulse counter feeds

- 172 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a signal to the electromagnet. which when turned on. the stem touching the can

moves the cassette holder by one step. when the cassette holder is completely

full. the carriage moves to the microswitch. and the automatic unit is cut off.
The operator changes the cassette. returns the carriage to the initial position
and the cycle is repeated from the beginning.

7.6. Equipment for the Automated Assembly of Alloy Diodes

The assembly of 0226 silicon alloy diodes is accomplished on an assembly unit
with a continuous nickel belt. The belt transport mechanism is fed to a press
from the unreeling assembly; the forming of the chip holder and the cutting out

of the preparations are done automatically in the press. Oil residues are

removed from the strip in a degreasing bath with trichloroethylene. The degreased
strip is fed into the automatic unit for the weld attachment of the lower lead.

A moving electrode is brought from above against the strip. while from below. a
feed carriage feeds a nickel plated copper wire and presses it against the strip
and welds it. after which a knife cuts off the lead. Then the strip moves on.
going to a tinning mechanism. a washing bath and drying furnace.

The washed dry strip is transported in this way to a furnace for bonding the
junctions. The operator sets the cassette holder with the junctions on the strip.
The junctions are wetted with solder. and after cooling form a reliable electrical
contact with the chip holder. Then a capsule is manually placed on the junction
lead. After this, the capsule is automatically ring welded to the chip holder.
The operator seats the cassette holder with the intermediate leads on the capsules
to center a capsule relative to the crystal holder. The clamping devices go in
the perforation holes. thereby centering the capsules. After performing the
operation, the operator removes the cassette holder with the bonded capsules and
the strip is transported to the automat for tube swaging. A die, which in press-
ing the tube against a stationary support. deforms it by 3.5 + 0.5 an is fastened
to the rod of a pneumatic mechanism. which is operated by a valve controlled by

a cam. The swaged portion of the tube is then welded at 3 + 0.5 mm by the weld-
ing mechanism. The operation of the tube welding mechanism is similar to the
swaging mechanism, only electrodes are mounted in it instead of dies.

Following the welding of the tube. the electrodes are moved away and the sealed
device is fed to the position for welding the upper lead. The automatic welding
of the lead is accomplished in the following manner. A clamp of the mechanism
catches the nickel wire and feeds it through an interception assembly and a
knife draw die to the small tube of the capsule. A moving electrode is brought
up by means of a pneumatic cylinder, where this electrode presses the lead from
the tube against another electrode which can be moved. with the approach of the
moving electrode to the tube of the device, a centering fork catches the tube
with its lower cutout. while with the upper one. centers the lead relative to
its axis. Following the welding. a knife cuts off the lead, while the intercep-
ting assembly retains the wire until the clamp returns to the upper position.
The moving electrode is returned to the initial position and the entire cycle is
repeated.

- 173 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The removal of the assembled device from the strip is accomplished in a press
for cutting out the finished device. The press cuts out two devices for the
purpose of improving the dynamic characteristics.

In structural terms, the assembly unit combines several sections, which are joined
together in a line, which is described in Chapter Fifteen. The mechanisms of the
unit operate from three separate drives. The ring welding mechanism and the
mechanism for swaging and weld attachment of the tube, as well as the mechanisms
for welding the lower leads and tinning the strip, and the strip transport and
upper lead welding mechanisms are all driven by the main drive. The forming

press for the chip holders and the press for cutting out the finished device
operate from individual drives. The synchronization of the operation of all of
the drives is electrical.

The major assemblies and mechanisms which assemble a device are described in the
following.

I =F’“ The assemblies for clamping, feeding
‘ﬂﬁ. - and cutting the wire, the upper elec-
"\\ - trode, the pneumatic cylinders and
AJ \\ valves are located in the mechanism
3) .4 for welding the upper lead (Figure

7.19). The parts of the mechanism

are driven by the main drive through
clutch 8, cylindrical gear 7. the shaft
for actuating the valves 5, cylindrical
gears, shaft 13, the conical spur gear
pair 6 and a vertical distribution
shaft.

The lead is clamped by means of jaws
which are driven by the rod of pneumatic
cylinder 9, and moved by pneumatic cylin-
der 12. The pneumatic cylinders are con-
trolled by valves 6. The pneumatic vy'-
inder for feeding the lead provides for
the requisite clamping force for the lead
against the strip. which is regulated by
varying the air pressure in the system
by means of reducing valve 1 and is sta-
bilized by receiver 2. The feed brake

is adjusted by throttling valves 3.
There is a moving stop 10, which limits
the lowering of the feed assembly, for
the regulation of the protrusion of the
lead. During alignment and adjustment,
the mechanism is disconnected from the
main drive and the parts are moved by
levers ll.

 

Figure 7.19. Kinematic schematic of the
mechanism for welding the
lower lead and the tinning
mechanism.

- l76 -

F0R40FFKJAI.USEiJNLY
The drying furnace is made in a separate housing, in which spiral heaters are
located. The working temperature for the drying is 100 1 10° C. The time that
the furnace is in the operating mode is no more than 30 minutes.

The furnace for attaching the junctions takes the form of a separate housing,

in which there are four electric heaters. 0n the outside. the furnace is
covered with a casing which is cooled by water flowing through it. The tempera-
ture in the furnace is adjusted in a range of from 50 to 600° C. The time that
the furnace is in the maximum operating mode is no more than 30 minutes. It is
powered from the AC mains at a voltage of 220 volts. The maximum power of the
furnace is 2.5 K".

A kinematic schematic of the ring welding, tube swaging and upper lead welding
mechanism is shown in Figure 7.20. The main drive for the unit consists of
electric motor 3, the V-belt drive, worm gear reducer 2, cylindrical spur gear
transmission b and the distribution shaft 1.

The ring welding mechanism consists of the welding housing, the upper S and
lower 11 pneumatic cylinders for moving the electrodes and the lower electrode
clamping assembly 12. The overall travel of the upper electrode is no mm. The
working travel of the upper electrode is 10 mm, and that of the lower electrode
is 35 mm.

The tube swsging mechanism includes pneumatic cylinder 6, stationary stop 10
and the guides for holding the strip.

The mechanism for welding the upper lead has a welded frame, on which the
distribution shaft 9 with the control cams and drive gears, as well as the
wire bobbin 7 and electrode assembly 8 are mounted. The entire mechanism is
secured on a separate plate, having four slots. The parts of the mechanism
are rotated by the main shaft 1.

The entire process of assembling the devices is carried out in a controlled
medium, which is assured by the protective suit existing in the unit. It con-
sists of standardized sections of welded structures. Each section is installed
and secured to the upper plate of the frame.

To control all of the mechanisms of the equipment, there is a control panel in
it on which the requisite controls, switches and lights are located, by means
of which the mechanism is turned on and the production process operations are
monitored.

7.7. Equipment for the Assembly of Power Transistors

The sharp growth in the production of power transistors, the increase in the
currents, voltages and power, and consequently, the increase in the dimensions
of the chips. lead diameters, geometric dimensions as well as the materials

of the package make it necessary to seek out new, more promising methods of
assembly, which would make it possible to boost productivity and quality.

- 175 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.3399?!-
uggg v.3" Home. 05 no :0: on 9530: was 9.328 2.3 Juan—2.0.5
$qu 5530) an: of no .8332... on» 9359.» 032-23 03.3093. .ONK «usurp

 

-176-

FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
The existing production of power transis-
tors is characterized by a great divers-
ity of the assembly methods. for example.
the connection of the chips is accomplished
by flux soldering, eutectic bonding, and
bonding in a hydrogen furnace. In one
case. here, the chip is joined directly

to the mounting base. and in the other,

to a gold plated molybdenum disk. The
connection of the leads is also accom-
plished in different ways: flux soldering.
bonding in a hydrogen furnace and ultra-
sonic welding. All of this requires the
development of special equipment to per-
form the indicated operations.

 

The installation for the ultrasonic bond-
ing of leads (Figure 7.21) to high power
transistor chips is described below. It
provides for the automatic bonding of two
wire leads to the metalized pads of a chip
by means of applying ultrasound and pressure with the subsequent forming of the
leads to assure their orientation relative to the and faces of the transistor
mounting bases. The installation is serviced by a single operator. The produc-
tivity of the installation is 1,200 welds/hr. The devices are fed in a cassette
holder; the capacity of the cassette is 10 devices.

Figure 7.21. The unit for ultrasonic
lead bonding.

The installation consists of the following assemblies: the control panel 1,
the welding head 2, the mechanism for clamping and feeding the devices 3. the
plate A. manipulator S. the electrical equipment cabinet 6. table 7, ultrasonic
generator 8 and the pneumatic assembly 9. The installation can operate in two
modes. In the case of operation in mode I, the leads are welded to a chip in
the unit; in the case of mode 11 operation, the leads are bonded ultrasonically
to the cross-ties of the transistor mounting bases.

The bonding of a lead to a contact bonding track of a chip is accomplished by
means of the tool which is mounted at the end of the waveguide of a magneto-
strictive ultrasonic transducer. The bonding occurs by virtue of the joint

action of pressure and ultrasonic oscillations on the parts being joined to-

gether.

The working cycle of the process takes place over one revolution of the distri-
bution shafts A, B and c (Figure 7.22). The functional linkage of the operation
of these shafts is accomplished electrically. The following mechanisms are
operated by means of the cams arranged on distribution shaft A: the wire feed
mechanism is driven by cam 16; the wire cutting mechanism is driven by cam 18
and the wire holder mechanism is rotated by cam 20. The shaft is rotated by
electric motor :9. Distribution shaft 3 controls the operation of the mechanism
for the step feed of the cassette holder by cam 29 and the mechanism for clamp-
ing the devices in the bonding position. The shaft is rotated by electric

- 177 -

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(HNLY
FOR‘OFf1C1AL USEGDNLV

motor 26 through the toothed belt drive 27. The mechanism for lowering the
nrnustica] system with the tool secured to the end of the concentrator is driven
by com 22. which is positioned on shaft C. The shaft is rotated by electric
motor 21. The clamping of the wire feed jaws 12 is accomplished by an electro-
nagnet. built into the stationary jaw 13. The wire. which is cut off by knives
ii, is fed to holder 10 near the tool 25. The devices are brought into the
working position in the cassette holder with each step of carriage 8. The final
matching of the bonding pad on a chip to the tool is accouplished by manipulator
30. Shafts A and B. after being turned off, are braked by electromagnetic brakes
a, which are rotated through gear pairs 2 and 3, as well as brake 17.

 

Figure 7.22. Kinematic schematic of the ultrasonic bonding unit.

The working controls of the installation are controlled by cams, contactless
switches 9, 23 and 16. as well as clamping microswitches. by means of which
the following are accomplished: the device is clamped (cans l and 28); the

- 178 -

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
pneumatic valves for the lead bending and forming cylinders are actuated (micro-
switches S and 6); the device feed drive motor is turned on (lobes 7); the feed-
ing of the wire to a specified length (cam 16); the turning-on of the drive
motor for wire preparation (lobe 15); the cutting-off of the wire (cam 18); the
rotation of the wire holder (cam 20); the lowering of the tool (cam 22); the
turning on of the ultrasonic generator and the shutdown of the motors (lobe 2b);
and the moving of the cassette holder through one step (cam 29).

In structural terms, the major assemblies and mechanisms of the installation are
made as follows. The welding head is the major actuating mechanism and consists
of the following assemblies: the wire preparation drive, the wire feed and cut

off mechanism, the mechanism for feeding the wire to the tool and the acoustical
head and housing.

The wire preparation drive provides for the requisite motions of the mechanisms
which prepare a wire segment for bonding. It consists of a distribution shaft
with the cams seated on it, by means of which the clamped shutdown of the shaft

is realized after the motor is turned off. In addition, there is an electromag-
netic break.

The wire feed and cutting mechanism provides for feeding the wire from the
spools by means of jaws into the nipple of the holder of the wire transport
mechanism. The cutting of the wire is accomplished by a moving knife, which
turns on its axis relative to the stationary knife. The mechanism has a stop
plate. which is set up relative to the height of the guides. assuring that the
requisite length of the wire is obtained.

The mechanism for feeding the wire to the tool feeds a section of wire. which
is secured in the nipple by means of a spring. which actuates during the motion
of the knife and clamps the wire at the tool. The wire feed is accomplished by
virtue of a reciprocating motion of the lever.

The acoustic head is mounted in a carriage in ball guides on a cantilever bracket
and is rigidly coupled to a shaft, which is supported on two bearings mounted in
the bracket. Because of this coupling, it has the capability of rotating
together with the axis through an angle of :_S°. The horizontal position of

the end face of the tool is set by adjusting screws. The rotation of the system
about its axis depends on the height to which the head is lowered after the

tool encounters an obstacle.

The mechanism for clamping and feeding the devices by means of the carriage and
two lugs accomplishes the stepwise feeding of the cassette holder. The cassette
holder moves in the guides on bearings, which extend above the slot. The
clamping of the devices is accomplished on both sides by cams, mounted on a
single shaft. There is an electromagnetic brake, which is coupled to the shaft
through a gear coupling to clamp the shutdown of the shaft at the moment it is
turned off.

The manipulator moves the cassette holder with the devices relative to the tool
in a field of 25 x 25 mm. It is built using ball guides. There are two

- 179 -

FINI(H"H(1AI.US£10NLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

puahbuttonn for turning it on and the feed of the devices in the drive control
of the manipulator. The operator controls the operation of the installation from
the control panel and both aeoiautoutic and adjust-cut nodes are possible.

-180-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER EIGHT EQQIPHENT £93 HERHBTICALLY SEALING SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES

One of the decisive factors which influences the stability of semiconductor
device parameters is the composition of the ambient medium around the semicon-
ductor chip with the electron and hole junctions. which are extremely sensitive
to exposure to all possible kinds of dirt, moisture, various kinds of deforma-
tions, etc. A hermetically sealed package. inside which the junctions are
placed, should reliably isolate them from the environment. Semiconductor device
packages having a leakage of less than S ‘ 10"6 l ' um/sec are considered hermet-
ically sealed.

The major requirements placed on hermetic sealing operations are: producing
vacuum tight and mechanically strong joints of the package elements; precluding
the possibility of dirt. gaseous emissions and splashes getting into the sealed
volume of the device during assembly; the impermissibility of heating the
junction during the hermetic sealing above 120' for germanium devices and 200'
for silicon devices.

The diversity of existing semiconductor device and 1c packages is explained by
the simultaneous use of several methods of hermetic sealing in production and
the types of equipment corresponding to them. The techniques of cold and resis-
tance welding have become the most widespread for hermetically sealing metal-
glass packages, while the methods of soldering with low temperature solders and
roller contact welding are most widely used for sealing metal-ceramic packages.
The sealing of semiconductor devices and 10's in monolithic plastic packages by
means of transfer forming (casting under low pressure) has become widespread.

A large group of semiconductor devices. diodes, is hermetically sealed in all-
glass packages using special equipment; in this case. the alignment. electro-
forming and welding together of the packages is accomplished in the equipment.
The parts being welded are heated by means of a plate or ring type direct incan-
descent heater. Equipment is known in which the heating is accomplished by
radiotrequency currents. In a number of cases. equipment is used to hermetically
seal complex products in multiple lead packages in which the heating of the
parts of the package being joined together is accomplished by an electron beam,
focused infrared rays, by a plasma or a laser.

8.1. Equipment for Cold welding

Cold welding assures good quality of the weld seam: the process takes place
without gas liberation and heating which have a harmful influence on the pro-
perties of an electron-hole junction. To be included among the drawbacks to
this technique are the necessity of increasing the diameter of the package
because of plastic deformation of the components being welded, the necessity
of using ductile metals and the somewhat limited capabilities of welding thin
wall ports.

Cold welding of a semiconductor device mounting base with a piston can be
accomplished using one and two sided compression. In the case of compression on
one side, an annular indentation is formed on one side (Figure 8.1a), and with

- 181 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFFKJAl.US£(NHLY

two sided compression. it is formed on both sides (Figure 8.1b). The optimal
variant is one sided deformation in a free volume. In this case. the deformation
needed for seizure of the copper-Fernico pair is 672 as opposed to 722 in the
case of double sided deformation [52].

The optimal degree of deformation of the package parts being welded is assured
through the structural design of the working tool, which makes it possible to
produce the specified thickness of the metals at the weld site.

The working tool is a punch (Figure 8.2) fabricated of the Khvc or KhlZH alloy
steels and tempered to a hardness of are - 52 to 60: the hard alloy VK20 is also
used. The weld quality is governed by the condition of the surfaces being joined
and the force applied to the working tool.

I

I r
IuQQSgggozé? ggigggggzaég
m\*\\ \\\‘\\ \ I .\ \\\\\

    

     
   

 
    

   
    

    
 

ﬂ
Figure 8.1. Kinds of cold welding.

For hermetic sealing using cold welding
in semiconductor production, special
hydraulic or pneumatic presses are
used having a force of from 5 ° 10‘ up
to 6 - 105 N. The parameters of the
most widespread equipment are given

 

Figure 8.2. The working tool for
cold welding.

below. Key: 1. Punch from the side cf
the part made of softer
material;
2. Cup;
3. Cap;

4. Mounting base;

5. Punch from the side of
the part made of harder
material.

Cold Welding Eguipment
Technical Specifications 020.0007 020.0011 2.221.006 2.220.003 S.333.00.000

Output, welds/hr 600-900 200-600 1.200 800 500

Working force. Newtons 105 6-10“ - 105 5-104 - 6105
3-105 mos

working travel of the 27 5 10 6 10

tool. mm

Number of carousel 12 2 8 6 6

positions. pieces

- 182 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 8.3. Semiautomatic unit for hermetically encapsulating semi-
conductor devices.

The semiautomatic unit for hermetically
sealing semiconductor devices using a
force of 10s Newtons is shown in Figure
8.3. The semiautomated unit is a 12
position carousel type. All of the
mechanisms, assemblies and parts are

' mounted on a machine tool bed. consisting

of cast bases 1 and 11 and two plates:

the upper S and the lower 14 plates.

The carousel 7 with the seats 8 in

which the assembly of the device package.

parts is accomplished prior to welding

as well as the welding itself are mounted

in the upper plate; the unloading

mechanism 6 for the automatic unloading

- of the welded devices from the carousel

nests; hydraulic press 10, which creates the requisite force and consists of a

hydraulic cylinder with a piston. two columns and a cross-piece. The housing

9 with the upper punch is connected to the cross-piece; there are grabs on the

piston to extract the nest with the lower punch. In case a device jams in the

upper punch. a mechanical device for pushing it out is provided, which is

coupled to the piston.

 

Figure 8.4. Kinematic schematic of the
semiautomatic hermetic
encapsulating unit.

All of the assemblies which are located on the upper plate of the bed are isolated
from the environment by protective cover 18. The interior volume of the protec-
tive cover is filled with an inert gas or clean dry air during the operation of
the semiautomatic unit. There are two windows each in the front and rear walls

of the protective cover in which locks 16 are inserted (for loading parts and
unloading finished products) as well as seals 19 for the arms of the operator.

A reducer 3. which is coupled to the electric motor by a V-belt drive A is

- 183 -

FOR OFFICJAI.USE¢DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

secured at the bottom of the top plate.
Oil tank 13 with a hydraulic pump and
electric motor 15 are mounted on the
lower plate.

Panels 2 and 12 with the control elements,
as well as the electrical and hydraulic
equipment are mounted on cast bases.
Cabinet 20 with the electrical equipment
is built into the rear portion of the
bed. To fill the lock chambers and
working volume of the protective cover
with the inert gas or cleaned dry air.
a hose with a nipple, which is screwed
into a through-hole in the upper plate.
There are similar nipples in the lock
chambers. A luminescent lamp 1? for
local illumination is placed at the top
in the protective cover.

 

The interaction of the actuating mechan-
Figure 8.5. Hydraulic schematic of the isms can be traced using the kinematic
semiautomatic hermetic schematic of Figure 8.6. The rotation
sealing unit. from electric motor 1 is transmitted
through V-belt drive 2 and the worm gear
pair 3 to camshaft 10. The helical groove 7 as well as the cams b and 9 which
are rigidly secured to the camshaft drive carousel 6. the unloading mechanism
5 and slide valve 8.

The hydraulic system (Figure 8.5) operates as follows. Industrial oil 20 (COST
1:07-56) is fed from vane pump 1 through the plate filter 2 into the four-way
valve 5 to working cylinder 6. The oil pressure is monitored by nanometer 3.
When the projection of slide valve 5 is covered with oil, the oil fills the
space beneath the piston under pressure and lifts the piston. The oil. which
during this time is above the piston, drains off into the tank. when the valve
is released. the oil executes the return trip and the piston returns to the
initial position. Check valve 6 with the unloading valve provides for a constant
specified pressure and protects the hydraulic system against overloads.

8.2. Equipment for Electrical Contact Resistance welding

Resistance welding, in contrast to cold welding. makes it possible to weld
finer parts, does not increase the dimensions of a package, and provides for

a higher productivity. For the purpose of eliminating long term heating of the
devices being sealed together, resistance welding is used which assures local
and brief heat liberation at the weld site.

Parameters of capacitor machines for contact welding of semiconductor device
packages are given below [53]:

- l84 -

FOR‘OFEKJAI.USE(NNLY
of Ca acitor Hachine

Technical Parameters Ink-£001 ﬁnk-10001 HTK-8002 HTK-S-3
Perimeter of the package 22-55 55-100 30-80 3-12
being welded (the welded

seam), mm

Output. welds/hr 1,200 1,200 900 1.200
Force on the electrodes. 1-103 - 2-103 7. 1'5'1031.’ 3°10: -
Newtons 5°1o3 1.23-10 1.23.10 3~10
Nominal welding current 60.000 100,000 80,000 32,000
(Amplitude value),

amperes

Maximum stored energy, 3.6 16.1 14.8 2.7

J 0 103

The formation of the welded seam in the case of electrical contact resistance
welding occurs by virtue of the heating of the parts being welded by the current
and their plastic deformation with the action of the applied compression force.
The electrical energy is stored in a capacitor bank where the capacitors are
charged from a DC power supply.

The quantity of energy stored is regulated by changing the working voltage and
capacitance of the bank. Changing the working voltage is accomplished by changing
the master voltage, while the capacitance of a bank is changed by means of switch-
ing three se tions of a capacitor bank in different combinations by means of

a step switch for the capacitance, P.t.

The battery is discharged through the primary winding of the welding transformer
at the moment the discharge circuit is closed by one of the discharge contactors.
which operate in sequence, changing the direction of current in the transformer

windings in each cycle for the purpose of preventing the magnetization of the
transformer.

The discharge current pulse. and consequently. the welding current pulse are
governed by the parameters of the electrical power section: the working voltage,
the capacitance of the bank of capacitors, and the transformation ratio of the
welding transformer.

An overall view of a capacitive welding machine is shown in Figure 8.6.

The major assemblies of the machine are: the frame 2 with the bracket 8. welding
attachment 11, the pressure drive 10. the pneumatic system 9. protective enclosure
5, gas system b with the drier 3. welding transformer l with the switch for the
taps 7 as well as choke 6 and the electrical equipment. The machine complement
includes a power supply and control station (not shown in the figure).

In structural terms. the frame takes the form of a welded metal chassis. on the
upper plate of which the bracket and protective enclosure are mounted. The

pressure drive is installed on the bracket; the welding attachment is mounted
inside the protective enclosure. Inside the frame housing are located various

- 185 -

INJI OFFICIAL USIICMULV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 8.6. General view of the capacitive welding machine.

devices and machine systems; access to the adjustable elements of which is accom-
plished through two doors in the rear wall of the housing. The welding attach-
ment provides for moving the upper electrode during welding and maintaining the
working surfaces of the electrodes parallel. something which is important in
obtaining a high quality seam. The welding attachment housing is fastened to

the base of the protective enclosure.

A slide. with the upper electrode mounted in it. which is connected through the
upper current conductor and flexible buses to the secondary winding of the welding
transformer. travels inside the framework on ball bearings. The lower current
conductor is brought in through a hole in the base of the chassis. where this con-
ductor connects the lower electrode to the secondary winding of the welding trans-
former.

The force is transmitted from the pressure drive to the slide through a set of disk
springs. placed between the slide and a U-shape bracket. which when engaged with
the slide goes into the tailpiece of the pressure drive.

The pressure drive (Figure 8.7), which is intended for producing the force on the
electrodes during welding. consists of pneumatic cylinder 7, piston 6 with the rod
5. spring 6, adjusting nut 3. push rod 1 and the pressure indicator 2. The force

on the electrodes is produced as a result of the spring compression and the trans-
mission of this force through the push rod to the slide of the welding attachment
with the upper electrode secured to it. The structural design of the pressure drive
provides for a stable specified force on the electrodes with considerable fluctuat-
ions in the pressure in the compressed air mains and in the pneumatic cylinder.

- 186 -

F0! 0FF"JM1.US£‘DNLY
The air rate of flow through the system is regulated by means of valves, which in
turn make it possible to regulate the rate of travel of the pistons of the pneumatic
cylinders.

The constancy of the gas medium in the welding region is assured by the gas system
and the protective enclosure. The quantity fed into the protective enclosure is
monitored by a direct reading flow meter. The admission of gas into the lock cham-

her and its extraction from the protective enclosure and the chamber are accompli-
shed by means of vacuum valves.

The welding transformer is mounted in the central portion of the machine frame
housing. The primary winding of the transformer is made from two cylindrical
type coils, while the secondary is made from two copper foil packets connected in
parallel. A choke is used to shape the leading edge of the welding pulse. where
the choke winding is inserted in series with the primary winding of the welding
transformer. The core of the choke has a variable air gap.

 
   
     

The electrical equipment of the machine

consists of the electrical power section
and the control circuits. The power sec-
tion stores the energy from the mains in

   

\\‘

v
I‘l

       
     

  
  

 

¢.:= the bank of capacitors and feeds it to
gtgg the weld site. The control circuits pro-
. "3' vide for the sequence and duration of
.j ‘E }= actuation of the power section components
JJI4§ :: and the other elements of the machine
§d§z= ‘ during cyclical operation.
‘

The machine has a broad control range for
the amplitude and width of the welding
pulse as well as the electrode force.
because of which, one can weld devices
with diameters of from 3 to 12 mm. The
welding pulse is adjusted in seven capa-
citance steps of the bank of capacitors
with the voltage varying from 150 to 400
volts. using eight steps for switching
the welding transformer. The force on
the elfctrodcs is adjusted in a range of
3-10 -3-1o3s.

m

       
 

?:ZZZBV

     
   

‘02
I
III/I’ll,
grvv

\n*,/a
,1

. ill!
' .mmhu a‘

8.3. Equipment for Hermetic Encapsulation
with Plastics

Encapsulation using plastics finds wide
Figure 8.7. Structural design of the scale applications for devices used in
pressure drive. consumer electronics equipment. Various
plastic materials are employed: epoxy
resins with various hardeners and synthe-
tic elastomers. The most widespread methods of hermetic encapsulation are the

techniques of free potting of the forms and casting at low pressure - transfer
forming.

- 187 -

INJI‘OIFICJAl.lﬂ§EICHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

The UGP-SO installation (Figure 8.8) for hermetic sealing of semiconductor de-
vices with plastic takes the form of a column type hydraulic press with the
compression plate located at the bottom and the casting cylinder a placed at the
top. Control panel 1. cleaner 2. the press 3 and table 6 with the control unit

5 located on it are mounted on the welded frame. The frame is enclosed with
sheathing. and the hydraulic equipment is located inside the frame. The servicing
of the installation is accomplished from the instrument side of the panel on

which the control buttons are brought out.

 

Figure 8.8. The installation for plastic Figure 8.9. Functional schematic sun
encapsulation. ing the hermetic encapsu-

lation process.

The operation of the unit is based on the principle of batch encapsulation in r
stationary compression mold. The sequence for the execution of the hermetic
encapSulation operations is shown in Figure 8.9. A section of the strip carrier

2 is loaded into open compression mold l with the chips bonded to the strip
(Figure 8.9a). when the pump is turned on. there is at first an accelerated
closing of the compression mold, and then a slow closing. The maximum compression
force in the USP-50 installation is 0.5 MN. A tablet of the compression molding
material a is loaded into casting chamber 3 of the compression mold (Figure 8.9b),
then the lowering is speeded up. and thereafter the working stroke of rod 5 of

the cylinder (Figure 8.9c). The speed of the working stroke is adjusted by means
of the feed mechanism. while the force is adjusted by means of the stop valves
using the manometers until the requisite pressure is reached in the upper and
lower cavities of the cylinder. During the working travel of the rod. the
material is injected at high pressure (Figure 8.9d). To improve the fluidity,

the tablet of compression molding material is heated beforehand by high frequency
currents. To obtain a high density in the package, it is exposed to the nominal

- 188 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(the exposure tine depends on the Compression
a time delay relay . Then the rod 5 is lift—

nlding material and is specified by

d. the compression mold is released. the hermetically sealed devices 6 are

emoved and the compression mold is cleaned (Figure 8.9f). The installation is
Installations with compression forces of 1.0. l.5 MN and

'cady for a new cycle.
tle presses. which provide for an increase in

wre. as well as ao-called shut
>utput by combining the main and auxiliary process times.

rvssurc for some time (Figure 8.9a)

3.A. Equipment for hermetic Sealing by Means of Soldering

kages are hermetically sealed in a batch

by means of soldering using a heated inert gas (Figure 8.10).
ess in the unit both with flux and without it

d in a ten place cassette holder with the assembled
ing carriage of the installation.

lished automatically upon instructions
ffective zone of a

Flat metal-glass and
sealing installation
One can run the soldering proc
[541. The devices being seale

ldering cycle is accomp
introduced into the e
rate heater for each package. something

the soldering conditions. as well as the
A provision is made

from the progra-aer.
jet of heated inert gas;
which provides

possibility of more precisel
for an individual direct reading flow meter to regulate

for each heater. The heat flow
of the package base where the sen

than the soldering temperature.

cooling. the cap of the device is clamped with
against

Excessive fore

weak force promotes
cap and the appearance of defective

seals. Following soldering. the her-
metically sealed packages are flushed
with a cold inert gas, which promotes

the rate of crystallization and prevents
the infiltration of solder inside the
integrated circuit package. Upon com-
pletion of the cooling. the carriage

with the cassette holder is automatically

returned to the initial position.

During the entire
a special device and pressed

the base with a specified force.
e leads to splashes, and

the shifting of the

8.5. Equipment for Checking t
Seal of .

package 0
1C is one of the most important para-

meters which influence their operability

and reliability. The criteria for a
hermetic seal differ depending on the
area of application of a semiconductor

Installation for batch her- device and 1C, as well as the interior

netic sealing by means of
soldering.

 

Figure 8.10.

- 189 -

EYMICNWNCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY

volume of the gackage: thus, for consumer electronics devices. the leakage should
not exceed 10' 1 - um/sec, and for especially reliable devices. the permissible
leaks do not exceed 10'8 l ' um/sec. This means that over a period of 10 years,
the package will not admit more than 1 cm3 of air with a pressure difference of

1 atmosphere.

Several techniques exist for checking the hermetic seal of devices:

a) Bubble methods, based on the observation of gas bubbles exiting a device
placed in a liquid. These include the following:

--Fluid method, in which the check of the hermetic seal is accomplished by visual
observation of air bubbles exiting the device package where the device is
placed in silicon oil heated up to a temperature of 200' C;

--The vacuum-liquid method, which is based on observing gas bubbles exiting a
device placed in a liquid, over which a rarefaction is created.

The vacuum-liquid technicue has a poor sensitivity of 10'2 l ' um/sec (the liguid
method has a sensitivity of 10 1 ° um/sec), but it can be increased up to 10'
to 10" 1 ° um/sec, by varying the composition of the liquid, the pressure,

the temperature and the depth of immersion of the device.

b) The mass spectrometry method, which is based on reading the amount of helium
exiting through leaks exisigng in the device package. This is the most widespread
and sensitive method: 10' 1 ° um/sec.

c) The halide technique, which is based on reading the concentration of halogens
in the space surrounding the sensor (the sensitivity runs down to 10'6 l ' um/secl.

d) The radioactive method, which is based on reading the gamma radiation of a
radioactive gas which penetrates inside the package during preliminary pressuriza-
tion of the product being tested (a sensitivity of down to 10'9 l - um/sec).

e) Indirect methods of testing for s hermetic seal, which are based on the

change in the electrical parameters of the product being tested by virtue of the
intrusion of a liquid inside the package (pressurization of the devices in water
or acetone, exposure for several days in a heat and moisture chamber at a tempera-
ture of 60 1'5° c and a relative humidity of 95 to 981).

The use of a particular hermetic seal testing technique is determined based on
the specific structural design and production process features of the products

being tested so as to assure a reliable estimate of product quality. For example,
the utilization of the mass spectrometry method does not preclude the necessity

of checking for the presence of medium and large leaks, since where they are
present, the helium which was introduced into the device beforehand during hermetic
sealing or pressurization can escape prior to its testing. A significant compli-
cating factor when testing with mass spectrometry can also be the presence of

the flow of helium desorbed by the product package. In certain cases (polymer and
ceramic packages), the desorption is so great that it is commensurate with a leak
in the package. Mass spectrometry testing does not yield an objective estimate

in this case.

- 190 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6 I: 3

5 To the ‘m-z

"3“:y'fgffy mechanical
pump.

Figure 8.11. Basic schematic of the automatic unit for checking

a hermetic seal.

thod of testing products. in which polymer

The utilization of the vacuum-liquid me
as of seal because of the dissolution of

materials are present, can lead to a lo
the compound.

When selecting a method. it is also necessary to take into account technical and
economic indicators, which govern the cost. production process suitability and

equipment productivity for hermetic seal testing.

The most widely used equipment is based on the utilisation of bubble (vacuum-

liquid) and mass spectrometry methods.

A schematic is shown in Figure 8.11 which illustrates the operational principle
for hermetic sealing and the interaction of its

of an automatic unit for testing
mechanisms. The automatic unit consists of a vacuum system and the standard PTI—G
11 and obtaining the

helium leak detector.
requisite vacuum, cases 1 with the devices being tested are loaded into magazine

21. from which they roll down to feed mechanism 20 via the troughs. “hen the

slide of the feed mechanism goes to the extreme rear position, the case which
is located on its upp front of the slide. "hen

the slide moves forward. it pushes the case, which is
position, and takes it place.

- 191 -

ItHl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬁﬂ£(nﬁLY
INJR OITWCJAL.USEileY

Hechanism 22, which is controlled by cam 19, presses the case against the seal 18.
Cam 16 opens valve 7. and the preliminary vacuum exhaustion of the casing is
accomplished. Then valve 7 is closed and valve 8 is opened, which is driven by
cam 15. The high vacuum exhaustion of the case takes place. The further rotation
of the distribution shaft 17 leads to the closing of valve 8 and the opening of
valve 9 by means of can 14, where valve 9 connects the vacuum volume of the auto-
mated unit, which is located to the right of valve 9, to the vacuum system of

the leak detector. All the other valves of the automatic unit are closed at this
time. In the case of a seal failure of the device being tested, the helium partial
pressure increases in the mass spectrometer analyzer of the leak detector and a
signal appears which is amplified by an electrical circuit in the automated unit
and causes the actuation of relay 5, which plays the part of an electromagnet,

and lock 4 and barrier 3 are opened in this case.

In order that the relay does not actuate before the case with the device which
caused the increase in the mass spectrometer current is dumped, there is a time
delay relay in the electrical circuitry which delays the signal to relay 5 by

a few seconds, i.e., by the amount of time from the appearance of the leak detec-
tor signal to the contacting of the case. The case with the unsealed device is
rolled through the open barrier 3 into the collection holder 2 for rejected
devices. If the device is hermetically sealed, lock 4 remains closed and the
case rolls via barrier 3 into collection holder 6 for good devices. Valve 10,
which is actuated by cam 13, opens immediately after valve 9 closes, and remains
open until valve 8 opens.

Valve 10 serves for additional pumping out of the vacuum system of the automatic
unit. located to the left of valve 9, as well as the vacuum system of the leak
detector. In the case a large quantity of helium from a heavily leaking device
gets into the vacuum portion of the automatic unit and leak detector, this
exhaust line helps to speed up the preparation of the automatic unit for the
execution of the next testing cycle. If it turns out that such a quantity of
helium has gotten into the leak detector that it cannot removed over one prepara-
tion cycle, the large leak blocking circuitry actuates and motor 12 of the auto-
matic unit is cut off. The motor is turned on again only after the system is
completely ready.

The PTI-6 standard mass spectrometric helium leak detector operates in the follow-
ing manner. The molecules of helium which enter the vacuum system of the mass
spectrometric analyzer along with the molecules of other gases and vapors are
ionized by electrons, emitted by an incandescent cathode. The ion beam, which is
subjected to an accelerating voltage, exits through the slot of a diaphragm stop
into the mass spectrometer chamber, where the ions are segregated with respect

to mass in a homogeneous magnetic field. By choosing the accelerating voltage,
the mass spectrometer is set up in such a fashion that only helium ions impinge

on the ion collector (receiver). which is positioned in the chamber at an angle

of 120' to the source.

Following amplification, the ion current is registered by a voltmeter on a
remote control panel. A change in the voltmeter readings is evidence of the

presence of a leak and of its size. An electronic autorecording potentiometer or
other instrument can be connected to the control console.

- 192 -

FOI:0FFKJAI.USE(HQLY
CHAPTER NINE EQUIPMENT FOR TESTING THE ELECTRICAL PARAMETERS 0F SEMICONDUCTOR
DEVICES

 

The electrical parameters of semiconductor devices are measured in practically
all stages of their manufacture, beginning with the processes for producing the
structures right up to reliability tests. The major task of testing parameters
in the initial manufacturing stages is not to pass on to subsequent production
process operations those devices whose parameters are worse than the values
established beforehand. The parameters of semiconductor devices are measured

at the conclusion of a production process primarily for the purpose of distribu:-
ing them in groups in accordance with the limiting values of the parameters esta-
blished for each group by the technical specifications. The third major function
of parameter testing of semiconductor devices is the checking of the capability
of the devices of maintaining their properties when exposed to various media:
temperature. humidity, pressure, vibration, shock, etc. In this case. the
electrical parameters serve as the criterion of immunity of the semiconductor
devices when exposed to the perturbations enumerated above.

Depending on the level of mechanization and automation of the major and auxiliary
operations. the quality control and measurement equipment can be broken down

into manual, semiautomatic and automated. Included in the manual group is equip-
ment for which the loading and unloading operations of the products belng meas-
ured, as well as the reading of the measurement results. are accomplished by an
operator. In automated testing and metering equipment. the loading, contacting.
oriented unloading and sorting of the measured products in accordance with the
measured parameters are realized automatically. Semiautomatic equipment occupies
an intermediate position. In it, only the loading of the products being measured
is accomplished manually by an operator. while the remaining operations are
realized automatically.

In terms-of the information obtained from quality control and measurement equip-
ment, 10 is broken down into equipment for parameter measurement. which makes it
possible to measure the true value of parameters. and classification equipment,
which sorts the devices being measured into groups depending on the aggregate of
measured parameters. For classification equipment. the sequence for parameter
measurement, the comparison of the measurement results with the specified refer-
ence value and the logic processing of the measurement results of all of the
parameters for the purpose of determining the group are all carried out automatic-
ally. The equipment breakdown given here into measurement and classification
equipment is conditional to a considerable extent, since at times the same devic
can perform both measurement and classification tests.

9.1. Measurement Equipment

Measurement equipment is used when tests are made by the quality control depart-
ment services as well as during various tests. in laboratories during developmen-
tal work. in trial production when placing new devices in production, during
input quality control by consumers of the devices, etc. As a rule. equipment of
this type is designed for testing one or more parameters of the same type and

has a comparatively simple design. Meter type measurement instruments are most

- 193 -

ltll(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.UG£‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

frequently used as the indicators in it. Digital meters for semiconductor device
parameters have started to become more widespread of late.

A significant quantity of specialized parameter meters intended for measuring one
or more parameters of a certain type of semiconductor devices is in operation at
enterprises fabricating semiconductor devices. As a rule, the measurement con-
ditions are established automatically after the product being measured is connect-
ed. the range of measured values is small, the switching from one parameter to
another is accomplished manually and the measured value is read out visually from
the scale of a meter or a digital display. Such parameter meters are used in

the case of a small production volume, during trial production or in other cases
where the application of complex automated equipment is absent or ineffective.

Moreover, there are universal meters, which are distinguished by large ranges of
operating mode settings and measurable values. This equipment is used in research
laboratories for the incoming testing of semiconductor devices and for the
measurement of their parameters when repairing various radioelectronic systems.
Several types of such all purpose parameter meters are being produced by domestic
industry.

araauoa
:gglcrao

Meter

 

Figure 9.1. Block diagram of the L2-23 meter for semiconductor
device parameters.

Key: 1. Voltage converter;
2. Circuits for measuring diode parameters;
3. Internal power supply;
0. RC oscillator;
S. Circuits for measuring transistor parameters;
6. Millivoltmeter amplifier;
7. External power supply.

The L2-23 parameter meter for semiconductor devices is intended for measuring
the major parameters of p-n-p and n-p-n transistors as well as semiconductor
diodes.

- 19b -

FOR OFFHJA1.USE(HHLY
A block diagram of the meter is shown in Figure 9.1. The meter is powered from
an internal power supply consisting of two "373" batteries: moreover, the meter
can also operate from an external power source. The high voltage needed for the
measurement of the inverse current of semiconductor diodes is obtained by means
of converting the DC voltage from the internal source to an AC voltage and subse-
quently rectifying it. The 760 Hz alternating current signal needed to measure
h215 and hz b is generating by an RC oscillator. The amplifier of the millivolt-
meter ampli¥ies the AC signal which carries information on the parameter being
measured up to a level sufficient for the deflection of the meter needle. The
parameter measurement circuits for semiconductor diodes and transistors provide
for the connection of the devices being measured and the switching of the measure-
ment resistors and power supplies. We shall analyze the measurement of one of
the most important parameters of transistors: the common base current gain. “21b:
which is accomplished using the circuit depicted in Figure 9.2. The parameter
“21b is defined as the ratio of the change in the output current of the transistor
to the change in the input current where the output circuit is short circuited
for the alternating current. The short circuit mode is realised by inserting a
capacitor Cg in the collector circuit of the transistor. The alternating current
input signal is generated by the RC oscillator, which is the current generator;
this is assured through the insertion of resistor R2. which considerably exceeds
the input impedance of the transistor. In this case, the alternating current of
the emitter-base junction of the transistor being measured is governed by the
voltage U en and the resistance of R2. and in the case of constant values of use“
and R2. the input current will be the same for all of the transistors being
measured. Thus. the measurement of thb reduces to the measurement of the tran-

sistor output current. Since the value of hz b is close to unity, the ratio of
the base current to the emitter current

is usually measured to improve the
measurement accuracy:

11-55.. _1 _ _.
.. 4. I f I I’lnsl- (9.1)

The value of the input current ie is
measured as the voltage drop across
the calibrated precision resistor R4,
while the base current is measured
as the voltage drop across resistor

 

Figure 9.2. Circuit for measuring the R5. which should also be a precision
current gain. h21bt in a resistor. Resistors R and R2 should
common base configuration. either be equal or dif er from each

other by a ratio specified beforehand.

Key: 1. Measure; .
2. Calibrate; The 8.10 13 thus. U R
6 s

3' "generator" l—l":usl 3-17.31. (9.2)

Since uca . 84 and R5 are constant quantities. the scale of the meter measuring
Uh is gra uated directly in the values of “21b-

- 195 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFRJAI.US£(NVLV

One can test the following parameters by means of the L2-18 digital low power
transistor parameter meter: the quantity l/(B.t + 1) (3st is the static gain);
the collector voltage “CEO 11“, at which the onset of the change in the phase of
the base current begins; the voltage between the collector and the emitter in the
saturation mode "CE eat; the voltage between the base and the emitter in the
saturation mode "BE eat; the inverse collector current Icgo; the inverse emitter
current 1330; and the floating emitter potential 033 f1.

- .. — - — — - — I’m”... converter-1 pave: Supply

I .
lad—[W l .
'3 .i

       
   

Int .

Figure 9.3. Block diagram of the L2-l8 digital meter for low power
transistor parameters.

Key: 1. Pulse current driver;
2. 2 to 200 volt supply;
3. 0.1 to 20 IA current regulator;
6. Master oscillator;
5. Switcher;
6. Pulse amplifier;
7. Peak detector;
8. Digital voltmeter;
9. Comparator;
10. Modulator;
11. Low frequency amplifier;
12. Compensating voltage unit;
13. “can value detector;
16. Automatic control unit;
15. Display unit.

- 196 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The procedures for measuring some of these parameters will be treated below.

The meter consists of three units: the converter, a digital voltmeter and a
power supply (Figure 9.3).

The converter and the automatic range selector provide for feeding a DC voltage

to the digital voltmeter input in a range of 0.1 to 1 volt, regardless of the
parameter being measured and its value. The conversion factors for each parameter
and the units of measurement are indicated on the front panel of the meter.

The transistors being tested are connected to the measurement circuits through
a switcher. Various connections are made in this case, depending on the para-
meter being measured.

The Heasurement of 1/(3st + 1). The base of the transistor being tested is
connected through the measurement resistance to the canon bus. A voltage of

2 to 200 volts is fed to the collector from the supply. The emitter is connected
to the output of the pulse current driver, which converts the voltage pulses of
the master oscillator (a push-pull multivibrator) to current pulses with an
amplitude variable in a range of 1 to 200 mA. Voltage pulses are picked off of
the measurement resistor, the amplitude of which are directly proportional to

the quantity l/(B t + 1). These pulses are amplified by a two stage pulse ampli-
fier and converted to a Dc voltage by the peak detector. The output voltage of
the peak detector is fed to the input of the digital voltmeter.

The Measurement of U 11“. The transistor being tested is connected just as for
the measurement of l 3,: + l). The output voltage of the peak detector is not
measured; only its polarity is analyzed. which is indicated on a light display
panel in the form of a > sign when the phase changes and a < sign in the
absence of a phase change. The measurement is performed as follows: the voltage
of the 2 to 200 volt source is changed until the sign < changes to the sign > ;
at this moment, the voltage at the collector of the tested transistor is measured
with an external voltmeter, which yields the quantity "CEO 11..

Current Measurement. The transistor is connected in the appropriate measurement
configuration. The current being measured is converted to a voltage proportional
to it, which is first fed to a modulator. and then to a low frequency amplifier,
an average value detector, and finally, to a digital voltmeter.

The digital voltmeter is an automatic compensator with discrete equalization. It
consists of the following assemblies: a comparator, a compensating voltage gene -
ator. an automatic control unit and a display block.

A voltage proportional to the parameter being measured is fed to one of the two
inputs of the comparator in the digital voltmeter. The compensating voltage is
fed to the other input, which is changed discretely in accordance with a program
governed by the operation of the automatic control unit. There is a programmer
in this unit which is triggered by a pulse from the automatic range selector
following the completion of the selection. The program actuates the flip-flops

- 197 -

FIIICINWCJAI.USB(MVLY
FOI!0FFKJA1.1EHE(NTLY

at a storage register in a definite sequence. which in turn switch on the requi-
site compensating voltage. The flip-flops remain turned on if no pulse arrives
from the output of the comparator. or turn off. if such a pulse arrives.

The presence of a pulse at the output of the comparator means that the compensat-
ing voltage is greater than the voltage at the input. Upon the completion of

the measurement cycle. a tetradecimal code (a. 2. 2, l) is registered in the
flip-flops of the register memory. where this code corresponds to the state of
equality of the compensating and measured voltages, i.e., the digital equivalent
of the parameter being measured. The tetradecimal code is fed to the input of
the display unit. where it is converted to a decimal code. The image of the
decimal numbers is produced by means of IN-l neon indicators.

In"!

(2)

    

Figure 9.4. Block diagram of the PNKhT-l instrument [transistor
characteristic curve family tracer].

Key: 1. External supply;
2. Horizontal deflection X amplifier;
3. Step function generator;
6. Volts/step;
S. mA/step;
6. Collector supply;
7. Indicator (CRT);
8. Power supply;
9. Vertical sweep Y amplifier.

The comparator takes the form of a DC voltage amplifier with periodic drift
correction. The amplifier consists of two vacuum-tube and six transistor stages.

The compensating voltage unit consists of a Y configuration potentiometer, de-
signed for a tetradecimal code with weights of b. 2, 2 and l, and a group of
relays, the contacts of which switch the potentiometer resistance. The relay
coils are controlled by signals from the flip-flops of the memory register of
the automatic control unit.

- 198 -

FOR(MﬂﬂCh\leﬂEONLY
A provision is made for the capability of connecting a recorder (printer) to the
meter; a voltage drop with an amplitude of 5 volts is used to trigger it. The
information for the recording is fed out in the a, 2. 2. l tetradecimal code.

Transistors can be rejection sorted with respect to one of the parameters by the
meter. The meter takes the form of a desk top type instrument.

Important information on the electrical properties and quality of semiconductor
devices is contained in their volt-ampere characteristics. A whole series of
instruments exists for the visual observation of the volt-ampere characteristics
of semiconductor devices. A block diagram of the PNKhT-l instrument for observing
transistor characteristics is shown in Figure 9.6. while an external view of this
instrument is shown in Figure 9.5. The major assemblies of the PNKhT-l instrument
are:

--The collector power supply;
--The step function generator;
--The vertical sweep amplifier (the Y amplifier);

--The horizontal sweep amplifier (the X amplifier);
--The indicator;

--The power supply.

‘ The PNKhT-l instrument makes it
possible to observe both the families
of transistor characteristics as
well as the volt-ampere characteris-
tics of p—n junctions. To obtain
a family of transistor characteris—
tics on the cathode ray tube screen.
a pulsating voltage is fed to the
collector which is obtained by
rectifying a sine wave and which
serves for the sweep. A step func-
tion changing voltage is fed to the
input of the transistor being tested,
where this voltage is used as the
argument signal. The voltage across
the junctions of the transistor being
Figure 9.5. The PNKhT-l scope for observ- studied or the voltages proportio :1
ing transistor characteristics. to the currents through these junc—
tions (depending on which character—
istics of a transistor must be ob—
served) are fed to the X and Y amplifier inputs, and following amplification. are
fed to the deflection plates of the CRT. By way of example, we shall consider the
circuit configuration for a test transistor to observe the family of output
characteristics of the type IC - f(U ) for different values of the base currents
in a common emitter circuit (Figure S6)

 

- 199 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ETHICIHHCJAI.USECHNLV

In this case, a step voltage is fed to
the base of the transistor, while a half-
wave of the sinusoidal voltage is fed to
the collector. The signal picked off of
resistor R20 which is proportional to

the collector current. is fed to the ver-
tical sweep amplifier. while the signal
from the collector-emitter junction if
fed to the horizontal sweep amplifier.
The pulsing and step voltages are syn-
chronised so that during one half-wave,

the current in the base of the transis-
Pigure 9.6. Common emitter circuit con- tor remains constant and one character-

 

figuration for plotting istic is traced during this time. During
characteristics of the the time of the next half-wave of the
type Ic - f(Vc). collector voltage and the next step of

the base current, yet another character-
istic is traced on the indicator screen. During the action of the next half-wave

of the collector voltage and the next base current step, the following character-
istic is traced on the indicator screen: Ic - f(Uc), etc.

The 13L061 cathode ray tube is used as the indicator; a transparent scale with
a grid is placed in front of its screen. Structurally, the PNKhT-l instrument
is made in the form of a table top unit. A sloped panel with the contacts for
the connection of the semiconductor devices to be studied is fastened to the
lower portion of the front panel of the unit.

9.2. Classification Equipment

A typical representative of classification equipment is the all-purpose low power
transistor classifier, the KT-2 (Figure 9.7a). This is a semiautomated classi-
fier with a carousel transistor transporter S. which is structurally separated
from the support frames 1 with the measurement and operating control units. and
the support frame 2 for the logic and computer units. The classifier has pro-
gramming panels 3, test probes a and receiving hoppers 6. Universality is
achieved through the capability of changing the classification program, test modes
and limiting values in an operationally timely manner; the modular structural
design makes it possible to rapidly change the composition of the parameters
being tested by changing the instrumentation units.

A block diagram of the classifier is shown in Figure 9.7b. The transistors being
tested. with the prestraightened leads_are loaded by the operator in an oriented
manner in the connecting heads 3. The latter are mounted on the carousel 10

and execute a start stop motion together with it, because of which each connecting
head sequentially passes by all of the measurement posts. A measurement post
consists of the test probe 2 as well as the measurement and test condition setting
units 9.

The rest probes are installed above the carousel. The transistor pins are con-
nected directly to their contacts, which are located in the bottom end face

-200-

INJI‘OFIWCIAl.lEﬂE(MULY
Jaquuaa
3 Load

a (b)

    

 

Figure 9.7. The KT-2 all-purpose classifier
for low power transistors.

a. External view;
b. Structural schematic.

during the time the carousel is stopped. The
input circuits and the measurement unit devices
are placed inside the test probes, which should
be brought close to the test object to assure
noise immunity and reduce the influence of
parasitic leakage and reactances.

The values of a particular parameter of the
transistor being tested are compared in each
measurement block with its limiting value which
is established beforehand. The comparison re-
sults are transmitted in the form of a binary
code (1 is a value measured greater than the

limit; 0 is a value measured less than the limit) for storage to one of the shift
registers 6 of the logic and computing unit (SLU) 8. The storage is needed be-
cause the rejection sorting is based on the measurement results for all of the

parameters .

Corresponding to each measurement post is its own shift register. In step with
the travel of the tested transistor from one to measurement post to another, the

- 201 -

FOI.0FF1(]AI.USE¢MVLY
FORiOFFﬂﬂAl.USEIDNLY

data on it is accumulated in the registers and is moved simultaneously in them
from the input to the output. The capacity of the registers is not the same;

it is numerically equal to the number of the measurement post to which the regis-
ter belongs (the count starts with the unloading post, to which the number 0 is
assigned). Such a configuration of the shift registers provides for the synchron-
ous output of all data on the transistor being tested to the data processing unit
7 at the moment the transistor arrives at the unloading post. The shift registers
are designed around ferrite-transistor memory cells. The data processing block,
in accordance with the program atered in it and based on the information arriving
at it. generates the instruction for the sorting rejection mechanism 6, which
routes the transistor to receiving hopper 5.

The classification program is composed on the basis of the technical specifications
and is entered on two program cards in the form of holes punched through at the
requisite points. The cards are placed on the program panels of the SL0. and
special electrical contacts are inserted in the receptacles for these panels,
which match the holes in the cards.

The operation of all of the measurement blocks is synchronized through the SL0
from the contacts which are closed by cams 1. which rotate synchronously with the
carousel.

SBi-l electromechanical counters are mounted in the classifier. which count the
number of transistors in each group, the overall number of transistors which have
been sorted, and the number of transistors having a negative test result at any
of the six measurement posts.

In the majority of measurement units in the classifier, the compensation measure--
ment method is employed, because of which, stringent requirements are not placed
on the stability of the gain and the linearity of the amplifiers.

Voltage and current regulators, regulated pulse current generators as well as low
and high frequency generators are used as the test condition setting units in

the classifier. A provision is made in the test condition setting blocks for

the capability of adjusting the output voltages and currents.

The device for transporting the transistors, a kinematic schematic of which is
shown in Figure 9.8, operates as follows. All of the mechanisms are driven by
the distribution shaft 26. Rotation is coupled to the distribution shaft from
electric motor 1 through V-belt drive 62 and a worm gear reducer (worm 39 and
worm gear wheel 23). A number of auxiliary elements are installed in the trans-
mission from the electric motor to the distribution shaft: safety clutch b3,
free-wheeling clutch 41, which permits only one-way rotation of the drive, and
electromagnetic break no, which is actuated when the electric motor is turned on.
End cam 20, the Geneva mechanism carrier 21, the conical gear of reducer 37 and

came 38.

During the rotation of end can 20, once every revolution of it the rack 11 is
raised and lowered, which rotates two shaft-gears 10 (one directly, and the other

- 202 -

FOR¢NHHC1AL.USE10NLY
\i 4.
' "_-Il-IVJ" III I

«/
Izzme~4-s:z--rr'!‘lfk. H

#2“

I..|. -..-r_- — I u

 

Figure 9.8. Kinematic schematic of the KT-Z all-purpose classifier.

through rock 9). Bccentrics 6 are mounted on the shaft-gears. which when rotating,
raise and lower disk 7. when the disk is lowered, levers 4 take a position such
that the leads of the transistors being tested, which are installed in the con-
necting heads 12. are pressed against the contacts of test probes 3. When disk

7 of lever b is raised, in rotating, the leads of the transistors are disconnected
from the contacts of the test probes.

The levers 6 are installed on the carousel S. which executes a start-stop rotating
motion. The caroustl rotates at that point in time when disk 7 is lifted. The
start-stop notion of the carousel is realized by means of a Geneva mechanism,

the carrier 21 of which rotates along with the distribution shaft 26 and rotates
the Maltese cross 22. The backlash free gear 8, which is engaged to the carousel
gear. is sounted on the same shaft as the cross.

The transistors are off loaded and sorted into groups at a special post. When
lever A arrives at this post and its arm with the connecting head is lifted up-
ward, the package of the transistor being tested enters into the fork of unloading
lever lb. By this point in tine. the cup on lever 31 is set under tray 13. Lever
1a is driven by shaft 25 through gears 19 and 18. cam 17, lever 16 and pull rod
is. Hith the rotation of lever 16, the transistor is removed from the connecting
head and by virtue of the weight of the transistor itself, falls through tray 13
into the cup on lever 31. After this, levers 31 and 32, which are coupled through
gears 29 and 28. rake-rod 27 and cam 27 to shaft 25, begin to move and run up to

- 203 -

IKIICIﬂﬂ<1A1.lEﬂE(HﬂLY
IN)! (HHHCJAJ.IH§E(NNLV

the turned on electromagnet 30; the lever 32 opens the bottom of the cup and the
transistor falls into one of the hoppers 33.

The number of electromagnet and hoppers corresponds to the number of classifica-
tion groups. The electromagnets are actuated by signals from the logic computer
unit.

Shaft 25 is driven by distribution shaft 26 through reduction gear 37, articulated
couplings 36, shaft 35 and reducer 36. Hith the rotation of distribution shaft
25, cams 38 periodically turn microswitches on and off, because of which electric-
al signals are generated which are used via the logic computer unit for the
synchronization of the operation of all of the classifier devices. An emergency
shutdown lever 22 is provided in the design of the semiautomatic unit.

Main Technical Specifications of the KT-Z Classifier

Output, pieces per hour 1.200
Number of classification groups 16
Number of limiting values for the parameters

being tested 29
Frequency of the signal for the measurement

of high frequency parameters. KB: 20
Power consumption, K" 3.5

While the KT-Z classifier contains the loading and unloading mechanism for the
transistors being measured and a measurement section as indispensable parts, the
operation of classifying the semiconductor devices into groups can be realized

if any of the general purpose or specialized meters are used in conjunction with

a separate sorter. intended for the loading, contacting and sorting of semiconduc-
tor device into groups.

By way of example, we shall consider the combined operation of the EH-630 para-
meter measurement instrument and the 08-5002 sorter. The Eﬂ-630 unit is designed
for testing the static parameters of digital integrated circuits having up to

24 pins based on the "reject - good" principle. The measurement of a sequence of
parameters (tests) is accomplished automatically in accordance with a specified
program. The programming is realised by a combination of special pins, inserted
in the appropriate jacks of the programming matrix. The unit can run either an
entire sequence of tests (up to 78 tests) or terminate the measurements following
the first rejection. The parameter measurement process is based on the automatic
comparison of measured and reference analog signals. A block diagram of the
EH-630 unit is shown in Figure 9.9. He shall analyze the function of its major
assemblies.

The instrument control circuitry 1 provides for the following: the generation of
a pulse train at a frequency of 100 Hz for the counter and the test number indi-

cating circuit 2; control of the 80 bit register for program indication and indi-
cating the result of each test 5; triggering the modulator of the test circuit

- 204 -

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
Figure 9.9. Block diagram of the EH-630
tester for checking the

parameters of integrated
circuits

A. To the integrated circuit
leads;

B. Test;

c. Reject;

D. Start test;

8. End test.

Key:

are located in block 13, to the pins of the 10 being tested

the program.
being measured

the test data processing circuitry 3. which in turn generates the "reject"
Power supply 18 it intended

 

Figure 9.10. Kine-atic schematic of
the US~5002 sorter.

10 in each test; generating the "end of
rest" signal, which is fed to the exter-
nal monitor 20. The test number indi~
eating circuit and pulse counter 2 pro-
vide for counting the teat pulses. in-
dicating the number of the test and
control the operation of the 80 bit
register for indicating the results of
The program setting

out to
signal.
for powering

- 205 -

FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂC3Al.US£lDNLN

The Main Technical Specifications for the EH-630 Unit

Number of quality control tests 78

Duration of a quality control test, msec 10

Number of leads which can be switched 26

Range of voltages which can be checked, volts 0.01 to 9.99

Range of currents which can be checked. a 0.1 - 10-6 to 99.9 - 10‘3
Voltage test error, mV 3 (11 + 0.5)

Current test error. nA + (22 + 10)

The kinematic configuration of the 08-5002 sorter (Figure 9.10) consists of

three sections, which are coupled together pneumatically. The major section,

the travel mechanism 2. receives a reciprocating motion from a pneumatic cylinder.
the rod of which is rigidly coupled to the guides of the travel mechanism. The
product loading mechanism 1 functions cyclically with the letter, where the
operation of this mechanism is likewise based on the reciprocating motion of the
rod of another pneumatic cylinder. The third section is composed of the unload-
ing and sorting mechanisms 6 of a modular design with individual pneumatic cylin-
ders. The pneumatic cylinder rod of each mechanism is rigidly coupled to the
three other unloading rods. The drive for each unloading mechanism is pneumatic-
ally coupled to the main drive (the travel mechanism) in such a way that the
unloading rods begin to move only after the travel mechanism is passed by the
guides two-thirds of the way to the position of the elements. The return travel
of the working elements of all three mechanisms is accomplished simultaneously.
The cycle time can be adjusted by two factors: the standstill time of the travel
mechanism in the measurement and unloading positions (electrical control); chok-
ing down the cross-sections of the internal bores (pneumatic control). The
loading mechanism 1 pushes out one product each from the case (or other loading
device) during each cycle, where this produce is the one those parameters are to
be measured. This product is moved by the travel mechanism to the contact posi-
tion. where the product being measured is connected by means of the contacting
device 3 to the power source setting the conditions as well as to the measurement
circuits [through switcher 14 (see Figure 9.9), if we are speaking of the opera-
tion of the 08-5002 sorter in conjunction with the EH-603 measurement instrument].
During the return motion of the travel mechanism, the product whose parameters
have just been measured. enters the unloading and sorting mechanism. and depend-
ing on the measured parameters and signals from the measurement unit, goes into
the appropriate case. The products being measured are housed in this case in
special satellite carriers with standard dimensions, which makes it possible to
standardize the transport assemblies. loading. unloading and contacting devices.

9.3. Automated Systems Using Computers for Parameter Testing

Quality control and measurement complexes which contain a measurement unit and
computer (tvu) have become widespread recently. where the computer controls the
feed of the mode setting currents and voltages to the product being measured,
provides for switching the pins of this product in accordance with the

- 206 -

FOI'OFFKJA1.UBE(N9LY
measurement circuit for a particular parameter, as well as the measurement of
the parameters and the processing of the measurement results. In this case. the
entire sequence of parameters is measured automatically in accordance with the
computer program. Following the completion of the measurement process. the
computer makes the decision as to the conformity of the parameters of the meas-
ured product to their specified values. Information on the measurement results
can be fed out in various forms: the true value of the parameters. printed out
on paper by a numeric printer operating as part of the computer hardware; a
"reject - good" light signal on the panel of the measurement unit; control sig-
nals to the sorter for the products being measured, by means of which the pro-

ducts are broken down into groups.

-__——-

F_---Ewg ______

       

(1)- 37.3»: 57-:- I

Pigure 9.11. Block diagram of the UT-l neter.

Key: 1. 01-1 meter;
2. Bits 6 to 8;
3. "Pass";
6. Bits 3 to 5;
S. Decoder N;
6. Input-output pulses;
7. Instruction decoder;
8. Computer;

- 207 -

9.
10.
ll.
12.
13.
16.
15.

FOI1OFFNJAI.USE(HNLY

Input gates;

Buffer register;

Adder;

Data register;

Data decoder;

Instruction exchange unit;
Classification result
display;
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Figure 9.11 [cont.]: 16. Plan number selector;

17. Result register;

18. Unit for specifying the bias and limiting value
conditions;

19. Switcher;

20. Comparator;

21. ”Start measurement”;

22. Synchronization unit;

23. "3nd of tests";

26. "Meter ready";

25. "Result ready";

26. Product being tested.

Start of n-th test

Dieter ready 0') hm: M: rule I.) 7)
W St I _ 9’ . ”Lg”.
Start “2'" I002; lure! ass-curate 52mm!" use“: Met - ready
nus I

2) _ s a buk- ._ "“ *N*"‘*
Heter'm‘" $3.33: I R ‘e‘m mn- ' " ‘9‘- “""" (11)

ready 3;" '. 5) "

(12)~ - «was! I-:' .‘ - .
(13M? .

6N12W1 I h .. I

6n21ﬂ£_. " ' ' . -' ' 1;:

a...__. '5; . . .

m_~. — ' l I ‘

aﬂﬂ IIII| ' """"
mil-.1...” sunl" ﬁt in . “'—'—"

- saunas-Id

 

 

 

awn """“"
( l 5)5¥I'l.?- stamps-u 7' . , ’§
(16).“?! mum’s " ‘ 'Nlu‘ man 10 ' —

 

( l 7 )4!!!" [Images new.“ "

 

 

.—

Figure 9.12. Time diagram showing the interaction of the UT-l meter
and the computer.

Key: 1. Result ready; 10. Start;

2. Transmission of the data 11. Transmission of the
of the first test; data of the first test,

3. waiting for the result; etc.;

4. Transmission of the data 12. "Start measurement";
of the n-th test; 13. "Pass";

5. Transmission of the re- 14. "Result ready";
sult to the computer; 15. 6N16 (”end of tests");

6. Result ready; 16. "Comparator mode";

7. Transmission of the classi- 1?. "Classification result
ficetion result to the meter; display".

8. Waiting for the result;
9. Transmission of the result
to the cosputer;

- 208 -

FOI<0FFHJA1.USE(NVLY
The measurement time for a single parameter usually amounts to a few milliseconds,
and thus it is possible by means of a computer to carry out the testing operations
for several tens of parameters of a semiconductor device, for example, an inte-
grated circuit. in fractions of a second. The high productivity of parameter
testing is the major distinctive feature of computer controlled monitor and
measurement equipment. The second feature is the measurement precision, which is
due to the use of the "weighting" measurement procedure and the comparison of

the quantity being measured with a reference value. A characteristic representa-
tive of the family of computer controlled measurement and classification equip-
ment is the all-purpose UT-l meter, which is intended for checking the static
parameters of low and medium power transistors and diodes. The operational
principle of the meter will be clear following an analysis of its structural
configuration (Figure 9.11) and the time diagram showing the interaction of the
reter and the coaputer (Figure 9.12).

After the system is started, the computer operates by periodically interrogating
the meter readiness starting with the initial program address, by sending the
6Nll instruction to the meter with a period equal to the execution time for two
instructions in the computer. After the arrival of the "Start" signal at the
meter synchronization unit (from the pushbutton on the control panel with manual
loading or from the automatic sorter), the synchronization unit feeds out the
"Meter Ready" signal to the instruction exchange unit, which with the arrival of
the next 6N1! instruction will feed a "Pass" signal to the computer. After re-
ceiving this signal, the computer leaves the periodic interrogation mode, feeds
out the 6N12 instruction, upon which the meter readiness flip-flop is reset and
the number of the classification plan is transmitted to the computer. Following
this, the initial data for the performance of the first test are transmitted

(l to 5 words for the 6N21, 6N22, 6824. 6N3! and 6N32 instructions each) and at
the end, the GNOb instruction, "Start Test“. is fed out. The l to 5 words are
written into the data register and are decoded by the data decoder, the signals
from which are fed to the unit for specifying the bias and limit value conditions,
as well as to the switcher. As a result, the requisite circuits are switched for
testing the requisite parameter and the specified currents and voltages are
applied to the pins of the product being tested.

The instruction "Start Test" is converted in the instruction exchange unit to the
"Start Heasurement" signal, which when received by the synchronization unit, the
latter generates the "Comparator Gating" signal 26 to 30 msec following the
"Start Test" instruction. This delay is necessary so that the transient pro-
cesses from the switching are finished beiere the comparator begins to compare
the actual value of the parameter with the specified ultimate value.

After putting out the "Start Test“ instruction, the computer changes over to the
periodic interrogation of the readiness of the measurement result. The interro-
gation is accomplished by means of periodically sending the 6N01 instruction to
the meter. when the test is completed, the synchronization unit will feed out
the "Result Ready" signal to the instruction exchange unit, which upon the
arrival of the next 6NOl instruction. will feed out the ”Pass" signal to the
computer. The computer then quits the periodic interrogation mode and feeds out
the 6h02 instruction, upon which the result readiness flip-flop is reset and the

- 209 -

FOI‘OFFKJA1.UBE(NULY
INJR‘OFITCJAL.USIZ(MULY

result is transmitted to the computer. The computer compares the result obtained
with the specified limiting value. and then transmits the initial data for the
performance of the next test. Following the measurement of all of the parameters,
specified by the classification plan, the computer determines the classification
group of the product being tested and feeds out the instruction 6N1b, in accor-
dance with which the classification resalt (the group number code) is transmitted
to the data register. and after it. to the classification result display. In
accordance sith the 6316 instruction. the "End of Tests" signal is fed to the
synchronization unit. because of which. the generation of the "Comparator Gating"
signal is inhibited and the "End of Tests" light lights up on the front panel

of the meter.

 
  
       
    
 

Comparator

”saws;
laud

Output

-10 volts
-ua

Figure 9.13. Circuit for measuring the inverse current of a
p-n junction.

Key: 1. Feedback resistor 1;
2. Feedback resistor 2;
3. Dc amplifier 2;
a. Dc amplifier 1.

Following the transmission of the classification result, the computer shifts
over to the mode for interrogating the readiness of the meter using the 6811
instruction. which continues until the next “Start" signal is transmitted. One
computer can control several meters. In this case. each meter is assigned its
own ordinal number and the N decoder in each meter is correspondingly aligned.
The computer periodically interrogates the readiness of the meters and the meas-
urement results. when any meter feeds out a reply signal to the computer, it
transmits the corresponding data to it and continues to interrogate the other
neters.

By way of example. we shall consider the measurement of the inverse current of a
p-n junction using the 01-1 meter, which is based on the principle of comparing
the measured and reference values. A resistor “m (Figure 9.13) is connected in

series with the p-n junction being tested. Two voltages are applied to the network
consisting of the p-n junction and the resistance 8.: a voltage U1nv is applied

- 210 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
from the tested junction side, while a reference voltage of opposite polarity

Be is applied on the side of resistor 3.. "hen the two currents flowing through
the p-n junction and resistor R. are equal. the voltage at point 1 is 01 - 0.

If the currents are not equal though. the voltage 01 will be positive or negative.
Thus. the polarity of the voltage at point 1 is an indicator of the equality of
the measured and ultimate values of the currents.

The following can be written for the limiting value of the current:

I - Ee/Rm (9.3)

li-

The quantity 111. is specified by setting definite values of Be and kg. The vol-
tage Be is produced by an operational amplifier which takes the form of direct
current amplifier UPT-Z which has feedback. A reference voltage of 10 volts is
fed to the input of OPT-2. The setting of Be is accomplished by changing the
input resistance of OPT-2. R1nz. since the following equality is justified for
UPT—Z:

Be " uin(be2/ R1n2’ '

where 01“ - 10 volts is the reference voltage and bez - KOhm [feedback resistance
2].

(9.“)

Thus. by changing Rinz in accordance with the computer program. one can produce
various values of the reference voltage 3e at the output of OPT-2. The inverse
voltage Uinv is generated by operational amplifier UPT-l and is set by changing
the feedback resistance be1-

The moment the limiting value of the current is equal to the measured value, i.e..
the point in time when the voltage at point 1 becomes equal to zero, is regis-
tered by the comparator, which transmits the appropriate signal to the computer.
In this case, it is not necessary to carry out the testing process until the

point in time when the limiting current value is equal to that flowing through

the p-n junction. It is sufficient in the classification mode to determing
whether the current through the junction is greater or smaller than the specified
limiting value, and to feed the appropriate signal to the computer.

9.6. Contacting Assemblies for Checking the Parameters of Semiconductor Devices

One of the most important mechanisms whose influence is felt on the mean time
between failures. the service life. the productivity of measurement and test
equipment as well as the confidence levels of the measured parameters is the
contact making assembly. A contacting assembly (K0) is understood to be that
device which makes it possible to repeatedly connect the devices being tested to
the electrical circuitry. in this case assuring a minimum connection resistance,
Rec", for the electrical current flowing through the plug connection between

the contact and the lead to the product which is connected. as well as minimal
induced currents in the measurement circuits and maximum insulation resistance
between the contacts in a specified temperature range. It is apparent from the

- le -
FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

definition of a contact assembly that its major technical characteristics will
be the following:

-The permissible current, A;
-The permissible voltage, V;
-The capacitance between any contact pairs, de;
-The contact inductance, nﬂy;

--The connection resistance between the contact device contacts and the lead of
the device being tested, ohms;

--The insulation resistance between two contact pairs and between any contact and
the device package, ohms;

--The wear resistance, the number of contact making cycles;

--The operating temperature range, 'C.

The nominal values of the technical specifications of contact assemblies for

various semiconductor products are stipulated by the corresponding standards
[55-57].

Depending on the structural design. contact assemblies are broken down into two
major classes: contact assemblies without a mechanical drive and mechanically
driven contact assemblies.

Contact assemblies without a mechanical drive are intended for operation in
manual quality control and measurement equipment as well as test stand equipment,
where the operations of loading the products into the contact assemblies and
removing them are accomplished manually. In this case, the leads of the products
fall directly on the contacts of the contact assemblies. Loading is realised in
the majority of cases with lead friction against the contacts. something which
leads to the destruction of the coating on the semiconductor device leads and

to rapid wear of the contacts of the contact assembly.

 

2
J
/.
Figure 9.14. The contacting device for
transistors with flexible Figure 9.15. Schematic of the contact-
leads. ing device of measurement

equipment which operates
using the start-stop
principle.

- 212 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
Various contact systems are used in contact assemblies without a mechanical
drive depending on the type of semiconductor device packages. For diodes and
transistors with rigid leads, these are usually push-in contacts, where the
insertion and removal of the device are accomplished with friction, while the
contact force is produced by means of the elastic properties of the contact
material and additional springs.

There are several contact system designs for transistors with flexible leads:
bent tubes made of nickel alloy, bronze tubes with a lobe shaped contact bent
back inward. collet chuck type clamps, as well as guillotine type terminals.
Contact assemblies having a collet chuck or guillotine t, ;- contact system make
it possible to insert and remove the devices without friction, but are complex
to manufacture and have a low productivity. and for this reason have not found
wide scale applications in the production of semiconductor products.

Contact assemblies for transistors with flexible leads using contacts made of
nickel tubes have become widespread. Such contact assemblies are shown in

Figure 9.1a. The contact force in the tubular contacts is created by virtue of

the deformation of each lead of the transistor being tested, which duplicates the
profile of the contact tube. Contact is made at several points in this case.

Since the insertion and removal of the devices are accomplished by overcoming

the frictional forces between the device lead and the contact tube, the protective
coating of the device leads and nonuniform contact wear take place as a consequence
of this. Especially severe wear is observed at points where the tube bends. A
tubular contact provides for a resistance of neon ; 5 ' 10’ ohms. The instability
of the contact resistance, which is explained by the differing degree of curvature
and differing cleanliness of the lead surfaces are to be numbered among the
drawbacks of a tubular contact device. It is necessary that the contact assembly
by mounted in a vertical position, while the lower end should not be clamped or
sealed shut so as to spontaneously remove from the contact tubes any wear products
caused by friction with the leads of the devices being measured.

Mechanically driven contact assemblies, which are schematically depicted in Figure
9.15. are used in automated and semiautomatic measurement and test equipment

which operates using the start-stop principle. They operate in the following
manner: the leads of the device 3 are automatically inserted in the receptacles
of the support A and connected to the electrical circuit by the contacts 2. The
requisite force is produced by elastic element 1. Contact assemblies with a
mechanical drive should be distinguished by a high service life, since they are
intended for operation in high output equipment.

Their serviceability depends on meeting four conditions:

—-The simultaneous entry of the leads of a single product during the measurement
time;

--A low resistance and stable contact between the product and the electrical
circuitry during the measurement time;

-Connection without deformation of the product;

- 213 -

FOR OFII‘IOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Spontaneous removal of inadvertent objects from the contact region.

Difficulties arise in meeting the first condition which are due to the ambiguous
arrangement of the leads of the majority of products (diodes and transistors

with flexible leads, all types of series produced IC's). For this reason, it is
necessary to begin meeting the condition with an analysis of the structural
design of the semiconductor product, the quality of the leads and possible devia-
tions from the geometrical shape.

The condition for a low resistance stable contact between the product and the
electrical circuitry will be met if neon between the contact and the product
lead is no greater than the permissible maximum value for the entire operational
time of the equipment. Greater contact compression forces lead to rapid wear

of the contact and support surfaces. For this reason, in developing contact
assemblies it is necessary to determine the optimal contact pressure depending
on the structural design of the contact, its material and coating as well as

the specific nature of the lead of the product being tested (diameter, coating,
etc.).

The most characteristic type of semiconductor devices with an indeterminate
arrangement of the leads are transistors with flexible leads. The transistor
leads having a diameter of 0.2 to 0.3 mm are at times deformed and tangled
together. For this reason, it becomes necessary to straighten the leads of

the transistors prior to measuring the electrical parameters. Special lead
straightening machines have been designed for this purpose. At times, the

lead straightening operation is performed by the contact assembly. One of the
structural designs for a contact assembly with a comb for straightening out
transistor leads prior to measurement is depicted in Figure 9.16. In this case,
the leads of the transistors being tested 2, which are fed to the measurement
position by means of shuttle 8, pass through the teeth of the comb 7 prior to
coming in contact with the contacts 1, where the comb teeth fan the transistor
leads out in a definite manner and the probability of the leads making contact
with the contact areas 1 will be significantly higher than in the case of
unstraightened leads. The comb 7 and the shuttle 8 are not shown in Figure 9.16
(at the left). After the transistor gets into the contact position, contacts

1 are pressed against the transistor leads by a clamping force P, which is
applied to plates 3, which are spring loaded and secured together with the current
conducting flexible elements b on base 5. The conducting elements A and the
springs of the plates 3 are separated by insulating washers 6.

The vertical impinging of the leads on the contacts is assured by the width of

the contacts, which must always be chosen greater than the possible deviations

of the transistor leads. The task of horizontal alignment of the leads on the

contacts reduces to the condition for the teeth of the comb getting between the
transistor leads (see drawing section 3-3).

The design of contact assemblies for integrated circuits (lc's) presents con-
siderable difficulty, since Ic's have a larger number of leads (usually from
8 to 64) with relatively small package dimensions. In this case, the leads of

- 216 -

I")! 0F1WCJAI.USE(NHLY
View A‘L’J.

is?

Figure 9.16. A contacting device with a comb for splaying out
the leads of transistors.

  

B-B
:—
1s 1

Ic's housed in flat packages with a planar arrangement of the leads. are as a
rule made of inelastic strip materials and are readily deformed. The use of
push-in contacts, similar to the contacts treated earlier for other types of
semiconductor devices, is characteristic of 10's in the 201.12, 301.8. 301.10 and
301.12 packages. For flat pack 10's, the elastic properties of the contact
material are utilized to compensate for dimensional deviations and produce the
contact force.

Contact assemblies without a mechanical drive for integrated circuits in the
601.1b. 301.12 and 201.1b packages are shown in Figure 9.17. Their operational
principle is clear.

To automate the measurements of the electrical parameters of integrated circuits,
it is expedient to place the latter in special satellite carriers, which make

it possible to use automated vibration load equipment and automatically sort

the measured Ic's into groups. The use of satellite carriers with standard
dimensions has made it possible to standardize the design of contact assemblies
for integrated circuits in various packages. A series of standardized contact
assemblies is being produced by domestic industry for integrated circuits with

a low level of integration; the technical specifications for these assemblies
are given in Table 9.1, while the structural design of two types is shown in
Figure 9.18. In the KUU-l and RUB-2 contact assemblies (Figure 9.18s). the
satellite 4 with the integrated circuit in a circular package which is placed

in the satellite, where the IC rests on the support surface 5. causes the contacts
3 which are arranged in a circle to move towards the center of the circle. In
this case, the contacts go into the corresponding grooves in the satellite,
where the It pins are positioned. connecting them to the electrical circuits of
the measurement instrument through contacts 1, and electrical connector 2, which
serves to disconnect the contact assembly during the replacement and repair

of the latter.

The KUU-6 contact assembly (Figure 9.18h) for integrated circuits in flat
packages also functions in a manner similar to that described above. The
difference consists in the fact that the contacts in this case are arranged in

- 21$ -

IIIICNHWCIA1.USEINNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 9.17. Contact assemblies for integrated circuits.

four rows so that their ends are in one plane. The IC being tested is clamped
in the KUU—6 by means of special pins, which are located in the assembly, and
holes in the satellite 4. In this case, the 10 leads make contact with the
contacts 3 of the contacting assembly. With the further squeezing of the satel-
lite. by virtue of the elastic properties of the contact material a reliable
contact is made between the 10 leads and the electrical circuits of the measure-
ment instrument through electrical connector 2. In all of the standardized
assemblies treated above, contact is made with the IC's being tested using a

two wire Kelvin system, something which makes it possible to segregate the vol-

tage and measurement circuits.

 

Figure 9.18. Mechanically driven contact assemblies for integrated
circuits.

a. In the 301.8 and 301.12 packages (KUU-l and KUU-Z):
b. In the 601.14 package (KUU-b).

— 216 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090004-3

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09:

||||||I||III|I|||I|||IIIIII|II|IIIII

 

nan nu
m3 3
nllldll z
. usuwga . UOOuuam
uuoaaam
3—» no
.2395 2—»
9322 cu

vououz oouou

 

can . a u

no“ . n u
. HoodoNu

acquuuuaoo
no non
Ilazv an»:
o» and
Innqu

 

 

 

 

 

 

e~.~0¢
.Aucnmzao~
m; u an .7282: 3.3.
an o~.uo~ ntppu
w~ o~.~o~ «tuba
«N N~.Hon «nabs
n.o
u n 36 2 8m 67.: 2 a .8.” 7:8.
vmu 01:0 us: > < nuoau ou«>on Nun
.ouuam .oucouo«¢ .oocou .owuu .uaou ncoo vouooh nan-u<
yoga to: couu nuavau Iuo> nuao mo 0:» no «0
I600 hat luoacoo you» oap«o non ouqxuam cash
cooauon unoa cu Icoo nous 1552 «o «:59
00:0» uu-ucou nuom
nauonou
41a. 35:.

339.8 .52 35 “8 332.82 33:8 no 33833» m 38.58... Sn: 2:.

- 217 -

FOR/OFFﬂﬂAI.USE(NQLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600090004-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1&5 TEST EQQIPHENT

 

Semiconductor devices which are used in different equipment function under complex
and diverse conditions of exposure to the environment and mechanical loads. The
structural design of semiconductor devices and the observance of the technological
processes for their manufacture should guarantee their normal operation under

the conditions stipulated in the technical specifications. However. in practice
because of the degradation of the quality of the raw materials, deviations from
the fabrication technology. worker errors. equipment failure and a number of

other reasons, not all of the manufactured semiconductor devices can maintain
their parameters under difficult conditions of exposure to the factors indicated
above. Because of this. all semiconductor devices or sample batches are subjected
to various kinds of tests during their manufacture so as to confirm the capability
of the semiconductor devices of functioning under the stipulated conditions

while retaining the electrical parameters within the stipulated range.

As a rule. devices are subjected to tests in the concluding stages of the pro-
duction process for their manufacture.

The major kinds of tests of semiconductor devices are:

--Hechanica1;

--Climatic;

--For immunity to special effects;

--Aslns:

--Reliability and service life.

The requirements placed on the immunity of semiconductor devices to various
effects. the immunity principle. the testing procedure and the circuit configura-
tion for the devices being tested are stipulated in the overall technical ape-
cifications (OTB) for the semiconductor device, by the special technical speci-

fications (ChTU) for each particular series or type of semiconductor device as
well as by the state (COST) or sectoral (DST) standards.

10.1. Equipment for Mechanical Tests

The major kinds of mechanical tests of semiconductor devices are the following
[58]:

--Tests for the absence of freely moving particles inside a package which are
capable of disrupting device operation;

--Tests for the absence of short term short circuits and breaks in the circuits
of the semiconductor device leads;

--Tests for resistance to shock and vibration loads;

--Tests for resistance to exposure to linear acceleration.

- 218 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 10.1. Kinematic schematic of the Figure 10.2. Kinematic schematic of
80-1 shock test stand. the VS-68 vibration
test stand.

Hetallic particles which are capable of causing short circuits of the leads of
semiconductor devices may remain inside a package in the fabrication of such
devices. One of the most widespread reasons for the appearance of metal particles
is the sparging of the metal during the hermetic sealing of the packages. Poor
quality execution of the operation of lead bonding can be the cause of an unrelia-
ble contact between a chip and the external leads of the semiconductor device.

Permanent breaks and short circuits in the leads of semiconductor devices are
easily detected when measuring the electrical parameters. To ascertain short
term disruptions of this type, the devices being tested should be subjected to
shock and vibration loads, and the presence of short term short circuits and
breaks is registered by special equipment.

Equipment for mechanical tests should incorporate the following devices:

"For generating mechanical loads (vibration, shock or linear loads) with the
requisite parameters;

o-For securing the devices being tested;

--Por setting the electrical operating conditions (where necessary, stipulated in
the sectoral or special technical specifications).

Moreover. equipment intended for testing for the absence of short term breaks
and short circuits in lead circuits should also contain devices capable of
registering these defects.

Primarily mechanical and electrodynsmic shock teat stands are used to produce

219 -

IKIICHNHCJAJ.IEHE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shock loads. Mechanical stands have found the greatest application because of
the comparative simplicity of their structural design as well as the absence of
electrical interference arising during their operation.

A kinematic schematic of the mechanical SU-l shock test stand is shown in Figure
10.1, which provides for the free fall and sharp deceleration on its platform of
the products being tested.

The products being tested, which are placed in special cassette holders. which
provide for reliable fastening and supply the proper electrical conditions where
necessary, are secured to platform 1, which is coupled by means of cam 6 to the
drive mechanism. consisting of electric motor a. V-belt drive 3, and a reducer
containing two pairs of cylindrical gears 2 and 5. With the rotation of cam 6,
platform 1 first lifts up, and then falls sharply on the supports 7, and a shock
load is thereby imparted to the products being tested. The number of shocks per
unit time is adjusted by varying the r.p.m. of direct current motor 6. while

the size of the shock load is adjusted by changing the adjusting washers on
supports 7. The number of platform impacts is counted by a counter.

The Main Technical Specifications of the 50-1 Test Stand

Number of impacts per minute 10 to 100
Acceleration, g 10 to 150
Maximum weight of testable products, kg 50

Platform dimensions, mm 285 x 452
Overall test stand dimensions, mm 620 x 560 x 750
Overall control console dimensions, mm 632 x 6&0 r 854

The vibration test stand, a kinematic schematic of which is shown in Pigure 10.2,
imparts vibration loads to the products being tested. The tested products are
placed on table a. A rotation is transmitted from electric motor 1 through V-belt
drive and gears 7 to shafts 5. Gear sectors are fastened at the ends of these
shafts: stationary 6 and moving 8 sectors. Hith the rotation of the shafts 5

at the same angular speed in opposite directions, the horizontal components of

the unbalanced forces mutually cancel out. while the vertical forces are summed
and cause the vertical motion of table 0, which is rigidly fastened to shaft 2.
The amplitude of the oscillations is adjusted by moving the moving gear sectors
relative to the stationary ones, while to adjust the amplitude, there is adjusting
screw 3. The frequency of the vibrations is regulated by changing the rotational

speed of electric motor 1.

Electrodynamic vibration test stands are used to test semiconductor devices and
10's for vibration resistance at frequencies above 500 to 1000 Hz: in these test
stands, the vibration of the table with the products being tested fastened to it,
is accomplished by means of the motion of a metal core in an alternating magnetic
field, produced by a sine wave or pulsed voltage. The UVE-S/IOOO electrodynamic
vibration teat stand, consisting of the VE-S/1000 vibration test stand, the

- 220 -

FOR 0FFK]AL.USEIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UUS-3 amplifier and the control console for the unit are pictured in Figure
10.3.

 

Figure 10.3. The UVE-S/lOOO electrodynauic vibration teat stand.

a. Control console;
b. Amplifier;
c. Vibration test stand.

The Major Technical Specifications for the UVE—S/lOOO Vibration

Test Stand

Nominal load capacity of the vibration test stand, kg 5
Frequency range, Hz 5 to 10,000
Maximum acceleration for a load weighing 5 kg, g 30

Maximum travel amplitude. mm 7.5
Magnetic field intensity at the level of the

vibration test stand table. no more than, Ala #00

when testing for the absence of short term breaks, shock loads with a specified
acceleration and frequency are inparted to the semiconductor devices. In this
case. the appropriate electrical conditions are created for the devices being
tested and meters which register the appearance of a pulse from a short term
break should be connected to each tested product during the entire testing time.

Tests for the absence of short circuits in the leads and for freely moving par-
ticles in the package of semiconductor devices are performed under the same
conditions, with the exception of the fact that the tested products are placed

on the platform of the vibration test stand. Additionally, the electrical con-
ditions during the tests for the absence of breaks and short circuits are differ-
ent. about which something will be said belov.

- 221 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIiOFFKJAl.US£1DNLY

Devices for which no disruptions of the contacts. short circuits and breaks in
the leads were detected are considered to have passed the tests. A short circuit
in the lead circuitry of s sesiconductor device is characterized by a resistance
Rs.c. which is inserted in parallel with this circuit, and by the short circuit
tine. A break can correspondingly be characterised by a resistance “break' inser—
ted in series with the lead circuit. and by the duration of the break process.
Values of the resistances R,.c. and “break can vary in a range of from 0 to O.
depending on the factors which caused the short circuit or break. In line with
this. the signal which appears in the circuits of the product being tested and
which characterizes the occurrence of a short circuit or break can have different
values under identical test conditions.

Circuit configurations for diodes are

(l E‘IIE shown in Figure 10.6a and b. while circuits

for transistors when testing then for the

 

” 'eter absence of short circuits and breaks are
(l mun-u u shown in Figure 10.5.
" 0 Voltage sources are necessary to set the
electrical test conditions. while the
Figure 10.0. block diagram showing setering devices register the pulses

the testing of diodes for which appear across the load resistance
the absence of breaks (a) R“ in the case of the appearance of short
and short circuits (b). tern short circuits or breaks. In this
case, the polarity of the recorded pulses
differs when testing for a break and for
short circuits. The sensitivity of the
metering devices should be such as to

be able to determine the values of the
resistance R,.c. and Rbrea for a definite
value of the voltages at the leads of the
devices being tested.

Key: 1. Voltage source:
R" - load resistance.

 

Transistors which operate at low and
nediun frequencies (up to 300 to 500 HHz;
are tested for the absence of short cir-
cuits and breaks in the active node, i.e..
when an inverse voltage is applied to the
collector and a forward voltage is applied
to the enitter. The values of the voltage
Key: 1. Voltage source. at the collector UK [Vcc] and the enitter
current IE are stipulated in the special
tochical specifications for the specific semiconductor devices. Testing high
frequency transistors in such a node can lead to the appearance of self-excitation
phenomena in the devices being tested. which in turn leads to false actuation of
the metering units. To combat these phenolena. blocking chokes, capacitors, etc.
are usually placed close to the products being tested. In a nusber of cases,
it is expedient to test high frequency transistors with the junctions blocked.

i.c.. it is necessary to apply inverse voltages to the emitter-base and collector-
base junctions.

Figure 10.5. Block diagram showing the
testing of transistors
for the absence of short
circuits and breaks.

- 222 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.US£<0NLY
Besides the shock and vibration test

stands which test for the absence of

short circuits and breaks. which were
treated above, devices are needed to create
the electrical conditions as well as
fastening and contacting devices for the
products being tested and indicators. All
of this is colbined in the RT-120 installa-
tion for registering short circuits and
breaks in transistors (Figure 10.6). It
consists of rack 7. in which all of the
electrical blocks are housed, and rotating
unit 8, which is lounted on stand 9 and
uhich lakes the contacts with the tran-
sistors being tested and rotates then in

; two eutually perpendicular planes. Soee

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

-————._-'

Figure 10.6. The RT-120 tester for registering short circuits and
breaks in transistors.

six indicator units 5 are housed in rack 7, in each of which there are 20 indica-
tor cells. Each cell is connected by its own input circuits to one transistor
under test. while the output circuits are connected to a small light mounted on
the front panel of the entering unit. The lights fron the 20 neter indicator
cells are cosbined together in signaling display 6. The power supply for the
transistors being tested 3. the power supply for the indicator cells 4. a block
of filters 2 and the control unit for the vibration and impact test stand 1 are
located in the lower portion of rack 7. The rotating device 8. which is connected
to the rack by cable 10, is made in the form of a rigid platform, which rotates
through 90' on its own axis. The cassette holders with the transistors being
tested (20 transistors in each cassette) are clanped in the rotating device by
leans of plate 11 and flywheel 12. The transistors are connected to the metering

- 223 -

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
l!”l(ﬂﬁﬂ(1Al.lﬂ§E(NULV’

and mode setting units through special contacts, which provide for reliable con-
tacts during the impact and vibration testing time.

The 80-120 unit for registering short circuits and breaks in diodes is structurally
similar to the RT-lZO unit treated above.

The resistance of semiconductor devices to linear acceleration is tested in a
centrifuge. The goal of these tests is to check the strength of the bonding of
the chip to the device package. the strength of the bonding of the leads to the
bonding pads of the chip. the hermetic seal quality and the quality of the metal
to glass seals at the sites of leads in the device and to generally check the
capability of the device of performing its functions during the process of
exposure to linear loads. The criterion for a device being good following the
tests is the maintenance of the electrical parameters within the specified range
or the satisfying of other requirements indicated in the special technical speci-
fications.

10.2. Equipment for Climatic Tests

The main function of climatic testing equipment is to check the operability of
semiconductor devices and IC's when exposed to various climatic factors [58].

The operability criterion for tested products is the preservation of their struc-
ture. external appearance and electrical parameters. which are checked either
during the tests or after exposure to the climatic factors.

The following categories of climatic tests have been established by existing
standard setting documents:

--For heat resistance;

--For cold resistance;

--For moisture resistance with both short term and long term exposures;

--For resistance to exposure to a cyclical change in temperature;

--Por resistance to exposure to reduced and elevated pressures;

--For resistance to exposure to a sea fog;

--For fungal resistance.

Semiconductor devices are tested for thermal and cold immunity in heat and cold
chambers respectively. where they are exposed for a definite time. most often
30 minutes. with the electrical conditions maintained. Upon the expiration of
this time. the electrical conditions are removed from the devices under test
and the parameters of the devices being tested are measured until they are re-
moved from the chamber. Cold immunity is tested at a temperature of -60' c,
while heat immunity is tested at a temperature of +70° C for germanium devices
and +125° C for silicon semiconductor devices. Other values of the test tempera-

tures are also possible. which are indicated in the special technical specifica-
tions for the device being tested.

- 226 -

FOI'OFFHﬂAl.USE(NVLY
For moisture resistance testing, the devices being tested are placed in a mois—
ture chamber without any electrical power being applied to them and kept there

for b to 30 days. In this case, a definite temperature is established in the
chamber in a range of +00 to +60° c at a relative hunidity of 981. At the end

of the tests. the electrical conditions are supplied for 5 minutes for the devices.

Testing for resistance to a cyclical temperature change, which has the purpose of
checking the quality of the seals of the device leads to either glass or ceramic
naterial as well as the quality of the connection of the chip to the mounting base
of the device, is carried out by means of placing the products being tested in

the heat and cold chambers by turns, the temperatures in which are previously
brought to the ultimate values indicated in the particular technical specifica-
tions. The exposure time for products in the chambers is limited by the time it
takes to reach temperature equilibrium or is established by some standard setting
documents. The devices should be moved from chamber to chasber within the time
specified in the particular technical specifications (no more than 1 to 5 minutes).
In this case. the temperature in the chamber after inserting the products in it
should change by no more than 10' C and be restored after a time of no more than

5 minutes. if other values are not indicated in the particular technical specifi-
cations. The time, which includes the exposure of the products in heat and cold
chambers taking into account the movement of the products from chamber to chamber,
is called the cycle time. The number of test cycles is specified by the particu-
lar technical specifications. The devices are as a rule tested without electrical

power applied.

The immunity of semiconductor devices to reduced and elevated pressure is checked
in a pressure testing chamber. The level of the pressure, the testing time and
the necessity of applying electrical power and the electrical parameters are
stipulated by the relevant standard setting docunents.

To test for sea fog exposure, which is carried out for the purpose of determining
the corrosion resistance of semiconductor devices in an atmosphere saturated with
viscous salt solutions, the devices are placed in a chamber in which a fog is
produced froa sea water by means of an aerosol device, pulveriser or in some
other fashion, or from a salt solution obtained by dissolving sodium chloride in
distilled water. The fog should have a dispersion particle si e of 1 to 10 um
(95! droplets), and an absolute moisture content of 2 to 3 g/n . During the
testing, the devices being tested are placed in the chamber so that the solution
spray and drops from the ceiling. walls and system of supports do not fall on

the products.

when testing for immunity to fungi, the semiconductor devices are placed in a
special fungi formation chamber, where they are sprayed with a water suspension
of a mixture of fungi spores, prepared in accordance with special instructions.
The testing is carried out at a temperature of about +30° C and a relative
humidity of 951 in the absence of air circulation.

There is a large products list of specialized and general purpose test equipment
to test semiconductor devices for resistance to exposure to climatic factors.

- 225 -

FOI.051IC1AI.USE1DNLX
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R00050009000H

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I I
a... 8.
CH O‘COO Call-.830!

“anywa— uni—.28:

A h

l A
Olin 2F 0! o...
anon-.30 3:33:3—

oﬂno ask a! o...
can. 103 3.3.6.3:

Ola. 0—3. 38 0.—
UMOQGOU I23§2°x

nos
Chg—Argon:
scan

            

   

2.5.3.88.
8.3.3:»!!!

aausuoanum

8I8 «8...
8|»: 86
318 to

I . 8_Ia 3.6

no. .06
5.6.0
870.0
1: 6..

32|03+
.8+.l....m-..
$763+
.33...
3315+
£7-
$5+T.......l.
EL+7 5..-.
3.2+? 7LT.
Ema-.3. ...
SF: :5 ..
.3? =3...
.owca

   

0. 6:32...—
ling-sq

0.2530388.

08.9.5.5.
".3225
v.93.
3.93.

:8. want.
3-4....nxz
256.3th
7...!
“51.55....th
5:52.5—
=...n . :75.
:5. 3...: by.

Swizziz

53a .3 m =3. 32.38 .«0 «Hanoi-nan no a: 2:.

1013.23.3th
393233.319... AS
5!.- «9:8.
5:.- qcua-x n8
Roxana-3:3...
32.33.31»... A:
Kauai-90x9... Amy
egos-Sagan on
3.2.5... : 2.62. 2.0.32 any
3.3.3. : 3...: 2—231 any
noon—659...": nag-z
an»:
22.3 Evan!
non-3502...: sea-z
gnu:
:3 £33.09
0.130.883:
3%

 

m

-226-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000500000004-3
climatic testing equipment can be broken down into manually controlled equipment
and automated equipment with respect to the manner of loading the products being
tested into the medium and their removal from it. as well as with respect to

the manner of recording and processing the test data. Manually controlled equip-
ment. as a rule. is utilized in sample tests. where not all of the semiconductor
devices being manufactured are subjected to testing, but only a portion of them.
The productivity of this equipment is determined by the capabilities and skills
of the operator. The test results are recorded manually by the operator. The
major technical specifications of manually controlled climatic equipment are
given in Table 10.1.

In automated test equipment which is used in the mass testing of semiconductor
devices. the loading of the products into the chambers, their removal following
the tusts and sorting into groups are accomplished automatically.

Chambers with manual control of the heat. cold, moisture. sea fog. fungal growth
as well as pressure test chambers consist of the chamber itself where any of

the climatic conditions are created and the products being tested are placed,
the climatic support system. as well as the devices for regulating the climatic
parameters of the chamber within the range permissible for the testing and an
instrument for recording the values of the climatic parameters. Depending on
the external dimensions and useful volume, the equipment can either be of a

desk top or console type design. As a rule. such equipment is all-purpose and
can be used for testing various electronic hardware. In this case, the enterprises
performing the tests of, for example. semiconductor products, should themselves
design the devices for making the contacts with and switching the products under
test. which are placed in the chambers, as well as the devices which assure the
proper electrical conditions for the tests.

An elevated temperature is produced in heat chambers by means of electrical heat-
ing, and either the vaporization of compressed gases or compressor cooling is

used to produce a below freezing temperature in cold chambers. He shall consider
the structural design of a console type heat and cold chamber (Figure 10.7). A
two stage compressor 1 is used to obtain a below freezing temperature in the
working volume of the chamber. A positive temperature is produced in the chamber
by means of electric heaters S. The fans a are used to mix the air in the chamber
to obtain a uniform distribution of the temperature field over its entire working
volume. The setting and regulation of the temperature are accomplished by thermal
regulator 2: the current value of the temperature in the chamber is registered

by instrument 3. which can either be a meter. a digital meter or an autorecorder.
Moreover. there should either be holes in the chamber for the electrical cables.
or special sealed entrances for supplying voltages from the external supplies to
the products being tested. as well as for the measurement of the parameters of

the tested products.

Hoisture chambers differ from heat and cold chambers to a minor degree: special
devices are used to create environments with an elevated humidity instead of
devices for heating and cooling. One can use a fan with a vaporizer as such a
device. The vaporizer, which takes the form of a reservoir with water and a water

- 227 -

INDI40FIWCJA1.I£SEZ(HVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heater, humidifiea the ambient air by
virtue of heating and evaporating the

water. The fan circulate; the air in the
chamber. Semiconductor devices are usual-
ly tested for moisture resistance at a
relative humidity of 85 to 982. Tests

for moisture resistance are usually per-
formed at an elevated temperature. Be-
cause of this. moisture chambers are
usually made together with heat chambers.

 

F' . . d h .
igure 10 7 A heat and €01 c amber Pressure testing chambers. which are in-

tended for testing semiconductor devices
for exposure to elevated and reduced atmospheric pressure, likewise differ little
in structural terms from the heat and cold chamber treated here. A specific fea-
ture of them is the elevated requirements placed on the strength and hermetic
seal integrity of the walls, seals as well as the electrical leads. Sometimes,
the tests in a pressure testing chamber should be accompanied by heating or cooling
of the tested products. Because of this, there exist combined chambers which
combine tests at elevated and reduced temperatures as well as with elevated and
reduced atmospheric pressures. A reduced atmospheric pressure is created by means
of vacuum pumps. An elevated atmospheric pressure is produced by means of a
compressor.

 

Figure 10.6. The set of equipment for testing the electrical parameters
of transistors at temperatures of -60 and +120° C.

In contrast to the all-purpose climatic testing equipment treated above, the
UKT-lZO (position 1) and the UKT-60 (position 3) (Figure 10.8) installations for
testing the electrical parameters of transistors take the form of specialized

heat and cold chambers respectively and are designed for heat and cold resistance
testing. as well as for measurements of the major parameters of transistors
(inverse currents and the gain) at temperatures above and below freezing. Each

of these installations is equipped with a switcher for the sequential connection

of the transistors to the tester to measure the parameters and a device for setting

- 228 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
stor being tested.

2 electrical operating node
2 control point setter are housed inside the installations.
ter-clssaifier (position 2). There is a
transistor, the para-eter being

e measured h
splay in it o

:asured and its value are
utonatically recorded on a nuaeri: printer.
used as the coolant in the “KT-60 installation.
cated inside the installation. The
in the col

   
 

corner 0
two circular

ed are inserted. Sinilar open-

itioned symmetrically in the
installations.
lding a spare

Moreover. one c
e holders wit

racted from t
the ambient temperature.

holders.
then the cassett

sistors just ext
to keep then at
ace of the cassette
emitter, base and
ted to the switcher.

The electri
holders, and

collector lea
The holders at

do of the tr
e interchan

or low power
It is distin

with flexible leads is depicted in
by its increased

similar devices
8 is achieved in that the

total design. Thi
he tors of no insulating plate
f the edges of which there are
The insulating

transistors
guished from

grooves

plates
contacts 9 secu

achieved by spr

sistors touch-
the ribs of which move
produced by the

h the cassette
0 the neaaur

holder con
nent equipment
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The force produced by the rotation of eccentrics l is uniformly transmitted by
stiff plate 2 through the springs to plates 3, which in moving along guides 6.
produce the requisite contact force on each transistor lead.

The automation of the measurement of semiconductor device parameters in a range
of temperatures from below freezing to above freezing has a considerable economic
impaI.t. since the measurement of the parameters takes only fractions of a second
itself in the overall operational cycle. while the insertion. exposure to the
medium at a specific temperature, as well as the removal and recording of the
measurement results is more or less easily automated. In this case. automated
testers are used as the measurement equipment, which was the topic in the preced-
ing chapter, ahile run-through chambers are usually called climatic equipment,
having in mind the fact that the products being tested in an automated cycle
sequentially pass through all stages from the loading to the sorting into the
appropriate containers following the completion of the tests [60].

Semiconductor devices are usually tested in run-through chambers while placed in

group or individual carriers. The use of satellite carriers in automated equip-
ment is covered in more detail in Chapter 15.

 
     

    
   

 

;:n'-]

3. [u' .
@1431 II

”0.)

Figure 10.10. The PPS-130 semiautomated unit for diode instability
testing.

We shall consider the structural design and operational principle of the PPS-130
and PPS-60 semiautomatic units. which are intended for checking the drift in the
parnnwters of alloy diodes at temperatures of +130° C (PPS-130) and -60° C
(PPS-GD). In the units. the diodes being tested are placed in a group carrier
cassette. which is loaded either manually or automatically on an independent
piece of equipment, while the diodes are removed from the cassette upon the com—
pletion of the tests automatically. being allocated to individual hoppers in
accordance with the value of the parameters measured.

- 230 -

Ft"!(lﬁﬁ(]Al.lEﬂi(NVLY
The structural design of the units is quite similar. and their difference consists
in the system for producing the appropriate temperatures.

In the PPS-130, this is a coil heater, and in the PPS-60 unit. it is a valve for
delivering liquid nitrogen and a tubular coil.

The unit (Figure 10.10) consists of the following major assemblies: the frame 12.
in which the chamber 1 is mounted and all of the remaining assemb1ies and mechan-
isms. There are two rectangular openings in the front wall of the chamber for

the cassette holders to enter and leave it. Two-level guides 13 are installed
inside the chamber. along which the holders move, one pushing the other. The coil
heaters 2 (or the tubular coil with the coolant in the PPS-60 unit) are secured

on special brackets to these same guides.

Four axial fans 6 are installed for the purpose of assuring uniform temperature
distribution in the upper portion of the chamber. The mechanism 8 which feeds
the cassette holders into the chamber 1 is mounted on the front of the chamber.
The mechanism 15 which removes the cassettes from the chamber 1 is mounted on the
back of the chamber opposite the lower level of guides. The cassette holders

are transferred from the upper level to the lower by means of mechanism 16.

 

Figure 10.11. Kinematic schematic of the PK-SOOS run-through
chamber.

The contacting device 6 is positioned in the immediate vicinity of the outpu.
opening of the chamber, where this device is used to connect the diodes being

- 231 -

FOR 0FFK]A[.USE(NNLY
FINICHHH€JAI.IISE(NNLY

tested to the instrumentation. Hechanism 11 moves the contact sockets. and also
opens and closes door 7. Mechanism 9 unloads the cassette holder from the chamo
her, while mechanism 10 sorts the tested diodes into groups. All of the mechan—
isms operate in a definite sequence, which is assured by the electrical circuitry.
The temperature is automatically maintained at the specified level by means of

an automatic control system. the sensor 3 of which is located in the center of

the chamber volume. There is a reference graphic control chart 5 on the front
panel for operational convenience, which depicts the operating sequence of the
mechanisms in the unit.

The PK-SOOS run-through chamber is an automated unit for measuring the parameters
of transistors and integrated circuits in a temperature range of from ~65 to
+lSO° C. In this case. the products being tested can be exposed in the chamber
automatically for from 6 to 30 seconds. The parameters are measured by an
external measurement instrument [60}. The operating principle of the PK-SOOS
runothrough chamber is illustrated by the kinematic schematic shown in Figure
10.11.

The products being tested, which are placed in a special satellite (Figure 10.12).
are fed into the loading magazine 9 (Figure 10.11) from which they are pushed out
one at a time by pneumatic cylinder 10 into the drum type transport magazine.

The slots in carousel 8 of this mechanism are thus gradually filled with the
products being tested in the satellites. Carousel 8 has 31 slots, arranged
uniformly about the perimeter. Each of the slots holds 7 satellites. which feed
under their own weight from the loading magazine and are arranged one on top of
the other. Following the loading of seven satellites in one slot. the carousel
rotates clockwise through an angle of 11.6° and the next slot comes up to the
loading magazine. where this slot had been in the measurement and unloading pos‘
tion. Each subsequent rotation of the carousel occurs after feeding seven
satellites sequentially into the measurement position and correspondingly loadinv
seven satellites into the slots of the carousel in the loading position. which

is realized by means of transport mechanism 7. The loading of the products being
tested into the chamber and the rotation of the carousel coupled to it take place
in a definite cycle. set by the control unit. which is not indicated in the
schematic. The exposure time of the products in the chamber prior to the measur--
ment of their electrical parameters depends on this cycle. as well as the capacity

of the carousel.

 

Figure 10.12. Satellite carriers: for unencapsulated transistors (a),
integrated circuits in the 101ST14-1 package (b) and
transistors with flexible leads (c).

.. 232 -

FOR‘OIINCJAI.US£GDNLY
The motion of the carousel 8 and the travel mechanism 7 is accomplished by means
of pneumatic drive 3, which is driven by cospressed air at a pressure of 2 to 5
arm. The carousel is rotated through each seven operational cycles of the travel
mechanism 7 by means of the ratchet wheel 1 and lever 2, which are located on
the shaft of the travel mechanism 7.

After the travel mechanism has brought carousel 8 to the new position 30 times.
the products being tested which were first placed in the carousel slots come to
the measurement and unloading position. The transport mechanism 7 engages the
satellite with the product and brings it to contacting device 6, where all of

the leads of the tested product are connected to the circuits of the external
measurement instrument. In this case. the control unit feeds the "Start Measure-
ment" signal to the external meter for the parameters. Following the completion
of the measurements, a "End Heasurement” signal is fed to the control unit from
the metering instrument. The control block generates the signal to turn on the
electropneumatic valve of drive 3. In this case, transport mechanism 7 transports
the satellite to the unloading position. where it falls into unloading magazine

A by virtue of its own weight, and then into the corresponding hopper of the
unloading device 5. Having stopped in the unloading position for about 200 msec.
the transport mechanisn 7 returns to the contacting position. extracting behind
itself the next satellite with the product from the carousel slot, located in

the measurement and unloading position. The connecting device is equipped with
special catches, while the satellites have special holes for locking in the
contacting position.

The high temperature is maintained in the chamber by means of the coil heater.
while the environment with the below freezing temperature is produced by the
evaporation of liquid nitrogen.

The Major Technical Specifications for the PK-SOOS Run-Through Chamber

Output for a product exposure time in
the chamber of. pieces per hour:

3 minutes 6,200

6 minutes 2,100
Exposure time of the products in the
chamber, minutes 6 to 30
Temperature range in the chamber. ’0 (-65) to (+150)
Precision in setting the temperature, ’C i 1.5
Temperature fluctuations around the set
point, ‘C i 0.5
Temperature distribution nonuniformity in
the product transport region, ’0 a

Semiconductor devices can be tested for exposure to a cyclical temperature change
in the simplest case by means of conventional heat and cold chambers, which were
treated above. In this case, the transport of the products from one medium to

e 233 -

FIHICIHNC]AI.USE§€NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the other, which is realized manually, should not take more than one minute in
accordance with the requirements of the existing standard setting documents. The
chamber temperature following the insertion of the products being tested into it
from another medium should not change by more than 10' C. It is difficult to

meet these and a number of other requirements in the case where heat and cold
chambers are used which are not coupled to one another. Several types of special-
ized units exist for testing for exposure to cyclical temperature change (thermal

cycling).

 

Figure 10.13. The UTT8-60/160 semiautomated temperature cycling unit.

a. General View;
b. Schematic drawing of the climatic testing unit.

The UTTs—60/160 semiautomatic temperature cycling unit (Figure 10.133) consists
of two parts: the control console (depicted on the left) and the climatic unit.
a schematic drawing of which is shown in Figure 10.13b. The heat chamber 1 and
cold chamber 2 are made in the form of hollow toroids, inside which there is an
intense air flow circulation. Cassette holders with the products being tested
are transported by means of carousel 7 and holder transport mechanism 2 clockwise
about the periphery, and simultaneously upward and downward, alternately falling
into each position in the heat and cold chambers. The carousel 7 and mechanisms
2 are driven by electric motor 6. All of the mechanisms and devices in the unit
are mounted in the assembly frame 5. Liquid nitrogen is used as the coolant; the
feed of the coolant is regulated through valve 6, which is controlled by a
thermal regulating system located on the control panel. For repair and preventive
maintenance of the unit, its upper section with the heat chamber can be lifted

by means of an electric hoist, located in the lower portion of the installation.
The UTTs-60/l60 semiautomated unit makes it possible to perform thermal cycling
operations in three and five cycle multiples. Upon completing the last half-
cycle, the cassette holder with the products is pushed out into the unloading

position.

— 236 -

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An external view (Figure 10.16a) and an operational schematic (Figure 10.14b) of
the single chamber T0—5081 semiautomated thermal cycling unit are shown in Figure
10.14. A distinctive feature of the unit is the absence of a mechanism to trans-
fer the products being tested from one medium to another, since these products
are fixed in a stationary position in the chamber. where an elevated and reduced
temperature environment is alternately produced in the chamber [60].

The T0—5081 semiautomsted unit consists of the chamber 12, which is connected to
the branch pipes 2 and 15 and air ducts 5 and 11 by means of the channel switches
l and 9, and along with these units. forms closed loops. There are guides for
the placement of the cassette holders with the tested products in the walls of
chamber 12. The holders for various types of semiconductor devices differ in
their structural design, but the external dimensions of all types of cassette
holders are the same. The products being tested can be placed in the cassette
holders both chaotically and with an ordered row layout. A block of heating
elements 6, consisting of five ESP-01 resistive elements and which serves as a
sensor in the temperature regulating system, is placed in the center of chamber
12. The upper l and lower 9 switches for the channels serve to switch the air
flows through the chamber 12. The drive for the channel switches is pneumatic.
One sensor each 14 for the temperature regulation system, which takes the form

of a resistance thermometer, is installed in branch pipes 2 and 15. A thermal
relay 3 is additionally inserted in branch pipe 2 for the emergency disconnection
of the semiautomated unit in the case where the temperature norm is exceeded in
the "heat" channel.

 

Figure 10.1h. The single chamber TO-5081 semiautomated heat cycling unlL.

a. External view;
b. Operational schematic.

- 235 -

POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A three-phase heater 6 is used to heat the air in the "heat" channel. The evapor—
ation tube of liquid nitrogen feed valve 10 serves to cool the air in the "cold"
channel. A heater 13 is inserted in the air duct 11 of the cold channel to dry
the air duct when repairing the semiautomated unit and after the completion of
operation.

Fans 7 and 8 serve to product an intense flow of heated and cooled air through
chamber 12.

All of the major controls, the digital display for the number of half-cycles and

meters which show the value of the temperature in the channels are placed on the

panel of the control console located in the top left corner of the unit. Chamber
[2 is covered with a door with a special device which reliably hermetically seals
the joint between the door and the chamber.

In the case where an intense flow of hot air flows through the chamber with the
devices being tested, as shown in Figure 10.16b. the cold air loop is closed into
itself in the idle mode. The temperature in the working and cold loops is main-
tained in the specified range by a temperature regulation system. After the
specified time for a half-cycle has elapsed, i.e., the time for the exposure of
the products in one particular medium, the channel switches l and 9 automatically
connect the cold air channel to chamber 12 with the products under test. while
the hot air channel is switched to the idle mode. The number of cycles in the
TO-SOBI semiautomatic unit is specified beforehand by a special unit on the con-
trol panel. and after the time for all cycles has elapsed. the semiautomatic unit
is cut off and signals the conclusion of the tests.

The Major Technical Specifications for the 10-5081 Semiautomatic
Thermal Cycling Uni.

Useful chamber volume. liters 80

Specific mass rate of flow of the liquid nitrogen

per kilogram of tested products. per hour, kg 4

Compressed air flow rate, mm3/hr 0.5

Maximum weight of the products which can be

tested, simultaneously loaded into the chamber. kg 63

Range of working temperatures. '0 from -65 to +200

Temperature fluctuations at the operating point, °C 2

[0.3. Equipment for Aging and Reliability Testing

The reliability of semiconductor devices is characterized by the probability of
their failure free operation for a specified period of time. The failure rate
expressed as a function of their operating time is characterized by the greatest
failure rate during the period immediately following the start of device testing.
This is explained by the revealing of hidden manufacturing defects. Then the
failure rate falls off and is practically constant over time. This is the main
operating time of the devices.

- 236 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Manufacturers of semiconductor devices, in striving to deliver products with a

high reliability to consumers, subject the devices to conditioning, the duration

of which corresponds to the burn-in time, i.e., the revealing of unreliable devices
is accomplished in the manufacturing stage prior to the delivery of the products

to consumers. The conditioning time falls in a range of from a few hours to
several hundreds of hours and is primarily determined by the level of fabrication
technology for the devices and the requirements placed on their reliability.

To determine a quantitative reliability indicator, the semiconductor devices are
subjected to special tests, which reduce to exposing the tested products to
definite electrical and temperature conditions, and monitoring the electrical
parameters and recording the devices which fail. The test conditions and criteria
for good products are defined by the special technical specifications.

In terms of its functional configuration, equipment for aging and reliability
testing is identical. But a number of specific requirements placed on each of
these types of tests leads to the necessity of designing specialized equipment
for both conditioning semiconductor devices and reliability testing.

The conditioning of discrete semicon-
ductor devices and IC's can be carried
out both at room temperature (elec-
trical aging) and at an elevated tem-
perature (electrical and thermal
aging), both in static and dynamic
modes.

A block diagram of the STT-ZOOOH test
stand, which is designed for the
electrical and thermal conditioning
of integrated circuits, is shown in
Figure 10.15. The electrical con-
ditions are set by the power supplies
8?, while the dynamic mode for
switching the lC's under test is
provided by mode switching units BR.
The electrical circuits being aub-

 

Figure 10.15. Block diagram of the STT-
2000“ test stand for the
electrical and thermal
conditioning of integrated

circuits. jected to electrical and thermal

Key: 8P - Power supply: conditioning are placed in special
BR - Mode setting units; cassette holders K. made in the form
K - Cassette holders: of printed circuit boards and placed
KT - Renting chamber; in the heat chamber KT, the tempera-
BK - Monitor unit; ture in which can be brought up to
BTR I Thermal regulating +150‘ C. The monitor unit BK serves

unit; to monitor the test conditions, while

IT - Measurement instrument; the thermal control unit BTR sets
32 - Protection unit. and maintains the temperature in the

heat chamber KT at the specified
level. The measurement instrument

- 237 -
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lEﬂE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 10.16. The STT-ZOOOH test stand Figure 10.17. The UBTT-T test stand
for the electrical and for electrical and
thermal conditioning of thermal conditioning
integrated circuits. of transistors.

lT registers the value of the temperature in the chamber, while the protective
unit 32 protects a number of assemblies of the test stand against overloads.
such as the fan motors and the heaters. The STT-ZOOOH test stand is structurally

made of two sections: the rack with the power supplies and mode control unit‘

and the table with two chambers. mounted one on the other (Figure 10.16). A
spare set of cassette holders with contacting devices for the tested integrated

circuits is placed on the table.

The Major Technical Specifications for the STT-ZOOOH Test Stand

Test stand capacity, pieces 2000
Triggering pulse repetition rate, Hz 50

Pulse amplitude. volts 5 to 6
Temperature in the heating chamber, 'C 60 to 150

The UETT—T test stand for the electrical and thermal conditioning of transistors
(Figure 10.17) consists of a single rack, in the lower portion of which the
power supplies to produce the collector and emitter voltages are placed. while

the heat chamber is placed in the upper section, where five loading units with
contacting devices for the connection of the transistors under test are inserted
in this chamber. The test stand is intended for static electrical and thermal
aging of low and medium power transistors with flexible leads. connected in a

— 238 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
con-on base configuration. The conditioning of the transistors is carried out
with the application of inverse bias to the collector and emitter junctions.

The Major Technical Specifications of the UBTT-T Test Stand

Test stand capacity. pieces

Temperature range. ’6

5.400
40 to 200

Power supply voltage for the transistors

being tested. volts

  

L ~
Figure 10.18. The UNTH/T-Z unit for

reliability testing
of low and medium

power transistors.

3 to 100

In contrast to equipment for conditioning.
test stands for testing semiconductor devices
for service life and reliability should make
it possible to monitor the operating con-
ditions and measure the electrical parameters
for each product under test during the
testing time. Moreover. the products being
tested should not fail because of defects

in the test stand equipment. All of this
does not allow the design of equipment for
reliability testing for a large number of
products to be tested simultaneously and
requires the incorporation of all possible
protective, warning and automatic recording
devices.

The UNTH/T-Z unit for the reliability test-
ing of low power transistors is shown in
Figure 10.18. The heat chamber is located
in the upper portion of the rack in this
installation. The checking of the operating
conditions and electrical parameters in

each product under test is accomplished
through special electrical connectors.

A temperature regulating unit is located below-the heat chamber, where this
unit has a device for signaling when the set temperature conditions are disrupted.

An electrical operating mode nonitor unit and the power supplies which provide

for the maintenance of the specified electrical test conditions stipulated in

the special technical specifications for the specific type of device are installed
in the lower portion of the rack. The products being tested are secured either

by means of special terminals. or by means of soldering to provide a reliable

contact during the tests.

The Major Technical Specifications for the UNTM/T-Z Unit.

The capacity for three sections having different
independent electrical conditions. units 150

- 239 -

FOR OFEKJAI.USE(HVLY
Range of temperatures, '0
Temperature maintenance precision. °C
Setting range for the collector-base voltage. volts

Setting range for the collector current, IA
CHAPTER ELEV!“ PRODUCTIOR PROCESS EQUIPMENT FOR THE FINAL 0?BRAIIONS

The final operations in the production of semiconductor devices and integrated
circuits include the application of protective coatings to the finished devices,
their marking and packaging.

For the purpose of protecting semiconductor device packages and 10's against
external effects during operation, thin films of varnish and paint materials or
metals are applied to their surface.

Degreasing and drying, priming and drying as well as painting and drying can be
numbered among the operations of the production process of painting semiconductor
device packages. The painted devices undergo a 1001 examination for external
appearance and selective quality control.

The semiconductor devices are marked for the purpose of designating the type of
'device. the trademark of the manufacturing plant, the date of manufacture and the
mark of the quality control department which confirms the good condition of the
device. and where necessary, polarity marks. The devices are marked with fast
drying marking paints or nitrocellulose enamels of various colors. The marking
label is applied to integrated circuit and semiconductor device packages primarily
using the so-called offset method.

Packaging is the final operation in the process of manufacturing seniconductor
devices and protects the devices against mechanical damage and other effects
during transportation and storage. There are several methods of packaging:

--ln cardboard or plastic boxes, where each device is placed in a separate nest
to prevent its moving;

--ln polyethylene packets;

--In polyethylene material in which cells are produced underneath the devices by
means of vacuum forming [61].

11.1. Equipment for the Protective Coating of Finished Devices

Depending on the type of semiconductor device, various techniques are used to
apply protective coatings: painting. nickel plating and tinning. The most
widespread methods of painting are dipping. flushing with a continuous stream and
spray painting.

The structural design of an automatic painting unit for semiconductor devices in
metal-glass packages. using preliminary straightening of the leads, drying and
feeding of the finished devices to the next operation, is shown in Figure 11.1.
The automatic unit is attended by a single operator and paints from 8,000 to
[0.000 devices per hour.

The production process is realized in the following sequence. The devices which
are degreased beforehand are loaded into vibrating hopper 7, from which they

- 241 -

ETHICIHWCJAI.1EHE(HVLY
FOI‘OI11CJAL.USEIMNLV

 

Figure 11.1. Automatic unit for painting and drying [semiconductor]
devices.

are fed piece by piece to the lead straightener 6. The uniform feed is accom-
plished by means of setting the requisite gap in an electromagnet. Having fallen
into the electromagnetic scoop of the lead straightener, the devices are oriented
by an electromagnetic field and are transported to a drum, which in rotating
continuously. catches and feeds them into a slot between upper and lower cams,
where the leads are straightened. (The leads of the devices may not be straight-
ened. This occurs because the devices are not rolled out and untwisted. To
eliminate this defect, it is necessary to adjust the pressure of the rubber sur-
face of the cams against the device. In that case where the rubber is worn out.
it must be replaced.) The straightened leads are rolled down into the magnetb
holding tray 5, where they are uniformly distributed over the entire length and
are fed into the loading drum by means of a magnetic field, where this drum in
rotating continously catches and feeds them to transfer loading drum 2, between
the disks of which the tube of the painting assembly 3 is located. In passing
through under the tube, the devices are painted and fall onto a comb where the
excess paint is removed, which drains off into a funnel and goes through an
opening into the pump tank. The width of the jet is regulated by a lever located
on the upper part of the painting assembly. The painted devices fall from tray
11 into the radiative heat chamber for drying them, where they are dried in an
ultraviolet spectrum for 7 to 9 minutes at a temperature of 130 :_10' C. The
temperature in the chamber is regulated by a slide valve which is located in the
air duct. when leaving the drying chamber. the devices fall into the unloading
transporter l, by means of which the devices are loaded into the corresponding
packing case and forwarded to the next operation.

The major assemblies and mechanisms of the automated unit are: the vibrating
hopper, the lead straightener. the magnetic holding tray. pump 6, the painting
assembly, drying chamber 13. the unloading transporter. control panel 9 and drive
[2. Small table 8. the vibration hopper, lead straightener. magnetic holding tray
with the delay unit for devices with unstraightened leads and the device for

- 262 -

FOI‘OIFKJAI.U5310NLY
stopping the feed of the devices to the loading drum as well as the panel with
the transfer drums and painting assembly are mounted in frame 10. A pump is
mounted underneath the small table which feeds the paint into the painting assem-
bly. It is equipped with a coarse cleaning filter, a drain valve and a housing
with an exhaust unit. The vibrating hopper orients the device and feeds them
into the lead straightener. The drying chamber which is shown in Figure 11.2 is
located in the left side of the frame and takes the form of a thermally insulated
enclosure 2 with double doors. The inside door is made in the form of panel 3
on which the PRK-ZM lamps are mounted with reflectors. Inside the chamber, the
coil heater 1 is secured to a textolite plate. It consists of a stationary brass
coil and a brass rotating disk with cutouts in which the devices are loaded. The
internal elements of the chamber have a light reflecting surface. The panel of
magnets b, by means of which the devices are held and moved along the groove of
the coil from the periphery to the center is located behind the coil heater.

The rotation of the transfer drums and
the coil heater is accomplished by drive
12 (see Figure 11.1), which consists of
an AOL—lZ-h electric motor, a worm gear
pair and a number of intermediate gears.
A three step pulley is mounted on the
electric motor shaft to change the r.p.m.
of the disks, the transfer and loading
disks. and correspondingly, the drying
time. The electric motor is secured in
one of three positions. The drum 2 is
turned by two RD-09 motors.

11.2. Labeling Equipment

The offset method of applying the marking
label has become the most widespread
technique in semiconductor device and 1c

production. Additionally, coded markings
Figure 11'2' Thermal radiation drying are used in the fabrication of micro-

chamber (39°t1°“ through miniature devices. There are more than

 

A'A)’ 20 ways of applying a marking brand, in-
cluding direct, flat application, stencil-
ing, etc.

Depending on the structure of the device package, the marking is applied either
on the end face of the package, its side surface. and so on (Figure 11.3) [A].

An automated unit for marking and drying devices is shown in Figure 11.6. It
consists of the following major assemblies and units: the marking unit I. the
infrared drying conveyor furnace II and the combination unit III. when attended
by a single operator, the automated unit provides for a kinematic productivity
of 5.600 devices per hour.

- 243 -

FOI:OFFIC1A1.USE¢DNLY

The operational principle of the automated unit consists in the following: the
devices which are degreased beforehand and have straightened leads are loaded into
vibration hopper l in batches of no more than 700 pieces each. The devices are
fed from the vibration hopper by means of a directed magnetic field into each

of the forks of carousel A by means of the transfer drum, which takes them from
the loading drum 2. rotating synchronously in this case with both them and the
carousel. The polarity of the device is determined on the forks of the carousel.
in the case of improper orientation of the device relative to the marker, the
device is rotated through 180'. This is accomplished through a belt drive, which
is engaged by means of an electromagnetic assembly. A pair of blocking contacts
which gives the instruction to shut the automated unit down is provided to prevent
improperly oriented devices falling onto the marking drum. The correctly
oriented device goes onto the marking drum 5, where the marking sign is applied

to the cylindrical surface of the device package by means of rolling using a
rubber roller. on which there is the corresponding protruding marker. The rota-
tion of the device about its axis is accomplished by virtue of friction between
the device package and the rubber insert of the printer mechanism.

The marked devices are transloaded into the carriage of the distribution mechan-
ism 6 and layed out on the chain conveyor 10, on which they are fed into the
furnace chamber for preliminary drying. The final drying of the marking label
is accomplished on the grid of a strip conveyor 11, located in the lower portion
of the chamber. to which the devices are transferred by the transloading drum
from the chain conveyor. The dried devices are unloaded from the strip conveyor
to the receiving hopper. In step with the accumulation of finished devices,
they are periodically unloaded and forwarded to the subsequent operations.

The marking unit I consists of the following major assemblies and components:

the vibration hopper, the marking mechanism. the drive sprocket wheels 7, the
rubbing rollers 16 which uniformly apply the paint to the printing plate of
roller 3. drive 14 and control panel 17. The unit is driven by an electric motor
through a V-belt drive, a conical worm gear reducer. having two output shafts

for driving the marking mechanism and the master block of sprocket wheels for

the chain conveyor drive. Manual drive is used when aligning the unit for the
drives of the chain conveyor and marking mechanism assemblies.

The marking mechanism is structured from the following major assemblies and
components: the loading drum, the collecting drum. two bushings with built-in
permanent magnets. a carousel. consisting of a chassis on which 10 toothed small
shafts are uniformly mounted in a circle where the shafts have fork brackets
fastened to the square tail stems. The forks are clamped by means of flat sprin~s
in a definite position. because of which they are always set in a plane parallel
to the axis of rotation of the carousel. The permanent magnets built into the
forks hold the devices and keep them from falling out during the rotation of

the carousel. The marking drum is made in the form of a disk with two rim
flanges. about the outer diameter of which the grooves for the placement of the
devices are uniformly arranged. The printer mechanism consists of the frame.
rover. nut and holder with the rubber insert. The marking paint for the outer
surface of the cylindrical rubber insert is transferred from the marking pattern
to the package of the device. making the necessary marking in this case. Then

- 255 -

lN)!‘0F1ﬂC1Al.lEHE(NVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLV

the devices are fed by means of a similar drum into slots in the carriage, which
executes a reciprocating and cyclical motion along the axis of the shaft. placing
the devices in two rows in the indentations in the combs of the chain conveyor.
The reciprocating motion of the carriage is realized by means of a cam working
through levers and stems with a stationary fastened fork and tray. which hold the
devices in the slots of the carriage during its motions.

The stereotype block mechanism consists of a disk with two carriages which are
fastened in a stationary manner to a shaft; the templates are fastened to these
carriages; a bracket with rollers and slide blocks, by means of which the period—
ic reciprocating motion of the carriages along the slotted shaft of the stereotype
block is realized; an electromagnetic assembly, which engages the belt drive for
orienting the devices by means of an electromagnet; an armature and brackets;

3 Geneva mechanism. by means of which the carousel and the printing drum are
rotated cyclically; as well as a brake which suppresses the inertia of the rotating
parts of the marking mechanism.

The infrared conveyor drying furnace consists of the chain conveyor 10, the strip
conveyor 11. the sprocket drive wheels 7, the upper and lower heaters 8 (the
Kl-ZZO—lOOO infrared lamps), thermocouple 9. strip conveyor drive 12, air duct 13
and frame 15.

The control panel 17 consists of the panel on which the toggle switches for con-
trolling the following are mounted: the marking mechanism. the plate and strip
conveyors and the vibration hopper. The corresponding signaling lights are also
placed here.

The setting and monitoring of the thermal modes of the drying chamber, as well
the adjustment and automatic maintenance of the specified temperature (1 lS° C
in the drying region) are accomplished by means of the regulating devices and
instruments.

11.3. Packing Equipment

 

Figure 11.5. The mounting of devices on a cardboard card.

With mass production, the packaging of semiconductor devices. especially miniature
ones. is extremely labor intensive. The presence of external leads creates
certain difficulties when packing the devices. Finished devices are frequently
packed in cardboard boxes. shaped sheets of polyethylene or polyethylene packets.
A general view of devices mounted on a cardboard card is shown in Figure 11.5a.

-246-

2.?wa

“ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\

holes are punched in the cardboard card prior to mounting for the installation of
the devices. The cardboard cards and the finished devices (classified into groups)
are delivered to the work positions, where workers install a device in a'hole and
fasten it with a nut. placed on the heat sink (Figure 11.5h). After this. the
devices. along with the acconpanying sheets. are placed in cardboard boxes and
dispatched to the finished product warehouse.

Yet another method is that of packing finished devices in shaped cells. Polyethy-
lene with a thickness of 2 to 2.5 mm is used in this case. The cells are produced
at a temperature of 160' to 250’ C corresponding to the configuration and overall
dimensions of the devices. A formed polyethylene sheet for packing integrated
circuits is shown in Figure 11.6. Such sheets are fed to the work positions.
where the devices are loaded into the cells. After this a second sheet is placed
on top and they are sealed together. Devices packaged in this way are then for-
warded for delivery to consumers.

   

Figure ll. . e packing of devices in

polyethylene cells.

In the structural design of the instal-
lation described below (Figure 11.7).

the semiconductor devices are packaged

in polyethylene and cellophane packets.
The unit is attended by a single operator
and its output is 2,000 devices per hour.
100 devices are packaged in a single
packet. The automatic fabrication of packets with dimensions of 84 x 60 mm is
carried out in the unit as well as the counting of the devices loaded into the
packages. The batch loading of devices into ready packets is done manually by
the operator. A packet is fabricated from a doubled polymer polyethylene-cello-
phane filn.

 

Figure 11.7. A unit for packing semi-
conductor devices.

The following operations are performed in the unit:
--The fabrication of the packet;
--The automatic counting out of the requisite nuaber of devices (50 pieces);

--The loading of the devices into the packet;
--The sealing of the loaded packet. .

- 267 -
FORIIHHKJAI.US£<ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL,US£(M‘LY

The operational principle of the packaging unit consists in the following. The
packet is fabricated from polyethylene-cellophane film in the sealing unit 6,
where this film is unreeled from two bobbins and fed through an upper pair of
guide rollers to the sealing rollers. which are driven. The bobbins with the
stock of tape are mounted on brackets. which are fastened to the chassis of the
sleeve sealing assembly. There are flat springs for clamping the end of a strip
prior to winding a bobbin. The rollers are heated up to a temperature in a range
of 160 to 250' C. necessary to scaling the film. when the strips move between
the rollers. they are sealed along the edges. Here. the cross welding is accom-
plished at definite spacings. In continuing their motion. the sealed strips
(sleeves) are fed into the lower pair of rollers, which move it into the knife
assembly where the sleeve is cut into packets.

The rotational speed of the sealing rollers is regulated by an r.p.m. controller
8. which is located in the table pedestal. The devices are loaded into the
packets from guide A, which is a unique kind of holder to which the devices are
fed in an oriented position from vibrating hopper 3. with the accumulation in
the guide of a definite number of devices (units of 50 pieces each), the ready
and open packet is brought up to the lower section. After this. by pressing on
n lever, the upper support is opened and the lower one is closed. In this case,
the upper support cuts out the 51st device from the series of devices appearing
one after the other. The lower 50 devices fall from the guide into the packet.
The iever returns the supports to the initial position (the top one is open and
the lower one is closed). while the guide is filled with a new batch of devices
from the vibrating hopper. The devices are loaded twice in groups of 50 pieces
each time into a packet. Upon completing the loading into the packet. an accom-
panying sheet is inserted and the loaded packet is sealed shut. This is accom-
plished in sealing unit 5. For this, the edges of the packet which are to he
scaled are placed in the lower heater of the assembly and the actuating foot
pedal 9 is pressed. After the upper heater is lowered until it makes contact
with the bottom one. the foot is taken off of the pedal. After a few seconds
have elapsed (the duration of the pulse is adjusted in a range of from i to 6
seconds). the upper heater automatically returns to the initial position. The
devices which are packaged in the packets are fed to the finished product ware-
house.

The unit has a table 1. on the plate of which all of the major assemblies of the
unit are secured. including the unit control panel 2. The table has a pedestal,
in which the power panel is located as well as the electrical equipment. Located
on the front side of the pedestal are the handle of the RNO-250—0.S regulator.

by means of which the r.p.m. of the sealing rollers of the sleeve sealing assem-
bly is changed, as well as the handle for adjusting the voltage of the pulsed
heater of the sleeve scaling assembly and the handle of regulator 7 (a Rho-250-
0.5). by means of which the voltage fed to the electromagnets of the vibrating
hupper is adjusted. Handle ll of the automatic unit AST-Z is placed in the left
portion of the table. where this unit is intended for turning the mains voltage
on and off. There is a recess in the rear part of the table in which the pneuma-
tic control panel 10 is located. The recess is covered with a small removable
door.

- 268 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PART III LINES AND SYSTEMS FOR THE MASS PRODUCTION OF SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES AND

INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

CNAPTER TUELVE TNE THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES OF THE CONPREHENSIVE HECHANIZATION AND
AUTOMATION 0P SEMICONDUCTOR PRODUCTION

[2.1. Problems of Comprehensive Automation and Specific Features of Semiconductor
Production

Semiconductor production differs substantially from machine construction in a
number of specific features. The major feature consists in the fact that the
process of producing the major element of the device, which determines all of
its functional capabilities - the chip with the p-n structure - is the result of
a series of successive operations inside the volume of the chip. In contrast to
machine structures which can be taken apart. a chip is practically a single com-
ponent. and a rejection in only one operation leads to the rejection of the
device as a whole. A second feature is the microscopically small dimensions of
a device and the exceptionally high requirements placed on the overall technical
level for the production, the purity of the materials used and the conditions
under which the process is performed. The third feature is the large number of
different products in the products list with a relatively unstable market situation
as well as the presence of such production process operations as classification
or sorting according to the types of devices with different parameters following
their final fabrication (Figure 12.1). The specific features enumerated here
bring about a high level of production process losses. The level of production
process losses depends in the final analysis on the technical level of the
technology and production which is achieved in the industry. It is rather high.
something which leads to the necessity of planning it for each product. in con-
traat to machine building production. where production process losses are the
result of rejects in the fabrication of individual parts. are insignificant and
are not planned for, with the exception of certain products in special instrument
making, the production technology of which has a number of general features in
COIIDB with electronic instrument making.

Because of this, all of the design calcu-
lations for lines to be developed. includ-
3l23 run: ing the determination of the quantity of
necessary production process equipment.
the arrangement of the monitor equipment,
etc., must be carried out taking into
account the average static plan norms for

"I!!!

   
     
    

(1:: we 4: "J",
Chasm”: ion nanv

Figure 12.1. Schematic showing the production process losses (the percentage
separation of finished yield). Correspondingly, the problem of
K1312 devices into reducing losses through reducing the level
groups in the classi- of production process losses takes up
fication operation. first place in semiconductor production.

The major ways of solving it are improving
the quality of the materials used,

-249.-

INJI‘OFFWCIAI.I£SEZ(NULV
1 {nos ommu. usr: omx

creating special product g: conditions, stabilizing the parameters of the pro-
duction process, etc. w a I creating comprehensively mechanized production, decis-
ive factors are also the choice of the production process, which assures minimal
losses. as well as the development and introduction of equipment which assures
stability and reproducibility of the parameters of the production process.

The most objective criterion for evaluating the work of any sector of the national
economy is the growth in the productivity of the labor force. This indicator can
be utilized to analyze and substantiate objective laws which govern technical
progress, quantitatively estimate then and forecast the developmental paths of

new hardware, since in the final analysis. this indicator is related to the pro-
duction cost and the qualitative level of production. The theory of machine and
labor productivity developed by Professor G.A. Shsumyan, in figuring the final
parameters of new hardware and determining its efficiency. works from the condi-
tion of attaining a maximum growth in labor productivity [62, 63]. The starting
postulate of this theory is the concept of an ideal continuous service machine
with an infinite service life and absolute reliability, the productivity of which
is governed only by the production process (the technological productivity):

eideal . k
Of course, the general trend in automation is towards increasing the production
process productivity, i.e., developing progressive technological processes and
methods, and creating highly productive tools for production based on them. How-
ever, this approach is a far from adequate tool for the creation of high efficiency
production, since the degree of utilization of the capabilities of a production
process in an actual machine or line can differ substantially, but is always less
than the ideal. From the viewpoint of machine and labor productivity theory. any
time during which the production process is not under way is lost. For this
reason, both cyclical losses (idling time for machines or an automated line) and
non-cyclical losses, despite their different nature. are treated as losses. The
actual productivity is:

0 I k'"ntechnorg

where n is the productivity coefficient which takes into account the cyclical
losses; "tech is a coefficient which takes into account the losses due to technical
factors; "or is a coefficient which takes into account the losses due to organi-
zational facgors.

Losses are broken down into the following six kinds, each of which determines the
corresponding problem of the comprehensive automation of production processes.

Losses of kind I are cyclical, and define the problem of automating the working
cycle, and creating continuous service machines and lines; problems of kind II
are related to the tool (changing, adjusting, truing, etc.). and define the pro-
blem of automating the changing and adjusting of a tool; losses of the III kind
are the adjusting and repair of machine mechanisms and define the problem of
service life and reliability of automated systems; losses of the IV kind pertain
to organizational factors (receiving the material, turnover of the finished parts

- 250 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEiONLY
F0I40FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

and the collection of waste, the absence of semi-finished products, etc.), and
define the problem of autonating production control; problems of the V kind are
those of product rejection and define the problem of product quality; losses of
the VI kind relate to setting up equipnent again because of the transition to the

fabrication of another product and define the problem of autonated production
flexibility.

Formulated in general form. these problems are fully applicable to semiconductor
production. however, because of its specific features. the significance of the
individual problems is substantially and qualitatively redistributed as compared
to those of machine building production, and the tasks in the field of comprehen-
sive mechanization are aade more precise and specific [6‘].

The Problem of Automating a Working Cycle and Designing Continuous Operation
Machines and Lines

The following approaches to the solution of this problem as applied to semiconduc-
tor production can be noted:

1. The wide scale application of the batch processing technique is here one of
major ways of curtailing losses of the first kind. The features of semiconductor
production noted above provide for a considerably higher efficiency in the applica-
tion of the group sethod than in the case of other types of production. The

group coefficient. i.e., the nunber of elements subjected to simultaneous process-
ing. amounts to sore than 1,000 in semiconductor production in the operations of
producing junctions on a wafer. and with an increase in wafer diameter up to 100

to 150 an. the number of eleaents of a device which can be processed simultaneously
on a single wafer reaches 6,000 and more. If one considers that in a nunber of
cheaical treatment operations, a special batch package is employed which sakes it
possible to load up to 100 or more wafers. then it can be asserted that the
difference in the batch methods in semiconductor production is of a qualitative
nature and has a substantial influence on the organisation of this production and
the techniques for auto-sting it.

2. The use of through-going production process satellites and group interoperation
containers. In the overwhelaing majority of fabrication stages in semiconductor
production, as a rule. the product is not put in hoppers or mechanically trans-
ioaded, and its transportation at times results in additional rejects. For

this reason, a universal technical solution in the creation of a continuous auto-
mated flow is the use of new principles for transfer between operations based on
the utilization of through-going production process satellites to assure the
naintenancc of product reliability, where such satellites are frequently insepara-
biy coupled to the structure of the device, as well as principles based on the

use of strip carriers and special cassette holders.

3. The design of specialised transloading and collecting holders. Those specific
features of the production process such as the necessity of performing operations
in a controlled gas environment, in a vacuum, or in a dust free volume, as well
as the lisitation on the storage time of the process stock require the design of
special loading and unloading as well as collecting devices to seet these

- 251 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions. Specialized translosding devices are also being designed for brittle
or easily deformed elements of a product. In the initial production stages. where
wafers are manipulated. the automation of their transloading is most efficiently
realized by means of using individual production process transport cassette
collecting holders.

One of the ways of automating the auxiliary transport and loading-unloading
operations is the utilization of industrial robots and automated manipulators.
which are computer controlled [65]. The introduction of such robots is of
exceptionally great importance in the stage of the complete automation of semi-
conductor production for a large products list.

bosses of the second and third kinds and the problem of automating the replacement
and adjustment of s tool which are related to them. as well as the problem of

the service life and reliability of automated machines and lines in semiconductor
production are also of no less importance than in other sectors of precision
instrument making. There are no substantial specific differences between the
problaas in precision instrument making and those in semiconductor production.

and for this reason. they are not treated here.

The Problem of Control Automation

The problem of automating production control with an elevated level of automation
for the major production processes, and correspondingly. with an increase in

the specific share of organizational losses is taking on ever increasing import—
ance. The introduction of elements for the scientific organization of labor
based on the simplest organizational equipment. standard collecting holders and
transloading devices frequently has a great impact. Of course. the task in the
crest ion of comprehensively mechanized production is the introduction of an
automated production control system (ASUP) based on computers.

The Problem of Product Quality

Reducing product ion process losses leads to a direct decrease in the labor
expenditures in the same production where the losses were reduced. something
which can be seen from Table 12.1. where two production variants are cited with
an arbitrary output of 1,000 pieces of finished devices. The overall percentage

TABLE 12.1. The Influence of an Increase in the Percentage Yield in Individual

Production Stages on the Overall Reduction in the Labor Input
Reguirements for a Device

 

 

Stage I Stage II Total
Production Indicators Variant Variant Variant Variant Variant Variant
for the Various Stages 1 2 l 2 l 2
Percentage yield. 2 50 75 no 80 20 60
Production volume,
pieces 5.000 1.670 2.500 1.250 1,000 1.000
Inhnr input require-
uncut 650 150 250 125 700 275

- 252 -

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
yield in the second case is three times greater than in the first, the labor
intensity in the first step is three times lower, and two times lower in the
second. The overall labor intensity is reduced by a factor of more than 2.5 times.
for this reason. the design of a unit which produces a drop in the production
process losses for semiconductor devices can frequently lead to a more substantial
result as regards the reduction of labor intensity than the mechanization of any
manual operation, without increasing the yield percentage. And even a significant
increase in labor productivity in an individual mechanized operation leads to a
reduction in the overall labor productivity in the production complex given the
condition that this mechanization is accompanied by even a slight reduction in

the percentage yield. For this reason. any engineering decision concerning the
introduction of new processes and the creation of tools for comprehensive mechan-
ization shOuld be made as a result of a technical and economic analysis, based
primarily on an evaluation of the change in the level of production process losses.

Because of the special importance of the problem of quality in semiconductor pro-
duction. one of the most important tasks is the design of automated quality con-
trol and measurement equipment for the monitoring and classification of both

the finished products with respect to their parameters. as well as the technology
and components of a device during the fabrication process. the design of automated
production process equipment. equipped with sensors, monitor instruments, and
built-in microprocessors for monitoring, controlling and optimizing the production
process modes. The final task is the creation of automated control systems for
the production process (ATU TP) based on computers. The production process losses
should be reduced to a minimum, and the possibility of producing the requisite.
previously specified group of devices during the production process should be
realized by means of these systems.

The Problem of Production Flexibility

The problem of flexibility of highly mechanized production is also particularly
acute for semiconductor production. The group method yields almost unlimited
possibilities for increasing productivity in the first production stages. The
same possibilities have been obtained recently in the stage of quality control
and classification operations because of the use of universal testers as part of
a computerized complex. The high productivity and universality of these instal-
lations comes into contradiction with the relatively poor productivity of assembly
lines and the sometimes limited demand for specific types and groups of devices.
This problem can be resolved through the creation of high productivity production
systems for products lists with many products, including high productivity all-
purpose production of chips and specialised assembly operations.

12.2. The Systems Approach to the Planning of Automated Production

The considerations set forth above make it possible to define the production of
semiconductor devices as a complex probabilistic system, in which the production
processes are structured based on the conditions of the combined work of man
and machine. This means, first of all. that in all stages of the design and

development of automated production. it must be treated as a complex system
which converts expenditures to product as a result of the mutual interaction of

- 253 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTI 0F11C1AI.USIZ(NNLY

all of its components (people, equipment, the technical conditions for production,
production stocks of materials, etc.); secondly, production control must also be
treated as a complex system, which performs the functions of resource distribution.
analysis and quality control for the final purpose of decision making; thirdly,

the two systems - production and control - must also be studied in their interac-
tion. since each production component is tied to each control function [66, 68, 69].

The relatively small amount of research in the field of comprehensive automated
production system design was one of the reasons for the fact that in the technical
literature devoted to this topic there is as yet no standard terminology.

At the present time, production, which incorporates several comprehensively
mechanized lines, is called comprehensively mechanized production or a comprehen-
sively mechanized shop. if it is enclosed within the framework of a single shop.
However, it is expedient to use these terms only as applied to a specific produc-
tion structure, while in the developmental stage for a universal project plan,
their application is not convenient. For this reason, the term "line" is fre-
quently applied without substantiation to several lines, arranged sequentially

in different production stages. The terms "complex" and ”set" which are frequently
used also lead to an ambiguous interpretation. since they are introduced in COST
2.101-68 [State Standard 2.101-68] as a broad concept of specified products, the
main difference between which and the assembly unit is the fact that they are not
put together at the manufacturing enterprise in the assembly operations.

The term "system" is also a very broad and ambiguous concept. From the formal
viewpoint, a system is an aggregate of functional components which interact with
each other to achieve the set goal. A man working with a machine is already a
system. A "man-machine" system is only a component of a flow line system. etc.
In such system research, the concept of an "system" applies only to the process.
However, it must be recalled that systems analysis and systems engineering were
created primarily for working with objects in the physical world for the purpose
of creating technical systems. It is expedient to use the term "production sys-
tem", which most precisely reflects the existence of a facility, which basically
takes the form of an aggregate of technical hardware, lines and sections, in
contrast to a "system of production", which takes the form of a process for a
specific purpose, because of which the individual components are transformed into
a useful product. The major terms and definitions adopted by the authors are
given below.

A complex is two or more specific products which are not put together at the
manufacturing enterprise in the assembly operations, but which are intended for
the performance of mutually related operational functions. Each of these specific
products. which is incorporated in the complex, serves to perform one or more
main functions, established for the entire complex (for example, a flow line, an
automatic telephone exchange. etc.).

A set is two or more products which are not put together at the manufacturing in
the assembly operations and which take the form of a set of products having a

general operational function of an auxiliary nature (for example: a set of spare
parts. a set of tools and accessories, etc.).

- 25a -

FIIICMWWCJAI.USEZCNULY
A flow line is a set of main, auxiliary or lifting and transport production pro-
cess equipment. machines and mechanisms (consisting of a minimum of two units of
the main equipment which perform various operations), in which the operations of
reprocessing or assembly, which are carried out with human participation, and
these operations are assigned to definite equipment or definite work positions.
In this case, the sequence for the equipment configuration or the working posi-
tions conforms, as a rule, to the sequence for the performance of the operations.

A comprehensive mechanized flow line (KHL) is a line in which all of the main
operations of the production process for the fabrication of a product are per-
formed by mechanisms. machines or other kinds of equipment with a mutually linked
productivity, and additionally, the processes for transporting the products from
one working position to another are mechanized.

An automated flow line (APL) is a set of main. auxiliary, lift and transport pro-
duction process equipment. machines and mechanisms (consisting of a minimum of

two units of main equipment which carry out different operations), which execute
the operations of a portion of the production process for the fabrication of a
product without direct human participation and in a definite production process
sequence at a definite pace. In this case. there are both overall control and
automated transport devices to move the products from one type of equipment to
another, while man performs only the functions of set-up, observation and control.
The initial loading and final loading operations (or one of them) may be performed
manually in individual cases.

A comprehensively mechanized (automated) production system (KHPS) is a couple:
having an overall production program for a specific purpose and which takes the
form of an aggregate of a minimum of two comprehensively mechanized (automated)
lines, coupled by material transport flows and joined together by a common (auto-
mated) technology and production control system.

The planning of large systems such as production systems for semiconductor pro-
duction is impossible without a preliminary engineering and economic analysis of
the production process, without preliminary work to optimize the structure and
parameters of the system being planned. as well as to tie together and match up
the main indicators for the lines incorporated in the system.

An effective tool for analyzing a system and optimizing its parameters is modeling:
the main tool for checking the theories and design methods being created, as well
as the main tool of the optimal design theory. The model. in being a copy or
abstract representation of the major characteristics of any process. shows the
links which exist between the cause and effect, between the tasks and the caps-
bilities. The creation of a mathematical aodel for a production process is a
necessary condition and the first step in the work on its automation. However.
the study of production systems using mathematical models would be impossible
without computers. The utilization of mathematical optimization techniques using
computers in the design of production systems opens up further possibilities to
improve the efficiency of production. and along with this. is the basis for the
development of the principles of computer aided design for automated lines and
production systems.

- 255 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An important problem for the developers of comprehensively mechanized production
systems in the initial stage of planning is becoming the determination of the
optimal parameters of the system and the lines incorporated in it, as well as

the determination of an efficient structure for it, the optimum production volume
and the choice of the quality control system (Figure 12.2). The sequence for

the determination of optimal system parameters shown in the schematic is of a
conditional nature, since it is necessary to take into account their unavoidable
interrelationship during the project planning process.

The task of reliably determining the
final parameters of the hardware being
designed. including the production
engineering parameters of enterprises
is directly related to the problem
of parameter optimisation; production
engineering parameter optiaization is
“‘9‘“WW”’&' an inportant condition for reliable
ﬁlll”l forecasts of scientific and technical
' ” progress. Having calculated reliable
data on the final indicators of the
production facilities being developed,
it is as if we are obtaining informa-
tion from the future. This source of
information makes it possible to depart

 

Figure 12.2. The sequence for the selec-
tion of the major parameters
of a production system.

Key: 1. The selection of the from traditional methods of extrapola-
structure; tion (although only within the limits
2. The choice of the opti- of the period being examined) and in-
mum production volume; crease the reliability of predictions
3. The choice of the system of technical progress for this period.
for positioning the The economic interpretation of the
quality control opera- indicators and the achievements of
tions. scientific and technical progress arc

of first rate importance in this case.
It is specifically this moment that should become a connecting link between the
general economic forecast of sector development and the particular technical
results anticipated with the creation and introduction of the new hardware and
technology into production. This is a complex and as yet not fully solved problem
in terms of methodology.

The special position of the three following tasks follows from the definition of
a production system itself: the creation of the system for assuring the appro-
priate production conditions; the creation of the quality control. production and
technology control systems as well as the creation of organized material transport

I love.

One of the most important factors which assure the technical level of production
is the design of the system for providing production systems with water and gases
of the appropriate degree of purity, as well as with dust-free environments.
Although many devices intended for this purpose are developed for applications

in individual installations and are even built into them, such a system should be
designed as a whole as applied to comprehensively mechanized production.

- 256 -
FOI‘OFTNCIAI.US£1DNLV
The development of a quality control system is likewise necessary for the success-
ful functioning of a production system. The basis on which quality is maintained
and controlled, as well as quantitative monitoring - the feedback - in the final
analysis develops a quality control system into a production and technology control
system.

The performance of the functions which comprise the basis of the production process
depend on the system of material flows. For this reason, the methods of moving
materials and semi-finished products, related to the use of the latest equipment,
should be developed simultaneously with the resolution of other production prob-
lems. A situation is more often encountered where the inclusion of a new piece
of equipment in a flow line makes the existing procedure for the movement of semi-
finished products inefficient. J. Riggs [67] underscores the fact that attention
devoted only to one part of the overall flow line leads to the fact that the
solution of one problem generates another, on the solution of which the existence
of the entire flow line will depend. In this case, the author employs an analogy
with a river, where the cleaning of the bottom on any section of the river does
not increase the volume of water flowing through this section.

Chapters 13, 16 and 515.1 of this book are devoted to questions of designing sys-
tems for providing production with pure media. control systems for technology and
production as well as material transport flows using comprehensively mechanized
lines in semiconductor production.

12.3. The Engineering Economic Analysis of a Technological and Production Process

The engineering policy in all stages of the design of comprehensively mechanized
flow lines and production systems should be based on an engineering economic
analysis of the production process, for which this equipment is being developed.
The following goals must be kept in mind in this case:

1) The engineering economic stage by stage production analysis should precede the
formulation of the task and the advanced project plan, so as to determine the
production steps and operations where the greatest labor outlays and materials

are concentrated, and to determine the most "critical" production points as well
as determine the stages and operations in which there is the potential possibility
of obtaining the maximum effect, and thereby, establish the points for the neces-
ssry concentration of the efforts of system designers;

2) The technical and economic analysis of the processes in the individual stages
should assist in determining in the preplanning stage through which components

the desired effect may be obtained (savings of the main or auxiliary time, savings
in materials, etc.), and thus, in choosing the direction for the solution of the
problem;

3) And, finally, the analysis should assist in determining the most efficient
path for solving the problem and choosing the optimal technical variant in the
developmental stage.

Some techniques of technical and economic analysis of production as applied to
problems which arise in project planning and design work on the automation of
seaiconductor production are presented below.

- 257 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A Model of Material Flaws of a Production System Based on Cost Indicators

When determining individual labor productivity at an individual enterprise or
section, only the expenditures for human labor at the given enterprise (or section)
are taken into account. Correspondingly, a savings in human labor, including
savings due to reduction in the labor input requirement. means a growth in labor
productivity.

The special position of the problem of quality in semiconductor device production
is responsible for the fact that the balance sheet for labor productivity is
governed in many respects here by the level of production process losses. This
circumstance does not allow one in the comprehensive analysis of production systems
to limit oneself to the labor input requirement indicator for an individual sec-
tion. since the use of this indicator without taking production process losses
into account can lead to erroneous conclusions in the choice of the approach to
the design of new equipment. It is necessary to work from the overall labor
productivity, which is defined by all of the work time expenditures per product
unit. i.e., by the expenditures of current and past human labor, embodied in raw
materials, working materials, fuel and labor tools. The total outlays of present
and past human labor are characterized by the "economic input requirement for a
product" indicator which has been developed in recent years. However, the prac-
tical utilization of this indicator involves a number of procedural and practical
difficulties. Therefore, it is expedient in practical calculations to use an
cstimate of the optimality of a variant based on the "minimum production cost"
criterion. since the production cost indicator sufficiently precisely accounts for
the additional expenditures of materials and semi-finished products related to
production process losses.

F1f8t 90¢t10“ 2“‘ 3°°“°“ i-th section nrth section
1-0 porn" .'-l pum- _ (:1 runs: .. n-d ("t-Ill

 

_'*'_“'_'_1

 

Figure 12.3. A model of the material flows for a production system.

Key: 1. ”off 1 [section 1 cost];
2. TPl [section 1 production process losses];
3. Deff n [n-th section effective cost].

A model of material flows in a production system, which takes into account expen-
ditures related to production process losses, can be represented in the following
form (Figure 12.3). The system consists of n production process sections or lines;

- 253 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
at the end of each of these, the product quality is checked, which, as was noted
above, is one of the conditions for singling out a section as a subsystem. As

a result of the quality control in each section, the rejects and production pro-
cess losses T? are ascertained. Since quality control operations can also be
carried out within a section, we understand K1 in this model to he the entire qual-
ity control sun, which is realized in the section, including the final one, while
7P1 is the sum of all of the losses ascertained in the section as a result of the
quality control. The semi-finished products from the preceding section are fed

to the i-th section, where these products are acknowledged as good following the
K1_1 quality control with an overall cost of ”eff 1-1, as well as the additional
materials for the processing in the i-th section of the entire amount of semi-
finished products which arrive at this point. The cost of these materials (or
semi-finished products) is expressed by the H1. The labor expenditures for produc-
tion and quality control of the operations, carried out in the i-th section, con-
prise the quantity T1.

To carry out an engineering economic analysis of a production system using the
model proposed here, it is necessary to introduce an indicator which evaluates
the cost level of the production process losses.

The Cost Coefficient of Production Process Efficiency

The generally accepted characteristic at the present time for the sifting out

of defective products in semiconductor device production is the good product yield
coefficient (or percentage), x; let the quantities :1 be the yield coefficient

in the i-th operation (or section) and n3 1 is the overall yield coefficient in
the i-th operation from the start of the prccess. This indicator is rather infor-
mative and convenient in estimating the technical level of production, for the
operationally timely analysis of the course of a production process as well as

the analysis of a local production process. It is needed in the calculation of a
whole series of parameters for complex lines, including their effective produc-
tivity, the line pace, the quantity of process stock, etc.

However, the good product yield coefficient does not sufficiently completely
reflect the cost level of losses in a comprehensive analysis of several production
sections arranged in series, since it does not take into account the differing
volume of losses in the indicated sections, including those related to the arrival
of additional materials and semi-finished products at the given section. It is
apparent that for production processes producing devices which differ in their
structural design and production technology, where these devices have the same
yield coefficient, the specific share of the production process losses differs

in the cost expression. For this reason, in line with the model adopted here, we
shall introduce a cost indicator along with the good product yield coefficient,
where this cost indicator takes into account the production process losses [68],
and we shall consider its relationship to the yield coefficient (Figure 12.6).

Lct Ci be the cost of all of the outlays (for materials, processing, product
measurements, etc.) to produce one product in the i-th production section (or

step). Then one can write the total expenditures in the section, Di, in the
following form:

- 259 -

Ff”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USEioNLY
FOIINHNCJAL.USE(NVLY

 

Figure 12.4. The cost coefficient of
production process effi-
ciency.

Key:

b.

Material balance sheet
for the production of
semiconductor devices;
The relationship of
the yield factor 53
and the cost coeffi-
cient of production
process efficiency

2c.

”eff n [effective cost
of the n-th section];
Effective cost of the
(n - l)th section;

TPl [production pro-
cess losses of section
11:

Production process
losses of section n;

ncn ceff n/D °

Dl-'(M|+Tl) + (Mg-+7.1) + . . .
-No(Cs+C|+n-|Ca+ --

+‘(M(+Tl) -
. +nu-ICI).
where Co is the product cost at the

start; so is the number of products
started in production.

The cost retained in production after
the i~th section snounts to:

f
D... (-ﬂuNoC-ﬂslNog-‘o CA.

where

r'
C- ‘
2.. C. is the aggregate of

expenditures in the 1 sections for
one product; n31“ is the nuaber of
good products folfouing the 1 sections.

The quantity:

1
Quizzes

.10

l
X 'I-t-Icﬁ

lvo

 

M-£mt_-

D!

is the coat coefficient of technological
production efficiency, which is intro-
duced in a asnner similar to the good
product yield coefficient. It is not
difficult to see from the latter rela-
tionship that the following inequality
is observed:

nuSnccsl-

This inequality makes it possible to
immediately conclude that the specific
share of production process losses in
the cost expression is usually less
than expressed by means of the product
yield coefficient. It can be seen for
the first, or separately treated sec-
tion (1 - 1) that:

Hen-mu "K1.

i.e., the use of the nc coefficient is
expedient only in the case of a

- 260 -
INDRiOFFICIAl.IISE:CH‘LY
comprehensive and simultaneous analysis of several sections or stages. The dia-
grams (see Figure 13.6) [sic] clearly show the specific features of the change in
the cost coefficient of'production process efficiency nc during the production
process and its relationship to the good product yield coefficient with respect
to the start us.

Since the production cost for a good device can be represented by the expression:

I l "
C. ms"_§'h-.C--

‘lss
while the aggregate expenditures for the fabrication of a single device are:

 

s
C- 2C..
an
‘0 Then:
I
hazel
- H_-£
‘kl . C. '
Ehacs
ma

Thus. the coefficient n , calculated for the production process as a whole, ref-
lects the fraction of tgg requisite expenditure for the given technical production
level to fabricate a single device, referenced to the actual outlays, i.e., it

is a cost expression or the economic equivalent of the efficiency of a production
system. The introduction of a cost indicator for production process losses in
semiconductor manufacturing is quite important to ascertain the production sections
having a poor efficiency, to refine the production process. modernize equipment,
determine the most efficient organizational and technical measures as well as to
plan work on the comprehensive mechanization of semiconductor device production.
The utilization of the cost coefficient he makes it possible to determine the
efficiency of new technological processes. equipment and production systems.
Because of the fact that the cost coefficient nc characterizes the actual outlays
and estimates the production process losses expressed in terms of cost, accounting
for production process losses using this indicator can make it possible to
efficiently distribute the facilities for production and correctly plan the major
kind of losses in semiconductor production.

It follows from what has been presented above that the cost coefficient of pro-
duction process efficiency is more indicative than the good product yield coeffi-
cient in the case of a comprehensive technical and economic analysis of techno-
logical and production processes, and can be widely utilized in industrial and
trial production to analyze processes, evaluate the effectiveness of an improve-
ment in a production process as well as introduce new technology, equipment and
methods of labor organization. The coefficient no can also be used when analyzin"
the level of production process losses within sections.

- 261 -
IND! CINNCJAI.II§EZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Questions of Procedure in Analyzing a Production Process

If in the initial stage of planning a production system the decisive role is to
be played by the comprehensive analysis, and correspondingly. the cost indicator
for production process efficiency based on the economic model adopted above, then
in the stage of developing the lines incorporated in the system, when determining
their optimal composition (and production volume) and selecting the order for

the layout of the control operations, the analysis should be carried out for the
process realized directly in the line; the major role is played here by the
characteristic indicators of the production process, including those for the

estimation of the level of production process losses and the yield coefficient,
r and n3.

O . Because of the fact that one is usua‘ly
1., m 1., 1.; (.ta a) 1.. a... not successful in restoring defective
) InuaoII-a products in semiconductor device pro-

.C. :gl) duction, while the procedure for the
y. ‘-.; T sequencing of the operations, with

‘mblﬂ1(h)!, rare exceptions, cannot be changed,
Loses the production process can be repre-
sented as a string of production pro-

Figure 12.5. Process schematics. cess operations, 3 - l, 2, ..., n,
a. Production process’ between which there are i . l, 2. ...
b Local production process- a quality control operations (Figure

' ’ 12.3). The requisite operations on

Key: 1. To the (j + l)th opera- a product are performed during the

tion. production process to obtain the

requisite properties in it. Quality

control operations should not change the product, but are intended to check 1' -;

state and its conformity to the established requirements.

(1,, 'l: (-- 2-IIJ, (I-I‘Io, 0.”
6—o—o—- «(B—«10

Figure 12.6. Simplified model of a production process.

It Is apparent that a sequential and detailed analysis of a local production

process is extremely difficult, since it is necessary to take into account a ,
large number of factors. including random ones. He will note that in such an 221
analysis, the aggregate of n operations must take into account at least about I

factors. for exasple, when n - 10, about 2,000, while in the production of

planar transistors. the number of operations is considerably greater. Consider-
ing what has been said above and the difficulties of a procedural nature in the
analysis of conplex systems, it is expedient to reconnend the use of a simplified
approach in the analysis of a production process for the manufacturing of semi-
conductor devices.

- 262 -
FOR 0F11CJAI.USEGDNLY
A production process can be represented by a rather simple model (Figure 12.6):
a signal no - l is fed to the input of a series string of attenuators with over-
all independent random absorption factors :1, where this signal is attenuated in

step with its propagation through the system (the intermediate value is ‘ )
and at the output of the system, takes on the value: m-I'Iu.)
. b-i
m- “n

(-I .
The utilization of this model substantially simplifies the analysis of the complex
system under consideration. It is obvious that the simplified model treated here
can be used to analyze a production process if the parameters being monitored
and their ranges of permissible values are chosen in accordance with the assump-
tions indicated above. As has already been noted, the major indicator in the
analysis is the production cost of the devices. in accordance with a change in
which one may also estimate the expediency of selecting those quality control con-
ditions under which the production process can be analysed based on the simplified
model described here.

The most important conditions for the efficiency of automated systems are reliable
equipment operation. and the reduction of losses of the second and third kinds

to a minimum. Questions of assuring reliable operation of automated machines

and lines, which do not lead to fundamental differences in the conditions of
semiconductor production, are not treated in this book.

12.4. Some Methods of Determining the Optimal Parameters of Semiconductor Produc-
tion Lines and Systems

The basis for the substantiation of an efficient production system structure is
the technological process. Any system, in being a single integral complex of
mutually related components, possesses a definite structure which allows for the
singling out of a hierarchy of elements, where these elements possess properties
of subsystems relative to the main system. For this reason, without segregating
such elements, i.e., without determining the structure, it is impossible to
either set about the planning of the major system components or analyzing the
system. The fundamentals of a systems approach to the planning of automated pro-
duction and the terminology were set forth above (see 512.2). In setting about
the solution of a specific problem in the area of project planning, it is essen-
tial to take into account the fact that for relatively simple production systems,
which take the form of continuous flow line production or shops with equipment
which is grouped together with respect to the production process principle, the
subsystems can be considered to be individual equipment units. For such a comp':x
system as a comprehensively mechanized production system for semiconductor devices,
it is necessary to treat larger facilities, equipment groups, as the subsystems,
i.e., individual lines and sections. For this reason. the problem of rigorously
substantiating the optimal breakdown of the production of electronic equipment
products into lines and sections, or, in other words, the problem of selecting

an efficient structure for it, is a far from simple one. The specific features
of semiconductor production which were enumerated above even more underscore the
impact of technology on the level and nature of the entire production process.
When selecting an efficient production system structure, the main criterion

- 263 -
F0I40FFKJAJ.USE(MVLV
FINRIDF1WC1Al.lEHE(NNLY

becomes certain common parameters of the production process; the nature and
reliability of the production process, the high level of production process losses
and their statistical nature which govern the layout of the quality control equip-
ment and the collection points between sections and the duration of the working
cycle in the sections begin to play a more important part. Of the production pro-
cess factors which govern the breakdown of comprehensively mechanized production
of semiconductor devices into stages, we shall single out the following main ones:

1. A change in a processing unit, which is determined by the nature of the process
itself and, as a rule, related to a jump like change in the batch processing
coefficient and correspondingly. to a change in the working cycle TP (for example,
after breaking a wafer into chips or following a classification operation).

2. Special technological features of a process, including the existence of tech-
nological unity, common methods and operations which make it possible to bring
them together into a single complex with a single final goal, which ends in the
output of the object (or part), which is subjected to quality control and stored
with the process stock.

3. The level of production process losses ascertained during quality control
operations, which when significant. also substantially changes the working cycle

of subsequent operations.

Having taken these production process factors as the initial ones for the primary
logical substantiation of an efficient production structure, one can analyze these
factors and come up with a quantitative evaluation of them. By way of example,

we shall consider the technological process for the fabrication of silicon planar
transistors. The analysis is carried out for the following major steps: 1.0.

the fabrication and treatment of the wafers; 2.0. the fabrication of the wafers
with the transistor structures; 3.0. the separation of the wafers into chips;

4.0. the assembly of the device: 5.0. finish operations (classification tests of
the device and final operations)*.

The indicated classification most completely conforms to the actually adopted
production process for the fabrication of planar devices, which makes it possiblt

to obtain data for a reliable analysis of each step.

He shall consider three variants of the basic structural packaging of the devices
proposed for production: a cold-welded metal-glass package, a hot-welded T018
metal-glass package, and a plastic package. We have conditionally taken the
overall production volume to be 30 million good devices per year, with 10 million

devices each in each structural package variant. The major parameters of the
production process, which govern its breakdown into independent production sections

or lines, are given in Table 12.2. An analysis of Table 12.2 confirms the

——————————-

*Building up epitaxial films, which is in essence an independent step, is not
considered in this example. and because of this, as a rule, this specific
territorial feature is considered a specialised production step. The entire
first step may also be singled out as such production.

-254-
IN)! OWWHCJAI.IJSE§(MVLV
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R0005000900044

o.no o.co o.oo 0.00 0.09 o.no
n n n n a a
ocuonoo
Iooooo
as. 3»:
Ioauol Iaonoo Aououa
In»: Icon: no Macao:
oou>ov ouuooooov
noxooa "on. song: oauno
no. ooou>ov sud: sun:
noxuoz

mmmmmuumawummmuul .Iqmﬂ.ndmmeIIIIdII| cocoa ammuuu.llmmwmmm .IIImmmm

naucsuo no. god» Iuoom tuba: Iuoxoom Iowan-o: no£uua Ioaon on. Iuooua

Iaoo uou«u«o uuuol ~.o no. coda onoum nauosa aouosu dooa

.N. n nooau. a. a snow Ion-a uooa.e.« .n.~ nuua.~.~ uaono.a.~
mmmmmuwwmmllll Ion oousuusuum no“:

9.235.... o. n 3 6..” 38.: no 8332‘»... .o.~

 

o.no 0.00 0.00A

Chauoﬂhuu 0&0

oo«>on unwuuoo sauum noduuou unauavOuo no nooooua o:u :« noun:

c.cd

noun:

ahead: 0:»
no menu-00

IIIUCHG cc « u 9:19:—

03...» . A069:

:00. noun-non uo non
Ilacv uooacuwuoau ouu
no van-away» o:0«uo>
you coco 0:» ocean
Iuouov snug: .aouau
loam nououoouuo uo
Queue-anon unduouuuv

a sud: noun: no moans:

noon“
.Auouuuoo moon» uo
unavouov uwouo who:
can an you own:
«no mo sown-ouuoon

oncooum on»
no queues-non nan-z

noun v:-
couuoouu

LE

seed

 

uo coauuavoun vouuconoo: auo>uoaosounaou osu cu uncum Mono: 0:» no nuance-ham on»

Chauﬂdiﬁﬂkh HQCOHﬂ Bouaddm

 

.N.~H man<H

 

 

- 26$ -

POI/OFFKJA1.USE(HNLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDP82-00850R000500090004-3

necessity of segregating the follouing stages of the production process into in-
dependent lines or sections: 1.0. 2.6, 3.0. 6.0, and 5.0. For the plastic
packaged device. steps 6.1 and 6.2 should be singled out as independent sections.
This cannot be said for atagea 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3, as well as stages 3.1 and 3.2
for devices in a aetal-glass package, having a cannon production facility and

a ninor change in the production output cycle.

The structure of the coaprehensively nechanized production treated above for
silicon planar transistors is shown in Figure 12. 7.

,, 3_
,' 3—:
Mum:—

L...—

' _ _ _ _ _
.0 olmml

3mm,- D:mxeanaa(-aa)meena-I I

 

Figure 12.7. Structure of comprehensively mechanized production of
silicon planar transistors.

Key: 1.0. Fabrication and processing of the wafers;
1.1. Section for aechanical treat-eat of the wafers;
1.2. Line (or section) for chenical treataent of the
wafers;
1.3. Epitaxial growth section;

- 267 -
FOIGMﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Figure 12.7 [cont.]: 2.0. The fabrication of the chips with the structure;
2.1. The line for chemical treat-ant of the
wafers;
2.2. The section (or line) for heat treatment
operations;
2.3. The photolithography line;
2J0. The test probe measuresent section;
3.0. The separation of the wafers into chips: the
lines for separating the wafers into chips;
b.0. Assembly of the device;
$.11. Line for the nounting of cold welded
devices;
6.11. Line for mounting the devices in a 10-18
package;
6.1P. Line for mounting the devices on a strip;
$.2x. Line for heraetically sealing cold nelded
devices;
b.20. Line for hermetic sealing the devices in
T0-18 packages;
6.2P. Section for hermetically sealing the
device in plastic;
5.0. Tinishing operations;
5.1. The section for device testing and
classification;
5.2x. The line for concluding operations on
cold uelded devices;
5.20. The line for concluding operations on
devices in T0-18 packages;
5.2P. The line for narking and packing devices
in plastic packages.

The Task of Substantisting the Optinal Productivity of Lines (or Optimal Produc-
tion Volume) and the Equipment Composition Corresponding to It During the
Developsental Stage

The volume of comprehensively nechsnised production being planned can be deter-
nined as a result of analysing the following factors:

--The national econonic demand for devices of the given type and the prospects
for an increase in this denand in upcoming years;

--The level of the so-cslled critical volune, i.e.. the production volume below
which the outlays for conprehensive mechanization are not justified;

--The specific production engineering conditions for creating comprehensively
nechanieed production: areas. the volume and capabilities for coordinated
deliveries of seni-finished products, etc.

However. the factors cited above are only limitations inposed on the output
quantity of the production being planned and allow for the possibility of a

rather wide variation in it. For this reason. the calculation of the structure
and conposition of equipment in practice is usually based on a specified

- 268 -

FOI40FFKJA1.USE(HNLY
production volume, which is the rounded-off sari-us technically feasible value

of device output under the given conditions. The productivity and other technical
capabilities of the equipment employed in the system, both the newly designed
equipment and that which existed previously, are linited to finite values governed
by the technical level of the equipnent. We will note that the composition of

a line is discrete, and the productivity of the individual equipment units in

the general case may not always be strictly be interrelated, nuch less have a
com-on specified device output quantity.

Because of this, it can be said that the composition of the equipment designed for
any arbitrarily selected or predeternined production volume does not always yield
the best results for the given conposition with this production volume. As has
already been noted, market conditions and other limitations imposed on the pro-
duction volume during equipment selection make it possible to establish this
quantity within a rather wide range; for this reason, it is expedient to formulate
the problem of detersining the optimum production volume by working from a spe-
cified technological level for the process, which is characterized by the equip~
sent indicators, as well as from the major criterion: minimal production cost
taking into account the limiting factors mentioned above.

when selecting an efficient structure for a comprehensively mechanized production
systen, we worked from the basic principle: a nodular configuration for it. It
is obvious that having determined the optimum production volumes for the indivi-
dual nodules (lines or sections), incorporated in the production system, we
thereby resolve the question of choosing the optimal volume for the entire system.
For this reason, only a production line is treated in the following. The task
has two aspects: having determined the optimum volume, we simultaneously deter-
nine the line composition corresponding to it. The criterion taken as the basis

for the design calculations is the production cost per unit of output product.
It is assuned that the specified equipment productivity in each production process

operation, including that maxi-um feasible value for newly developed equisent,

as well as the production process sequence for their configuration, i.e., the
structure of a line. can change only through an increase or decrease in the amount
of equipment in definite production process operations.

l-n

He designate {1‘45 as the quantity of equipment units in a line (11 is the

number of equipment units for the i-th operation); Q is the line productivity,
pieces per year; C is the production cost of a unit of output product, in rubles.

He shall consider a three-dimensional
system of coordinates with the ori

gin at point 0 and having axes of

00, 00 and OC. As has already been
noted, the line has a discrete com-
position. Then the functions of 9,

 

r”, 0' ﬂ " . Q and c can be represented graphical-
Flgurc 12.8. The proposed relationship ly (Figure 12.8). Only a productiv-

between the number of line ity segment is being treated: la,

equipment units, line pro- b], i.e., QB [a,b]. In fact, let a

ductivity and production cost line conposition of 01 appear at
per unit of output product.

- 269 -

INJI40FFIC1AI.IHSII(NULY
INDR‘OITﬂClAL.USIZ(NVLY

point a - Q. It is clear that Q can increase up to Q: by virtue of several factors
(the equipment load factor, the {abor intensity. etc.), which have an impact on

line productivity while its composition is constant. A further increase in line
productivity can be achieved only by virtue of changing the conposition of the line
by adding a certain number of equipment units for certain production process opera-
tions. The production cost of a unit of output product in the sections [01, 02],

[Q2. Q3], .... (Q.-1. le' .... [Q._1, 0.] can be expressed by the formula:

where:

onto. le ( {3333:

ck is the production cost per unit of output product in the k-th section with a
constant line composition, in rubles: ”k are the overall annual expenditures for
the output product in the k-th section in the case of constant line composition,
rubles.

It is apparent that the expression Ck - Dk/Qk is the equation of a hyperbola. We
forsulate the problem in this fashion: it is necessary to determine that line
composition having a productivity 03(a, b) which would provide the minimum produc-
tion cost per unit of output product. It follows from Figure 16.8 that to solve
the problen posed here. it is necessary to find the points 01, 02. ..., Qn3(a, b)
and to choose from them the point Qj having the minimal production cost per unit
of output product. The composition of the line corresponding to the point 03 will
also be optimal.

The Task of the Optimal Placement of Quality Control Operations and the Layout of
the Test Equipment in the Planning of comprehensively Mechanized Production

The main function of the quality control system for the operations in the semicon-
ductor device production process is the timely and complete ascertaining of defec-
tive products. Sufficiently complete detection is possible with an appropriate
choice of quality control parameters and limits for their permissible values.

The selection of the quality control system should be first of all subordinate to
these requirements just as to the requirements for control of the production pro-
cess, but with the simultaneous condition of assuring the least expenditures for
quality control and generating the minimum production cost of a good device. It
is especially important to solve this problem when designing new comprehensively
mechanized lines. which is always accompanied by the development of not only the
production process equipment but also new quality control and instrumentation
hardware. For this reason, we shall pose the problem of the optimal distribution
of quality control operations in the production process with the major condirion
that of generating minimal outlays for quality control and production of semicon-
ductor devices. through the timely ascertaining and rejection of defective pro-
ducts. The method of solving this problem is based on two presumptions; the pro-
duction process is characterized by stable indicators. while the requirements
placed on the goodness of products in the quality control operations make it possi-
ble to sufficiently completely detect defective products.

- 270 -
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USB(NVLY
The technological process of producing seniconductor devices, as was noted above.
should he represented by a rather large nunber of parameters in a detailed ana-
lysia. The analysis of systqss sinilar to that treated here hecaee possible in
recent years through the develop-ant and refine-eat of nunerical nethods using
coeputers capable of operating with data files of a rather large size. Maths-stic-
al nethods are described in [67. 70] for the optieixation of the structure of
conpreheneively nechsnized lines, including the application of one of the nuneric-
al analysis eethode for cunbersoee queue. the randon search technique. to the

opti-ieation of a quality control syst- for semiconductor device production opere-
tiona.

- 271 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER THIRTEEN EQUIPMENT TOR PURIFYING MEDIA AND PROVIDING THE HICROCLIHATE
IN THE MAJOR OPERATIONS OF A PRODUCTION PROCESS

13.l. Requirements Placed on Production Process Media. The Main Methods of
Purifying Media

Diverse kinds of production process media (water, air, nitrogen, hydrogen, etc.)
are needed in semiconductor production, where they are employed in various stages
of device fabrication, something which determines the different levels of require-
ments placed on them. The purist liquid and gaseous media are needed when treat-
ing the surface of a semiconductor. which actively interacts with its environment.
Even under high vacuum conditions, a monoatomic layer of oxides is formed on the
surface of a semiconductor in a few seconds.

The phenomena which take place at a surface can have a substantial impact on the
level and stability of device parameters. For this reason. production processes
and special equipment complexes which provide for high quality preparation and
monitoring of water and gas parameters are of particular importance.

Purified water is widely used in practically all stages of production to wash
parts and prepare solutions. The technical requirements placed on water parameters
are given in Table 13.1.

For the operations involving the preliminary washing of wafers, water is used
having a specific electrical resistance of 5 HOhm ‘ cm; for finish washing opera-
tions, water is considered acceptable when it has a specific electrical resistance
of 16 to 18 "Ohm ' cm and a contaminating particle size of no more than 0.5 um.

Hater contaminants are broken down into four main groups: mineral. desolved
organic impurities. suspended solid particles and microorganisms. Special meas-
urement hardware and cleaning techniques have been developed for each kind of
pollutant. The diversity of techniques and equipment to obtain ultrapure water
makes it possible to select the optimim variants in each specific case. In this
case, it is necessary to take into account the characteristics of the initial
water and the requirements placed on the level of purity of the water produced.

TABLE 13.1. Technical Requirements Placed 25 Water Parameters

 

 

 

Grade 21 Water

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parameters A B V

Electrical resistivity at 20° C, no 18 15 5

less than. HOhm ' cm

Oxidahility. no more than (with respect 0.8 0.8 1.2

to KMnOb), mg 02/1

Silicic acid content, mg/l. no more than 0.01 0.02 0.05

Content of microparticles l um and up to not not

more in size, units/ml 10 checked checked

Microorganism content. colonies/ml 5 - 10 5 - 20 g 50
- 272 -

INDR 0F1ﬂ€ﬂAl.lEﬂ£(NHLY
The standard production process for water purification includes three main
stages: the preliminary preparation, the main purification and finishing puri-
fication. The preliminary preparation combines the following operations:

--The clarification of the water, i.s.. the removal of coarse dispersed and col-
loidal impurities, which is accomplished by means of coagulation, liming, and
the use of magnesium to remove silicon;

--Hechanical separation of suspended particles using a filtering layer (sand,
crushed anthracite, marble. diabase, granite, etc.);

--Condensation, distillation and electrical coagulation to remove organic impuri-
ties;

--Sorption by means of macroporous and isoporous anion exchangers to remove or-
ganic impurities.

The major methods of removing truly dissolved substances from water to obtain
desalinated water are described below. The first of them provides for the repeat-
ed distillation of the water. The amount of impurities following distillation
amounts to up to 20 mg/l, and the specific electrical resistance of the water is
about 300 KOhm ‘ cm, which does not meet the requirements for semiconductor
production technology. Following triple distillation in quartz equipment, the
resistivity of the water reaches 3 "Ohm ' cm. however, this is also insufficient
to perform a number of finishing operations.

Ion exchange techniques are most frequently used to desalinate water: sorption
of ionic impurities by means of ion exchange resins and the removal of ionic
impurities by an electrical direct current with the electrodialysis using selec-
tive membranes made of ion exchange materials.

Voter which has been cleaned of inorganic impurities by means of ion exchange
resins is called deionized. The purification of water using ion exchange resins
is based on the ability of certain resins to bind ions of impurities which are
water soluble. The resin composition is conditionally depicted in the following
manner: R-H is the cationic resin, 8-0“ is the anionic exchange resin (R is the
organic radical of the given resins). Natural water is a very dilute solution

of mineral salts, primarily sulfates, chlorides and bicarbonates of calcium,
magnesium and sodium. Iron and manganese cations are contained in somewhat small-
er amounts in water as well as anions of the following acids: salicic, phosphoric,
nitric, etc. when water passes through a cationic exchange resin, cations of

the mineral salts are substituted for the hydrogen ions, as a result of which,

an acid solution is produced at the output of the ion exchange column in accor-
dance with the following reaction:

Fe“ 50,-? Fe so;’
on” 0- c. i-Cl"
R H + + - R + m + .
Mg" "co,- Mg "co;
an "$30,- Na "5:0,-
- .213 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLV
FOI‘0F11C1AL.USIZ(MVLV

In H-cationized water, which leaves an ion exchange column. the gram equivalent
acid content basically corresponds to the concentration of the salts of the strong
acids formed in the original water at the moment of the ion exchange reactions.
with the further passage of the water through the anion exchange resin, the so.'2,
Cl’ and other anions are trapped in accordance with the following reaction:

90.“ so.
cr cu
a on + .. a + our.
moo;- H00.
asso; asso.

The on" which is liberated with the substitution of the ions combines with the
ﬂ+ ion and forms a molecule of water:

n+ + or - “20

There are traces of ionic contaminants contained in water under actual conditions
where the water has passed once through a cation exchange resin (first purifica-
tion stage). To increase the degree of purity. a repeat cleaning is provided
which is similar to the first stage; used as the second stage in modern equipment
are nixed action filters (FSD). filled with a mixture of cation and anion exchange
resins. The filter can be represented as a set of parallel and series connected
cation (K) and anion (A) exchange microfiltera (Figure 13.1).

The quality of deionized water is primarily defined by the specific resistivity.
which is inversely proportional to the concentration of residual ionic impurities.
A chemically pure water with a specific resistivity of 18.3 "Ohm - cm at a tem-
perature of 25° c or 25.6 HOhm ' cm at 20° C can be obtained in theory by means
of ion exchange.

The technique for obtaining desalinated
water by means of ion exchange membranes
and the application of direct current is
called electrodialysis. The essence of
this demineraliaation method consists in
the removal of ions of dissolved salts by
continuous electromigration with the appli-
cation of a DC electric field through

 

Figure 13.1. Schematic showing the cation and anion permeable membranes (Fig-
working of . combined ure 13.2). In this case, there is the
directional transport of cations towards
action filter.
the cathode and anions towards the anode.
Key: 1° Initial water; As a result, the water is desalinated in
2- Purified water; the even chambers 2, A and 6 and the salts
K ' Cationic exchanser are accumulated in the odd salt accumula-
f‘1‘9'33 tion chambers 3 and S. The usual process
A ' Anionic 9*Ch‘“8¢' of electrolysis of the water containing
filter'- the dissolved salts takes place in the
- 276 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lush
Mam ”'5?" end chambers 1 and 7 where the electrodes
Muinnu are placed, in which case, gaseous hydro—
"“fgf“' gen is liberated at the cathode:

"’""‘ 23*+2e'-a
2

- while oxygen is liberated at the anode
u;uuut as a result of the hydroxyl ions giving
“* ‘) up electrons: '

60H“ - be‘ - tho + 02
Figure 13.2. Schematic of an electro-
dialyzer. During slectrodialysis, polarization pro—
, _ ceases also take place in ion exchange
Key. 1' Polluted water, membranes for the purpose of obtaining
2. Purified water;
. completely desalinated water [71], where
3. Electrolysis product, h 1 d od 1
‘. Initial water. t ese processes as to unpr uct ve
expenditures of electrical power, which
to a considerable extent limits the
capabilities of this purification method [72]. This method is economically expe-
dient to make water fresh which has a comparatively large content of mineral
salts and is used in the preliminary processing stage.

Electrodialysis and ion exchange techniques have been combined into a new process:
electro-ion exchange. in which the sections of the electrodialyzer are filled
with ion exchange resins. The method makes it possible to simultaneously carry
out the processes of the sorption of ion impurities from the water being purified
by ion exchange as well as electrochemical desorption of them with the application
of an electric current. The resins in R-H and R-Oﬂ forms traps and concentrates
the ions of the water being purified, which then migrate through the membranes
with the action of the applied voltage. The introduction of ion exchange fillers
into the chambers of the electrodialyzer makes it possible to reduce the electric-
al resistance of the system. This leads to a reduction in the voltage, which is
due to the absence of polarization. However, there is a phenomenon similar to
polarization at the points of contact between the particles of the ion exchange
resins and the membranes, and which leads to the electrolytic decomposition of

the water into hydroxyl and hydrogen ions. Because of this process, the mixed
layer of ion exchangers is recovered, which can be represented in the form:

*"+m¥+mm+Rﬂ-RM+R£H+MQ

As a result, the salts are concentrated in the salt accumulation chambers, while
a considerably desalinated water is obtained in the desalinization sections.

The reverse osmosis technique occupies a special place among purification methods
[73]. The essence of it consists in the fact that if a pressure is applied to

a solution which is in contact with a semipermeable membrane, where this pressure
exceeds the natural osmotic level. pure water begins to filter through this
membrane, while the dissolved impurities, in being concentrated, are drained off
in the sludge. This method makes it possible to reduce the concentration of
salts in water and to hold back almost all suspended particles prior to the ion

- 275 -
FOI10FFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR 0] ICIAI. USE ONLY
l
l
I

exchange stage. As compared to tli techniques cited above, this method makes it
possible to partially or completc.y eliminate the use of resins and chemical
reagents, considerably reduce the metal input requirements for the equipment which
is built and curtail the number of attending personnel and the area occupied.

In holding back the dissolved salts, the membrane simultaneously proves to be a
molecular filter, capable of retaining bacteria, pyrogenic agents and the majority
of organic substances encountered in natural water. The process of reverse osmo-
sis takes place at room temperature, does not require recovery of the filters,
because of which the economic outlays are small. Reverse osmosis is also promising
both for the preliminary purification of water from dissolved organic and ionic
impurities and for the finish purification from suspended microparticles.

Progress in semiconductor production is responsible for the rise in the require-
ments placed on the purity of all of the materials used in production. Because
of the sharp decrease in the dimensions of device components, when estimating

the quality of the water being used, with the exception of salt content (specific
electrical resistivity), it is necessary to take into account the size and quan-
tity of the suspended microparticles. The requirements placed on water used in
finish operations are especially high; in this case, the preliminary and fine
scrubbing filters should assure the absence of microparticles more than 0.2 um

in size.

The most effective method of cleaning out microorganisms is purification by means
of filters; in this case, the water being cleaned should be sterilized beforehand
by intense ultraviolet radiation.

The major production process operations in semiconductor production are carried
out in a gas environment: pure nitrogen, argon, oxygen, hydrogen or in mixtures
based on them. In this case, the gas production process medium can perform Li
functions of a reagent (for example, the operations of epitaxial film growth and
diffusion from a gas phase), a protective environment (for example, the operations
of annealing and melting-in) or a filler gas. Correspondingly, distinctions are
also drawn in the requirements placed on the degree of purification of the median:
when processing in a reducing medium, oxygen impurities and water vapors are h”
ful; in neutral media, oxygen, hydrogen and water vapor impurities are harmful;

in oxidizing media, hydrogen impurities are harmful, and in individual cases also
water vapor; in all cases, dust particles are harmful. Because of this, all of
the gases used in semiconductor production are subjected to purification which
assures a volumetric oxygen content of no more than 0.0005! (for hydrogen used

in epitaxial growth, this requirement is even higher: the volumetric oxygen
content should not exceed 0.000012); the water vapor content (relative to the

dew point) is no higher than -65° C to -75' C. When using nitrogen, argon and
oxygen. the volumetric content of the hydrogen in them should not exceed 0.0012.

The technique of catalytic hydrogenization has become the most widespread method
of removing oxygen; in this case, the gas being purified (nitrogen and inert
gases with about 42 added hydrogen) is passed through a tank with a catalyst:
palladinized alumogel. and in it, the hydrogen present bonds the oxygen. The
residual volumetric fraction of oxygen obtained with this cleaning technique
amounts to no less than 1 ' 10" 1.

- 276 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 13.2. Requirements Placed 23 Production Rooms

 

Elec-
tronic- Dust
Vacuum Con- Quality Moisture
aniron- tent.‘ Control Air Tem- Maintenance
ment Par- Particle perature, Precision.
Rooms Class ticlesll Size. Em 'C I
General purpose, air Ill >700 In accordance In accordance
conditioned with SN 2&5- with SN 245-71
71
Special purpose, air 11 5700 2.0 1 2 1_lO
conditioned
Clean (sealed areas) lb 5200 1.0 1 2 1 10
Clean rooms la 70 - S 0.5 1 2 1 10
(>23) (>50)
Especially clean >la <5 0.5 1 l 1 5
rooms (:23) (:50)

 

For greater purification of hydrogen from oxygen and all other impurities, a dif-
fusion technique is employed which is based on the capability of hydrogen alone
of diffusing through a palladium membrane. This method theoretically makes it
possible to completely purify the hydrogen. Contamination of the hydrogen occurs
subsequently by virtue of gas emission by the system and the infiltration of air
from without into the main line when transporting the hydrogen to the user.

The most effective and widespread method of drying gases is the physical adsorp-
tion technique. Silica gel and zeolite, which have a well developed surface and
the capability of adsorbing water vapor are the most widely used as the solid
adsorbents.

All of the gases employed are subjected to dust removal, where especially high
requirements are placed on gases employed in the processes of producing semicon-
ductor device structures (epitaxy. diffusion. dielectric isolation, etc.).

The quality and reliability of semiconductor devices are also governed to a con-
siderable extent by the purity, and primarily the humidity and absence of dust

In the air environment of production rooms. Contaminants are introduced into the
environment through unsealed places in the structural members (about 152). through
special clothing and footwear (about 302) and the remaining 552 occur during the
production process and are a consequence of the imperfection of the air distribu-
tion system [7&1.

Special rooms - sealed areas equipped with air conditioners and special dust
removal systems - are constructed to meet the special requirements placed on the
air environment. which are determined by the specific features of the production
of the electronic hardware products [the electronic and vacuum environment

- 277 -

FOIilHﬂKIAl.USE(HNLY
FOP I 'FICIAI. USE ONLY

requirements (BVG)]. Local dust protection units are employed to carry out the
production processes which are the most critical as regards the degree of environ-
mental purity. These include clean rooms, which provide an air environment with
specified and maintained constant temperature. humidity, pressure, dust content

as well as direction and speed of air flow. Even higher requirements as regards
the degree of dust removal are provided by dust shielded chambers and boxes; they
are employed to carry out the most important operations during the photolithography
process, in the fabrication of photographic templates, etc. The requirements
placed on production rooms are given in Table 13.2 [75].

13.2. Equipment for Centralized Hater Purification

Hater purified by means of deionisstion in centralised purification equipment
should have a specific resistivity of no less than 1 HOhm ° cm at a temperature
of 20 1 2° C, an oxidability referenced to oxygen of no more than 1.5 mg/l and
a salicic acid content of no more than 0.2 mg/l.

The UTs-l, UTs-Z, UTs-S and UTs-los units with outputs of l, 2, S and 10 m3/hr
respectively are used for centralized water purification.

Two sections are incorporated in the centralised water purification unit [76]:
the ion exchange unit itself and the recovery station. The equipment complement
of the ion exchange unit consists of a water heater, a mechanical filter, fil-
tration columns, a combined action filter, a tower type degaser with fans and
two tanks for collecting the dionized water and a resin wetting tank. Included
in the equipment complement of the recovery station, which is intended for pre-
paring the recovery solutions, are an ejector system for the preparation of the
working acid and alkali solutions, a solid alkali solvent tank and two dosage
units: for the alkali and the acid.

 
 
   

To consumer
I: nettle-m

[—7

F'-
Acid
lawns (6)
—.s1—————s——m
"ﬁg" Initial water

\

Figure 13.3. Production process scheme showing a centralized water
purification facility.

- 278 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key to Figure 13.3: 1. K - Cation exchange filter;
2. D - Degssifier
3. A I Anion exchange filter;
6. F50 - Combined action filter;
5. SB - Collecting tank;
6. Drainage;
7. Drainage conduit.

The water incoming to the unit is heated up to a temperature of 20 to 25‘ C by

the heater, which is a housed pipe heat exchanger, in which the water flows through
the pipes, while the steam flows through the space between the pipes. The pipe
arrays and the pipes themselves are made of stainless steel. Standardized puri-
fication production processes, assemblies and components are used in the units.

Two similar production process lines are employed. One such line is shown in
Figure 13.3. Hhile one carries out the purification, the other carries out the
recovery. Thus, two cation exchange filters K, a degaser D, two anion exchange
filters A and two combined action filters PSD and a collecting tank for the
deionized water SB are incorporated in the equipment complement of the unit.

The raw water ( -'- )‘is fed from above through valve 1 into cationic exchange
filter K, and then the H-cationized water ( -l- ) is fed through valve 2 to de-
gaser D, where the free carbon dioxide gas which is formed as a result of the
decomposition of the carbonates and bicarbonates in the raw water is removed from
it. The water is fed from the degaser by a punp through valve 0 to the anion
exchange filter, in which the oxygen radicals are absorbed. This completes the
first purification stage; the specific resistivity of the water after this amounts
to 2 to 3 MOhm - cm. The water is then fed through valve 5 to the combined action
filter, FSD, of the second purification stage. The desalinated water ( - - )
having a resistivity of 5 to 6 non. ' cm is collected in the collecting tank and
is fed by a punp to the user for direct utilization or supplemental finishing
purification.

The exchange capacity of the resins is exhausted during the process of purifying
the water. The exhaustion of the H-cation exchange filters is determined from
the overshoot in the cations being extracted; in anion exchange filters in the
first stage, it is determined from the overshoot in the chloride, and in the
second stage. based on the overshoot in the salicic acid anion. With the detec-
tion of such overshoots, the appropriate filter is disconnected for recovery work.

The process of recovering ion exchangers in a filter consists of three sequential
operations:

--The breaking up of the ion exchange resin with a flow of water from bottom to
top to eliminate the compressed nature of the ion exchange material, which is
produced when filtering under pressure and can lead to the nonuniform flow of
the recovery solution, and consequently, to incomplete restoration;

--The recovery itself, i.e., the passage of a restoring solution through the
ion exchanger (from top to bottom through valves 3 and 6): cation exchangers
are restored by a solution of sulphuric or nitric acids ( -9>—), anion exchan-
gers are restored by a solution of sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate or

- 279 -

FtHICHﬂWC1AL USIZ(”NLY
FOR :-1ﬂ(]Al.US£i0NLY

bicarbonate ( -*- ). During restoration. the hydrogen ions displace the metal
cations retained during the operating cycle from the cation exchanger; the
hydroxyl group Oﬂ‘ ions displace the anions of the acids. and the exchange capa-
bility of the resins is restored. To recover filters with a mixed layer of ion
exchangers. the acid and alkali solutions are fed through valves 7 and 8 from
below and above respectively, while the filtrates are dumped from the top and
through the center drain;

--Hashing the recovery products and excess regenerating material from the ion
exchanger by a flow of water from the top down. Hater from the mains and deion-

ized water is used for the flushing.

The filtration column (Figure 13.6) is intended for extracting ions from water by
means of the KU-2-8. EBB-10?. AN-3l and nv-17-s ion exchange resins. The dis-
tribution system 3 for the water, which is made of vinyl plastic piping with holes,
and the distributor for the delivery of the recovery solutions, are located in

the upper portion of the column. There are 67 drainage caps 7. which take the

form of a set of vinyl plastic discs with polyethylene washer inserts. aounted in
the lower portion of the column on plate 1. The drainage is intended to prevent
the removal of resin. A hatch 2 is located above the drainage system for removing
the resin during the repair of the drainage system; there is a branch pipe in the
cap of the hatch to which one can connect another pipe and remove the resin hy-
draulically. The housing of the filtration column 5 is made of a steel pipe.

the diameter of which is calculated as a function of the output of the unit. There
is an inspection window 6 in the upper portion of the column housing, through
which one can observe during operation. The hatch b in the upper cover serves

for topping out the resin during the operation of the unit. The column is mounted
on a welded frame and can also be mounted both separately and as part of other

units.

   

Figure 13.6. Filtration column Figure 13.5. Degasifier.

- 280 -

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
.o>~a> ”caucuauox .wu
“nouaau wade-onu ucau .nn «nouuuquuo uouou>cuuus .o~ "scan mcuuuou
taco .nm «glam .eu “head! >uu>auowoo¢ .nw nu0u~«m .NN uncanny cauuuo
vocunaoo .nw “mash .ON «cum .ou “neuuuoawoa .wu “hone: auou scum .hn
“suede .on uncuol auuuunnm .n~ "none: :9 .qu noucoaono oauoano
oouo>ou oahu henna: .nH «Adan cusp-cum xnws .Nu. “nouawu unacaoao
ooh-co .uu use.» ouutnoonanuOIIn¢£ l5uvom .Ou “scan vuuq ownsznuam .0
«misc cacao: .a “Aauaculauounv nouuuu unmanago ooucoo .s ninja-sues
ace-I959:— 333 «03!, own-Io»: no new .0 ”bond: «cow—.200: .n
"noun! nan-3 .c nuouoloauogh .n “nouoaoacz .N “nouangoxo use: .H "aux

.uOuo: euaaquun: unuusvoun you cause. uncooua acuuuauoua ouoan .o.na ouawum

a a
C I
-II“
1 ____.

 

 

  

omuasuauv noun: no:

i :43... :1. .33“: ..
smug vouwuha h0g5; Den ‘8 2H.
cogx

noun: no:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The degasifier (Figure 13.5) is intended for the removal of carbon dioxide from
the H-cationiaed water. The cylindrical vinyl plastic housing 8 consists of
three sections, 5 and 6, filled to a height of 2.6 m with vinyl plastic chordal
baffles. The baffles are made so that the plates 3 of one row overlap the gaps
between plates 5 of the next row. The water exits on top through a branch pipe
and is uniformly distributed by a special plate 7 over the surface of the attach-
ment. There are 68 water distribution branch pipes on the plate and 8 branch
pipes for the air outlet. The branch pipes for water distribution are distributed
uniformly over the area of the plate. Raschig rings are also used to fill the
body of the degasifier. The degasifier column is mounted on tank 9. in which the
water is collected following degasification. An BSU-l level indicator is mounted
in the tank. Air is delivered to the lower portion of the column from fan 2,
which is mounted on frame 1 alongside the tank. The air from the fan goes upward
to counter the flow of water and goes out into the atmosphere.

The combined action filter is intended for holding the mixture of KU-2-8 chs

and Av-l7-8 chs ion exchange resins. The housing is made from steel pipe, the
diameter of which is computed as function of the output of the unit; the internal
surface of the pipe is rubber coated. The structural design of the combined act-
ion filter is similar to the structure of the conventional filtration column
described above, with the exception of the center drain unit.

The basic production process scheme for producing ultrapure water at a rate of

2 n3/hr is shown in Figure 13.6. A high degree of purity is assured by virtue

of the use of a multistage processing system, which includes the removal of micro-
particles in the mechanical filter 5 (the removal of particles with dimensions of
more than 20 pm); the coarse cleaning filters 7 and 11 remove particles larger
than 6 um; the fine cleaning filters 22 and 27 remove particles larger than 2 no
and 0.2 um respectively; the purification employs the reverse osmosis technique
using roller type elements 13, degasification, double ion exchange purificatitn
in combi.ed action filters 21 as well as ultraviolet sterilization. To provide
for continuous system operation, collecting tanks 25 with a capacity of 10 m3
each are provided where necessary for the restoration of the combined action fil-
ter; additionally. the combined action filters are structurally designed so that
they allow rapid replacement with a filter which has been restored in a separat-
special section. "here a greater purified water consumption is required, the
collecting tanks make it possible for two production process finishing "lines"

to operate in parallel, which boosts the system output up to 4 m3/hr.

The unit for water purification using reverse osmosis (Figure 13.7) is intended
for water purification in a semiautomatic operating mode, and when operated in
conjunction with combined action filters, makes it possible to obtain water with
an electrical resistivity of 8 to 10 HOhm ' cm. The starting water, which is
cleaned in a mechanical filter, is fed into the purification block. All of the
assemblies of the purification block are mounted on frame 1, to the bottom frame
of which the high pressure pump 9 is fastened as well as the tank for the acid
solution 7 and the tank for the washing solution 8. There are three purification
modules 5, a filtrate flow rate indicator 4 and a concentrate flow rate indicator
6, as well as filters for cleaning the washing solution 3 and a pH meter 2 all
arranged in vertcsl racks in the frame. The installation is controlled from a
control console, on which there are the following: pushbuttons for checking the

- 282 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 13.7. Installation for water purification using reverse
osmosis.

operability 10; for resetting the alarm signal and turning the unit on again 15;
“Alarn Signal Cutoff“ toggle switch 1‘; small monitor lights for installation
operation; the adjusting control for pH meter 12; aaneter l3; counter 11: and the
main switch with mechanical interlocking 16. The power panel is located inside
the control console and power is brought into the console fron below.

The basic production process schematic of the water purification unit using
reverse osmosis is shown in Figure 13.8. Th initial water at a pressure of 3

to 6 kgf/cm2 is fed through valve 1, mechanical filter 2, valve 3. and electro-
magnetic valve 6 “o the nultistage centrifugal pump 7 via a pipe into which a

332 acid solution is also fed from tank 2‘. The acid in supplied to correct the
pH of the initial water, which should fall in a r’nge of 5.2 to 5.6. The water
is delivered by pulp 7 at a pressure of 28 kgf/cm through open valve 21 and pipe
15 in part to filtration modules 16 and in part recirculates through bypass valve
23. In flowing through modules 16. the water is collected in the collector l3,
and then passes through the flow rate meter 12 and is fed through valve 9 to

the user or for further purification. The pressure of the water fed into the
modules is monitored by neans of nanometer 20 and contact manoneter 19. The
concentrate is drained fro. the nodules 16 through receiving manifold 16. valve
17 and valve 11. The concentrate pressure is checked by a manoneter and adjusted
by valve 17. A portion of the water incoming for purification is fed through
valve 22 to sensor 8 to check the pH and is dumped into the drain.

In the case where the purification modules 1‘ become fouled, they are chemically
flushed with a solution prepared in tank 5. A 21 (by weight) solution of citric
acid is used to wash out iron. with the subsequent addition of ammonia (NH¢0H)

to obtain a pn - b. In the case where calcium sulphate is washed out, the same
solution is used, but with a pH of 7 to 8. Calciun carbonate is washed out using
a solution of sulphuric or nitric acid with a pH of A while organic substances
are removed by an alkali solution with a pH of 13.

The solution is delivered by pump 7 fro. tank 6 through valve 3. sensor 5 and
valve 6 to the filtration modules lb; the filtrate is then returned through
valve 9 to tank 6. Prior to returning to tank 6, the concentrate is cleaned in

- 283 -

FOI¢OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
INJI.OFFICIAL USII<MULY

  
 

.— J.-

.1" I u -

C entrat " ‘ -l\- 5
one I r I iaii' e i E
I,

”iltrat: , ' I I
swam- 4 v _ J
I\- I - .,
° “
, ‘:ll|ll :.::=l==l==l=: .:
sud-l! ,. _ .
... - m ; u ,
tater ﬁt I 0 3
‘(s -

Figure 13.8. Production process scheme for the water purification
unit using reverse osmosis.

Key: A. Chemical solution:

B. To the drain;
C. 50 - Not further defined.

filters 10. A contact thermometer 18 is installed at the outlet from the pump 7
on the pressure delivery line. where this thermometer disconnects the unit when
the temperature goes higher than the permissible value.

13.3. Equipment for Finish Hater Purification

Following the preliminary purification of water with a resistivity of 1 now; -(“u
and more, it fed for thorough desalinization to a finish purification installation.
The configuration of a string of finish purification units, designed for the use
of ion exchange in a mixed layer of KU-2-8 chS and AN-l7-8 chs ion exchange

rosins. includes type UP-lOOA, UP-ZSO and UPGOOA units. Also incorporated in t‘r
configuration of a string of finish purification installations are type use-100
and DEE-250 units, which employ the technique of electrodialysis with intermen-
brane filling using a mixture of the ion exchange materials indicated above. The
outputs of the units are 100, 250 and 400 liters per hour respectively; the elec-
trical resistance of the water following purification in the units is 15 to 20
"Ohm-cm at a temperature of 20 'C. The units should be placed close to the points
where the water is used. In this case. to prevent contamination by the atmosphere
of the assembly shops during the recovery of the spent resins, this process is
carried out at a central location in an isolated room using special recovery equip-
ment. For this purpose, the filtration column of the finishing units is made so
as to be easily disassembled. The continuous monitoring of the course of the pro-
cess is accomplished using a continuous flow neter and an instrument for measuring
the water resistivity at the filter column inlet and outlet.

The UF-ZSO finishing water purification unit is shown in Figure 13.9. Desalinsted
water with an electrical resistivity of 2 to 3 "Ohm-cm, obtained from the

- 286 -

F‘IRIJFF1CJAI.USIZ(H‘LY
centralized unit, is fed through sensor 1. inlet valve 2 and direct reading flow
meter 3 to the filter column 5, and then through outlet valve 6 and sensor 7

to the user.

 

l-—-°~

I In A
" u (a)

a—-—-0'\p

l n A
m"

Figure 13.10. Water resistivity
metering circuits.

The degree of water purification is moni-
tored by means of instrument a, which
indicates the resistivity of the voter at
the outlet. when the resistivity falls
below the permissible value, a signal light
on the panel of the instrument turns on.
the initial water feed valve into the
filter turns off and the filter is dis-
connected for restoration. The filter is
made in the form of a cylindrical housing
of plesiglass. There is a drainage disk
in the lower portion. There is a plug
in the upper cap of the filter for the
release of air froa the filter in the
initial operating period of the unit. A
direct reading flow meter serves to meas-
ure the water rate of flow incoming for
purification. Its housing is also made
of plexiglass. There are divisions which
show the water rate of flow on the exter-
Pigure 13.9. The UP-ZSO final Hater ior surface of the housing.

purification unit.

 

The sensors of the flow-through meter for monitoring the water resistivity,
which are secured to the frame of the unit 8, consist of a cup and a nozzle.
mode of plexiglass. Two stainless steel electrodes are screwed into the cup.
where the gap between the electrodes is set during the adjustment of the instru-
ncnt. The sensor is connected to the measurement instrument by a shielded cable.
The basic electrical resistivity measurement circuits for deionized water are
shown in Figure 13.10.

The operation of the meter. a block diagram of which is shovn in Figure 13.10a,
is based on the aeasurement of the current flowing through a measurement cell,
0. with a constant voltage applied to the circuit, when the resistivity of the
solution in the measurement cell changes. its resistance changes, and

- 285 -
FOIiOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tonsequently also the current flowing through the circuit. Thus, one can judge
the resistivity of the solution in the cell from the current in the circuit, i.e.,
R-f(1).

The scale of the microammeter PA is graduated in values of the resistivity (HOhm '
Cm) .

If the additional resistance R in the circuit of Figure 13.10b is chosen two to
three orders of magnitude greater than the resistance of the cell being measured,
3, then a change in the current flowing through the circuit with a change in

the resistance of D from Dmax to pain can be disregarded in practice.

Thus, one can judge the resistance of the meaSurement cell by measuring the voltage
drop across it, i.e., R - f(AU).

The scale of the nillivoltmeter PV is graduated in values of the resistivity
(.‘iohm ' cm).

The operation of the meter, the measure-
ment portion of which is depicted in
Figure 13.10c, is based on the measurement
of the imbalance of the bridge which is
due to the change in the resistance of the
measurement cell 0, inserted in one of its
arms.

The thermistor Rt serves to compensate 'nr
the change in the water resistivity wit.

a change in temperature.

The imbalance signal is fed following
amplification to the meter, the scale of
which is graduated in MOhm ° cm.

The URS—l installation (Figure 13.11)

used to segregate and recover the KU-Z—R
chS and AV—l7-8 chS ion exchange resins,
which are used up in the UP finish puri-
fication installations, where this unit
can also be used as a finish water purifi-
er with an output productivity of 800
liters per hour when the two filtration
columns operate in parallel, or as a unit for producing desalinated water lmving

a resistivity of 1 non-n - cm and higher from the water mains. In the latter case,
the filter columns which are loaded with the resin mixture, are connected in
series through a degaaifier and the output productivity of the unit will be 400
liters per hour.

 

Figure 13.11. Unit for segregating and
recovering resins.

The unit has two columns for the ion exchange resins, a degaaifier column for
the removal of carbon dioxide which is filled with Raschig rings made of

- 286 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
polyethylene tubing, as well as a pump for delivering water from the degusiflcr
rank to the second purification stage. Located on the control panel for thclu\n
is a meter for measuring the water resistivity, which makes it possible to deter-
mine the quality of resin recovery or the thoroughly desalinated water which is
produced. An ejector system is provided in the unit for the preparation of the
recovery solutions.

The UFE-ZSO finish water purifier (Figure 13.12) takes the form of a composite
structure, consisting of the support frame, electrodialyzer, direct reading flow
meters. cutoff valves. sensors, electrical circuitry and a piping system. The
support frame consists of a frame, base and sheathing: the frame and the base take

the form of a welded structure of angle irons and serve for the housing and
securing of all of the assemblies. The direct reading flow meters, electrical
circuitry, valves, solution tanks, water resistivity sensors and piping system
are located within the support fro-e. The dialyzer is secured to the front wall
of the frame. The instruments for metering the electrical parameters (ammeter
and voltmeter) are mounted on the front panel of the unit as well as the water
resistivity measurement block and the current density adjustment control. The
cutoff valves are fastened to the inclined front panel. The side walls of the
frame are covered with removable bent steel section sheathing. The rear wall of
the frame is covered with a removable door. There are a plug connector for the
electrical current (power mains),a grounding bolt and outlets for the production
process pipes on the rear wall of the base. A group disconnect switch is located
on the right side wall of the base. There are holes in which handles are inserted
in the side walls of the frame for moving the unit.

The electrodinlyzer takes the form of a
composite structure of two electrode
chambers E, desalinization chambers D
and brine chambers B, the number of
which depends on the output productivity
of the installation. The chambers are
assembled in the following sequence:
E-eB--D--B--D...B--E.

‘.
P.

All of the chambers are separated from
each other by-cation and anion exchange
membranes and are joined together through
gaskets using studs, which are insulated
with polyvinylchloride tubing. To pro-
vide for a gap between the electrode and
the membrane in the electrode chambers
and between the membranes in the brin.
chamber, gaskets are inserted made of
perforated and corrugated vinyl plastic
film. There are holes which are plugged
with plugs in the upper portion of the
desalinization chambers, through which
the resins are loaded in; there are holes
, in the lower portion for water delivery
’igure 13‘12' The 1“3t’11‘t‘°“ for the to the electrode and brine chambers.
finish purification of
water using electroiooiz-
ation.

 

\

- 287 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe or: I m. use ONLY

There are manifolds for water distr.}.tion to the chambers in the upper and lower
portions of the electrodialyzer; theme are air vents in the upper portion for the
removal of air from the desalinization and electrode chambers. Direct reading
flow meters are installed in the unit for the measurement of the purified water
flow (unit output) and the water flow in the electrode and brine chambers.

The unit operates continuously and requires no chemical regeneration. The recovery
or t“ resins takes place during the deaslinization process by virtue of the

pa w. electrolysis of the water into 3* and OH“ with the application of direct
cur. ‘ "'

The major user of ultrapure water is equipment for the chemical treatment of
wafers. This fact is taken into account in the design of equipment for water
purification. A schematic of a recirculation system for producing ultrapure
water is shown in Figure 13.13. The major components of the system are secured
in a dust free box. in the working volume of which the chemical treatment unit

is placed. For reducing the water flow rate and expenditures related to its
purification. a provision is made in the system for the capability of the repeat
use of a portion of the water (with a resistivity of more than 1 "Ohm ° cm) follow-
ing the washing operation. in structural terms. the system Consists of the block
of filters 1. the water delivery unit 2, the water return unit 3 and the fine
cleaning filter for the deionized water a.

    

 
 

'—

In:
”a. w water

Figure 13.13. The recirculation system for producing ultrapure water.

Key: . Block of filters;
2. Water delivery unit;
3. Hater return unit;
4. Fine cleaning filter;
5. Cascaded Hashing bath;
6. Resistivity meter.

- 288 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The incoming water in the block of filters (Figure 13.16) is sequentially cleaned
of mechanical particles larger than 2 an in the preliminary cleaning filter 6,
which takes the form of a three layer filtration systee: two layers of cardboard,
which play the part of a preliminary filter and a substrate, as well as a layer
of filtering aaterial positioned between then (the extended filtration surface is
achieved by virtue of corrugating the filtering layers). The water is then puri-
fied of organic impurities by their sorption by a layer of macroporous anionic
exchange material or activated charcoal (filter 7), and also cleaned of ionic
impurities in a nixed layer of ion exchangers (combined action filter 8). The
units of the filter are changed in step with the degradation of water quality,
which is checked by resistivity ester 9, as well when the hydraulic resistance
increases above a set level by virtue of the clogging of the filters, which is
registered by nanometer 6. The block is also equipped with a flow rate meter 2
and a check valve 1, which prohibits the flow of water in the return direction
when the systen is disconnected.

Following the fine cleaning filter, the
water is fed to the user (in Figure 13.13,
to the cascade washing bath 5), and then
to the return unit and through the open
valve is dumped into the drain. Upon the
signal from the meter 6 when the drain
water reaches a specified resistivity.

the valve is switched and the water is

fed into the collecting tank of the water
delivery unit.

    

(In: ~

a
tutti. water To retain the deionized water parameters

achieved following purification, the
retaining fittings are made of technical
plexiglass and teflon, while the distri-

Figure 13.1‘. Basic schematic of the
block of filters.

Key: 1. Check valve; bution systea for the water delivery from
2. Flow rate indicator; the intermediate centralized purification
3. Filter housing; equipment, is made of high pressure poly-

4. Hanometer; ethylene pipes, vinyl plastic pipes or

5. Housing; seamless cold drawn pipes of corrosion
6. Preliminary cleaning resistant steel; high pressure polyethyl-
filter; ene pipes or teflon 4D pipes are used to

7. Filter for removing deliver the deionized water from the
organic contaminants; finish purification units. The piping
8. Filter for reeoving should be able to be disassembled for
ionic impurities: ease of washing and repair. The pipes
9. Resistivity meter. are washed no less than once per quarter
with a 3 to 52 solution of hydrogen
peroxide or sodium chlorate which is kept
in the piping for no less than one hour. After the solution is drained out, the
internal surface of the pipes are flushed with type V deionized water until a
resistivity of the flushing water of 1 "Ohm - cn and an oxidability of no more
than 1.5 ng 02/1 are achieved.

- 289 -

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ONLY

13.4. Equipment for Gas Purification and Drying

The installations for the chemical adsorption purification of nitrogen and hydro-
geg used in semiconductor production have an output productivity of from 100 to 1
nm Ihr ; installations for the adsorption purification of air have an output of

from 6.000 to 30 nm3/hr and diffusion purification units for hydrogen have outputs
of 6, 10 and 50 nm3/hr. The major impurities which must be removed from the

gases being cleaned are moisture, oxygen. hydrogen and dust.

The basic production process scheme for the purification of nitrogen in the 000A-
50 (1). operating as part of a complete set with the SUV-50 (II) excess hydrogen
removal unit, is shown in Figure 13.15. In the case of operation with simultan-
eous restoration of one of the adsorbers (for example, A1), the isolation fittings
are set in such a position by the switching of the control levers that the nitro-
gen incoming for purification goes into adsorber A1, heated by the heater built
into it. and extracts the moisture released from the silica gel. The restoration
takes place at a temperature of 180 to 190° C.

To avoid the failure of the seals of the
isolation fittings because of exposure

to high temperatures, the nitrogen is
water cooled in a heat exchanger T1 fol-
lowing A1 (T in the case of restoration
of adsorber i2). Then hydrogen is added
to the nitrogen through electromagnetic
valve K and the automatically controlled
valve of the actuating mechanism 1“ in

an amount which is 0.5 to 1.52 greater
than the stoichiometric ratio for the
amount of oxygen impurity. The nitrogen
and hydrogen mixture is fed to the pun.-
fier 0, which is filled with a palladium
catalyst, in the presence of which the
hydrogen bonds the oxygen so that at a
temperature of 90 to 100° C. the residual
volumetric fraction_2f the latter amoun|a
to less than 1 ° 10 . Then the nitro-
gen being cleaned is fed into the reactor

 

Figure 13.15. Basic production process

schematic of the UOGA—SO 0 . Purifier [filled with

nitrogen purification unit. palladium catalyst];
Key: 1. Nitrogen for purification; R ' RBBCtOTI

2. Freon; A1 - Adsorber 1;

3. Hydrogen: T1 - Heat exchanger 1.

1M - Actuating mechanism;
K - Electromagnetic valve;

—_———————

*At normal atmospheric pressure.

- 290 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
R of the hydrogen removal unit, where the following reaction takes place:
P

31?
CuO TCHr'Cu NM).

The copper oxide. which is precipitated on alumogel, assures a residual volumetric
oxygen content of less than 1 ' 10-32. Being cooled in the heat exchanger T3 to
a temperature of 30 to 35' C, the nitrogen is fed to heat exchanger 1, which is
cooled by freon by the hr-son type refrigerator KhK. When cooled down to 3 to 5'
C, a large fraction of the moisture condenses in the evaporator and is drained
from it through an automatic condenser outlet tap; and additionally the sorption
capability of the adsorbent is increased. The nitrogen is fed from the evaporator
to the adsorber A2, where the residual moisture content is reduced down to 10 mg/
.3. and fed into the nine through the rxc-so dust removing meet 5. when the
Copper oxide turns to copper in the reactor P. valve K cuts off the hydrogen feed.
The removal of the oxygen now no longer takes place in purifier 0, but in the
reactor P in accordance with the reaction:

Cu”—f';£o,»2ctno.

The residual volumetric oxygen content is l ' 10"X. The valve K is automatically
controlled [77].

“WSW The installation is equipped with
anyuﬂuuww automatic instruments for monitoring
' the residual orygen and hydrogen
content (PKG-IS) as well as the
moisture content (UV-l). The con-
figuration of the UOGA-loo unit is
similar to that described above.
Zeolite is packed in the adsorbers
in the UOGA-ZS unit. The evacuation
of the moisture liberated from the
zeolite during recovery is accom-
plished by means of a nitrogen (or
air) flow which is exhausted into
the atmosphere.

   

00.0.00000

Figure 13.16. Schematic showing the opera-
tion of s palladium filter
for hydrogen purification.

The units for the adsorption and
catalytic purification of hydrogen
differ from the nitrogen purifica-

Key: 1. Pure hydrogen to the tion units in that there are no
user; blocks in them which involve the
2. Haste to the flare; dosing of hydrogen into the flow

3. hydrogen for purification. being purified or for monitoring
its residual content.

In the hydrogen purification units (000V). heat exchanger T3 (Figure 13.15) is
Inserted directly after the purifier 0.

The UOGV units can be employed where it is necessary to remove hydrogen and mois-
ture from oxygen.

- 291 -

FOR<0FFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY
UOGA-SO+ UOGA-25H+

+BUV +BUV

 

Nitrogen Nitrogen

0.05-0.2 0.05-0.2

50 25
2.10" 1-10"
1.10-3 1.10-3

10.5 2.8
2 - 3 2 - 3

-------- Not explosion

9.6 9.6

UOGV-IOO UOGV-SO
Hydrogen Hydrogen
0.05-0.2 0.05-0.2
100 50
2-10" 2.10"
10.5 10.5
2": 2‘3
VChe-Tl VChn-Tl
proofed ---'
9.6 9.6
[Cont inued] GAS PURI PI PATIO" BQUI PHENT

00V- 50 Kl-‘OG-3 UOV -B -0 . 5 OUV-B -2 UOV-B-S UOV-IO DOV-20

 

Hydrogen N2, ll; Air Air Air Air Air
Air -
1.0-1.1 0.1-0.6 0.6-0.8 0.6-0.8 0.6 0.6-0.8 0.6-0.8
50 1 - 3 30 120 300 600 1.200
'4 .1.
<1o10 <1'10 Rot Renoved - -
<2.7 1'10.3 Not Removed - -
Tote1* 5 .0 100 100 100 100 100
ruovsl
VChn-Tl 2 - 3 not Ruovsd [sic] - - -
lot enplo- Not explo- Not Explosion Proofed - ' - -
ion eion

rroofsd proof ed

6 0.5 0.5 0.5 12 26
_—______________—————————

and other inert gases can be purified in nitrogen purification equip-s1

1 csn be purified in hydrogen purification equipment.

ld hydrocarbons are adsorbed by different types of zeolites in the sdso:
lted units.
I
son (main. use ONLY

A rumplctc finish purification complex (KFOC), consisting of a scrubber unit,
recovery block and a recovery storage tank set, is produced for the finish puri-
fication of production process gases. The purification unit consists of three
modules. each of which is designed for an output of l nm3/hr. The interchangeable
tanks are filled with a reagent depending on which gas is to cleaned of which
impurity. To remove oil and moisture from air, the UOV-B and UOV series instal-
lations are employed. The first with heatless recovery of silica gel and the
second with recovery using heated air. In installations with heatless recovery,
more than 301 of the air being dried is consumed for the needs of the latter.
where the minimum working pressure for then amounts to 0.6 HPa.

The characteristics of the major gas purification units are given in Table 13.3.

 

Figure 13.17. Various structure designs for type FAQ dust removal
filters.

The greatest degree of hydrogen purification is obtained in diffusion purification
installations. The action of a diffusion purifier is based on the utilization of
the differing penetrating power of the hydrogen being cleaned and the impurities
through tubular filters, fabricated from a palladium alloy (Figure 13.16). To
speed up the purification process. it is carried out at a temperature of 430 to
470' C and a gas pressure of 0.6 to 1.1 MPa. In the case of diffusion purifica-

tion of hydrogen, even without preliminary degasificagion of the giping, the
residual volumetric oxygen content amounts to l - 10' to 1 ' 10' 2, while the

moisture runs down to 1.3 mg/m3 [78].

Th3 series of type FAG filters (Figure 13.17) with an output of from 0.3 to 200
nm lhr is being produced to remove dust from production process gases. The use

of the LES-2 filtering material (lavsan fiber) makes it possible to remove 0.3
um particles from gases at flow rates of 5 to 10 cm/sec in filters having an
output of up to 6 nm3lhr and particles with a size of 0.5 um in filters with an

output of up to 200 nm3/hr [79].
13.5. Gas Purity Monitoring Instruments

The most widespread automatic instruments for monitoring the purity of gases used
in semiconductor device production are cited in Table 13.6.

The KIVG meter is most often used to monitor the humidity of gases; this meter
is an automatic continuously operating coulometric type device intended for

—291.-

IN)! OFFICJAI.IJSEI(NVLY
l'
TABLB l§.A. 92; Monitoring Inetrunenth

Instrunent

PKG-13

PKG-IS
DV-l

“Tsizkon”

GL-5108

"Beykal-I"

"Beykel-II"
"Baykal-III"

Aerosol par-

ticle counter

KIVG

Mediun
Being

Tested

Nitrogen
Hydrogen

Nitrogen

Nitrogen
hydrogen
Oxygen
Air

Nitrogen
Inert gasee

Nitrogen
Hydrogen
Inert gnsee

Nitrogen

Hydrogen

Oxygen
Air
Inert genes

Nitrogen
Hydrogen
0'78."

Air

Inert gases

Nitrogen
Hydrogen

Medium
Being

Tested |sic| lengee

0178c"

Bydrogen
Moisture

Oxygen

oxygen

Moisture

Dust

Moisture

Meaeurenent

Remarks

1 .104: - 1 . 10-2: Produced as part

2 . 10-3: - 2 - 10-2:
2.8 to 100 Isl-3

1 . 10-6 - 100:.
9 scalee

1 . 10":- 5 ~ 10":
s - 10": - 1 - 10-3:

0 to 900 Isl-3,
9 scales

0.6 to 10 no

1’ to 900 nag/.3,
7 scales

of the equipnent
couple-out for the
UOOA and UOGV in-
stellstions

The seee

The note

There should be no
treces of M2, CO
or other impuri-
ties which react
at 800’ c in the
presence of plat-
inun with oxygen
in the nediun
being neeeured

______________—_—————-————————

measuring nicroconcentrations of noisture in gases with autonetic eigneling of

the ultinete values of the quantity being neeeured.

The operation of the neter

ie booed on the principle of the continuous extraction of water vapors by a
fill of hygroscopic nateriel free a precisely apportioned flow of the gas being

- 295 -

F0.‘0FFIJAI.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

analyzed and the simultaneous electrolytic decomposition of the water which is
extracted into hydrogen and oxygen. In this case, the steady-state electrolysis
current serves as a measure of the quantity of water vapor incoming into the
instrument per unit time. Partially hydrated phosphorus anhydride is used as the
hygroscopic material. Given a constant rate of flow of the gas being analyzed
through the sensitive element, the electrolysis current is proportional to the

concentration of water vapor in the gas. A basic schematic of the KIVG meter is
shown in Figure 13.18. Instruments of the KIVG type measure microconcentrations

of moisture of from 0 up to 1,000 million particles of water vapor with respect
to the gas volume.

    

 

\\m\ \\~A\\\\\\\\\s\~ \\

Figure 13.19. Schematic of an elec-
trochemical cell of a

Figure 13.18. Basic schematic of a coulo- gslzsnic oxygen sna-
metric humidity analyzer. y: r.

Key: 1. helical platinum elec- Key: 1‘ Lead anode;

l l 2. Electrolyte (KOH)'

tr es, coat 1th an 3. Silver cathode; ’
adsorbent (P205); R - Variable resist e-

2. Fluoroplastic tube; anc ,

3. Heter. n - Meter.

The GL-Slos stationary automatic galvanic gas analyzer is intended for the con-
tinuous measurement of microconcentrations of oxygen in various gases. Its
operation (Figure 13.19) is based on the measuremeat of the electrochemical

effect in a galvanic element, which is proportional to the concentration of

oxygen in the gas being studied where its flow is constant. The oxygen is initial—
ly adsorbed by an electrolyte on the protruding surface of a cathode, which is
vetted by virtue of capillary forces, and then goes over into the volume of the
electrolyte in the form of ions, as a result of which, an electrical voltage
appears across the cell electrodes which is approximately proportional to the
oxygen concentration in the gas. The sensitivity of the galvanic element depends

on the geometric dimensions of the cathode, increasing with an increase in its
surface area.

The "Tsirkon" instrument is produced to monitor the microimpurities of oxygen in
nitrogen, in argon and in other inert gases. The sensitive element is a cartridge
of 852 zirconium dioxide and 152 calcium oxide, permeable to oxygen ions. Plati-
num electrodes are applied to the walls of the cartridge; the current between the
electrodes is proportional to the number of oxygen ions diffusing through the
cartridge wall. Since the measurement takes place at a temperature of 800° C,

- 296 -

IND! OF1WCJAI.USE2(HNLY
the instrument can be used for gases which do not contain traces of hydrogen,
carbon monoxide and other impurities which react with oxygen in the presence of
platinum at the temperature of the process. The instrument makes it possible to
measure the volumetric oxygen content in gases down to l ' 10'51.

The AZ-S meter, which is intended for measuring the number of dust particles (lar-
ger than 0.3 um) in the air of rooms makes it possible to ascertain sources of
dust and to study its migration. To determine the number of particles contained
in a pure gas medium, a gas stream is produced which within the field of view of

a microscope is illuminated by a beam of light. In the absence of dust in the

air (or gas). the light from the illuminator does not get into the microscope.

If a dust particle appears in the air, then it scatters the light which is collect-
ed by the microscope objective and falls on the cathode of a photomultiplier. The
photomultiplier converts the flash of light scattered by the dust particles to
electrical pulses, which are counted by an electrical circuit. The dust content
measurement range is 0 to 300,000 dust particles per liter of air.

Pipes made of stainless steel, aluminum (for neutral gases and air) as well as
fire refined copper and teflon are used to transport the purified gases to the
point of consumption. Only vacuum tight corrosion resistant fittings are used
on the piping layouts for the purified gases. The feed system for the purified
gases (with the exception of hydrogen) is made disconnectable, with seals at

the points of vacuum connections made of rubber or fluoroplastic, for periodic
cleaning (no less than once a year) of the piping. Nondisconnecting connections
are used for the transport of purified hydrogen.

The cleaning of the purified gas transport systems is accomplished in the followb
ing sequence:

—-The cleaning of the interior surface with metallic gophers;

--Hiping out with a clean, bleached coarse calico cloth, wetted with khladon-ll3
[sic], and then purging with dry nitrogen or cleaned dry air; thereafter,
repeated wiping with bleached coarse calico wetted with ethyl alcohol, and
purging with dry nitrogen or air until the smell of the alcohol disappears.

13.6. Clean Rooms. Dustproof Chambers and Boxes

A clean room (Figure 13.20) is a hermetically sealed volume, consisting of the
main working room and a vestibule. The production process equipment is installed
in the working room; there are locks in side panels for transferring products
into the clean room without degrading the parameters of the air environment inside
the room. To avoid sucking the ambient air inside the room, an'excess pressure
of from 2 to 5 mm 820 is maintained in the room. The forced air delivery units

1 are placed in the upper portion of the room to supply dust free air. The
framework for the false floor 4 also consists of cells in which metal sheets
with holes punched in them are installed and wooden gratings are placed on top,
which provides for uniform removal through louvers of the air forced into the
room. The wall panels have several variants: those which are blank panels 2,
those with a window 6, having a door, with a transfer lock 5 - and can be secured
to the framework and to each other by means of plates in any sequence [76].

- 297 -

FOR'OIIIC1AI.USE¢MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 13.20. General view of the KCh-l clean room.

Key:
2. Hall panel

1. Forced blower unit;
with door;

3. Window for air outlet;

4. Perforated

floor;

5. Hall panel with transfer lock;

6. wall panel

 

Figure 13.21. The 0—3 filtration module.

the module.

which automatically clamp the doors in the closed position.

with window.

Clean rooms of a different structural
design are known and have also found
applications: those with vertical or
horizontal air flows [75. 80].

The D-3 filtration module (Figure 11.2“
is also widely used to house the p!“
duction process equipment and perform
operations in a dust free environment;
this module takes the form of a dis-
mantlable frame structure, on which
three ceiling dust removal units 6 a;
mounted. The corner racks 2 and the
frame 3 of the main framework are made
of bent shaped steel; the racks are
secured to the floor by means of binder
strips 1, made of sheet metal. The
floor of the room in which the module
is installed serves as the floor for
the module. The walls 5 are made of
transparent plexiglass, assuring a11-
sround access in the working space of

The doors are fastened to the support posts by means of hinges,

Windows are left

between the door and the floor, through which air is forced out into the room.
The ceiling dust removal unit takes the form of a housing in which a centrifugal
fan and coarse and fine cleaning filters are mounted on shock absorbers.

- 298 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The operation of the module systems is con-
trolled from control console 6, on which there
is a common cutoff switch and toggle switches
for actuating each of the three dust removal
units as well as signal lights for the mains
power and fans. and potentiometers for control—
ing the air delivery rate by means of changing
the r.p.m. of the electric motors.

The 0-3 module can also serve as a section in

a clean production process corridor, since it

has the capability of being joined to the same
module on its wide side and one of its long

sides.

 

Dustproof chambers of various structural
Figure 13.22. The SHP-l dustproof designs are used to create a dust free environ-
assembly table. ment in the working space for the production

process equipment. The SHP-l dustproof assem-

bly table is shown in Figure 13.22. where this
table is intended for assembly, hook-up and quality control operations in a dust
free environment. The equipment for performing production process chemical and
photolithographic operations was described earlier in Chapters 2 and S. Dustproof
boxes with a vertical air flow are used to house such equipment. The structural
design of the boxes makes it possible to put together complete production process
line sets using them and where necessary, rearrange the equipment in an operatinn-
ally timely manner, depending on the changed production process.

The operational principle of local dust removal installations is based on the
continuous flushing of the working space with a uniform flow of dust free air.
The air collected from the room (which in individual cases can be a clean room)
passes through a coarse cleaning filter. made of modified fluoroplastic. This

is the primary coarse cleaning of large dust particles. The cleaning efficiency
is 70 to 801. The precleaned air is then fed by the forced air delivery unit to
the fine cleaning filter, where the FPP-lS-l.7 filtering material practically
completely cleans the air of dust and uniformly distributes the air flow over the
output cross-section of the filter. The air then moves in the working space.
capturing dust particles along its path and removes them from the work area.

- 299 -

_ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(NAPIER FOURTEEN PRODUCTICN PROCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT IN THE

PRODUCTION OF DISCRETE SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES AND INTEGRATED
CIRCUITS

 

16.1. General Information on the Control of Production Processes in Semiconductor
Production

The refining of semiconductor hardware and technology is accompanied by the in-
creasing number and complexity of the interrelationships in technological process-
es and the appearance of new production process operations and precision equip-
ment. Such production is complex as regards the oraanization, equipment and
technology, as well as the methods and tools for process control. Figure 14.1
depicts the internal links between the stages of the planar process (solid lines)
and some of the control processes (dashed lines). Effective control of such
production is possible only based on automated control systems (ASU) using com-
puters. An automated control system for a production process (ASU TP) solves

the problems of retrieving and processing data on the state of the pracess, and

the output of the control signals to the actuating mechanisms for the adjustment
of the parameters.

The controlled units in this case are machines and instruments, while the data is
transmitted by electrical, optical and other systems. Usually, an automated
production process control system is incorporated as a subsystem in a single
integrated control system for a production complex.

00 Mus
06;:ch lotu-
ausupa a II-
luau-nos

 

Figure 110.1. Schematic showing the functional links in the production
process for the fabrication of a planar structure.

Key: 1. Preliminary stage;
2. Production of the diffusion regions;
3. Formation of the topology;
4. Production of the metalization and dielectric regions;

5. Quality control and classification.
1he introduction of an automated control system for a production process is

usually preceded by the step of controlling the stages or operations in a techno-
logical process using local controllers, which provide for process stability and

- 300 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
relatively constant parameters, for example, temperature, gas pressure, etc. over
time. The use of computers makes it possible to realize a higher level of control
problem solution: the number of controlled parameters increases, the control
algorithm is more complicated, rapidly changeable control programs are used and
the computer memory is employed to take into account the dynamics of the process.

Automated control systems for production processes permit the following:

--An increase in the technical economic and other production indicators of techno-
logical processes, determined by the organization of the production;

—-The stabilization and optimisation of the output of a products list of products
by virtue of assuring a large number of controllable parameters with a complex
algorithm and rapidly changeable control program in accordance with the dynamics
of the process.

The production process technology for the production of discrete semiconductor
devices and integrated circuits, as a controlled system, is characterised by
multifaceted physical and physical-chemical phenomena {89], a large number of
operations which differ in the content of the production process methods, the
equipment used as well as the number of factors which are uncontrolled and diffi-
cult to take into account. The latter take the form of the degrees of freedom

in the technological process which are not equipment related. In essence, they
are uncontrolled and can exert a substantial influence on the production results.
In contrast, for example. to machine building or some other processes of chemical
production, there is no unique correspondence between the number of variable
process parameters, set of data sensors and the corresponding actuating mechanisms
in the technological process for the fabrication of discrete semiconductor de-
vices and integrated circuits.

The target functions of automated control systems for production processes are
based on the specific features of the process: the controlled system and the
extent to which it is technically prepared for being controlled. The expansion
of the functional assignments of automated control systems for production pro-
cesses in semiconductor device production is accomplished within the framework
of a single complex: the refinement and automating of the production tools, and
the development of methods and tools for control and testing. Because of this,
the automated control systems for production processes, introduced into semicon-
ductor device production, differ in terms of their structure, software and hard-
ware.

The software for automated process control systems is based on statistical contrc'
techniques, primarily on methods of correlation and regression analysis. Depend-
ing on the nature of the process dynamics, the extent to which the process is
debugged and its controllability, various statistical methods can be used.

Search techniques are employed predominantly to analyze and correct nonsteady-
state processes, for which the construction of statistical models and their
identification with the controlled facility are practically infeasible. Non-
parametric statistics are usually employed in these cases and the volume of the
calculations is small.

- 301 -

IIII(HHHCJAL.USECHVLY
I-‘(lR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

I- in expedient to employ adaptive methods when controlling, working out and
Jvhuuuinu processes which are characterized by a considerable fraction of non—
steady-state behavior. In this case,the statistical links between the quality
function and the process factors are determined, and information retrieval systems

hosed on computers can he used.

Optimal techniques are employed for almost steady—state processes for the purpose
of ongoing quality control and final optimization. These methods are based on
regression models and require a large set of calculations.

 

Figure 14.2. A group of quality control posts.

Depending on the degree to which the production process as a whole is prepared
for control and depending on the stages involved, structural configurations arv
pu<sihle for automated production process control systems at various functional
algorithmic levels. The classification of automated production process control
systems according to the functional algorithmic criterion [81] reflects the
practical content of work on the comprehensive automation of production process

The least complex are control systems for a single production process operation
or group of operations of the same type, for example. a group of quality control
stations for testing the parameters of discrete semiconductor devices and It‘s.
The structure of such a system is rather simple (Figure 1A.2); the signals from
the sensors 5 are fed to the interfaces 6 with computer 3. are processed in
accordance with the control program and the control action is fed to the actuating
elements of the production process unit 6. The correction of the control program
and the output of information to the indicating displays are accomplished on the
operator's control console 1. The operator control console is coupled to the
computer by the data input-output unit 2. The introduction of such systems makes
it possible to substantially increase the volume of data used in the control
process. limit erroneous actions of an operator and boost equipment productivity

by increasing the control pace.

- 302 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
More complex in terms of structure and function are systems which solve problems

of process optimization for the purpose of satisfying a particular quality criter-
ion. Such systems are utilized to control a stage in the production process. the
operations in which are linked to the unity of the equipment used or the conditions
under which the process is carried out. for example, for the processes of diffusion
and oxidation in the manufacture of integrated circuits.

The software for such systems is based on adaptive and optimal statistical tech-
niques. The structure of the system is characterised by the presence of devices
for the analysis. comparison and prediction of process dynamics and can contain
feedback loops for self-teaching (the correction of the mathematical model and
control routines). The speed of such a control system makes it possible to con-
duct the production process in a mode close to the optimal, and in real time,
something an operator cannot achieve in the case of s multiple factor process.

Multilevel automated production process control systems, which control complex
technological processes on the scale of production sections and shops, solve an
even broader group of functional problems. Along with the tasks of optimizing the
production process. such an automated production process control system can also
solve problems of organizational control, the optimisation of the products list,
etc., i.e., the control of the production process is accomplished within the
framework of comprehensive control of a production subdivision.

14.2. Computers and Information Control Complexes. Peripherals.

The main link in an automated production process control system is a computer
having an all-purpose functional structure. Computers of the following types are
effectively utilized in the domestic electronics industry: the "Elektronika-IOO"
(the "Blektronika-lOOl" is a version using integrated circuits), the "Saratov"
(the "Saratov-2" is a version using integrated circuits) and the H—6000. The
"Minsk-22". ”Hinsk-32", etc. computers are also used in multilevel automated
production process control systems.

The "Elektronika-loo" is designed as a desk top computer, and the structure pro-
vides for easy replaceability of the modules and the computer is convenient to
operate. The "Elektronika-IOO" computer with the appropriate selection of peri-
pherals is used in control computer. data and computer as well as information and
instrumentation complexes. The standard software for the "Elektronika-IOO" com-
puter is rather well developed.

The "Saratov" minicomputer is close to the "Blektronika-loo" in terms of its func-
tional capabilities.

The "-6000 ainicomputer is of interest for the development of various kinds of
automated production process control systems. It is a part of the set of the
aggregate system of computer hardware (ASVT-H). The structure of the computer is
adapted for the connection of up to Sb peripherals, including various data pro-
cessing and input-output units. something which permits a wide variation in the
set of functions which can be performed as regards information retrieval, as well
as the real time monitoring and control of processes.

- 303 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

1.

2.
3.

6.

10.
ll.

12-

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 14.3. Block diagram of a control computer complex [82].

The processor ("Elek-
tronika-lOO" computer);
Arithmetic unit (DAB);
Analog to digital con-
verter (ATsP);
Controller for the in-
creased capacity main
memory (control of the
H02" [magnetic core
storage]);

Peripheral magnetic core
storage units;

Read-only memory (920);
Magnetic tape controller
(DUEL);

NHL-67 magnetic tape
storage units;

Analog signal switchers
(MS):

The frequency to code
conversion block (BChKP);
Digital signal switcher
(K08):

Control unit for the
switchers (BUR);

- 304 -

FOI¢0FFKJAI.USB(NVLY

13.
15.
15.

l6.
17.
18.

19.
200

21.
22.

23.
26.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

um

man (26)

3”,:"(2n

W(28)
nuns .

Wag)
um!

I Isl

Its-1m

Pulse distribution unit
(BRI-l);

Step motor power ampli—
fier (UHShD-l);

Fixed voltage level unit
(3W):

Data display block (BIT);
Remote display (3V1);
System of data input-
output hardware (SUVVI);
CRT text display (BLTI-l);
Series-parallel repeater
(BPPR);

High speed printer (03?);
Unit for interfacing two
computers;

First communications
interface unit;

Second communications
interface unit;
"Minsk-32" computer;
Frequency sensors;
Analog sensors;

Digital sensors;

Digital information;
Analog information.
The realization of a particular functional structure for an automated production
process control system is based on the set of hardware for performing the various
functions. The contents of a set is governed by the functional algorithmic level
of the automated production process control system being realized. In line with
the overall requirements, the set of hardware for automated production process
control systems should provide for the capabilities of retrieving, storing and
processing large data files and executing a broad functional program in real time.
This is achieved by connecting a large set of various peripherals to the computer.
As an example, one can cite the hardware of the "Raduga K-SO” control computer
complex (UKV) [82]. A block diagram of such a complex is shown in Figure 16.3.
The function of the units corresponds to the captions underneath the figure. The
control computer complex functions with the direct input (or output) of informa-
tion on the production process from analog and frequency transducers (the total
number is 8,192), as well as digital sensors (up to 6,154). The technical capa-
bilities of the "Radugs K-SO” control computer complex in terms of retrieving.
storing and processing large data files make it possible to use it as the topmost
component in an automated production process control system, as one of the control
assemblies for an automated production process control system as well as the
lowest section in the complex hierarchical structure of an automated production
process control system.

There are a certain number of loops in complex information and computer systems
for automated production process control systems in which data is sequentially
retrieved, transmitted, processed, displayed or stored. An integral part of each
loop of a control complex as a whole is the programming software. Programs for
control computer complexes can be broken down into groups in accordance with the
functional purpose for such programs [83]. Programs in the first group are
loosely linked to specific content problems which are solved by the control compu-
ters. These are programs which set up the system, test monitoring routines as
well as programming automation programs and a library of standard subroutines.

The second group of programs is determined to a greater extent by the specific
tasks being carried out by the control computer complex, and depends in many
respects on the control hardware. This group includes programs which support the
monitoring of the course of the execution of the organizing programs; the moni-
toring of the operation of the system of peripheral equipment (transducers, actua-
ting mechanisms, data displays); monitoring the input and output information:
failure analysis, as well as the continuation of task execution after the determin-
ation of errors and dropouts.

The specific and special requirements placed on control computer complexes are
taken into account by programs of the third group. These are programs for pro-
cessing the signals from analog, frequency and digital sensors, programs for
processing the information from the operator, correcting the mathematical model

of the facility as well as controlling and feeding out information to the indicat-
ing displays.

The general design principle for the structural configuration of the software of
the automated production process control system, which is shown in Figure l&.ﬁ,
is formulated in [83].

~ 305 -

ﬁORfHWﬂCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NULY

Controlled 0b ect

     

   

""M%l
all units sans»

Operator

To

Figure 16.6. Generalized block diagraa showing the software for
an autonsted production process control system [83].

Key: 1. Data retrieval unit; 9. FK-Z processor and course

2. Unit for generating of the solution [sic];
the vector of the cur- 10. Block FKoI of the control
rent status of the con- coaputer complex peri-
trolled object; phery;

3. Unit for coaparing the 11. Control computer coaplex
current status vector life support unit;
of the controlled ob- 12. Inforlation output unit;
ject with the specified 13. Operator effects unit;
vector; 15. Unit for higher level

3. Unit for generating the interfacing;
control actions; 15. Central dispatcher for

5w Control unit; the system.

6. Bquipaent diagnostics
unit;

7. Unit for storing and
processing systen and
technical-econoaic data;

8. Optimization and adapta-
tion unit;

- 306 -

FOI‘OFHK]AI.USE(MNLY
The control loop consisting of the first five units performs the major control
functions. In this case. the generation of the current status vector for the con-
trolled facility is realised based on the data collected concerning the process,
the data on the reliability of the input information incoming from the unit for
functional monitoring of the sensors. the cosmunications channels and partially the
input information, as well as data from the operator's console. The current status
vector of the controlled unit is compared with the vector specified by the mathe-
matical model of the controlled facility. which is being corrected during the
control process.

The functional reliability of automated production process control systems is
assured by diagnostics hardware. units for functionally monitoring the processor
and course of task execution, as well as the life support units for the control
computer complex.

The set of functional blocks of the given software is applicable to a broad class
of production process control systems and allows for the standardization of
individual blocks within the framework of various structural-functional autOmated
production process control systems.

The analysis of the course of the production process over some period of time and
the construction of a model of the production process, if this is possible based
on data on the controlled object, are necessary for the development of a structural
and functional scheme as well as the support facilities of an automated production
process control system for a specific production process which solves the problems
of optimizing the controlled object. These tasks are performed by an automated
data retrieval and processing system (A501).

The data retrieval and operational processing system for a planar transistor
production shop [8‘] does the following: calculates the mean and ultimate values
for the variation of the production process parameters; calculation of the output
yield process for wafers and chips on a wafer; the determination of the interval
distribution of the parameters being measured; the storage and feed-out upon
interrogation of the data on the results of the past ten operations in the process
of fabricating the functional structure of the transistor and two assembly opera-
tions for each production batch as well as the information on the course of the
production process over specified time intervals (weeks, months); the generation
of messages on the pace of the production cycle. Provisions are made in the
system for the self-checking of the functioning and the monitoring of information
at the system input and output. This system includes quality control instrumen-
tation and information control complexes, which are tied together through the
computer interfaces or by means of data stores. The shop system for the retrieval
and operationally timely processing of the data on the prodution process for the
planar transistors is shown in Figure 16.5. The quality control instrumentation
complex automatically measures the parameters of test cells and transistor struc-
tures, and has a programmed transition from the mode for the rejection and classi-
fication of transistors according to the product groups to the mode of quantitative
measurements of the parameters for the selection of devices, as well as the
statistical processing of measurement results and the generation of histograms
showing the distribution of the quantitative values of the measured parameters.

- 307 -

FOR‘OFF“JAI.USE¢DNlV
F03'0FF"JAI.USE(NNLY

     
 

w- mm mm (18)
.- In» anal cam-cl unease (19)

Figure 16.5. A ahop level ayetea for the retrieval and operationally
timely proceeeing of information [8‘].

Key: 1. Magnetic tape storage;
2. Digital to analog con-
verter;
3. Data trunk;
4. "Elektronika-loo" coe-
puter;
5. Date plotter;
6. Alphanueeric terninal;
7. Data control trunk;
8. Hopper card reader;
9. Standard input-output
harduare;
10. Tape puncher;
11. Card puncher;
12. Teat store location
meter;
13. Meter for the electrical
paranetere of tranaietore;
16. Inatrueentation data
channel:
15, 18. Multiple probe inetellatien;
l6. 19. Service data input coneole;
20. To the central proceeeor of the enterpriee.

- 303 -

FOI‘OFFHJA1.USE(NVLY
The generated neasuresent results are fed out to a printer and to punched tapes,
or are transeitted to the coeputer of the data control couples. A provision is
made for the entry of service data in the cosputer of the quality control instru-
sentation couple: from the operator's work position.

The data control couple: perforns the following functions: deter-ines the optimal
values of the nodes for specific operations in the production process based on
the results of estﬂaating the quality of previous operations in the production
process and data for the starting wafers; queries the sensors concerning the
course of the process; checks the readiness of the production process equipment;
analyses the operation of the equipsent and generates the synbol for its opera-
tional readiness; and displays the infornation and signals esergency conditions.

10.3. Autonated Production Process Control Systess for Several Production Steps

Individual steps in the production of discrete sesiconductor devices and integrated
circuits can in and of theaselves be nusbered along complex processes as regards
the nature of the production process dyna-ics. nunber of variable paraseters and
the relationships between then. This applies prinarily to the steps in the fabrics-
tion of the functional structures of lC's.

The inforsation cited in the previous section attests to the cooperatively great
possibilities of the level attained with the functional support and hardware and
software of autonated control systess for complex production processes. The
realization of this level is governed at the present tine in nany respects by

the system being controlled. For this reason, the design exanples treated below
for autonsted production process control systees for individual production steps
in the fabrication of semiconductor devices and integrated circuits reflect the
aggregate of results in the conprehensive systen: "Production process - autonated
production process control systen".

We shall treat sole of the results of a quantitative analysis of the production
process for two stage boron diffusion into silicon fron a liquid diffusant in a
gas vehicle flow based on the data of [85].

The analysis is based on statistical modeling using linear regression nethods for
the influence of 14 production process factors on the surface resistance of the
diffusion layer, the diffusion depth and thickness of the oxide, as well as on
the coefficients of variation in these quantities. It was detersined using the
results of an active experiment that under the conditions of the experinent, the
acting factors can be broken down into three groups:

--Controlling factors: the tins of diffusant passage; the tine for the first
passing of dry oxygen in the second stage; the tine for the passage of moist
oxygen in the second stage;

--Controlled factors: the temperature in the diffusion region in the first stage
and the tenperature in the diffusion region in the second stage;

--Regulated factors: the specific resistivity of the starting silicon; the tempera-
ture of the therlostatically controlled feeder; the argon flow rate through the
furnace during the tine of diffusant passage; the argon flow rate through the

- 309 -

FOIilHHCJAl.USE(HVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

1521-“:st "a

Correction of the natheua
nodels

 

Figure 16.6. Basic schenatic shoving the control of diffusion
and_oxidation processes [86].

Key: 1. RR - Gas flow rate regulator;

2. ex - Electroaagnetic valve;

3. TA - Hot-wire anenoaeter: gas flow rate sensor;

4. Dv - Hater dosing apparatus;

5. PC - Steam generator;

6. BU - Control unit for the gas flow regulator;

7. PR - Blectro-echanicel drive for the dosing apparatus;

8. PVI - Tine interval prograaner;

9. SH - Gas aixer;

10. Control conputer.

feeder with the liquid diffusant; the oxygen flow rate during the diffussnt pes-
sage; the oxygen flow rate during deoridation: the oxygen flow rate in the second
stage; the deoxidation tine in the first stage; the passage tine of the dry
oxygen in the second diffusion stage.

Sone of the third group factors, in the case of difficulties with regulation, can
nove over into the second group. In governing oneself with such a breakdown. one
can plan prograns for the functioning of an automated production process control
systea which realize the following target functions:

--Haxiaua process reproducibility at a specified quality level for series produc-
tion;

--Haxinun process reproducibility following readjust-ant (when shifting from one
products list to another);

-Hode optinisation when the output product characteristics are varied where the
product is produced by a given technological process in controlled production
process experinentation systsns under trial production conditions.

- 310 -

lillClﬂﬂClAl.USl(ﬂVLY
Also used as controlling factors along with the tine intervals are the rates of
flow of the gases. water vapor and diffusant in the automated production process
control system for the diffusion and oxidation process during the fabrication of
lC's [86]. A schematic of such a system is shown in Figure 16.6.

The production process is time controlled by s time interval programmer, which
switches the systen hardware in accordance with the specified program.

The tasks of monitoring and analysing the stability of the fabrication process for
the functional structures of 10's during the stages of the oxidation and diffusion
operations with the corresponding technological processing are handled by the
automated system proposed in [87]. The control conputer hardware for this system
is based on the "Blektronika-IOO" computer and operates in real time; it is
equipped with a set of punched tape data input-output consoles, a set of peripheral
magnetic core stores, a central post and can contain up to 66 data transmit-receive
peripherals, up to 10 data punchers. up to 16 "Meandr" neters-claaaifiers and up

to 16 automated data retrieval units.

The system for the industrial production of epitaxial silicon structures can also
be treated as an example of an autonated production process control system in

the semiconductor production step [88]. The set of hardware for a single nodule
in such an automated production process control system includes two ”Blektronika-
100" computers. which operate in a complete duplication mode, as well as data
input-output hardware ("Konsul-ZSb" electric typewriters), central posts (analog
signal switchers with timers) and a central control console. Sone six production
process units (12 reactors) are connected to each automated production process
control system nodule. The automated production process control system functions
in accordance with the schematic shown in Figure lb.7. (X and XY‘P are the vectors
for the input and control actions, and the optimisation parameters are: p is the
resistivity and d is the epitaxial film thickness).

 

Figure 16.7. Block diagram of the automated production process control
system for the fabrication of epitaxial structures [88].

Key: l. Reactor; .
2. Retrieval and processing of data on the production
process;
- 311 -

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Figure 16.7. [cont.]: 3. Production process model;
4. Calculation of the control actions;
5. Generation of the control signals;
6. Current identification of the coefficients of
the production process model.

During the control process, information on the criterion for the conduct of the
process and the nuaber of the operating reactor, the main hydrogen flow rate,

the flow rate of hydrogen through the vaporizer, the admission of the water con-
taining mixture into the reactor, the flow rate of the hydrogen for_the dilution
of the water containing mixture. the flow rate of the water containing nixture
from the tank, the concentration of silicon tetrachloride in the hydrogen and

on the temperature of the pyramid (on the RF induction unit current). The signals
from the sensors fron all of the units are fed to the central posts, are processed
(compared with the specified values) where signals are present concerning the
operation of the units when building up a layer, and the resulting signals are

fed out to the central control console. The model is corrected in the computer
(linear regression models of the process are employed) and the control signals

are fed out to the systen for regulating the water containing mixture. When the
specified epitaxial filn thickness is achieved, the process is terminated.

Thus, automated production process control systens for the industrial production
of electronics hardware products differ in terms of structure, hardware and soft-
ware, handle different functional tasks and have differing degrees of efficiency.
However, the overall trends in the design, support and functioning of automated
production process control systems make it possible to predict the rather complete
standardization of the techniques and tools for automated production process con—
trol systems in the seuiconductor device and IC industry in the years just ahead.

- 312 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER FIFTEIN COHPREHBNSIVELY HECRANIZED PRODUCTION LINES FOR CERTAIN MASS
PRODUCED TYPES OF SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES AND INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

The structure and design of comprehensively mechanized and autosated lines in
semiconductor production are governed in the final analysis by both the structural
design and production process features of the devices, the technology, the products
list and volume of production. As applied to standard production process schemes
for the production of semiconductor devices (see the Introduction, 1-4), there

are comprehensively mechanized lines for the production of point contact and alloy
diodes and lines for the major steps in the production of planar semiconductor
devices and integrated circuits, including photolithography lines, lines for

the assembly of transistors and integrated circuits, lines for the final operations,
etc.

The structural design features of lines are also governed to a considerable extent
by the method of transporting the products, and the structural design of the
interoperetion and production process packaging. The most widely used means of
packing and placing products in coaprehsnsively mechanized lines and some of the
characteristic lines for the mass production of semiconductor devices are des-
cribed below.

15.1. Product Packing and Placement Hardware for the Major Steps in the Compre-
hensively Mechanized Production of Semiconductor Devices

In the mess production of semiconductor devices, the main component of the
material load flow is the products being processed (the wafers of semiconductor
materials, chips, parts of chips, and devices in various stages of completion),
which are transferred systematically and in large amounts from operation to opera-
tion. Additionally, components of the material load flow are the production pro-
cess packages and auxiliary materials (chemical reagents, coolsnts, etc.). A
loed flow with conveyor systems is the most organized type. Besides belt trans-
porters, pneumatic transport and trays riding on an air cushion are used for

this purpose. In the case of small physical volumes of materials which are sup-
plied periodically, transport using manual or mechanized carriages, or manual
delivery of the loads in specialized accessories is employed.

As was noted above (Chapter 12), the use of through-going production process
satellites and a batch packing for transport between operations is an all-purpose
engineering solution when setting up the material flow on automated lines. This
can be seen in the example considered above (512.6) of the production process of
the fabrication of a silicon planar transistor (also see 1.11). Special satellites
or group packing are used in all steps of this process. These are through-going
group cassette holders, which differ in the basic material, in all stages of the
fabrication and treatment of the wafers (1.0 and 2.0).

In the steps of separating the waters into chips and assembly (3.0 and 6.0), the
group carriers are segments of strips with the load in special cassette holders

or flexible strips. The stage of finish operations is characterized by the
wide scale use of through-going satellite carriers with the load in case containers.

- 313 -

FORfﬂﬂﬂCtALlﬂiHONLN
FOR OFFICIAL IISF. ONLY

 

Figure 15.1. Basket container for the loose holding of products.

Nonvthclcss, the hardware used in comprehensively mechanized production of seni—
conductor devices for packing and holding the products is distinguished by a
considerable diversity of structut11 forms and materials used.

Each kind of equipment has devices related to the placement. transport and loadinv
and unloading of the products being processed, the considerable diversity of

which is predetermined by the narrow specialization of the devices for product
placement and arrangement as applied to the specific type of product.

The following are used at the present time as the standard hardware for the
placement and holding of chips. capsules for devices, mounting bases. leads and
finished devices on production lines:

--Easket container for the loose holding of products (Figure 15.1);

--Vulticell flat and basket holders for the ordered arrangement of products
(Figure 15.2);

—-Cascs for the oriented stowage of products (Table 15.1);
——Strip carriers for products, made in the form of small strip segments or wound
into a roll (Figure 15.3).

A characteristic feature of modern comprehensively mechanized lines is the choice
of a minimal products list of packing and layout hardware for products using

this products list in the greatest number of operations. i.e.. using the so—callcd
through-going pack. The specific features of the various product packs are noted
’below where they are used as through-going holder packs.

- 31h -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
:7 .
‘.

2;;aaut3afat.;-; -i_.\“m.w.c_ .._¢1¥| .
Figure 15.2. Multiple cell flat and basket cassette holders for
the ordered placement of products.

Key: a. Cassette holder for products with circular packages:
b. Cassette package for holding unencapsulated transistors;
c. Fast unloading holder for the stowage of leads with
a bead in the production of diodes;
d. Cassette holder for the stowage of transistors in
T0-18 packages;
2. Flat cellular cassette holder for the stowage of wafers:
f. Set of devices for transferring wafers from plastic to
flat metallic cassette holders;
3. Hultistory cassette holder for wafers or lC frames.

The basket package for the loose holding of products is distinguished by struc-
tural simplicity and relatively large capacity for holding the products. However.
the unordered loose storage is iuperuissible for many kinds of products. This

type of product layout is the most applicable for storage between operations for
low priority products in the case of small series production. As a through pro-
cess holder, the basket pack with the loose holding of the products is applicable
in limited cases (mass galvanic processes, for holding substandard products, etc.).

- 315 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hulticell flat and basket holders (see Figure 15.2) have found the greatest
applications in the production of discrete semiconductor devices and integrated
circuits in performing operations manually. The accounting for the products is
facilitated in multicell holders, where these products have a definite orientation.
The use of such cassette holders as the through-going package is made difficult
because of the complexity of mechaniaing the loading and unloading of the products.
The most preferred approach is to employ such a method of arranging the products
where it is possible to design simple accessories and devices for the batch trans-
ferral of products into all or a certain portion of the holder cells (see Figure
15.2c). Hulticell cassette holders made in the form of shelves (see Figure 15.2g)
make it possible to automate the loading and unloading of products (in a specific
case. wafers of semiconductor materials) using step vertical travel devices. These
kinds of multicell cassette holders are being successfully used as through process
holders in photolithography lines.

 

Figure 15.3. Strip carriers.

a. Strip carrier wound into a roll;
b. Multipass pack for holding transistors.

Cases for the oriented stowage of products by means of stacking (the products are
placed one on the other) are adapted for gravity feed loading and unloading of
the products with the action of the weight of the product itself in the case of

a vertical or inclined configuration of the case [89]. The case system. just as
in the case where multiple cell cassette holders are used. creates the conditions
for rapid counting and taking the nuaber of products into account. The cases
themselves, in being a kind of package, can serve as the structural components

of loading and unloading as well as transport devices, which makes it most effec-
tive to use the case system specifically on those lines where it is necessary

to have a single package for servicing the large number of kinds of equipment.

As can be seen from Table 15.1, the profile of the cases is worked out to obtain
the initial blanks by a progressive technique: pressing the material through

a draw die (extrusion). Further processing consists only in cutting the shaped
billets into measured segments.

The stowing of discrete semiconductor devices and It's using strip carriers is
widely used in mechanized lines to produce small products, predominantly those of
a flat shape (for example, "Minimod" IC packing [62], the production of transistors

- 316 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 15.1. Standardiaed Cases £2; Oriented holding 2; Products

Kind of Product Expo of Case Bolder Function

' ' For the stacking of
flat and bulk sat-
ellite carriers;
for devices in flat
packs with pin
leads. and for low
power transistors.

 

 

 

 

n | 2

For the holding of
products in flat
packages with stub
leads.

For holding power
transistors in RT-
18 and 10-3 pach- .
ages

 

For holding devices
with a screw (as-
teuer

 

- 317 -

FORtOFﬁKJAl.USIIMNLY
TABLE 15.2.

Function
1

For integrated
circuits

For chips

For unencap-
sulated de-
vices

For the "com-
pressible
packet" con-
necting de-
vice

For integrat-
ed circuits
on a strip

For IC'a vith
HOS struc-
tures

Kind of Product

2

3*

 

J-d-ﬁ—
:—

h

____—-—

ﬂ

Shorting clamps

 

Base
3

M
___J____

M
5%.
ﬂ

g

The Standardization of Hardware for Holding Products Using Standard
Baa

Remarks
6

For automating quality
control, test and in-
dividual operations
when producing 16's in
flat packs.

 

For the oriented group
holding of chips, test»
ing the parameters of
the chips and auto-st-
ically feeding the
equipment for group or
individual connection
of the chips.

For automating the
production of single
chip and unencapsulat-
ed devices

For use as a connect-
ing device during tests
of flat pack integrated
circuits.

For use in the pro-
duction of integrated
circuits using poly-
imide film.

For the production of
integrated circuits
with MOS structures,
which require the
shorting of the leads

On nvnOnnr on. (an?
_____________________._.__———————————

and Ic's in plastic packages. etc.). In a nunher of cases, the strip carrier is
used as e Iultipsss pack for the place-eat end step feed of transistors with flex-
ihle lesda (Figure 15.3). The strip seguents. as a tool for the stowing of pro-
ducts. are made of setal. including the structural nateriel of the products. if

a portion or coeponents of the devices the-selves will be nade true this sene
strip. long Iultineter strips. rolled onto spools, are nede of plas\;cs: poly-
inide. sylsr or in the for: of Iultilayer transfer strips, one of the layers of
which has adhesive properties for the tenporsry securing of flet products, such
as chips of seeiconductor neterials. Production process satellite carriers
(Table 15.2) have been used recently es the pecking for the individual stowage of
integrated circuit chips and bulk products (transistors end 16's in TO-S packages,
flat packs with stub leads. etc.). All of the kinds of packages which were noted

- 319 -

FIHIIINNCIAI.USB|MVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MNLY

above may be used for the group placement of products placed in production process
satellite carriers. A production process satellite carrier is a device i r the
oriented placement and reliable securing of one or more products. The satellite
carrier provides for the execution of a number of test operations involving tem-
perature exposure (from -60 to +150' c) without removing the product from it; it
also provides for chemical and mechanical treatment (marking, painting, contacting),
etc. In being a through-process package, which goes directly with the product

into the working region of the equipment when performing production processes, the
satellite carrier should be made of materials having the requisite heat resistance,
shOuld stand up to mechanical loads including abrasion. and be immune to chemical
corrosion. which occurs during the course of the production process. It is econ-
omically expedient to reprocess such material predominantly with injection molding
machines. Polycarbonate (a heat resistance of less than +120° C). arylos ( a heat
resistance of up to +140“ C). polyarylate (a heat resistance high than +160° C)

and a number of other thermoplastics are the most widely used for these purposes.

15.2. A Comprehensively Mechanized Line for the Assembly of Pulse Diodes

The comprehensively mechanized pulse diode assembly line (Figure 15.6) which is

of the intermittent flow-line type provides for the execution of the production
process for the diodes from the operation of loading the cassette holders with

the device elements to the quality control of the external appearance of the finish-
ed device.

The equipment incorporated in the line is characterized by a high level of mech-
anization and output productivity (6.500 to 6,000 devices per hour). The products
are transferred using a through-going multiple place cassette holder (25 devices).

The line can be broken down into three sections: the section for producing the
junction (positions I-VII), the diode assembly section (position III) and the
quality control section (position VIII).

The major operations of the production process for diode assembly which are carried
out on the line are the following. At positions I and III, the holders with the
compensators and the assembled fittings. The loaded cassette holders are then fed
to position 11, where the lower and upper halves of the holder are joined. after
which the assembled cassettes are fed to positions Vl-Vll. Here. the operators
place the cassette holders under microscope S and check the correctness of the
loaded elements of the devices. The cassette holders are then fed to the welding
unit 3. After completing the welding process, the cassettes are fed to position
VIII, where the operator extracts the devices from the cassettes and carries out

an external inspection. Good devices are forwarded to the subsequent operations.

The main production process is producing the p-n junctions and is accomplished on
the welding unit. The unit has two electric heaters for preheating the cassette
holders. which provide a temperature of +300° C, as well as two molybdenum heaters,
by means of which the working temperature in the welding region for the device
elements is maintained at 1000 + 200' C. Nitrogen is fed to the installation to
provide an inert medium in the regions for the welding and preliminary heating.

The welding unit and the enclosure for preheating the cassettes are mounted on

- 320 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500090004-3

POROFFICIALUSEC

FOR OFFICIAL IS: ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0005000900044

 

«shun; diodes.

A cmtemuvcly acchnnuod line for a.

Figure 15.5.
FINI()FF1C]AI.lEﬂ£(NNLY

three support plat es, which are positioned in the frame. Hater is fed through a
header for cooling and heat removal during the process of operating the unit. The
temperature of the drain water should be higher than 30° C. This is accomplished
by using a valve to regulate the quantity of water fed into the heaters.

The cassette holders are moved in the operation of loading the device components
(positions 1-!!!) and for quality control (positions IV-VII) by means of the
transporter 6, which consists of the drive, including an asynchronous electric
motor and reducer, tension roller, support rollers 9, limiters and the belt. The
rate of travel of the transporter belt is 7 m/min. The electric motor is con-
trolled by means of the instruments and hardware located on panel 7. The conveyor
13 moves the loaded cassettes from positions lV-VII to the welding operation and
then on to position VIII, and also returns the free cassettes from the last opera-
tion to position 11. The cassettes are placed in positions IV-VII on the conveyor
so that the cassette pin by means of which the conveyor chain, which has a ring
for catching the cassettes, moves the cassette along the guides and must neces-
sarily be located at the front of the cassette relative to the conveyor travel.

By virtue of adjusting the conveyor speed (up to 1.17 mlmin), the welding time

is set in a range of from 17 to 65 seconds. The conveyor consists of a drive
which includes a DC motor and reducer. the tensioning unit for the chain 1 and

the drive sprocket wheels.

The work of the operators at all of the working positions, with the exception of
the welding unit, is carried out on the tables ll, which have a protective enclo-
sure 6, in the upper portion of which there are lights 8. The tables and protec-
tive enclosures take the form of welded metal frames. The tables have metal
sheathing. an upper plate and boxes, where the requisite tools and attachments
are located. The framework of the protective enclosure is covered with plexiglass
walls. There are plates with guides in the protective enclosures along which the

cassette holders travel.

The magnetic loader 10 at working positions 1 and 3 provide for the placement of

the device holders, as well as the assembled fittings in a vertical position for

the purpose of convenience in loading them into the cassette nests. The magnetic
field is generated by two electromagnetic coils. which are controlled by means

of the apparatus and instruments located on panel 12.

There are direct reading flow meters and valves on gas panel 2 for adjusting the
amount of nitrogen fed into the welding unit.

15.3. The Comprehensively Mechanized Assembly Line for 0226 Diodes

The comprehensively mechanized line for the assembly of silicon alloy 0226 diodes
provides for the execution of the production process for the indicated diodes
from the loading of the chips into the cassette holders to the packing of the
finished devices. The line equipment is arranged in the production process se-
quence shown in the schematic of Figure 1.9. The line equipment can be broken
down into three sections: the equipment for producing the junction; the section
for assembling the diode, and the section for production process testing. classi-

fication and final assembly.

- 322 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The line is characterized by a high level of sechanization and equipment produc-
tivity. The group nethod of asseebly and treating the parts is elployed in the
labor intensive operations of loading the graphite cassettes prior to alloying,
unloading the cassettes after the flashing-off operation, and checking for a
hernetic seal and tinning of the leads.

A line speed eonitor panel is installed on the line. Information is fed to the
panel froe aonitor points on the line, and free the operations of checking the
volt-ampere characteristics of the junctions. Such information precludes the rolc
of a subjective factor in deternining whether a product is good. The presence of
a speed checking panel makes it possible to strictly account for the finished pro‘

ducts and control the course of the production process in an operationally tinely
manner.

The group loading of the graphite cassettes with gold spacers, silicon chips,
graphites plug and aluninum electrodes is carried out using a seniautomatic load-
ing unit. Sons 100 of the indicated elenents are loaded sinultaneously. The

loading is acconplished by means of vibration loaders and group vacuun suction
attacheents.

The junctions are fused in a carousel type vacuun furnace with an sutomatic
operational cycle.

The fused-in junctions in the cassette holders are forwarded to the cassette
unloader. where the group unloading of the cassettes is acconplished by leans of
a vacuun suction attachment and the quality of the alloying is visually inspected.
The graphite cassettes free the unloader are again fed to the seaiautonatic loader
in fluoroplastic cassettes which loosely hold 600 itens in each one and are for-
worded to the etching unit. The junctions are washed with deionized water in
this sane unit. The junctions are dried in an ultraviolet conveyor furnace, after
which they are transferred to the unit for autonaticelly applying a protective
coating and drying then. To provide for high device reliability. the operations
of drying the junctions and applying the protective testing are carried out in

a nitrogen atmosphere. The cassette holders are transferred in this case into
the units in a hernetically sealed pacluge through a special lock. which has an
inert gas delivery systee. The junctions. which have been varnished and placed
by an automatic unit in the nests of the fluoroplastic cassette holders. undergo
drying in a radiative heat furnace with a controlled environnent. The junctions
are then fed in the cassette holders to the unit, where in addition to cutting
the leads with a special attachment. a sanple 202 quality control check is made
of the junction paraneters based on the "Go-~80 go" principle. The junctions
with the trisned sluninun leads are fed to a senisutonatic unit for attaching

the junctions to the final leads.

A unit for assembling the diodes on a continuous belt is of particular interest,
where the assembled junctions are fed to this unit. The belt serves as the
transporting element and sinultaneously as the naterial for the fabrication of
the chip holder of the diode being sssenbled. 8one 16 operations are carried
out in the unit: from the cutting out of the perforations and the forning of
the chip holder to tie cutting out of the sealed diode.

- 323 -
’ FtHICNWHCIAI.USEiNNLY
FOR'OFTWCJAL USE(MNLY

The following operations are performed in the assembly unit: 1) The cutting out

of the perforations and the forming of the chip holder on the strip; 2) The de-
greasing of the strip; 3) The welding on of the lower lead; 6) The application of
flux and the tinning of the chip holder; 5) The washing away of the flux; 6) The
drying of the strip; 7) The placement of the junctions on the strip in special
cassette holders; 8) The soldering of the junctions to the strip; 9) The placement
of the capsules on the chip holder (on the strip); 10) The welding of the capsule
onto the chip holder (strip); 11) The crimping of the capsule tube; 12) The welding
on of the capsule tube; 13) The welding on of the upper lead; 16) Cutting the
finished and assembled diode out of the strip.

The finished diodes which are cut out of the strip have burrs at the cutout points.
The burrs are removed on an automatic roll flattening unit, from which they are
forwarded to the operations of checking the hermetic seal, thermal cycling. and
quality control of the electrical parameters and mechanical testing. The devices
are then sent on to the degreasing and drying operation, which is carried out in
an automatic unit. This operation is necessary for the subsequent operations of
tinning the leads, and painting and drying the diodes.

The leads are tinned in an automatic unit by the batch method. The diodes with
the tinned leads are automatically fed to a diode washing and drying installation.
The diodes which are dried out after washing are forwarded to a painting and dry-
ing unit.

The painted and dried diodes undergo testing for moisture resistance and are then
forwarded to a automatic classifier. The 0226 diodes are classified with respect

to the electrical parameters into four groups. according to the inverse current
and forward voltage drop under normal conditions.

The marking and drying of the labeling for the diodes are carried out in an
automatic marking and drying unit. The labeling is dried in a radiative heat
chamber of the automatic unit, after which the electrical parameters of the de-
vices are tested. The visual inspection of the external appearance of the finished
device is made by an operator at a separate working position.

The good diodes which have been checked for external appearance are packaged in
cardboard strips (in an automatic packing unit). The cardboard strips with the
diodes loaded in them in an automatic unit in groups of 20 pieces each are then
manually loaded into cardboard boxes in packs of 5 each and turned over to the
warehouse.

15.4. Comprehensively Mechanized Lines for the Major Steps in the Production of
Planar Transistors and Integrated Circuits

In contrast to the standard assembly lines for specific types of diodes treated
above, a trend has been noted in recent years towards the design of all-purpose
lines, suited to the production of a broad products list of semiconductor devices.
both discrete types and 16's, manufactured using planar technology. Lines are
described below which are used in photolithographic processes, in the assembly and
final operations in the production of planar transistors and integrated circuits.

- 32b -

FOITOFFICJAI.USEIDNLX
An Autonsted Photolithography Line

Autossted lines used in production for photolithography processes are described
in detail in Chapter 5. which is devoted to equip-ant for photolithography pro-
cesses. Given belov in Figure 15.5 is a ache-atic of yet another structural
variant of an autosated photolithography line using four track installations,
operating on the principle of linear transport of the usfers using a so-cslled
air cushion. The scheae for transporting the wafers on an air cushion is shown
in Figure 15.6. The use of this sethod of soving the wafers. which precludes
contact between the working surface of a wafer and the tool (tweezers), reduces
the fornation of breaks at the edges of waters as vell as the breakage of large
diaseter wafers to a considerable extent. Depending on the nuaber of sorting
tracks used in the production process. one can obtain a productivity of 100. 200.
300 and A00 wafers/hr.

 

Figure 15.5. An autonated photolithography line.

In (1) _' The line (see Figure 15.5) consists of
v v - an autosated couples for producing
\ $6 the relief in the photoresist and an
“A “\“ autonated coaplex for forning the topo-
logy on the seniconductor wafer. It
includes automated unit 2 which applies
the photoresist file to the surface of
the seaiconductor safer: automated unit
5, intended for developing the relief
of the photoresist on the wafer surface;

 

  
 

     
 

—.

M7.

figure 15.6. Schenstic showing the trans-
port of waters on an "air

"
cushion ° installation 3 which heat treats the
Key: 1. wafer; photoresist applied to the wafer; the
2. Air. latch-up and exposure unit 5; unit 6

in vhich the developing of the wafers.

the precision of the natching and the disensions of the damn are quality con-
trolled and the photoresist file thickness is neasured; the devices for loading
the wafers into the cassettes. l. and unloading than iron the cassettes, 1.

A water does not cone in contact with either the tools or the hand of an operator
on the line during the entire production process; this prevents the contasination,

dasage and breakage of the wafers. The use of a set of standardized cassettes
for wafers of various diaseters makes it possible to resolve questions of

-325-

FOR OFFICIAL [5! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production organization in an optimal manner. The wafers are reloaded from one
type of cassette to another by means of joining them together and tipping over,
which makes it possible to significantly curtail the labor requirements for the
transloading operations. Automatic reloading of the cassettes into devices for
receiving and feeding out the wafers is also used in the line for the purpose of
utilizing the given devices as automatic storage holders ahead of installations
with a semiautomatic operating mode. The use of the line described here in the
production of integrated circuits with individual processing of the wafers using
the "cassette to cassette" technique. as well as the control of the sequence and
duration of the production process operations (the feeding of the wafers to the
working position, the production processing mode and the feeding of the wafers to
the receiving cassette), which are realized from the control console. make a
whole series of advantages possible. including:

--Preciae observance of the processing nodes at the working positions:
--A constant output productivity for the holding of the wafers between operations;

--The lack of contact between the working surface of the wafers and the tools or
hand of an operator;

--The elimination of large diameter wafer breakage during their transportation;
——The choice of optimal productivity by virtue of a l, 2, 3 or T-trsck layout;

--0peration in accordance with a specified program which assures precise reproduci-
bility of the production process modes. which precludes the influence of sub-
jective factors to the maximum extent.

An Automated Assembly System

One of the problems of assembly automation is feeding preoriented chips which have
been classified into groups to the assembly operations [91]. As an example of

a solution to this problem, one can cite the TAO-1000 system designed by Teledyne
Tac (U.S.). in which all of the operations are automated - from the probe testing
of the wafers to the connection of the chips.

The new system consists of a set of equipnent, including the unit for probe test-
ing tie wafers, the installation for match—up and assembly, a strip sorter, an
optical autorecorder, installation for scribing and breaking the wafers. a match-
ing unit, a measurement unit. chip sorter, indexing device and chip separation
unit.

A semiconductor wafer is placed on the probe unit, in which the parameters of the
chips are checked; the results are recorded on a photographic plate, in which case,
they are arranged in a manner similar to the layout of the chips in the wafer.

Then the wafer is glued to an adhesive film and broken into chips. A broken

wafer on the film and the photographic plate with the recorded measurement results
for the devices are mounted on a cosmon frame in an oriented manner, where this
frame is placed on the sorter. The chips are removed from the film in this

unit and glued to strips in accordance with the categories recorded on the photo-
graphic plate. Chips of a particular group are fastened to each strip, where

these chips are glued to the strip in an oriented manner and are ready for assembly.

- 326 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Rejected chips are not removed from the film. This system has made it possible

to sharply boost the productivity of the operations of preparing chips for
assembly. The automated TAC-lUOO system, according to advertisement data, provides
for sorting up to 5.000 semiconductor chips per hour. This system has made it
possible to avoid the operations of restouing chips. sorting them, manual orienta—
tion as well as a number of others.

A Line for Final Operations in Integrated Circuit Production Using ?roduction
Procesx Satellite Carriers

The line (Figure 15.7) provides for performing the final operations of integrated
circuit fabrication, starting with the cutting of them out of the frames and

ending with the packing.

  

ow'ction of

integrated circuits using production process
satellite carriers.

Figur‘

An automated holding case system for loading (Figure 15.8), unloading (Figure
15.9) and transporting the products (Figure 15.10) is used in the line, where

this system is standard for the design of standardized hardware for holding de-
vices from a broad products list using production process satellite carriers.

The use of such a system makes it possible to iaplenent a high level of production
organization on the 1C fabrication section and to obtain a high productivity in

each operation.

The line equipment is arranged in accordance with the production sequence for
lhu processes being performed.

Thr oriented loading of the satellite carriers into the holding cases from a
vibration hopper is accomplished in the packing automat. Then the integrated
circuits are cut out of the frame in a semiautomatic unit. they are packed in
the satellite carrier and it is loaded into the case. The loaded case is fed to

- 327 —

.~.-r-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 15.9. Standardized assembly for
unloading satellites from
a cylindrical case.

 

the unit where the integrated circuits
are checked visually. The operation

of securing the integrated circuits in
the satellites by means of caps is
carried out in the next semiautomatic
unit. The devices are automatically loaded into the working position and they

are automatically unloaded into the holding case following the operation of instal-
ling the caps.

Figure 15.8. A standardised assembly for
loading satellites into a
cylindrical case.

The integrated circuits are automatically sorted into three groups in the universal
sorter: “Good", "Reject“. "No Contact”. The sorter has a carrying case system

for loading the devices into the contacting position and unloading them while
maintaining their orientation following the measurements. This provides for
significant reduction in rejects based on the external appearance of the integratcd
circuits. The cases with the IC's are fed from the sorter to an automated flow-
line chamber. where the IC parameters are measured after they are exposed to tem-
peratures of ~65 and +1G0' C. The devices are automatically loaded from the casr.
The exposure time in the chamber is from 1 to 12 minutes. The average rate of
change of temperature in the useful volume of the chamber in a range of 25 to la "
C is 2°C/min and in a range of from +30 to -65’ C, is 1.5'C/min.

The integrated circuits are then fed to an automatic unit where a label is applied
to the package, something which is monitored visually. In the subsequent opera-
tion. the labeling is varnished and then the IC's are fed to the drier.

The electrical and thermal conditioning stand is intended for simultaneously con-
ditioning 2,000 IC's by exposing them to square wave pulses at a frequency of

50 Hz and temperatures of 50 to 125’ C. It is possible to simultaneously con-
dition up to 10 types of integrated circuits in the stand, depending on which
interchangeable printed circuit boards with holders for the IC's are used in the
test stand. The temperature fluctuation at the operating point is less than 2' C
during the aging process. Each thermal control unit provides for a temperature
setting precision of +1' C. The time needed to reach the operating conditions in

- 328 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Oltell tte carr let .

Figure 15.10. Case for the transports-
tion of products.

the heat chamber is no aore than 120 minutes. The display unit provides for moni-
toring the operating modes in all of the printed circuit boards loaded into the
heating chamber.

The automated lc sorter takes the form of a standardized version of the sorter
noted above. It provides for sorting the 10's into 12 groups upon instructions
from an external meter. The cases with the Ic's of each group are fed to the
installation for removing the caps. where the caps are removed and the integrated
circuits in the satellite are unfastened. The cases with the 10's in the satellite
carriers are fed to this operation in the case where it is necessary to remove an
IC from the satellite. The integrated circuits are transported to the finished
product warehouse following packaging in a special installation.

Integrated circuit unloading devices made in the form of eight position case
holders which are automatically controlled are used in the majority of installa-
tions. where these units provide for filling the devices after the production
process operations are performed.

The contacting devices used in the individual installations provide for the
automatic connection of the leads of the circuits being tested to the instruments-
tion hardware (see $9.6). when testing integrated circuits. the connecting de-
vices are replaced after no more than three ainutes. The range of working tempera-
tures at which one million actuations is guaranteed runs from ~65 to +155‘ C.

As was described above, the cases used in the conplex provide for the storage.
stacking, loading, unloading and transport between operations of the production
process satellite carriers with the Ic's. The capacity of a single case is 150
satellites. The cases are fabricated by means of extrusion from an sluninum alloy;
the structural design provides for holding the circuits in the case during trans-
portation between operations and makes it possible to load and unload then while
preserving the orientation of the 16's.

The cases can also be used for the placement of satellite carriers with flat pack
Ic's having pin leads in TO-S packages with standard basing. similar to the basing

- 329 -

m OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the satellite carrier for flat integrated circuits. The production procesa
satellite carrier (Figure 15.11) takes the for- of the housing 1 and the cover 2,

and is fabricated fro- polyaulfone. polyarylate, arylox and polycarbonate. The

indicated plastics have good heat resistance (about +130' C). wear resistance and
iuunity to corrosive media.

-330-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

6.

9.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIN-106“?!"

Yefinov I.Ya., Gorbunov Yu.l., Koayr' I.Ya., "Hiltroelektronika. Piticheskiye
i tekllnologicheskiye osnovy. nadezhnost': Ucheb. posobiys clya vutov" ["Hicro-
electronics. The Physical and Technological Principles; Reliability: Textbook
for the Higher Educational Institutes"). ﬂoscow, Vysshaya Shkola Publishers,
1977. 616 pp. with illustrations.

Kurnosov A.l.. Yudin V.V., ”Tekluologiya proirvodstva poluprovodnikovykh
priborov" [”Ss-iconductor Device Production Tschnology"]. Moscow. Vysshaya
Shhola Publishers, 1971., 600 pp. with illustrations.

Chernyayev V.N.. "Tekhnogogiya proizvodstva integral'nykh nikroskhan" [”lntegra-
ted Circuit Production Teclnology"], Edited by LA. Vasenkov. Hoscow, Enargiya
Publishers, 1977. 376 pp. with illustrations.

Nikolayev LIL. "Oborudovaniye i tekhnologiya proizvodstva poluprovodnikovykh
priborov" ["Seaiconductor Device Production Tachology and Equip-eat"). Moscow.
Vysshaya Shltola Publishers, 1977, 269 pp. with illustrations.

Hazel' Ye.z., Press F.P., "Planarnaya tekhnologiya kraniyevykh priborov"
("Silicon Device Planar Technology"l. Hoscow. Energiya Publishers. 1974, 386 pp.
with drawings.

"Kremiyevyye planarnyye transistory" ["Silicon Planar Transistors"], Edited by
Ya.A. Pedotov, Moscow. Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1973, 336 pp. with

illustrations.

. Bochkin 0.1., bruit V.A., Nikiforova-Denisova 8.10.. "Hekhanicheskaya obrabotka

poluprovodnikovykh naterialov“ ("Mechanical Hachining of Semiconductor
Materials"), Second Edition, Moscow, Vysahaya shkola Publishers, 1977, 149 pp.

Pavlov l..P., "Hetody opredeleniya osnovnykh parametrov poluprovodnikovykh
uterialov" [”Hethods of Deter-ining the Major Parueters of Seniconductor
Hatsrials"]. Moscow. Vysshaya Shkola Publishers. 1975, 206 pp.

Golikov V.I., Karban' V.I.. Oniplto A.P., et a1., POLUPROVODNIKOVAYA WNIKA

I HIKROEIHTRMIKA [SMCWNC‘I’OR ENGINEERING AND HICROELBCTRONICS], "Issledo-
vaniye poverkhnosti nonokristallicheskikh podloshek dlya epitaksii posle
nekhanichsskoy obrabotlti" ("A Study of the Surface of Honocrystalline Substrates
for Epitaxy following Mechanical Treat-mt"), 1973. No. 13, pp 3-16.

Ren'yan V.R., "Tekhnologiya poluprovodnikogo kreniya" ["Seaiconductor Silicon
Techiology"), Translation frost the English edited by Yu.". Shashkov,
Hetallurgiya Publishers. 1969, 336 pp.

Kontsevoy Yu.A.. Kudin V.D., "Hatody kontrolya tektmologii proizvodstva
poluprovodnikovykh priborov" ["Quality Control Techniques for Semiconductor

Device Production Processes”]. Moscow, Energiya Publishers. 1973. 162 pp. with
illustrations.

~331-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

210.
25.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0vcharov V.P., Maslennikov P.N., lulygins 6.1., “Podgotovka plsstin bol'shogo
dianetra" ["Prepsrstion of Large Diameter Haters"), ZARUBEZMNAYA BLEKTRONMAYA
TBKBNIKA [PORBICM ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING]. 1979. No. 23, p 66.

Myagkov A.T., Korsetov Ye.M.. "Khiniko-tekhnologicheskaya apparatura nitro-
elektroniki" ["Chenicsl Production Processing Equipment for Microelectronics"),
Moscow, Bnergiya Publishers, 1979. 312 pp.

Ivsnov V.I., Malinin A.Yu., Niholsykin 11.1., et a1., "Reaktory osazhdeniya
sloyev iz gazovoy fazy i tendentsii ikh rcsvitiya" ["Reactors for the Precipit-

ation of Layers from a Gas Phase and Their Developnental Trends"), BLEKTRONNAYA
PROMYSHLENNOST', 1977, No. 5. pp 32-35.

Danilin 3.8., "Polucheniye tonkoplenochnykh elenentoy nikroskhen" ["Msking
Thin Filn Integrated Circuit Elenents"], Moscow, Energiya Publishers, 1977,
136 pp. with illustrations.

Danilin 3.8.. Minaychev V.Ye., Syrchik V.K., "Msgnetronnyye rsspylitel'nyye
sisteny" ["Magnetron Atonizstion Systems"). ELBKTRONNAYA PROMYSBLBNMOST'.
1976, Mo. 5, pp 62-65.

"Vvedeniye v fotolitogrsfiyu" ["Introduction to Photolithography"], Edited
by V.P. Lavrishchev, Moscow, anrgiya Publishers, 1977, 600 pp with illus.

"The Dawn of a New Era in water Processing. Introducing Uniplsne Systen 6000"
ELECTRONIC PACKAGING AND PRODUCTION, 1978, V01. 18, No. lo, p 153.

"Avtonatirirovannaya sistena obrabotkin plastin firny ln-Line-Technology"
["Autonated wafer Processing Systen of the In-Line Technology Conpany"],
Catalog of the ln-Line Technology Conpany (0.8.), B.M., 1977, 69 pp.

Parsnonov A.I., Prokhotskiy Yu.M., "Pornirovaniye plenok fotorezist netodon
tsentrifugirovsniys" ("Producing Photoresist Pilns by Means of Centrifuging].
ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSRLENNOST', 1975, No. 6, pp 60-65.

O'Hagan P., Dnughton 9., "Thickness Variance of Spun-On Photoresist", CIRCUITS
MANUFACTURING, 1978, Vol. 18, No. 6, pp 71-74.

"Fotolitografiya i optiks" ["Photolithogrnphy and Optics"), Edited by Yn.A.
Pedotov and 6.1. Polye, Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, Berlin, Technika
Publishers, 1976, 392 pp. with illustrations.

Tochitskiy Ya.I. Mal'to V.I., "Ustanovki sovneshcheniya i eksponirovaniys"
["Exposure and Aiigwnent Equipment"). "Obzory po elektronnoy tekhnike.
Ser. Mikroelektronika" l"Revieus of Electronics Engineering. Microelectronics
Series"), hsue S (263), 1975, 56 pp.

"Aligment Fixture", SOLID STATE TEGIMOLOGY, 1968, Vol. 8, No. 8, p 66.

Goldnann L.S., "Radial Distortion in Canhered Haters", SOLID STATE nmuowcv.
1979. Vol. 22. No. 6, pp 76-76.

~332-

FOR Oil-1C1“. USE ONLY
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

36.

35.

36.

Bolotnikov V.A.. Kotletaov B.N., Sokol'akiy H.N., Eonina R.I.. "Rastrovaya
osvetitel'naya sistena dlya proyektaionnoy i kontaltnoy fotolitografii"

[”Scanning lllunination Syste- for Projection and Contact Photolithography"].
MWYA PROHYSRLENNOST'. 1975. No. 6, pp 29-30.

Dikarev Yu.I., Synorov V.F.. Iolatykh E.L., "Plarnokhiaicheakoye travleniye
v tekhnologii IS” ["Plaanocheaicel Etching in IC Iechnology"]. ZARUBEEHNAYA
szrrnonuAvA TEKHNIKA, 1978. No. 2. pp 3-50.

Pedorov N.N., Ovcharov V.?.,"Plarnokhinicheekaya obrehotka poverkhnoatey plastin
poluprovodnikovykh priborov i integral'nykh skhen" ["Plaanochenical Treat-ent

of the Surfaces of Hafera of Seniconductor Devices and Integrated Circuita").
zanuszzanata ELEKIRONNAYA rlrxatxn. 1976. No 1a. pp 3 - s9.

"Plasna Etching is More Econouical and Paater than Cheaical", ELECTRONICS,
1976, Vol. 69, No. 6, p. 108.

Inozeatsev S.A.. Popov V.G.. Sidorenho V.I., "Rastrovyy elektronnyy nihroakop
dlya kontrolya nteallirirovannykh fotoahablonov" ["Scanning Electron Micro-
scope for Checking Hetalized Photographic Tenplates"), ELEKTRONNAYA
PROHYSRLENNOST'. 1975. No. 6. pp 50-52.

Calstyan V.C., Nosikov S.V.. "Prineneniye raatrovogo elektronnogo nikroskop

v poluprovodnikovoy elektronike" ["Applieation of the Scanning Electron
Hicroscope to Seniconductor Electronics"), ZARUEEZRNAYA ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA,
1971. No. 9, p 55.

"Scanning Electron Microscope". JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL ELECTRONICS: SCIENTIFIC
INSTRUMENTS, 1977. Vol. 10. No. 6, p 668.

Rubtsov I.N.. Sarkisov Yu.A., Panyushkin A.V.. "Siatena nul‘tiplikatsii dlya
izgotovleniya fotoshahlonov" [”Duplication Syaten for the Manufacture of
Photographic Tenplatea"]. "Obrory po elektrsanoy tekhnike. Seriya: Poluprovod-
nikovyye prihory.” Issue 16 (136), Part 1, Hoccov, TaNII Elektronika [Electro-
nics Central Scientific Research Inatitute]. 1973. 66 pp.

Raykhnan A.Ya.. "Metody generirovaniya izohrazheniya" ["Inage Generation
Tecllliques"]. BBKTRWNAYA PRMSBLENNOST', 1975, No. 6, pp 22-26.

Shuvayev G.V., Chigrinskiy 0.H., Eochkin 0.1., “Rardeleniye plastin poluprovod-
nikovykh naterialov na kristally" ["Separating Hafere of Seniconductor Materials
into Chipa”], "Obzory po elehtronnoy tekhnike. Ser. Tekhnologiya. organizataiya
proizvodotva i oborudovaniye” ["Reviews in Electronics Engineering. Series on
Technology, Production Organization and Equipnent"], Issue 2, Moscow, TsNII
Elektronika. I975. 60 pp.

Horlyand V.N.. Golubovskiy A.A., "Voprosy avtonatizatsii zagruzki kristallov
v proizvodstve poluprovodnikovykh priborov i integrel'nykh akhen" ["Questiona
of Autonating the Loading of Chips in the Production of Seniconductor Devices
and Integrated Circuits"]. "Elektronnaya tekhnika. Ser. 7. Tekhnologiya.
organizataiya proizvodatva i oborudoveniye". 1973, Issue 5 (57), pp 68-52.

- 333 -

FOR‘OFFIJAI.USE(HULY
37.

38.

39.

100.

141.

62.

63.

lob.

105.

1.6.

57.

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Nazarov V.A., Novak A.Ya., Anisimov V.I.. et al., "Komplekt ohorudovsniys dlys
oriyentirovannogo razdelsniya plastin na kristally" ["Set of Equipment for

the Oriented Separation of Uafers into Chips"], "Blektronnaya Tekhnika. Ser. 7,
“rekimologiya, organizatsiya proizvodstva 1 ohorudovsniye", 1973, Issue 5 (57),
pp 68-52.

Ovcharov V.P.,"Yaponskoye oborudovaniye dlya proizvodstva poluprovodnikovykh
priborov 1 IS" ["Japanese Equipment for the Production of Semiconductor Devices
and 10's"), ZARUBEZIINAYA BLEKTRONNAYA mu, 1976, No. 2, pp 3-53.

Haslennikov P.N., Ovchsrov V.F., Kholin 6.1., "Komplsksno-mekhanizirovannyye
linii 1 sistemy v proizvodstve poluprovodnikovykh priborov 1 IS" ["Comprehen-
sively Mechanized Lines and Systens in the Production of Semiconductor Devices
and IC's"), ZARUBEZRNAYA ELEKTRWAYA mm, 1976, No. 6, pp 8-9/

Grachev A.A., Kozhevnikov A.P., Lehiga V.A., A.A. Rossoshinskiy, "Ul'trazvuko-
vays nikrosvarka" ["Ultrasonic Hicrovelding"), Moscow, Energiya Publishers,
1977, 186 pp with illustrations (Biblioteha tekhnologs rsdioelektr.
spparatury, vyp. 11) [(Library of the Radioelsctronic Equipment Production
Process Engineer. Issue 11)].

Patent 1.121.128. Drauings Attached. Index 352-8. "Method and Apparatus for
Sorting Semiconductor Devices".

Grossnan S.Ye., "Hetod lentochnykh derzhatcley - put' k svtonatiratsii shorki
integrsl'nykh skhen" ["Using Strip Bolders: A Ray of Automating the Asselbly
of Integrated Circuits"], BLﬁKTRONIKA, 1976, No. 10, pp 29-39.

Bosvell, "Hekhanicheskiye svcystva "flip-chipov" 1 ustroystv s balochnyli
vyvodami" ["Hechanical Properties of "Flip Chips" and Devices with Beam Leads").
ZARUBEZHNAYA ELBKTRONNAYA mm, 1971, No. 6, pp 23-29.

Lin, L1, 61m., "Nekotoryye vcprosy proyektirovsniys prihorov. montiruyemykh
"flip-chip" netodon" ["Some Questions of the Design of Devices Mounted using
the Flip Chip Tecl‘llique"], ZARUBEZHNAYA BLEKTRMZAYA ”ERIKA, 1971, No. 4,
pp 30-£3.

Rydzevskiy A.P., "Vliyaniye rezhina ul'trazvukovoy nikrosvarki ns kachestvo
svarnykh soyedineniy" ["The Influence of Ultrasonic Hicrouelding Conditions
on the Quality of Welds”, ELEKTRGINAYA PROHYSHLBNNOST', 1971, No. 3, pp 37-39.

Shanov A.M., Tsar'kov A.N., Sokolov A.V., Nazarov G.V., "Konplekt oborudovaniys
dlya besprovolochnogo nontszha aktivnykh elementov" ["Set of Equipment for
Booking Up Active Devices without Using Hire") , BLEKTRONNAYA PROHYSRLBNNOST',
1973. No. 8. p 80.

Berger H.A., DAYLENDDR Ye.G., "Gibkin ploskiy hahel' dlya podklyucheniya IS"
[”A Plat Flexible Cable for Connecting Integrated Circuits"], ELEKTRONIKA,
1973, No. 7, pp 50-59.

- 3310-335 -

FOR 0FFHJA1.USE(NULY
58.

‘9.

51.

52.

53.

56.

$5.

56.

57.

S9.

Koen. "Termokompressionnaya ustanovka dlys montaaha kristallov DIS s
upravleniyem ot minikomp'yuter" ["Minicomputer Controlled Thermal Compression
Bonding Unit for Mounting LSI Chips"], ELEKTRONIKA, 1973, No 25, pp 9. 10.

"Svarochnyy stanok. programmiruyumyy pri pomoshchi PZ " ("ROM Programmable
Helding Machine"). BLEKTRONIKA, 1971, Mo. 26, p 85.

Fedorenko Yu.S.. Ivanov V.V.. "Proizvodstvo poluprovodnikovyky priborov metodom
nepreryvnoy lenty s germetizatsiyey plastmaasoy" ["Production of Semiconductor
Devices Using a Continuous Strip and Potting in Plastic"], OBMEM OPYTOM V
BLEKTRONNOY PROHYSHLINNOSTI, 1969, Mo. 3, pp 39-63.

Lay-en 6.. "Novyye netody komponovki, povyshayushchiye plotnost' raspolozheniys
elementov” ["Meu Layout Techniques which Increase Component Place-ant Density").
ELEK‘I'RGIIKA. 1978, No. 20, pp 35-68.

Dubolazov V.A., Gurskiy P.I.. "Primeneniye kholodnoy svarki dlya germetizatsii
korpusov elektronnykh priborov" ("Application of Cold Welding to hermetic
Sealing of Electronic Device Packages"), AVTOMATICHBSKAYA SVAPKA [AUTOMATED
"ELDINGJ, 1975. No. l. p ‘6.

"Kondensatornyye mashiny dlya kontaktnoy svarki korpusov poluprovodnikovykh
priborov" ["Capacitor Contact welding Machines for Semiconductor Device Pack-
ages"), VNIIBSO [All-Union Scientific Research Institute for Electrical ﬁelding
Equipment]. SVAROCRNOYB PROIZVODSTVO [UBLDING PRODUCTION], 1976, No. l, p 49.

Sorokin A.Ya., Stakhovskiy S.S., Popov V.A.. Kazurov 3.1., "Cermetizatsiya
ploskikh korpusov" ["Mernetically Sealing Plat Packages"], "Elektronnaya tekh-
nika. Sat. 7. Tekhnologiya, organisatsiya proiavodstva, oborudovaniye", 1973,
Issue 5, pp 21-25.

DST ll P0.36ﬁ.002-72 [Sector Standard 1] P0.36b.002—72]. "Uatroystva kontaktir-
uyushchiye dlya gotovykh mikroskhen. Tipy i osnovnyye paranetry" (“Contacting
Devices for Finished Integrated Circuits. Types and Major Parameters").

DST ll 364.003-72. "Ustroystva kontaktnyye dlya poluprovodnikovykh priborov"
["Contscting Devices for Semiconductor Devices"].

OST ll 360.010-75. "Ustroystva kontaktiruyushchiye dlya kontrolya parametrov
poluprovodnikovykh priborov i integral'nykh mikroskhen" ["Contacting Devices
for Testing the Parameters of Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits"].

COST 16962-71 [State Standard 16962-11]. "ladeliya elektronroy tekhniki. Methan-
icheakiye i klimaticheskiye vozdeystviya. Trebovaniye i metody ispytaniy"
["Blsctronic Equipment Products. Mechanical and Climatic Loads. Requirements
and Test Methods").

Patent 333735 (USSR), "Kssaeta dlya transportirovaniya i podklyucheniye k
izmeritel'nym ustroystvam tranziatorov s gibkimi vyvodami” ["Cassetteutype

Holder for the Transport and Connection of Transistors vith Flexible Leads
to Measurement Bquipment"], Kononov V.I., Makhayev V.G., Published in
BYULLETBN' IZOBRETZNIY, No 11, 1972.

- 336 -
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(]AI.USE(NVLY
60.

61.

62.

63.

65.

66.

67.

69.

FOR OI?W(1AI.lﬂ“§(HMLV

Kononov V.1., Pilimonov V.N., Shpakov V.A., "Vysokoproizvoditel'noye oborudo-
vaniye dlya klimaticheskikh ispytaniy" ["Bigh Output Equipment for Climatic
Tests"], newsman Pmmsammosr'. 1979, No. 5, pp 67-50.

Moryakov 0.8., "Ustroystvo i naladka oborudovaniya poluprovodnikovogo proit-
vodstva" ["Configuration and Set-Up of Semiconductor Production Equipment"),
Moscow, Vysshaya Shkola Publishers. 1976, 318 pp with illustrations.

Shaumyan C.A., "Kompleksnaya avtomatizatsiya proisvodstvennykh protsessov"
["Comprehensive Automation of Production Processes”), Edited by L.1.
Volchkevich, Moscow, Mashinostroyeniye Publishers. 1973, 660 pp, with illus.

Volchkevich L.I., "Nadezhnost' avtomaticheakikh liniy" ["Reliability of Auto-
mated Lines"), Edited by C.A. Shaumyan, Textbook for Machine Building higher

Educational Institutes and Departments, Moscow, Mashinostroyeniye Publishers,
1969, 308 pp, with drawings.

Maslennikov P.N., "Osnovnyye nauchno-tekhnicheskiye napravleniya soadaniya
kompleksno-mekhanizirovannykh proizvodstvennykh sistem dlya izgotovleniya
poluprovodnikovykh priborov i integral'nykh skham" ["The Main Scientific and
Technical Directions in the Design of Comprehensively Mechanized Production
Systems for the Manufacture of Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits"),
in the collection "Novoye v tekhnike poluprovodnikovogo proievodstva" ("New
Things in Semiconductor Production Hardware"), Voronezh, VGU [Voronezh State
University] Publishers, 1971, pp 4-10.

Belyanin P.N., V.N. Danilevskiy, Knyaseva N.P., et al., “Promyshlennyye roboty

i ikh primeneniye dlya avtomatizatsii proizvodstvennykh protsessov" ("Industrial
Robots and Their Application to the Automation of Production Processes"],
VESTNIK HASNINOSTROYENIYA [MACHINE BUILDING BULLETIN], 1976, No. 5, pp 14-17.

Khorvat 1., "Teoriya industrial'nykh sistem" ["1ndustrial Systems Theory“],
Translated from the Hungarian, Edited by V.G. Afanas'yev, Moscow, Progress
Publishers, 1976, 264 pp with illustrations.

Riggs J., "Proizvodstvennyye sistem: Planirovaniye, analiz, kontrol'"
["Production Systems: Planning, Analysis, Testing"], Translated from the English,
Edited by A.1. Anchishkin, Moscow, Progress Publishers, 1972, 340 pp, with

drawings.

. "0 kriteriyakh otsenki urovnya tekhnologicheakikh poter' v kompleksno

mekhanieirovannom proizvodstve poluprovodnikovykh priborov" ["On Criteria for
Evaluating the Level of Production Process Losses in the Comprehensively
Mechanized Production of Semiconductor Devices"], ELEKTRONMAYA PROMYSHLENNOST',
1972. No. 8, pp 9, 10.

Maslennikov P.N., Sysoyev V.V., Luk'yanov D.N., "Optimizatsiya organizatsionnoy
struktury kontrolya tekhnologicheskogo protsesss" ["Optimizing the Organizat-
ional Structure for Quality Control of a Production Process"]. "Elektronnaya
Tekhnika. Ser. 8. Upravleniye kachestvom, metrologiya standartizatsiya",
1976, Issue 9, pp 60-66.

- 337 -
FOR¢NHNC1A1.USB(HNLY
70.

71.

72.

73.

7b.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

Haslennihov P.N., Sysoyev V.V., "Optimizatsiya struktury liniy poluprovodnik-
ovogo proisvodstva pri ikh proyektirovanii" ["Structural Optinization of Seni-
conductor Production Lines During Their Planning”], edited by P.H. Klenent'yev,
Voronerh, VGU [Voronerh State University] Publishers, 1979, 108 pp with
illustrations.

"Tekhnologicheskiye protsessy s prineneniyen nsnbran“ ["Production Processes
Using Heabrsnes"], Translation fron the English, edited by Yu.A. Hasitov.
Moscow, Hir Publishers. 1976, 370 pp.

"Ionoobaennyye nenbrany v elektrodialize" ["Ion Exchange Henbranes in Electro-
dislysis”], edited by K.H. Saldadze, Leningrad, Khiniya Publishers, Leningrad
Division, 1970, 287 pp. "

Shayskhnetov A.R., borisovskiy I.V., Dytnerskiy Yu.I., et s1., "Ispol'zovaniye
obratnogo oenose v skheae polucheniya osobo chistoy vody" ["Use of Reverse
Osnosis in a Process for Producing Especially Pure Hater"|, "Elektronnaya
Tekhnika. Ser. 7. Tekhnologiya, organisatsiya proizvodstva i oborudovaniye",
1975, Issue 6, pp 66-47.

Ranchugov V.A., Korneyev V.N., "Chistyye tonnaty tips KCh" ["Type Kch Clean
Roons"], "Elektronnaya Tekhnika. Ser. 7. Tekhnologiya, organizatsiya proiz-
vodstva i oborudovaniye", 1973, Issue 6, pp 55-47.

Andreyevskiy G.P., "Chistyye koansty" ["Clean Icons”), BLEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLEN-
NOST', 1975, No. 3, p 67.

Kastal'skiy A.A., "Proyektirovaniye ustanovok dlya khinicheskogo obessolivaniya
vody" ("Designing Units for the Cheaical Desalinization of Uster"], Moscow,
Stroyizdat, 1968. 212 pp.

Patent 667757 (USSR), "Ustanovka ochistki acts 1 inertnykh gaeov" ["Purifice-
tion Unit for Nitrogen and Inert Gases"], Rubashkin 3.1., Donnitskaya M.A.,
Chernikov V.I., et 31., Published in BYULLBTEN' IZOBRBTBNIY, “0. 15, 1975.

Baril H.A., Sanoylikov V.K., "Gazovyye sisteny oborudovaniya proizvodstvs
poluprovodnikovykh priborov i integral'nykh skhen" ["The Gas Systens of
Production Bquipnent for Seniconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits"),
Moscow, Bnergiya Publishers, 1978, 112 pp, with illustrations.

Kanchugov V.A.. Korneyev V.N., Rozentsveyg I.Yu., Sverdlov A.S., "Pil'try d‘vs
ochistki tekhnologicheskikh sred" ["Pilters for Scrubbing Production Process
Hedia"], ”Elektronnsya tekhnika. Ser. 7. Tekhnologiya. organizatsiya proizvod-
stva i oborudovaniye", Issue 3, 1972, pp 70-74.

Goloto 1.0., Dokuchsyev B.P., Kolnogorov 6.0., "Chistota v proievodstve
poluprovodnikovykh priborov i integral'nykh sk " ["Purity in the Production

of Seniconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits"], Hosrou, Energiya Publishers,
1975, 208 pp, with illustrations.

- 338 -

F0R4OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
81.

82.

83.

8b.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Val'kov V.H., "ASU T? v proizvodstve izdeliy elektronnoy tekhniki" ["Autouated
Production Process Control Systems in the Production of Electronic Equipment
Products"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 197‘, p 9.

Coryachkin V.I.. Dyukov N.H., Yeremin A.P., "Upravlysyushchiy vychislitel'nyy
kompleks 'Raduga K-SO'" ["The 'Paduga K-SO' Control Computer Conplex”],
ELBKTRWNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST' , 1975, No. 1, pp 67-71.

Bugayev N.V., Zudin A.c.. Crishin R.z., Pchelin A.A., "Hetodicheskiye voprosy
postroyeniya matenaticheskogo obespecheniya ASU TP" ("Methodological Questions
in the Construction of Software for Automated Production Process Control
Systems"]. "Elektronnaya tekhnika. Ser. 9. Avtomatizirovannyye sisteny
upravleniya" ["Electronics Engineering. Series 9. Automated Control Systems"],
1973, Issue 3, pp 86-93.

Vakhtel' V.K., Hsslennikov P.N., Ye.8. Solovsy, V.V. Stepanov, "Upravleniye
tekhnologicheskia protsessom proizvodstva planarnykh tranzistorov ns base
yedinogo konpleksa tekhnicheskikh sredstv v rankakh ASU TP" ["Production
Process Control for the Production of Planar Transistors based on a Unified
Set of Hardware within the Framework of Automated Production Process Control
Systass"], ELBKTRMNAYA PNHYSHLENNOST', 1974, No. 1, pp 25-27.

Belenov V.K., Iosnnisyants T.A.. "Kolichestvsnnyy analiz tekhnologicheskogo
protsessa" ["The Quantitative Analysis of a Production Process”], BLEKTRONNAYA
PROHYSHLENNOST', 1975. N0. 1:, pp 72-76.

Vorob'yev A.I., Yegurnov L.G., Kondrutskiy N.A., “ASU TP diffuzii i okislenii
pri izgotovlenii IS" ["Autonated Production Process Control System for Diffusion
and Oxidation in the Fabrication of Integrated Circuits"), BLEKTRONNAYA
nomsunmosr'. 1974. No. 1, pp 32-36.

Koleshko V.H., Savonin Yu.l., Khonich V.I., "Avtomatisirovannaya sistena
upravleniya tekhnologicheskin protsesson proizvodstva IS" ["Autoaated Production
Process Control System for Integrated Circuit Production"), "Elektronnaya Tekh-

nika. Ser. 9. Avtonatizirovannyys sisteay uprsvleniys", 1975, Issue 2,
pplN-MZ.

Biryukov V.H., Bychkov V.M., Nikitenko V.N.. Shevyrev Yu.Ye., "ASU TP
promyshlennogo [roizvodstva krenniyevykh epitaksial'nykh struktur" ["Autonated
Production Procvus Control System for the Industrial Production of Epitaxial
Silicon Structures"), BLEKTRONNAYA PRDHYSRLENNOST', 1975, No. 10, pp 26-27.

Sirotkin v.s., Press P.P., "Uprsvleniye tekhnologicheskini protsessani
proizvodstva poluprovodnikovykh priborov" ["Production Process Control for
Semiconductor Device Production"], Moscow. Bnergiya Publishers, 1979. 208 pp
with illustrations.

Belov V.A., Hakhayev V.C.. Nazarov V.A., "Vybor sposobov transportirovaniys
tekhnologicheskikh nositeley-sputnikov" ("Choosing the Methods of Transporting
Production Process Satellite Carriers"), "Elektronnaya tekhnika. Ser. 7.
Tekhnologiya. organizatsiya proizvodstva i oborudovaniye". 1975, Issue 2.

pp 50-55.

- 339 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

91. "Vysokoproizvoditel'nnya since-n dlya podgotovki kriatallov k shorts,
nod. 1000" ["Bigh I :foruance System for the Preparation of Chips for Assembly:

Model 1000"], Prospcctuu of the Teledyne The. Conpany (0.8.). Burlin, Moscow,
1970, 3 pp.

COPYRIGHT: ”Radio 1 Svyaz'", 1981

8225
cso: 01‘511129

-gm-

-3ao-

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY