APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100030044-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/834l

16 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 16/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publicntions contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parenth(.cs. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with \he source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GWERNINO WNERSRIP 01’
MATERIALS REPRODUC.D HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
olnuoourmc earn '- "rm-u N--- 1. Reripiesl's Area-semi No.

sneer JPRs l./8341
TRANSLA'I'NNS on ussn SCIENCE mo 'rmmotocv - PHYSICAL
sciences mu Tecumuxw , (rouo 16/79)

7. Jilin-ix)

l0. Picket/Tssh/Ieel Unit No.

il. Contact Gas: No.
II. Type 0‘ leper! t Period
Covered

O. l'slluseulr, “platinum- ‘43-..- .ml Adela-u
Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

n. Hun-mm; (heat-undue Nose soul min.

An nhovc

IS. \url-Iu .- nl.ur Nun."

I‘. Almi- u. n

The report contains information on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics:
ntwnplmric uclencee; chesistry; earth sciences and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; mathematical
sciences; cybernetics. cosputers; mechanical. industrial. civil, and marine
engineering; methods and equipment; missile technology; navigation.
communications. detection. and countermeasures. nuclear science and technology;
ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels: space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

. h. v I.s.i-. .usi in» 0- II amp... We. Dru "gems

USSR Electronics Missile Technology

Aeronautics
Astronomy

Ast rophyeice
Atmospheric Sciences
(then let ry

Computers
Cybernetics

Earth Sciences

Oceanography
"is. H- nels- I». "re u-h-Inl Trina

Electrical Engineering
Energy Conversion
Materials

Mathematics

Mechanical Engineering
Civil Engineering
Industrial Engineering

Marine Engineering
iiethods
Equipment

Navigation and
Cos-micatione
Detection and
Comtermeasuree
Nuclear Science and
Technology

Ordnance

Physics

Propulsion and Fuels
Space Technology

llr- ' "‘3" I- ”Mn-I- 01.03.05 .07.08,09.10,11,12.13,14.16,17.18,19,20.21,22

. Serum, iass( I» 2|. 0. oi Pages

lﬂ. \- .sIlaI-slsly VMvua-sll
Report)
\ .

For Official Use Only. Limited
Nusbar of Copies Available From JPRS

s use-u u Ins-n Ia! v l-I.‘I

 

rue route on I»: napnoouceo “"°"”‘ ""'""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 13/8341
16 March 19

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND. TECHNOLOGY
(moo 16/79)

CONTENTS
malice AID MIMI.- maximum

Spatial-Tine Processing of Radio Sigmls in Radio ﬁssures-ant
Systems in the General Cue (Review)
(I. n. max-,- (2. s. hkhmnscn; m2 mxommoum,

IOV 78) tseseeseseoole0:00.000one...loco-sessooeteessess

The Synchronous Excitation of the Primary Harmonic of a
Field Hith e Periodic Structure by an Incident
Nonrelstivietic new

(0. A. Alekseyev, et s1.) IVUZ mrmm,

I" 78) oessose-ossessssss00000.eosesee-seoseesesseeseos

Poetdetectos- Storage in 8199.1 Detection Channels
(m. L. Mar; IVIZ mrmmm, Nov 78) ..........

Processing s Bimel With e Randal Delay Using s Digital
Mstched Filter
(1. P. Khyshev; m mxmm, Nov 78)

The loise humanity of the Optima Detection of Pluctusting
Sigmls in noise or an Unknown level _
(x. x. Vuil'yev; m mzmm, sov 78)

The Reflection of s Qusicontinucus Signal Pros: the Surtsce
or the Birth st Snell Grazing Angles

(n. r. Vssllevich, u. A. Vinogrsdov; m mmmmm,

“0' 78) e.see.sosssoossssseoneseesesoess.sesosseeoesooese

Modeling the Processes in s Self-Oscillating System which Is
Acted Upon by s Reflected Denying Signel
(v. o. Lysenko, A. n. Mileslsvskiy; m mzomm,

'OV 78) see-solo.etssssoseeesolesooeeonssoooosooesoleess
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

courm's (Continued)
momma, momma up arms

Oatmeal” Model or Gravitation and Inertia
(x. 7.. Vaclav; mmmn ommm, no 87, 1977)

Methods of Eon-ting the Accuracy, Rework Density and
1303110me econ Section or a cravintric Survey
(3. p.an-omev;mmmm 630mm, No 87, 1977).

MONITORS

not of Soviet Articles Dealing Hith Composite Interim
(commm mm sovma WV 9833 to
mum: 1 mm. mm max seen. smvnm
mm. mmmmm my” No 2»,

1978) tootoollcO00.90.000000-00.0.000000000000090...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 621.391.161

SPATIAL-TINE PROCESSING OF RADIO SIGNALS IN RADIO MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS IN
THE GENERAL CASE (REVIEW)

Kiev lVUZ RADIOBLBKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 11, Nov 78 pp 3-15

[Article by 1 .Ya. Kremer and 6.8. Nakhmanson, manuscript received following
revision 10 Hay. 1978]

[Text] Optimal spatial-time processing of signals is
considered in the general case. including the location
of the objects and external interference sources being
observed in both the far field of the receiving antenna
systems as vell as in the Fresnel zone. Also analyzed
are the possibilities of utilyzing information on the
curvature of the wave front of signals and interfer-
ence to increase the precision in the deterlinstion of
the location of the observed objects, increase the re-
solving pouer of the systel and discriminates signals
from interference generated by external sources.

Introduction

The basic principles of the theory of optisal spatial-tile processing of
signals in determining the position of observed objects and the parameters
of their notion have been rather thoroughly vorked out in the literature
[1.- 3]. etc. However, specific results in this field have been primarily
obtained as applied to the special case where the wave fronts of the signals
in the external interference can be considered planar, i.e.. the observed
objects and interference sources are located in the far field of the receiv-

ing antenna systeas. something which is justified only when the following
condition is let:

I i’ (1)

where R Ris the distance of the radiation source from the center of the
antenna; RA3 is the radius of the far field; L is the overall dimension

of the receiving antenna system; 9 is the angle between the normal to the
plane of the antenna and direction to the source; 1 is the wavelength.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effort to increase the resolving power of radio measurement systems
and. related to this. the trend towards the use of large antenna systems
and the mastery of increasingly shorter wavelengths, as well as the use of
diversity receiving systems lb, 5] is leading to the fact in a number of
cases, condition (1) is not met and it is impossible to consider the vave
fronts of the signals being processed to be planar ones. T us, the basic
relationships derived for the case of plans electromagnetic waves are not
applicable to the analysis and synthesis of optimal spatial-time signal
processing algorithms in a number of radio measurement systems and the
theory of several such systems (multiposition radar systems [5], hyperbolic
radio navigation systems [6]; etc.) are at times developed independently

of the general theory of spatial-time processing signals. This makes the
analysis of such signals difficult based on uniform methodological principles
of optimal reception theory. as well as the estimation of the closeness of
their characteristics to the potential achievable ones and the determination
of ways of optimizing them. Hhat has been said above can also apply to
sonar systems. For this reason, an urgent problem is the generalization of
theory of optimal spatial-time processing for the case of the reception of
signals with both planar and spherical fronts, i.e., for the general case
of the location of the observed objects and external interference sources
in both the far field and the Fresnel zone of the receiving antsnnas‘.

In this treatment, the electromagnetic field of the signal has an additional
parameter (as compared to the case of a plane wave), the curvature of the
wave front, which can be employed as a source of information. For small
sized ("point") signal sources. the curvature of the wave front is uniquely
related to the range to the source. With suitable processing of the signal.
this allows for the realization of the following additional capabilities,
which are manifest more strongly. the greater the ratio of the dimensions
of the antenna system to the range to the signal and interference sources.
and the smaller the vavelength:

--The spatial resolution of the objects with respect to range. by virtue of
the difference in the curvature of the wave fronts of the signals generated

by the- [2, 7s 8];

-The discrimination of the useful signals from interference generated by
external sources. by means of selection based on the curvature of the vave
fronts [9];

-Thc determination of the range of "point" signal sources based on the
curvature of the wave fronts:

 

‘ For multiposition measurement systems, the antenna is understood to be
the set of antennas of all the receiving stations.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICKAL USE ONLY

In those active radar systems. where the range is measured based on the
signal delaytime.theuscof a supplemental independent information source

will permitzincreaaing the precision of the range detersination [10, ll.
12. 13. lb] .

This paper is a survey of the basic principles and specific features of the
optimum spatial-tine processing of signals in the general case, including

the processing of both plane and spherical waves, and a brief analysis is
given of the potential characteristics of such processing (resolving power.
noise humanity, and precision in the determination of the location of objects).

This analysis is based on both published and new results. To simplify the
aathematical derivations. the treatment uses the exaaple of a plane problem.
where the antenna system is oriented along one of the coordinate axes, while
the objects and interference sources being observed are located in the same
plane. The basic governing laws ascertained using the plane problem example
are also Justified when the objects and interferrnce sources being observed
are positioned in three-dimensional space. as well as for antennas of any
size (linear, planar. three-dimensional).

The Ambiguity Function of a Space-Time Signal and the Spatial Resolution
Posibilities

A description of antenna systems and signals, geometric relationships. An
antenna system with an overall dimension L and a center at the origin of
the coordinates is oriented along the Ox axis (Figure l). The geosetry of
the antenna system and the gain distribution in it are defined by the aper-
ture function too [3]. Basically, two forms of the functions i(x) will be
considered: a function corresponding to a continuous linear aperture with
uniform gain II(x)|2 - I when le ;,L/2; |I(x)|2 - 0 when le > LIZ and the
I

discrete function |l(x)|’-.Ed(x—x¢). , where :1 are the coordinates of the

receiving elements. A continuous aperture for the case of reception in the
Fresnel zone is somewhat of an idealization, however, such a representation
of 1(x) permits the derivation of the basic relationships in compact form.
while the numerical results, as calculations show, practically coincide with
the results obtained for an antenna array consisting of a large number of
isotropic elements with spacings between adjacent elements less than A. The
discrete function ”(30]2 is a sufficiently good description of an antenna
array of isotropic (nondirectional) elements with an arbitrary number of

2
Data on an active radar system are given in [15], in which the range

measurement is based on the curvature of the wave front and the informa-
tion on the time delay is not used.

3
FOR omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

A
n' a.
at
. a so an alkyd; .
1/2 0 1 U2 5 Fuel. °
Figure 1. Figure 2.

elements and arbitrary spacings between then, as well east the antenna systems
of nultiposition radio aeasurement systems under the same conditions and with
relatively small antenna dimensions at the individual receiving stations.

Let the observed object take the form of a small (point) isotropic radiation

source. located at the point Hg with coordinates of R and 0. The form of
the signal radiated by the object (for the case of passive radar) or the
sounding signal (in the case of active radar) is defined by the expression:

s.(0-Re(s'.(m-Rew(o{"). (2)

where Wt) is the complex envelope of the signal. If the sounding signal is

radiated from point 0. then when there are no distortions in it in the pro-

pagation process and the corresponding normalizing of the amplitude so(t).

the spatial-time signal being processed has the form:
3(:.x)-a.i(x)%,- '~(t-i++‘ﬂ)r~. (3,

where 00 is the random initial phase which is uniformly distributed over the

range [0, 2n]; r(x) is the range from the object to point x of the receiving
antenna, equal to

r(x)—r(x.R.0) - I’m.

(5)

no is the amplitude of the received sings]. at the point x - 0. Under the
same conditions, in the case of passive radar, if the time is read out with

respect to the signal arriving at point 0, the signal being processed has
the torn:

s(t.x)—a,l(x)7ﬁ—)s.(¢- 34:1)”:

(5)

r(x) at values of the range R which considerably exceed the overall dimen-

sions of the antenna system L, can be approximately represented by three
terns of series (the Fresnel approximation):

I;
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

r(x)-R—xslne+§'£;£l+... (a)

The near boundary of the field in which the Pres- 21 approximation can be used
is determined fron the condition where xll6 does not exceed the value of the
fourth term of series (6), and when 0 - 0, the fifth tern of the series.

R'>Riu-Ra£’-l§n—°-. RO>R'°.,_R”£.|_I_:r65_sﬂ. (7)

The region of the location of the objects being observed, R6,, [Rnesr] _<_
5‘ R 5. RA; IR“, field}: where it is necessary to take into account the
sphericity of the wave fronts and the Fresnel spproxinetion can be used, we

shall call the Fresnel region.

The abiguity Motion of a space-time signal. Let two observed objects
(signal sources) be positioned at points having coordinates of (R1, 01) and
(32, 92). Taking formulae (2), (3) and (5) into account, and neglecting the
lack of equality of the amplitudes of the signal at the different points in
the antenna system, something which is permissible when R)"; > I. [16], the
range and direction ambiguity functions for the case of active and passive
radars will have the following for-s respectively [6]:

. 5 Ii(xw$.(’4i—’3*%'J=3ﬁ)em?;-<n+k.-r.—R.)dx
9(R..o..R.e.)- "'

 

I Item: (9)

Lli(x)ré.(-’I:—RL§—'¢5l)expi-2E(r.-R.-r.+k.m

(NR:- 0,. Rev es)- (9)

 

T ”was '

where 51(1) is the normalized complex autocorrelation function of signal (2):
r1 and r: are the distances from the signal sources to the point x of the
antenna systen.

In (9), the argunent 5, is the difference in the time shifts of the signals
received by the antenna systea at the points x and 0. For the' case of not
very large antenna system dimensions (or a rather narrow spectral bandwidth
die). the following conditions are observed

rI-R; rl—R' I
c — c «'51:; 9‘81 (10)

and the ambiguity function (9) does not depend on the wave form of the signal
so(t). He shall introduce the following symbols: AR - R - R2 is_ the differ-
ence in the ranges of the objects being resolved; no - In: is the mean
geonetric value of the ranges. Then, in case directional resolution is im-
possible (61 - 62 - a). taking approxination (6) into account, the expressions

5
ma OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the range ambiguity functions for active (8) and passive (9) radar can
he represented in the fore

 

9(ARI R000)-
[g yum. (2—+-’;—R.,wo)exp ;T(2‘—3+-‘;—§-w a)“.
5‘ more:
- amm- ' (12)

(12)

/ i limra

As follows fro! (11), in the case of active radar. the resolving power with
respect to range is due to two factors:

   

I.“ "(It)”. (Ww*)ewIT(-m-m'0

“The resolution with respect to the delay tine (tine resolution), detersined
by the ZARIc ter- in the 15t argument (when (10) is net. the values of the func-
tion 51 are determined by this tern alone);

«The resolution due to the difference in the curvature of the wave fronts of
the signals (spatial resolution).

In the case of passive radar, the range resolving power is due only to the
spatial resolution. Formula (12) shows that the range resolving power due

to the curvature of the wave front of the signals increases with an increase
in the square of the ratio of the overall dimension of the antenna system L
to the distance to the objects being resolved so. with a widening of the signal
spectra and a decrease in the wavelength. For a linear antenna of length L
with uniform gain. if condition (10) is net, (12) yields the following [2]:

mom" m-CO’WVE (13)
where (Rn-Scourge” is a Presnel cosine integral, a - -ARL‘om‘0/(M)-

The graph of the function nun, R0, 6), detersined by (13). is shown in
Figure 2. The width of this function at the 0.5 level is determined by the
expression

8R3
Mg.ﬂml-l6ﬂ/R. (16)

6
ton orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Formula (14) shows that in systees with narrow hand signals, resolution with
respect to the curvature of the wave front can be effective only at ranges
significantly less than the far field radius of the receivang antenna system.
The latter condition is usually set for eultiposition radio systems. In such
radio systole, the values of the range 80 are of the seas order of Iagnitude
as the overall dimensions of the antenna system L [5). In this case, the
range resolution interval runs to units or tens of wavelengths, i.e.. an
extremely high spatial resolution can be achieved. The failure to aeet con-
dition (10) leads to an additional inproveeent in the resolution with respect
to the curvature of the front.

Optieal Spatial-Tine Processing and the Discrimination of Signals from
Interference

He shall consider signal processing for the case of active radar with a small
isotrnplcnllyrcradiaring tnrget,locatedst a point with coordinates of (R, 0)
(Figure 1). The following results, as applied tr the spatial processing of
the signals, are also justified for the case of passive radar for ssell radia-
tion sources. The signal (3) is received by the antenna against a background
of internal antenna system noise with a spectral density of "0' which is un-
correlated at different points in the antenna system, as well as against a
background of noise generated by an internal. small isotropic source of
geuesinn white noise, located at point Mn having coordinates of no and °n°
The correlation functions of the internal and external interference at the
antenna input have the fore:

,s.(:,. t, x.. a"): 5’2!- Mx. — row. — ta): Bn(t..l»x.ara)-r

[38H - ”internal] where N1 is the spectral noise power density of the external
source in the antenna aperture; fnl and rnz are the distances from the noise
source to the points x1 and :2 of the antenna system, deter-ined froe (6).

(15)

Signal processing algorithms. when receiving spatial-tine signals with a

random initial phase against a background of gaussian noise. the absolute

value of the correlation integral of [l] is taken as the output of the optimal
(in the sense of a criterion of the probability ratio) signal processing cysts-x

dumxﬁumdml. (16)
( .

where 6(t, x) is an additive eixture of the signal and interference; &(t, x)
is the reference signal which deternines the signal processing algorithm;
(T) and (L) are the time and space intervals. in which the signal processing
is accomplished. The reference signal is defined by the relation:

2-;

 

7
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL 083 01be

(Inn—J) «£00.f,.x.x.)s(i..r,)d.dr.. (17)

where s(t. x) is the useful signal. vhile 0(t. t1. at. 1:1) is the inverse
correlation function of the inter'erence. defined free the integral equation:

(£5400: ‘coieoldﬂhhoxotdacar-‘(f-QNI-a). (18)

where Mt. t1. 2:, x ) I In“. t1. 3. :1) 4- “It“. t1, x. :1) in the correla-
tion function of the interference at the antenna input. For a linear antenna
with unifora gain. the reference signal which satifies equation (17) assuses

the fore: 2 R —R '3 —T—‘TN T! '-
0(‘s‘)-mln;y~(‘ #1) i+ O 'u“) 'I (10“, x

I _ Rier,)—r‘§x 121"”
xi'irw-l 3"\‘ . m a" (19)
and for the i-th receiving elenent of a discrete antenna system (antenna array):
;,m-;l7f; (-_l.)... H25“- ;..( -mgggﬂ m,
where

A..-~.[r.~(~.+~.)§, 4].

The first terns on the right side of expression (20) and (19) describe pro-
ceasing latched to the received useful signal (3). In the following, we shall
call spatial-tine procaesing using such a reference signal latched processing.
This processing is optimal only in the absence of noise generated by an external
source. Hith latched processing. the antenna systee is ”focused" with respect
to range and direction. The second terns in (19) and (20), subtracted free the
first, provide for opti-al coepensation of ex: \rnal interference. The essence
of optimal spatial-tine processing in the presence of internal and external
noise is core clearly seen in the case vhere expansion (6) can be used, and

the signal in a narrow hand one in the spatial-tinnise sense (the correlation

tine of the signal l/dfc is sany tines greater than the minute value of the
time shift between the signal values at the extreue points of the antenna

system). For the case of range values vhich exceed the overall “unions of
the nntennn systes. one can neglect the inequality of the anplitudes of the
signals at different points in the antenna. then ferrule (19) assmes the

"m: o(l.x)- 1724“") "(“alwth nine _.t'm'0) __

-mp‘tkno..kﬁ)up[h~(— (xi—9' %)]I (21)

8
PO!» ORIGIN. USS ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL 088 OﬂtY

share I

3:. (RtoReG..9.)~ ’1': lap ‘I 3;?- .r(ain0. -- sine.)—

_ a. toa‘O _ «3'9 (22
7H4. 74. )1!“ ’
The expression which defines the fern of the reference signal for the antenna
array is determined on analogy vith (21). substituting x1 for x. It is not
difficult to sea from (21) that with spatial-narrow hand signals, tine and
spatial processing are separated: the factor in front of the curly braces
datersinaa the optimun tiasviae processing of a signal. and the expression

in the curly braces determines its spatial processing. which reduces to the
latched spatial processing of the useful and interference signals. and the
subtraction free the results of the first operation of the result of the second.
‘fhe subtraction is carried out with the weighting factor slam... 6.. R. 0)]
I010 + N1). defined by the sutual positioning of the target and the noise
source. as veil as the relationship of the external and internal noise inten-
sity. Hhera several external noise sources are present. natched spatial pro-
cessing should be carried out for each source, jl st as in (19), with weight-
ing coefficients which depend on the relationship of the intensities of the
noise sources and their mutual arrangement [9]. Usually. the coordinates and
intensities of the noise sources areunknoun beforehand. and for this reason.
they should be deternined by the processing system in the process of generating
the reference signal. The design of such processing systems is possible by
means of using the principles analyzed in [2. 17).

The suppression of noise emanated by accrual aouncas. The effectiveness
of the suppression of noise generated by external sources can he evaluated
in terms of the signal to noise ratio at the output of the processing system.
The poster signal to noise ratio for the case of spatial-time signal process-

ing is equal to [l]:
gag-IS, $s(f.x)o(f.x)dfdx .
c (u (23)

To estimate the level of external noise suppression, so shall introduce the
following coefficients:

k-v'lvi: I- am... at.)

where q2 is the output signal to noise ratio for the case of optimum process-
ing of a signal with espherical front against a background of internal and
external noise; qﬁn is the ease for the optimal processing of a signal with
a plane wave front under the salsa conditions; Q6 applies in the absence of
external noise. The coefficient it indicates the degradation of the output
signal to noise ratio by virtue of the presence of external noise: the coef-
ficient l is the level of suppression of external noise through the use of
information on the curvature of the save fronts.

9
ton omcm. use mm
90!! OHICIM. US! ONLY

In the optinsl processing of narrow band signals in a linear antenna of length
1.. formula (23). taking (21) into account, yields the following [9]:

- — N . "

h . m'Pg(Ra.9soRoo)Po ‘-(l+ t)‘ (25)

The values of the coefficients k and lere shown in Figures 3a and 3b (the
D D

solid lines) as a function of v - T—Fl' , where I!” is the far field
I

radius of (l), for the case where the angular coordinates of the noise source
and the target coincide (0. - G). and gating of the external noise is possible
only through the difference in the curvature of their wavefronts. he follows
froa figure 3. with a significant difference in range between the signal and
noise sources (7 » 1) It I l. i.e.. the external noise can be suppressed alsost
coaplctely. In this case, the advantage gained in the signal to noise ratio
as coepsred to the case of processing a plane wave l is approximately equal

to the ratio of the spectral densities of the external and internal noise at
the antenna aperture. The gain falls off in step with a decrease in the curve-
ture of the wave front.

It was noted above that the realization of optimal spatial-tile processing
of signals where external noise sources are present is rather conplicated.
For this reason. it is of interest to assess the possibilities of suppressing
external noise for the case of sinpler (free a design viewpoint) sstched
processing. In this case. the coefficients k and l are defined as:

N N
.- —* . ’-
~.+N.I9L(R..e.. new (' + Wt)‘ ‘26)

The values of I: and l with latched processing for the case of 6., - e are
shown in Figures 3a and 3b by the dashed line. A cosparision of these curves
with the curves for the case of optinsl processing shows that at extreaaely
snall (r a 0) and extrenely large (1 > 20) curvatures of the wave front,
matched processing provides for npproniaately the ease degree of external
noise suppression as optimal processing. while in inter-ediste cases (1 < 7 <
< 20). optissl processing in sore effective.

Figure I: illustrates the suppression of external noise for the case of optimal
spatial-tine processing in nultiposition radio syste-s, where the number of
receiving points is slall, while the spacings between then are >> A. The curves
are plotted for the case where there is no gating with respect to direction
(0. - 6), while the noise source is located in the far field (1 I flu/R).

The dashed lines apply to s three-position syste- (x1 - -0.65 1.. x2 - 0.

x3 . 0.55 1.). and the solid lines apply to s five-position system (:1 I-

- -0.65 L, :2 - -0.2 L, X; - 0, x4 - 0.25 L, x - 0.55 L). The curves in
Figure la attest to the fact that in nultiposit on systens. the input signal]
noise ratio expressed as a function of y - Ila/ll is of an oscillating nature.
An increase in the nuber of receiving positions leads to a sIoothing of the
oscillations.

10
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the case of active radar:
°"'T%[‘(%)‘['+ﬁéﬁ-J(m+§+§"‘"°)+

-l
+T¢%-eoee(1—anwe)]+%i.f-§wo] . (23)

In far-ulae (27) and (28), L% and L2 are the not-elited second and fourth
Ioeente of the aquare of the aperture functioneli(x)l2 (l, 3]. deter-in

by the geoeetry of the antenna system and the gain dietribution in it: q
ie the eignal/noiee ratio: e la the speed of light; n: ie the aquare of
the equivalent width of the eignal epectrun. defined as the second central

aoeent of the spectrue. The foraulae are derived using the approximate ex-
pansion (6). . .

For the case of range measurement based only on the
curvature of the wave front. the eeasureeent error

ee followe from (27), is proportional to the vavelength
A and the square of the ratio of the range R to the
overall size of the antenna L. and the error depende
slightly on the epectral width of the eignel. Shown
in Figure 5 is the nor-sliced diepereion of the range
aeasurement as a function of the ratio LIZR for a
linear antenna of length L, with a uniform gain die-
tribution. and for an equally epaced antenna array of
the sane length consisting of three elemente where

(Ila/to)2 << 1.

 

Figure 5.

In active radar. for the caee of optimal spatial-time

processing of the eignala, the range ie determined by
neana of the joint utilization of the inforeation on the delay time and the
curvature of the wave front of the signals. To estimate the influence of
vave front curvature information on the precision of range eeaeureaent, shown
in Figurea 6a and 6b are the ratio of the dispersions of the range estiaate
for the case of optimal spatial-time proceseing of the eignala (oi) and for
the cnee of eeaaurement based on the delay time (0‘0) for a linear antenna of
length L (Figure 6a) and for en aqually spaced antenna array of the eame
length (Figure 6b). As can be eeen from Figures 6a and 6b, the use of wave
front curvature inforention pcrmite a eubstantial increaee in the range eeaeure-
lent precision when L/R > L/Rbound - Zlnaluo.

For example, with a relative spectral width of “3/"0 I 10", the influence of
the information on the curvature of the wave front begins to have a substantial
effect at ranges of R2 ; 103L. An analyeie of Figures 6. 5 and 6a ehowe that
for Identical valuea cf the output signal/noise ratio and identical overall
di-ennlonu of the antenna. the range measure-ant preceaion when using "dis-
persed” antenna arrays is higher than when ueing antennas with a continuous

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\.‘ l--I ‘ r

A:
I-MI

        

”5.1025 1' 0 ”saws/0';

(a) (b)
Figure 3. Figure 4.

Based on the values of the signal/noise ratio at the output of the processing
syates cdlputed from formulas (l9)-(23). the probability of detecting an
object by means of the vall-knoun detection curves can be determined. In this
case. it is necessary to consider the fact that at snail values of R/L. an
increase in the range resolving power by virtue of resolution of the curvature
of the wave front leads to an increase in the nulber of resolution ale-eats

in the scanning field, and consequently. to an increase in the false aler-
probability.

Determining the Position of Objects and Their Para-eters of Motion

The possibility of determining range based on the curvature of a wave front
arises with spatial-time processing of signals with spherical wave fronts.

in passive radar systels. this is the sole pri-ary source of infornation con-
cerning the range; in active radar :,3tens. the infornstion on the wave front
curvature can be eapioyed in conjunction vith the information on the delay
time of the signals to increase the precision in determining the location of
objects, and in some cases, it can be used independently [15]. for the case
of interference in the fore of gaussian white noise, vhich is not correlated
at the different points in the receiving antenna system. as well as for large
uignal/noise ratios, the precision in the eatination of the range R using
the nexinun probability sethod is characterized by the following expression:

For the case of passive radar

~3—3w((-))l
11

FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aperture. and becomes higher the smaller the number of elements of the array.
however, for large values of LIA, a reduction in the number of elements of
the array can lead to ambiguity in the measurements which can be eliminated
by means of expanding the spectrum of the signal being processed. The re-
quirements placed on the signal spectrum to eleiminate measurement ambiguity
in the angular coordinates when using "dispersed" arrays in the general case
of the positioning of the objects being observed do not differ substantially
from the requirements which are set when the objects are located in the far
field of the antenna array. The ambiguity phenomenon of range measurements
arises in the spatial-time processing of signals with a spherical front. It
can be shown that ambiguity in the range measurement can arise when receiving
signals with a linear. equally spaced antenna array containing n elements,

where n < [1/5] (Rff/R + 3). The ambiguity is eliminated if the signal spec-
trum width are meets the condition:

(29)

am am:
“ﬁllml mama

Iﬁlllll WIN!“
Illllll “mm

a
on": 5 0': 5 will: We 5 0;: swun-
(a) ‘ (b)
Figure 6.

      

      

ad

 

in paper [ii], the potential precision in the estimate of coordinates is
analyzed for the case of an antenna of any size. A comparison of the results

obtained in this paper for a circular antenna. with those results given above
for a liners antenna shows that for the case of equal overall size, the ad-

vantage gained in precision by virtue of using information on the wave front
curvature is approximately the same for both antennas.

An analysis of the precision in estimating the angular coordinate of an object
In the general case shows that when receiving signals with spherical wave
fronts. the potential precision of the determination of directions is practical-
ly the same as when receiving signals with plane wave fronts.

ignoring the wave front curvature in spatial-time processing of signals can
lend to a substantial degradation of the signal/noise ratio and the range
lcdeufclcnt Precision. Thus. when R I 0.02 er. the signal/noise ratio falls
off by tens of times [ll]. The range measurement precision. as a result of
failing to take into account the information contained in the curvature of the

wave front, (or R a 25L and LIA - 100, decreases by ten times when “3/“0 I
- 10-3 and by 100 cm: when “3/00 - 10-6 us).

13
roa ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The potential possibilities for increasing the accuracy of multiposition
radio systems operating in the Fresnel zone can be illustrated by means of
conparing the precision of range measurement in a range difference (hyper-
bolic) radio naviagstion system [6] and in a system with the same arrange-
ment of the receiving stations, which carries out the optimal spatial-time
processing of the signal. Shown in Figure 7 is the ratio of the dispersions
of the range estimate cg in a two-base hyperbolic system with receiving sta-
tions at the points :1 - b/2. :2 - 0. x3 - ~L/2. and in a system which realises
the optinal processing of the signals received at the same stations: 0%

(0% was determined on the basis of the relationships given in [6], and Ego
values of 03 t were determined from formula (29) twice. It can be seen from
Figure 7 that the precision which can be attained in hyperbolic radio naviga-
tion systems is extremely for from the patential accuracy obtainable with
optimal coherent processing of the signal.

The rclutionshipaggiven above were derived with the assumption that the signal/
noise ratio is rather high, and the range estimate is reliable. i.e., the pro-
bability of anomalous errors is neglectibly small.’ With small values of the
parameter BIL. the resolving power with respect to range increases sharply by
virtue of the resolution based on the curvature of the wave front, and con-
sequently. the probability of anomalous errors also increases. In this case.
higher values of the signal to noise ratio can be necessary to assure relie-
bility of the estimate than is true of the case of range measurement based
only on the signal delay time. An analysis of this phenoaenon is given in

the literature [19], the results of which show that for signal to noise ratios
of ea 3 20, the increase in anomalous errors must be taken into account at
relatively small values of the range (as tempered to the dimensions of the
antenna system) and at a relatively small signal spectral width (for na/UO -

- 10-3-40“ when a < (l-3)L, for Ila/mo - 10-5—10-6 at a < (10—30». In
many cases, the measurement systems should determine the parameters of object
notion, i.e., the derivatives of the coordinates. along with the coordintes
of the objects. The potential accuracy of the Joint estimation of the coor-
dinates and their derivatives for the case of spatial-time processing of sig-
nals in the general case was investigated in [12], where it was shown that
taking the curvature of the signal wave front into account has practically no
influence on the precision of the simultaneous estimation of the angular co-
ordinate and its derivative. with the simultaneous estimation of the range
and its derivative. the potential precision of the estimate of the radial
velocity in the Fresnel zone when using signals without frequency modulation
is the same as for the far field. and for signals with frequency modulation,
can be substantially higher. This is explained by the fact that for PM signals.
the estimates of the range and velocity are correlated.due to the specific de-
pendence between the frequency and time shifts for these signals. In deter-
mining range. the use of the information on wave front curvature, which is not
related to the signal time shift. simultaneously boosts the precesion of the
range estimates and weakens the correlation between the velocity and range
estimates. for this reason. increasing the precision of the radial velocity
estimate is more important. the smaller the all ratio and the narrower the
signal spectrum.

1h
FOR OFPICIAL ”SB ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

The expressions given above. which were derived for the general case of the
positioning of the targets and the noise sources, includes as a special case,

the relationships described in the literature for spatial-time processing of
signals with plane wave fronts.

Conclusion

Thus} based on the analysis carried out above for the main features and the
potential characteristics of spatial-tine processing of signals in the general
case, which includes the processing of both plane and spherical waves, the
conclusinncaaba drawn that with spherical waves, it is possible to achieve

a higher resolving power, noise immunity and precision in the radio system.
Rhea estisating the capability of achieving these potential characteristics.
along with the difficulties of the engineering design for coherent processing,
it is necessary to likewise consider the fundamental limitations placed due

to radio wave propagation conditions and the characteristics of the radiation
of the objects being observed. These factors can degrade the systel charac-
teristics as coupared to the potentially possible ones cited above, but cannot
completely eliminate the advantages which result from information on the cur-
vature of the signal wave ironts.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Fal'kovich S.Ye., "Otsenka paramatrs signalov" ("Batisatiag a Signal
Parameter“l, Moscow, Sovatskoye Radio Publishers, 1970.

2. Shir-an Ya.D., "Razreshsaiye i szhatiye signalov” ["Signsl Resolution
and Conpression"]. Moscow. Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1976.

3. Urkovits, "Tochnost' otseaki uglovykh koordinst v radiolokatsii i
gidrolokatsii po astody asksiasl'nogo pravdopodobiys” ("The Precision of
the Estimation of Angular Coordinates in Radar and Sonar using the Haximua
Plausibility Hethod“], ZARUBBZHNAYA RADIOBLEKTRONIRA [FOREIGN RADIO-
ELBCTRONICS), 1966. No 10.

h. Koatorov 0.5., Golubcv-Rovozhilov Yu.s.. "Vvedeniye v radiolokatsioaauyu
sistemotekhniku” ("Introduction to Radar Systems Engineering"], Moscow.
Sovetshoye Radio Publishers, 1971.

5. ”Spravochaik po radiolokatsii” ["Radar Handbook”], Edited by ".1. Sholnik,
Moscow, Sovotshoye Radio Publishers, 1978, g,

6. Skihe N.l.. ”Sayre-ennyye giperbolicheskiye sistemy dal'ney aavigatsii”

["Hndara hyperbolic Long Range Navigation Systems"), Moscow. Sovetahoye Radio
Publishers. 1967. '

15
. roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dulevich V.Ye.. et al., ”Teoretichaskiye oanovy radiolokatsii“ ["Tha
Theoretical Pundasentals of Rndar"]. Hoscov. Sovetskoye Radio Publishers.
1966 .

Reutov A.P.. Hikhaylov B.A.. Kondratenkov 6.8., 80va 3.V., "Radio-
lokntaionnyye eistosy hokovogo ohzora" ["Side Scan Radar Systena"].
Noocov, Sovetakoye Radio Publishers. 1970.

Kroner I.Ya.. Pon'kin V.A.. ”Prostranstvenno—vreaennaya ohrahotka
signolov v zone Prenelya” [”Spatial-Ti-e Signal Processing in the Fresnel
Zone"). MDIO’I‘BKIINIKA l WWII“, 1977. 23, No 1, p 72.

Kroner I.Ya.. Nskhssnson G.F., Sidorik Ye.c.. "o potantsial'noy toehnosti
otsonki nestopolozheniya tseli pri passivnoy lokatsii na (one proetranetven-
no-rnspredelennykh posekh" ["On the Potential Precision of an Estimate of
Target Location with Passive Radar against a Background of Spatially Die-
tributed Interference" IZV. WZOV ~ RADIOBLEKI‘RONIKA [PROCEEDIMS 0? I'll!
NIGHER BDUCAI'IONAI. INSTITUIBS - RADIO ELBCTRONIOS]. I977. 32. No 9. p 40.

Kroner A.I.. Tritonov A.P.. "Predel‘nays tochnost' otsenki koordinst
tochechnoy tseli” ["The Maxi-u- Precision in the Estimate of the Coordi-
nates o! a Point Target"]. RADIOTEKRNIKA I ELBKTRORIKA, I977, 33, No 8.
p 1.607.

Kreser A.I.. Trifonov A.P.. "Predel'naya tochnost' sovsostnoy otsenki
keordinat i ikh proizvodnykh radiolokatsionnysi setodani“ ("The Maxi-us
Precision of the Simultaneous Batisation of Coordinate: and Their
Derivatives using Radar Methodo"). RADIOTBKHNIKA I BLEKTRORIKA. 1978. 3;,
"o l. P 67s

Karavayev V.V., Sazonov V.V.. "0 tochnosti otobrazheniya ob”yekta v
golografii” ["On the Accuracy of the Representation of an Object in
holography"l, RADIOTEKHNIKA I BLBKTRONIKA, 1970, 1;. No 11. p 2.396.

Gershson 8.0.. Shikalov A.A., ”Otaenka potentsial'noy tochnoati itsereniya
rnsstoyaniya do nepodvishnogo iatochnika shuns” ["An Batilate of the
Potential Precision in the Heasurenent of the Range to a Stationary Noise
Source"l, AKUSTICHBSKIY ZHURNAL, 1977. 3;, No 2. p 269.

laidukn K., Ogura Kh., Yan' Dzh.L.. Nguyen V.Kh., Uidsark Dzh.R..
"Rndiolokator no haze golograficheskoy satritsy” ["A Radar Designed Around
a holographic Hatrix"], TIIER. 1976. 25. No 10. £5.

Krcnct A.I.. Trifonov A.P., ”Vliysniye razserov antenny na pooekhoustoy-
chivont' priesa proetranstvenno-vresennogo signals" [”Tha Influence of
Antenna Dimensions on the Reception Noiee Insanity of a Spatial-Tine
Signal"|. 12V. VUZOV - RADIOBLRKTRONIKA. 1977, 32. No 8. p 102.

16
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ON’IC [AL USE ONLY '

l7. uurokov V.A.. Zorin L.A.. Rntynokiy H.V.. Shlshkin B.V.. "Adsptivnyye ‘
ohrnbotki signalov v nntennykh roshethnkh" ("Adaptive Signal Processing
in Antenna Arrays“. ZARUBEZRNAYA RADIOELBKTRONIKA. 1976. No 8, p 33.

18. Kronor A.I.. Trifonov A.P., "Stavnsniye tochnosti optissl'noy i
kvnzioptinal'noy otsenok dnl'nosti pri lokatsii v sons Fronclya"
l"A Casparison of tho Precision of Optimal and Quasioptilal Estimates

of the Range with Prosnel Zone Radar"). 12V. VUZOV - RADIOBLBKTRONIKA.
1978, 3;, No 3, p 92.

19. Kroner A.I., Trifonov A.P.. "0 porogovykh citektakh pri otsanke
nestopolozheniya tseli v zone Frenslys" ["On Threshold Effects when

Estimating tho Location of a Target in the Fresnel Zone"]. RADIOTBKHMIKA
[ RLBKTRONI'M.‘ 1978. 3.10 No 3. p 629.

COPYRIGHT: "lzvostiyn vuzov SSSR - Radioelcktronika," 1978

“225
(18031870 ‘- -.

17

M OI’PICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELMRONICS AND ELECTRICAL WINNING

UDC 537.862:621.385.6

THE SYNCHRONOUS EXCITATION OF THE PRIMARY “ARMONIC OF A FIELD HIT" A
PERIODIC STRUCTURE BY AN INCIDENT NONRBLATIVISTIC FLOR

Kiev IVUZ RADIOBLBKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 11. Nov 78 pp 109-113

[Article by G.A. Alekseyev, A.Ya. Kirichenko and v.1. Nikhaylov, manuscript
received 14 Nov, 1977]

[Text] The problem of exciting a flat periodic structure
of the "comb" type with a wide, preaodulated electron flow,
incident to the surface of the structure at a large angle.
is analyzed. The condition for the synchronous excitation
of spatial harmonics is also analyzed for the case of the
sequential interaction of the electrons with the trans-
verse component of the electric field. The theoretical
analysis is carried out within the framework of a speci-
fied current level procedure. The possibility of synchro-
nously exciting the prilary harmonic of the resonant field
of the comb with a nonrelativistic electron flow incident
at a large angle is experimentally confirmed.

The interaction of electron flows with the higher spatial harmonics of the
field of a periodic structure, or relativistic electron flows are usually
employed to overcome difficulties in the scale modeling when designing O-type
alcrawavc generators in the shortwave band [1]. The trends cited here are
due to the fact that with electron excitation of distributed electrodynamic
structures. as a rule. the motion and bunching of the electron flow in the
direction of wave propagation are usually employed i.e., in a longitudinal
direction. while the interaction of the electrons is realized with the long-
itudinal component of the electric field [sic].

However. the transition to operation at the higher spatial .
harmonics of the field leads to a considerable degradation of the energy
exchange between the electron flow and the high frequency field. due to the
sharp reduction in the coupling resistance. In step with the shortening of
the wavelength of the generated wave, difficulties also arise which are re-
lated to the necessity of guiding intense electron flows close to the periodic
structure. parallel to its surface.

18
roe orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the methods of overcoming these difficulties can he the use of syn-
chronous electron excitation in o-type devices of waveguide distributed
systems with an aggregate of charges which are phased modulated in the direc-
tion of wave propagation. where these charges move transversely with respect
to the system, and there is a short term local mechanism for their inter-
action with the transverse component of the electric field. Various config-
urations for the use of such sequential interaction of electrons with the

high frequency field to excite electromagnetic waves were proposed and ana-
lyzed in the literature [2 - 6].

In particular, the synchronous excitation of a plane periodic structure can
be accomplished with a wide premodulated electron flow, where the generated
hunches are incident to its surface at a specified angle (Figure l).

The synchronous excitation condition, working from which the optimum value of
the angle 0 - 60 is defined. is in this case the condition of equality of
the velocity of the intersection point of the surface of the structure with

the front of the incident bunch ,and the phase velocity vnn of the excited
math spatial harmonic of the field at a frequency of nut

vs

Mac... (1)

here v. is the electron velocity of the flow; u is the modulation frequency.

The velocity velsinoo, defined in [3] as the phase
velocity of the sequence of particles, and in [5]

as the velocity of the electron wave crest, because
of smallness of the angle 00 can be chosen rather
large. and even exceed the velocity of light in a
vacuum. In this case. as noted in [5], there arises
the possibility of the interaction of electron flows
with fast electromagnetic waves. when using periodic
structures though, there also arises the possibility
of their excitation at the primary spatial harmonic
(m I 0) at a nonrelativistic velocity of the elec-

trons ve and at rather high values of the phase ve-
locity vno.

 

The case of the synchronous excitation of the pri-
mary harmonic of the field of a periodic comb type
structure with a wide, incident, premoduleted elec-
tron flow is treated in this paper.

Figure 1.

An approximate theoretical description of synchronous excition, as applied to

the configuration of Figure 1. can be serived within the framework of a speci-
fied current level procedure.

19
roe orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the im‘mmpmwnt of the current. bunched at a frequency of no in the
drift apnco. following velocity modulation in the gap of a toroidal reso-

nator with a voltage Usimt, for an arbitrary slope angle 0 of the generated
bunches, one can write:

In“. 3‘ 0-210Je(mm'mu(u-“)~ (2)

where 10 is the linear current density at the input to the modulator; j“ is
a Bessel function; x - ueo is the flow bunching paraneter; 00 is the aper-
ture angle. For the configuration considered here:

“(3. z). W.

9o (3)

where d1 is the distance from the periodic structure to the modulating re-
sonator at the cross section 2 - 0. The parameter u characterizes the ve-
locity modulation level of the flow and is defined by well know expressions
from kinematic or electron-wave analysis. Hhen taking into account the action
of space charge forces in the direction of flow travel, the parameter u is

canal to: 0 sin [%P-(d.+zt¢o—r)cosol
ﬂ-WM .

%.L(d.+zigo—x)a1so . (a)

where H is the parameter of velocity modulation; up is the plasea fre-
quency; Uo - (1/2) (slew; is the accelerating voltage.

In the case where O - 0, expressions (2) -- (lo) correspond to the unidi-en—
sional theory of electron flow bunching in the drift space. For the n—th
spatial harmonic of the resonant field of a comb type periodic structure,
the interaction with which is considered here, one can use the expression:

Enu- —E.~n(1)¢'."'sln(nm!—p“z-¢.). (5)

whcrc “nu - m/vm; 39m (2) is the amplitude of the field hex-Ionic at the
low] of the i ernction system; to is the constant phase shift with respect
to the voltage. in the resonator gap.

By making use of the slowness of the change in the function J,l (MI) in the
range Ax a 1/8“. (with the condition << e), which is ilportant for the
integration, and by working from the 1 near nature of the rise in the ampli-
tude 82. (z) with an optimum phase shift of to - (nwdl Ive) + s/2). one can
derive the following approxination for the interaction power:

l-‘a
9.2;} ram—m we»... — Ip_(L)J.(nx.) x

sln L (6)
x m .
P...+ T.)m’o
20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here, 10 - 10L case is the total beam current; X1 is the bunching parameter
of the flow in the plane of the periodic structure at z - 0; p - l -
- (Van/Va) sins is the desynchronization parameter.

It can be seen free (6) that the optimal conditicns for the interaction of
the electron flow with the spatial field harmonic are realized for the case
n - 0, i.e.. when condition (1) is net. In this case, the electrons inter-
act in sequential fashion with the high frequency field, and there is syn-
chronous excitation of the structure.

By equnt&ng the quantity Pe to the flow of power in the transmission line
P“. - (Bum)2/26§mknn, where “am is the coupling resistance of the spatial
harmonic at the frequency nu. we obtain the following expression for the
amplitude of the field in the section a - L:

5" (L)- ”(ml-1.03".) (7)

new. '

An analysis of (7) taking into account the coupling resistance Kan as a func-
tion or the number of the spatial harmonic shows that due to the rapid de-
crease in It“l3 with an increase in m, interaction with the priuarly field
harmonic is more effective (for the case of a fixed velocity we) where

we << ”no, then interaction with a higher spatial harmonic (a ﬁ 0) when

Vc a Vm.

In fact, the ratio of the coupling resistances at the primary and higher
spatial harmonics is given by the expression [7]:

 

as! l
K ‘ .. quhhii::
i new '
m0 0" Sill-F“- (a)

where l is the period of the structure.

it can be seen from a comparison of (8) and (7) that with an increase in I,
Kn“ falls off faster than the latter factor in (7) increases in this case.

The spncific features of the synchronous excitation of a comb type periodic
structure with a wide incident electron flow. as applicable to the configur-
ation of Figure l. were analyzed experimentally. The beau width in the z
direction was asleno. The angle of incidence 6 - #0 was chosen at 17’. The
excited microwave radiation at a frequency corresponding to the fourth time
harmonic of the aodulating signal (n - 6) was registered by a detecting re-
ccivcr. The distance from the modulator to the comb d1 at the cross-section
z - 0 was chosen so that the amplitude of the in current harmonic was maximal
in the plane of the periodic structure.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

     

  

Vilma
" ' Z5 ‘
“Al h!!m44ﬁ!!!ﬁ!a!lllll: “3
'hLNthmﬂ!!!ﬂﬁE!!!ll'r

lav (”W Jan (6.
m I. VOICE

    

Pigure 2. Figure 3.

The asplitude of the output signal is shown in Figure 2 as a function of the
level of the accelerating voltage 00 for various values lo. It can seen from
the Figure that the experimental function Eng (00) is of a nonmonotonic
nature with a number of marina and minina. The prinary voltage eaximus cor-

responds to values of vc at which the optimal value of the angle .0 is found
close to 17‘.

It can also be seen from Figure 2 that the radiation intensity at the pri-
mary maximum depends on the current level. something which is in agreement
with expression (6). The position ofthe primary maxi-on is shifted in the
direction of higher accelerating voltages with an increase in lo. something
which is related to the nature of the change in the function J“ (lo) as a
function of the space charges density.

The dispersion function of the position of the main maximum. which is shown
in Flugre 3. confirms that operation is realized at the primary spatial
harmonic of the field (a - 0). The vertical straight lines in Figure 3 de-
plrt the experimental data. The solid curve represents the dispersion of

the cash, which was obtained by catculation. while the dashed line represents
the dispersion of the hot system when excited by a flow parallel to the sur-
fare at the periodic structure.

The Investigations carried out here confirm the possibility of the effective
excitation of a periodic structure with a pre-odulated incident electron flow.
in this case, it proves possible to excite the periodic structure at the pri-
mary spatial harmonic, without turning to an increase in the accelerating
voltages or using relativistic electron flows. To excite the primary spatial
harmonic of the field of the comb used in this experiment by an electron

flow moving parallel to the surface of the structure. an accelerating voltage
on order of magnitude higher would have been required.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nynchronous excitation of periodic structures with a transverec flow of
electrons can prove to be useful in both the design of generators (for ox-

olpie. frequency multipliers). and in the study of clectrodyncnic structures
with retordotions close to unity.

l.

2.

3.

7.

Bl IL IOGMPNY

Devyatkov N.D., Golunt M.B.. "Puti rszvitiyo olektronnykh prihorov
nillinetrovogo i ouhuillinetrovogo dispntonovdlin voln" ["Hayn of
inproving Millimeter and Sublillineter wavelength Electronic Devices").
RADIOTWIKA I BWTRNIKA, 1967. 33, No ll. p 1.973.

Hihrnn 1.0., ”The Duplex Traveling Have Kiystron". PIKE. 1952. 59, No 3.
ﬂ 3080

Totcl'bnun 8.1.. ”Pozove fokueuvsnnyo pri poporechniy nodulyotsii
shvidhosti" ("Phone Focusing During Transverse Flow hodulntion").
DAN UKSR [REPORTS 01’ m UKMINIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES]. 1955. No l.
p 5‘. [81¢].

Alekncyev F.A.. Bliokh P.V.. “Rogerentnoye tornoznoye izlucheniye
protynzhcnnyhh ogustkov“ l“Coherent Braking Radiation of Extended

Bunches”. 12V. WZOV - WIOPIZIKA [PROCEEDINGS OF THE HIGNBR EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTES . RADIOPNYSICS], 1966. 1, No 6. p 1.06‘.

Ioiotovnkiy B.H.. Ginzburg V.L.. "Bfﬁekt Vavilovn-Cherenkovn i effekt
Dopplero pri dvizhonii iotochnikov so okoroot‘yu, hol'she okorosti sveto
v vnkuunc" ["The Vevilov-Chsrcnkov Effect and the Doppler Effect with
the Motion of Sources at 0 Velocity Greater than the Velocity oi Light

in n mun." 1, urn [usrmx mxcncsmu nnux - mamas m tar msran.
SCIENCES], 1972. 192. so a. p 577.

Kirichcnho A.Yn., "Voxhuzhdcniye periodicheskoy struktury clcktronnyn
'anychikon'" (“The Excitation of a Periodic Structure with on Electron
'Havc Creat"'l, DAN USSR [REPORTS 01’ Tile UKRAINIAN ACADM OF SCIENCES],
Series A. "tiziko-Iste-oticheokiye i tekhnicheskiye nsuki“ ["Hothe-eticel
Phyuicn and the Engineering Sciences”). 1977, No 10. p 926.

chycn V.. ”chdcniye v clektronike sverkhvyookikh chantot” [”Introduction
to S"? Electronico"l, Moscow. Sovetskoyc Radio Publishers. 1962, Port 1.

COPYRlGﬂT: "Izvestiyn vuzov SSSR - Rndioclcktronikn.” 1978

8225
050:1870

23
Iron onrcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

momma MID MIMI; alumna

WC 621.396.669

voermmmon STORAGE IN SIGNAL nmcnou CW3“
Kiev IVUZ RADIOBLEKTRONIKA in Russien Vol 21 No ll. Nov 78 pp llk-llB

[Article by Yu.l.. Hesor. nenuscript received following revision 3 North.
1978

[Text] The noise immunity of e typicsl signel detection
chennel with power and logic types of postdetector etorsge
for the cese oi the reception of e week redio or noise
pulse egeinst e hechground oi steedy-stete noise. Quenti-
tetive estieetes of the efficiency of the systess con-
sidered ere derived.

Postdetector storage in n typicel detection chennel (preselectoro-detector—
lowps .s ﬁlter-threshold gets) cen he reelised both eheed of end efter the
threshold gets. A block diegree of e detector with prethreshold (power)
storage is shown in Figure ls, end with postdetector (logic) storege. in
Figure lb. The letter hes the edventege thet the storege is cerried out
with the einisu possible values of interaction: when the threshold is ex-
ceeded. etenderd pulses ere sued.

W (a) ’(c) (n) msm (A) (s) (oi, an‘ '(r‘ c
mmnzmm mmnmmm

e 5
(n) (b)
Fiugre 1. Block diegrens of e typicsl detection chennel with power storege
(s) end with logic storsge (5).

Key: A. as [entenne systes];
3. PR [preselector];
c. D [detector];
0. FNCh [low pess filter];

8. NE [power type storegc device];
1'. P0 [threshold gets];
a. NI. [logic type storege device].

2%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The noise inlunity of detectors with storage was treated in [1, 2. 3] as
applied to the reception of a pulse train: in this case. the optinua nueber
of pulses “a detareined by working iron the aininun requisite power of the
pulse tra!n. in a number of detection problees (for exanple. in the case

of passive radar), another formulation is of interest: finding the gain in
the noise iasunity of a systee with storage as a function of the number of
storage cycles. free which both the optimal as well as the aininun possible
(effective) nusber of storage pulses can be deterained. As far as is known.
no coaparative assesseent oi the noise ileunity of typical detector channels
with power end logic storage has been nede in this foreuiation.

working froe this. given below is a cooperative analysis of the noise innu-
nity of these eystess in probability terns when detecting week signals. where
it is expedient to use and there is the possibility of reception with storage.
The case of the reception of a radio pulse or a noise pulse against a back-
ground of steady-state noise is studied.

He shall consider a channel with power storage. He shall nake the following
assuaptionnt PR is an ideal bandpass filter with a passband of at; D is

a bilateral square-law detector; FNCh is an ideal integrator with a switching
interval of T. he was shown in [4]. for sutficiently weak signals. 1 << i.
and for a rather large product

arr >> 1

the signal to noise ratio at the output of the low pass filter in

(o/n)‘ - (dﬂh- " my.

where y is the ratio of the signal power to the interference power at the
output of the preselector. -

Following the storage device. in which N-tuple addition is sccoaplished with
n tine shift equal to the apriori knovr :9:i:: :2 the signal repetition,

ussuoing constancy of the amplitude of the pulses within the limits of the
atornge tine:

(ems - (c/n).- Win/at. (i)

Assusing the distribution at the input to the threshold gate to he nor-s1.
one can find the correct detection probability (VPO) of a channel with a
power type storage device:

9.... -0lev-ll0(| -P.)). (2)
s r
where the probability integral is 0(2)!- ije '42.

25
roe orncm use om
FOR OIPICIAL US! ONLY

P", (Pfol is s specified false elsrs probability (VtT).

Prom thin. for e detector with power type storsge with specified (else slate
and correct detectio probsbilities:

h- 50§Paufaa0sl —P..l . (3)

By working free iornulss (2) and (3). en expression cen be derived for the
gain in the correct detection probability of a channel with power storege

ss cospsred to a sinilsr detector without storage for the case of equal ratios
of 1 end the (else elarn probsbility:

_ Pig» _ °M§rm°lhhn
e. I u Lac-u. .otv hymn—P...» ' (a)

or I. as well as an expression for the gain with respect
to "the three holdr e§2os for the seee correct detection and fslse elers
probabilities in the ss-e coapsrison circuit:

'- I'N (5)
'N

The first epprosch (d) is of interest in working with en object st s constant
distance. end the second (5) is of interest when working with a loving signal
”Urcc s

The cherscteristics of the adventsges gsined,l . and Q . es s function of
the number of storege cycles N for various vaY- s of the false elsrl pro-
bability ere shown in Pigure 2. Hhen cslculatir by. for each false slsrl

probability using (creole (3). those values of r re used which st h - 5

provide for e correct detection probsbility for the cese of power storage
of 0.9.

we ehnll consider the noise insanity of s detector with postdetector storsge.
which performs a “no less then H of N” logic operation. where H is the

nuebor ot storage cycles where the threshold is exceeded. In this case, we
shall essuse the sssunptions Iede above ere still in force. In the specisl
case of h - N. in e chsnnel with logic storage:

Par ee-Pgn

(6)
p...-r:.- (comm-awn 4.01)".

(7)

2.5
roe omcm. use our
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

lnr I (also alarn; an I logic storage; no I correct detection]. where ’cd
and Pt" are the correct detection and false alarm probabilities in a de-
tector without storage. As can be seen free expression (6). 9 ...1 . <

« Pg“. by virtue of which the threshold can be lowered in the Setsction
channel and a gain obtained in the correct detection probability. Thus. the
gain in the correct detection probability with respect to o channel without
storsge. for the case of the sass islse alarm probabilities and a specified

" (Olev-usou JVm)"
1" EFT"? v-mmu -9.»

O

ﬂunlhw (8)

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIE

I-IIZI
I-I'AI

rear
II, A;

    
       
 

Vigore 2. The gain characteristics when ’nona [9, correct detection. power
storage I 'cdps’ (h I 5) I P 1 [9. correct detection. logic
storage I P¢d1.] (N I 5) I 0. r a. In the correct detection pro-
bshility, with power storage:

1. Pg. I 10'5; h. In threshold ratios:
2. Pf. I 10'3; l. Vith power storage:
with logic storage: 2. with logic storage.
3. Pf. - 10-5; 7:. " ”‘5‘
, 3. with logic storage
‘0 Pf. ' 10.30 Pf. - 10.3. .

[an I logic storage; N3 I power
storage].

An expression can be derived from for-ole (7) for the ratio r of a detector

with logic storage for specified correct detection and Eslse slat. probabi-
litics:

21
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPlGIAL 088 OHLY

L’ELM‘J V 1" W9 (9)
V O

- y. logic atoraga]. froa which the gain in the threshold ratios as
cogpnred to a channel without etorage for the caee of the ease correct de-
taction and false elara probabilities is:

_r_ _ o .. 01--»
“'lrJy—m «can +ugcm- ,‘ (10)

The gains 3 . and Q“ are shown in figure 2 so a function of the nuaber of
storage cyciee N for different values of the false elara probability. The
calculation of the ratios 7 for the In (N) characteristics. which when

N - 5 provide for e value of Poole - 0. .9. was carried out using fornula (9).

In the general case M i N. on the basis of the theorea concerning the repl-

tition of trials of the false alarm and correct detection probabilities in
n channel with logic storage:

Pun - ”g. “*‘P:§‘u - P.)-‘M. (I ”

tau-"gov (Olev-w on -P..)|)“*' x

x (I «war, «:00 —an"""“. . (m

where Pg. is the false alars probability in a detector without storage; ca
is the number of conbinationa of N with respect to H.

The gain in the correct detection probability over that of a channel without

storage. for the case of sale false alert probabilities and specified ratios
of y. aaounte to:

”"IP': L... {ii-‘5” (0mm «not! -P..m"*' x

x(n—omy-mou-P..)))"““+°)I@Imr-uc0(I—P.)l~ (1”
where ”nro is the false alers probability which can be found fros the equation

N2“ dam“ _P")II-¢H+0 _P. (1‘)

28
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC!AL US! ONLY

The gain in the threshold ratios, Qle' as cospsred to a channel without
storage, for the case of the sass correct detection and false alare probabi-

litiea. can he coaputed iron the Innily oi detection characteristics (12).
in which the value of the isles alarm probability equal to Pnfo (1‘) is
substituted.

The gains V1. and 01. are shown in Figure 3 as a function of the nunber of
storage cycles where the threshold is exceeded, h. (or various values of

the para-stars.
i ,
Irrig-
.r' \Q
loll‘

         

Vigurc 3. The gain characteristics {or the case of storage with ”no less
than H o! h” logic where N - 5; At? - 105;

e. In the correct detection probability where y - 0.01;
Pia ' 10“:
b. In threshold ratios 1 when Pcd - 0.9;
l. Pf. - 10“;
2. Pf..' 10-3;
3. Pf. - 10-2.

Thus. a colporstlvc assessment of the noise ilnunlty of typical detection
channels with storage permits the (allowing conclusions:

--Typlcnl detection channels with power storage (Figure la) have a substantial
nolnc blaunity advantage over channels with logic storage (Figure lb);

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
POR OFFICIAL I)“ ONLY

u’thn onnlytioal exproeaione derived (or the gain in the noiae i-unity.

3
2p

. (ll). 31. (N). 0 e (h) and 01. (N) Ind the graphical functions (Pigureo
and 3) can he on to detenine the option- nuaher of atorage cyclea;

“A cheractarietit feature of the curvee for an (N) and 'le 0!) when
"t. con-t. figure 3) la the preeence o! a nearin- et tha option- ratio
0 H ‘0 e

BIBLIOOMPIIY

l. Outhln l..8.. ”Tooriya optinal‘nykh utodov radiopriyaoe pri tlyuhtua-

2.

3.

6.

teionnykh polekhahh” ["The Theory of Optinel Radio Reception Method.
for the Caae of ﬂuctuating Noiee"l. lioecov. 8ovetokoye Radio Puhliehere.

1972.

”Voproay etatieticheakoy toorii radioloketeii“ l”Queetione in the
Statiaticol Theory oi Radar"). Rdited by 0.9. 'rertakovehiy. Hoecov.
Sovctekoyc Radio Publiehere, 1963.

Lenin Yu.s.. ”Optimal'nyye fil'try i nakoplteli lopul'enykh oignalov"
("Optimal Piltere and Storage Devicee for Polee Signale"]. Hoecov.
Sovotahoye Radio Publiohore, 1969.

Ontkin N.G.. Gorenin V.A.. Rarnovekiy H.l., .(reenyy 1.x...
"I'nnekhouetoychivoet' tipovogo trekta ohneruaheniye eisnelov" ['“Iho
noise luaunity of e Conventional Signal Detection Channel”). Kiev.
Tekhnika Publishere. 1971.

COPYRIGHT: "Iavootiyn vuxov SSSR - Radioolektronike." 1978

8225
(15081870

\ 30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIPICIAL 088 ONLY

ILIGTRONIOO AND SIESTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 621.372.5‘.037.372
'ROCBSSKNG A SIGNAL HIT“ A IAﬂDON DELAY USING A DlOITAL MATCHED FILTER
Kiev IVUZ RADIOELRKTRONIRA in Russian Vol 21 No ll. ﬂow 78 pp 123-126

(Article by l.P. Knyshev. nanuscript received 18 Novesber. I977)

[feet] A received signal, uhich is processed in a digital notched filter
(roar). has a certain delay. This delay is proportional to the range to the
target in the case of a radar systea. or to the spacing between the trans-
sitter and the receiver in the case of an interaction transsisaion systel.

The received signal can be written as:
I‘Uﬂ7-t«f-+g.l
where x(nT) is the transsitted signal; tasn I‘del] is the delay tine.

The site of ‘del can be expressed in tar-s of the quantization interval P
as

where No is an integer and It] 3 0.5.

Au shown in [l], a delay by an integer nusber of quantization intervals does
not influence the shape of the output signal of a digital notched filter.
but rather leads to e shift in this signal by the sase tise interval NOT.

It in also indicated in this some paper that a delay by a tise less than the
annatiaatinn interval leads to nissatching of the pulse response of the dig-
tni sntched filter and a decrease in its saxisul.

Then, the delay (T causes a degradation of the output signal to noise ratio.
The amount of the loss in the signal to noise ratio can be found free the
reduction in the naplituda of the digital sstched filter response:

‘”'$' (1)

a

.. .ar.p¢r):our-ur>-R(€n
where ii“ 42;
sponse to the delayed signal. where s - 0.

is the digital satched filter re-

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHOIM. US! ONLY

II
m.§mmw-m-m

in the response of the digital satched filter to a signal without a delay.
where e - 0.

Considering the fact that y(0) is the eutocorrelation function of the signal
aunt). and y'(0) can be treated as a shifted autocorrelation function. ex-
pression (1) can he represented as!

nib-593' (2)

Expression (2) per-its finding the losses as a function of the delay or as

a function of the cysts. paranatera, based on the known autocorrelation
function.

Thus. for a signal which is the discrete analog of a linear RI signal:

sM-mIZ-gi]. O‘s‘N. (3)

where ‘1'” In] is the signal width and R is the width of the deviation
bandwidth, the eutocorrelation function has the following form

I”
ah NT
Rm- 1"- )e- #wmum]. (’0
h 1.- 1' '

if it is assured that losses are next-e1 at the misu- eianatching of the
readouts of the signal and the filter response (6 - 0.5), and also taking
into account the reletionship Ii - II, In" - Zeb. P; - NT and expression
(b). or the site of the losses (2) can be represented as:

naex ' h‘%"(%) a

The graph of the sentim- losses as a function of the digitization interval
is shown in figure 1, where l is the wines losses “neat- and 2 are the

nvernge losses Vowg‘ Figure l attests to the fact that to obtain low losses.
it is necessary to select a rather high digitization frequency. The value
of this frequency should be more than twice as high as the upper value of

the frequency deviation 6“.“ 3 ii).

The delay £1” can be treated as a continuous rando- quantity with a zero
nverege value and e probability density p(£) - ll‘l'. Consequently. the

site of losses is also it randou quantity. The average value of this quan-
tity can be defined as [2]:

‘0’ ' ‘O’
"nvg' 5-1 smaQﬁ-mj R6130- (6)
or or

32
FOR OFFICIAL US! Oil“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Expression (6) pernits the determination of the average
value of the lessee in a systes or the selection of the
values of the parameters based on the known autocorrels-
tion function.

Thue, for signal (3), which has the eutocorrelation
function (h). the average size of the losses is equal
to

 

0.03!”

"avs ' M~"'T+ (7)

Pigure 1.

Shown in tigure 1 (curve 2) is the size of the aver-
age losses (7) as a function of the quantization
interval. As use to be expected. the sire of average losses is substantially
less than the aaxinal losses.

Depending on the specific require-ants placed on a system, the sire of the
digitisation interval can be chosen based on the maximal or the average
losses.

Expression (2) or (6) can serve as a criterion for the choice of a signal
vhich provides a ainiaun of losses from the random tine of signal arrival.
The optimal signal in this case will he one with a niniaal change in the
value of the autocorrelation function in the range [-0.5 - +0.5]T.

"hare necessary. in accordance vith the general procedure of [2], other

characteristics of the tendon site of the losses can also be found (the
dispersion, probability density distribution).

BIBLIOGRAPRY

l. Gol'denherg L.H.. Levchuk Yu.P.. Polyak H.N.. "Tsifrovyye fil'try"
(”Digital Pilters"l. Hoscov, Svyae' Publishers, 197‘.

2. Levin B.R.. "Teoretichcskiye osnovy statisticheskoy radiotekhniki"
(”The Theoretical Principles of Statistical Radio Engineering"), Moscow.
Sovctskoye Radio Fuhlishers, 191‘, l.

COPYRIGHT: "leveetiya Vurov SSSR - Radioelektronika,” 1978

8225
68031870

33
ron orncm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

memos All) MIMI: mm

1106 621.391.8

I118 NOISE MIT? 01’ I'll! OPTIMUM DETECTION OF FLUCTUATING SIGNALS IN NOISE
OF AN UNKNOW LEVEL

Kiov [V02 RADIOEBKTRORIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 11, Nov 78 pp 125-127

[Article by K.K. Vnsil'yev, manuscript received following revision 10 Nov-
ember 1977]

[Text] The problem of the incoherent detection of packets of pulse signals
against s background of nornal noise with an unknown dispersion is frequently
encountered in the design of radio systole. In nany cases. this problem is
effectively solved using a contrast procedure, which consists in processing
two independent samples free the envelope of the input process. One of then.
in“) .1. can contain the useful signal. while the second, (1:01)?“ is a

grad teaching sa'nple in the region of the interference [l].

The application of the maxim- plausibility nethod [2] and the enpirical
theory of [3] for the case of sanples of equal volume 04 - N), has permitted
the finding of the nost unifornly powerful enpirical rule (M) for signal
detection [2, 3]. '

The results obtained earlier can be extended to the case considered here for
aesples of different volulss. In this case, the M rule for the detection
of a signal with a randon anplituds is written in the following fore: there

is a signal if:
'Dhﬁe) '0
(1)

u u a
whore N'E" = h-z'é‘ ; 1 is a constant defined by the specified false
nlnrn probability.

The noise inunity of the resulting optimal procedure (1) is analysed in

this paper as a function of the number of signal positions I! and the number
of reference interference readouts ii. In this case, it is assuned that the
distribution density of the probabilities for the readouts (X51) and {:01}
can be represented by the following expressions where the useful signal is
present:

3'0
Iron onzcm. US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O N O u
nap-n-uw-w-l'lwux
H H

where why-[lum+$l°'luvl- lit/”'(H-Sl is the law governing the distri-
bution of the probabilities of the envelope of the sun of the normal noise

and a signal with random amplitude: s is the ratio of the signal power to
the noise dispersion 02; Dow-(tuloh exu- 4/2119.

     

 
 
 
    
     
 

 
 

e-IIAWMS
3.“, germ I
.uhxllll
RSI"
IIIhSSI

hulu
we, I
m I

IIENII .
mm:
Illa-15

 
     

       
   
   

Figure 1.

To find the power function for rule (1). we note that the squares x31 and

x51 of the resdouts in the regions of the signal and interference have an
exponential distribution. For this reason, the statistics A. and y obey

a gene distribution, and consequently, the random quantity 2 - y/ l + S)
has a Fisher z-distribution: w(z) - 1‘0! 4- N)2N'1/I‘(H)I‘(N) . (l + a)”,
where No) is the gene function of [5].

In this case. the detection algorithm power function for (1) can be ampresaed

in terms of a complete 30!, M) and an loco-plate qu. H) beta function [6]
in the following manner:

8 " l - qu. H)/B(N, H).
where qu/(Hﬂm-YNHS).

For calculations on a computer, it is convenient to represent this relation-
ship in the following form:

N-l

' I
”ngic'm-v

He shall determine the level of the threshold signal S from the condition
Ma, y) - D, where D is a specified correct detection probability. In

this cnse, we find the constant Y from the specified false alar- probability
8(0 ' 0. Y) - F.

35
FOR cnrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The threshold signal levels are shown in Figure l as a function of the nusber
of analysed signal positions N for various ratios of v - MIN sample volules
in the regions of the noise and signal when P - 10-2 and 10", and D - 0.5
and 0.9.

As can be seen fro: the Figures. the threshold signal level decreases with
an increase in the relative nuaber of interference readouts u. when v e 0.
the effectiveness of the algorithe considered here coincides with the case
where the optisal procedure A. 2 y is used for the detection of fluctuating
nignnla in noise of a known power. A decrease in the voluse of the sesple
in the interference region lends to losses in the threshold signal, which
are caused by the apriori unknown noise level. In this case. the asount of
the loss with respect to the case of a known dispersion increases both with
a decrease in the specified false alarm probability and in the case of a
shortening of the length of the pulse packet.

To ronpute the effectiveness for a large number of analyzed signal positions
N. it is expedient to make use of the following approxisate formula.

wO-l
. os-o VP .
°.m_7'g,5..o.wq ’3 °( Vw=i
where . which is found for the conditions of

n gausaisn distribution of the statistics 7. - 710.

In this case. the siaplest expression is successfully derived for the
threshold signal level if D - 0.5. Then S - S-c-HIVI-HvIF F—uc. where
a - xi/(H - sf); Xp is the noraal distribution quantile at the 1-? level
(Table I).

Table l

 

AHJIYBAo rhoua that the relationships given here approxiaate the 8(N) func-
tion considered with an error of less than 5%, if R > 50. By way of illu-
atration. characteristic curves (the dashed line). cosputed taking the
approximate formulas into account. are shown in Figures la and lb.

we shall make use of the criterion of the ssysptotic relative effectiveness
(A05) of algorithm (1) and the optimal signal detection rule for the case

of conpletely known interference parameters to cospore the signal processing
procedures when N e O. In this case. the the A03 can be celputed fro-

the following for-ole [l]:

36
to: 017mm. use can
POR OFPlCIAL USE ONLY

N M
o Ila a- lien .
"is”? in“ $34.
where No and N are the number of analysed signal positions for the optimal
algoriths and the algorithm considered here respectively; n1ly) is the asth-

esatical lean value of the statistic y when the useful signal is present;
a; is the dispersion of y when 3 . 0.

Mil-W'd-W-

taking into account the well known expressions for the momenta of the Fisher

s-distrihution [4]. it is not difficult to find the following formula for
the sire of the A08;

lly calculating:

0-m~

The derived expression provides the possibility of rather simply deteruining
the requisite increase in the length of a pulse packet as a function of the
nuaher of reference readouts H. which allow for the obtaining of additional
inforsation on the interference dispersion. As calculations show. the say-p-

totic foraula found here approxisatea the precise relationships with an error
of less than 5!. if N > 500.

Thus. as a result of the analysis aade here. precise and approxiaate forau-
las were derived which are needed to esti-ate the noise in-unity of optilal

detection of packets of (luctuating signals in noise with an unknown disper-
sion.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Levin B.R.. "Teoreticheskiye osnovy statisticheskoy radiotehhniki"

I"The Theoretical Principles of Statistical Radio Engineering"), Moscow.
Sovetskoyc Radio Publishers. 1976. Book 3.

2. rrokof'yev V.N.. "Ohnaruzheniye pachki aignalov s neizvestnyni para-straai
v shunakh neizvestnogo urovnya" ["The Detection of a Signal Packet with
Unknown Parameters in Noise of an Unknown Level"), 12V. VUZOV -
RADIOELBKTRONIKA [PROCEEDINGS 0? TBS NIGNER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES,

RADIO ELECTRONICS]. 1972. 1.2. No 10, p 1,234.

3. Prohof'yev V.N.. ”K zadsche obnaurzheniya signalov v shu-ahh neizveatnogo

urovnya" ["0n the Proble- of Signal Detection in Noise of an Unknown Level”]
RADIOTEKHNIKA I BLEKTRONIKA, 1969, lg, No 10. p 1.895.

37
ron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lo. Krmr 0.. ”Mumctcheouye utody nut-tut" [Nuthatch-1 mthodu of
Statistics"). “new. Hit Publish". 1975.

5. Grudoheoyu, 1.8., Ryzhtk !.H., "runny incosralav. an. ryndov. 1
protwodonty” [”‘rablu of Integulo. Sun. 80:10. and Producto"). Hoocov.
Nana Publish“. 1971.

COPYRIGICT: ”Izvuuyn vuzov 888R - Rndtoelektronilu," 1978

8225
08031870

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WRONIOB AND ELECTRICAL WINNING

00¢ 62). .396.“

THE REFLECTION OF A QUASICONTINUOUS SIGNAL FRGi TNB SURFACE OF THE EARTII
AT SHALL GRAZING ANGLES

Kiev WUZ RADIOBLEKTRONINA in Russian Vol 21 No 11. Nov 78 pp 133-135

[Article by luv. Vasilevich and N.A. Viacgradov. manuscript received ll.
December, 1977]

[Next] in studying groundreturns, a statistically rough surface is usually
outplayed no the nodel of the reflecting area [1]. In this paper. this surface
In treated as a filter with randoaly changing characteristics. Such an

approach penits the use of the well developed tools of parasetric systesa
theory.

He shall write the reflected signal in the form of the sun of the returns
from the elesontal areas:

N
yon-2 “m «phone-g}.
h.

where K(r. t1) is the reflection factor of the i-th reflecting area; AD is
theaizo of an eleseatal area, within the bounds of which one can consider
the reflection characteristic to be constant; c is the propagation velocity

of the radio eaves; MM) is the shading function of [1]: 0(01) _°(“* 1‘. )
91 is the grazing angle: h. is the height of the antenna. 7 ’

It is usually assuaed that the signal reflected fro- an eleseatal reflector
(loch not influence other signals. It as noted in [2] that the setting of
conditions which define the mutual influences of the eluental reflectors
does not produce any sarked change in the results.

Taking this into account, one can go to the limit where ht + 0 and N 9 O:
'-

m- [ cmwmw-oa.
'dr

where Inn and r.“ are the delay liars of the reflected signals; Ht. 1) I

. u s- K1311 is the pulse characteristic of the reflection of the surface
am
”pent.

39
ms onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 08! ORLY

if a pulsed signal with an aaplitude A and a period '1'. up] is used as
the sounding signal.

u
so)- 2 Air-ﬂaql—No-QTJ.
ad

then the reflected signal assuses the fora:
u; -T i omen-sf, ”Ail-ed3-nal-Mu-d3- “I“
Let another set of .1;::;::1 reflectors be located at a certain distance
0;. The signal reflected from it will be:
W) - Tame (i—e. osO-e-odt.

H
where

we.

when coaputing the correlation function (KP) of the reflected signal. it is
necessary to consider the statistical characteristics of the roughness of

the reflecting surface. Taking this into account. we write the correlation
function in the fern:

Ru. o-ﬁ meow-enema. NM

where 92(h1. hz) is the tuc-diaensionel law for the distribution of the
heights.

The assumption that the distribution of the heights of the points of the
reflecting surface is close to a normal distribution is substantiated in

ll. J, ‘1. Considering Hz(h1, hz) to be normal. following several cunberaose
transforlations, the correlation function can be reduced to the for-z

Ru. v)-hisw.hdsil-M.)¢Iel-(-‘f-o.me)'ll-om|}lm0r

where “h is the 8K0 [expansion unknown] of the surface heights: 0 is the
grazing angle; A is the wavelength: p(h) is the correlation function of the
surface heights; and k1 is a proportionality factor.

It Is noted in [3] that an exponential correlation function of the heights

is the one most frequenctly chosen, since when it is used. the dependence

of the reflection characteristics on frequency is taken into account. however.
it was demonstrated in [2] that this correlation function corresponds to a
signal which does not posses the property of regularity at the origin of the
coordinates. and for this reason, cannot be used for estimating the surface
properties at this point. It should be noted that the experisentally obtained
correlation functions likewise differ fro- the exponential ones close to the
origin of the coordinates. This particular feature sust be considered when
estimating the parameters of the reflected signal.

ho
roe onlcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A

Eidmlk‘lll
'EII‘W‘WM
IIII‘ ’

IIIIIx\\\‘IVII
llllll‘p may ...

Peta

  

      
  

   
   
 

neiisl
Eh!!!

a a to 10cm
Peel. "‘°°

    
     

   

Figure l . Figure 2 .

it i» sometimes assaned that the signal reflected from the ground is a
steady-state process. however. it was noted in [1.] that the8 nonsteedy—atate
nature of the background plays a substantial part.

we shall employ a locally steady-state process. which yields good results
when studying actual phenomena, as a nodal here. The correlation function

of such a process has the form
R“v”-RIWRsM-RI(£":S"'")RsVI-‘s)o

lust.

where R“""R|( ) is a multiplying factor proportional to the
nonsteady-stete dispersion; Rz(v) - R2(t1 - t2) is the correlation function
of the steady-state process.

when irradiating a section of the ground surface. there occurs averaging of
the reflected signal in both space and tine.

The spectru- of the signal which is averaged in space within the units of
the resolvable area can be treated as either instantaneous or of short dura-

tlun I5]. '
3.0.0!- {known-Me.

Within the lillts of the width of the directional pattern with respect to

the elevation angle. for the case of grazing propagation, the pulses of s
quasicontinuous signal are reflected inedistely frou several sections. which
are separated fro. each other by a range AD - ch/Z. 0f substantial interest
for the signal studied here is the spectru- when averaged over several repi-
tition periods (the current spectra of [5]):

Sung-55.0.00. (1)

h].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! ONICIAL ”8! ONLY

whore r" ia the atoraeo tine.

To eatiaato the ehepe and width of the current apectru. experiaentel
atudiea were carried out and calculationa were perforned on e coaputer.

The experimental reeulta are above in Figure l, where f0 - 1010 he. 1'1 -

- l ueec. '0 - 2'. e . Tap/r . while the caleuletione are ehown in Figure 2.
where ‘0 - 1010 Ht. 1'", - 333 Kilt. r1 - l neat and "corr - S ueec. here.
81-“. t") - conat., when If - fol < 10‘ Ila.

An unalyaia of the reeultant date atteete to the rather good esreeaent of
the computed and experilentel reaulte.

The liaitationa of a correlation function in the fora of an exponential one
were noted above. to epecify the reaulta in the eapreeeion under the integral
alsn nore praeieely for integral (1). an additive resulariains operetor wee

introduced
’ Much-es (WI-MO-il‘l'ﬂﬂ-Wml

(n In the regularisation para-eter of [6]). The operator u(r. a) wee computed
by a variation procedure. It ahould be noted that without the introduction

of the operator at (r. a). atrons oacillationa of the apectrua appear at fre-
queneica which are nultiplea of the repetition rate.

Thus. the eelculetione perforaed here allow for the following conelueiona:

l) The apectrun of a quaaicontinuoue eisnel reflected free a aection of the
earth'a aurface. containa a aarked coherent eoaponent. and in terne of ita
characteriatice, approxiletee the apectrun of a reflected continuoue signal:

2) Thia effect ia aanifeet at aaall grating anslea of the bean. and apparently.
in related to a reduction in the pulee voluae of the amber of reflectore.
which aake the neat auhetential contrieutiona to the reaulting aisnel.

BIBLIOOMPE!

I. an" r.c., Puke 1.n., "heeeyeniye voln na etetietieheaki nerovnoy
poverkhnoeti" ("Have Scattering at a Stetiatically Uneven Surface"],
Hoacow. Nauka Publiahere. 1972.

2. Zuhkwich 8.6.. "Statieticheakiye kharaltteriatiki redioaignalov.
otrezhennylth ot :ennoy poverhhnoati” ("The Statietical Characteriatice

of Radio Signals. Reflected fro- tha Barth'a Surface”). hoacow. Sovet-
ukoye Radio Publiahera. 1968.

352
NR OHICIAL 088 ONLY
3.

It.

5.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Moore K.K.. "lldlr Return from the Ground". run BULLETIN 02 anc.. Lawrence
Kansas. 1969, No 59.

Sokolov A.V., ”Notody nodolirovonlya radiolokutoionnykh tacloy (obxor)"

(”Hothodl of Hod-ling Radar Intact. (antcv)”l, ZARUIBzuﬂAYA RADIOBLBK»
TRON!“ [FOREIGN MDIOBLBCTRNICB]. 197‘, No 6.

Kharkovich A.A.. "Spoktry 1 unnlta” ["Spactra and Analyst."]. Moscow.
Pix-atsll Publtuhora, 1962.

lehonoM A.N.. Aroontn A.Yn.. ”Hocody rochnntya notorrektnykh snatch"

["Hathodo of Solving Inpropcr Proble-u”). Hoacov, ﬂanks Publishers.
197‘.

COPYRIGHT: "Inventtya vuzov SSSR - Rndioolektrontka," 1978

8225
68081870

#3
FOR onxcm. use om:
’0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ELECTROIICB AND BLICIRICAL ENGINEERIRO

UDC 621.373.52.001.S7

MODELING 1H3 PROCESSES IN A SELF-OSCILLAJIﬂO 818138 "RIC“ I3 ACTBD UPON
bY A REFLECTBD DBLAXING SIGNAL

Kiev IVUZ RADIOILEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 21 No 11, Nov 78 pp 137-139

[Article by v.0. Lysenko and A.R. Mileslavekiy, ssnuscript received follow-
ing revision 17 April, 1978]

[Text] The problee of studying a self-oscillating systee, which is acted
upon by a reflected delaying signal arises in s nunber of engineering ap-
plications [1]. Such systess have been called sutodyne systees. Despite
the fact that considerable literature has been devoted to sutodynes ll - 5].
several questions are far tron cospletely worked out.

Little attention has been devoted in the literature to studying the process-
es in an autodyne for the case of large levels of external input which are
cosparable to the self-oscillations. The goal of this paper is to partially
fill in this gap. The probles oi the behavior oi an autodyne systes at high
reflected signal levels is not only of theoretical, but also of practical
interest, since in solving it. one can. in the first place. find the linit
of the applicability of linear theory [1 - 3]. and secondly. answere the
question at which psrenetere is external synchronization of an sutodyne is-
possible. was shown in [A]. the presence of synchronization leads to a
substantial eduction in the doppler coeponent in the spectrum of the output
uignnl of the eutodyne. i.e., to a disruption of the operability of the de-
vice.

In npproxinsting the static characteristic of an active elelent with the.
function i(u) - slu - S3u3, an sutodyne systss can be described by s non-
linear differential equation with a delaying srgusent:

run-«w-x°mm(o+-:uo-u¢u—sm (1)

which when k - 0 coincides with Van der Pol's egg, ion. "are p is the
differential operator; x(p) - [3S3Ry/(SIRy - 1)] u(t) is the nor-sliced
voltage; R, is the controlling resistance of the generator; c - 6(818y - 1):

his
son onlcm. usz ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY

6 and an are the attenuation and resonant frequency of the tuned circuit;

k is the ratio of the amplitude of the external force to the amplitude of
the self-oscillations (h < l): 1(t) is a variable delay due to the relative
motion of the autodyne and the objects being studied.

Precise analytical eethods of solving equation (1) do not exist. even for
small values of k. In this work. equation (l) was studied on an HN-lBH
analog computer. in accordance with the structural configuration shown in
figure 1, where the dashed line encloses the electronic analog of the self-
oscillating system. The reaaining part of the circuit. which contains five
integrators. seven multipliers and five adders. takes the for- of a variable
delay block. the para-atric transfer function of which has the fore [5):

use—1 sou. enemy “9—80“ .0
Sum-WW 175—. +3.5‘unnL-o-l-T'm5'm ' (2)

A linear function of 1(t) (dr/dt (< l) was used in the nodeling. something
which corresponds to a unifora relative notion of the autodyna and the object.
The delay r(t) was placed outside the differential operator sign in (2).
aoaething which, as analysis shown. does not lead to substantial errors.

Transfer function (2) provides for the greatest value of the para-eter
Hotnn‘ . 7.64 at a specified phase error (0.1 red) as conpared to other
well knonw approximations of an ideal delay network [5]. Thid permits ob-
serving the solution of equation (1) in a tine segment which is at least
equal to one period of the doppler frequency n - nodr/dt.

The operator 5(9. t) can be realized by eesns of two series connected stages
which have identical transmission coefficients. The method of implicit func-
tions [6] was employed when selecting each of these coefficients on the ana-
log computer. Operational aaplifiere. looped by negative feedback through
capacitors with a swell capacitance play the part of integrators with a high
gain [6] (figure 1).

The results of the modeling for two levels of the reflected signal, k - 0.3
nnd k - 0.9 are shown in Piugre 3a. b (no - 2:, no!“ - 100). A drawback
to modeling based on the entire equation (1) is the fact that it is inpoa-
nible to observe its solution over several periods of the doppler frequency.
for this reason, a second modeling stage wee carried out, based on truncated
eqations found free (1) by conventional aethods. we will note that the
results of both experiments are in qualitative agreement.

It can be seen fro. Figure 2a. b that the voltage across the tunded circuit
of the nutodyne takes the fore of an aaplitude noduleted signal. The fre-
quency of the modulation, and this is extrelely important, almost does not
change with an increase in the level of the reflected signal k. "hen k g
; 0.l-0.3. the law governing the modulation is close to a harmonic one.

#5
roe onrcm. use any
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, it can ho nssusod that tho lineat thoory of on autodyno is justifiod
in the gluon caso up to vsluos of k :_ 0.l-0.3. with an incroaso in k, tho
Indulation lovsl incroasss. approaching mot. and in this csso. tho lav
governing tho Iodulstion dilisros fro- s sinusoidal ons. llovovor. this
difforonco is snail and will hsvo practically no oiioct on tho norosl func-
tioning at tho lou troqusncy procassing circuitry.

 

It follows fro. the sodoling rosults that ovon for largo lovols of tho ro-
tlcctsd signal (It - 0.9), the systsn does not go into synchronization. Us
shall deal with this quostion in soro detail.

We shall establish tho relationship botvoon tho dolsy tine ﬁr) . zrlc
(r is the distance; c is the spood of light) and tho tins constant T¢(r),

R6
ton ontcm. use can
FOR OPTICIAL US! ONLY

which characterieoa the rate of the proeeaaea during synchronization end

dctorninea the tine for eetabiiehing a eynchronoua node. Hi ahall lake uee
of the well hhown formula of [7] to eetiaato T¢(I)i

'«M- ﬁa(~?‘;‘-:)"'~ m

where v ia the efficiency of the reaonant circuit; Puan ia the power radiated
by the autodynex Pap ia the power of the received signal. The proportion-
oiity factor between then in the near iield hae the fore [1]:

{a -ggz. m

where A in the wavelength: 6. ia the antenna gain; N? is the coefficient
which takca into account the loaeea with reflection re. the object being
etudicd. and la uaually equal to 0.3-l.

Taking (3) and (6) into account, we obtain

it can be eeen that neither the range r nor the working frequency of the
nutodyne no entcra directly into (5).

It iollowe iron rclationahip (5) that if an antenna with a gain of 6. << 1/6
is eapioyed in the autodyne (thie ie the neat wideepread ceee in practice),

then r << Tc. and there can be no aynchroniration in euch a eyeten. Thia ia
explained by the inertia of the aynchronitation proceaa iteelf. and in con-

tirncd, in particular, by the reeulta of analog modeling.

bIILIOGHAPHY

). Konnn I.H., ”blizhnynyn radiolohatahiye” ["hear Field Radar"], Hoacow,
Sovotukoyc Radio Publichera. 1973.

2. Innnchcw V.H.. Lyeenho v.c., Saol'ekiy S.H.. "K teorii avtodinov na
incrtaionnyhh aktivnyhh clenentakh“ [“On the Theory of Autodynea ueing
Inerclnl Actlvc Zlelente”], IZV. VUZOV - RADIOELIKTROHIIA [PROCHEBIHGS
OF THE HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES - RADIO ELECTROHICS]. 1976. 19.
“o 5. P 620

3. Tahoyo-a 1.. "Doppler Signal Detection with Negative Reaiatance Diode
Oscillatora”]. 1283 TRAHS.. 1973. HTT-Zl. No 2.

37
ton onlcm. use ONLY
A.

7.

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

‘rnnnrchnk D.Yo., Khotuntoov YuJ... "Povodoniyo rinkhronizirovonnogo
aonorotoro pri voxdoyotvii oii'nykh oiamlov o imnyoyuohchoyoyo
chutotoy" ["‘l‘ho Behavior 0! a Synchroniud Oociilator with tho Action
0! Strong signal- having a Changing Pregnancy”). mrmm I

Kern 6.. Mon 1., "Bloktronnyyo analosovyye i analogovo-toiirovyyo
vychioiitoi'nyyo ushiny" ["moctronic Analog and Analog-Digital Computers”).
Moscow, Mir Publishers. 1968. Port 2.

Umyov A.8., "Oonovy nodolirovoniya no analogovykh vychiolitol'nykh
unhinokh” ["1110 Principles of Modeling on Amios Cooputoro"], Moscow.
"an“ “1519:3030. 197‘.

Adler R.. "Inolodovoniyo yovloniy oinkhronintoii gonorotorov" ["An
:nvootisation of Oocillotor Synchronization Phonounoﬂ, man. 1973.
1. No 1 .

COPYRIGHT: ”Izvutiyo wzov 888R - Mdiooloktronih," 1978

8225
050:1870

108
m orncw. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

caopmsrcs, ASmm AND sue:

(me 550.831.01
CORPUSCULAR MDEL OP CRAVITA‘I'ION AND INERTIA

Noacow PRIWAYA GBOPIZIKA in Russian No 87. 1977 pp 92-106
[Article by K.Ye. Veaelov]

[Text] The corpuscular model of gravitation and interia described is based
on the faniliar concepts of Lomonoaov and Le Sage regarding the mechanism of
gravitational interaction and on inferences from the special theory of rela-
tivity. In it is hypothesized the existence in an entire space of particles
which travel chaotically at an enormous speed and penetrate all bodies, losing
in the process only a very moderate portion of their momentum. Such a space
is celled a gravitational vacuum. Bodies in a gravitational vacuum, because
of mutual screening (4], will be attracted according to the inverse square
law. The vacuum will also exert resistance to a change in the state of notion
of a body, i.e.. will create inertia.

In the corpuscular model is discussed not a formal transition from one inertial
system of reference to another, but a transition through accelerated motion,
the energy of forces, and modification of the mass of bodies. The corpuscular
model of gravitation and inertia explains satisfactorily. quantitatively and
qualitatively. three familiar effects of the general theory of relativity, and,
in addition, secular and seasonal variations in the length of the terrestrial
day and shortening of the year. It can also be enlisted for the purpose of
explaining many geological and geophysical effects.

In the corpuscular model the following limitations are imposed on interaction
between the vacuum and bodies.

1. Particles in the gravitational vacuun possess a steady state of chaotic
motion with a maximal: rate of propagation of physical interactions of c .

Hith linear and uniform motion, between the bodies and the gravitational

vacuum an exchange of mental: is carried out and on average the condition of
dynamic equilibriue is fulfilled. If a single body is at rest or moves through
inertia. then the force of hydrostatic pressure is exerted on it. balanced by
the body's internal forces. Then work is not performed. DynaIuc equilibrium
is accomplished in the exchange of momentum between the vacuui and body; in

the vacuua an inhomogeneity exists (a gravitational field), characterised by
the existence of an equilibrium exchange.

1*9
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with linear and unifora notion. neither the gravitational vacuua nor the uoving
bodice gain additional nonentun. Over aufficiently long intervala of tile

and epace. the following equality in fulfilled (over a ehort interval it can
also not be fulfilled):

d
n i-h-0~ 1e." 0.

where p in the inpulae particles of the gravitational vecuua inpart to the
body. and Pa in the inpulee of the body iaparted to the gravitational vaccua.

This equality memo that if external forces are not exerted on the body. then
it either ia at rest or it novea without acceleration. ll'he linear and uniforn
motion which haa already originated in not evidenced in any unaer.

2. Hith acceleration of the body's notion under the influence of an external
force or under the gravitational influence of bodiea on one another. the
dynanic equilibrium in the exchange of aouaentua between the bodiee and the
gravitational vacuum in diaturbed becauee of the fact that it ie reetored not
inatantaneouely. but at a rate not greater than the epeed of chaotic notion
of the particlea of the gravitational vacuum.

in the proceea of an increaae in the body'e traveling apeed. particlea of the
vacuun are captured by it. The more the body acceleratea. the sore particles
will be captured by it and the greater the increeae in the external iapulae
required in order to change its epeed. In thia caee the energy of external
forcee reaulta in a change in the nee (energy) of the body:

(1)

where dp/dt ie the external force: p ie the external inpulae; n in the
lane of the body: A ie the energy of external forcee; c in the apeed of
light: and be ia the increment in the path.

Bqumtion (1) can be rewritten thue:

:2 a "(1.

ch' (2)

if the body loves in the direction of the effect of the external force.
then the inertia can be expreeaed via the derivative of the me in term of
s :

at: (at .
“new " "'27-

(3)

50
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this way it is possible to explain the origin of inertia and the increase
in mass with a change in the speed of the body. llere the increases in mass.
AI . are mainteined in the body even after the cessation of the force's
inﬂuence in subsequent notion through inertia. work can be perforeed on
account of the inertial momentum of another body or on account of the momentum
of the gravitational vacuum. The first type of interaction is called inertial.
and the second gravitational.

Inertial interaction takes place when the aonentun of inertial notion of one
body is transmitted to another via some type of interaction (e.g.. gravitational
or electromagnetic). here one body can lose its ease, and the other acquire

the sense amount, or they will acquire it in one interval of travel and lose it
in another. borrowing it from the vacuua and giving it back to it. Their mass
will change as a function of the sign of the energy, in keeping with equation
(1). llera the sum of masses will remain unchanged for the entire interval of
the path and interaction period.

Gravitational interaction takes place when two or more bodies are present in
the vacuue. These bodies will mutually screen movements of the particles of
the gravitational vacuum. If they are imbilized. dynastic equilibrium in
exchange is established. dp/dt - 0 . And if not, then dynaaic equilibrium

is disturbed. the bodies will move toward one another under the effect of
force F - dp/dt and work will be performed. ac - (PM) . Furthermore. any
work on the part of forces of the gravitational vacuum (field). be it accelera-
tion or inhibition of inertial motion. will result in an increase in the body's
lass, since it is performed because the body acquires moaentu- frosI the

vacuum.

Obviously. acceleration of the body on account of the absorption of maentua
frost the vacuum will be slighter, the greater its speed relative to the vacuue.
A body traveling at the speed of the vacuum's particles, even, cannot accelerate.
In keeping with the above, the equation for the increase in mass with gravita-
tional interaction will be as follows:

66 e'
Anal-a- i—-‘-; . (6)

where v is the body's traveling speed.

The increase in less on account of gravitational interaction will equal zero
when the work of the forces of the gravitational field equals zero and when
the body travels at the speed of light. Since the mass of the body depends
on the body's speed relative to the vacuum, in equation (6) speed v should
be measured in the same system of reference in which the body's mass is mea-
sured.

51
rot omcm use can:
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Thus. the interaction or bodiee in the veeuun enounte to the feet thet bodice
con ecquire or import eonentun to the vecuun'e pertielee. or through the

vacuum inpert their on inertiel nonentun to another body. In grevitetionel
interaction. bodiee elveye pick up nonentun tron the vecuun. end, eoneequently.
energy. too. In inertiel interection. nonentun end energy cen both be picked
up from the vecuue end he inverted to it. In the inhibition of inertiel notion.
the redietion of energy into the vecuue ehould be obeerved. end in ecceleretion.
on the other hand. the ebeorption of it by the body fro- the vecuue. In thie
connection. it beeonee neeeeeery to extend the leve of coneervetion to the
vecuun. I! e body heving inertiel eonentun trevele in e veeuue in the preeenee
of other bodiee. then ite neee will ehenge:

60 l AA
“47W '-':r+-a-

(5)

or

d” m __ a
"'37" VII/“~23- +14."
(6)

where A ie the work performed on eccomt of the inertiel notion of enother
body or eyetel of bodiee. end c in the work on eccount o! the grevitetionel
vecuun.

Equetione (5) end (6) ere epproxieete. eince the reletive influence of the
increeee in neuee hee not been teken into eccount in then.

Let us coneider two ceeee of the interection of bodice.
The first ceee: ‘i‘uo epheree. A end B. ere treveliug elong e eingle etreight

line peeeing through their cuntere. In ephere B there in e through opening,
eb, freely edeitting the other ephere (fig 1).

Figure 1. Interection of M Bodiee Ireveling Along e Single Streight
Line

at
roe omcm use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on the ratio'ot speeds and eesoes. these bodies. having set. can
separate forever or can fora a system of bodies periorning vibrational sove-
aents relative to s certain point loving inertially. The velocity of this
point will be detersined by the result oi adding the noaents of these bodies.
and the ease of each body will chenga as a function of whether its inertial
notion is accelerated or slowed down. In subsequent vibrational notion rela-
tive to the center of inertia. these nesses will change. Let us consider the
notion of these bodies in a systea of reference releting to their center of
inertia. At one stage in travel. the bodies. because of gravitational inter-
action. will travel. under acceleration. towerd one another right up to the
instant their centers coincide. In the next period their inertial notion in
opposite directions. because of gravitational interaction. will bc retarded
until their speed becoaes zero. Then follows attraction of the bodies. and
the like.

In the process of this motion. the mess of both bodies will increase on

account of gravitational interaction, in keeping with equation (6). in addition
to this. in the interval of the path when the notion is sccelersted. the
direction of acceleration is in line with the direction of eeveaont of the
center of inertia. and the body's uses increases. and when the notion is

slowed down. the less is reduced in keeping with equation (1). To the extent
that the less of one body increases. the ease of the other body will be re-
duced. In body A. on account of inertial and gravitational interaction with
body I. the ease will change in keeping with the equation:

5 - aw 'i A'V
'3'" TV“‘:1'|+T' (7)

—"f|"‘IV—:rr+_7‘ m

Here the lass. n . and the speed. v . are detersined in the systea of reference
relating to the system's center of inertia: H is the potential created by
body 3. Since AH - (vs/2) sin (2r/T)At , then equation (7) will have the fora:

AT" - all—i- (lg-In 3.;- .\tl V:- -l- sin-i:- M) v
(9)

where t is the period of travel 02 body A. T is its coaplete vibration

period. and v0 is the Isainun speed of body A.

Thus. it the body were to perfora vibrations relative to the center of inertia.
then on account of gravitational interaction its uses will increase for the

53
Iron onrcm. use om!
FOR OHICIAL "8! ONLY

duration of the entire period (the firet tore on the right aide of equation
(9)). On account of inertial interaction (the eecond tare). the naaa will
increeee end he reduced and reeain unchanged for the entire period (if the
effecte)of grevitationel interaction for the eaee tine are not taken into
account .

The eecond caee: Bodiea A end 3 travel eo that. an the reeult of gravitational
end inertial interaction. the path of noveeent of body A ie perpendiculer to
the line of the .ettrective force of body 3. Then becauae of the fact that

the work of the forcea of the gravitational field equale zero. the increaee
in tune will aleo equal zero. but thie notion became poeeible ae the reeult
of e combination of the inertial notion end notion cauaed by the gravitational
ettrection of body I. In thie caae notion tehee place in auch a way that with
the paeeing of tine the conditione for notion under the influence of the force
of attraction do not chenga, ea the reault of which dynamic equilibriun ie
eetebliahed for the nonentun gotten end inparted by the body. but with pre-
eervetion of the conetancy of the epeed vector in terne of eagnitude. ite ,
eenee changee continuouely. eince at eech point the Ionentue picked up provee
to be directed toward the attrecting body. An e reault. the effecte of the
force of gravity boil down to twiating of the path without the perforeance of
work. in keeping with Newton'a law. end. coneequently. without an increeae in
none.

The angle of deflection of the epeed vector during period At ie detenined
by the equation:

69-1-34 all: e.

where g ie the acceleration of the force of attraction in orbit. end «3 ie
the angle between the directione of acceleration of the force of attraction

end of velocity v .

The neen angle of deflection of the path will be twofold euller:

AQ-lgalec.
(10)

In notion in a circle with an attracting body at ite center. the angular
velocity will be conetant.

he the reeult of coﬁination of the inertial traveling apeed of the center of
inertia and the apeed of uniform travel elong the circle around it, the re-
eultont notion will take place with e linear velocity of variable eegnitude,
work will be perforned. and the seen of the body will change. If body A ie
lunch aneller than body 3 and it travele along a circle around it and the
vector of the inertial apeed of the center of inertia lien in the plane of

510
FOR ORIGIN. 033 ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the 'path of travel o1 body A. then the increaee in the mace of body A can
be deternined approxinataly by the equation (fig 2):

An 1v

7" ‘ elneu.

where v ie the linear velocity of body A. v2 ia the traveling epeed of

the cent‘r of inertia. u - 2:1 . and 1' ie the period of rotation of body
A.

 

rigure 2. Travel of Body A Along a Circle Around Body 3:
v «linear velocity of body A; vzuepeed of cantor of
i ertia: v-reaultant epeed

when there ia an angle 8 between the plane of the path of travel of body A
and the aenee of the inertial apeed vector. then the reletive increaee in naea
can be deternined by the equation:

'2‘; - 2? cosh aloe». (11)

Thus. in thin caee gravitational interaction reaulta only in twieting of the
path. and inertial interaction will be eccowenied firat by e poeitive and then
by e negative growth in can. In a conplete revolution of body A the growth

in its one will equal zero.

The actual notion of the planete of the aolar eyetel taken place in ellipeee.
which cen be conaidered a combination of the two caeee described here. When
bodies travel along parebolae end hyperbolee. their meeee increeee on eccount
of gravitational interaction. But an the reeult of inertial interaction. in
the end reeult the growth in naeaee will equal zero.

Thue. the properties deecribcd above. of a corpuacular model of gravitation
and inertia. are baeed on the following nein aeetnlptione:

55
ron ontcm. use on“
POI! OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

1. The particlee of a gravitational vacuum have a critically high traveling
epeed. which cannot be exceeded by the apead of phyeical intarectiona and
rate of infatuation propagation.

2. In inertial lotion dynaeic equilibriua ie accompliehad in the exchange of
Ioeentum between bodice and the vacuum.

3. Accelerated notion of a body relative to the vacuua ia eccoepanied by
the trenafer of mentue tron the vacuum to the body and. vice-veraa. froe
the body to the vacuum. and'by tho tranafer of neeentum from one body to
another.

Further-ore. any work of forcea ia accompanied by a change in the body'e aaee.
An increaee in the body'e maea ie accoapanied by the abaorption of eoeentua
from the vacuum. and a reduction in it, on the other hand. by radiation of it
into the vacuua. Therefore. for the corpuecular aodel of gravitation and
inertia. the love of coneervetion Iuet aleo cover a gravitational vacuum.

In the corpuacular nodal there inevitably axiate a ayeten of reference relating
to the vacuum. Acceleration (increaae in maaa and abaorption of the vacuua'a
particlee) end retardation (reduction in maea and radiation of moaantue into
the vacuua) are diecuaaed in relation to the vacuum. The very aeauqtion of
the exiatenca of a critical epaed for phyeical interactiona in an acknowledge-
aent of the fact of thia eyetea'e exietence. It ie poeaible to hypotheeiee
that the exiatence and travel of the bodiea theneelvee owe themaelvee to the
vecuua. end that when the bodice reach the critical epeed the conditione for
their exiatence duuppear («.51. But the actual notion of bodice ie deter-
nined in relation to an arbitrarily eelected eyetee of reference. 'lherafora,
an increaee in maaa can be found only in relation to the maee of the etate

of notion of the body in the eyetem of reference in relation to which the
work or increaae in eomentun are computed. The aign of the increaae in men
can be determined froa non-inertial effecte, auch ea the change in the rate
of inertial rotation, the change in the body'e weight. and the like.

gffecta of the Corpuecular Model of Gravitation and Inertia

change in Race of the Planete Veraua Their Gravitational Interaction with
the Sun

The ploneta of the aolar ayatea travel in elliptical orbita, being drawn
closer to and farther away fro. the Sun. Here the gravitational field
performs work. Regardleee of the aign of thia work. the me of the planeta
and Sun will be increaaed. l’or the ease reaaon the maea of the planeta will
increuae when they rotate on their own axee. An eatinate of these effecta ia
give in [6]. and the main reaulte of these eatimatea are given in table 1.

In calculating the increaae in Earth'a maee on account of rotation on ite
own onto. the increaae in ite danaity from the surface to ita core ia taken

into account. Por the other planete the denaity ia named to be conetant.

56
roe ontcm. use ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      
      

Table l.
1) n...°:x~mz:r:mm
IWM
Ilsa-Ora
2.06- i0'"
0 1240'"
6.54040
0.2 ‘ 10‘“
2.8-10‘"
“
Key:
1. Planet 6. Jupiter
2. Earth 7. Relative increase in less of planets
3. Mercury during terrestrial year caused by
6. Mars rotation
5. Venue 8. Around Sun

9. 0n own axis

The increase in east of planets on account of travel around the Sun takes
place unifornly. and on account of novenent on their own axes it is proportional
to the distance fro: the axis of rotation. The effect of an increase in the
less of Earth nust result in secondary effects [6). such as an increase in its
dinensions, extension of the period of rotation on its own axis. an increase in
the force of gravity on its surface. shortening of the year and an increase in
teaperature. The effect of an increase in the seas of planets should be avi-
denced in evolution of their orbits. in particular. in rotation of the peri-
helion. By an increase (cf. table 3) in the dimensions of Earth it is possible
to explain such geological facts as the correspondence in the configurations

of coastlines of neighboring continents. the apparent drift of continents.

the expansion of oceans. the young age of rocks making up their floor. differ-
ences in the structure and coaposition of the crust of continents and oceans.
and the presence of nueerous faults.

By the non-uniformity in the increase in sees in the crust it is possible to
explain orogsnesis and folding. periodic uplifts and subsidence of the ground
surface, the oblateness of Earth at its poles, and the reduction in the nunber
of earthquake centers per unit of area fron the equator to a pole. The pear-
shaped forn of the Moon can also be related to a non-uniforl increase in less.
because of the fact that it always has one side facing Barth.

Periodic Change in Mass of a Planet tron lts Inertial Interaction with the Sun

The planets and Sun travel in ellipses around a certain point noving in-
ertially. As was denonstrated above, this action. because of inertial

57
1'08 orrrcm. use ONLY
FOB OHIOIAI. US! ONLY

interaction. ehould raault in a periodic change in the aeea of planete end
the Sun. An increaee or decreeee in the naee o! the planeta takae place

on account or a corresponding change in the naea or the Sun. tor the purpoee
of ainplirying calculationa. let ua aeeune that the planete travel not in
ellipeea. but in circlea (ct. ti; 2). ‘lhen. for an epproxinate conputetion
of the relative increaaa in neaa it ia poeeihle to uae equation (11). where
VI in the linear velocity o! a planet vhen it in traveling around the Sun.
v ie the inertial velocity of the eoler ayaten relative to fixed atere.
aid 8 ie the angle between the plane of the planet'e orbit and the vector

of the eoler eyeten'e inertial velocity.

The reel valuee of v and 8 are unknown to no. It ia known very approxi-
nately that the Sun a at a velocity of 20 tile toward a point with coordi-
nataa of u - 27o‘c. 8 - 30'. Taking thia into accmt. we find an eqlitude
for the relative increaee in neaa of planets vhich ie eoneuhet too high. aince

we have aeeuned thet coe a - 1 .

 
  
   

  

 

Table 2.
6) Seen: 2
7) g;
33 3'35» 10) 2710'} 1 n
Grm- 1 03.0 -'
hm” up) :3: I
JIyua’ 16) m—oao -
15) 0 none-e my? Me.
Kay: '
1. Planet 6. Earth
2. Period of revolution around 7. liercury
Sun in terreetrial yeere 8. Venue
3. Range of relative increaee 9. Here
in naea of planet. (An/n) ° 10. Jupiter

.109 11. Saturn
4. Range of relative change in 12. Uranus
none 0! Sun under influence 13. Neptune

of a planet. (AI/n) . 101“ lb. noon
5. Range of change in period of 15. Travel aroma Barth

rotetion of planeta on their
own axee. A 0 10". e

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In table 2 are given the ranges of relative changes in the mess of planets

and the Sun. and also ranges of the change in the period of rotation of planets
on their own axes. Since the parameters of the Sun's motion relative to

remote stars have been determined unreliably. experimental data on changes in
the period of rotation of the planets on their own axes and in the acceleration
of the force of gravity can refine them. A periodic change in the mass of
planets and the Sun is apparently accompanied by periodic radiation of energy
into the vacuum and absorption of it from the vacuum. which in turn can influ-
ence the state of matter and processes occurring in the planets and the Sun.
The greatest influence on the Sun is exerted by Jupiter, with a period of
revolution of 11.86 years. The cyclicity of solar activity. with an 11-year
period. can be related to the influence of Jupiter, complicated by the influence
of other planets. primarily of Saturn, and then of Venus, Barth. Uranus and
Neptune. It is possible to hope that more careful studies of the phenomenon

of the variability of solar activity will reveal effects related to the in-
fluence of other planets on the Sun. A periodic change in the mass of planets
can result in periodic changes in the length of the day, which can be detected
experimentally. The eo-called seasonal variations in the length of the day
observed on Earth are close to those computed. Usually these variations in the
length of the day are related to seasonal movements of air messes. This re-
lationship cannot be considered totally substantiated, since seasonal varia-
tions in both hemispheres are mutually opposed and the only thing that can be
shown is asymmetry of the dry land and sea and the elliptical nature of Earth's
orbit, resulting in the fact that Earth over the course of the year drawn near
to and farther away from the Sun. When it nears the Sun. Barth's rate of ro-
tation must be reduced. and when it draws away from it, increased, as the re-
sult of the rising and lowering of air masses.

In our opinion. the major share of seasonal variations is associated with
a change in Earth's mass. Movements of air and water masses can only com-
plicate the pattern.

Periodic changes in the mass of planets must be accompanied by a change in

the acceleration of gravity at their surface. On Earth the range of these
changes can reach 6-10”6 cm/s’. Therefore. there will be nothing remarkable
about the fact that geological phenomena (earthquakes. eruptions of volcanoes)
correlate with periods of the year.

Inertial interaction of Earth and the Noon must result in an influence of the
Moon on Earth with a rather high range. Therefore, it in possible to hope
to discover on Earth the influence of the Moon on the nature of the occurrence

of various processes.
Deflection of a Light Bean by the Sun

The motion of a planet around the Sun can be divided in two: One component
in motion in a circular orbit without an increase in mass, and the other is
motion perpendicular to it with an increase in momentum and mass. The first
agrees with Newton's law. and the second exactly differentiates the corpuscular
Iodel from Newton's mathematical model. Let us find the numerical relationships

59
ron orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL 038 ONLY

between these effects. for this purpose let us consider the notion of Mercury
and Berth. In one second the incresse in Hercury's use equels Asl'hl -

- (2.2-lO‘°)/(0.76-lo7) - 2.94045.“1 . n wss assuned previously. an.
pnrticles of the gravitational vacuun trevel st the speed of light. 3.1010 cn/s.
Thon tho relative increese in nonentu—the ecceleretion-dwill equel u .

- on/eoc/t - 8.7-10'3 cn/s2 . where t is the length of e year in seconds.
Dividing this figure for eccelerstion by ordinery Newtonian acceleration in
Hercury's orbita we find thet u/g - 2.15-10‘5 . for Berth the ratio of u/g
equsls 1.37.10' . Since both one effect end the other are inversely propor-
tionel to the square of the distance. then the total proportionality letter.
the grevitetionel constent in Newton's lew. represents well their coebined
effect. So it will be until we hewe to deal with low reletive velocities for

the interscting bodies or with s week grsvitetionsl field.

Let us seems the: one of the bodies is light end we will find the bend in
its been when pessing nesr the Sun. Before beginning eny nonputetions. let
us introduce sons eseuptions.

1. Light is not eccelereted and not retarded in the grevitstionel field.

2. when the bean travels elong a line perpendiculer to the direction towerd
en ettracting body. light. as does my other body. bends it peth in keeping
with Newton's lew. i.e.. with equstion (10).

3. When the been nowes in the direction of the attrscting body. it chenges

its use end energy es s function of the change in gravitaticnsl potentiel.
i.e.. in keeping with equstion (7). where v . c acquires s nonentun of

one . directed towerd the ettrecting body. According to this. the notion of

the been cen be represented es consisting of Dtion directed towsrd the sttrect-
ing body end notion perpendiculer to it. ‘l'hus. bending of the been will con-
sist of ordinsry Newtonien. without en increese in nose. end of corpusculer.
with en increese in none.

Let us aseune thet the been in trsveling iron e ster to Berth touches the
eoler disk and that it is bent very slightly; therefore in deriving equetions
it is possible to disregard it (fig 3). Corpusculer bending of the been.
“It . in segnent As equsls:

_ Ape-09.10

where n is the angle between the line of the bean and the line to the
center of the Sun end An/n is the relative increase in ness (been energy)
coqmted by equetion (7). Substituting the vslues of n end An/n in this

equation. we find thet:

is
M. - W srcttg'ﬁ- M.

where k is the Sun's constent.

60
PO! ONICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

figure 3. Sketch for Calculating Deflection of a Light Been by the Sun

The deflection for the been found. be . tahce place on account of the col-
ponent of ite notion along the line tgward the center of the Sun. On account
of the cowonent of Newtonian notion along the perpendicular line. the bean
ie deflected in keeping with equation (10):

MIN

6'"- 2‘. “IL...” ’0‘

After integrating. we find:

.u*+h-W.‘ (tr—l).

‘l'hie equation will be accurate only in the case of alight deflection of the
been. In calculating, the following reeulte were gotten: p - 0"51 .

0. - 0"“ . and p - 0"95 . Thie deflection of the bean wee detected by
oheerving the covering of a eter by the eoler diet during an eclipee. le-
ceuee of deflection of the been. the eter will he vieible etill. when the
eoler diet obecuree fron View the etraight line froa the etar to the obeerver,
end it will becone vieible before the eolar dieh uncovere thie line. There-
fore. angle d nuet be doubled. i.e.. 20 - l"9 .

In table 3 are given the reeulte of calculatione and of experinntal deter-
ninatione of certain effecte.

Comparieon of the calculation and experimental reaulte ehowe totally eatie-
factory agreement. The rotation of the perihelion of Mercury according to

the calculated data ie eonewhet leee than the experi-ental. Thie can be
cxplained by ineufficient accuracy of the calculatione. The difference in
rceulte for the rotation of the perihelion of Earth. of 2.5 percent. ie
apparently related to inaccuracy of the experimental data. and perhape to

en inrecieely denee model of Earth. Regarding the rotation of the perihelion

of Venue the eene can be eaid an about Earth.

61
ron ontcm. use on!
FOR ORIGIN. "8! ONLY

Table 3.
Effect Celculeted Experieentel Source
dete dete experi
eentel
dete
seculer increeee in
period of rotetiou of Berth
on ite own exie in one yeer. _
eeconde (L‘sto 12.5» (10 to 15)-10 5 [2]
010'
Seculer increeee in rediue
of Berth in one yeer. en <0.2 0.6 to 1 [3]

Seculer increeee in nevi?

on eurfete of Berth. ale (2.3 to 8.5)- <1-10"

om"
Seculer reduction in period
of revolution of Berth erouad _ _
Sun in one yeer. eeconde mas-10 3 (5.3 to 6.7)010 3 [1o]
Seculer rotetion of the peri-
helion of Mercury in 100
terreetriel yeere, from erc 62.56 402.6 [8]
Seculer‘rotetion of the peri-
helion of Berth in 100
terreetriel yeere. free ere $.02 3.8 [3]
Secular rotation of the peri-
helion of Venue in 100
terreetriel yeere, free ere 6.97 8.5 [7]
Renee of eeeeonel verietion
in the period of nation of
Berth on ite ovn exle. _
eeconde (5.8 to 9.0- 1040 " [1]
40-"
Renee of eeeeoneg verietioue
in arevity. cue/e 6.10.6 -
Deflection of light been fro-
eter by Sun 1"9 2" [7]

The eetiefectory egreeeent of the eelculeted ad experimtel dete for the
rotetiou of the perihelion o‘f Eerth while toting into eccount rotetion on

62
NR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its own axis and the distribution of density within it is a strong argument
in favor of the corpuscular model of the gravitational field. Precise de-
terminations of the rotation of perihelia of the planets can give valuable
information on the distribution of density within planets. and in certain
instances on the period of their rotation. The satisfactory agreement of the
calculation and experimental results for the deflection of a_ light beam from
a star by the Sun also testifies to the correctness of the mechanism of
gravitational and inertial interaction employed in the corpuscular model.

The secular variation in the period of rotation of Earth on its own axis,
besides the growth in mass, depends on noon-Earth tidal interaction, which
results in lengthening of the day. The movement of heavy components toward
the core and of light toward the surface, on the other hand, results in
shortening of the day. Therefore, it is difficult to expect precise agree-
ment between the calculation and experimental results.

The range of periodic variations in Earth's rate of rotation agrees satis-
factorily with the experimental. The discrepancies present can be fully
explained by the radial migration of masses in the atmosphere and hyrdosphere,
and perhaps also in the substance of Earth. Tnis migration can be correlated
with the movement of other planets because of their influence on the activity
of processes in the Sun.

The experimental data on the increase in Earth's radius are highly approximate.
No less approximate also are the results of calculations characterizing only
the upper limit. Periodic secular variations in gravity have been modified
several times depending on the model used for the increase in mass. And the
experimental data which would make the selection of a model more definite
have as yet been insufficiently accurate. Improvement in the accuracy of
data on variation in gravity has been hampered not only by insufficient
accuracy of the measuring equipment, but also by interference related to
relative variations in gravity, which can be explained by relative horizontal
and vertical movements of layers of Earth. Reliable experimental data can be
gotten only by simultaneous measurements at many uniformly spaced points on
Earth. Relative variations in gravity should be much slighter at the poles
than at the equator.

As far as variations in the length of the year are concerned .(the tropical
or Bessel), it can be considered that the calculated and experimental data
agree satisfactorily, if the not too high accuracy of the experimental data
is taken into account.

In conclusion, let us summarize the above.

1. The corpuscular model of gravitation and inertia satisfactorily explains
the existence of forces of gravitational interactionoand forces of inertia,
and physically interprets the inferences of the theory of relativity.

2. This model demonstrates that our solar system, as is the entire universe,
is evolving, and explains certain geological and geophysical phenomena.

63
ron orrrcrlu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The experimental data confirl the existence in necrosystens of the effect
of an increase in use vith gravitational interaction and of a change in

use with inertial. An increase in less will evidently also take place in

a variable gravitational field (gravitational and inertial induction of less).

lo. It is a very good idea to eat up experieents with rotating bodies and
artificial satellites for the purpose of oonfiraing the corpuscular model of
gravitation and inertia. They should be set up in order to explain the mechanics
for an increase in less in a gravitational field. i.e., in addition to weighing.
a precise physical chenicsl analysis should be nsde of the uodels before the
experinent and after it.

5. It is necessary also to improve the accuracy of deternining the rate of
rotation of Earth and the other planets on their own ends and of their revo-
lution around the Sun, the rates of the rotation of perihelia and their orbits.
and the characterietica of solar activity. and to arrange for research on
geological, geophysical and biological phenomena caused by the evolution of the
solar system.

Bibliography

1. Bakulin. P.l.. Konopovich. SJ]. and Motor. v.1. "Kurs obshchey astro-
nouii" [Course in General Astronomy], Moscow. Nauka. 1976. 133 pages with
illustrations.

2. Belotserkovskiy. D.Yu. "Results of Recent Investigations of the Rate
of Earth's Rotation" in "Vrsshcheniye i prilivnyye deformatsii Zenli"
[Rotation and Tidal Defornations of Earth], Kiev. Naukova Dunks. 1970.

3. Bott. u. "Vnutrenneye stroyeniye Zenli" [Internal Structure of Barth].
Noscov. Mir. 1976. 325 pages vith illus.

6. Veselov, K.Ye. "Variation in Gravity Over line and the Corpuscular
hypothesis on Gravity." PRIMAYA GBO‘HZIKA, No 73, Hosea, Nedra.
197‘. pp 163-150 with illus.

S. Veselov. K.Ye. "So-e Geological and Geophysical Consequences of the
Corpuocular Bode). of a Gravitational Pield," PRIWAYA GEOPIZIKA.
No 80. Hoscow. Nedra. 1975. pp 200-212 with illue.

6. Veselov, K.Ye. "Geophysical Effects of the Corpuscular Model of a
Gravitational Yield." MWYA GWIZIKA. No 86, Hoscov, Nedra. 1976.
pp 121-133 with illus.

7. Ivsnenko, D. "Pundanental froblens in Gravitation" in "Noveyshiye
prohleay gravitatsii" [Recent Problem in Gravitation]. Room, 11., 1961.
pp 33-311.

6!»
ton onrcw. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. Landau. L.D. and Luau", Yam. "Ieoriya polya“ [Mold Thoory],
Moscow. Pinata“, 1960, 309 page: with 111m.

9. Ryabov. Yu.A. "thshantye nebunykh tel" [button of Heavenly Bodies],
macaw. Plantain, 1962, 213 pagu with 111m.

10. nuboohiu, 6.N.. ed. "Sprmchnoye mkovodotvo po neboanoy ukhantka
1 atrodtnmike" [Manual on Celestial Mechanics and Mtrodynutcn].
Moscow. mm. 1971. 119 pas“ with 111m.

COPYRIGHT: Izducl'uvo man. 1978

0831
cso: man/08w

65
Iron onlcm. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIOPHYSICS. W M!) SYACB

UM 550.831.23

METHODS 01' WC THE ACCURACY. W DUST“ AND HOW? CROSS
SECTION OF A GRAVIHBTRIC SURVEY

Moscow PRIWYA ctonzm in Ruesien no 87. 1977 pp 111-121
[Article by 3.1’. Surovtsev]

[Text] At the present tine there ere seversl different nethods of determining
the pnreneters of e grevinetric survey. tech of these is besed on certein
npriori eesuwtions regerding the properties of the useful signsl end noise
end in then ere utilised different criterie for detecting end eepereting the
signal. end different softwsre is used.

Let us compete severel methods of celculetion es spplies to the problem of
scenning mildly sloping pletforn structures. He know thet mildly sloping
structures creete grevity enomelies with en intensity of 0.1 egel end minim-
dimensions of 1 to 2 In [6.8]. These dete fore the beeis of ell subsequent

celculetions.

According to "‘fechnicel Instructions for Crevitetionel Prospecting Operetions."
e grevity enomely is considered reliebly identified if it is intersected by

s ninimm of two sections end is confined by s mininun of three points.
Furthermore, the root-neen-squere messurenent error nust not be greeter then
0.3 rinse the intensity of the enouly [2]. As epplies to prospecting of
nildly sloping structures, this meens thet required ere en observetion network
density of not less then 0.5 X 1 km end s survey error of 0.03 to 0.05 sgsl.
The survey scele corresponding to these pereneters equels 1:25.000. end the
isoenonely cross section, 0.25 mgel. But we here no know1edge of the elteretion
of quentitetive rsletionships between the network density end the sccurecy of
the survey [2]. Below ere presented nethods which to one degree or enother

solve those problems.

In 1958 B.V. Kotlyerevskiy suggested thet e determination be mede of the
persmeters of the smell-scele surveys widespreed et the time by neens of the
nethod of relative errors [3]. Its essence consisted in determining survey
pnreneters on the beeis of selecting specific reletive errors in the detection
of grevity enomelies end in determining the growth in these enemelies within
the linits of the chert's cross section. Apriori essigument of errors mode

66
ron orncw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it possible nutcaetically to find the network density, survey accuracy and
scale and ieoanoeely cross section required in this case.

Let us discuss this method as applies to the problem of prospecting nildly
sloping structures. we will essune that the neen distance between observation
points, a . expressed in fractions of I. . half of the linear dieensions of
the effective anomaly. varies within the range of 0.1 5 all g 1.5 , and the
survey error. a . varies Iron 0.02 to 0.15 ml.

 

Figure l. Curves for Calculating Survey Parameters by Using the nethod
02 Relative Errors 8 and D :
a—curves for equal v'a'lues of relative error E : l—o -
- 1 0.05 am; 2—9 - ,+_ 0.10 ml: 3—0 - 3 0915 legal;
h—curves tor equal increments of A12; is the nsxim

prospecting anomaly and an, is the
tion points in fractions of half the distance between adjacent

extremes); c—curves for equel values of relative error ”in :
(Caption continued on following page]

67
FOR orncm. use 0qu
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

l-P - 0.1 mgel; 2-P I 0.25 mgel; 3-P - 0.5 mgal; d-curves tor
relative error no: : l--P - 0.10 mgal; 2-P - 0.25 mgal; 3-
P n 0.50 mgal

In rig ls are given curves by means or which. tor tixed values of the relative
error in identifying an anomaly. B (0.2 and 0.6). with a selected survey
accuracy. 0 . (0.05. 0.10 and 0.15'ngl). it is possible to select the relative
network density. a/i . for the purpose of identifying the effective anomaly
with a predetermined maximum intensity. :9 . rrom consideration of these

curves it can be concluded that in idant ying an anomaly. . with an error
of o . an increase in the relative network density. alt . c rresponds to a
reduction in relative error En . end. on the other hand. in identification

of an anomaly. g2 . a simultaneous reduction in the network density (all e e)
and increase in ccurecy of the survey (o-eO) makes it possible to maintain
relative error E constant. and the same is true with a simultaneous increase

in network densigy (alt-.0) and reduction in accuracy (0 + -). Hith an assigned
network density and survey accuracy. a smaller relative error. 8 . corresponds to
a greater intensity. . and linear dimensions. 21 . and vice-vgrsa. These
dependences broaden th opportunities for selecting the network density and
survey accuracy. Furthermore. depending on specific conditions. it is possible
to modify the parameter by means of which in the specific instance it is simpler
to reach the required relative error, E. .

In determining the isoanomaly cross section and the survey scale corresponding
to it. in the method is employed an auxiliary function for the increase in
gravity. A , between neighboring observation points within the limits of

the offectlse anomaly. In fig lb are shown curves for equal values of A 0
versus the maximum intensity of the anomaly. g . and the relative network
density. s/i . The values selected for A gerve as the basis for plotting
auxiliary curves for components D and 19 of the total relative error in
determining the increase in anomaligs (Du -°§ #5:“ + ”5») within the limits
of the charts' cross section.

In fig 1c are given series of curves for equal values of conponent Dim as

a function or the relative network density. maximum intensity of the anomaly
and the increase. A 0 . between neighboring points and isoanomsly cross section.
P . All series havi been plotted for three fixed cross sections (P - 0.1.
0.25 and 0.5 mgal) and corresponding survey scales. 1:10.000. 1:25.000 and

1:50.000. The values of ”Om are determined from the curves in fig ld.

Practical determination oi the required cross section. P . reduces to the
following: a) A determination is made of the increment function, A . with

an assigned relative network density and maximum intensity of the ekgmaly.

b) A selection is made. by means or the nearest fixed value of A . of the
required curves for the c nents of the relative error. D . eh an assigned
error of D - t + . free the curves selected a defermination is made
of the requfred isodaomely cross section, P . and. consequently, of the survey
scale. too.

68
roe orncm. ass ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. the cross section and survey scale determine the degree of certainty

in finding the increment in gravity within the limits of the effective anomaly.
i.e.. the degree of reliability in determining the regularities in the nnomaly's
structure. By varying the degree of reliability within reasonable limits. it
is possible to alter the isoanomaly cross section and survey scale. 0n the
whole. the method of relative errors opens up extensive opportunities for
varying survey parameters. It makes it possible, taking into account the
equipment available and local conditions. to select those parameters which
ensure the required relative errors. E and Da . with the smallest loss of
materials. and. consequently. with the greatest savings. Among the method‘s
disadvantages must be placed the absence of procedures for determining survey
parameters in the case of detection and isolation of an anomaly commensurate
with the noise (a 1 0.5 and D 3 l ). In addition. all computations are
made within the llhits of an individually taken profile.

Let us now discuss three other methods which suggest determination of the
network density and survey accuracy on the basis of a statistical approach to
solving the problem. They are based on the following npriori assumptions re-
garding the properties of effective anomalies and noise: a) Gravity anomalies
and random observation errors are regarded as steady-state random functions
satisfying the condition of ergodicity. b) These functions are isotropic in
the statistical respect. i.e.. the second correlation factor is constant for
the entire territory considered. c) Random observation errors are distributed
according to a normal law so that their first correlation factor equals zero.

and their second correlation factor is not higher than 1.5 times the distance
between observation points.

In 1966 1.0. Sawinskiy suggested a method for finding the optimum observation
network density while estimating the certainty of detection of the subject

of the search [4]. The essence of this method consisted in estimating the
probability, P . of a sub-crose-section by the points of an orthogonal
observation neEwork for objects of elliptical shape. The author put together
tables and, on their basis. auxiliary nomograms for estimating P . in which
taking part as parameters are fixed values of the ellipse's contraction co-
efficient and of the distance between profiles. expressed in fractions of

a unit of length of the object (major axis of the ellipse). By assigning a
specific probability of detection of the object. on the basis of its dimensions.
by means of the tables (nomogrsma) is automatically found the required observa-
tion network density. A positive advantage of this method is the simplicity

of estimation, based on the criterion of certainty of detection. Purthermore.
in each specific instance the optimum certainty is determined by taking into
account the economic indicators for the cost of the job. At the same time it
should be stressed that the capabilities of this method are limited. since it
does not consider such an important characteristic as the survey's accuracy

and its relationship to the strength of the useful signal. In view of this.
the application of this method is not possible in gravitational prospecting.

in particular.

In 1967 K.V. Gladkiy suggested determining the interval. L , between observa-
tion points. which enables the achievement of equality in the r.m.a. errors

69
son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at observation points. 0 . and in the interval between than. t . 0n the
basie of this condition. for a point situated in the interval oi L/Z, he
derived an equation for the relationship between the lean statistical function
of the square of the effective anoaaly. 3(0) . the network density_autocorrela-
tion iunction. 3(a) . and the r.a.s. error at observation points, a [l]:

as...» «n+3 (I) —ts (1/2). (1)

He nade a study of this equation as applied to the problel of. prospecting
aildly sloping structures. l’or this purpose. the gravitational effect of a
nildly sloping structure is approximated by the influence of a contagt surface
with excess denaity. Ao , at a boundary located at a loan depth of a , and
having a mean statistical asplitude of z and correlation radius of R .
Taking into account the apriori assulptions discussed above. regarding the
properties of anonalies and tendon noise. the following problel has been
formulated: Bari-ate the maxim:- intervel. I. , between observation points
tasking it possible to achieve at point L/2 an r.a.e. error, c . in the value
of the My prospected. interpolated linearly, equal to the r.a.s survey
error. o .

Let us substitute in equation (1) expressions. 3(0) , for the contact surface
and network density autocorralation function, 30.) - 3(0) exp (-L2/r1) [5]-
Aiter tramforaa. equation (1) is written in the form:

where x - exp ball/2392] and K is a certain auxiliary function:

Inna-a? Vi «9(aﬁ/n.)'lt-o(aﬁln.)l:

“Evan—s; u-maoi.

Having solved this equation, unknown interval 1. can be found iron the
equation:

' v- —en:IImn x. ,
(3)

The donain for determining x in equation (2) depends on the range of variation
of the paragetgra of the contact surface characterizing the aildly sloping
structure (h, 2, kg. A ) and agrvay errors. o . In fig 2 are shown curves for
auxilia functions I: and go . which are detenined tron assigned values

for H. .R: and so.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

      

o 1—w--'r“-1 mo 1)
'5
50
-I0 \
a‘ 0 0.5 I.’ f~lf,f/¢u'

Figure 2. Curves for Estimating Coefficients _32 and go in the
Method of lquating Errors 0 and t

Key: 2
1. mgal 2. g/cm

The advantage of this method is the ability to determine an interval between
observation points which ensures equality between errors at observation points
and in the interval between them. Among its disadvantages must be listed the
limitations imposed by the apriori assumptions regarding the properties of
anomalies and noise, the factor of establishing an interval, L , for an indi-
vidual profile. and the need to solve a quadratic equation.

In 1967 A.A. Nikitin, in discussing questions relating to the detection of
slight geophysical anomalies against a background of random noise, touched
upon the problem of estimating the observation network density and the
accuracy of geophysical surveys [6]. Based on the hypothesis that errors

in detection of the useful signal involving a signal gap or the detection of

a false signal are equally probable, he suggested a relatively simple equation
making it possible to estimate the certainty of detecting a determined anomaly
against a background of random noise, in terms of area.

Let us consider A.A. Nikitin'a equation in somewhat modified form, character-
izing the certainty of detection of a determined anomaly against a back ound
of correlated noise, 0* , with a delta autocorrelation function, R - :_5§23§7 .
For N profiles (lg i 5.") and H points within the limits of each profile ‘ y
(l 3 j 1 H) intersecting the prospected anomaly, we have:

V +—‘...
?_o( n+9. +9 '

2

 

(’0)
O
where ‘D "' ”Vii! MIN—Wm“ is the probability integral.

Taking part in equation (4) are functions, 9 , for the ratio of the energy
of the prospected anomaly to the energy of the correlated noise for the i-th

profile:

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M

B; (’(m) .1

I l M: '
" 'T'W' (5)
where 'g- is the aean statistical intensity of the prospected anomaly. 3 is
the mean statistical intensity of the randon non-correlated noise. and R is
the delta autocorrolation function for the noise.

It follows tro- equations (4.) and (5) that the certainty. y . is directlz
proportional to the nsan statistical strength of the effective snot-sly. g .

and to the square root of the raster of observation points within the limits
of this anonsly. and is inversely proportional to the lean statistical strength
of the rando- non-eorrelated noise. a , and the square root of the autocorrela-
tion radius of the correlated noise. 3 .

Equation (4). taking (5) into account, can be rewritten in the torn:

N
3/3 ”20" (10/ 1/ mm .
' ‘ (6)

where (1(7) is a function vhich is the inverse of the probability integral.

 

97"
5 I
4
89.7%
3 ”.75
2 ”.05
I
0 Z O 5' d 10

Vain/r

Figure 3. Curves for hunting Network Density and Survey Accuracy
in A.A. hikitin'a Method

72
you omcm. us: our
FOR OFfICIAL USE ONLY

“—a—n

_ N
In fig 3 are shown curves for the dependence of g/o on 251‘”:
for three fixed values of the certainty. y . of detecting '“

an anomaly. It can be concluded from studying them that a different degree

of certainty in detecting the anomaly matches up with one and the same observa-
tion network density with a different degree of accuracy. Similarly, a
different degree of certainty in detection matches up with a different network
density with the same degree of accuracy. With an increase in the number of
observation points within the limits of the proepected anomaly the certainty

of its detection increases. with an increase in the autocorrelation radius

of the noise, this certainty diminishes.

This method can be employed with success in detecting slight anomalies. equal
to and slighter than the strength of the noise. and not only random non-
correlated. but also correlated. Among possible disadvantages of this method
should be listed the requirements imposed in the apriori assumptions regarding
the properties of anomalies and noise, and also the condition of equal pro-
bability of errors of the first and second kind.

All five methods discussed. for determining the parameters of a gravimetric
survey, employ the common principle of certainty in the detection of the
useful signal against the background of random non-correlated noise. This
certainty of the existence of a useful signal is a function of the accuracy
and network density of the gravimetric survey.

Let us proceed now to a comparative analysis of the certainty of signal de-
tection in the different methods.

Of course. the specifications of "Technical Instructions for Gravitational
Prospecting Operations" are fairly categorical: The signal-to-noise ratio
within the limits of the effective anomaly should be not less than three

(a 1 3). Then the certainty of detecting the effective anomaly is practically
equal to unity (0(3) - 99.7 percent). Undoubtedly. detection of the effect
of a mildly sloping structure with this certainty practically excludes the
possibility of missing it. But in the case of low strength of the effect
this imposes quite strict requirements on the accuracy of the survey. In
particular, the employment of standard gravimeters ensuring a measurement
error of 0.05 to 0.06 mgal can become simply impossible. And this. in turn.
can restrain the introduction of gravitational prospecting in the practice

of prospecting work. In addition, the instructions do not give an answer

to the question of the required observation network density and of the possi-
bility of varying it in relation to the accuracy of the survey. Of course.
in practice an attempt is always made to make more than three observations
per profile within the limits of an anomaly. But in each specific instance
this nuaber is determined arbitrarily.

In V.V. Kotlyarevskiy's method of relative errors, evidently for the first

time in domestic practice precise relationships were established between
the certainty of detecting anomalies and the accuracy and observation network

density required for this. Typically, the relative error itself, 8. - o/gn .

73
FOR OFFICIAL use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is a value representing the inverse of the eifectivec-aignel-to-noisa ratio
introduced by the instructions (a a 1/3 ). furthernore. unlike the instruc-
tione. here this value is not a fixed ode. It can vary. being bound only

at the lower liait (a g 2). The assiguent of r. autonaticslly deteraines
the required accuracy and observation network density. l'urtheraore. the
certainty of detecting the anomaly is defined as Q - 0(l/BI) . In addition.
this nethod assunes that it is possible to vary the paransters of accuracy

and observation network density while maintaining the required certainty of
detection. 0n the whole this nethod broadens the capabilities of gravitational

prospecting in iornuleting different problems.

Of all the methods emnaerated above. the lost effective. evidently. is LA.
Nikitin's nethod. This is explained by the following reasons. l'irst. here
is neat sinply expressed the relationship between survey paraneters and the
certainty of signal detection. Unlike other nethods. it can be used for
detecting anonalies whose intensity is equal to the strength of the noise and
is slighter. This aethod is the only one in which eatine'cea are Iade with
reference to area and in which the case of correlated noise is considered.
Survey parameters are detenined here on the basis of an apriori assigned
certainty of detecting the subject of the search or of prospecting. with
assigned certainty. it is possible to vary both the network density and the
observation accuracy. All this nakes it possible to roost-send this nethod
as the basic one in estimating survey parameters. in particular. in prospecting
nildly sloping structures.

Let us now discuss the certainty of signal separation against a background
of rando- non-correlated noise. Generally. this certainty is determined

by the accuracy and network density of the survey. the ratio of the useful
signal and noise strength. and the law for variation of the strength of the
useful signal. and. as a consequence of all this. by the isoanonaly cross
section and the survey scale. Pornlly. both in "Technical Instructions for
Gravitational Prospecting Operations" and in B.V. Kotlyarevskiy's nethod,
the certainty is assigned by selecting the isosnonsly cross section. In the
instructions this problem is solved on the basis of the principle that the
cross section nust equal triple the neasurenent error.

Further-ore. a necessary condition for outlining an anonely is the presence
within its linits of not less than three points obtained on independent trips.
As far as the scale of the survey is concerned, it is determined on the basis
of its foml relationship to the isoanonsly cross section chosen. The con-
dition inposed on selection of the cross section assumes a degree of certainty
in outlining anomalies with isolinee which is practically equal to unity

(9(3) - 99.7 percent). But this concerns only snonslies which are two times
greater in strength than the neaeurenent errors. Of course. this nethod cannot
be enployed for the purpose of Outlining anonalies equal to and slighter than
the noise. In other words. these enonalies will be omitted. since they will

not be outlined .

The euploynent of BA]. Kotlyarevskiy's method takes it possible in selecting
the cross section to operate with the set of parameters of the ans-sly to be

7:.
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

isolated. Tho selection of the cross section itself here depends on the
apriori assigned certainty with which we wish to isolate the anomaly in
question. 0 '- 0(l/D ) . And this certainty. in turn. depends on the selected
network density. thg accuracy of the survey and the signal-to-noiss ratio
(the law of variation of the strength of the useful signal is assigned
apriori in this method). This has a direct relationship to the problea of
isolating low-strength anomalies. Actually. this nethod establishes the
required quantitative relationships between the certainty of isolating the
effectiVe anomaly. survey parameters and the isoanosaly cross section (survey
scale). for the case when the intensity of the effective anomaly is commensu-
rate with the observation error. 0(1/0') - 0(1) .

The cmsrative analysis of eethods made here can be conducive to improving
the geological and econosic effectiveness of gravitational prospecting.

In conclusion. let us illustrate the capabilities of these methods with a
specific empla. We assure that the subject for prospecting is a mildly
sloping structure with the following parameters:

Number of gravitationally active boundaries 1
Bxcess density within limits of gravitationally active boundary.

Ap . in g/cm3 __ 0.2
Mean bed depth of gravitationally active boundary. ll , in Ian 1
Axisysuetric sutocorrelstion radius of boundary. R: . in he 2
Mean statistical amplitude of structure. 2 . in km 0.1
Linear dimensions of anolaiy of structure. 2!. __ d
Mean statistical intensity of effective anomaly. g . ngal 0.2
Maxims intensity. g . mgal 0.3
Ratio of autocorrelngion radius of noise to interval between

neighboring survey points 1.5

 

        

 
  

is)

consumed! m twp-m
enemas-earn

name A. A. "mum's
(In mulls)

VI
v

   

  
 
 
  
 
 

Walt

wet-n! turpen-
K. B. teens-ore

(I0 We»

        

7) lies-pom saus-
pssns, area

8) henna com. nu

urea
10) Cow-us p

iiocnsespsocn au-
11) sum uoaso-
soh season:

[Key on following page]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL 083 ONLY

Key:
1. Perennter 7. Harare-Int error. we).
2. Hethode 8. Network deneity. In
3. Given in technicel in- 9. Survey ecele. Igel
etructione. (by prorile) 10. Croce eection. p
lo. MI. Ketlyerevekiy'e 11. Certeinty of ieoleting errective
method or reletive eneeely

errore (by profile)
3. RN. Oledkiy'e lethod of _
equeting errore o and c

(by profile)
6. Beeed on A.A. Nikitin'e

theory or optima reception
(by eree)

In the teble ere given the reeulte ot eeti-etee by eech method. with en indice-
tion of the certeinty of detecting. 11 . end ieoleting. 72 . the effective
enoeely.

Bibliogrephy

1. Gledkiy. KAI. "Grevirervedke i negnitorecvedke" [Gravitation]. end Hegnetic
Prospecting]. Hoecow. hedre. 1967. 318 pegee with inuetretione.

2. "Inetrukteiye po provedeniyu grevieetricheekikh rebot" [Instruction on
Gerrying Out Crevinetric work]. Hoecow. hedre. 197.‘ 46 pegee with illue.

3. Kotlyerevekiy. a.v. "Betieeting the Accurecy of e Crevinetric Survey end
Selection of en Intelligent Obeervetion Network end Gravity Ieoenolely
Croee Section," PRIMAYA GOOPIZIKA. No 20, lioecow. Nedre. 1958. pp 36-
62 with illue.

lo. Neeteov. 1.1). ”Vyeolootochneye grevirezvedke" [High-Current Grevitetionel
Proepectinsl. Hoecow. Nedre. 1967. 230 pegee with illue.

5. Nikitin. A.A. "Stetieticel Detection of slight Geophyeicel ADO-.1188
Ageinet e Beckground of Benda- Noiee" in "Avtoreferet dice. ne eoiek.
uch. etep. kend. tekh. ne " [Author'e Abetrect of Dieeertetion for the
Acedelic Degree of Candidete in Technicel Sciencee]. Moscow, mm. 1967.
115 pegee with illue.

6. Sevinekiy. 1.1). "reblitey veroyetnostcy podeecheniye cllipticheekikh
ob"yektov prynnougol'noy ect'yu neblyudeniy" [Tables of Probability of e
Sub-Croee-Section for 811iptice1 Objecte with en Orthogonel Obeervetion

Network]. Hoecow. Nedre, 1966. 36 pegee with illue.

7. Serkerov. 8.A. "Invcetigetion of Optinl Trencfonetione of GravitationeI
end Hegnetic Anonelice" in "Avtoreteret diee. ne eoiek. uch. etep. tend.
tckh. neuk." Hoecow. mummy, 1965. 136 peace with illue.

76
FOR orucm use om: ‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Surovtuv. BJ’. "High-Currant Gravitucianal Prospecting 1n Scanning
and Prospecting Mildly Slopins Structures in the Central Russian: 0“. the

Russian Matron." "(MAYA GEOI’IZIKA. No 65. lbscov, Nedra. 1972.
pp 151-163 with 111W.

WIGHT: Imtel'ocw Red“. 1978

8831
cso: SIM/085%

77
pox onxcm. use any
FOR (lPl-‘ICIM. USE ONLY

I1IlII.lCA‘l‘mNS

LIST I)!" SOVIET ARTHTlJ’ZS DEALING WITH COMPOSITE MATERIALS

Mnscou (SOSUIMRSTVENNYY KWITET SOVETA HINISTROV SSSR P0 NAUKE I TEKIINIKE.
AKM‘I‘NWA NAIIK SSSR. SIGNAL'NAYA INFORMATSIYA. KOHPOZITSIONNYYE HATERIALY.
in Ruuoiun Vol 3, No 2h, 1978 pp 3-5

[Following is a listing of the Soviet entries from SIGNAL'NAYA INFOMATSIYA.
xmmsnsnmuvn: MATl-IRIALY (SIGNAL INFOMATION. COMPOSITE MATERIALS). 3
hII-liuuu'ulinic publication of VINITI. This listing is from Vol 3. No 21., 1978]

[IZXI'I'I'IILS]

1. Technology of Fusing Graphite Articles Sealed Hith Thermal Diffusion
Substances. (:oryainova. A. V.,bonchuk. 1.. i... Tatarinova. L. V. “Khin. 1
unit. mashinostroyeniye“. 1978. No. 10. 27.

’0. Patent. Method of Manufacture of Bimetallic runner Components 8y
Pressure Holding Hith Heat. Samsin, V. 0., Karakozov. E. 5.,
bureznikov. Yu. 1.. Cusev. Yu. V., Il'yevskiy. I. 1.. Aleksandr-0v. Yu. 6..
Kazhokhln. A: Be, Vusikov, 5. A0. $.01in A. It. mittiyev, 3- Po

[Hosk. vech. netallurs. in-t]. ussn Author's Certificate. (v 23 x 19/00).
No 610638, Announced 2.06.75, No 21h067l. Published 23.05.78.

'3. Patent. Method of Welding High-Alloy Steels. Denisov. 8. 5..
I'lntomv. V. H., Volkov, A. 1., Heylakh, A. l. USSR Author‘s Certificate.
(v 23 i. 9/02). No 535927. Announced 25.07.75, No 2159800. Published 1.02.78.

0. Mc-tlxxlniogy for Studying the Design Strength of Laminar and Anisotropic
Materials Based on High-Strength Aluminum Alloys. Rudnitskiy. Ye. N.,
Hiklyuyev. l’. 6.. Kudryashov, V. G. "l'ekhnol. legit. splavov”, 1978,

Nu. 8, 70-73.

M. Internal Oxidation Hhen Beating the ninetel Silver 4' Copper.
Nasturov. V. A., Pozdnyakov. V. H. "Nauch. tr. Gos. n.-n i proyekt. in-te
spluvov i obrah. tsvet. men", 1978, No. 58, 28-32.

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In. Evaluation and Analysis of Sensitivity of Monitoring, the Monoeneraetic
Electrons of Composite Materials with A Fluctuatins Content. Rudenko, V. N..
Yumln. N. 1‘. "Dufektoskopiyn", 1978, No.9, 72-82.

21. Study of the Corrosion Resistance of Plastic-clad Metal in Food
industry Enviroments. Istrntov. I. F.. Briton. l. M.. Nifan'tevs, 1.. V..
Dekhtyaronko. N. 6.. Klyachko. Yu. A. "Kormziya i ushchita met.
(Knlininnrndr'. 1978. No.6. 25-31.

2h. Contact-Extrusion Welding of Reinforced Materials Based on Low-

Density Polyethelyne. Solov'yev. V. P. "Svsrochnoye pr-vo". 1978. No. 9.
19‘h2'

M). Influence of Alloying nickel um. V-Metals 0n Netting of Graphite.
Kashin. 0. A., Dudarev. Ye. F.. Borisov, M. D. ”Somatimost' i. edgezion.
vzaimleystviye rssplavov s metallsni“. Kiev. 1978. 66-69.

(20le IGIIT' VIN ITI , 1978

7869
(:50! 1870 END

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY