FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10137
24 November 1981

East Europe Report

SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 10/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS

(POUO 10/81)

Coursurs

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Photodiode Laser Radiation Detector Described . ~
(Prentisek Lindner, ec 01.; CBSKOSLOVBRSKY CASOPIS

PRO FIZIKU, Jun 81) ...................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

PHOTODIODE LASER RADIATION DETECTOR DESCRIBED
Prague CBSKOSLOVENSKY CASOPIS PRO FIZIKU in Slovak No 3, Jun 81 pp 272-276

[Article by Frantisek Lindner, 3A2 National Enterprise, Bratislava; and Anton
Strba and Pavel Vojtek, Department of Experimental Physics, PFUK, Bratislava:
"Detection of Laser Radiation With a Semiconductor Photodiode"]

[Text] Laser Radiation Defection by the Help of Semiconductor
Photodiode

This article analyzes the possibilities for use of the 1PP7S
silicon semiconductor diode for detection of helium-neon (He-Ne)
and ruby laser radiation. The spectral sensitivity of the
diode and its range of linear response to radiation flux and
pulse energy are determined.

1. Introduction

Alongside thermal detectors such as calorimetric and modern pyroelectric detec-
tors, photoelectric radiation detectors continue to be a main topic of interest.
These devices include semiconductor photodetectors, an important feature of
which is their integrating capability, and particularly semiconductor diodes.

The magnitude Id of the current which an illuminated photodiode passes into an
external circuit can be determined from the well-known Shockley equation [1]

U
(1) la = ’r ' Io (cxpfﬁ' )

where If is the photoelectric current, I0 is the saturation current of the
diode in the forward direction at temperature T, q is the magnitude of the
elementary charge, U is the voltage across the diode, A is a coefficient char-
acterizing the p-n junction, and k is the Boltzmann constant. The photoelec-
tric current If is a linear function of the radiation flux 0 which produces it:

(2) I, - S‘o

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 81 is the spectral sensitivity of the diode. Its magnitude for a given
wavelength SA depends on the material anddesign of the diode.

2. A Detector for Continuous Laser Radiation

In practice. two ways of connecting the diode to the external circuit are most
frequently encountered, the gate connection (Fig. la) and the resistive connec-

tion (Fig. lb). In both circuits, the resistance R represents the load resis-
tance and the internal resistance of the diode connected in parallel.

In the gate circuit. the voltage U in Equation 1 is equal to the voltage UR
acnossresistance R. The increase in the current Id resulting from illuaina-
tion of the diode changes the voltage across resistance R, which in turn
affects the magnitude of the current Id. In this case the diode current Id and
the voltage UR will not be linear functions of the radiation flux 9 according
to Equation 1. Linearity is maintained only for a small voltage UR- such that
qU <<AkT. Under these conditions the second term of Equation 1 can be ignored
an the current Id will be equivalent to the photoelectric current If.

Figure 1. Connection of the Photodiode to the External Circuit: a) gate:
b) resistance

'e

In the resistive connection (Fig. lb) the voltage U is equal to the difference
between the power supply voltage "b and the voltage UR' A suitable selection
of this bias voltage Oh and the resistance R will satisfy the condition

qU
, -—— <1
(3) cm Mr

and according to Equation 1. the diode current Id will be a linear function of
the radiation flux 6 with the form

(a) I. - Sub + 1,,

Accordingly the current I can be considered a neasure of the radiation flux 0.

Because of the small nagn tude of the current, it is sore convenient to measure
the voltage UR across resistance R:

2
FOR 0FFN]A1.US£1DNLY
F0R1OFFNJAI.USE(N‘LY

(5) u‘ :- Slko + LR

The photoelectric voltage Uf - S; R. can be separates fro: the dark satura-
tion voltage ”on - 10R by intermittent illulination or one-tile illulination
of the diode. The photoelectric voltage Uf will be the pulse conponent of the
voltage "R and can easily be neasured through a buffer capacitor using an
oscilloscope or some other measuring device. The sensitivity 80 of such a
detector, which depends on "f, is

(5) 5; - S‘R

The magnitude of this quantity can be varied linearly by changing the resis-
tance R. The spectral dependence of the sensitivity 80 is governed by the
nature of S; as a function of the wavelength. Because of their spectral sensi-
tivity, connonly used silicon diodes are suitable for use in this nanner to
detect the radiation flux of He-Ne lasers.

The naxinun current which can be recorded by a detector with linear response
depends on the maxim-I value of the voltage U at which condition (3) can still
be net. The condition for the naxinun photoelectric voltage Uf - ”R - Y R fol-
lows from Equation 5. It is assuled that there is no saturation of the p to-
electric effect in the vicinity of the p-n junction. The threshold flux for
registration of radiation depends on the noise characteristics of the diode.

The properties of such a radiation flux detector using a lPPTS diode can be
seen from the experinentsl curves for photoelectric voltage Uf as a function
of the radiation flux fron an He-Ne laser which are presented in Pig. 2. In
this case. continuous He-Ne laser radiation interrupted by a Iechanical nodu—
lator was scattered by a frosted screen located directly in front of the

diode. The curves for Uf(.) given in Fig. 2 also shows the change in sensi-
tivity SO as a function of R. These curves can be used to determine the spec-
tral sensitivity of the lPP7S diode and frosted screen to Be-Ne laser light

(I . 632.8 nn), i.e.. S; - 25 21 nA/w. Thus, by a suitable choice of R. it

is possible to measure radiation flux in a range of fron 10'3 to 102 “H by this
method, which exceeds the measuring range of the TKGH-203 Czechoslovak-produced
detector now available.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. A Laser Pulse Energy Detector

The detector's ability to register single radiation pulses and the spectral
sensitivity range of the lPP7S photodiode (360 to 1,100 nanoleters) [2] lake
it possible to use the detector for detection of ruby laser pulses as well
(A - 696.3 on). But because of the large radiation flux, an attenuator must
be placed before the photodiode. This prevents saturation or suppression of
the photoeffect in the diode and assures linear response to the incident
radiation.

One suitable type of attenuator is a cavity attenuator, which is shown scheaa-
tically in Fig. 3. It consists of a hollow cylinder with circular openings in
the ends. The openings are covered by frosted screens H. One opening is used
for the radiation input and the other for the output. The radiation isprevented
from passing directly through the attenuator by lovable dial: D which is the
sue size as the input opening. The transnissivity T of the attenuator can be
changed by changing the interior coating or by varying the distance 1. between
the disk and the input opening (Table l).

--—-

———-.
-—--.

 

Figure 3. Arrangenent of Cavity Attenuator

Table l. Transnissivity of Cavity Attenuator With Different Inner Surface

Coatings
Cylinder surface Ends Disk l.(-) '1'
white white -- -- 3.6 - 10'2
white white white 40 8.8 - 10'3
Black white white 50 4.2 - 10'“

In detecting ruby laser pulses with a typical width of 10"8 sec, the intrinsic
capacitance of the diode and of the leads in Fig. 1 cannot be ignored. These
can be represented in the for. of a capacitor with capacitance C connected in
parallel with resistance R. The time constant RC of the resulting integrating
circuit makes it practically impossible to monitor changes in the radiation
flux 0 (t) during the pulse. The tine dependence of the photoelectric vol-tags
D (t) will be different fron that of the incident light pulse 9(t). Fig. It

s ows the response Uf(t) of the detector to a single radiation pulse for differ-
ence values of the ratio RC/r. The pulse has the form

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

 

- f

(7) Om - 0,. cos' (:- ' — t)

where on is the naxim flux in the pulse and r is the pulse width at the
‘4” level. The pulse duration is 21’- The aagnitude Uf(21’) of the photo-
electric voltage across resistance R after the end of the light pulse can be
expressed in the fore

(a) UAZK) - ﬁ‘ ——|,— [I - txp(—Zr/RC)]

2(32)“

where U" - 5) sun. For small values of r/llc, i.e. when Rc >> 1. Equation 8
can be siqlified as

The expression 0"! in the m-erator of Equation 9 gives the pulse energy 3.
when the integration condition RC >> 1 is maintained or, as can be seen from
Fig. 4, when RC > 101', the photoelectric voltage Uf (2r) is a measure of the

pulse energy. The integration condition can be met by connecting a capacitor
of sufficiently large capacitance in parallel with the load resistance. The

sensitivity 83 of the resulting detector can be expressed, according to Equa-
tion 9. in the form

(10) 5I = :9.l
C

When an attenuator with transmissivity T is used. the sensitivity SD! of the
detector with the attenuator is increased by a factor of T over that of the
detector without the attenuator SE

(11) SM. " TS:

The laser pulse energy 3 neasursd by a detector with sensitivity SDI! can
accordingly be determined from the measures voltage Uf(2'r)

an _%§=C

E _ .-— UR!)
so: TS. |

Since we know how to determine the pulse length r approxinately, the detector

any also he used for an approximate estinate of the maximum radiation flux in

the pulse O"- 8/1.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. Deformation of Radiation Pulse by Energy Detector Hith Different
Time Constants RC

The spectral sensitivity 8; of the 1PP7S diode for ruby laser light vith
X - 696.3 nm can be determined from the value for the 33-h! laser using the
following equation:

(13) SgnuJ ' l-335013..

For typical values, i.e., 'r ~10'3, c a: 10-9? and SA - 1.33 x 25 aA/v, the
sensitivity of the energy detector is SD! - 3.3 V/IJ. and for r “3 ' 10'8 sec,
SD. at0.l V/kw. The linear response range of the energy detector is limited
by the same factors as in the case of the radiation flux detector. The radia-
tion flux in short laser pulses can now be recorded without deformation by a
photodiode specially designed for the purpose [3]. These diodes differ fro-
the types studied here in both their design and their operating principle.

lo . Conclusion

He have shown by theoretical analysis and experinental measurements that the
1PP75 semiconductor photodiode can be used satisfactorily in a resistive circuit
to detect either continuous or pulsed laser radiation. The simplicity of the
circuit and the small bias voltage sake it possible to use the detector in
various measurement systems with either He-Ne or ruby lasers as the radiation
source. The oscilloscope recording the photoelectric voltage say in this case
replace suitable measuring devices of another kind.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Pavlov. A. V. Optiko-elektronnyye pribory [Optoelectronic Devices].
ENZRGIYA, Moscow, 1975 [in Russian].

2. Ben, J., et 31. Czechoslovenske polovodicove soucestky [Czechoslovak
Semiconductor Components], SNTL, Prague, 1973.

3. Misek J.. and Kratina, L. Optolektronikc [Optoelectronicc], SNTL,
Prague. 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Academia, Nakladatelstvi Ceskoslovenake Akadelie Ved. Prague,
1981 .

81.80
cso: 21.02/71. can

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY