FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10272
22 January 1982

Translation

RELIABILITY OF SOLID STATE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

Ed. by

I.Ye. Yefimov. LG. Kal'man and VJ. Martynov

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[J are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3E RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10272
22 January 1982

RELIABILITY OF SOLID STATE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

Moscow NADBZHNOST' TVBRDYKH INTEGRAL'NYRB SKHEH in Russian 1979 (signed
to press 7 Sep 79) pp 1-216 '

[Book by Ivan Yefimovich Yefimov, Igor' Georgiyevich Kal'man and
Vladimir Ivanovich Hartynov: 'Hard Integrated Circuit Reliability:
Second Edition, revised and supplemented”, Izdatel'stvo standartov,
15,000 copies. 216 pages]

CONTENTS

Anrhtation 1
Chapter I. Basic Concepts of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Chapter II. The Reliability of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits 16
chapter III. The Hajor Kinds. Causes and Hechanisns of Seniconductor

Integrated Microcircuit Failures 30
l. Failures related to phenomena in the voluae of the semiconductor chip 33
2. Failures which depend on the state of contact bonds 34
3. Failures due to phenomena at the chip surface 52
6. Other kinds of nicrocircuit failures 55
Chapter IV. Methods of Monitoring and Estimating the Reliability

of Semiconductor Hicrocircuits 59
5. General principles 59
6. The classification of tests 73
7. Rules for series production product acceptance 112
Chapter V. Ways of Assu.ing Semiconductor Integrated Microcircuit

Reliability 122
8. Assuring integrated circuit reliability during design 153
9. Assuring integrated circuit reliability during the

fabrication stage 157
10. Assuring integrated circuit reliability in the applications
stage 175
- a - [I - USSR - N r000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500020041-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter VI. Hetrological Support for Integrated Circuit Quality
Control and Reliability Testing

- 11. The role and place of astrological support in the quality
control system
12. Basic principles of metrological support for integrated
circuit quality control and reliability testing
13. The state inspection and departmental monitoring of
metrolugical support

14. Centralization of tests: a vay of improving the level
of astrological support for quality control

Bibl iography

l-‘OROl-‘FICMLUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020041-9
IN)! OﬁﬂﬂCJAL.USI2(MNLY

Annotation

The major aspects of semiconductor integrated circuit (IC) reliability are
treated in the book. The kinds and main reasons for Ic failures during the
production process and in operation are cited. Methods of quality control
as well as the estimation and prediction of Ic reliability are analyzed.

The book is intended for engineering and technical workers engaged in the
production and utilization of semiconductor Ic's, and will also be useful
to students in the VUZes and technical schools for the appropriate special-
ties. There are 31 figures, 26 tables and 186 bibliographical citations.

Table of Contents LOtiginal pagination]

chapter I. Basic Concepts of Semiconductor Integrated CirCuits 3
Chapter II. The Reliability of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits 17
Chapter III. The stor Kinda, Causes and Mechanisms of Semiconductor

Integrated Hicrocircuit Failures 31
1. Failures related to phenomena in the volume of the semiconductor chip 34
2. Failure; which depend on the state of contact bonds 35
3. Failures due to phenomena at the chip surface 56
4. Other kinds of ndcrocircuit failures 58
Chapter IV. Methods of Monitoring and Estimating the Reliability

of Semiconductor Microcircuits 62
5. General principles 62
6. The classification of tests 77
7. Rules for series production product acceptance 120

Chapter V. Ways of Assuring Semiconductor Integrated Microcircuit

Reliability 129
8. Assuring integrated circuit reliability during design 169
9. Assuring integrated circuit reliability during the
fabrication stage 174
10. Assuring integrated circuit reliability in the applications
stage 194
- 1 -

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(3NLY
FOR OFFICIALrUSEICM‘LY

Chapter VI. Metrological Support for Integrated Circuit'Quality

Control and Reliability Testing 196

11. The role and place of netrological support in the quality

control system 196
12. Basic principles of netrological support for integrated

circuit quality control and reliability testing 197
13. The state inspection and departmental monitoring of

netrological support 206
16. Centralization of tests: a way of improving the level

of metrological support for quality control 208
Bibliography ' 210

- 2 -

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(HHLY
FINICMHWCJAL.USEGMNLY

Chapter I. Basic Concepts of Semiconductor Integrated Hicrocircuits

A semiconductor integrated microcircuit takes the form of an electronic circuit
produced in a monolithic semiconductor chip. The various regions of the chip func-
tion as independent active or passive circuit components, which are coupled to--
gether by a system of thin film conductors. Such a monolithic circuit, as a rule,
is enclosed in a hermetically sealed package. where the electrical connections
between the contact areas of the circuit on the_chip and the package leads are
usually made with gold or aluminum conductors.

Modern technological methods, used for the construction of IC's, make it possible
through the use of the properties of semiconductor materials to fabricate both the
active components (transistors, dipoles) and the passive components (resistors,
capacitors) of the circuit in the volume and on the surface of a single chip. The
techniques of epitaxial build-up-of semiconductor material layers, photolithographic
etchings, dopant impurity diffusion, oxidation, thin film deposition and other
technologies are employed for these purposes.

Certain 16 components are depicted scheastically in Table 1 which are produced by
planar epitaxy with insulation using p-n junctions. Various combinations of active
and passive components are used to realize monolithic IC's for various functional
purposes.

From a structural standpoint, Ic's have come to be conventionally broken down into
two classes. The first class is logic or digital circuits, which are used basic-
ally in digital computers and controllers (l. 2. a]. In an integrated circuit
design, the circuits of this class are realized both in-the form of individual
logic elements (gates) of the following types: "RAND", ”NOR","NAND/NOR", etc., as
well as in the form of more complex elements (flip-flop, buffer circuits, half-
adders, counters, etc.).

The second class 16': is comprised of linear or analog circuits. These include
primarily different kinds of amplifiers (multistage, differential, operational,
video amplifiers, read amplifiers, analog switches, etc.). It is more difficult
to make such microcircuits in integrated circuit form. The reason for this con-
sists in the lack of integrated circuit inductive components and in the high
requirements placed on the precision of IC resistors.

The major advantages of linear integrated circuits as compared to analog circuits

using discrete components are the improved temperature stability (related, in par-
ticular, to the identical nature of the characteristics of planar transistors).aa
well as the favorable capability of realizing negative feedback. This is respons-
ible for the high operational reliability of linear IC's.

There is yet another class of integrated circuits which takes the form of a unique
"hybrid" of integrated circuits of the first two classes. These are linear

pulse IC's, which usually include various current drivers. Logic gates are in-
serted at the input to these Ic's (for example, TTL circuitry), while analog
current pulse drivers with a high power dissipation level are inserted at the

- 3 -

F0310FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
. u G: D t
' 3". ‘ n-nm:
c I:Z':D 3‘ @ n-channel

-1...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

output. The production technology for linear pulse IC's does not differ from
the technology used in the fabrication of logic and linear IC's.

We shall treat in somewhat more detail the first class of microcircuits. The
following logic gates have become the most widespread at the present time [1, 3-6]:

--Resistor transistor or current switching circuits (PTTL), and HOS transistors
of the same type of conductivity.

The increase in the functional complexity and level of integration cf integrated
semiconductor circuits required the modification of existing circuit designs

and the creation of new ones which make it possible to substantially improve the
characteristics of the basic logic elements and large scale integrated circuits
(LSl's), designed around them (reduction in the power dissipation, increase in
the circuit speed. reduction in the area of the basic logic gates. etc.). As

a result, such logic circuits as the following are being developed and placed

in production [10-15]:

dified transistor logic (with a supplemental transistor in the output circuit):
T 3
--Integrated injection logic: 12L;

--Emitter follower logic: EFL;

-Logic using complementary HOS transistors: CMOS;
--Logic using charge coupled devices: CCD's, etc.

Logic circuits are most easily realized in integrated circuit form. Because of
the fact that the logic devices (modules, assemblies) of electronic digital
computers (ETsVH) can be put together from identical functional components. the
finite series of logic IC's needed for computer construction consists_of a
comparatively small number (5 to 20) of standardized circuits. The use of Ic's
as digital computer components which, as a rule, operate in the milliwstt and
microwatt power ranges. improves their operational reliability. This, in parti-
cular, has been responsible for the predominant development of logic IC's as
compared to linear ones.

The constant striving towards microminiaturization of integrated circuits led to
the fact that the component layou" density on a microcircuit chip increased by
more than three orders of magnitude over a decade (from 1962 through 1972). In
this case. the increased level of integration of IC's was achieved b increasing
the chip dimensions (from 1 mm2 in 1962 to approximately 6 msg

1973), reducing the averaged size of the components and the spacings between them
on the chip (from 2 . 10- in 1962 to 1 . 10-3 an in 1973) and
using multilevel interconnections, which made it possible to approximately quad-
ruple the ratio of the actually utilized area to the overall area of the IC chip
[17].

Component miniaturization became possible only because of the refinement of the
fabrication technology processes for IC's and optical production process equip-

ment which makes it possible to use precision photographic templates for quite
sizeable areas.

- 5 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600020041-9

332.95.3- 5 2—32.83;

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. in. a in .
2.... 8. 82 2|. 21. 87a 8:2 .33 s. 5‘93»... hum! AS
a ||..| [I'llllleIIla' v .lllﬂ-ﬂrz'nﬁ 3v
.III Isl v llhllll. s o a .3383 w...- A3
IIII dual So... Illa: ||86| «86 lall .515!!- g A3
« Illalll a a Ilnlll .8388}... 888.33. SO

 

 

“ II
a... G 82... 3.7.5... 3.7.3 8.6 5.7:...

0:0 waduwuhOUOQhwzu
““0“” SHEA USmI—b—L. gal—59m ﬁg ungLuothU “QueuOAop—zouhr
.103: u nun—Ewan 8
c . é .23: cages-nob

3.88 a: 3:950 no «an.

A3

"I

’IQI

 

3

 
 

 

3.39:0 noun.— 35 35:28:
39.7.39.— uo 33353328 03339.50

3.333. 3 cum: @399 030.. owmam

 

. N man—«G.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020041-9
FORtOFFﬂﬂA1.USEiONL¥

As a result of working out the engineering design solutions and the fabrication
technologies for logic integrated circuits, considerable progress was achieved

in the field of microminiaturization of electronic systems. Individual printed
circuit boards with logic IC's, combined in the modules and assemblies of digi-
tal computers, are being replaced at the present time by series and random

access memories (2U), logic gates with an arbitrary structure and microprocessors,
made on individual chips. i.e., realized in the form of LSI's [10].

The basis for the achievements in the field of systems engineering is the exten-
sive set of technologies. which are distinguished by their diversity and caps-
bilities of improving the qualitative characteristics of IC components.

n‘EJBb C, E, B

'1’”, r In a ,, _ . r , Illlll’llll

act:

     
  
   

      

   

I/ Ilyll, r .

' - r , , ll; . . [Ir/74
£5 gﬁinmsxzszilllz/ 4!,
/ ’I/I’I/I/[II/I/I’II/l’l” I 61 b

Figure l. (a-e). Transverse sections through planar transistor structures,
fabricated using various technologies.
Key: 1. Silicon:

2. Silicon dioxide;

a. Triple diffusion (3 D technology);

b. Epitaxial collector (planar epitaxial technology with insulation
of the elements by p-n junctions);

c. With dielectric insulation;

d. Insulation created during collector diffusion (CID technology);

e. Isoplanar technology (with insulation of the elements by a

dielectric).

The topological drawings and technological characteris ics of various four-input
basic logic gates. realized in the form of TTL, ECL, I L and M08 structures are
shown in Table 2 to compare the capabilities of the various technologies [11,12].

The maximum functional density (number of circuit functions per unit of chip
area) is limited by the amount of power dissipation or the area occupied by the

transistors, interconnections and passive elements [9]. Thus, the maximum pack—
aging density of an IC is obtained with a minimization of the supply voltage and

- 7 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFHJAI.USE(NULY

the geometric dimensions of its components. Since the minimum size of the major
10 element (transistor) is governed by the "closure" effect (the mutual overlap-
ping of depleted layers when the supply voltage is raised), to further reduce

IC dimensions. it is necessary to increase the doping concentration of the
diffusion regions of the structures with fine layers.

Cross-sections through planar transistor structures fabricated using various
technologies are shown schematically as an illustration in Figure l (a-e):

--Triple diffusion (3 D technology) (Figure l a);

--lnsulation created during collector diffusion (CID technology) (Figure l d);

--Isoplanar technology (with the insulation of the elements by a dielectric)
(Figure l e).

The technologies for fabricating integrated semiconductor circuits have been
treated in detail in domestic and foreign literature [7. 2, b, S. 8]. For this
reason, in this section we will deal with questions of IC fabrication technology
only in order to discuss the major factors governing their reliability.

Planar technology methods are used to construct lc's (doping impurity diffusion,
plate oxidation and photolithographic etching of an oxide film. thin film
deposition, etc.), which make it possible to obtain individual circuit compo-
nents and make electrical connections between the components by means of thin
film conductors ("metallization"). A combined technology is used when fabrica-
ting resistors with high nominal values and having a small scatter in their
characteristics. A distinctive feature of combined technology is the fabrication
of resistors by means of deposition on the surface of the semiconductor structure.
created by planar epitaxy, of a thin film of material with a high specific
resistance.

Silicon usually serves as the main semiconductor material used in the fabrication
of IC's. The use of silicon assures good producibility of the devices in the
fabrication process using planar technology methods. In this case, the execu-
tion of the oxidation and photolithography operations on silicon is substantially
simpler than when other semiconductor materials are used. Moreover, the opera-
tional temperature range of semiconductor devices made from silicon is signifi-
cantly wider than for germanium devices. However, the merits of silicon do not
preclude the possibility of using other raw materials in some cases.

We shall consider one of the basic technological processes in the fabrication
of IC's using planar epitaxy with insulation of the elements by p-n junctions
and one-level metallization.

A chip of p-type silicon with an epitaxially grown layer of n-type silicon on
it and locally formed hiddenn+'type layers. located at the "epitaxial film--
substrate" separation boundary in the regions of the future transistors of the
16’s for the purpose of improving their electrical parameters serves as the
starting material in this case.

Using group techiques, by means of alternate oxidation, photolithography, diffus-
sion and deposition operations. several hundreds of chips are produced simultan-
eOusly on this plate, where each of the chips takes the form of a complete

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

microcircuit. After this, the plate is cut into individual chips and each chip
is mounted in a package. Then the packages are hermetically sealed and the
quality control and sorting of the finished 16's are carried out.

Cross-sections through such an It: in various stages of the technological process
of its fabrication are shown schematically in Figure 2 (a-f). For the sake of
simplicity, only the transistor structure and diffusion resistor are shown.
Diodes, as has been noted, are realized on the basis of the transistor structure
by using its individual junctions ("emitter-base" or "collector-base"). The
typical production process consists of the following main operations:

«Oxidation of the plates of the starting material (Figure 2a);

«Photolithographic etching of the oxide film to produce the configuration of
the insulated regions:

«Stage I of boron diffusion (infusion - the application of the boron);

«Stage II boron diffusion (dispersal - the insulating diffusion of the boron
through the entire thickness of the epitaxial layer) and oxidation of the
silicon (Figure 2b);

«Photolithographic etching of the oxide film to create "windows" underneath
the base regions of the transistors and underneath the diffusion resistors;

«Stage I boron diffusion (application of the boron to the surface of the bases
and resistors);

«Stage II boron diffusion (dispersal of the dopant to the requisite doping
depth of the base«collector junction) and the oxidation of the silicon in the
"windows" (Figure 2c);

«Photolithogrsphic etching of the oxide film to create "windows" underneath the
emitter regions and the contact areas of the collector;

«Stage I phosphorus diffusion (application of the phosphorus to the surface of
the emitter areas and the collector contacts);

«Stage II phosphorus diffusion (dispersal of the dopant to the requisite doping
depth of the emitter-base junction) and the oxidation of the silicon in the
"windows" (Figure 2d)*;

«Photolithographic etching of the oxide film to create "windows" underneath the

contacts (Figure 2e);
--Deposition of a thin aluminum film;
«Photolithographic etching of the aluminum to shape the requisite configuration

of the internal circuit wiring between the components (Figure 2f);
«The melting—in of the aluminum;

«The cutting of the plates into chips;
«Sorting and rejection of the chips (finished IC structures) with respect to

the electrical characteristics as well as visually;

«Mounting of the chip on the package base;

«Heat compression or ultrasonic welding of wire leads to the contact areas on
the chip;

«The welding of the wire leads to the external package leads;

«The hermetic sealing of the IC;

«Technological testing of the IC;

«Sorting and rejection of the IC's with respect to the parameters.

 

*The stage I and II phosphorus diffusion operations can be combined in a single
process.

-9-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

............... ;.;.'.>\\-. - -

........ \‘,v.‘.‘.'.'.n'.

 

, the photoresist, is
h the figure is

-10-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORioFFKJAl.USE(NULY

transferred from the photographic template to the photoresist layer by means of
contact or projection photographic printing. Ultraviolet irradiation of the
photographic layer increases the speed of photoresist dissolution in the
developer. During the developing process, the exposed portions of the photo—
resist are dissolved in the developing solution. After thermal hardening - the
polymerization of the remaining photoresist - an acid resistant mask is obtained,
which makes it possible to etch the oxide (or metal) film in the areas not pro-
tected by the photoresist, and thereby obtain in the oxide (or metal) film the
figure corresponding to the photographic template. When the oxide etching
process is completed, the plate is cleaned of the photoresist, after which the
plate with the corresponding figure in the oxide is sent on for the doping
impurity diffusion operation (or the operation of melting in metal). The dif-
fusion of doping impurities is intended to create regions of p or n conductivity
at the appropriate points in the chip. The doping impurities diffused into the
chip at points free of the oxide, which makes it possible to localize the impur-
ities in the corresponding regions of the semiconductor material and thereby
create the requisite circuit components.

For the purpose of having better control of the diffusion process, it is usually
accomplished in two stages. The impurity is initially applied to the surface of
the plates, which then goes into the shallow surface layer of the silicon
through the "windows" in the oxide (Figure 3). After this, the plates are
annealed at high temperature in an oxidizing gas medium, the so-called dispersal
of the impurity. In this case, the impurity diffuses down to a specified depth,
producing the requisite diffusion profile, while the oxide film which appears
protects the surface of the plate and the p-n junction being created against
exposure to the environment.

He shall now analyze the process of fabricating a silicon IC step by step.

After the oxide film is applied to the plate of the original silicon, it is
photolithographically etched to produce the configuration of the insulating
regions. As as result, grooves are created in the oxide film which expose the
silicon for the diffusion of the p-type doping impurity in these regions, some-
thing which is essential for the creation of electrically insulated n-type
"pockets". in which the individual integrated circuit components will be fabric-

ated in subsequent stages (Figures 3a, b).

Windows underneath the base regions and underneath the diffusion resistors are
created in the second photolithographic stage in the corresponding insulated
portions of the structure. The resulting figure on the oxide film should pre-
cisely match the relief obtained as a result of the first photolithography.

The next diffusion of the p-type doping impurity is necessary to produce the
base collector junctions and the regions of the diffusion resistors. The holes
created in the oxide by the preceding photolithographic etching are covered
with an oxide layer, which is grown thermally during the second stage of boron
diffusion (Figure 3c).

In the subsequent step, the third photolithographic etching is accomplished for
the purpose of creating "windows" underneath the emitter regions and the

- 11 -

FOI.0FIWCJAL.USIZ(HVLY
ﬁORloFFNJAl.USE(MVLY

contact areas of the collectors. It is absolutely necessary in this case that
the new pattern of the photographic template completely match the already

existingpattern on the oxide layer.

(——
.—

, .—
n“\\\\\‘“~\\\\\\\\‘“\\\\ \\\\\\\\ \\\\
ulnar—aunannranuyw ,,,,,,,,,,,,

i‘mil I

 

Figure 3. Defects in integrated circuits related to photolithography

defects.
Key: 1. Silicon;

2. Silicon dioxide;

3. Photoresist;

4. Photographic template;

5. Ultraviolet radiation;

6. Scratch on the photographic template:

7. Dust particle;

8. Aluminum;

9. "Base-emitter" short circuit;

10. p-n junction with low breakdown voltage;

11. "Emitter-collector" short circuit;

12. Diffusion tube, diffusion resistor break.

The next phosphorus diffusion produces n-type regions needed for making the
emitters of planar transistors and the regions of contacts to the collectors,
which makes it possible to improve the characteristics of the corresponding
ohmic contacts (Figures 3d, e).

Then the fourth photolithographic etching is carried out, during which "windows"
are created in the oxide underneath the contacts to all elements of the planar
structure formed during the preceding operations in the production process cycle.

After this, the internal circuit connections are made between the individual
components (Figure 3f). For this purpose, an aluminum layer is initially

- 12 -

FM)! OﬂﬂﬂCJAl.lEﬂE(NVL3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deposited on the entire surface of the plate, and then by means of photolitho—
graphy the unnecessary aluminum is removed, as a result of which, the requisite
pattern of connections between components is produced. The operation of melting
in the aluminum promotes an improvement in the adhesion (sticking) of the metal
film to the surface of the substrate. as well as an improvement in the character-
istics of the ohmic contacts. At this stage, the production process for produc-
ing the structure of the integrated microcircuit is essentially completed. Sub-
sequent operations, as has already been noted, are carried out to break the

plate up into chips, mount the chips in packages, hermetically seal the packages
and check the characteristics of the finished IC's.

To realize all of the advantages of semiconductor microelectronics which assure
a high level of 16 quality and reliability while maintaining a high percentage
of good product output, careful handling of all of the technological operations
and the assurance of effective monitoring of the 16 production process are
essential. This is especially important in the production of integrated circuits
with an increased level of integration. The task is facilitated significantly
by the fact that the technological operations and the equipment used are of

the same type, which makes it possible, first of all, to standardize the produc—
tion process using a limited number of basic technological processes for IC
fabrication, and secondly, to provide for effective control of the production
process and thereby achieve high IC quality and reliability.

The following play a large role in IC production: the purity and perfection of
the crystalline structure of the semiconductor materials; the careful proces-
sing of the plates, which provides for high purity of their surface; the use '
of ultrapure chemicals, water and gases; high photographic template quality
(strict tolerances for the geometric dimensions, no damage to the pattern of
the photographic layer and "compatibility" of the set); and precision in the
combining operations.

All of these requirements follow from the major feature of the production of
integrated circuits with a high layout density of the circuit components on a
single chip. If only one dust particle of micron size or diffusant particle
gets on the surface of a planar structure during the diffusion (Figure 6a),
oxidation (Figure 4b) or photolithography. it can lead to the disruption of the
requisite diffusion profile and the appearance of so-called "diffusion tubes"

or to a degradation of the oxide film quality (punctures, holes), which serve as
the cause of short circuits, elevated leakage currents and a reduction in

breakdown voltages.

The presence of dirt and moisture in the energy vehicles, for example, in the
oxidizing or inert gases. has a negative impact on IC quality, since the masking
and passivating properties of the oxide film are sharply degraded in this case.
something which, in the first place, significantly reduces the output percentage
of good circuits. and secondly, can lead to the most diverse IC failures during
their testing and operation.

Dislocations, microcracks, sections with a nonuniform doping impurity distribu-
tion and other microdefects in the crystal lattice of the initial semiconductor

- 13 -

FOR OFFICLAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arr/”nu. . _ V . [It/zlrlnnmt:

n ,_-;:- ’ .-

    

(b )‘

Figure 1.. Defects in integrated circuits related to diffusion defects.
Key: 1. Silicon;
2. Silicon dioxide;
3. Dust particle;
In. Diffusant (donor) particle;
S. Diffusion tube, diffusion resistor break.

material are causes of the appearance of potentially unreliable integrated cir-
cuits, especially in the case where the indicated defects occur in the region
of the active components of IC's or prove to be close to the p-n junctions.

The precision in combining the templates in the photolithography process, which
is due to the great layout density, is of exceptional importance in the produc-
tion of IC's. If a useful output of 0.85 to 0.9 is obtained after each super-
imposition operation. then following the fourth combination photolithography
process, the quantity of rejects because of just one unsatisfactory Combining
operation will amount to 35 to 50 percent (in practice, this quantity will be
less since several defects occur in the same structure).

It should be noted that when fabricating the contact connections, a whole series
of difficulties come up, which are related. first of all, to the complexity of
producing intersecting connections, and secondly, to the appearance of parasitic
capacitances between thin film conductors positioned close together, the length
of which can reach a significant value in complex circuits.

One of the most important problems which occur in IC production is the problem
of insulating circuit components. The choice of the method of insulation plays
a substantial part from the viewpoint of both the fabrication technology and

the quality and reliability of the finished IC's, since the insulation determines
the parasitic feedback loops (leakages, parasitic capacitances, etc.) between
the circuit elements. The method of insulating elements with isolating p-n
junctions was described above. Other techniques of element insulation are

also possible, for example, using a layer of silicon dioxide.

The design of high quality and high reliability 16's is a complex problem. The
fabrication technology for IC's gives them advantages over semiconductor devices

-11.-

'ma omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and other electronic technology products. However, these advantages can be
realized only given the condition that all of the specific features of IC pro-
duction are carefully taken into account and with the comprehensive resolution

of several structural design and technological problems.

-15-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter II. The Reliability of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits

In integrated semiconductor circuits, the active and passive components are com-
bined in a monolithic chip and manufactured in a single technological process.
This is responsible for their high liability [1, 2, b, 18, 19].

Planar technology is employed in the fabrication of 16's, which provides for
good protection of the p-n junctions against the impact of the environment.
Hicrocircuits, as was noted in Chapter I, are fabricated using a group technique,
in which several hundreds of semiconductor IC chips are produced on one plate of
semiconductor material under identical conditions and production modes. The
hermetic sealing of the finished functional unit, which is the integrated cir-
cuit, in a single package makes it possible to simultaneously protect the

entire set of circuit components against exposure to the environment. It is
anticipated in this case that the reliability of a circuit enclosed in a single
package will increase with increasing circuit complexity and number of compo-
nents, figured on a per function basis.

The comparatively small quantity of standard technological operations, the con-
tinuity and closed nature of the fabrication process for integrated circuits,
within the bounds of a single production line, allow for the maximum automation
of the fabrication and quality control processes, a reduction in the probability
of allowing errors and the achieving of uniformity in product quality. As com-
pared to semiconductor production, well organized integrated circuit production
is characterized by a smaller scatter in the parameters and characteristics of
the finished product.

The relatively small number of contact connections in integrated circuits as

compared to circuits designed around discrete semiconductor devices and other
electronic hardware components, and the more sophisticated fabrication tech-

nology for integrated circuits are also responsible for the high reliability

of the solid state devices.

Thus, integrated circuit reliability proves to be approximately equal to the
reliability of a single transistor, meeting the most modern requirements, while
the application of IC's opens up broad possibilities for further improving
equipment reliability. Comparative data on the reliability of several radio-
electronic assemblies, constructed using various components, are given in Table
3 [20]. An analysis of these and other data makes it possible to draw the con-
clusion that in the integrated circuit variant, the radioelectronic assemblies
have a reliability which is two to three orders of magnitude greater than the
reliability of similar devices designed around vacuum tube and semiconductor
devices.

It should also be noted that the increase in the functional complexity and
level of integration of 16's, related to the increase in the number of compon-
ents in one device, up to a known limit (up to the level characteristic of
circuits using discrete components) does not reduce its reliability. Thus. for
example, if the failure rate at normal temperature is 10'7 hr' , and at a

_ 15 -

FOI.0I1ﬂ(1Al.USElJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 3. Comparative Data on the Reliability of Radioelectronic Equipment
Assemblies Constructed Using Various Components (Failure Rate in

hr‘lz
Discrete Semiconductor Device -
ngponents Integrated

Radioelectronic _
Equipment . Vacuum
Unit (or Device) Tubes
Flip-flop 5.1'10'4
Half-adder 6.7-10’“
"HAND" gate 5.6'10'4
J-K Flip-flop 9.2'10"

Ordinary Accep- Following Special Circuit
tance Testing Selection
5.3.10'5 3.7.10”6 s.s-1o‘7
3.9-10'5 1.7-10'6 8.5-10’7
3.9-10'5 2.4-10‘6 8.5-10'7
9.5-10'5 5.1-10'6 3.5-10'7

temperature of +85’ C is equal to 6 - 10'7 hr"1 (which corresponds to the relia-
bility of a series produced plan-r silicon transistor) for a microcircuit.
equivalent to a radioelectronic circuit consisting of 20 discrete components,
then a rsdioelectronic circuit incorporating 10 such transistors and other

components will have a failure rate A of (l--6) ' 10'

6 hr’l.

This clearly

illustrates the advantages of semiconductor IC's as components for equipment.

Besides the considerable reduction in the number of components, with the use of
IC's in equipment there is a substantial reduction in the number of different
kinds of connections, something which also leads to a reduction in its failure

rate.

As is well known, contact connections have an impact on the reliability of any
device. This is explained by the fact that device or equipment reliability is
composed of the reliability of the elements comprising the device or equipment,
For the case of independent failures, this func-

tion is written in the following expression:

as well as their connections.

k

1
*total‘ ' 1Elueixei +3£1chdcj

where dtotal is the integrated circuit (radioelectronic equipment unit) failure

rate;

lei: he: is the failure rate of the i-th integrated circuit (or_device)
component and that of the j-th contact connection between the

components;

N , N is the number of components incorporated in the integrated cir-
ei cj
cuit (or the electronic equipment unit), and the number of connect-
ions between them.

It is apparent that the use of IC's leads to a sharp reduction in the number of
welded and soldered connections between various components, figured on the
basis of the function performed.

It is specifically for this reason, that despite the fact that welded contact
connection reliability is usually less than the reliability of other structural

_ 17 -

FOR 0FF1C1AI.UGEI(HVLY
FOR(MHWCJAI.USE‘0NLY

elements of monolithic IC's, by virtue of the smaller number of contact connec-
tions per unit function which is performed, the reliability of IC's as a whole
is better than the reliability of similar electronic products for a similar
functional purpose, designed around other components.

For the same reason, the reliability of radioelectronic equipment units designed
around 10's is several orders of magnitude higher than the reliability of equip-
ment designed around discrete semiconductor devices, and the "gain“ from the

use of IC's increases with their increasing level of integration and functional
complexity.

An important factor which has a favorable influence on the operational charac-
teristics and reliability of IC's is their low weight. This is due. on one

hand, to the good mechanical qualities of both the IC's themselves and the
equipment designed around IC's (strength and immunity to the impact of vibration,
shock and linear loads). 0n the other hand, the miniature dimensions (and low
power consumption) create the prerequisites for improving radioelectronic equip-
ment reliability by virtue of providing for redundancy.

An finally, the use of IC's as the component base for radioelectronic equipment
reduces by many times the possibility of decreasing equipment reliability,
related to the incorrect use of the components. This possibility is due pri-
marily to just the technical clarity of the use of integrated circuits. The

more discrete electronic products are replaced by IC's, the lower the probability
of making mistakes when installing and aligning equipment.

In step with the refinement of the structural design of IC's, their fabrication
technology a; well as the accumulation of experience with the manufacture and
operation of radioelectronic equipment designed around IC's, a substantial
improvement is being observed in the quantitative indicators for the production
and operational reliability of IC's.

The IC reliability level achieved at the present stage of integrated circuit
electronics development is characterized in different cases of 1c applications
by a nonfailure operating probability of 0.999 - 0.9999 in 10,000 hours.
According to some data obtained from the sphere of Iadioelectronic equipment
operation, the failure rate of IC's is 7 ' 10'9 hr' at a confidence level of
0.6 [21, 27, 28]. ' '

The service life of solid state semiconductor devices is significantly greater
than the service life of other electronic equipment products. At the present
time, accepted practice is to guarantee a service life for IC's of 10,000 to
15,000 hr. An improvement in the quality of the package protection for Ic's,
an increase in the reliability of their contact connections up to the level of
the reliability of the semiconductor structures, a further increase in the
quality of the active elements and the stability of the surface properties of
planar structures as well as the absolute observance of the requirements of
the technical specifications and standard setting documentation during opera-
tion will make it possible to achieve the ultimately possible service life
and reliability of IC's.

- 13 _

FOI(MﬂﬂChtLIEIZONLY
A1hKD380'IVIJIIdO'IOH

TABLE 4. Generalized Data on 0.8. Integrated Circuit Reliability

Maximum value of
the failure rate for
Volume of t e a confidence leVel

 

Tempera- tests, x 10 of 0.6 and higher,
Conditions ture °C circuit-hr hr'1
IC operation as part of
radioelectronic equipment - More than 35 (0.7--90) ° 10'8
Service life tests of 10's 25 More than 1 (0.6-6.7) . 10-7
Operation of minicomputers
using nos LSI 55 About 5 0.8 - 10'7
Service life tests of 10's as-125 More than 7 (0.16-18.0) . 10--6
The same 125 More than 1.1 8.‘ ' 10"8
The same 125 About 4.3 2.2 - 10-8
The same 150--2oo More than 0.6 (o.02-5.0) - 10‘5
Field tests - More than 0.5 1.8 ' 10'6
Accelerated stepped tests 125-200 More than 0.9 6 - 10'6
Storage 25 More than 1.7 5.6 - 10-8
The same 150 More than 9 0.63 ~ 10-7
The same 150--175 More than 3 (2.2--2.9) ~ 10-6
The same zoo-3oo More than 1 (0.9--2.4) - 10-5

 

Generalized data on 10 reliability, obtained from tests of 10's and during opera-
tion of radioelectronic and other equipment and instruments using these compon-
ents, are given in Table 4 [20-28, 30]. And the curves shown in Figure 5 demon-
strate the reduction in the failure rate of semiconductor IC's made by Texas
Instruments Inc. during l961-1973. The reliability of series produced products
has grown by several orders of magnitude over the past decade. As far as micro-
circuits produced in accordance with special programs for particularly important
facilities are concerned, the growth in their reliability is characterized by
even more impressive figures [27].

The convincing success in achieving the high "natural“ reliability inherent in
solid state components gave the specialists of the above mentioned company the
incentive to intoduce a new measurement unit for the integrated circuit failure
rate into everyday practice. Since in operating with the measurement unit
adopted in the 0.5. for the failure rate - percent per 1,000 hr - with a low
failure rate (hundredths and thousandths of a percent), there is a high pro-
bability of erroneously estimating the reliability, a new measurement unit was
introduced into practice: the FIT. One FIT is equal to one 10 failure per 109

device hours [28].

- 19 -

A1hK)3Sﬂ‘TVEMJJODIOﬂ
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In analyzing the data of the table, the
conclusion can be drawn that the reliability
of 10's incorporated in electronic equipment
when it is in operation is considerably
higher than their reliability determined
during testing.

.I

This is explained by the fact that during
operation, Ic's usually operate in less
severe modes than during the testing pro-
cess. A properly designed radioelectronic
system provides for its components to be
used in alleviated operating modes and in
the majority of cases, under conditions
close to normal. The electrical circuits
of such systems are designed taking into
account the permissible variations in the
values of the major parameters. A circum-
stance of no small importance is also the
massive numbers of 16's in service and the long operating time, which are respon-
sible for the accumulation of an enormous amount of experimental material, and
consequently, the high statistical significance of the estimate.

Failure Rate. hr"1

 

Figure 5. The decrease in the
failure rate of Ic's
Key: l.Series production;
2.3.Integrated circuits
fabricated in accor-
dance with various
reliability programs.

when testing Ic's though, everything is reversed. In striving for production
profitability, reduction in the product manufacturing time and an increased
percentage output of good products, the manufacturer directs his efforts pri-
marily towards the timeliness of obtaining data on the quality and reliability
of the output product. For this purpose, he knowingly limits the scope of the
tests, compensating for this by increasing the severity of the test modes, con-
ditions and evaluation criteria for the test results.

The accumulated operational and testing experience makes it possible to state
that inherent in 16's fabricated using planar epitaxial technology is a lack of
an explicitly pronounced burn-in period and in practice. a minor and timevise
uniform failure of 10's is observed in the process of their long term operation

under normal conditions (Figure 6).

At the same time, during tests of 16's under conditions of severe loads (espe-
cially with the loads applied in combination), an elevated failure rate of the
10's is observed in their initial period of operation. The potentially unreli-
able samples, having hidden production defects (and by virtue of this, a short
service life), generally fail in a period of 1,000 hours of operation. The
majority of them fail in the first 200 to 500 hours. Incorporating special kinda
of tests in the production process cycle for Ic fabrication provides for the
timely rejection of such circuits [4, 20, 27-30] and increases the reliability

of the manufactured batches of devices.

- 20 -

ITHICHHWCJAI.USE1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The electrical load has a substantial
impact on 1c reliability. With the
action of the current flowing through
an IC, because of local overheating st
defective points in the metalized inter-
connections (scratches, local thin
. places in the aluminum film at stepped
an a 1:3: nan points in the oxide down to values lower
’"" ' hours than the permissible) melting of the
interconnection material takes place,
while in the presence of moisture and
dirt, corrosion of the aluminum wires
and other thin film components of the
IC is observed.

 

Figure 6. The failure distribution
of IC's fabricated using
planar epitaxial technology
as a function of time for

reliability testing at an
ambient temperature of A voltage applied to a device causes

+125. c the formation of surface channels with
the opposite type of conductivity and
breakdown of the oxide in samples with
a contaminated surface or with an ele-

Key: 1. 1c chopper;
2. Hicropower "oar-NAND--

V s
3 :321clgé vated content of metal impurities in the
A. Number of failures, oxide layers.
units.

Under certain conditions, the electrical
voltage applied to an IC can lead to the
formation of electrical fields which act on the device similar to the action of

a mechanical load, localized at one point.

The criticality of lc's to electrical overloads is responsible for the special
requirements placed on the use of these devices. The operational modes of radio-
electronic equipment and systems using Ic's should also preclude the appearance
of electromagnetic pulses as well as those transient processes when switching
_circuits and when defects occur which would cause the 1C to fail.

An analysis of the operational data and the results of all possible 10 tests
shows that the 16 failure rate during operation and storage differ substantially
and depends greatly on the ambient temperature (Figure 7).

The ambient temperature, along with IC overheating caused by internal power dis-
sipation, leads to a change in device parameters. The transistors of Ic'a are
especially sensitive to a temperature change. Just as significant as the tem-
perature dependence is the temperature coefficient of resistance (1K8). Plotted
in Figure 8 are graphs which illustrate some of the major parameters, the pro-
parties of IC quality. as a function of temperature [4], and Table 5, the mean
time between failures as a function of the junction temperature.

Because of the structural design and production process features of silicon 16's,
the impact of temperature on their reliability is a great deal less than on

certain other semiconductor devices, in particular, germanium ones, nonetheless
it is significant, and this phenomenon cannot be disregarded.

- 21 -

FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

l

H-
"l
‘l
\

WIIIIWIIHI, .

:7
74.
=
_
g

I ll
Illl

 

Figure 7. Typical function A - f(T) for lC's during operation (a)
and in storage (b).
Key: A. Failure rate. hr"1

Numerous studies have made it possible to establish that parameter instability
of a semiconductor structure in 10's occurs as a result of exposure to an
elevated temperature at temperatures above 300' c. It can be seen from Figure
9, where the major electrical paraneters of a three-input "non" logic gate is
plotted as a function of the ambient temperature that up to a temperature of
+300° C, no substantial changes are observed in the values of the parameters.
Only at temperatures above +300" C is a significant deviation noted in the
majority of devices in the values of the parameters from the initial values.
It is supposed that with exposure to high temperature, leakage channels_appear
close to the p-n junctions. Along with this, reliability tests of these cir-
cuits at a temperature of up to +300° C have demonstrated the high stability
of the major electrical parameters (Figure 10).

 

IQELE_§; The following are numbered among the
Junction Operat- Mean Time Between 2::22Ezewticni;;c::n::::tﬁzzbizzd
:28 Temperature, gziiures, 24-hr electrical loads: the formation of
—L—-——— transition metal compounds with
80 6,9ab increased brittleness and high elec-
100 1,191 trical resistance. the formation of
120 243 electrical insulating layers at the
140 58.5 “aluminum-silicon" separation

boundary, corrosion of the aluminum
in cracks and at oxide steps, etc.

Among 1c failures which occur when they are tested for reliability under con-
ditions of normal and elevated ambient temperatures, catastrophic failures
predominate. The bulk of these failures is due to connection defects.

- 22 -

F081HﬂﬂKJA1.USE10NLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘ --lll---ll

IIIIJIIIIIII
!_I_III'IIIIIII

 
       

g --IllllI--II

46 --IIIIII--II

IIIIIEEifﬁ '
ﬁllmllml

‘1‘ -7s «5 :5 75 m: a: M“ 2 t «we
0 (a) ‘’(b) volts

last.“
x mm

      

    

 

    

0 i
'30 ‘00 0 M M "S 1”“: 0 N M to I" i” “04,7
l (3 t)

Figure 8. The temperature dependence of the current gain of a
silicon transistor (a), the transfer function of a

typical D‘l’l. circuit (b), the collector saturation voltage
(c), the input characteristic of a typical DTL circuit (d),
the resistance of a resistor (e), and the inverse current
of a silicon p-n junction (f) is the theoretical curve.
Key: A. R, - 300 ohms/square unit; temperature coefficient of
resistance - 2.8 ° 10‘3 deg" .

-23-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m not.”

 

Figure 9. The major electrical parameters of a three-input
"NOR" logic gate as a function of the ambient

temperature.
MM 0 Twit
£5

4” £0

. £5

0 5m Imlr 0 w M7,.
”M .0 ' 13.!“
MW 25
£55 10
I,” (5

0 50 MI,» W Ml:

Figure 10. The change in the main electrical parameters of

a three-input "NOR" logic gate during reliability
testing.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 11. histograms for the change in the voltage of three-input
logic IC's during service life tests at +125° C (a) and
storage life tests at +150° C (b) and +300° C (c).

Gradual failures comprise only an insignificant portion, thereby attesting to
the high "inherent" (inherent in semiconductor Ic's) reliability of these elec-
tronic products. The results of IC reliability tests at an ambient temperature
of +125° C in a volume of about 13 million circuit-hours are given in [22].
Only in 0.68 percent of the 10's did the amount of parameter drift exceed the
set norm. In the example cited in [6]. the lack of any failures at all in 16's
is indicated which were tested in an amount of 3. 626 units in an "ring oscil-
lator" circuit at En - 3 volts and an ambient temperature of +125° C for

ll, 865 hr.

The typical distribution of the parameters and the change in them during the
testing process can be seen from Figure 11. in which the results of shelf-life

and service life tests of HECL three-input Ic's are shown. The high stability
of the parameters is noted. At an ambient temperature of +300° C, the rate of
drift in the main parameters did not exceed a value of 0.00001 [23].

As is well known, temperature cycles and shocks, humidity, a gas contaminated
environment, mechanical loads, radiation and other factors have an impact on

IC reliability during operation in addition to the factors considered here.
Devices manufactured with high quality easily sustain all of these loads within
the limits of the norms specified in the technical specifications, testing

_ 25 -

FOI:0F1NCLALI£§E(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

programs and other standard setting engineering documentation. The IC failure
distribution during climatic and mechanical tests shown in Table 6 clearly illus-
trate the assertion concerning the capability of lc's of successfully standing
up to exposure to such loads [23]. As follows fro. Table 7, burned-in Ic's

stand up to more than 100 thermal shocks. A cyclical change in the ambient
temperature has a negative influence on poorly mounted microcircuits, as well as
on microcircuits in which materials with substantially different thermal coeffi-
cients of expansion are used. For example, the use of an unsuccessfully selected
molding composition used to hermetically seal the IC's in plastic packages can
cause the welded contacts to break or short circuits in the wire Jeads at the
surface of the chip. The voltages which occur when the temperature changes and
which are due to the differing thermal coefficients of expansion of the materials,
is the reason for this. Thermal shock can accelerate the breaking of poorly made
connections, etc. [4, 18. 27, 32].

Studies of the resistance of 10's to sea fog and tropical climate have made it
possible to establish the fact that the packages of the devices limit the
operational possibilities for IC's.

The mechanical strength of integrated semiconductor circuits exceeds the tech-
nical capabilities of the test equipment in the overwhelming majority of cases.
The greatest number of IC failures during shock strength tests and tests for
resistance to linear acceleration are observed at loads which are either never
or extremely rarely encountered in operation. The most vulnerable section in
[C's are 'the internal leads which connect the chip to the external leads. They
usually break during centrifuging. However, this occurs at an acceleration many
times greater than the. level encountered in equip-em: operational practice. For
this reason, by setting strict requirements on the level of the test load (up to
30,000 g), the requisite strength safety margin can be assured.

The radiation immunity of IC's falls at the level of the radiation resistance of
silicon planar transistors and is limited by the latter.

According to [27-30, 32], modern semiconductor Ic's stand up to operational
loads in the following ranges: linear acceleration of from 50 to 50,000 g for
standard products and up to 100,000 g for samples fabricated in accordance
with special programs; in a temperature range of from -l96 up to +200° C in
the case of thermal shock; up to 280° C for soldering and up to 1,100° C in an
inflammability test; from -185 to +300° C in a thermal cycling test; in terms
of moisture immunity and moisture resistance at about 100 percent humidity, in
a temperature range of 2 to 96° C; in terms of resistance and impunity to a
salt fog, at 71' C and 20 2, in a salt solution, up to 10,000 g shock accelera-
tion for a shock pulse width of from 0.2 uses to 6 msec; in terms of vibrational
strength and vibration imunity at accelerations of from 5 to 2.000 Hz, and a
displacement amplitude of no more than 2.5 cm and a vibrational acceleration of
up to 100 g.

We will note in conclusion that the predominance of IC catastrophic failures,
among which the greatest specific weight belongs to failures due to poor quality
connections, makes it possible to suppose there is a real possibility of a

-25-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 6. Failure Distribution as a Function of the Kind and Magnitude of

 

Test Load
Maximum Number

Kind of Load Test Conditions of FailuresI 2
Thermal shock 0-100°C; S to 270 shocks 0.71
Thermal cycling -60 + 175°C; 5 to 160 cycles 0.30
Tropical humidity -10 + 60°C; 90 to 98 1;

1.200 hr

Period from 0--500 hr 0

Period fron 500--l,200 hr 1.k0
Mechanical shock 3,000-10,000 g; 5 to 125 1 4°

shocks .
Vibration:
At one frequency 60 Hz, 20--50 g: 96 hr 0
In a range of frequencies 5 to 500 Hz; 20--50 g; 1 hr 0.4
Constant acceleration 150--50.000 g;

including 150-20,000 g 0

above 20,000 g 1.3

 

 

TABLE 7. The Results of 1c Tests for Exposure to Thermal Shocks

 

      
    

1) "mean lane-emu- nuneparm a peanut more tape-on»:

"whet 0f 010:0 noo'c lot 45 no +1196 ot-IDM +ll‘c

Kan-«cl»
\JODOI

Shocks

Note: Exposure time is 30 minutes.

Key: 1. Range of temperature change within 1 thermal shock;
2. Sample, number of units;
3. Number of failures. units.

 

further increase in IC reliability in the immediate future. As was noted above,
working out individual production process operations, refining the package pro-
tection, automating production processes, improving the metrological production
support and refining the quality control system for the output product as a
whole will assure the elimination of substantial sources of failures and the
attaining of the reliability inherent in solid state components.

—27-

IND! OFFICIAL USEZCHVLY
TABLE 8.

 

Key:

P‘H
bar-(D a~uar-
. .

FOR‘OFFﬂJAl.USE(MULY

 

Kinds of Tests —-——————-—
0 3 |/ 5 I lo \I I00

annwnunu
(Oﬂlmn-ummn)

(3)

 

WW (4) -//\\/// /\\\

\\V//\\7

:sz I%x\\V//\

(7)

uniruuma
Cmunummu

mun ——(—8)

KI ”u onnmwm-(

II! :0qu

Mann aaaaa
aonm-amunt (

K:I|I:fm‘:;

.IV/A\\\\V//
--\\\/////,\
II-\\\’//

IIW
III-7

IIII\

ll)

 

“06i¢:¢) (12)
"mum: /
ma '" ' (13)

. Reliability level (Aav

 

m1) 2. Maximum expenditures per IC. dollars;

Electrical (fun ctionalg; :4. Thermal Cycling; 5. Centrifuging

. chec king the hermeti

c seal; 7. Electrical 6 thermal conditioning;

Special te eats 9. X- -ray flaw detection; lO. Qualification teats;

. Operating life testi
. Checking the atrengt

ng: 12. Climatic tests (in the full volume);
h of the welded connections.

- 28 -

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A consequenc of the substantial improvement in IC quality is a perceptible
decrease in the number of complaints of substandard products, a reduction in
the volume of periodic tests and tests of the nonfailure operating time as well
as increased consumer confidence in the product manufacturer.

Reliability studies of domestic semiconductor Ic's which have been conducted in
recent years attest to the fact that the reliability which has been achieved
comes up to the world state of the art and further efforts in this field should
be made circumspectly, carefully weighing the economic expediency. The imple-
mentation of those measures to improve 10 reliability and quality should be
avoided which can be classified as superfluous and related to excess expenditures
on quality control.

Quality improvement programs should be worked out on the basis of several relia-
bility levels for the output product. Naturally, each of the levels should have
its own corresponding cost expression. General and special technical specifi-
cations on Ic's should provide for the possibility of the coordinated delivery
of products to a consumer having permissible deviations from the specified
requirements. Generalized data which illustrate these kinds of programs, which
are widely used in the U.S. and other developed capitalist nations, are shown

in Table 8.

- 29 _

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter III. The Main Kinds, Reasons for and Mechanisms of Semiconductor
Integrated Circuit Failures

An analysis of the reasons for the failure of IC's during operation and testing
makes it possible to establish the fact that at the present stage of micro-
electronics development, a characteristic feature is the predomipanca of failures,
as a rule, due to the destruction of some of the structural components as a con—
sequence of the imperfection of individual production process operations in Ic
fabrication and various violations of the standard setting engineering documen-
tation in their application stage. This is clearly seen from Table 9, in which
the generalized distributions according to kinds and causes of IC failures are
presented [27, 28. 31-38]. Improving the structural design and fabrication
technology of IC's will lead to a substantial increase in their reliability,
which is evidenced by Figure 5, in which the averaged curve for the reduction in
the failure rate of semiconductor integrated circuits over the period from 1961
through 1972 is shown based on generalized data (from various foreign sources)
[27, 32, 33, 30, 39, 40]. The curve for the reduction in the failure rate after
1968 becomes flatter. This is explained, first of all, by the fast process of
refinements in the structural design and working out the technology for bipolar
IC's in the initial period of the introduction of this technology, and secondly,
by the increase in the complexity of the technology and the rise in the level

of integration, characteristic of the later developmental period of microelectro—
nics [27].

A major source of total failures of IC's, as can be seen from Table 9. is the
destruction of the electrical circuit. Reasons for breaks in the electrical
circuits of Ic's are inadequate strength of the welded connections, the occur-
rence of undesirable transition metal compounds in the contacts of materials of
different kinds, as well as mechanical, electrical and chemical destruction of
thin film metal conductors and assembly defects in the IC's.

The main causes of short circuits in the electrical circuits of IC's are defects
in the photolithography and dielectric films, the occurrence of channels with
the opposite type of conductivity, body defects in the crystal lattice of the
semiconductor material as well as defects in the assembly of the IC's.

Gradual failures manifest primarily as an increase in the leakage currents and
are caused by such factors as the appearance of channels with the opposite type
of conductivity due to the migration of the mobile charge in the oxide film and
the contamination of the surface of the semiconductor chip and the IC package.
Where such defects are present, as well as in the case of a failure to seal by
the package with the exposure to the ambient atmosphere, individual electrical
parameters of an IC can gradually change their values ("drift"), something which
in turn can lead to equipment failure.

He shall treat the physical and chemical processes which lead to IC failures.

Hicrocircuit failures encountered in practice are shown schematically in Figure
12; they can be conventionally broken down into three categories:

-Failures related to phenomena in the body of the semiconductor chip;

- 30 -

FOR 0FFNJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hm

cw

{N

en

0N

an

 

NH

 

-I’a

IIIMdMI

cu undouuuua endouOu can undo .uown ouuxoua

on» no :mcuuuoo: menu uo madden 05» an ocean

Ina-on Huahonu saw: was nuwcouuo auoaqnnooa noon
.avuwa on“: oanuxoau any :0 =o«0:0u o>uaoouxo

cum amends Huuucnsuua “auaouoaaoo ouqxuun 0:»

an no nouoonuoo .owdsuaa on» no anon oauaauas uoom

.uwuahuo

acuuavaouaaou 0;» no ousuosuuo on» ad auoouov

unoon no nouaa onu no washes-own .ouon can»

on a nun: uncuuuwcuuu a“ abovxwoua :Aw50uguizucam:

.uownououosn onu no

Hq>olon cuOHnIOunn .udduos can aoeaxo ”canon.
Iuo>o new ucunuuo ounavnvuau .ouoouuv agnouu

OH IO£uu~0uosn Ou 05v noaaauuuv A:oanuu:v cauduuuom

.Ahuuoduu00no

ouuouo .=aux«na:v ~o>oa oanuuo> oanuoualuun

asu acuvoouuu .alawu owuuooaouv osu cu ouoowuv

van uuua .omuxoon on» can madam nauu¢>uoaam

«N ouuuoonouv 0:» no ouauuao 0:» mo couuaduluucoo

. .ouocuuou snooauovua nabv:«3 no ”can
saunas huouuuuaquuuua .couoouuou Haonaésuouuuodo
was dungeono .uo>uH ucouuao ounwoauauon osu
mauvoooxm .ouu .oaouu uoauou oAu uo couuuoomov

ou aneuoauouuuua: .wauuusouovca .ouuiav Haouquuo:

.uvaoH Huuuuwzooe

no aao>aa «Houaouahon osu unavaooum .:Hau:: a

=« aka: a no nouuoouuonouu on» we abuu0390n <

.vao: ozu uo cowuuu 0:» ca avcaonsou Hague noun“
noauuu mo cauuaauOu ozu can «Hanoi ozu no :0«
noauuuv Huauaz .Aouauuunau usu cu noun uoaucoo

«Sn mo :oaoonvo noon .£uw:onun cud: noonv :0“

ON Iuoocdoo van: osu uo :uucouuo awouaonuoﬂ boom

 

unsanum unsouwo uoudu oucu mo ounce

waaanou

ouuuahon use map
lawman :« .ouwxuaa
any cu uuuuuov

cu can wouaaaah

uwgu Hauwhuu osu

Ga anOHUv aoon
On one wouaauam

mucouov
anauuuo:u«~0uosn
cu 05v cousnanm

nuuauuwo
uuoga and annouuao
ouaxuon voauuuocu

uncuuavcou tau
uncuauaou luau
cusu no «unsound

Juana

.o

.n

.e

.n

COHUUOEGOU UOVH03 .H

ouaaunm Um no vuﬂx

 

- 31 -

FOI:0FFKJAI.USB(NULY
Id typical kinds of failures
I single-level layout in a f
tible conductor; 2. Breakage
a of phenonena on the chip 8
. Breakdown (punch-through)‘
lrcuit due to oxide film bre
Breaking of the ohmic conta
:nductor on the chip; 9. Inc
a contact of the chip to the
ne support piece; 11, 12. Lo
E the sealed aean (11) and t
ernal package lead.
FOR‘DFFKJA1.USE(MVLY

-Pailures which depend on the state of contact connections;
--Failures due to phenomena at the surface of a chip.

1. Failures Related to Phenomena in the Body of a Semiconductor Chip

The appearance of failures related to body defects is explained either by the
redistribution of the doping impurities in the body of the crystal chip or by
structural defects in the semiconductor crystal (dislocations, stacking faults.
microcracks, etc.), which occur or develop during the process of operating a
defective IC.

The redistribution of impurities is theoretically possible because of the con-
tinuously ongoing thermal diffusion of doping impurities used to create the IC
structure in a monocrystalline sample of a semiconductor aateriel. However.

there is little probability that this process plays a substantial role in prac-
tice, since the diffusion coefficients of the doping materials (boron, phosphorus,
arsenic, antimony, etc.) in a silicon monocrystal are insignificantly small in
that temperature range where 10‘s are used (from -60 to +125' C).

The most probable cause of failures related to phenomena in the body of a chip
are defects in the semiconductor material. Dislocations and other defects of the
crystalline structure, as well as tracks, deformations and mechanical stresses in
a silicon crystal, developing during operation of the IC when exposed to thermal
and mechanical loads, can have a substantial impact on changing the electrical
characteristics of integrated circuits, leading primarily to gradual failures.

with an increase in the level of integration, which is characteristic of the
state of the art in microelectronics, a trend is observed towards an increase in
the "stacking density", a reduction in the geometric dimensions of active and
passive 10 components and a reduction in the doping depth of the p-n junctions
related to this, as well as in increase in the level of doping of the diffusion
regions of the semiconductor crystal and the electric field intensity in the

IC elements.

Because of this, the degree of influence of local defects of the semiconductor '
structure on 1c reliability increases. The major mechanisms for the degradation
of the properties of epitaxial and diffusion layers of 10's with "small" p-n
junctions are the motion of dislocations, a change in the internal stresses of
the crystal lattice, recrystallization and breakdown of solid solutions, etc.
[bl-43]. The indicated processes lead to a change in such important character-
istics as the concentration, mobility and lifetime of the current carriers in
the semiconductor, and as a rule, to an increase in the leakage currents, a
reduction in the breakdown voltage values for the junctions and a degradation_of
IC speed.

We shall now move on to a consideration of failures related to contact joints.

- 33 -

FINICHHHCJA1.USE‘0N1¥
F'OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Failures which Depend on the State of Contact Bonds

Two types of contact connections are usually employed to connect an IC chip to
external power supplies. as well as to provide for electrical connections between
the circuit components. The first type is a connection of the thin film metal
contact areas on the silicon chip to external leads which pass through the wall
of the package (traverses). Such connections are made using gold or aluminum
conductors, which are welded to contact areas of the chip and the package trav-
erses. The second type of connection is thin film metal conductors. which play
the part of the intracircuit wiring between the individual components on the

IC chip. '

When producing the contact connections in Ic's, a considerable amount of different
kinds of materials is used (gold, aluminum, silicon, cermet and silicide connect-
ions, sublayers of molybdenum, vanadium. platinum, titanium and other difficultly
fusible metals, etc.). the interaction between which promotes the formation of
transition metals, frequently with undesirable properties.

Failures related to contact connections, as a rule, take the form of an increase
in the contact resistances or breaks in the electrical circuits due to two

mechanisms:

-'l'he clustering of vacancies in different regions of the wiring layout internal
to the circuit;

--The formation of regions with electrical insulating properties, which occur at
the separation boundaries of the various materials used in the construction

of the IC's [31, ﬁlo-66].

 

Figure 13. Regions of'possible cavity formation in an IC with
- one level of metallizstion.

Key: l. The metal to metal welded contact at the package feed-
, through;
2. Flexible (wire, lug) lead;
3. "sided metal to metal contact at the chip;
5. Contact between the deposited. resistor and a thin film
metal conductor;
5. Thin film resistor;
6. Thin film metal conductor;
7. Metal to semiconductor ohmic contact;
8. Contact between the chip and the chip holder of the

-34-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtMﬂﬂCJAl.USEZONLY

package (fused, glued);
9. Si chip;
10. Chip holder (package).

A cross-section through the components of the internal wiring layout of 16's is
shown schematically in Figure 13, where this layout is based on single level
metallizstion and regions are indicated in which cavity formation and breaks
are usually observed because of the clustering of vacancies (regions 1, 3, b, 6,
7 and 8).

Welded Contacts. One of the most well studied regions of the intrscircuit wiring
of IC's in this regard is, apparently. the region of the welded metal to metal
contact, in particular, the gold to aluminum connection.

  
   

    

ghxzy

Figure 16. Cross-section through a Au--Al connection after 5 to 10
minutes exposure to a temperature of about 300° C (a)
and after 10 to 1,000 hours of high temperature storage
at a temperature of 200 to 300° C (b). Mechanical stresses
in the velded joint which lead to contact breaking are

shown schematically in the figure (c).

Key: 1. Au;

2. Al;

3. $102:

a. Si;

5. AugAl;
6.mmu;

7. Auaal;

8o AUSAIZ;
9. Cracks;
10. Cavities.

- 35 -

IN)! OWHWCJAI.IISII(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The composition of transition metal compounds (phases) in gold to aluminum contacts
is complicated and changes, depending on the conditions under which the composition
is produced (the concentrations of gold and aluminum, the presence of free sili-
con, the temperature and pressure during the welding process, the ambient temper-
ature and the operational time of the finished 16) as well as many other factors.
The formation of transition metal compounds and the change in their composition
during operation lead to cavity formation because of the accumulation of vacancies
due to the Kirkendall effect, the occurrence of mechanical stresses at the surface
of the gold--aluminum separation boundary, and in the final analysis, to breaks

in the welded connections.

The mechanism for the failure of welded contacts produced by thermal compression
is usually as follows [57-52]. During the process of thermal compression welding,
which is accomplished at a substrate temperature of 300° c, the mutual diffusion
of the gold and aluminum takes place, which leads to the formation of transition
metal phases of the AuzAl type at the gold-s1uminum separation boundary (close
to the gold wire) and AuAlz type (close to the aluminum contact area on the
oxidized surface of the chip). In this case, because of local heating in the
contact region, the temperature rises up to the minimal melting temperature of
the gold-aluminum system, and the fusion occurs only in a small amount at the
separation boundary of these metals.

During the fabrication of the remaining thermal compression contacts for the
same IC, the substrate is at a temperature of about 300° c, which leads to rapid
thermal diffusion of the gold and the formation of transition metal phases of
the Auaal and Au5A12 types in the region of gold-~sluminum bonding (Figure 16a).
Immediately following the welding, the contact connections usually have good
mechanical and electrical properties. However, in the process of subsequent
operation or when the 1c is stored at an elevated temperature, irreversible
phenomena occur which cause the electrical resistance to increase and the thermal
compression contacts of the 16’s to break. The concentration gradient of the
metals and the difference in the diffusion coefficients of the individual com-
ponents in this metallurgical system are those conditions under which a mass
transport effect is observed (the Kirkendall effect) in accordance with the
equation:

x - V0.51 - exp (— 1-?) i. (1)

 

where x is the displacement of the separation boundary between the transition
metal phases relative to its initial position, cm;
R is the universal gas constant;
T is the absolute temperature, 'K;
t is the exposure time to the given temperature, ’0.

It follows from this that failures related to the formation of transition metal
phases in gold-aluminum contacts of 10's should be manifest extremely rarely

under normal operating conditions. This conclusion is confirmed by extensive
experimental data obtained during 16 testing and operation. Nonetheless, since

- 36 -

P03‘0FFKJAI.USB‘0NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the gold diffusion rate greatly exceeds the aluminum diffusion rate in the model
described here for thermal compression contact degradation, with longterm opera-
tion of a finished IC at the maximum permissible temperatures according to the
technical specifications, uncompensated diffusion of the gold into the aluminum
track is altogether possible, in which case, the M12 transition metal phase
with a red shading (the "purple plague") is formed at the peripheral areas of the
gold--aluminum contact. In this case, cavities and cracks remain in the region
of the weld which reduce the mechanical strength of the contacts (Figure 14b).
The indicated process of gold diffusion into aluminum can be supplementally
accelerated by the electromigration of the gold when DC or AC flows through the

contact. Electromigration processes in integrated circuits will be treated
below. '

The formation of transition metal phases and the changing of their composition
during operation of integrated circuits also leads to the occurrence of consider-
able mechanical stresses at the surface of the gold--aluminum separation boundary,
because of the variation in the body and the mismatching of the crystalline lattice
of the various transition metal compounds. The stresses occurring in this case
can be amplified by the presence of additional mechanical stresses at the peri-
phery of the thermal compression contact, as well as by the difference in the
temperature coefficients of expansion of the individual transition metal phases
(Figure 16c). All of these factors, in conjunction with the increased brittleness
of many transition metal phases, can lead to breaks of the gold conductors away
from the aluminum areas.

The proposed mechanism is confirmed in many respects by experimental results and
has made it possible to provide a reasonable explanation for the given phenomenon.

However, the latest studies (M, 53-55] have necessitated corrections in this
mechanism, since the newly obtained results could not. at first glance, be
explained by the Kirkendall effect.

It was found, in the first place, that the clusters of vacancies which lead to

the appearance of cavities, occur under definite conditions in aluminum. and

this is evidence that aluminum is a faster diffusant. Secondly, it was established
that the process of aluminum diffusion into the weld region is substantially
accelerated in the absence of oxygen in the internal atmosphere of the 10 package.

However, it was successfully determined as a result of additional experiments
[1.4] that the observed phenomenon is also explained by the Kirkendall effect if
one takes into account the fact that the transition metal compounds formed in the
region of the weld act as a barrier for the mutual diffusion of the gold directly
into the aluminum, while they also serve as an effective drain for both the gold
and the aluminum. It is specifically for this reason that cavities (breaks) can
be formed both in the gold and in the aluminum in welded Au-Al connections.

The influence of the gas environment in the 1C package on the process of mutual
diffusion in "gold~-aluminum" contacts [51.] is explained in the following manner.
When oxygen and water vapors are absent (the hermetic sealing is carried out in

-37-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.1 dried nitrogen atmosphere) with subsequent high temperature storage, the pre-
dominant mechanism is the diffusion of the aluminum into the region of weld. In
this case, the diffusion takes place primarily along the surface of the aluminum
film and along the grain boundaries. In the case where oxygen is present inside
the package in a minimal amount, but nonetheless sufficient (no less than 0.12)
(or water vapor also), when the IC is heated, oxidation of the aluminum surface
occurs, and the rate of its diffusion is substantially retarded, since under these
conditions, the predominant mechanism is bulk diffusion.

Aluminum wire is used in place of gold to completely eliminate failures related to
the formation of transition metal compounds at Au-Al contacts on a chip. However,

conditions appear in this case for the phase transformation of AuxAly on the gold
traverse.

An additional factor which has a negative impact on the mechanical strength of
welded connections is mechanical damage and undercutting etching of the contact
areas during photolithography, during the checking of the functioning of the 16's
on the plates, and the welding, which lead to a reduction in the contact surface
area and should be rejected in a timely manner during IC fabrication.

For integrated circuits, especially the early designs which were hermetically
sealed in plastic packages, the specific kinds of failures related to the welded
connections are intermittent breaks and short circuits of the wire leads at the
edge of the IC chip [27, 30, 56, 57]. The intermittent nature of the failures is
explained by displacements of the wire leads relative to the chip due to mechanical
stresses occurring in the Ic structure when subjected to temperature exposures
because of the difference in the temperature coefficients of expansion of the
materials employed.

Hany other kinds of contact connections are also used in 10's besides welded ones.

Vacuum Deposited Resistors. The most vulnerable component of integrated circuits
fabricated using a combined technology is the thin film deposited resistor.
Compositions which take the form of a mixture of two or more metal and ceramic
components, for example, a mixture chromium and silicon monoxide, Cr-SiO, or the
silicides CrSiz, b10312, etc., as was noted above. are usually employed as the
material for a resistive film. The electrical connection of deposited resistors
to other 16 components is made by means of metallic thin film conductors (Al),
where aluminum, as a rule, is deposited on a layer of a chemically neutral metal,
which separates the metal and resistive films. This is done for the purpose of
preventing a possible chemical reaction between the individual components of the
resulting system. In the case of damage or too small a thickness of the separat-
ing film, a reaction between the aluminum and the material of the deposited
resistor can lead to the formation of a transition metal compound, having dielec-
tric properties, and as a result, can be responsible for a break in the electric-
al circuit in the region of the metal to ceraet contact [87].

Electrolytic corrosion is of the greatest danger to integrated circuits with
deposited resistors, the chips of which do not have additional protection with

-33-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dielectric films, to prevent the intrusion of moisture and ionic contaminants to
the surface of the resistors [66, 31].

The corrosion of a resistive film takes place in several stages in accordance with
the following scheme: the electrolyte initially interacts with the metallization
at the positive contact (the anode). and then the products of this reaction inter-
act with the cermet, leading to the formation of an electrically insulating film
at the point of contact:

on + 6H.o -. m (0H). + 3H,?!"
6Al(OH).-6H.Al0..-.° sn++wo;+a1.o; (2)
2c: + won. 6H+ -. ammo». + 3H. 1 .

In properly designed integrated circuits (the chips protected with a 8102 film,
hermetically sealed packages), the occurrence of failures because of this factor
is practically eliminated.

Thin film metal conductors ("tracks") which provide for electrical contacts
between the individual active and passive components of 16's through contact
openings in the oxide film and which are produced in the corresponding regions
of the chip by means of photolithography, are usually employed as the intercom—
ponent wiring for integrated circuits. To obtain the indicated contact connect-
ions, as a rule, the method of aluminum deposition on the surface of an oxidized
silicon substrate is employed with subsequent photolithographic generation of
the "pattern" of intracircuit wiring and the melting of the aluminum to increase
its adhesion (bonding) to the substrate material and improve the characteristics
of the ohmic contacts to the silicon.

We shall deal with the kinds and mechanisms of failures of the ohmic metal to
semiconductor contacts.

Metal to Semiconductor Ohmic Bonds. The metal to semiconductor ohmic contacts
used for making electrical connections to the active and passive components of

a semiconductor structure on a chip are one of the important components of con-
tact connections of 10's which have an impact on their reliability. Requirements
are placed on them as regards the ohmic nature of the contact and low electrical
resistance, as well as the stability of the properties and the absence of pro-
cesses which lead to the degradation of the properties lying below the diffusion
regions and the p-n junctions [08, 53, 58-61].

The latter is especially important from the viewpoint of assuring reliability
of structures with small junctions and with "full" emitters.

Some three failure mechanisms are basically characteristic of the ohmic contacts
of integrated circuits (68, S3, 58. 60, 61]:

--The formation of short circuits in the region of etching holes or the appearance
of "nodules“, which lead to pinholes in the protective dielectric film above
the contact windows to the silicon, because of electromigration processes in
the IC conductors (the danger of failures because of this mechanism rises sub-

- 39 -

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stantially for IC's with small p-n junctions and multilevel metallization); the
formation of films with electrical insulating properties at the metal-semicon-
ductor separation boundary, which lead to an increase in the contact resistances
or complete electrical breaks in the ohmic contacts;

-Thernal diffusion of the aluminum into the silicon and short circuits at elevated
ambient temperatures and with local overheating of the diffusion regions on the
chips.

Failures of ohmic contacts related to electromigration effects will be treated in
more detail in the next section. We shall deal with failures due to the formation
of electrical insulating films and the thermal diffusion of aluminum into silicon,
which are observed during operation or storage of integrated circuits at an ele-
vated temperature.

The probability of breaks is increased where photolithography defects are present
(insufficient opening of the windows) and in the case of an inadequate tempera-
ture when fusing in the ohnic contacts [48]. It should be noted that an excessive-
ly high fusing temperature can also lead to a break in the aluminum film at the
oxide steps at the boundaries of contact windows.

In structures with a "full" emitter, which have found widespread application in
integrated circuits with an increased level of integration [VLSI], the interaction
reaction of aluminum with silicon dioxide represents a particular danger, which
takes place rapidly at temperatures above 500° C [48, 53]:

4A1 + 33102 + 2A1203 + 351 (3)

In this case. the 8102 is reduced to silicon, and the aluminum at the boundaries
of the contact window for the "full" emitter approaches an impermissibly close
distance, x, to the emitter junction (Figure 15), which can lead to a junction
short circuit.

   
 

before fusing in
We.

Do.-

after fusin in
u (a) 3

Figure 15. Schematic cross-section through a "full" emitter at
various stages in producing the 1c structure.
Key: A. Dangerous regions of the structure.

- 40 -

FOI10IIHCIA1.UBE1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To prevent this undesirable phenomenon in integrated circuits with "full" emitters,
multilayer films with sublayers of difficultly fusible metals (for example, Ho—Au,
Mo-Al, Ti-Pt-Au, etc.) are used instead of "pure" aluainus when producing the thin
film wiring layout.

Thin Film Interconnection Hiring. The increase in the level of integration of
integrated circuits, and as a consequence, the packaging density of the components
on a semiconductor chip, the increase in the speed and maximum frequency of inte-
grated circuits, as well as the density of the currents flowing in thin film con-
ductors have brought about an increase in the role of the intracircuit wiring
layout and its contribution to IC reliability [31, 68, S8, S9, 62, 63].

Aluminum is used as the basic material for thin film conductors in integrated cir-
cuits. From a reliability standpoint, the major drawbacks of aluminum as a
material for conductors are its following properties [68, S9]:

--The ability of aluminum to form large transition metal compounds in contact with
gold;

--The ability of aluminum to corrode in electrolytes because of its own electro-
negativity [66-67];

--The possibility of the corrosion of aluminum in contact with other metals
because of the galvanic effect [57, 68, 66, 69];

-The softness of aluminum and consequently, the ease of damaging an aluminum
film;

-The possibility of the appearance of cavities and projections on an aluminum
film because of electromigration at current densities somewhat less than for
other metals [31, 36, 66-66, 58, 59, 70];

-The possibility of liberating silicon dissolved in aluminum during the process
of fusing in the contacts at the boundaries of aluminum grains [66.66, 59];

--The rather intense reaction of aluminum with $102 with the reduction of the
silicon at temperatures on the order of 500° C [66, S3, 59].

Despite the indicated drawbacks, aluminum has a whole series of substantial advan-
tages over other metals, which make it practically the only material suitable for
producing single layer metallization of IC's, and for this reason, is widely used
in modern microcircuit engineering [68, S8, 59].

One of the reasons for the failures of thin film conductors is the inadequate
corrosion immunity of aluminum. The intrusion of moisture inside a package prior
to its hermetic sealing or as a consequence of an inadequate hermetic seal of

the package during thc testing (or operating) process of an IC can lead to the
destruction of the metallization. Only a thin film of A1203 (2 to 10 nmb on the
aluminum surface serves to protect it against the cheaical reaction of aluminum
with water. However, a rather small amount of chlorine, ammonia or copper ions
or those of certain other elements suffice for the passivating film of aluminum
oxide to be reduced and the direct interaction of aluminum and water to begin,

- 41 -

INDR‘OFFTCJAI.UBIiCM§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in which aluminum hydroxide is formed [65]:

2A1 + 6H.o -» 2A! (6H). + 311.1 . u.)

Aluminum hydroxide does not protect aluminum against exposure to harmful reagents
and possesses electrical insulating properties. As a result. breakage of the
electrical circuits of the 16's occurs.

Other aluminum reactions are also known in which the substances indicated above
play the part of catalysts [67], for example, the following cyclical reaction:

AICI. + 3H.0 .. Al (OH). + 3HC|

2M (0H).‘."_"":AI.0. + 311.0.
ageing

ma+2m..2mcn.+aH:1' .'
(S)

which leads to the oxidation of the aluminum. The process of aluninum corrosion
is accelerated substantially by electrochemical reactions:

«Where a voltsic couple of metals is present (for example, in the region of the
gold--aluminum welded contact, a voltaic cauple with a 3 V e.m.f. appears);

"When an external electrical bias is applied to the IC [28. 57, 66. 66, 68].

Anode dissolution of the aluminum at the "positive" contact is observed in these
cases.

The processes of electrolytic corrosion of thin film conductors represent yet
another danger, since disintegration products are formed during corrosion and
electrical transfer of metal ions (for example, gold. silver) to the cathode is
observed, which can lead to the appearance of shunting leaks and even to short
circuits because of the formation of current conducting "bridges" between adjacent
tracks [57, 65, 69]. The failure mechanisms described schematically above, relat-
ed to the corrosion of the material of thin film conductors. are shown in Figure
16. Dielectrics ($102, A1203 glass, etc.) are used to attenuate the effect of
the indicated processes in integrated circuits. However, since windows should

be formed it. this insulating layer in the contact areas underneath the welded
contacts. there exists the problem of circuit breakage because of metallization
corrosion in the indicated regions.

Protecting the entire assembly with glass after laying out the leads unfortun-
ately also cannot completely solve the corrosion problem, because mechanical
stresses and cracks. which are formed in the glass during the process of assembly
and hermetic sealing and with subsequent temperature loads on the 16, lead to
local exposed places on the wire (lug, tab) conductors [57, 65, 66].

Electromigration (electrodiffusion) processes represent a definite danger for thin
film conductors in 10's: mass transport as a result of the flow of an increased
density direct current through a conductor [27, 31, 31., (05, 46, 59. 60, 70, 71].

-42-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIMHHCJAI.USB(H‘LY

 

0 (a) (b):

Figure 16. Schematic illustrating the mechanism of the
occurrence of an electrical break (a) and e
shunting leek (b) in 1c circuits as a conse-
quence of corrosion of the material of thin
film semiconductors.

Key: 1. Al;
2. Au;
3. Ho;
4. $102;
5. Si;
A. Break (insulation by corrosion products);
3. Region of anode dissolution of the metal;
C. Leek (or short circuit).

Electromigration in thin film aluminum conductors can lead to two different kinds
of failures:

--The violation of the electrical integrity of aluminum conductors as a result of
the formation, directional motion and clustering of vacancies, which leads to
the formation of cavities cmmmensurete with width of the thin film conductor
(circuit breaks);

-The formation of "nodules" and "whiskers" because of a local accumulation of
aluminum which is manifest in the form of short circuits between the thin film
conductors of single and multiple level matalization and in the appearance of
pinholes in the protective 3102 and glass films, which can subsequently serve
as a cause of corrosion.

The electrical force acting on metal ions when an electrical current flows is
composed of two components:‘

--The force of the interaction of an ionized metal atom with the electrical field
(it is proportional to the electrical field intensity and the valence of the
metal, and is directed towards the negative electrode) and the force of the
"electron wind", which is governed by the impulse exchange between the charge
carriers and the metal atoms (it is proportional to the specific resistance of
the film and the current density. and is directed towards the positive electrode).

- 43 -

soe<nwunetlnn20NLv
F0R40FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

 

Figure 17. Schematic illustrating the mechanism for the occurrence
of IC structural component failures because of electro-
migration.

Key: 1. Cavities;
2. Depletion zone;
3. Whiskers;
lo . Nodules ;
S. Accumulation zone;
6. Change in grain size;
7. Change in film orientation.

The second component prevails in metals because of the shielding effect of the
electrons, and as a result, the drift of metal ions is observed from the cathode

to the anode.

In the absence of a temperature gradient, electromigration is not able in and of
itself to bring about the failure of a conductor made of a pure homogeneous mater-
ial. leading only to the continuous compensated notion of the metal in the direc-
tion of electron travel (towards the anode). In order for a break to occur in a
conductor as a result of the electrical current flowing through it, the continuity
of the flow of atoms over its length must be disrupted. This can occur where
various gradients are present:

-Tempersture gradients (Figure 17s);

-—6radients in the material composition (contacts of thin film conductors to gold,
silicon and aluminum wire. which have smaller diffusion coefficients than an

aluminum filmo (Figure 17b);

- 45 -

FOR‘OIWWC1A1.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MHLY

--Film structure gradients: a change in the size and orientation of the grains
(Figure 17c).

electromigration in thin film conductors is usually estimated quantitatively in
terms of the failure free operating time. The value of the mean time before failure,
‘u' of a thin film metal conductor is related to the transport speed for the
material, R, and the cross-sectional area of the conductor, 5, by the expression:

5
ac...‘ (6)
t, R

Itisapparent that such defects in conductors as mechanical damage, undercutting of
the film and local thin places lead to a reduction in the cross-sectional area of
thin film conductors because of the unsatisfactory coverage of the steps with oxide
and a reduction in their reliability because of the rapid development of the cavi-
ties which are formed prior to the stage of complete breakage.

The electromigration rate is described by the following expression [34, 46, 59, 60,
71, 72]:

R“ ""°"" [‘(%+%)]' (7)

where A and a are coefficients vhich depend on the structure of the metallic
film (grain size, the presence of additional protective films, the density of
structural defects, etc.), (A/cuIz)“n - hr'1 and centimeters;

J is the electrical current density through the conductor, A/cmz;
n is the exponent which depends on the electromigration mechanism;

0 is the activation energy for the electromigration process, which depend sub—
stantially on the composition of the film material, grain size and structural
perfection of the metal films, as well as on the presence of protective dielectric
films on their surface, electron-volts;

L is the length of the thin film conductor, centimeters;

k is Boltzmann's constant (k - 8.62 ' 10'5 eV/°K);

T is the absolute temperature, in °K.

The exponential dependence of the electromigration rate on conductor length, L,
was derived in [72] assuming a random nature for the localization and a constant

distribution density of structural defects over the length of the thin film can-
ductor.

It should be noted that different researchers obtain considerably different
quantitative values for the "parameters“ (A, n, O) in equation (7). These differ-

ences, as was noted above, are apparently explained by the substantial differences
in the aluminum films themselves (grain size, crystallographic orientation of the

- 45 -

FOR OFFKJA1.USE1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

film, the presence of impurities in the material of the thin film (copper, silicon.
aluminum oxide, etc.), unavoidable changes in the conditions on the substrate, the
difference in the materials and methods of applying the dielectric coatings, the
range of temperature and currents with which the experiments were performed and an
entire series of other factors. Thus, for example, with an increase in the temper-
ature of the conductor, the value of the exponent n varies from 1 to 3 [45] and
more (especially in the case of the combined action of various gradients in the same
conductor).

For the reasons noted previously, fundamental divergences are also observed in the
treatment of the experimental results [05, 62]. Thus, the majority of researchers
[46, 71-73] feels that the grain size and the coating of the films with glass has
an influence on the activation energy 0 because of the change in the predominant
diffusion mechanism:

-0.68 eV because of the combined action of diffusion via grain boundaries and
surface diffusion in fine grained thin films;

--0.8& eV because of surface diffusion in large grained films;

--l.2 ev in large grained thick films, covered with glass, because of the dominant
mechanism of bulk diffusion (with a reduction in the role of surface diffusion
of the film material).

Other researchers assert that the grain size has no influence at all on the level of
the activation energy [87] or feel that the increase in the activation energy
observed in this case is a consequence only of a more ordered orientation of large
grained films [#5, 73].

All of this is evidence of the inadequate extent to which the process of electro-
migration has been studied and the necessity of determining the quantity A, n
and O in equation (7) for specific conditions of the formation of thin film con-
ductors and the application of dielectric films which coat metal tracks.

Despite such substantial disparaties in the quantitative characteristics of the pro-
cesses, the understanding of the basic laws governing the mechanism of electro-
migration occurring in thin film conductors is useful both in the development of
more reliable 10's and for the accelerated evaluation of their reliability
(especially the durability indicators).

Short circuits of the p-n junctions due to the formation of etching holes in the
silicon in the region of the contact windows represent yet another variant of
failures related to electromigration in the thin film wiring layout for Ic's

[46, 60, 61]. This phenomenon is explained by the transport of silicon in the
direction of electron travel through a thin film conductor (in the region of posi-
tively biased ohmic contacts) and the subsequent filling of the etching holes,
which propagate at the depth of the p-n junction, with a layer of metal.

The electromigration process represents a special danger in very large scale inte-
grated circuits [63, 71], since the substantial reduction in the width of thin

_ 66 -
FIHRCHHHCIAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFIWCJAI.1EHE(M‘LY

film conductors. the presence of a large number of relief steps at intersections,
the rise in the current density at critical points and the occurrence of local
overheating because of the increased levels of power dissipation - all of this
leads to the fact that the electromigration process which occurs in the thin film
conductors of LS! circuits can become the major mechanism for failures which
governs the durability of the 10's.

Numerous studies of the electromigration mechanism in IC thin film conductors make
it possible to determine ways of minimizing this process both in the design stages
and in the process of fabricating the IC's [27, 31, 32, 45, 58, 59, 71]. These
include primarily:

--Lim1ting the maximum permissible current density through an aluminium conductor
to a value of 2 ' 10s Alcmz;

-Optimizing the conditions for applying and fusing-in the aluminum for the
purpose of assuring a large grained structure for the thin film conductors;

-0ptimizing the geometric dimensions and configuration of thin film conductors
(if there are no other limitations. it is more expedient to increase the width
of the conductors rather than the thickness in increasing the cross-sectional.
area, since this does not degrade the quality of the application of insulating
and passivating 8102 films in a multilevel layout or the structure of the metal
film itself; long conductors are to be avoided, as well as sharp changes in the
width of conductors, etc.);

--The selection of difficultly fusible metals with a low electromigration rate for
the thin film conductors (for example, gold, molybdenum, etc.);

--Alloying the aluminum with copper, magnesium, chromium and other metals which re-
duce its electromigration rate, as well as with silicon, for the purpose of pre-
venting the appearance of etching holes in the contact windows with the semicond-
uctor structure when electrical current flows through it; ‘

--Applying protective dielectric coatings of $102. A1203, etc. to the surface of
the thin metal films, which make_it difficult for "nodules" to grow (and conse-
quently also cavities) in the conducting films;

--Honitoring the thickness of thin metal films (especially the degree of coverage
of relief steps) using a scanning electron microscope; -

--Visually monitoring the quality of the thin film wiring layout under a microscope
for the purpose of rejecting lc's with defective current conducting tracks.

Multilevel Interconnection Layout. Because of the increase in the component place-
ment density on chips in the production of very large scale integrated circuits,
there has been a great growth in the role of multilevel metallization at the present
time [28, S9. 62, 71, 7h. 75]. When a transition is made to LSI circuits, as prac-
tice has shown, the prevalent types of failures become those related to the multi-
level metallization [27. 63].

- 47 -

FOI¢MHNCJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR1OFFKJAL.USE(HHLY

He shall consider problems of reliability related to the occurrence of new
failure mechanisms which are characteristic of multilevel metallization, a
schematic cross-section of which is shown in Figure 18.

There are three specific kinds of failures inherent in this structural component
of 10's [62, 7h, 75]:

--Disruption of the electrical contacts between the thin film conductors of the
different levels;

--Short circuits between the thin film conductors of the different levels because
of the presence of defects in the interlevel insulation;

-Breaks in the thin film conductors of the upper levels at relief steps in the
lower metallization levels.

Strictly speaking. the latter type of failures is also observed in 16's with a
single level of metallization, but with the transition to structures with multiple
level metallization, its role increases significantly.

Contacts between the tracks of the different levels should have a low electrical
contact resistance and a high current carrying capacity.

Failures of the first kind occur because of contact window opening defects in the
interlevel insulation. Undercutting etching and complete overetching of lower
.level thin film conductors are observed, since the aluminum used at the present
time as the basic material for thin film 1c conductors actively interacts with

a broad range of the etchants which are used. Moreover, it is difficult to assure
a high quality coating of the lower layer of metal when depositing the upper
metallization level in these regions because of the "shading" of the lower sur-
face (bottom) of the contact window by its walls [75]. The electrical contact
can be preserved in this case, however, increased resistance in this region can
lead to 10 failure during its operation.

Failures of the second kind are due to defects in the oxide film used as the
interlevel insulation. Usually, the oxide layer is obtained by precipitation
from the gas phase and is extremely inhomogeneous, in which case, the material
of the lower layer as well as the geometry and thickness of the oxide can have
an influence on its profile [62, 74]. If the edges of the thin film conductors
are not smoothed off in this case, then microholes can be formed at the steep
steps in the metallization, where these holes are potential sources of short
circuits (see region 9 in Figure 18). Insufficiently careful cleaning of the
surface prior to the application of the oxide, as well as unsatifactory monitor-
ing of the composition and thickness of the deposited oxide film exacerbate this
phenomenon. Effective techniques for solving this problem are smoothing off the
edges of the thin film conductors and providing for an optimal ratio of the thick-
ness of the metal layers and the oxide covering it (increasing the oxide thick-
ness).

Shorts between the conductors of the different levels can also appear because of
the growth of nodules ("little bumps") on the surface of the metal film during
subsequent heat treatment [7‘].

- ag -

FOI‘OFFﬂJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The height of such bumps can reach a few microns, and the passivating layers of
oxide or photoresist film cannot cover them, something which leads to undercut
etching of the oxide and the metal. As a result, shorts appear between the con-
ductors of the various levels when subsequent metallization levels are applied or
during operation of the IC's with temperature and electrical loads.

 

Figure 18. Cross~section through the structure of an integrated
circuit made with two-level metallization (levels I

and II) with a passivating protective glass surface.
"Thermal" 3102;

Precipitated $102;

Passivating glass;

Si;

Lower metallization level;

Upper metallization level;

Contact between the conductors of the different levels;
Thinning of the upper level conductor at a relief step in
the lower level;

Insulated crossing of the conductors of the different levels.

Key:

a o o o o a

\D @90U5UNH

An effective means of preventing the formation of nodules and cracks in the oxide
film is the use of a low temperature (< 600' C) passivating coating of $102 of
sufficient thickness (up to 100 nm). It is also recommended [73] that a combina-
tion of two technological processes be used for the application of the 5102 films
(RF vaporization coating at a temperature of about 100° C with subsequent chemical
precipitation of $102 from the gaseous phase). In this case, the bottou (main)
$102 layer provides for good insulation, while the upper layer covers possible
holes and smoothes the surface of the oxide film.

The third type of failure is breaks in the thin film conductors of the upper levels
at steps in the lower levels and is the most probable kind. where rather high and
steep relief steps are formed on which it is very difficult to apply a layer of
metal in the process of producing the third and subsequent levels of metallization
(Figure 19). The most effective means of eliminating this cause of failures is

the technique of "smoothing off" the edges of the thin film conductors when pro-
ducing the bottom (first) metallization level. However. it must be noted that the
cross-sectional area of the thin-film conductors of the first level is approxi-

- 49 -

IIHRCHNHCIAI.USEGNVLY
IN)! C”ﬂﬂ(141.lﬂ3EL(NVLY

mately cut in half in this case (as compared to the initial value), which can
lead to failures due to electromigration, if the reduction in the cross-section
is not compensated beforehand [74].

Scientific research and design work are
constantly under way to seek out new com-
(1) ”nun”, (2) binations of metals to produce reliable
I I l Annuawl current carrying conductors and materials
as well as a more refined technology for
hm: applying insulating films in structures
with multilevel metallization so as to
ﬂ more fully utilize all of the advantages
of multilevel metallization.

    
   
   

      
 

_§\"
—‘\
_ “ &‘\‘\‘~

The most promising trends in this case
Figure 19. Break in a third level are:

thin film conductor at
the matching boundaries
of conductors of metalli-
zation levels I and II.

-Replacing aluminum as the main material
of the conductors with multilayer thin
metal films based on difficultly fusi-
ble metals [S9, 58, 76];

Key: 1. Netsllization levels; -Using aluminum dioxide for the inter-
2. Break in level 3. level insulation of the films, where
this oxide is obtained by means of ano-
dizing, or using polyimide films [77,
78].

Thin multilayer metal films (Ti-Pd-Au. No-Au-No, Ts-Au-Ta, etc.) make it possible
to:

-lncrease the mean time before failure by one to two orders of magnitude (under
similar operational conditions);

--Reduce the geometric dimensions of the current carrying conductors as compared
to single layer ones with the same current density levels;

--Assure high adhesion and substantially reduce the probability of undesirable
chemical interactions of metal films with silicon dioxide, silicon, moisture
and surface contaminants of the chip;

--Harkedly reduce the mutual diffusion rate of the metals (the Au-Au welded con-
tacts).

All of these advantages completely justify increased complexity of the metalliza-
tion system, especially for very large scale integrated circuits.

The use of new insulating materials as the interlevel insulation instead of tradi-
tional silicon dioxide makes it possible to:

--Substantially reduce the probability of failures due to short circuits between

the conductors of the various levels as a consequence of the better electrical
insulating properties and the smaller number of defects in the "barrier" A1303

oxide films and the polyimide films (as compared to $102);

- so -

FOI‘OFFR!A1.USE¢NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Reduce to a minimum (in structures with A1203 dielectric insulation) or complete-
ly eliminate (in structures with polyimide insulating films) relief steps, which
makes it possible to eliminate local thinning of the thin film conductors at
relief steps of the lower levels of the wiring layout and to realize three to
five level metallization for very large scale integrated circuits while pre-
serving acceptable indicators for their reliability;

—-lncrease the resistance of multilevel metallization to thermal shocks because of
the high elasticity of the polyimide.

In conclusion, we shall consider yet another kind of contact connection used in
integrated circuits.

The Chip to Chip Holder Contact. In the process of mounting the chip in a package,
it is fastened ("seated") in the chip holder by means of brazing using a gold-
silicon eutectic or by gluing with a heat resistant glue (compound). It should be
noted that "seating" the chip on a eutectic is more to be preferred because of the
better mechanical properties and lower thermal resistance as compared to glued con-
tacts.

As a result of contamination of the chip surfaces and the chip holder, or inade—
quately worked out conditions for the "seating" operation, nonuniform wetting of
the surfaces being joined together with the gold (or glue) is sometimes observed,
misalignment of the chip and other defects occur which lead to a degradation in
the characteristics of the contact connection.

Nonuniform brazing or gluing (in particular, because of nonuniform wetting of the
surfaces) in the region of the chip--chip holder contact connection (region 8 in
Figure 13) can lead to the fact the IC's will contain cavities underneath the
chips, although they pass all of the electrical tests. This defect can manifest
both in an overall increase in the thermal resistance of the IC, and in nonuni-
formity of the temperature field in the chip, something which is the most danger-
ous for high power and linear IC's. The mechanical strength of such a contact is
naturally reduced. It is specifically IC's with such weakened contacts which are
the most inclined towards failures because of the difference in the temperature
coefficients of expansion of the materials employed. This effect is especially
pronounced in the accumulation of mechanical fatigue damage due to variable mech-
anical stresses which occur in the structural components with long term exposure
of the integrated circuit to temperature gradients: thermal shocks, thermal
cycling, and a cyclical variation in the dissipated power.

In this case. it is specifically a degradation of the contact connections which is
observed first of all, and which leads in the final analysis to a gradual failure

of the IC, especially in the case where it is hermetically sealed in a plastic
package.

We shall now move on to a discussion of third category: failures related to the
state of the integrated circuit surface.

-51-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Failures Due to Phenomena on the Chip Surface

Gradual failures due to surface instability of 10's and the influence of the
environment comprise an important category of IC failures, especially in the case
of an increased level of IC integration. The difficulty of achieving the high
level of purity needed to preclude undesirable surface effects, the reduction in
the dimensions of the components and the spacings between them, which leads to

an increased electrical field intensity in 16's, as well as the wide scale appli-
cation of an increased level of integration of MOS transistors with a thin layer
of oxide under the gates in integrated circuits - all of these factors make the
study of the influence of the surface migration of ions on Hos and bipolar IC
reliability an extremely urgent problem.

The application of dielectric films to the surface of a chip for the purpose of
passivating it or to form interlevnl insulation in the multilevel metallization

of very large scale integrated circuits can have a substantial impact on IC relia-
bility because of the change in the following characteristics of the Si-—SiOz
system [30, 31, 67, 62, 79-81]:

--The amount of the mobile and stationary charge in the oxide;

—-The stability of the charge in the oxide when exposed to an electrical field
under elevated temperature conditions;

--The surface recombination rate.

We shall consider the possible reasons for these failures. As is well known, when
using planar technology, the e1ectron-hole junctions are formed by the diffusion
of daping impurities into the silicon through local openings in the silicon dioxide
film which are produced photolithographically. In this case, the oxide layer
serves as a masking coating, performing the functions of a "barrier" for the doping
impurity (boron, phosphorus. etc.), which is necessary to produce the individual

16 components in accordance with the specified topology.

After fabricating the device, the oxide film remains on the chip surface and pro-
tects the p-n junctions from the environment, thereby performing the functions of
a passivating and stabilizing coating. However, charges of a diverse nature are
present on the surface and within the oxide (the positive and negative ions of

the doping impurities, excess ionized silicon atoms, electrons, holes, "traps",
etc.), which are symbolically depicted in Figure 20 [82]. During integrated
circuit operation, the redistribution of the electrical charges takes place at

the Si--5102 separation boundary and the near-surface region of the semiconductor
crystal, where this redistribution causes significant changes in the characteris-
tics of the p-n junctions and sometimes leads to the appearance of surface channels
with an inverse silicon conductivity ("inverse" channels). Because of this pheno-
menon, the leakage currents rise and the IC parameters are substantially degraded
[62, 79, 83].

The kinetics of the process which leads to the formation of inverse channels in
integrated circuits is shown in simplified form in Figure 21 (a-c). The oxide
layer which coats the chip of an actual IC takes the form of an amorphous

- 52 _

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structure, the basis for which is sili-
con, phosphorus and boron atoms bound
with oxygen atoms. Moreover, atoms of
such alkali earth metals as sodium.
potassium and lithim are usually pre-
sent in the oxide. The concentration
and mobility of these ions (and other
contaminants) is especially high in
the case of insufficiently effective
cleaning of the surface of the plates
prior to oxidation or contamination

 

NC. 20- Cxeu pummel-- “P". . during the process of applying (grow-
‘z‘ Tmm‘ ' mm“ we. ing) the oxide or where a high density
“ - 1 'm " WW" ' "W" of defects is present in the oxide
5“” .u .. film. The metal ions are positive,
<:> Excess ionized and in having a high mobility in the
Si atoms; “traps“ oxide structure. can easily move in
the oxide layer to the Si--Sioz separa-
-.+ Electrons and holes.. tion boundary when exposed to an elec-

trical field. As a result of this, a

Figure 20. Schematic of the distribution bulk positive charge is formed in the

of the charges occurring in thin oxide layer located directly at

an oxide film. the separation boundary. The electric-
al field produced by the bulk charge of
positive ions serves as the reason for
the occurrence of local regions (chan-
nels) in the near surface layer of the
silicon, which possess electron conductivity. The formation n-type channels
causes the depletion or inversion of the conductivity of the p-type silicon and
the accumulation of excess current carriers in the n-type material.

R+ and x' are ions at the
surface and inside the $102.

 

Figure 21. The sequential stages of charge separation by the electrical
field in an oxide film and the formation of inverse channels
on the surface of the silicon.

Key: 1. $102:
2. Si;
3. Metal electrode.

- 53 -

FKHR1JFFICLAl.ll§ElCMWLY
FIHICHWHCJA1.USE13NLY

It has been experimentally found that inverse channels can be eliminated by means
of high temperature annealing without supplying inverse bias to the re. However,
the source of instability is not eliminated in this case and during subsequent 16
operation at an elevated temperature. the channels are formed again.

HOS structures are the most sensitive to the state of the oxide, in which the
effect of ion surface migration is substantially amplified by the overall impact
of three factors:

-The oxide under the gate is the "working" element of the re, governing its basic
electrical characteristic: the threshold voltage;

--The thickness of the oxide under the gate usually does not exceed 150 to 200 nm,
something which, first of all, makes it difficult to assure a perfect structure
of the file. and secondly, leads to an increase in the electrical intensity in
the critical region, and thirdly, reduces the spacing which the positive ions
must overcome to reach the separation surface;

--The working supply voltages normally used to electrically drive Hos structures
substantially exceed the voltages for the majority of logic planar epitaxial
IC's [30].

The main kind of failures due to surface effects, characteristic of MOS IC's, is
threshold voltage instability when they operate under conditions of elevated temp-
erature and negative bias.

The design of integrated circuits of an increased level of integration with multi-
level metallization, as well as with a single level of metallization coated with

a layer of silicon dioxide (glass) exacerbates the problem of surface instability
[47, 62, 81]. This is related to the fact that the additional protective oxides
applied to the surface of the sufficiently perfect, thermally grown oxide, as a
rule have a higher moisture content, degrading the properties of the silicon--
silicon dioxide separation boundary.

Supplemental doping of the oxide with phosphorus (in the eaitter diffusion state)
is widely used to stabilize the surface, since the thin layer of phosphorus sili-
cate glass (PSG) formed in this case has getter properties with respect to the
alkali earth metal ions and plays the part of a barrier, actively impeding the
accumulation of ions at the separation surface [47, 62, 79, 86].

It must also be noted that when applying a glass-like film of P86 to the surface
of the oxide, its dielectric strength is increased at the same time, since the
boundaries of the grains and microcrystallites, which reduce the breakdown voltage
of the oxide, terminate at the ssc—-s102 separation boundary, not going out to

the surface of the oxide.

However, care must be taken when alloying the oxide with the P56 layer, because
the excessively high P205 concentration can lead to a shift in the threshold vol-
tage because of the phenomenon of P30 polarization.

Such a type of failure as a short circuit of the thin film conductor at the sili-
con surface through holes in the oxide film are also to be nuabered among failures

- 54 -

FinlfﬂﬁﬂCJAl.lﬁﬂifﬂWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

due to unsatisfactory surface states of IC chips. The reasons for this are usually
various oxide defects (holes, punctures, microcracks, underetchings, etc.), which
reduce its dielectric strength or which expose the surface of the silicon [47, 62].
In this case, only the small air gap between the metal and the silicon serves as
the insulator, the dielectric strength in the local region falls off sharply (from
4 ~ 10 V/cm to 5 ' 105 V/cm and less), and when a sufficient electrical voltage

is fed to the IC, the conductor short circuits at the surface of the semiconductor
chip.

One of the reasons for failures related to breakdown of defect free dielectric
films, used in Ic's with HOS structures, is the effect of static electricity dis-
charges on the ultrathin (usually no thicker than 150 nm) dielectric films which
insulate the gates. Thermally grown 8102 films or a combination of silicon dioxide
layers with silicon nitride, $102 + Si3N4, are used, as has already been noted.

as the dielectric in MOS structures. Despite the fact that thin homogeneous films
of the indicated dielectrics are immune to electrical fields of up to 4 - 107 V/cm,
an irreversible dielectric breakdown can be observed in HOS structures at consider-
ably lower intensities (about 4 ' 106 V/cm), corresponding to a gate voltage of

50 to 80 volts [89, 90]. This is explained by the redistribution of the electric-
al field, where this redistribution generates local regions with an elevated

field intensity in the near-surface region of the dielectric film at points where
the gate metallization overlaps the peripheral regions of the p-n junctions (the
drain and the source). Breakdown of defect free dielectric films in these regions
occurs at voltages considerably less than the breakdown level for the p-n junctions
of the MOS structure.

A. Other Kinds of Integrated Circuit Failures

Because of the high chemical reactivity of aluminum and a number of other metals
used in 16's, as well as the extremely unfavorable impact of moisture and chemical
contaminants on the properties of IC chip surfaces, the degree of hermetic sealing
of IC packages is of particular importance from the viewpoint of reliability. The
presence of microholes (leaks) in packages - defects in packages or the hermetic
seal which are not detected in time or which appear during improper application

of the Ic's - which promote the penetration of water vapor, dirt, chemically
reactive substances. etc. into the 16's during their operation, especially under
conditions of elevated ambient humidity, can lead to failures due to corrosion

of the thin film conductors and resistors as well as the occurrence of ion and
inversion type leakage, the mechanisms for which were treated in detail above.

Unsealed soldered or welded seams and the points of metal to glass Joints (espe-
cially in the case of incomplete fusion, incomplete wetting with solder, splitting
and other mechanical damage to package components) are possible paths for the
penetration of moisture, dirt, etc. into IC's. Moisture and contaminants can
penetrate into plastic packages to the surface of the chips through pores in the
plastic or along the surface of the separation between it and the metal leads
(feed-throughs and flexible leads) [65. 66, 69].

An important cause of degradation which exerts a substantial influence on IC relia-
bility is the corrosion of the metal parts of packages because of insufficient

- 55 -

Flll(“ﬂﬂC1A1.USE(N¥LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thickness or mechanical damage to their anticorroaion coatings, as well as because
of exposure of parts of the components fabricated from corrosion vulnerable metals,
at points of cracking or chipping of the glass insulators.

Chemical or electrochemical corrosion of package components, primarily the external
leads of a package, leads to 10 failures in the external appearance or because of
the tearing away (breaking) of the external leads during storage or operation of
the IC with power applied under conditions of increased ambient humidity.

To eliminate the indicated reasons for failures, the most promising approach is
the refinement of methods of checking the hermetic seal of IC's, which make it

possible to ascertain leaks in the packages throughout the entire range of inflow
rates.

During longterm operation or testing of 10's at an elevated temperature (on the
order of 125° C), failures are observed in a number of cases which are related to
the disruption of the electrical integrity of the soldered connections of the
external leads of a microcircuit, with the leads made of gold plated Pernico,

to the current carrying tracks on the printed circuit. The failure mechanism in
this case is related to the dissolution of the gold in the lead-tin solder [91],
which can lead to the occurrence of sections of exposed Pernico on the external
leads of 16's (when they are mounted on a printed circuit board) and the subse-
quent degradation of the soldered contact quality (during subsequent operation

of the IC's) in the case where the thickness of the gold coating of the external
leads is insufficient, while the quality of the soldering of the IC to the circuit

board is unsatisfactory ("point" soldering).

Such are the major kinds, reasons and mechanisms of the degradation processes
which lead to failures of semiconductor integrated circuits.

In conclusion, we shall briefly treat the specific features of very large scale
integrated circuits which influence their reliability and which are manifest in
the redistribution of the dominant failures with respect to types and in changes
in the kinetics of integrated circuit failures.

To define the trends in the change in the reliability of very large scale inte-
grated circuits it is necessary to evaluate the impact of the following factors:

--Hultilevel metallization with dielectric film insulation applied by precipita-
tion techniques;

--The reduction in the dimensions of the active and passive components as well as
the spacings between them;

--The increased power dissipation level per unit of chip area;

--The increase in the dimensions of the chip and package [32, 62, 71].

An analysis of the test and operational data existing at the present time large
scale integrated circuits [27, 32, 33, 30, 62, 86] attests to the fact that with

an increase in the number of gates on a chip, a redistribution of the types of
failures takes place (see the comparative data in Table 10):

_ 55 -

FOR 0I11C1A1.lkiE(MVLY
IKIRCHNHCJAL.LEﬂE(ﬂ‘LY

TABLE 10. Comparative Data on the Distribution of 10's with Respect to the Kinds
of Failures as a Function of the Level of 1c Integration

Number of 1c FailuresI X
LSI

 

Low Level Intermed-
of lnte- iate Level 81- HOS

Reason for the Failure gration Integration polar Structure
1. Thin film conductors ("metalliza-

tion") 16 25 27 A
2. Defects in the photolithography and

diffusion 14 12 25 6

3. Defects in the structure and con-
tamination of the oxide and semi-
conductor chip 26 25 16 54

d. Defects in the assembly and sealing
(breaks in the welded contacts.
defects in seating the chip, dis-

ruption of the hermetic seal, etc.) 28 12 6 -
5. Intrusion of foreign particles

into the package 8 12 14 12
6. Other reasons for failures (includ-

ing undetermined ones) 8 16 lb 26

7. Incorrect use (in the form of the
ratio of failures because of ,
incorrect use to the total number
of detected failures) ' 36 17 5 15

_____________——.——————————

-For bipolar large scale integrated circuits (L81), the specific percentage of
failures related to the metallization, diffusion and intrusion of foreign par-
ticles into the package increases [27, 32];

-Por LSI circuits based on HOS structures, the characteristic causes of failures
are defects in the oxidation, charge instability related to contamination and
defects in the photolithography [27, 31, 32, 33, 30, 62, 86].

Problems related to the use of multilevel metallization were treated in Chapter
II. He shall now briefly touch on the influence of "dimensional effects“ in
large scale integrated circuits.

A substantial increase in the level of IC integration is manifest, first of all,
in a sharp reduction in the geometric dimensions of individual elements (for inte-
grated circuits of the third and fourth levels of integration, down to values on
the order of l to 3 um) and the spacings between them. and secondly, in the use of
structures with "small" p-n junctions with submicron doping depths for the junc-
tions and minimal thicknesses of the epitaxial layers, reaching 1 to 2 um.

- 57 -

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Obviously, elements with such small dimensions will be made with greater relative
errors than the larger elements of integrated circuits of the first and second
levels of integration, since the absolute errors in the fabrication of IC's given
the technological state of the art will be approximately the same. In this case.
considering the fact that concurrently with an increase in chip size, the number
of defects occurring on its surface will also increase, the conclusion can be
drawn that with a rise in the level of integration and when the present level of
materials quality and technological process stability is maintained, the percentage
of potentially unreliable IC's will increase. The reduction in the geometric
dimensions of elements on a chip, besides increasing the criticalness of IC's to
the layout precision and resolving power provided by photolithographic processes.
the role of such failure mechanisms as corrosion and electromigration of the
material of thin film conductors will increase markedly. as well as the formation
of shunting leaks (shorts) between 1c components, leaks and breakdowns of p-n
junctions due to disruption of the diffusion profiles because of photolithography
defects, etc. The influence of "small geometry" is manifest here in two ways:
first of all. as was noted above, with a reduction in the spacings between the
elements, there is an increase in the electrical field intensity between them,
which increases the rate of degradation processes; secondly, the reduction in
the width of thin film conductors, the doping depths of the p-n junctions as well
as the spacings between the active and passive components and current conducting
tracks on a chip increases the criticalness of IC's to the failure mechanisms
indicated above.

All of this attests to the necessity of devoungapecial attention to questions of
assuring the reliability of IC's with an increased level of integration in all of
their production (design, fabrication) and applications stages.

; 58 -

INNRIMHHCJA1.USE1ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter IV. Methods of Monitoring and Estimating the Reliability of Semiconduc-
tor Integrated Circuits

5. General Principles

In considering the methods of monitoring and estimating the reliability of semi-
conductor integrated circuits, it must be remembered that reliability is one of
the most important properties of their quality. For this reason, quality control
is at the same time a method of checking the reliability of the 16's being
monitored.

TABLE ll. Costs of Reliability Tests for Semiconductor Ic's

 

1 2 nan-owes“ lacuna-crate c r-u

    

 

 

 

I 0 23 I29 also 400

10% l 39 12.5 40000 600

l 2 53 I39 scan 900

""""""'___IB5iE'2"I3B?3§T_-"-__——___-___—_-

l 0 0:10:00 2 l1 roseplo 2300 I00

10” I Oroao 4 [[13160qu 4000 I”

2 0mm 5 npaiupuo 5300 no

out 5 ”0.0

Key: 1. Quantity of IC‘s being tested, items;
2. Permissible number of failed IC's in a batch, items;
3. Confirmed A characteristic with p* - 0.9:
a. Test duration, hours;
5. Test cost, thousands of rubles.

The highly reliable nature of semiconductor Ic's is responsible for the insignifi-
cantly small number of device failures during even the most extensive testing,
because of which the use of methods of monitoring and evaluating reliability based
on the determination or confirmation of a specified A characteristic proves to be
unacceptable in the majority of cases because of economic considerations and by
virtue of its excessive operating time requirements. The data cited in Table 11
which characterize the time needed to evaluate IC reliability in this way, as well

- 59 -

FKII(HWWCIA1.IEEB(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as its cost, speak for themselves. It must be kept in mind that these are clearly
understated data, since in figuring the cost of the tests, only the costs of the
samples being studied was taken into account (taken as equal to 10 rubles), as
well as personnel salaries and overhead; such important components as the cost of
the testing and measurement hardware, equipment and production space amortization,
expenditures for materials and electrical power, etc. were not taken into account.
Nonetheless, the data cited here are sufficient to convince one that even the most

delay in obtaining the information needed for quality control. In essence. it is
equally impossible to lose thousands of hours waiting for the results of tests
necessary to make the decisions to ship or not to ship the manufactured product,
or having shipped it prior to the completion of the tests, several thousand hours
after finishing the tests to then take steps directed towards improving the
quality. In this case, such belated information on the quality of manumfactured
products carries a very expensive price. If one additionally takes into account
the fact that the estimate of the reliability obtained in such an expensive way
applies only to a definite type of IC, and it is not always possible to extrapolate
the results obtained to other types of IC's, the inexpediency of such an approach
to reliability evaluation becomes obvious [92, 93].

Another serious drawback to the method treated here is the technical complexity
of the tests. The complexity of the tested unit is responsible for the complex-
ity of the equipment used for the tests. Automated production lines, precision
measurement hardware and test stands of the most complex designs as well as '
climatic chambers comprise the equipment of microelectronics enterprises and
provide for great precision in setting production process and test modes and
conditions, maintaining them and recording the measurement results. With all of
this, errors are not permitted in the measurement of the parameters, otherwise,
a nonexistent (false) failure will be taken into account, or, vice-verse, a real
failure will be allowed. In both cases, the time and money prove to be spent in
vain. It must be noted that in step with the further refinement of individual
technological operations, the imperfection of which at the present time serves
as a source of 1c failures, their reliability will approach their own physical
limit and the indicated difficulties in evaluating the level of reliability
attained will increase.

The methods of monitoring and evaluating IC reliability employed in worldwide
practice take these difficulties into account. Thus, for example, the military
specification standards of the U.S. and other foreign nations provide for a
differentiated approach to the solution of the given problem. In accordance with
the documents, production monitoring is accomplished at an easily monitored level
(for example, the basis for the 0.5. monitoring plan is the requirement that a
figure of A - lO—-20 2/1000 hr be confirmed), while no estimation is made of

the attained level of reliability according to these documents. It is achieved
by taking into account the data on IC reliability during operation.

By monitoring the constancy of the production level over the time segment of
interest, confidence is gained that the reliability of the product batches

fabricated during this period is no worse than a specified level. In other words,
it is altogether sufficient to monitor the failure free rate during series pro-

- 60 -

It!!!)FFIClAL [EHECHVLY'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

duction (in contrast to trial production, when obviously it is expedient to
determine both the no-failure operation figure and the service life).

Thus, the high reliability of semiconductor Ic's renders an evaluation of their
reliability by means of testing of little promise. The solely acceptable method
of solving this probles is gathering and processing the results of IC operation.
A role is set aside for tests though in check operation which is performed in
the interest of obtaining information which characterizes the stability of the
production process and the production level during the time segment being moni-
tored.

Confidence in the correctness of implementing the technology and the requisite
quality of the raw materials, semi-finished products and complete product assem-
blies, along with knowledge of what reliability the given technological process
assures create the prerequisites for an apriori estimate of the reliability of
integrated circuits produced over the time segment which was studied.

The product quality control system employed in worldwide practice is based on
the following principles:

-In the process of doing the scientific research and prototype design work.
limit tests are performed, while operational monitoring is carried out during
the production process of fabricating the integrated circuits;

--Each production batch of 10's is subjected to acceptance tests, based on the
results of which a judgment is made concerning the possibility of delivering
this product to the consumer; standards are employed in the acceptance tests
which are many times greater than the operational norms;

-Ihe level of operational loads simulated under laboratory conditions is chosen
as close as possible to the actual ones which it is still possible to reproduce
using the test equipment;

--Depending on the fabrication quality, the finished products are differentiated
with respect to reliability categories; corresponding to each category are its
own requirements and check operations;

-The shipment of the products is based on the results of checking the production
level of reliability;

--The estimate of the attained reliability level is made on the basis of results
of comprehensive tests performed for the full volume, needed to determine the
quantitative indicators for reliability, service life and strength safety mar-
gins as well as the safety margin for exposure to environmental factors, taking
the operational data into account.

The most important features of a progressive quality control system can be charac—
terized as follows:

--The requirements placed on the components are as close as possible to the actual
ones, taking economic expediency into account: the cost of reliability assur-
ance programs for the supplier and the consumer are taken into account;

--Test procedures are based on intensifying the developmental processes of hidden
production defects and identifying failures, and provide for maximum rejection
of all "week" devices;

- 51 -

FORIOFFKJA1.USB(NVLY
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE10NIN

-During acceptance testing, product quality is checked with respect to all
major requirements;

--The most progressive test procedures and the analysis of failed products are
standardized;

--The engineering and standard setting documentation provides for sharing the

responsibility for quality assurance and maintaining the reliability of Ic's
during production and operation.

The engineering standards setting documentation establishes several levels of 16
quality, which differ from one another in the degree of stringency of the
requirements placed on quality and the quality evaluation criteria. In line
with existing practice, the norms adopted for checks at various production stages
are made significantly stricter than the norms used when quality control testing
the finished product. This is done in the interests of providing guarantees of
the rigorous performance of production process operations and the high quality
fabrication of the products in all stages.

For lc's intended for delivery to especially important projects, special reliabi-
lity assurance programs have been developed. They take into account the opera-
tional conditions of the integrated circuits. The monitor operations which are
repeated and targeted as much as possible towards a specific goal provide for
checking that the samples being studied conform to the requirements placed on
them. For example, it is well known that the 0.8. space research program includes
general and special programs for space systems reliability support as a whole as
well as for individual equipment, assemblies and components of radioelectronic
hardware.

Integrated circuits, just as other kinds of equipment components which are intend-
ed for these kinds of projects, are certified by means of performing qualification
tests which guarantee the evaluation of definite reliability levels for the 16's,
and are incorporated in the listing of products authorized for applications in
special equipment.

During the process of 1c fabrication, its quality is repeatedly and carefully
checked. Beginning with the input quality control of the raw materials, semi-
finished products and complete product sets and concluding with the quality con-
trol of the finished product, integrated circuits are constantly under the
observation of shop workers, as wall as the workers of technical control depart-
ments and reliability services.

The monitor operations during the production process for semiconductor integrated
circuits comprise about 60 percent of all operations. The fraction of the outlays
for monitor operations reaches 60 percent of the overall expenditures.

The numerous check operations are called upon to test the fabrication quality of

the integrated circuits at various stages in the production process. In this
case, checking is done to see that the following major requirements are met:

- 62 -

Ft“!(lﬂﬂ€1hl.U§E(ﬂVLY
Ft“!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(MﬁLY

-Conformity of the external appearance of the chips, plates and bases of the
10's to the requirements of the engineering standards documentation;

-The absence of varnishes, glue and other organic materials inside the package,
which are not authorized by the engineering standards documentation, as well
as foreign particles;

--The absence of cracks, cuts, dirt and foreign materials over the length of the
re leads;

-The strength of the internal connections.

The quality of Ic's during the production process is monitored by means of
measuring the corresponding characteristics and parameters, as well as by means
of all possible kinds of tests.

For ongoing monitoring of the production level and quality of the product at
various stages in the fabrication, tests are employed, the kinds and order of
performance of which are set forth in later sections. Recent years have been
characterized by the wide scale dissemination of nondestructive techniques for
quality control, estimation and prediction of reliability as well as apriori
methods of predicting the reliability and durability of intergrated circuits.

Integrated circuit quality control provides for establishing the fact and degree
of IC conformity to the requirements of the engineering standards documentation
which regulates the requirements, norms, methods, means, procedure and organiza-
tion for the conduct of tests, measurements, as well as acceptance and shipment
rules for the received product. Such engineering standards documents include
state and sectoral standards, enterprise standards, model regulations and tech-
nical specifications [9A, 95].

The conformity of 16's to the requirements of the engineering standards docu-
mentation is evaluated by means of measurement and the determination of various
parameters and characteristics under various environmental conditions under
specific loads.

The listing of the parameters to be monitored during the production process is
indicated in the routing charts, while the parameters of the finished products
are indicated in the technical specifications.

In the interest of providing for maximum quality control effectiveness (also
including economic effectiveness), the most informative parameters are chosen
as those to be monitored. These are those parameters which correlated well with
other ones and most fully reflect'the physical processes in the 1c which occur
under the applied load and with the ambient conditions, as well as the variation
in the processes. An effort should be made to see that their number is as small
as possible. An obligatory requirement placed on the parameters selected for
IC quality control is measurement simplicity, convenience and safety and the
capability of reproducing the measurement results. The listing and number of
such parameters are governed by experience with the design, fabrication and
operation of the integrated circuits. The list of the parameters being measured

_ 63 -

FOR10FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can be supplemented based on the operational results for the 16's. If failures
are repeatedly found which are due to the inability to check a given parameter

during production, it is essential to incorporate an additional quality control
operation.

The volume of checks is curtailed if the accumulated experience attests to the
expediency of eliminating particular checks.

The quality control is realized by performing the following:

--Qualification tests (in the stage of getting the products in production), the
purpose of which is to demonstrate production readiness to manufacture products
which meet the requirements of the customer;

--Input quality control of the materials, semi-finished products, component pro-
ducts and devices;

--Operational quality control of the manufacturing of the 10's;
--Honitoring the production processes;
-~Quality control testing of the finished product.

The tests are performed on special equipment which assures that the specified
test mode will be maintained for the requisite time and the estimation of the
test data will have the requisite precision. Meeting the indicated conditions
assures obtaining reliable results as well as the reproduction and uniformity
of the test modes at various times on various equipment. Just as important a
role is assigned to the choice of the type of test hardware as to the selection
of the optimum testing procedure in the efficiency of evaluating quality.

The requirements placed on the choice of the optimal testing methods and equip-
ment provide for the observance of the following main recommendations. They
should make it possible to obtain exhaustive and objective data on the tested
quality property of the integrated circuit being tested in the most economical
manner. In other words, a reliable estimate of the capability of the test
subject to stand up to the test conditions and maintain operability under these
conditions should be obtained in the shortest possible time while using compara-
tively simple test equipment and gauging the minimum possible number of servicing
personnel.

In cases where stand tests do not make it possible to obtain the requisite infor-
mation, the results of full scale and objective tests of the 16's are employed.
Objective tests of integrated circuits are nothing more than their operation

as part of equipment designed around them under conditions stipulated by the
technical specifications for the unit. By carefully taking into account the
information on 10 behavior under operational conditions, the most reliable esti-
mate of IC reliability is obtained without additional expenditures of time and
money.

A typical program for worldwide practice in acceptance testing is shown in Table
12 as an example.

- 66 -

PoaiofFﬂJAl.USE(ﬂVLY
Subgroup I

Checking the overall
dimensions

Subgroup 11

Resistance to exposure
to the soldering temper-
ature

Thermal cycling

Thermal shock

Moisture resistance

 

In accordance with the tech-
nical specifications

The 1c leads are simultaneously
or alternately innersed for 10
sec in solder at a tenperature
of +230° C to a depth of 1.5 n
from the package

Number of imersions is indi-
cated in the technical specifi-
cations

Prom -65° C to +175° C. Expo-
sure time 30 min; transfer time
5 min. Number of cycles: 5.

From +100' C to 0° C. Exposure
time 0.25 to 5 min. Transfer
time 3 to 10 sec. Number of
shocks: S.

From -10° c to +60° C. Hoisture
up to 98%. Time for 1 cycle,

21: hr. Number. of cycles indi-
cated in— technical specifica-
tions.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 12. [cont.]

 

Resistance to the action Acceleration of 20,000 g;

of a constant (centri- l min each in 3 mutually
fugal) acceleration perpendicular directions.
0verall.testing time: 3 min.
Subgroup IV 20 1--5
Checking the mechanical Three leads are checked by
strength of the leads means of suspending a load.

The weight of the load and
the time are given in the
technical specifications.

Subgroup V 20 1--5
Checking the corrosion The devices are kept for
immunity 24 hr in a chamber with a

salt fog at T - +35° C.

The concentration and flow
rate of the fog should pro-
vide for a salt precipitation
of no more than 50.000 mgm/m2

per 24 hr.
Subgroup VI A - lO--20 -
Storage T - +l75° C; duration of
1,000 hr.
No-failure operating T - +125° C; duration of
time 1,000 hr. Nominal electrical
mode.
Subgroup VII 1 - 10-20 -
No-failure operating T - +125° C; duration of
time 1,000 hr. Nominal electrical
mode.

 

As follows from Table 12, the various kinds of climatic and mechanical tests are
combined into individual subgroups. The products are subjected to these tests in
a definite sequence. In accordance with the selected plan for selective monitor-
ing,'corresponding to each subgroup of tested samples is its own acceptance num-
ber, which expresses the permissible number of failures or the specified failure
rate. The re'.lts of tests are considered satisfactory if the nunber of inte-
grated circuits (IC's) which failed during these tests does not exceed the
established norms.

Production monitoring of the established reliability level is accomplished by
means of tests for failure free operation, while the estimate of the attained

-66-

FOR omau. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reliability level during the average service life is found by means of testing
the IC's for operating longevity. Tests for failure free operation solve the
problem of determining the probability of no-failure operation or the failure
rate during the specified continuous testing time. Longevity tests make it
possible to determine the reliability of the tested circuits over the course of
the guaranteed service life.

The volume of the tests is determined in strict accordance with the purpose of
the tests. If the issue is the performance of production checks of the reliabi-
lity of the output product for the purpose of determining production stability,
then in selecting the sample size and the testing duration, one should proceed
primarily from considerations of the maximum assurance of operational timeliness
of the quality control and economic substantiation of the selected testing plan.
The main factor in the determination of the reliability estimate is assuring the
requisite confidence level of the results.

The most acceptable plan in all respects for ongoing reliability monitoring is
a monitoring plan based on two specified reliability levels [92.96].

Such a plan is based on monitoring the constancy of a minimum reliability level,
Pmino taking into account the acceptable level. P [Pace], which is agreed upon
by the manufacturer and the customer and provides or observing the interests

of both parties. Selective quality control plans based on two levels have been
described in detail in the literature [96-99]. Because of their advantages, they
find widespread applications in many sectors of industry.

" ‘ ‘
a p, ESIEREQISEI

      
 

  
 
     
   

    
    

 
    

i-IllINLVIIIIIMI '
.llllnnnllmnllll
.“EEﬂESW'W'Eﬂ
K k x
(1) ;. if InIIm-ﬁﬁ‘ﬁglu
g” lulu-mammal“
g4, III ﬂaunt!“
l _ mums"
iiili iuilliﬁmsil

   

a: q: l! a; l 2 s o s m al.w
”'0 P0: ’91 p.’ PU: ”an...
(2) Mummﬂuum unnuDA~¢qu~¢~wu unnummw

Figure 22. Family of operational characteristic curves for
a selective monitoring plan with two levels of
reliability.

Key: 1. Probability of batch acceptance
2. Failure rate at the average reliability level.

. ".~.’

-67..

F11R‘0FF1C1AI.IKSEZ("VLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The essence of selective quality control with respect to two levels consists in
the following. Working from the proposed or attained reliability level, which

is taken as the acceptable level Paccn a minimum reliability level Pmin for the
case of a specified value of manufacturer's risk a, where the constancy of P31“
is monitored during the testing process for the case of a specified consumer risk
8. The requisite sample size, n, and the acceptance numbers, c, are determined
on the basis of the established levels. For small acceptance numbers (c - l--3),
the difference in the values of Pa¢¢ and P31“ fluctuates from 6 to 13. Production
monitoring at a level of 6 to 13 times lower than the attained level makes it
possible for the manufacturer to test a small number of devices in a short time,
something which makes these tests economically advantageous. The interests of
the consumer are covered in this case (with a risk of B of receiving poor quality
products) with a confidence that in (P) l - 8 cases, the received products will
have a reliability above Pmin at least as much as is required so that the manu-
facturer's risk a (the risk of rejecting a good product) does not exceed the
established level. Thus, the constancy of Pmin will be evidence of the mainte-
nance of the reliability of the output product at the requisite level. The
family of operational characteristic curves for the selective quality control
plan based on two levels is shown in Figure 22, which clearly reflect the proba-
bility of accepting (or rejecting) products as a function of their reliability.

The use of supplemental samples is permitted during the quality control process,
the size of which is governed by the difference between the sample corresponding
to the main plan, and the sample in accordance with the equivalent plan. In
this case, the total number of failures during device testing should not exceed
the acceptance number for the main plan.

The manufacturer, in basing his work on definite production process margins, is
himself correct in choosing a more stringent plan than the plan specified by

the consumer, and implementing quality control at a higher level of reliability.
If the actual reliability level proves in fact to be the one for which the tests
are passed successfully, their results will be just as objective as the positive
results of tests in accordance with the main plan, while the cost will be lower.

Equivalent plans make it possible where production is well set up to successfully
implement quality control with smaller samples and improve the economic indicators
of production.

When checking and evaluating the reliability of such difficult to monitor products
as integrated circuits, failure analysis is of critical importance. Production
reliability monitoring of current products and the apriori estimation of the
reliability level can be based on the failure distribution for various circuit
tests. in particular, this applies to climatic and mechanical tests which in and
of themselves do not allow for the quantitative estimation of product reliability.
The failure distributions with respect to the kinds of failures and types of tests
obtained in the testing process are compared with the corresponding distributions
of previously tested batches, the reliability of which was acknowledged as satis-
factory. If the distributions match, it can be assumed that the quality, and
consequently also the reliability of the given batch is no worse than for the

- 53 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.UBE(MVLY
FOILOFFKJAI.USE(MYLY

products tested earlier. A significant divergence between the obtained distri-
bution and that adopted as the reference standard can be evidence of the appear-
once of a new failure source and mechanism. In this case. the given batch of
circuits is carefully analyzed and the source of the failure is determined and
eliminated.

The utilization of this method for production monitoring and apriori estimation
of IC reliability is possible only with an established technology for their
fabrication. It is important in this case to know what level of circuit relia-
bility is provided by the given technology and to strive to assure that it is
constantly observed during the circuit manufacturing process.

Reliability Estimation. Integrated circuit reliability is estimated under pro-
duction conditions in accordance with the documentation which is in force by

means of testing the circuits for longevity, taking into account the results of
operating equipment using the integrated circuits. The plan for conducting the

        

         

:IIIIIIII: il'
-IIIIIII IiIIi
II IIIIIIIIII
IIIIIIIIIII
IIIIIIIII II
EUIIIIHIII III I ,IIIIIIIII

IIIIIIII II .IIII’II'III
IIIIIIIIIII'II'II’IIII

gIIIIlla IIIIIIIIIIII-
EI IIIIIIII’Igggegi IIIIIII-
' llll I‘III IIIIIIIII IIIIIII
, III III ’IIIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIII
II IIIIIIIIIIIII’IIIIIIIIIIIIIII
' [I‘tl’ "M‘IIIIIII'IIIIIIIIII"

[IIIIII’IIIIIIIIIIIII
IIII’IIIIIIIIIIIIII

’I I“ IHIIIII’IIIIIIIIIIIIIII
IIIl’IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII

IIII’ IIII
III/)E‘ggﬂlllII IIIIIIIIIIIII

n .I I s I I a 9 m n q u u u
(2)’I(]l,!-l- dawn-mm- mum WW "and, at.

                   

I I

Illa-loun-
ll-_-luI-mmw
IIEIII§IEII
II-E-Iﬂliﬂ
IEIIKIINIW
‘-“-‘-‘
LEI-Iniluile
alum-slaam
ss-numa-AI
Ins-mammuu

i i
I I
I I
I I
I I
I

 
   

‘1

I
I
I
I
I
III
I

  
    
         
        
 
  

 
       

Figure 23. Curves for estimating the reliability of products
with various confidence levels of the estimate.

Key: 1. Confidence level, p;
2. Upper confidence limit of the number of failures,

ACg.

- 69 -

FIMIIHWHCJA1.USEIMVLY
FIN!(NHﬂCJAl.USE¢NVLY

longevity tests is set up by working from the formulated task: confirm the anti-
cipated reliability level or determine the actual reliability over the course of
a specified service life. When determining sample size, one works from the
requisite confidence level with which results must be obtained. Curves are
plotted in Figure 23 which show how the test results (the upper boundary of

the confidence interval) depend on the confidence level. By using this graph,
one can determine the requisite sample size by means of formulas (8)-(10) or

the relevant tables given in the literature [96--98].

The quantitative reliability indicators are calculated assuming an exponential
distribution of the failures. using the well known formulas:

1..(t)-§; (8)
-‘Lo- 9

1.0) ..' H
-93. (10)

M!) u.

P(t)=1-u, (11)

where don is the test value of the failure rate, hr'l;

A3 and A“ are the upper and lower confidence interval limits respectively
for thelvalues of the failure rate with a confidence level of
P*, hr' ;

c is the number of units which failed over a time t, items;

Acg and Ac“ are the reduced values of the number of units which failed over
the time t, corresponding to the upper and lower bounds of the
confidence interval;

n is the number of units good at the start of the time interval under

consideration, items;

t is the time interval being analyzed, hr.

The data of Table 13 can be used to determine Ac; and Ac“ where P* - 0.9.

An important role in estimating IC reliability is assigned to the information
obtained in the course of operating radioelectronic equipment designed around
the 16's. The special role of operational data when figuring IC reliability is
determined by two major principles: first of all, by the fact that it is spe-
cifically these reliability indicators which are required for practical utiliza-
tion in calculations of the reliability of radioelectronic equipment being
designed; and secondly, by the difficulties in estimating the attained high
reliability by means of tests by the manufacturer.

One of the ways of overcoming these difficulties is using all of the information
acquired over the time interval preceding the point in time of the estimate.
Utilizing operational reliability data, as well as the results of longevity and
no-failure service tests, production process tests and the results of studying
IC reliability using special programs makes it possible to increase the confi-
dence level of the estimate of the attained reliability level.

- 7o -

FINR!)FF1CIAI.I£§I§(M¢LY
INDR*0F1HC1AL USE2CHNLY

TABLE 13.

 

Key: 1. Number of failed units, c, items;
2. One-way interval, Acn [upper], items;
3. Two-way interval.

The following expression is used when calculating the quantitative reliability
indicators based on several tests of batches:

23:1

N‘)‘ T" (12)
IEFM

where c1, n1 and t1 are the number of units which have failed, the number of
units good at the start of the tests and the testing time

for the i-th sample respectively.

The mean statistical value of the failure rate in the case of an exponential
distribution can be determined from the formula:

I_;;zsuph
MI ' O (13)
where PCT is the mean statistical value of the failure free operating probability
over the time t.

E.“"““’ (14)

P" -—-7_.
F"
-1
where n1 is the i-th sample; .

m is the number of samples;
Pon1 is the test value of the probability of failure free service of the

i—th sample;

Pon(t) - 1 - (c/n) (15)

c

-.71 -

EXHICHHHCIAI.USEIX'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when PCT ; 0.9,

Ina-ﬁn.
‘ (16)

The results of non-failure operating tests performed within the framework of the
production quality control for output product reliability are used to estimate
the reliability.

[lo-failure operation tests are performed in a forced electrical mode at an
ambient temperature of +125° C. As follows from the graph (see Figure 7), the
failure rate at this temperature averages 13 times higher than at normal temper-
ature. Using an acceleration factor of K, - 13. makes it possible to obtain

a value of the failure rate of no more than A - 2.2 ' 10'6 hr'l. Thus, even a
small volume of no-failure operation tests can be used to determine the achieved
level of reliability.

The objectivity of the estimate will increase in step with the generalization of
the results of the periodic monitoring of the reliability.

An analysis of the existing domestic quality control and reliability assurance
system for integrated circuits shows that the system of documents which regulate
the requirements placed on quality, as well as the norms and methods of relia-
bility and quality control encompass to an insufficient extent the existing
capabilities for further improving the efficiency of efforts in this area.

However, there are still also deficiencies in the organization of IC quality
control. A number of methods and standards for IC tests in accordance with
additional consumer requirements and programs which reflect specific conditions
of product applications have not as yet been standardized.

The IC quality control system which is in wide use is also inadequately effective
because it does not provide for complete utilization of the information on the
manufacturing quality of products and reliability under operational conditions
[99]. In contemporary production, of all of the information obtained during
quality control and reliability checking of integrated circuits, only that part
of it is taken into account which is essential for estimating the suitability

of the finished product and for making decisions concerning its shipment to the
customer.

This occurs primarily as a consequence of the lack of a strict quality control
system for products during their manufacture. and in particular, because of a
lack of automated control systems which provide for data analysis. storage and
feed-out at the necessary time, where this information is needed to correct the
production process, as well as for test program comparison and other standard
setting engineering documentation, which regulates the methods and procedures for
production control for the purpose of assuring output products of a specified
quality.

In the literature which has been cited, the deficiencies of the existing testing
system have been formulated as follows:

-72-

momcuiussonu
FOR1OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

l) The development of testing programs without considering the results of the
tests of the entire preceding aggregate of output products and the introduction
of special methods of IC quality control in individual operations based on the
results of quality monitoring; 2) the failure to use the results of operational
quality control when planning tests; 3) the failure to receive information on
time, due to primarily to the use of manual labor in the monitor operation and
when processing the test results; a) a low confidence level for the quality
estimate in the majority of cases, which is explained by the lack in a number of
cases of scientifically substantiated standards and requirements placed on the
test modes, the precision in setting and maintaining them as well as by the
methods of carrying out the measurement operations used in this case and the
reference standard base. All of this leads to the necessity of repeated tests,
which unavoidably entail an increase in the cost of production, the product, and
an extension of the time frames for placing the products in production and manu-
facturing them.

Replacing the existing product reliability and quality control system in micro-
electronics with an automated quality control system (A80!) is the only way of
eliminating the deficiencies and further improving production efficiency. In
order to justify the hopes placed in it, an automated quality control system
should be based on the creation of the techniques and hardware for metrological,
engineering, technical, software, informational and organizational support.

One of the possible variants for an automated quality control system structure
is treated in [99], which provides for shifting the center of gravity from the
monitoring of the finished product to more careful and exhaustive operationally
timely monitoring. The author of_the proposed system notes with justification
that in the early stages of integrated circuit design, quality control of the
fabrication is more effective, since there is the real possibility there of
-preventing the appearance of defective products.

Along with this, tests of the finished product remain the only way of obtaining
the information needed for a final quality evaluation of the produced product.
For this reason, control of the tests is one of the major tasks of an integrated
circuit automated quality control system. Testin control is understood to be
the development and realization of a set of organizational, technical and scien-
tific and procedural measures, which provide for the preparation and conduct of
the tests (planning the preparation, selecting the testing plan, the test'
operations, the analysis of the results obtained and working out the corrective
actions to take in production).

6. The Classification of Tests

Integrated circuit quality is composed of a number of properties which character-
ize circuit functional capabilities (resorption time, ultimate temperature,
characteristics of the major structural components which govern the integrated
circuit parameters: base, collector and emitter currents, leakage current,
junction capacitants, dynamic resistance between the emitters, forward voltage

drop across the collector-base junction, inverse voltages across the collector-

- 73 -

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEGMVLY
FINICHHHCJAI.USEGDNLY

base and emitter--base junctions, residual emitter-collector voltage, etc.), the
operational capability (heat resistance and thermal stability, moisture resis-
tance and operating stability in the presence of moisture, cold resistance and
operational stability in the presence of cold, vibrational strength and vibra-
tional stability, shock strength and operating stability under shock loads,
strength in the case of free fall and transportation, resistance to centrifugal
acceleration, etc.) as well as durability, non-failure operating life and shelf
life. The structure of integrated circuit quality is shown schematically in
Figure 24. Among these properties there are a number of properties (weight,
hermetic seal integrity, lead strength) which characterize the fabrication
quality of each integrated circuit taken individually.

As is well known, reliability is one of the major quality properties of any
product, and integrated circuits in particular. It characterizes the capability
of an 1c of performing its own functions under definite conditions for a speci-
fied time. Integrated circuit reliability is conditioned by its non-failure
operating time, durability, and shelf life [100]. Non-failure operating and
durability of a microcircuit determine its capability of maintaining operability
for a specified time. This difference between these concepts consists in the
fact that the former provides for the retention of operability for a specified
time interval without interruptions in operation, while the second provides for
the retention of operability until completely worn out, with interruptions in
operation for technical servicing and repair. The non-failure operating pro-
bability and failure rate serve as the non-failure operating time indicators.
The durability indicators are the average service life of the integrated circuits,
the minimal mean time between failures and the gamma percentage service life.

Shelf life of an IC is the property of the 1c of preserving the stipulated opera-
tional indicators during and after storage and transportation, the duration and
conditions of which are established by the engineering standard setting documen-
tation. The shelf life indicator for integrated circuits, in particular, is the
average storage life.

All of these properties of IC quality are specified in the technical specifica-
tions and are subject to check with a definite accuracy.

Measurements and tests are the only source for obtaining objective information
on integrated circuit quality. By simulating the environment under laboratory
conditions, the 16's being studied are exposed for a definite time to various
operational loads and in this way, a rather precise idea (close to the actual
value) is obtained concerning the resistance, strength and immunity of integrated
circuits to these factors, the extent of the influence of the load on the
structure of products and the capability of a unit being tested of standing up

to the destructive effect of the ambient temperature, vibration, radiation, dust,
humidity, pressure, etc.

The engineering standard setting documentation provides for the performance of
the following kinds of tests when checking the quality and reliability of 16's:

_ 74 -

F0!‘0FFHJA1.USE(NNLY
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

Figure 24.

Key:

1.
2.
3.
4.
S.
6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Strength of Leeds

:35
‘ s

5!?

all

Konmalv :
QUALITY ,

Q.
~
:

1

3%

(27)

Fhﬂﬂnlb
hots? anu!‘

Janina:
~09"!!qu

' (28

I and“!
umuanuue

(29

k E
E

Typical block diagram of the quality properties of a semi-

conductor integrated circuit.
Logic "0" output voltage;
Logic "1" output voltage;
Input current for a logic "0";
Input current for a logic "1";
Current consumption. I°cone3
Current consumption, I'cone3

- 75 -

FOR40FFKJA1.UBI(HVLY

Beet Resistance

A
H
O

V

n

' (17)

(18)

(19)

20)

A
N
g.-

v

22)

23)

N
&
v

25)

a (MW 26)

Hiiiimﬂﬂll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. Delay time, t°14e1.;
9. Gain, ;
lO. Bias vo tage, no“;
11. Difference in the input currents, Ali“;
12. Output voltage, U+but;
13. Output voltage, u.out3
14. Hermetic seal integrity;
15. Thermal stability;
16. Moisture resistance;
17. Operational stability in the presence of moisture;
18. Cold resistance;
19. Operational stability in the presence of cold;
20. Vibration strength;
21. Operational stability in the presence of vibration;
22¢ Impact strength;
23. Operational stability in the case of shock loading;
26. Strength during transporting;
25. Strength in the case of a fall;
26. Resistance to centrifugal loading;
27. Non-failure operating time;
28. Shelf life;
29. Durability.

1) Mechanical tests to detect resonant frequencies, vibrational strength. stabi-
lity under vibrational loads, impact strength when exposed to one-time and repeat-
ed shocks, resistance to single shocks, strength when exposed to centrifugal
accelerations, lead strength (tensile strength, bending strength, bending

fatigue strength) and the strength of the internal connections;

2) Climatic tests for heat resistance and thermal stability, cold resistance and
operating stability in the presence of cold, storage life at an elevated temper—
ature, resistance to a cyclical temperature variation, resistance to heat shock,
moisture resistance and operational stability in the presence of moisture, sta-
bility at reduced atmospheric pressure, operating stability and resistance to

the effect of environmental factors at the due point and exposure to hear frost;

3) Acoustical tests for resistance to sound pressure (to a single noise);
0) Biological tests for resistance to the development of mold and fungi;

5) Electrical tests for insulation resistance, non-failure operating time, dura-
bility and service life;

6) Chemical tests for explosion hazard, suitability for soldering, resistance to
corrosion when exposed to a corrosive medium;

7) Hydrolic and pneumatic tests for the effect of an elevated air pressure, the
effect of barometric shock and the hermetic seal integrity;

- 76 -

l!”l(ﬂﬂl(1hl.lﬂi§(ﬂ§l¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8) Flammability tests.

The classification cited here was compiled taking into account the requirements of
(101]. However, one must point out the fact that the cited standard does not
fully reflect worldwide experience and the industrial sector standard setting
engineering documents. In turn, the latter do not conform to the requirements

of the given standard. For this reason, the authors considered it possible to
employ the classification which was acceptable at the same time both for the
presentation of the given material and on the whole for the problems of testing
devices, equipment and components. It is impossible to justify the presence of
two individual, $.dependently existing classifications for tests: tests of
devices and equipment, and tests of electronic hardware products.

We shall consider the specific features of the classification which is discussed
in the book.

It is difficult to imagine a classification which would not provide for a grade-
tion of the tests, depending on the step in the manufacture of the product. Such
differentiation exists in principle in [101], but in a very veiled form and is

in need of being made more precise. In accordance with this standard, there
exist research and operational tests. The first are performed primarily in the
stage of working out the draft plan of the product, while the second, as follows
from the name, are performed during the operation of the finished product. In
practice, these are most frequently the operation of the product for testing or
physical unit tests. However, tests performed during the production stage are
lacking in the table of the standard as an independent category, something which
is responsible for the lack of clarity and the incomplete nature of the testing
classification with respect to this first and most important criterion. Techno-
logical production process tests are lacking among the production teats cited

in the standard which are performed during the product fabrication stage. This
kind of testing is especially important for industrial sectors which produce
electronic equipment products. To be included in the group of production process
tests are all the kinds of tests which provide for the fabrication technology of
a product at various stages in the production process and which pursue the goal
of step by step checking for the formation of the specified product properties.

Tests which in engineering practice are called conditioning, rejection, production
process run, burn-in. artificial aging or "seasoning" tests, etc., or completely
undeservingly bypassed by the standard [101]. These are very important kinds

of tests, which are widespread in industrial sectors producing electronic and
electrical equipment products. Burn-in or rejection tests are performed for

the purpose of ascertaining and rejecting from the manufactured products the
defective, potentially unreliable product units. Another task of these tests is
to increase the operational stability of the conditioned products and reduce

the scatter in the values of the product parameters, in the general set of pro-
ducts. which in this case is IC's. Such tests provide for a substantial increase
in product quality while simultaneously increasing the plan income of an enter-
prise [4. 27, 102] and cannot but occupy a necessary place among the other kinds
of tests. It can be assumed that not all quality control specialists are in
agreement in including conditioning among tests instead of including it among

- 77 -

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HULY
INDR 0F11C1A1.USIICNQLY

production process operations. Such a viewpoint has a right to exist and can
be discussed. We include these kinds of tests among the group of production
process tests, working from the duality of their nature: on one hand, the for-
mation of definite quality properties in a product, and on the other, the purely
checking functions performed by the test procedures using the test equipment.

Another deficiency of the standard of [101] which is especially important for
classifying the tests of devices and equipment is the lack of a criterion among
the classification criteria which characterizes the status of the unit being
tested: breadboarded unit, trial or prototype unit subjected to testing or a
series and mass produced product which is being tested.

The classification of tests within the limits of the criteria provided in [101]
is also not optimal and is in need of improvement.

Thus, for example, by working from the definitions given in the main text of this
standard setting engineering document, all of the tests can be subdivided accord-
ing to the purpose for which they are performed into research, check, comparison,
determination, developmental debugging, certification, service life and reliabi-
lity tests. It appears erroneous to merge research and comparison and check

and developmental tests into a single group. Research tests can be both compar-
ison and determination tests. One can also include developmental tests in the
group of research tests, since in accordance with the standard, these are "tests
performed in the process of developing a product to evaluate the impact of
changes made in it for the purpose of attaining the requisite quality indicators."

A more precise formulation is given in the reference appendix to the standard
under discussion here. In accordance with the classification given in the
appendix to standard [101], all of the tests are broken down according to the
purpose for which they are performed into check, research and liait tests.
However, in our opinion, this explanation too does not make the classification
finally complete. Differentiation of tests into research and check tests is
logical. The presence of limit tests in this group is not justified. According
to the definition given in the main text of the standard, limit tests are
research tests and for this reason cannot appear together. The standard includes
a definite portion of the test types in the category of check tests. Exceptions
are determination tests, which "can be included among check or research tests...",
as well as comparison, developmental debugging, certification, accelerated tests,
normal tests, stand or test facility tests, operational, destructive, nondestruct-
ive, service life and reliability tests. The association of these tests with
some category or group of tests by the standard [101] is not established and
their place in the classification table is not indicated.

Other positions taken by the state standard being analyzed here are also dis~
putable. Thus, for example, the difference between comparison and evaluation
tests is presented in such an ambiguous manner that it is difficult to imagine
when one should be used in practice and when the other should be used.

No category is provided in the standard in which certification tests are to be
included.

- 73 -

ROI OFFICIAl.lﬂiE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Approximately the same thing can be said about developmental debugging tests.

It is hardly correct to include the abbreviated tests provided in [101] among
accelerated tests. The formulation of this kind of test defines than as:
"accelerated tests without intensifying the processes which cause failures or
damage". But in Appendix 1 to the standard, it is explained that in the case
of abbreviated tests, "a reduction in the time needed to acquire the requisite
volume of information can he achieved, for example, based on the use of supple-
mental infarmation obtained outside the tests. . .", and then the explanation
is given as to via which routes one can obtain this additional information, and
among them are the application of extrapolation techniques, etc. This is
already a different way of obtaining information on the property of the product
being checked, which exists on an equal footing with a test. but is not a test.
In this case, the intermixing of three classification criteria is present:
duration, conditions for test performance (in nominal or forced modes) and the
source of the original information needed to estimate the quality of the product
being checked. "Accelerated tests can be either forced or abbreviated," states
the standard, and it is right there admitted that so-called "abbreviated tests"
may also not be tests at all.

It appears that the differentiation of the tests according to the classification
criteria of "property being evaluated" and "point of performance" has not been
thought through to the conclusion.

According to the first of these criteria, tests are subdivided only into reliabi-
lity and service life tests. Essentially no place has been found in the standard
for vibrational strength and operational stability under vibrational load, mois-
ture resistance and operational stability with exposure to moisture, heat resis-
tance and thermal stability tests as well as tests similar to them which are
performed for a similar purpose.

According to the second classification criterion, tests are broken down into
operational and test stand types. Again no place is found in the classification
table for laboratory tests which the designer or the manufacturer of the product
performs on test stand equipment.

The standard considered here [101] is not tne only document which regulates the
classification of tests and the terminology in this field. In addition to this
standard. similar problems are also solved in [100, 103-105]. However, the pre-
sence of these additional documents does not bring any order to the problem under
discussion. Thus. for example, in contradiction to standard [101], according to
standard [104], hydrostatic, biological and radiation tests are included in the
group of climatic tests, while acoustic tests are numbered in the group of
mechanical tests. While according to [101] quality control tests are tests of a
unit performed to monitor its quality, according to [105]. these are tests of
units from a set—up series and series produced products.

Acceptance tests, according to standard [101] are "quality control tests of
prototype units (batches) of a product, as well as products from a single pro-

-79-

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

duction run, which are performed to resolve the question of the expediency of
placing this product in production or turning it over for operation respectively."
However. according to standard [105], acceptance tests are "tests of prototypes

of new types of products, intended for series production, as well as imported
products.“ The fact that in the example considered here the issue involved
different products cannot justify the differing formulations of the same concepts,
since the kind of products being tested is of no importance for the classification
of the tests.

Even a unified terminology has not been worked out at the present time. Defini-
tions of strength and resistance are encountered at each step which are used to
define the capability of a product of standing up to the destructive effect of

a definite load and to maintain operability and external form after exposure to
this load. In contrast to the concept of "stability", which is used to charac-
terize the capability of a product of retaining operability when exposed to this
load, the term "strength" means the retention of operability by a product as a
consequence of this exposure [sic].

Without doubting the obvious nature and expedience of using the term "stability",
we shall put forward our own point of view concerning the terminology for des-
cribing the capability of a tested unit of retaining its qualities following
exposure to operational factors. In our opinion, no effort should be made to
substitute the word "resistance" for the term "strength" or vice versa.

It is convenient to use both of these terms in practical work.

Each of them under certain conditions is more suited to the description of a
particular physical process. For example, when the issue is one of the capabi-
lity of an IC of standing up to exposure to a corrosive gaseous medium (for
example, a salt atmosphere), one does not want to talk about the "strength

of an IC with respect to a sea fog", but it suggests itself to say rather "immun-
ity . . . to a fog". The same thing must be said about other tests. The
operational stability of a product in the presence of moisture sounds better than
saying its moisture strength. In the case of describing the capability of a
product during exposure to mechanical loads, it is equally correct, in our view,
to say both vibrational strength and vibration immunity (in contrast to vibra-
tion stability). However, for the purpose of bringing order to the terminology
and the rules for utilizing it, it is probably nonetheless necessary to make a
choice of one of the terms. Taking into account what has been said here, the
following system is proposed: to describe the mechanical strength of products,
use the term "strength" (vibrational strength, impact strength or shock strength,
strength in the case of a fall, tensile (or compression) strength, strength in
the case of a centrifugal load, etc.). However, the capability of products of
preserving their qualities and conforming to the requirements of standard

setting engineering documentation following exposure to climatic, biological and
chemical factors is characterized by the definitions: "moisture immunity",
"corrosion immunity". "fungal immunity", "immunity (but at: "strength") to
cyclical temperature changes". "thermal immunity" (but not "thermal strength"),
etc.

_ go -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

A few words are in order concerning terminology in area of testing, in which the
main kind of exposure is to gas or liquid pressure. The standard [101] does not
reflect the physical nature of the phenomenon and does not differentiate between
atmospheric pressure and artificially produced pressure. While the first serves
as a load when studying the capability of a product of operating under natural
conditions, the second is a direct consequence of human activity. For this
reason, it is correct to include stability testing at reduced atmospheric pres-
sure among the group of climatic tests, since testing for exposure to elevated
gas or liquid pressure is numbered among hydrolic and pneumatic tests.

Thus, test classification secording to the attribute of the "kind of acting
factor". employed in the given monograph, appears as shown in Table lb.

In this table, the authors present their own variant of test classification

based on other attributes as well. We shall not comment on the classification
table in detail because of a lack of space here. He shall only underscore the
fact once again that it takes into account the deficiencies of the standard [101]
as well as operational experience in the microelectronics sector of industry.

Research Tests. According to the classification of tests which is given in
state standard [101], tests performed in the interests of studying definite
properties of a unit are called research tests. A representative of this class
of tests is limit tests. The standard definition of limit tests reads: "limit
tests are research tests performed to determine the relationships between the
ultimately permissible values of parameters for a product and the values of the
operational mode parameters."

Tests of this kind are employed for the purpose of ascertaining the range of
stable and reliable operation of a product, determining the correlation function
of the parameters, establishing the listing of parameters to be checked and the
standards for them. working out methods of evaluating and predicting integrated
circuit reliability, as well as establishing the requirements placed on redun-
dancy of 1C components and requirements placed on the measurement and test
facilities used in working with a given type of integrated circuit.

These tests make it possible to estimate the strength and stability margins of
integrated circuits exposed to various factors, and to determine the distribution
of product failure according to kinds and degree of severity of the acting fac~
tors.

included among limit tests are thermal shock tests, thermal cycling. one-time
large force shocks, centrifugal loading, resonant frequency tests as well as
high temperature storage.

The methods for performing these tests are selected by working from the posed
problem and the design and production procesa features of the tested unit. Gene-
ral rules for the performance of limit tests provide for the following:

——The performance of the tests right up to the destruction of large parts of the
samples;

- 31 -

l1)R OIIWCJAI.IEHE(MULN
for Radioelectronic Eguipment and Electronic

Classification Attribute

 

Place and Status of
Manner of the Unit Nature Manner
Perfor- Under of the of Eva-
nance Test Test lustion
Test stand Bresdboard- Coopers
and proving ed and tive
ground cate- prototype
gories units
Test stand,
proving
ground and _
unit tests 2::::
Products Destruc- 1
from series tive and t on
and usss- nondes-

production tructive
Status of

the Unit Nature
Under of the
Test Test
Products

from series

and mass-

production
Prototypes, Destruc-
products tive and
from series nondes-
and trial tructive

production

Manner
of Eva-

luation

Compara-
tive,
determin-
ation

Determin:
tion

____—_——————
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(0) '
3's 0‘ (b) d 3" "
‘5
f!
g
(1). ‘5 (3)§§
3%
8 §
(2).“,ayz'grfvyll' 5. 3’ 5. 5‘ 5'

Figure 25. The change in the load (a). failure distribution
as a function of the load (b) and the number of
units which pass the test as a function of the
load level (c).

Key: 1. Load level;
2. Time or the number of load "steps";
3. Number of units which pass the tests, percent

--Gradual increase in the load;

--The choice of the kind and size of the load an that it is not accompanied by
the appearance of new failure mechanisms which are not inherent in the given
type of integrated circuit during operation.

The technique of a gradual stepped increase in the load has been recognized as
the most expedient and is universally used (Figure 25). A typical curve for the
rise in failures during accelerated durability tests. performed using a stepped
load, is shown in Figure 26. Thus, the test method treated here is based on

a gradual failure of units (in step with the increasing load) which have differ-
ent defects, and which under operational conditions could appear in the course
of an extremely long operating time.

'N

Kuwnnh
, t
C

I...

   

5a

Figure 26. Typical curve for the in- Figure 27. Graph of the change in the
crease in the number of value of the failure accel
failures during accelerated eration factor as a func-
tests of durability (step- tion of temperature and
wise increase in the tenper- voltage.
ature).

Key: 1. Acceleration factor.
Key: l.Nunber of failures. 1.

- g4 -

FOR!!HHK1AI.USEIDNLY
INJR¢OFIICJAL USIZCNNLY

Usually, one kind of load or another is employed. But there are cases of the
simultaneous use of several loads of a different nature.

Combined exposure to two different loads makes it possible to amplify the effect
and reduced the duration of the tests even more. The growth in the acceleration
factor with an increase in the electrical and thermal loads applied to the pro-
duct at the same time is shown in the graph of Figure 27. The resulting function
reflects the results of tests of planar transistors in the reliability improve-
ment program for the Minuteman project. The curves in the graph for temperatures
above 200° c were plotted on the basis of extrapolating the experimental data

of paper [4].

We shall consider the methods of performing specific kinds of tests.

The technique of limit testing using thermal shock (heat shock) is the same as
with conventional testing. The difference is in the number of cycles. In the
case of the limit variant, the number of cycles has no standards set for it and
depends on the established criterion for evaluating the test results. The test
is conventionally terminated when 50 percent of the IC's supplied for the test
fail or when the integrated circuit immunity is confirmed with the reaching of
the final stage of the test exposure. The number of thermal shocks is figured
in tens of shocks. The ultimate values of the temperature and the periodicity
of parameter measurement are indicated in the engineering standard setting docu-
mentation.

Testing by thermal cycling is accomplished by increasing the load in each sub-
sequent step. The ultimate and intermediate values of the temperature are spe-
cified in the engireering standard setting documentation. The initial and final
loads are selected by working from a consideration of the specific requirements
placed on the structural design of the integrated circuits and their fabrication
technology. When performing succeeding tests on integrated circuits of the

same structural and production process design, the same stages are provided as in
the preceding case, however, the initial step is chosen two steps below that

one at which failures occurred during preceding tests.

Integrated circuit testing, which pursues the goal of determining the strength
margin and the immunity to exposure to temperatures, is performed by increasing
the temperature in steps. The duration of the exposure in each step is figured
in hours.

The strength and stability margins of integrated circuits in the case of simul-
taneous exposure to the ultimate ambient temperature and electrical load are
evaluated by means of a stepwise increase in the electrical load at a constant
ambient temperature.

Thc load is increased from the nominal to the ultimate value. The duration of
the exposure of the integrated circuits in each step is governed by their

function and the structural design and production process features, and is
indicated in the testing documentation.

- 85 _

FIMICHHHCJAL UGIZCHNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the case of tests at a constant electrical load, a value of 0.8 to 0.9 of that
ultimate load which is obtained when testing with a variable load is chosen as
that load.

Mechanical shock and centrifuging tests are performed by sequentially increasing
the load in steps, which are specified in the engineering standard setting
documentation. In this case, the products being tested are arranged so that
their exposures are realized in directions which are the most hazardous for them.

Production Process Tests. Production process tests serve to check the fabrics-
tion quality of products at various stages in the production process and reject
substandard products.

This very important kind of testing is not reflected in the standard of [101),
has been undeservedly forgotten and not taken into account in the classification
of the kinds of tests.

The significance of production process testing is extraordinarily great in all
stages of integrated circuit fabrication. Input quality control of the raw
materials, semi-finished products and complete product sets establishes the basis
for a high quality product. Effective operational monitoring provides for the
exeCution of all production processes in strict conformity to the standard setting
engineering documentation and thereby, the observance of all the requirements
placed on production. The final total of the operational quality control serves
to prevent rejections when fabricating 10's and the discarding of parts or pro-
ducts fabricated with a deviation from the drawings or technology. The produc-
tion process tests performed in the final operations make it possible to "clean"
the batches of products manufactured with poor quality and assure the specified
level of product quality. The more efficient the production process testing,

the lesser the role of the output acceptance quality control.

The tests performed within the framework of input quality control of materials,
semi-finished products, etc., are carried Out in accordance with programs com-
posed based on the technical specifications for their delivery.

All those tests which play a part in the technology in each operation and provide
for checking the conformity of the product of a given operation to the require-
ments which are established are included among the production process tests
performed in the process of fabricating the integrated circuits. Not just the
indicated problem is solved by means of these tests. The scatter in the values
of the major parameters of the lC's in the general ser are reduced by means of
them, the electrical characteristics are stabilized, by eliminating the causes

of parameter drift with time, and what is the most important thing, the tests
provide for sorting of the finished devices into groups as a function of their

reliability.

Without going in detail into all of the tests included in operational quality
control, we shall treat the latter in somewhat more detail, which we shall call
quality control sorting.

-86-

FOR OFIlClA1.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sorting tests, as the name itself says, pursues the goal of quality control sort-
ing of all products into groups, depending on their quality. The necessity of
these tests is due not only to economic considerations: the striving to extract
the maximum income and make production profitable. An important factor which
governs the expediency of incorporating sorting tests is the eternal lag of the
production level of product manufacture behind consumer requirements. This
especially concerns requirements placed on Ic reliability. Here as nowhere else
are the contradictions clearly manifest between the desire of the customer and
the capabilities of production. The requirements on re reliability and durabi-
lity run ahead of the ability to achieve them. and even more to realize the
requirements placed on the production process equipment, test facilities, methods
and equipment for metrological support of 10 production and checking 1c quality,
reliability and durability.

These tests are treated in detail in Chapter Five. For this reason, we shall
limit ourselves here to a discussion of some procedural questions.

Rejection sorting test programs differ substantially from one another. The
typical programs for such tests provided in v.5. military standard for semicon-
ductor lC's MlL-STD-833 are presented in Table 15. They contain test operations
and measures to artificially age the products, where these steps are called

upon to ascertain defective and instable devices and to influence the remainder
so that the causes of parameter drift are eliminated. Included among such meas-
ures are heat treatment of the 16's, which, as a rule, is carried out prior to
sealing them and thermoelectric conditioning, which precedes the direct rejection
sorting of the devices with respect to electrical parameters and specified
reliability criteria.

Various deviations from the standard program are possible in different cases.
The composition of the quality control, test and conditioning operations, their
sequence, conditions and operating modes vary as a function of the purpose of
the lC's, their structural design and production process features as well as
the requirements placed on quality and reliability.

In all cases, the resolution of procedural questions of test conduct is governed
by the following main principles:

--The choice of test types, methods and conditions should be based on knowledge
of the physical essence of integrated circuit failures with exposure to various
actions during their testing and operation, as well as on knowledge of their
structural design and production process features;

--The test methods should accelerate the development of typical defects inherent
in this IC design and given production process. but should not cause the
appearance of new failure mechanisms not inherent in the given type of IC
design and technology;

--The sequence for the performance of the tests should be chosen so that tests
are performed first which provide for the greatest rejection of substandard
products, and shOuld contain the kinds of tests which make it possible to re-
ject potentially unreliable integrated circuits.

- g7 -

ETHICHHHCIALIISEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 15. Program of Rejection Tests in Accordance with Method 5006 of

MIL-STD-883
Integrated Circuit Reliability Class

Kind of Test A B C
Visual inspection Condition A Condition 8 Condition 0
Artificial aging (stabi- Zb hours 2h hours 24 hours
lizing heat treatment)
Thermal shock 15 cycles 15 cycles or 15 cycles or
Thermal cycling 10 cycles 10 cycles 10 cycles
Mechanical shock 20.000 g none none
Centrifuging 30,000 g 30,000 g 20,000 g
Check of the hermetic yes yes yes
seal
Electrics; tests yes no no
Thermoelectric condition- 168 + 72 hr 168 hr -
ing
Check of the electrical yes yes yes
parameters
X-ray flaw detection yes no no
Visual inspection yes yes yes

—__————__.——._——————

The effectiveness of quality control sortin tests is govern by the correctness of
the choice of rejection criteria. the quality of the output product as well as
the requirements placed on its reliability and the listing and conditions of the
tests being performed.

It is not difficult to convince oneself of what has been said by glancing at
Table 16. where figures are given which characterize the efficiency of rejection
tests of 10's as a function of quality. As can be seen, the difference between
the failure rate for various groups of integrated circuits reaches several orders
of magnitude [32].

The governing factor when making a decision concerning the implementation of a
particular program of rejection tests for the integrated circuits which are being
produced is the economic factor. Tables 17 and 18. which were taken from the
literature [23, 32], are convincing evidence in favor of this argument and show
how great the losses can be if timely steps are not taken to reject units which
do not meet definite requirements. The levels of reliability regulated by 0.8.
military standard MIL-STD-BBS are presented in Table 17. The values of the 16
failure rate, which represent the requirements of various users. are the require-
ments of three companies using the integrated circuits. reported to national
symposia on reliability. The ARINC model is nothing more than the reliability

nos OIIICLAL11551MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 16. The Effectiveness of Rejection Sorting Tests (Average Failure Rate

per 1,000 hrI X} _

 

 

Key: A. Quality of the batch (fraction of defective integrated
circuits in percent);
8. Test effectiveness, percent.

 

TABLE 17. Requirements Placed on Integrated Circuit Reliability as s Function
of the Level of c lexit of ui t Re air

 

 

 

     
  
 
 

(a) gupus n mar-0.00 0.01—0.00 0000—0000 0000-0000

(”ref-'52 0.19 0.003 --

(exam ' 0.000 0.000 0.000
n 60:-

(a)... _ - 0.0000 -
“0.10.15

(nmmc - 0.03 l 0.00 0.000 0.000

________—_——————
(J) Omocu'renulu crouums (annexe manor!!!)

1 l I .3 I I .6 I 2.3

Key: A. Failure rate per 1.000 hr in X;
8. Aviation devices;
C. The repair is accouplished:;
D. Space equipment: repair impossible or very expensive;
E. Texas Instruments Company;

F. User A;
6. User B;
H. User C

- 89 m

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key [cont.]: 1. ARINC model;
J. Relative cost (cost index).

 

standard computed from [106] which makes it possible to determine the indicator
of product reliability improvement as a function of the kinds of rejection tests
employed, the operational conditions and the position of the estimated value on
the ) - f(t) curve. The cost index is defined on the basis of the price of

100 TTL circuits with a low level of integration, sealed in C-DIP packages.

TABLE 18. The Cost of class B Rejection Tests in Accordance with HILPSTD’SSJ

CostI Dollars

Kind of Test Minimal Average Maximal
Visual inspection (condition 3) 0.15 0.25 3.0
heat treatment 0.01 0.05 0.10
Thermal cycling 0.05 0.10 0.20
Ccntrifuging 0.05 0.10 0.25
Check of the hermetic seal 0.05 0.10 0.20-0.25
Thermoelectric conditioning 0.25 0.50 5.00
Check of the electrical para- 0.25 0.50 2.00
meters

 

Total 0.81 1.60 10.55

 

However, it would be incorrect to evaluate only the economics. The decision to
implement or not implement rejection tests should be made on the basis of the
results of analyzing a set of questions, among which the main ones are the
initial requirements placed on device quality, the permissible and justified
degree of integrated circuit rejection at the level of modules and systems, the
requirement placed on reliability and the degree of reproducibility of IC appli-
cation conditions by s.andard programs.

The conditioning of integrated circuits, just as heat treatment, used for artifi—
cially accelerating the aging of 16's, is more of a production process operation
than a test. In problems which are solved, for example, in the thermal and
electrical conditioning of products, the functions of production process and
quality control operations are interwoven, if a technological operation in this
case is understood to be an operation called upon to generate definite quality
properties in the product. It is not obligatory in all cases for all of the
output products, but is used only when the issue is one of obtaining highly
reliable products. The purpose of this operation can be formulated as follows:
stabilization of product parameters, reducing the amount of drift in the major
parameters of integrated circuits exposed to the applied load as well as the
scatter in their parameters and the rejection of units which do not meet the

set requirements.

- 90 -

FINICHﬂﬂCIAL‘INECNVLY
FOI‘MHHCJAL.USIIONLY

The kind of conditioning is chosen by working from the definition we have given
for it. As applied to electronics products, conditioning is the operation of
the products in an electrical mode under definite environmental conditions.
Specific features of semiconductor devices also do not preclude conditioning
products in a de-energized state. but in an environment at an elevated temper-
ature. For the sake of comparison we shall say: the conditioning of a bearing.
crank mechanism or assemblies and products from machine building similar to
them also consists in operating them, but the mechanical operation.

The aging conditions and modes are specified by working from the specific set
task, the state of the product. its proposed quality and the requirements placed
on the level of reliability. with the exception of individual cases, when one
knowingly incurs any material expenses, the rule is the designation of aging con-
ditions such that the cost of the conditioned integrated circuits does not exceed
the cost of losses which can be incurred by integrated circuit failure during
operation.

Quality Control Tests. Electrical Tests. In accordance with the standard of
[101], electrical tests are those in which the main kind of exposure is to elec-
trical loads.

Testing integrated circuits for non-failure operating time pursues the goal of
evaluating their stability during and immunity to longterm exposure to an elec-
trical load and an elevated temperature.

The tests are performed in a special chamber equipped so that is possible to
place a considerable number of products under test in it at the same time and
to create and maintain a temperature mode within a set precision for a long
period of time while simultaneously applying an electrical load to all of the
integrated circuits and monitoring the 16 parameters without removing them from
the chamber.

For the purpose of creating the worst case conditions for the products being
tested, they are tested at the maximum permissible load in a static or dynamic
mode.

In the static mode, either a reverse bias or forward bias voltage is fed to the
IC's being tested. In this case, the integrated circuits operate at the ultimate
permissible power dissipation.

The dynamic test mode is realized in one of the following variants: a parallel or
series excitation circuit. or a ring oscillator circuit configuration.

In the first of these cases, the requisite supply voltages and the corresponding
input signals are fed to the Ic'a under test, while the maximum load is con-
nected to the integrated circuit outputs.

In the case of series excitation, the integrated circuits are connected in series:
the Output of the preceding one is connected to the input of the following one.

The supply voltage is fed in, while an input signal is fed from an external
generator to the input of the first 10 in this circuit configuration.

- 91 -

FOR‘OFFRJAI.USEIM‘LY
FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY

Tests using a ring oscillator configuration differ from those treated above in
that the requisite supply voltages fed to the products being tested, while the
lC's are connected in series so that the output of the last one is connected to
the input to the first.

Logic Ic's are tested by any of the methods described here. As far as linear
integrated circuits are concerned, they are tested using both variants in a
static mode, while in a dynamic mode, they are tested only in a parallel excita-
tion configuration.

The test procedure provides for placing the Ic's in the test installation,
checking the electrical parameters under normal climatic conditions, elevating
the temperature in the working volume of the chamber up to the value correspond-
ing to that indicated in the standard setting engineering documentation, and
supplying the specified electrical conditions for the 10's.

During the testing process, the electrical parameters are monitored at definite
time intervals. The list of parameters, the periodicity, as well as the tech-
niques and equipment for the monitoring are indicated in the standard setting
engineering documentation.

The tested integrated circuits, after being kept at normal conditions, are sub-
jected to a final check: the external appearance and overall state are assessed
visually, the parameters are measured and they are compared with the initial
values. Those Ic's are considered to have passed the test, the external appear-
ance of which and the electrical parameters during and after the tests conform
to the standards established by the standard setting engineering documentation.
Durability tests are performed for the purpose of confirming the specified

value of the minimal time before failure and the gamma percentage service life
established in the standard setting engineering documents.

The tests are carried out under normal climatic conditions over a period of time
no less than the minimum duration of the non-failure operating time. The elec-
trical load is maximal. The circuit configuration is one of those treated above.
The periodicity of the testing is specified by the standard setting document.

As result is considered to be a positive outcome when the external appearance
of the integrated circuits and their electrical parameters conform to the norms
of the technical specifications, of the testing program, and of the particular
document which governs the rules and procedure for the‘conduct of the test.

The procedure for checking the durability of integrated circuits which is prac-
ticed in the majority of foreign countries provides for shipping the products
ahead of schedule. The stimulus to work on improving the fabrication quality

of Ic's is expressed in the fact that for a specified test duration of 1,000
hours, the manufacturer gains the right to turn the product over ahead of sche-
dule given the condition that 10 batches of the products tested sequentially for
500 hours showed a positive result. The conformity of the number of 10 failures
during the testing process to the acceptance number serves as a positive outcome
for each test, while the criterion for the stability of the quality level of

- 92 -

FOB4OFFKJA1.USE(XVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the output product is 9 batches which have passed the testing out of the 10
subjected to the control testing.

Integrated circuits from a batch which did not pass the test undergo the complete
program of quality control testing.

A high quality output product, which is characterized by the successful passing
of SOO-hour tests by 10 sequentially produced batches of integrated circuits
gives the manufacturer the right to curtail the length of the tests to 250 hours.
In turn, the success of such tests assures a further reduction in the testing
time down to 100 hours.

Mechanical, Climatic and Biological Tests. The majority of the methods for
mechanical, climatic and biological tests of integrated circuits do not funda-
mentally differ from the known methods of testing devices. equipment and their
components. They have been covered sufficiently completely in the press [6, 106,
107-111], and we will not stop to describe them here.

We shall ansider only those tests which are not used for quality control of
devices and equipment and are employed only in integrated circuit testing. Along
with this, we shall also analyze the so-called accelerated testing techniques.

Included among the group of tests to which only integrated circuits are subjected
is a series of mechanical strength tests for the leads and connections: the
testing of IC leads for bending and tensile strength, the testing of IC's for

the strength of the joining of the chip to the substrate and testing the strength
of the internal connections. Testing for lead wettability as well as 16 testing
for unmunity to thermal shock, testing for the purpose of checking for the pre-
sence of an impermissible amount of moisture inside the IC package (dew point
determination) and testing for nmmunity to exposure to dew are also included in

this same group.

Bending tests of IC leads are performed for the purpose of checking the ability
of integrated circuit leads, including their fastening assemblies, to stand up
to a mechanical load applied perpendicularly or at some angle to the axis of
the leads.

The test procedure consists in alternately hanging a load of a definite weight
from each lead of the 10 being tested. The integrated circuit is smoothly
inclined over to an angle of 90 degrees. One bend contains the inclining and
the return to the initial position. Several bending cycles are realized.

When testing for the purpose of evaluating the lead strength margin (in the
standard setting engineering documentation, this test is frequently called a
bending fatigue test of integrated circuit leads), the leads are bent through
90 degrees in both directions alternately. The bending radius and the point of
load application are specified in the standard setting documentation.

A set of clamping devices and loads are used for the tests which assure the
application of a bending load of a specified level to the leads of the packages

- 93 -

FOI‘0FFICLAI.[E§E(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

of the products under test. Moreover, a set of devices and attachments is used

to prevent an end-restraint moment on the leads and to visually assess the results
of the test. An outcome is considered to be a positive test result if there are
no breaks in the leads or cracks in the insulators.

The resistance of integrated circuit leads to a load applied along the leads,
i.e., to tensile forces, as well as the lead securing strength in this case

are checked by applying a static load in the direction of the lead axis in a
definite sequence to each lead of an IC. The size of the load is taken from
the standard setting documentation as a function of the degree of severity
established for the given product type. The time that the load is applied is
figured in seconds. The procedure allows for leads which are directed coaxially
opposite to each other to have a force applied to one of them while the othe.
is secured. The result of tensile strength tests of 1C leads is considered
satisfactory if no breaks in the leads or cracks in the insulators are observed
at the conclusion.

Methods are used for testing the strength of the internal connections in an IC
which make it possible to determine quality of the seating cf the chip on the
substrate and the force needed to tear away the welded connections. In the first
case, a load is applied by means of a special attachment to the chip uniformly
over the surface area in a direction perpendicular to one of the side faces of
the chip, so that the resulting force is directed at an angle of 15° to 20° to
the surface of the substrate. The strength of the internal welded connections

is checked by applying a load of definite size to the lead, which causes the
contact connection or lead to break.

We shall conclude the treatment of mechanical tests with yet another curious
circumstance in our opinion which undoubtedly deserves the attention of Ic
testers. It is asserted in [112] that in certain cases, tests using single
shocks can be replaced by centrifuging.

"hen the necessity arises during tests with single shocks or in a centrifuge of
providing for a pulse trapezoidal waveform with a rise time and leading edge
decay figured in tens and hundreds of milliseconds, one of these types of load
can be replaced by the other. The effect on the product under test proves to

be equivalent in both cases if the width of the leading and trailing edges
exceeds 0.09 seconds, while the law governing the rise and fall of the accelera-
tion is linear. In this case, the run-up and shut-down time of the centrifuge
is of no importance, and consequently, does not have to be standardized if the
product being tested does not have components in it having a resonant frequency
below 10 Be. It is important to smoothly change the r.p.m.'s of the centrifuge.
What has been said also applies to pulses of any waveform other than rectangular.

Besides the well-known widespread methods of checking product strength with
exposure to mechanical shock, a fundanentally new method of quality control for
connections is reported in paper [113].

The technique is based on a pulsed mechanical shock localized at a selected point,
where the shock is produced by the energy due to the effect of electrical energy,

- 94 _

Ftll()FF1ClAL USII(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the pulses of which are delivered to the test object by an electron beam instal-
lation. The thermal energy occurring as a consequence of the breaking of the
beam electrons in the material of the 1C package, where the beam is produced by
this installation, is converted to a compressive stress which acts on the IC
leads in this case. The Febetron-705 installation designed for this purposed
generates an electron beam with a diameter of about 25 mm having an energy of
up to 2 Mev and directs it onto the test object in the form of a 30 nanosecond
pulse.

Specialists of the Sandia Laboratories Company are proposing the use of this
method for selective input quality control of the welding of tab leads.

The tests which determine IC strength with a sharp change in the ambient tempera-
ture and IC immunity to this type of effect are subdivided into thermal shock
(heat shock) tests or thermal cycling testing. The essence of these tests is

the same. The specific feature which distinguishes these tests, consists, first
of all in the substantial difference in the time which is allocated for transfer-
ring the tested IC from an environment at one temperature to an environment at
another temperature (during thermal cycling, this time is measure in tens of
seconds, and when exposed to thermal shock, it is measured in seconds), and
secondly, by the nature of the test environment (thermal cycling is done in air
and thermal shock testing uses a fluid).

The integrated circuits being tested are placed by turns in the test environment,
having a particular ultimate temperature, and are held there for a period of
time indicated in the standard setting engineering documentation.

For convenience, the Ic's are placed in special container plates, which provide
for direct contact of the products being tested with the test medium.

Liquid nitrogen, a mixture of alcohol and dry ice, ice and glycerine'are'usedsas
such a medium. The choice of the material for creating the environment is
governed by the specified temperature. A "deep" cold is achieved using liquid
nitrogen, a temperature of zero is reached by means of using thawing ice, and

a temperature intermediate between them is achieved with a mixture of alcohol

and dry ice. A positive temperature is achieved using glycerine. Various brands
of glycerine are used, depending on the specified temperature.

The temperature limits, the duration of the exposure of the tested products to
the test conditions and the transfer time, number of cycles and parameters being
monitored are stipulated in the standard setting engineering documentation.

The tests are performed in special baths or chambers, which provide for the
stable maintenance of a specified test medium temperature.

The integrated circuits which pass these tests, after being kept under normal
climatic conditions, are subjected to visual and electrical testing and checked
for hermetic seal integrity. Those IC's which are considered to have passed the
test are the ones which meet the requirements of the standard setting engineering
documentation with respect to all criteria.

- 95 -

FOR OFFICIAI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The determination of the dew point is accomplished for the purpose of establish—
ing the possibility of the appearance of moisture inside an IC package in such
a quantity that it leads to an impermissible change in the electrical parameters
of the 1c when the ambient temperature changes.

Integrated circuit; are tested in a thermal chamber, the temperature in which
exceeds the ambient temperature by an average of 10° c prior to the start of
the test. Having measured the parameters of the 16 under test, the electrical
load is not removed. The parameters are monitored during the testing.

The test consists in changing the temperature in the working volume of the cham-
ber from positive to negative and again to the former positive value at a
certain rate. The duration of the temperature change from one ultimate value

to the other depends on the range of temperature change and is figured in
minutes. A change in 10 parameters within permissible limits, stipulated in

the standard setting engineering documentation, attests to IC capability of
maintaining operability under conditions of an unavoidable dewfall.

A variant of this test is the checking of the ability of 10 to operate in the
presence of frost. The procedure provides for the coating of the 16 with frost
and its subsequent thawing. To reproduce the test conditions, the integrated
circuits which are tested for conformity to the requirements of the standard
setting documentation with respect to the main electrical parameters, are kept
for several hours at a slightly negative temperature (20 - 30° C) [sic]. After
this, they are removed from the chamber and kept for several hours under normal
conditions in an energized state. The electrical parameters are checked period-
ically. The conformity of these parameters to the requirements of the standard
setting documentation serves as the criterion for positive outcome of the check
of the given quality property of the unit being tested.

IC testing for moisture immunity, performed in a cyclical variant, is included
among the number of accelerated testing methods.

Thermal cycling makes it possible to speed up the process of microdefect develop-
ment in the package protection for an 1C, on the surface, in the internal circuit
wiring layout and other areas, which in a medium with elevated humidity can

lead to a considerable change in the parameters.

The graphs in Figure 28 (a-c) illustrate the changes in the test mode parameters
over the course of one cycle. As follows from these graphs, the tests are
performed primarily in a heat and moisture chamber, where the temperature is
changed cyclically from the normal value to the working and ultimate tempera-
tures for the given type of IC's [107.109].

Each test cycle consists of exposing the integrated circuits to an atmosphere
with an elevated humidity at an elevated temperature and subsequertly changing
the temperature while maintaining the relative humidity constant. The ratio of
the duration of the exposure and the period of temperature change depends on the
design of the product and the problem being solved. It is usually chosen in a
range of from 1:1 to 1:0.17.

- 96 -

FtNICHﬂﬂCJAl.US£IFNLY
POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

rdvx"~nzn . ,
,s H. ._-.- as»; am

 

Figure 28 (a-c). Schematic of a single test cycle for moisture
immunity according to various standard setting
engineering documents.

Key: 1. Four to eight fluctuations per hour.

A typical test procedure provides for the preliminary exposure of the 10's to

an elevated temperature and normal humidity for several hours. After this, the
temperature in the chamber is reduced down to normal and the electrical parameters
are checked.

Following this, a humid environment is created in the chamber. while the tempera-
ture is periodically varied in a specified range.

Besides the steps described here, this kind of testing procedure provides for
exposing the IC's to a below freezing ambient temperature or vibrating them
with subsequent checking in a humid environment as the concluding step. The

requisite effect is achieved by combining the steps and changing their sequence
and duration.

The rate of temperature change is usually not standardized.

The quantity of air which is fed into the chamber every minute should exceed the
chamber volume by a factor of no less than five times.

- 97'-

recommomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The vibration of the integrated circuits is realized in the low frequency range
(10 to 60 Hz) with a continuous frequency change from the lower ultimate value
to the upper value, taking an average of 1.5 minutes.

At the end of the concluding cycle, the IC is exposed to an environment with
elevated humidity and a normal temperature.

Chemical Tests. Solder vettability tests of integrated circuits leads pursue the
goal of checking the preparedness of the leads to take solder. The second pro-
blem which is resolved in this case is an additional check of the thermal
immunity of the 16 during the soldering of the leads. Since touching a heated
soldering iron to an 16 lead is accompanied by instantaneous local heating, the
capability of the 16 to stand up to the effect of a thermal shock is checked.

The testing procedure provides for degressing the leads with alcohol and sub-
sequent treatment with flux. Then the wettability of the 1C leads with solder
is to be checked. It is accomplished by immersing the free ends of the leads

in solder, having a temperature which is stipulated in the standard setting
engineering documentation. The duration of one testing cycle is governed by the
testing documentation and amounts to several seconds. The solder should conform
to definite specifications. The major one of them is a clean and shiny surface
of the melted metal.

Sometimes the testing is complicated. In these cases, prior to treating with
flux, the degreased leads are exposed for several tens of minutes to distilled
water vapor.

The IC under test is suspended above the surface of boiling water at a distance
such that the ambient temperature does not exceed the value of the working temper—
ature of this type of integrated circuit. The integrated circuit is exposed for
several hours to normal climatic conditions between the above indicated operation
and the testing.

The thermal immunity of an IC during soldering is checked by repeated immersion
in solder with an interval between the sequential immersions lasting no more
than five minutes. The temperature of the solder in this case is elevated an
average of 20° C with respect to the temperature of the solder when testing for
lead wettability.

A tin bath equipped with a heat regulator is used for the testing and provides
for a stably maintained specified temperature. Moreover, equipment is used which
provides for convenient and reliable iamersion of the IC leads in the solder to
the requisite depth. To be numbered among the other equipment needed for this
test are the tank for checking the IC immunity to thermal shock during soldering,
an optical instrument with a magnification of 16 x and instrumentation for
monitoring the integrated circuit parameters.

Visual inspection of the IC's following solder wettability testing of the leads
should establish the absence of cracks on the surface of the leads as well as
corrosion pitting, bared sections and bubbles.

-98-

F0!(NﬂﬂK1Al.USE¢HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The assessment of the test results using optical equipment with a magnification
of 16x should show the absence of peeling, layer separation or bubbles in the
coating during bending of the leads through 180°. The 1c leads are bent in a
radius equal to half of the lead diameter. Integrated circuits, in the leads of
which cracks are found in the metal coatings or traces of corrosion are rejected.

A positive result is considered to be such a test outcome that the surface of
each of the tested IC is coated with a solid layer of solder over no less than
952. In this case, its individual punctures and cavities are scattered over the
entire surface, and not concentrated at one point, there is no mechanical damage
and the electrical parameters conform to the requirements established in the
standard setting engineering documentation.

Hydrolic (Pneumatic) Tests

In accordance with the classification given in the literature [101], to be includ-
ed among this group of tests are IC tests which pursue the goal of evaluating

the hermetic seal of the package protection. These tests are based on the
recording of the gas exiting through a hole in the product package, by means of

a special leakage indicator or visually.

In the standard [101], tests in which the major kind of exposure is to fluid or
gas pressure are called hydrolic and pneumatic tests. One can agree with such

a classification with certain conditions, however. the detailed definition of
these tests shows that it is nonetheless closer to reality to include them among
the group of climatic tests.

Apparently, it would be correct to additionally introduce into the standard of
[101] yet another classification group of tests: hydrolic tests, and to include
in it all kinds of tests related to checking the hermetic seal of the package pro-
tection forintegrated circuits and other products, as well as to the estimation

of the water, spray and droplet immunity of the components and assemblies of
instruments and equipment.

Minor defects in the package protection of integrated circuits which are responsi-
ble for a complete hermetic seal in the range of "small" leaks are determined by
mass spectrometry. The integrated circuit or batch of integrated circuits are
pressurized with helium. and then the rate of helium leakage from the IC package
is checked. A special pressurization chamber is used for the pressurization.

The pressurization is accomplished at a pressure exceeding five atm, for a

period of time of no less than three hours. With a lower pressurization pressure,
its duration is increased. Having completed the pressurization, the pressure in
the chamber is reduced to normal and the units are transferred to a control
chamber, where the rate of gas leakage is measured based on the expiration of

a definite time (up to one hour).

Used for the tests are an integrated circuit pressurization chamber, a mass spec-
trometer fo. monitoring the hermetic seal with a leakage indicator, having a

sensitivity sufficient to register a helium leakage rate of no worse than
10' Z ‘ um/sec; a diffusion type leakage reference standard and a production
process case for storing and transferring the integrated circuits.

- 99 -

FINICHWHCIA1.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Integrated circuits, the leakage rate of which does not exceed that set by the
standard setting documentation are considered to have passed the test.

The techniqueg provides for the determination of the hermetic seal in a range of
from 1 ° 10— to 1 - 10' Z ‘ um/sec. In using this method, it is essential to
observe that all of the plug connections have a vacuum seal within the sensitiv-
ity range of the leak sensor, while the leak sensor is graduated in accordance
with a standard diffusion type leak.

So-called "moderate leaks", i.e., defects due to a hermetic seal failure which
is characterized by a value of l ' 10'2 Z ‘ um/aec and more, are determined
visually based on the leaking of gas out of the 1c package.

The lc's are pressurized with freon in a chamber where the ambient pressure is
brought down to 1 mm Hg. The freon is fed into the chamber at a pressure of 3 to
5 atm. The duration of the pressurization usually runs to three hours and more.
Following the indicated exposure of the units being tested to the freon, the
pressure is reduced down to the normal level. and the 16's are dried and transfer-
red to a bath with heated ethylene glycol or another fluid with similar physical
properties. The presence or absence of gas bubbles exiting the 1C package at
points where there is a seal failure isdetected visually. The absence of bubbles
atteststo thehermeticsealofthepackage. 10's are tested in an indicating

fluid with the cap down. The depth of immersion of the products in the fluid
should be such that the bottom of the IC package is no less than 50 am from the
surface of the liquid. The temperature of the liquid is specified in the stan-
dard setting engineering documentation.

The result of the testing is observed and recorded for 10 to 30 seconds. If
several 16's are subjected to testing at the same time, it necessary to arrange
them so that the appearance of individual bubbles at each of them will not go
unnoticed by the observer and will be immediately regiatered.

To test the hermetic seal of integrated circuits with this method. it is neces-
sary to have a pressurization chamber: a high pressure vessel, a transparent
bath with a grid of stainless steel at a spacing of 50 mm and more from the
bottom of the bath, freon. ethylene glycol or another fluid suitable for indi-
cation purposes, a magnifier for observing bubbles and a thermal regulator
which maintains the liquid temperature in the bath in a range of 1 3° C.

An 16 seal failure estimated to have a leak exceeding 1 Z ' um/sec, is monitored,
just as in the case just described here, but without preliminary pressurization.
The dimensions of defects which determine the seal failure of a product package
are such in this case that there is no need for pressurizing the package. Inte~
grated circuits with seal failures placed in ethylene glycol. glycerine or
another indicator fluid give off bubbles.

The procedure for performing the test provides for heating the indicator fluid
up to a definite temperature specified in the standard setting documentation.
The tested samples, just as in the case already considered here, are immersed in

the indicator fluid to a depth of no less than 50 Imnfrom the surface of the
fluid.

- 100 -

FIN!(MWWC1A1.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The same equipment is used for the testing as when checking "moderate" leaks.

The gas inside the 1C package expands and gets out through the holes, forming
bubbles.

Besides those considered in worldwide practice. other methods are also used for
checking the hermetic seal of Ic packages.

Cyclical tests for moisture immunity are successfully employed to ascertain large
and moderate leaks. Defective integrated circuits are detected from the depart-
ure of the parameters from the norms because of the increase in the leakage

current and the reduction in the inverse breakdown voltage and gain of the
transistors.

The use of dyes makes it possible to precisely locate a seal failure point. When
checking the hermetic seal of 1C packages to detect leaks through cracks in
the glass or defects in the seal of the pins to the glass. luminescent monitoring

is frequently used. It consists in making the leaks visible with ultraviolet
light.

In conclusion, we shall deal with yet another method of checking a hermetic seal,
which some investigators include among accelerated techniques. The issue involves
testing integrated circuits under pressure in an aqueous solution of substances
which have a strong influence on the state of the surface of the semiconductor
chip. The sensitivity of the method is higher than some others. However, the

use of this methods entails a danger of the gradual failure of the 1c being
checked. if it has been acknowledged as a good one initially. A portion of the
solution, having entered into capillary holes during the testing. will move
during an extremely long period of time into the interior cavity of the package,
and having penetrated there, can unexpectedly cause the device to fail.

Nondestructive Integrated Circuit Quality Control Methods. Nondestructive methods
are becoming increasingly widespread among the various techniques of 10 quality
control testing. Their widescale introduction into quality control practice is
explained both by technical and economic considerations.

Quality control which is accomplished using nondestructive techniques makes it
possible to operationally timely determine the properties and state of the

raw materials and finished products, without rendering them unsuitable and with-
out reducing their operability and service life. The techniques are highly pro-
ductive and economical. They provide for an individual check of the quality of
manufactured Ic'e and the apriori evaluation of their reliability. These methods
are finding ever greater applications not only for quality control, but also for
failure analysis for the purpose of predicting the reliability and durability of
integrated circuits.

Without going into the fine points of the classification of the numerous tech-

niques of nondestructive testing, we shall briefly treat those which have

recommended themselves as the most efficient as applied to integrated circuits
[138, 125, 126].

- 101 -

IKIICHHHCIAI.UBIINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Optical (Light) Microscopy. Modern Optical microscopes (general purpose, metal-
lographic, biological, comparison microscopes, etc.) are extremely sophisticated
tools for quality control and research, having definite advantages over the
scanning electron microscope: the color image, the simplicity of use, the
possibility of directly observing the units being studied (tested), and the

wide range of optical radiation properties which can be utilized (interference,
polarization, luminescence, optical spectral properties of the radiation, etc.).

Optical microscopes make it possible to observe microscopic objects in a wide
range of magnifications (from 3: up to about 1,800x) with a resolution of
approximately 0.2 pm.

In this case, plates and finished lc's with such microdefects as mechanical
damage and disruptions of the topology (size, mutual position. etc.) of individ-
ual structure components, contamination and chemical destruction of 10 components
(thin film conductors and resistors, dielectric coatings, wire leads, package
components, etc.) are efficiently detected.

Interferometry Techniques. An important variant of the optical microscopy

method is interferometric techniques based on the observation of the distribu-
tion pattern of the intensity and phase of optical radiation from a microscopic
object when it is illuminated by a monochromatic incoherent or coherent source.

When observing the interference pattern from a flat plate in a microinterfero-
meter, for example, from oxidized silicon, parallel lines are visible (inter-
ference maxima), which are positioned at an equal spacing from each other; in
this case, the pattern does not change with an increase or decrease in the
optical path difference by an amount equal to a whole number of half-wavelengths
(A/Z) of the incident light. The presence of nicroinhomogeneities in the relief
of the surface being studied (or local sections of transparent coatings with
different indices of refraction) leads to the curvature of the bands. Measuring
the amount of the curvature and comparing it with the spacing between adjacent
parallel interference lines and with the quantity equivalent to half of the
incident light wavelength makes it possible to determine the size of the relief
unevenness (or the inhomogeneity of the optical properties of the transparent
coating).

Optical interferometry makes it possible to measure relief steps in an opaque
substrate of down to 0.1 times the spacing between the interference maxima, i.e..
the resolving power of the technique is about 0.03 um.

Infrared (In) interferometry is based on the use of the monochromatic IR beam of
a laser instead of visible light, which makes it possible to check plates of a
semiconductor material of different thicknesses, observing and measuring the
interference pattern by means of an electronic optical converter or a vidicon,
sensitive in the IR region [114]. Thus, for example, for measurements at a
wavelength of 1.15 um, the index of refraction of silicon for which is 3.4, the
spacings between the interference maxima are equal to A . 1.15/(2 ' 3.9) . 0.17
um. Assuming a measurement precision in this case of (l/S)A, we determine the
resolving power of the technique to be about 0.03 am.

- 102 -

Itﬂl(lﬂﬂK1Al.USIINVLY
FOR OFFKJA1.USE13NLY

Ellipsometry. The ellipsometry method is based on the change in the parameters
of elliptically polarized light as a result of its reflection from the object
being studied.

The appearance of lasers which make it possible to obtain narrow, nondiverging
monchromatic beams of light at a high intensity, have made it possible to use
ellipsometric techniques to study the regions of thin films of oxide and nitride
layers on reflecting surfaces [116]. In this case, measurements can be made in
small dimensional ranges (10'5 to 10‘6 cmz), having thickness inhomogeneities on
the order of a few tens of Angstroms, which is 5 to 10 times greater than the
capabilities of optical interferometry. Using this technique, one can effectively
monitor the quality of opening windows in silicon oxide or nitride during photo-
lithography, determine plates which have been poorly cleaned, the thickness of
the oxide and foreign films on which can amount to a to 5 nm (the thickness of
the natural oxide on semiconductor plates usually does not exceed 2 to 3 nm);
monitor the processing quality (cleaning) of the glasses used in the fabrication
of the photographic templates; study the changes in the index of refraction of
oxide, nitride and other transparent thin films, etc.

Optical Scanning Microscopy. One of the effective techniques of ascertaining
defects and studying the failure mechanisms of integrated circuits, related to
processes on the surface of a passivated structure, is the technique of semicon-
ductor structure light response [115, 116].

The basis for this method is the measurement of the photoelectric e.m.f., which
occurs when a semiconductor structure is illuminated with an intense light beam
(probe). Since the level of the light response signal depends on the electro-
physical properties of the semiconductor material, the p-n junctions and the
properties of the semiconductor chip surface, the recording of local light
response signals from various points in the structure being studied makes it
possible to ascertain and study 1c defects.

The physical principle of the operation of a scanning optical microscope is

based on generating minority current carriers in the semiconductor with the
action of light radiation. The charge carrier pairs generated by the light, in
propagating in all directions from the point of generation by virtue of diffusion,
reach the p-n junction and are separated by its field. In this case, a photo-
electric e.m.f. appears across the p-n junction which causes a current to flow
when the p-n Junction circuit is closed.

when a chip is illuminated with a localized light beam, the photoelectric current
will depend substantially on the point of beam impact. If the distance from the
point of impact to the p-n junction is large, the photoelectric current is
vanishingly small, since the nonequilibrium electrons and holes have time to
almost completely recombine, before reaching the junction. If the beam falls in
the space charge region of a junction, then all of the generated carriers par-
ticipate in producing the photocurrent. When the light spot falls on a thin film
metal conductor, the photocurrent disappears. If there is an opening (defect) in
the metal film, the photocurrent rises. If there is a localized inversion layer

- 103 -

FOR OFFICJAI.USI2(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

close to the p—n junction, the photoelectric current will not fall off over the
entire extent of the junction, because of the inversion layer. When a portion
of a p-n junction is illuminated in which there is an accumulation layer. the
current carriers generated by the light cause avalanche ionization, leading to
a sharp increase in the light response signals.

An optical scanning microscope takes the form of an installation with electronic
scanning of the light probe and the use of scanning to obtain the light response
images. The light source in it is a projection electron gun tube, while the
light response image is produced on the screen of a television display tube with
synchronized sweep.

As an example, we shall indicate the major technical characteristics of the
domestically produced “Fotoskan” scanning optical microscope [115]:

Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . down to 2 um

Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 to 300x

Field of view . . . . . . . . . . . . . from 0.2 x 0.2 to
5x5m2

Light spot scanning rate . . . . . . . . . . 10 and 2 m/sec

Frame frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12.5 Hz

Number of lines in a frame . . . . . . . . . 270

Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 kg

Overall dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.300 x 600 x 400 mm

It follows from what has been said above that the major advantage of a scanning
optical microscope is the capability of simple and rapid detection of bipolar
and MOS integrated circuits with "inversion channel". "microplasma breakdown of
the p-n junction", "metallization damage". etc. type defects. An additional
advantage of a scanning optical microscope over a scanning electron microscope,
with which one can also identify inversion channels (in an induced current mode)
is the complete reproducibility of the results, since a scanning optical micro-
scope does not lead to the degradation of the surface properties.

Laser Scanning Microscopy. A variant of scanning optical microscopy is the laser
scanning technique [116].

A helium-neon laser with power level of 4 m“ generates a beam, which is focused
by a special device into a spot with a diameter of l to 2 um. The scanning along
the x axis is accomplished at a frequency of 600 Hz and along the y axis in a
range of l to 10 Hz. Moving along the surface of a chip, the beam produces
changes in the chip conductivity, which cause a change in the current passing
through the chip. An image of the chip surface appears on the screen of a tele-
vision set, synchronized to the laser beam scanning system.

Scanning the surface of an IC with a laser beam makes it possible to ascertain
breaks in the metallization as well as various defects in resistors and diodes
in an operationally timely manner and without difficulty. The concentration of
the doping impurities, and consequently, the resistance of the resistors can be
measured with it. Under the appropriate conditions, by using a laser beam to

- 105 -

ma omcuu. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

generate a base current, one can turn on or saturate the transistors of 16's and
thereby check the correctness of the performance of various logic operations by
definite functional assemblies of an integrated circuit.

The proposition has been advanced [116] that in the immediate future, it will be
possible to introduce the system on a production line, and after a while, by
employing a modification of the given system using computers, one will be able
to create a fully automated production line for integrated circuits.

The use of this method in the early stages of IC fabrication will assure the
timely, inexpensive and more efficient rejection of defective integrated circuits.

Testing Methods Using Electron and Ion Microprobes. A substantial drawback to
electrophysical and optical testing techniques is the fact that they basically
provide information on the spatial inhomogeneity of microscopic objects and only
indirect information on the inhomogeneity of their composition.

For effective checking of the inhomogeneity in the composition of materials, which
provides for the localization necessary for the purpose of microelectronics,
methods are employed using electron or ion beams with energies on the order of

tens of kiloelectron volts. focused in a fine beam (a probe) [117]. Extensive
information can be obtained on micro-

scopic objects by means of measurement
facilities designed around electron and
ion probe excitation of solids with
various recording techniques (electron
and ion microscopes, x-ray microscopic
analyzers. installations for observing
cathode luminescence spectra, etc.). The
schematic shown in Pigure 29 illustrates
observation possibilities using an
electron probe microanalyzer.

Local x-ray spectrum analysis is an
extremely promising means of checking
the inhomogeneity of the composition
of semiconductor materials.

 

This method is based on the spectral
Figure 29. Symbolic representation of analysis of the characteristic radiation

the major physical phenomena which excited in local sections of the test
accompany the interaction of electrons object when it is bombarded with an
with solid matter. electron beam having electron energies

on the order of several tens of Kev by
virtue of rearranging the inner electron
shells of the excited atoms of the
material. By determining the intensity
of the spectral lines of the elements
included in the composition of the ob-
ject being studied, a qualitative and
quantitative analysis can be made of the
composition of the material.

Key: 1. X-ray radiation;
2. Cathodoluminescence;
3. Primary electrons;
h. Reflected electrons;
5. Secondary electrons;
6. Absorbed electrons;
7. The solid

- 105 -

IIHICHHHCIAI.IEHE(HVLY
FOR‘DFFKJA1.USELONLY

The method makes it possible to confidently identify the elements of Hendeleyev's
periodic table from sodium to uranium. The surface localization which is pro-
vided by the local x-ray analysis with a probe size on the order of one um usually
amounts to 2 to 5 um. The relative sensitivity of the method, as a rule, does

not exceed 0.01 to 0.1: by weight (10 - 101 atom/cm3); the error is no more
than 22.

Hicrocathodoluminescent analysis successfully complements local X-ray spectrum
analysis as applied to semiconductors with "forward" junctions, making it possi-
ble to eliminate the major drawbacks to the latter: the comparatively poor
relative sensitivity, and the difficulty of identifying light atoms which have
long wave radiation.

This is achieved by simultaneously recording the optical radiation in the electron
probe microscopic analyzer with the X-ray radiation (see Figure 29), something
which is accomplished by means of an optical spectrometer when the material is
bombar’:d with an electron beam having electron energies of a few electron-volts.

Hicrocathodoluminescent analysis has significantly greater sensitivity (1016 atom/
cm3 and lower when the samples being studied are cooled) as compared to local
X-ray analysis, something which is explained by the absence of phenomena similar
to X-ray bremsstrahlung in the case of cathodoluminescence.

This method makes it possible to analyze the composition of thin films with a
sufficiently high precision (for example, those based on gallium arsenide). In
this case, the size of the error even for light atoms does not as a rule exceed
12, while the surface locality amounts to 5 to 10 um.

Unfortunately, the method is inapplicable to the testing of silicon. which has
a low probability of radiative recombination.

Auger Analysis. The measurement of the energy spectrum of secondary electrons
(see Figure 29), which fly out from a sample when it is bombarded with an electron
beam having an energy of several Kev, can be used to detect light elements (113,.
118]. In this case, only electrons which exit from the surface are suitable for
the analysis. since their energy is not lost in collisions.

This method has a high sensitigity, making it possible to detect impurities with
a concentration of down to 10 atom/cm at a depth of from 1 to 2 nm with a
resolution of 20 to 50 um. where it can be used to study silicon plates.

Ion Hicroanalysis. The techniques of local X-ray spectrum and microcathodolumi-
nescent analysis are not suitable for checking the composition of semiconductor
layers with a thickness on the order of several hundreds or thousands of Angstroms,
since their localization cannot be less than several microns because of the
diffusion scattering of the electrons. The distribution of the atoms of the
material in such layers can be tested by means of ion microanalysis.

A beam of primary ions, for example, argon or oxygen (beam diameter of from 50 us
up to 1 mm and a primary ion energy of up to 15 Rev) is directed from an ion gun
onto the sample being studied. In this case, the ion gun can be focused down to
2 um [119].

- 106 -

ltﬂlCHﬂﬂClAl.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the case of ion bombardment of a test object, secondary ion-ion emission
occurs as well as cathode sputtering, ion-electron emission and electromagnetic
radiation.

Ion microanalysis is based on the phenomenon of secondary ion-ion emission. The
secondary ions are directed to a mass analyzer by means of an imersion lens and
following the appropriate filtering, fall on the cathode of an ion-electron
converter, where the ion-electron emission occurs. The accelerated electron flux
is deflected by a magnet to a scintillator, from which the light signal is fed
either to a photomultiplier or to the ocular of a microscope.

It is more expedient to use an ion microanalyzer to identify inclusions in thin
layers (of up to a nm) of semiconductor materials containing the lightest atoas
(for example, hydrogen, lithium, beryllium, boron).

The sensitivity of an ion microanalyzer differs substantially for the various
elements, however, it is significantly 1113th than ghe sensigivity of the two
techniques indicated above and can reach 10 - 101 atom/cm , which is not the
limit either.

It shOuld be noted that ion bombardment destroys the surface, i.e., this technique
cannot be included among nondestructive methods, however. it makes it possible

to determine the distribution of doping impurities with respect to depth in a
thin semiconductor layer relatively rapidly with a sensitivity inaccesaible to
any other technique, and from this point of view, is a powerful tool for the
physical technical analysis of microelectronic devices.

Scanning Electron Microscopy. A scanning electron microscope is most frequently
used as an effective means of studying microscopic objects, which include, in
particular, integrated circuits.

A large number of different models of scanning electron microscopes are used for
research purposes, however, their operational principle is similar {120-122}.

The major part of the microscope is the vacuum chamber in which the electron gun
and the magnetic focusing and deflecting lenses are placed. The electron beam
emitted by the gun is focused by the lenses down to a diameter on the order of
0.2 pm and impinges on the sample being studied. The deflecting coils which
accomplish the scanning provide for obtaining a raster sweep over the surface of
the sample. In this case, the coils which accomplish the scanning are controlled
by a generator which simultaneously controls the beam sweep on the screen of a
cathode ray tube. Thus, the scanning of the CRT beam is accomplished synchron-
ously with the scanning of the sample being studied.

The various methods of electron scanning microscopy are classified as a function
of the kind of physical phenomenon employed, which accompanies the interaction
of the primary electron beam impinging on the surface of the sample being studied
with the material of the latter (see Figure 29). A brief description of the
characteristics of electron microscopy techniques using this principle, with an

-107-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secondary electrons
emitted from the material
as a result of secondary
electron emission

The electron current
from electrons absorbed
by the material

Emission of electromagnetic
radiation in the visible or
infrared portion of the
spectrum

Primary bean electrons
which pass through the
material

characteristic X—ray emis-
sion of individual chemical
elements

Induced e.m.f. occurring

in a product because of

the separation of electron-
hole pairs by the p-n junc-
tion, where these pairs are
generated by the electron
beam.

Integrity of electrical
circuits, determination
of the electrical poten-
tials of individual
elements

The same

Identification of inho-
mogeneities in the con-
centration of the doping
impurities. Determina-
tion of crystalline
structure defects

The same

Chemical composition

of the material and
local inhomogeneities

in the layer near the
surface of a semiconduc-
tor, and thin film ele-
ments. Identification
of contaminants

Identification of inver-
sion channels, surface
structural defects,
local regions of micro-
plasma breakdowns, and
the temperature distri—
bution of some elements
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 19. [cont.]

 

 

 

8. Scanning reflected elec- Electrons reflected from The identification of

tron microscopy an equipotential surface inversion channels,
located in the immediate surface structural
vicinity over an electric- defects. local regions
ally energized product of microplssma break-

downs and the tempera-
ture distribution of
certain elements

—-——-————_—________—__

indication of their areas of application for purposes of studying integrated cir-
cuits, is given in Table 19 [113, 117]. A portion of these methods has already
been treated above (local x-ray spectral analysis, microcathodoluminescent ana-
lysis). In this section, we shall briefly deal with the capabilities of reflected
electron techniques as well as secondary electron emission and induced e.m.f.
methods, which are finding increasingly greater applications in microelectronics.
The major advantages of a scanning electron microscope over an optical microscope
consist in the large range of magnification (S to 50,000x), the high resolution
(15 to 20 nm) and the great depth of definition, as well as operation in a wide
range of modes, which make it possible to gather extensive information on the
characteristics of the object being studied.

Thus, for example. by using a scanning electron microscope in a reflected electron
mode, one can obtain a high quality magnified image of any portion of an integrated
circuit on the screen and record it on photographic film. The magnification fac-
tor varies in this case in a very wide range.

A precise quantitative evaluation of the results of measuring surface relief is
possible by means of stereophotography.

In a scanning microscope, the atereophotography is accomplished by obtaining two
photographs of the section under study at different angles. For this, the inte-
grated circuit is positioned strictly in the center of the frame. The resulting
stereo pair is treated by means of a mirror-lens stereoscope. which makes it
possible to identify the desired point in any of the photographs. A stereoscope
which provides for the measurement of a vertical relief component with an error
of no more than 52 is suitable for such applications.

In order to illustrate the capabilities of a scanning electron microscope, we
shall describe the operations in analyzing an 16 which has failed, which can be
sequentially carried out without removing the IC under analysis from the vacuum
chamber of the microscope. ‘

Having discovered the defective element of the 1C (a thin place in a thin film
conductor, damage to a wire lead, contamination of the surface or a change in

- 109 -

FtHICHHﬂCIAl.USI(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the color of the metal or oxide because of the presence of an inclusion of

unknown origin, etc.), one can measure the geometric dimensions of the elements,
or having connected an accessory for x-ray microsnslysis, use the scanning elec-
tron microscope for the operationally timely identification of the chemical com—
position of the unknown material. Having made electrical contacts beforehand

to the sample being studied, one can study it in a secondary electron emission
mode or using the induced e.m.f. technique without extracting the integrated
circuit from the vacuum chamber, and determine whether the just detected contami-
nation is the reason for the inversion or ion type leak, or whether it is the cause
of the chemical destruction of a thin film conductor, resistor, etc. All of this
increases the effectiveness of physical and technical analysis to an extraordinary
extent when determining the kind, cause and source of a failure.

Moreover, in a number of foreign companies - IC manufacturers, scanning electron
microscopes are used in IC production to optimize the production process modes
and selective quality control, for example, for thin film conductors (especially

when fabricating large scale integrated circuits with multilevel interconnections)
[113].

Equipment complexity and expensiveness, as well as the difficulty of interpreting
the resulting information in a number of cases and the changing of the surface
properties of an Ic (for example, the induction of a positive charge with the
action of high energy electron beams), which can lead to distortion of the data,
and in a number of cases, to irreversible changes in the characteristics of the
sample being studied, must be included among the drawbacks to scanning electron
microscopy techniques.

However, these drawbacks to the methods of scanning electron microscopy are com-
pletely compensated for by its numerous advantages, which makes the given group
of techniques an irreplaceable tool for the study and testing of integrated cir-
cuits, especially large scale integrated circuits which are characterized by
considerable functional complexity.

Thermal Infrared Analysis. Of the numerous techniques for the thermal investiga-
tion of electronic equipment products (temperature field and thermal radiation
field methods) in microelectronics, the most intensive efforts are under way in
using the passive infrared technique with various ways of recording the IR radia-
tion of an IC chip, the heating of which is caused by the current flowing under
various electrical operating conditions of the 10.

Studies demonstrate that the isotherm of the maximum temperatures pass through
regions where the p-n junctions, resistances and defects are located, which lead
to local overheating of the IC components.

Infrared radiometers are microscopes which are equipped with detectors for the
IR radiation emitted by an operating integrated circuit. Series produced models
of foreign IR radiometers have a temperature range of from 25° C up to h00° C,

a sensitivity of 0.5 to 1° c and a "spatial" resolution on the order of 10 to 20
um [113].

- 110 -

ﬁOliOFﬁKJAl.USE!0NlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the major difficulties.inherent in this method is related to the difference
in the emissivity of materials, because of which the intensity of the In radiation

emitted by two different materials (for example, aluminum and silicon dioxide) at
the same temperature is not the same.

Coatings with an identital thermal emissivity can be applied to devices, however,

this solution is obviously not an optimal one, since the coating itself can have
an impact on IC operation.

This problem can in principle be solved through the use of computer methods of
processing the data obtained when converting the thermal radiation fielf to
the true temperature of the 1c elements.

The design of a TV microscope is reported in [123], which makes it possible to
‘ find the localized sites of excess heat in high power IC's. The IC is placed
beneath the microscope objective with a magnification of 125:, and its thermal
profile is observed on the screen. All of the changes in the observed picture
which are due to a change in the electrical conditions are noted visually by
the controller. The device makes it possible to study thermal fields with a
size of down to 0.6 x 0.6 mm. The minimum temperature difference is 0.6° C.

X—ray Techniques. In addition to the methods of nondestructive testing treated

above, X-ray diffraction analysis is being successfully used to ascertain hidden

production defects in finished integrated circuits. The method is based on the

comparison of the x-ray diffraction patterns of the 10 being studied with a

"r"erence standard" X-ray pattern, in which integrated circuits having typical
5 are depicted.

x-ray diffraction analysis is accomplished by means of an X-ray machine with a volt-
age'range of up to 150 RV and a focal spot of no more than 1.5 mm. The films are
interpreted using any suitable device. In particular, the SPO-l microfilm reader

is used for this purpose.

The quality of the cap seal to the 1c package, the quality of the internal inter-
connections, the plate or the glass as well as the absence of foreign particles in
the device package are checked with the X-ray technique.

When it is not necessary to document the results of the quality control check, X-ray
television is used to check the quality of Ic's. With this method, an X-ray image
converter and a closed television system, which make it possible to visualize the
x-ray image, are used to record the shadow x-ray image. '

In the case of X-ray television monitoring [12h]. X-ray TV's are used, which have
a resolution of 20 to 100 pairs of lines per mm, a contrast sensitivity of no worse
than 51 and a magnification of from 20x up to 200:.

Work on nondestructive methods of ascertaining the hermetic seal integrity of packa-
ges has been widely implemented in practice. Along with those considered above,

these techniques provide for the rejection of defective and potentially unreliable

- 111 -

FOI.0FIWC1A1.IEIE(H€LY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

units. However, the utilization of these techniques for the purposes of evaluating
and predicting the reliability of Ic's is considered to be less promising.

Because of their merit, nondestructive methods are becoming increasingly popular
and displacing traditional quality control methods from the production cycle,
where these traditional methods have come to be of poor efficiency under modern
production conditions [125, 126].

It is absolutely no accident that nondestructive testing tools have gained first
place among the testing and quality control equipment planned for future years.

In the semiconductor industry and in microelectronics, the demand for the develop-
ment of new nondestructive quality control and physical and technical analysis
tools as well as facilities for climatic and mechanical tests is characterized by
a ratio of approximately l:0.5:0.3.

Setting standards for the operational quality properties in standard setting
engineering documentation for integrated circuits, which has been implemented in
recent years and has become increasingly stringent since that time, as well as
the relatively high production cost of these products and along with this, the
undisputed advantages of nondestructive testing facilities - all of this is res-
ponsible for the constant work on improving them. Because of the improvement in
the sensitivity and resolving power of these tools and the continuing improvement
in the other metrological characteristics of devices of this class, they increas-
ingly approach the level meeting the requirements placed on the standardized
metrological characteristics from one variant to the next. The latter circum-
stance offers the real promise of making a transition in the near future to com-
pletely nondestructive testing in the category of quality control facilities, and
to display equipment in the category of measurement facilities.

The Use of Test Structures. The quality control methods treated here do not
provide for a complete estimate of the quality of large scale integrated circuits.
It is practically impossible to check the elements of large scale integrated
circuits in the majority of cases. One of the methods of testing such 10's is
the testing of test structures, which contain individual structural components
and make it possible to identify failures of the major components of an 1c when
the load is applied.

The design of test structures and the methodology of their application for pur-
poses of quality evaluation and predicting the reliability of integrated circuits
in the quality and reliability assurance of integrated circuits during the
stages of design and fabrication will be described in more detail in Chapter V.

7. Acceptance Regulations for Series Produced Products

The acceptance regulations for series produced IC's provide for the performance of
acceptance and quality control tests: acceptance and delivery, periodic, stan-
dard, qualification, selective quality control as well as durability and shelf
life tests. The first group of tests include acceptance and delivery testing.
Periodic, standard, qualification and selective quality control tests, along

with durability and shelf life tests belong in the group of quality control tests.

- 112 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Acceptance and delivery tests are performed for the purpose of checking the
quality of the output product. For this reason, each batch of products from a
production run are subjected to these tests. '

The purpose of periodic tests is to check the constancy of the production pro-
cess over a definite time segment. Integrated circuits are subjected to these
tests which are fabricated during a reporting month. quarter, half-year. etc.
The periodicity of the tests is established by the standard setting engineering
documentation.

Periodic tests are also performed in the case of the renewal of the production of
products following an interruption. the duration of which exceeds that permitted
by the standard setting engineering documentation.

Standards tests are performed after introducing such changes into the production
process for integrated circuits or into their design that they can influence the
quality of the finished product. The task of these tests is to establish the
conformity of the Ic's to the requirements of the standard setting documentation'
after these innovations have been introduced.

Selective quality control tests belong to the category of quality control tests,
by means of which the consumer of a product can check the work quality of the
manufacturer practically within an unlimited range.

The goal of the tests for shelf life and durability, as follows from the names
themselves, is to check the conformity of the 16's to the requirements of the
technical specifications with respect to these indicators.

Qualification tests are performed when it is necessary to evaluate production
readiness to produce integrated circuits of a certain series. Based on their
results, the quality of the Ic's of a setting batch is estimated and their
acceptance is effected.

He shall treat the procedure and organization for the performance of the tests
enumerated above in more detail as well as the rules for integrated circuit

acceptance.

Qualification tests are performed on set-up batches of IC‘s. The program of
qualification tests includes: checking the external appearance and quality of
the marking of the 16's, monitoring the overall and connection dimensions, check-
ing the static parameters (direct current parameters) of the products established
by the technical specifications for the various test categories at the minimum,
normal and maximum permissible temperature, as well as checking the dynamic para-
neters (alternating current parameters) at the normal temperature; testing the
10's for immunity to a cyclical temperature change, testing for strength when
exposed to individual shocks and a centrifugal load; checking the hermetic seal;
HTBP testing; testing the strength of the external leads; checking the suitability
for soldering; checking moisture resistance; testing for vibrational strength and
operational stability when exposed to vibrations; testing for impact strength
when exposed to repeated shocks; checking the shelf life of the 10's at an ele-

- 113 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vated temperature; durability testing; fungal imunity tests; testing for frost
resistance; testing for immunity to a sea fog; testing for immity to elevated
pressure; testing for imunity to reduced atmospheric pressure; and testing for
ability to withstand sound pressure (acoustic noise).

The program of qualification testing is not exhausted with this extensive list.
It also includes limit tests, which provide for checking the margins of strength.
resistance and immunity of the integrated circuits to mechanical, climatic, elec-
trical and other loads. The strength of the packaging is also tested in the
process of qualification testing.

Thus. in checking integrated circuit quality, a thoroughgoing check is made of
production readiness to produce a product conforming to the requirements of the
standard setting documentation which is in force. Based on the results of these
tests, a decision is made concerning the start of series production of the parti-
cular type of product.

The test batch of integrated circuits intended for qualification tests is divided
into groups. each of which is subjected to certain kinds of checks and tests.
Its own acceptance number is established for each group in the technical specifi-
cations.

Upon the completion of all tests, a connission analyzes the results obtained.

The reasons for failure are studied in the integrated circuits which failed. Hhen
a negative result is obtained (poor 1c quality in the test batch), the 1c manu-
facturer develops and implements measures to improve their quality. Samples. with
defects in the external appearance and marking are not taken into account. Inte-
grated circuits fabricated after the implementation of these measures are again
subjected to qualification tests. At the discretion of the couission performing
the tests, this time the 16's can be checked only for those effects preceding the
tests for which a negative result was obtained. It must be noted that exceeding
the acceptance number in one of the groups is not a reason to terminate the tests.
The tests are run through to the conclusion so as to obtain an overall evaluation
of the batch being studied.

Limit tests of the 16's are usually performed simultaneously with the qualifica-
tion tests for this sane purpose. In this case, the margins of product stability
with various kinds of loads, the margins of strength of the structural components
are also ascertained, and the distribution of 10 failures are established, if
this is possible. with respect to the kind and degree of severity of the acting
factors.

The tests are performed using the same methods and on the same equipment used in
testing the strength and inunity of integrated circuits with individual types
of loads. The difference consists in the test modes, the criteria for evaluating
the results and the conditions for terminating the testing.

The use of thermal shock and thermal cycling, individual impacts of great force
and centrifugal acceleration, high temperature storage as well as alternating and

-11lo-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

constant electrical loading with the simultaneous exposure to the ultimate posi-
tive temperature is widely practiced as the loading during limit testing.

Considering the destructive nature of these tests, they are usually performed on
a limited number of products (up to 10 units).

The test conditions are chosen by working from the posed problem as well as the
design and production process features of the Ic's being studied. It is recommend-
ed in this case that the following main rules be observed. The load steps are
chosen taking into account the program and results of preceding tests of integrated
circuits similar to those being studied in terms of the design and production
process attributes (design and production process analogs). It is recommended

that the initial step be chosen two steps lower than the one at which failures
were obtained in the preceding tests. The duration of the exposure of the 10's

to each tests mode is figured in hours.

The thermal parameters are determined at the maximum electrical power dissipated
by the device. The ultimate values of the measurement temperature are specified
in the technical specifications for the product or in the testing program.

Measurements of parameters being checked during the testing process are made at
intervals of a definite number of cycles, specified in the technical specifications
or in the testing program.

As a rule, the margins of IC ability to stand up to electrical loads are evaluated
at the maximum ambient working temperature. The voltage, current or power is
gradually increased in steps. starting at the nominal value. The value of the
working temperature, the value of the load for each step and the duration of the
exposure in each step are specified by the technical specifications or the testing
program.

The safety margins in the ability of 16's to stand up to a constant electrical
load are determined at a load level close to the ultimate value, established by
the method indicated above. It is usually chosen 20% lower than the ultimate
value. The ambient temperature inlhis case is chosen equal to the maximum working
temperature specified by the standard setting documentation. It is recommended
that the parameters be measured at time intervals of approximately four days.

Three single shocks are employed at each load step. The size of the load (the
maximum acceleration and pulse width) are indicated in the technical documentation.
The shocks are applied in a plane which represents the most dangerous direction
for the 16's of the type being studied. A similar approach to the testing pro-
cedure is also realized with other kinds of mechanical tests.

The integrated circuits of each group are subjected to only one kind of test. The
products which have failed are removed and analyzed for the purpose of establish-
ing the cause of their failure.

The testing is terminated when the test program is exhausted, and the number of
failed Ic's does not exceed the permissible level, in other words, when confirma-

- 115 -

FOR OFFICIAI.IIHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tion is obtained that the lc's are capable of standing up to the applied ultimate
load. Another criterion for the termination of testing is the case of failure of
half of the products being tested.

The rules for the performance of the tests authorize the termination of individual
tests when a limit is reached at which half of the tested batch failed in the
previous case.

Acceptance and delivery tests are performed as part of the quality control for
each production batch of products. Selective single step quality control is
employed so a rule. However, continuous monitoring is also used. This is
usually practiced at the start of production of a certain series of 16's or when
the previously registered level of quality of the output product has fallen off.
A criterion for the assessment of the latter is an increase in the number of
complaints.

Products received by the quality control section are turned over for testing. The
accompanying documentation for a batch of IC's which have arrived for acceptance
and delivery tests should contain information on the type and number of products
in the batch, the date of batch manufacture and the date of presentation for
acceptance testing, as well as the results of the tests performed by the quality
control section. The integrated circuits are kept for a certain length of time
under warehouse conditions between the acceptance by the quality control section
and the acceptance and delivery tests.

In the case of selective quality control. the batches being tested are put
together froa different batches of 10's which are presented for acceptance test-
ing. The number of products in a test batch should be sufficient to carry out
te;ting with respect to all groups.

As a rule, the standard setting engineering documentation provides for no less
than five test groups. One group provides for checking the external appearance
and marking of the integrated circuits. Another provides for checking the over-
all nnd connection dimensions. The third provides for checking the static 10
parameters in the case of the normal and ultimately permissible ambient tempera-
tures in accordance with the technical specifications and dynamic parameters of
IC'a under normal ambient conditions. The fourth provides for a set of tests,
which consist of checking the ability of the 16's to stand up to a cyclical
variation in the ambient temperature, to linear loads as well as a check of the
hermetic seal of the 1c package. The fifth provides for testing the Ic's under
electrical load at the ultimate ambient temperature.

Each group provides for testing approximately the same number of 16's and an
equal number of permissible failures. An exception is the fourth group. the
tests of which are of a destructive nature, while the 10's subjected to these
tests are excluded from the number delivered to the consumer. For these reasons,
the number of 10's set aside for these tests is the minimum permissible.

The loads to which 16's are subjected during the testing process are specified
by the technical specifications.

- 116 -

It”!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(ﬂVLY
FIHl(HﬁﬂCNALlﬂﬂEONLY

The breakdown into the first and second groups is more symbolic than of any
substantial practical significance. Integrated circuits from one sample are
usually subjected to these tests.

It is permissible to subject integrated circuits to testing in accordance with
groups I, II. IV, V, which have passed the group III tests in the case of selec-
tive quality control.

Continuous monitoring of 10 quality is accomplished in accordance with the group
111 program. The number of tested products in this case is figured in hundreds,
among which, it is permissible to have individual samples which do not meet the
requirements of the technical specifications. However, failures because of an
open or short circuit in the electrical circuitry of the IC are not permitted

at all. Checking of the external appearance and labeling is also included in the
listing of the checks.

The acceptance rules provide for returning a batch of IC's to the manufacturer,
if a negative result is obtained in the tests, even if only for one of the groups.
It stands to reason that the issue involved here is more substantial defects than
defects in the external appearance and labeling. Such Ic‘e are simply rejected.

Various systems of applying sanctions to a manufacturer of a substandard product
exist. One of: he systems, for example, provides for terminating the acceptance
of products, if of 10 production batches of IC' s presented for acceptance have

3 batches in a row which were rejected in the process of the acceptance and
delivery tests. In this case, acceptance is renewed only after receiving posi-
tive results for 3 batches in a row. the testing of which was preceded by a
careful analysis of the reasons and sources for the rejection and failures, as
well as the implementation of measures in production to prevent them.

The listing of the parameters to be monitored is established by the technical
specifications.

Periodic tests are performed within timeframes established by the manufacturer
in conjunction with the customer. This is usually once quarterly.

A test batch of integrated circuits for these tests is put together during a
period of time between the previous and next checks. Included in the complement
of a batch are only those products which have passed the acceptance and delivery
tests.

Just as in the case of the acceptance and delivery tests considered above, a
periodic testing program provides for several test groups. The test program

for Ic'a in the first test group provides for repeating the tests covered by the
first three acceptance and delivery groups. The difference consists only in

the fact that these tests are completed with the check of the electrical para-
meters under dynamic conditions at the ultimate positive and negative temperatures.
The second group of 10's is tested for immunity to exposure to individual impacts
with an acceleration exceeding 100 g, as well as for moisture immunity. The

third group of Ic's are tested for MTBP for 500 hours at the ultimate positive

- 117 -

l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.U§E(ﬂdLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

temperature. The fourth group of products undergo testing for the hermetic seal
of the package, suitability for soldering, as well as the quality and strength

of the external leads. A separate fifth group of IC's is singled out for testing
of the moisture immunity during a longterm exposure.

The test sample for “TB? is made up of any one type from each group of the types
of IC series being tested. Batches of 10's which represent any one type of
products from one series are turned over for the remaining tests.

A positive outcome of periodic testing is considered to be the case where the

tests of all groups of IC's were accompanied by a number of failures not exceeding
that permitted by the technical specifications. Otherwise, the acceptance and
delivery of the product is stopped. Hark is done to ascertain the reasons for the
excess number of failures. New technological approaches are worked out and intro-
duced into production, changes are made in the IC design, new standards are set,
etc. In a word, a set of measures is implemented which are called upon to prevent
the appearance of an impermissibly large number of failures as compared to the
value established by the standard setting engineering documentation.

An important place is set aside for limit tests among the methods of analyzing
the reasons for an increased number of failures.

The rules for invoking sanctions provide for returning to the manufacturer all

of the previously received batches of 10's which have not been unloaded, without
the right of repeated presentation, if in the process of analyzing the samples
which failed during the periodic tests it is determined that an elevated percent-
age of failures was due to a degradation of the fabrication quality or the use

of materials, component products and semi-finished products which do not conform
to the requirements of the standard setting documentation.

This rule does not apply if it is determined that the reason for an unsatisfactory
evaluation of the test results is a defect in the equipment or an error by
personnel.

The acceptance and shipping of products is renewed after the newly fabricated
Ic's successfully pass the tests. In this case, the tests are usually repeated
only for that group for which a negative result was obtained.

Standard type tests are performed in accordance with a program which reflects
innovations made in the production and design of the 10's. The composition of
the quality control checks incorporated in a program of type standard tests
depends on the nature of the changes which have been made, the degree of their
possible impact on 1c quality and the possibility of ascertaining this influence
by means of the proposed methods. The program includes tests from among those
figuring in the technical specifications for the product. However, this does
not preclude using other kinds of tests also which can provide insufficient
information, including comparative tests of different products.

An evaluation of the acceptability of the changes being introduced is made on the
basis of the results of the type standard tests, taking into account the results
of all the other tests.

- 118 -

Illl(ﬂﬂWChNLIISE10Nll
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Selective quality control testing is usually performed by the major customer
for the products. The scientific research facilities of the customer are. as

s rule, used in this case as the testing base. However, if mutually agreed on
the tests can be performed at the manufacturer's also.

The volume of the tests is set in accordance with the desire of the customer and
governed by the testing program. Samples for these tests are selected in accor-
dance with the testing program from among those which have already been received '
by the quality control section. The testing timeframes and the procedure for
their performance are established by the scheduling charts.

Tests for durability are usually performed as part of the qualification tests. It
is considered sufficient to perform a durability check on any one type of 16 from
each group of types from a series. The selection of the type of products for

the tests is the prerogative of the commission which receives the setting batch.

The commission usually performs these tests only for the first thousand hours.
Then the tests are monitored by the quality control section.

It must be said that the practice of performing these kinds of tests which has
come into being. which is supported by the standard setting engineering documen-
tation, provides for combining the durability tests with the “TSP check of the
integrated circuits. Raving started the HTS? tasting of the devices, the testing
is finished with a check of the durability indicators. This is correct in all
regards, and primarily in economic terms.

The duration of the durability testing stage is determined by the minimal mean
time before failure of the 10's established by the technical specifications.

In the case where these tests are not a continuation of the HTS? tests and are
performed independently, then the IC's selected for the indicated tests are pre-
liminarily checked in accordance with the acceptance and delivery testing program.
In this case, not all of the re quality properties are checked, but only the
absence of external defects, as well as the static and dynamic parameters. The
static parameters, as is provided by the technical documentation, are measured

at the normal. minimum and maximum temperatures. The alternating current para-
meters are tested under normal conditions.

Substandard integrated circuits, which are detected during the check process, are
replaced with good ones. The rejected ones are forwarded to the failure analysis
subdivision to determine the reasons for the rejection or the failure.

A result is considered to be a positive outcome of the durability tests when over
the course of the minimum HTBF, the number of failed Ic's does not exceed that
permitted by the standard setting engineering documentation. A negative result
of these tests entails an analysis of the causes of the failures as well as

limit tests.

- 119 -

l!ll(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂI(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shelf Life Tests. The following main goals are pursued in performing shelf life
tests: the checking of the conformity of the IC's to the requirements of the
standard setting documentation, the gathering of data on the technical shelf life,
the more precise setting of standards for shelf life indicators and working out
recommendations to improve storability.

Various testing techniques are employed to check the shelf life. The choice of
the method is governed by the requirements placed on the operational characteris-
tics of the IC's. Depending on the requirements, conditions are artificially
created or selected, under which the IC's being studied are stored for a specified
period of time.

The IC's are stored in heated or unheated repositories. under shelter or at an
open air site. They are stored in standard packaging, or as components in equip-
ment or sets of spare parts and accessories.

Integrated circuits are not tested in open air sites in the factory packing, since
they are not adapted for this.

The heated room or storehouse with air conditioning should have a temperature set
in a range of from +5 to +40° C and a relative humidity of up to 802 at a tempera-
ture of 25° C. The conditions of an unheated room are characterized by a tempera-
ture which varies in a range of from -55° C up to +40° C, and a relative humidity
at standard temperature which does not exceed 981. On open sites and under
shelters. the permissible variation in the temperature fluctuates from -60' C to
+50“ C with a relative humidity of the environment under normal conditions of

“P to 1001 I

The duration of the testing is specified in the standard setting engineering
documentation. During this time, the electrical parameters of the 16's and
their external appearance should remain within the range of the established
norms. The norms are specified in the documentation for the starting point in
time and the end of the tests.

The following rules are observed when choosing the IC type. Integrated circuits
of any type are turned over for testing, which represent a group of series types.
In the interests of attaining the maximum testing economy, it is permissible to
group IC's of different types together. In this case, products are chosen which
are representatives of the basic design, the standard fabrication technology or
some other functional attribute. The results of the tests are extended to the
entire class or group of products.

Here, just as in other cases, the samples for the testing are selected from a
received batch by means of random sampling. Products having minor defects which
exert no influence either on the electrical parameters nor on the evaluation of
the external state of the IC are permitted to be subjected to this testing.
Integrated circuits which do not conform to the requirements of the standard
setting documentation are replaced.

The same parameters are checked during the testing process as during acceptance
and delivery tests. It is recommended that the measurements be performed with

- 120 -

IIHICIHHCIAI.USE(MVLL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the same facilities during all tests. The probability of failure free storage

or the percentage of good IC's following storage under specified conditions in
an established time interval or within a definite storage time are taken as the
criterion in evaluating whether the 16's are good.

Tests are also performed on lC's under natural conditions, storing them in
different climatic zones and regions.

Shelf life tests at elevated and reduced temperatures are performed in heat and
cold chambers. The 10's are de-energized when stored in them. The duration of
the storage is figured in tens and hundreds (up to a thousand) hours. Integrated
circuits for which the external appearance and electrical parameters following the

testing conform to the requirements of the standard setting documentation are
considered to have passed the test.

Failed IC's continue to be tested for a period of time necessary to determine
the amount of the deviation of the parameters during the storage time. Upon the
completion of the testing, the failed circuits are forwarded for analysis.

-121-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter V. Ways of Assuring the Reliability of Semiconductor Integrated
Circuits

Integrated circuit reliability is a comprehensive characteristic which is governed
by an aggregate of many mutually related factors. The specified reliability level
of integrated circuits is set during their design stage, and is assured during

IC fabrication and maintained during their applications [27, 32].

The ultimately attainable level of reliability of integrated circuits depends on
the selected design. It is specifically the design and production process variant
of an IC which governs the strength safety margins of its components, the levels
of the ultimately permissible loads (electrical, mechanical, climatic, etc.), and
in the final analysis, 1c reliability under its normal operating conditions.

The second major factor which determines the reliability level of an IC is the
quality of the execution of the production process for its manufacture, selected
for the realization of the design and production process solution established

in the planning stage. In this case, reliability is assured by an entire set

of measures, which includes primarily the following:

--A high degree of mechanization and automation of the production processes and
quality control operations;

--Effective input quality control of the raw materials, semi-finished products
and energy vehicles;

--High quality and efficiency in monitoring the observance of the technology and
the maintenance of technological discipline at the requisite level;

--The presence of an effective automated control system for the technological
production process based on statistical quality control of the production pro-
cess using test structures;

--An effective production process testing system for the purpose of rejecting
potentially unreliable products;

--Reliable monitoring of the level of quality and reliability of the finished
lc's;

--Thorough analysis of the reasons for IC rejection and failure;

--Systematic development and implementation of measures to eliminate the ascer-
tained reasons for failures during 16 testing and operation, etc.

Finally, an exceptionally important factor which governs Ic reliability during
operation is the strict observance of all of the requirements of the standard
setting engineering documentation for an integrated circuit in all stages of
its application:

--During the design of the radioelectronic equipment (REA) using the 10's;
--During the input quality control of the 16's;

--In the stage of installing and debugging the modules and systems of the-
radioelectronic equipment;

- 122 -

IN3I‘OIiICIAL USIICHﬁLY
$13 on walla". Hood—5
«goal we 00:02? 0:» new
nous-8o: mo 9.23:2-
uunooaouuus 130.; N8.—
..5 0:» cu own-3v
”noun-zoo! 39:30:
nacho—3: .3095 ac
ouﬂouaa «an new 939

23 no Aug." use...

53333355

«nouaouuwa a

have: 933033

"33> Noon :3

a noun .72.:

3th
can 0... no.7:—
0032.» mun—o

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

 

    

 

 

A333 03.3 no 0:» aqua-0H0
ucguuoagu uo bun-:0 .
05 «5:005 05 wagon.—
Aaoneuono anal .730 :3: 18H .ouuounou
Ind-Go Susanna lawn—do .0352; @0303 «an Anna» 20:.
0...an- Jouuuoo ”530: any you new @233 new»: «53¢: :85on .
53!... 2.95 so... 1.8 2.» «o L: in 2: 2:.- .En u 3.. 53.28 3
8283...... a: 95:8 «5 3 385 95:3. :8 53m: n
3 we nomaua mo b.5803 0330 05 a." noun uoauuou .
:n 5 .2533 0...» ”5.33.5: «32.33 9... 0.3 no unacaouo
savanna Hood: .938 9530: 1.2.0 no 3% 33033325 -
1:03 0..» ha .guuou 303 Isl—v 23 3.303 855.9
conga-Eon no: as» 5 0.330....— w=u>ou§ .623 59.0.33 3.63
on: £0.23 0H uuuuouno .95» .auoxuvcoo luounﬂou boo.— «up-«on.
0.3 :o 233” taken—Ba: Bonus «330: Hanoi 303 2.» «o 303 a mo
«Ion—3:005 lawn unuooua an.“ no :0: .2223: no cannon: ”no.“ down?— 05 5"
using-“inn I303 NEE—3.23: Issue—nag on: 2:. 152003 poem :33 33.50
I], will! «I! III.
mvmzuo: no.3 enough 01. u my .6
loo 3. E... 00 c3330; 1 s m 1
=33“??? wagouman c5 9:333 summon 0.53m...“ 0H «and: mm m m
37:30“ ceauwuuunﬂm 0H nun—.5 you condom 0H mo vcux nu mm m
av lam ﬂHgHHOh Uta c.“ uﬂuaaulh Um. I
Um no.“ 25:2. vocuuuuuuz «aqua—:55 uo nvoﬁo: m
3
III

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

avaua on“:

vuow spa:
«.0H you aﬁno

0>wuuowum

usuaauz

 

.ouuuuopsa

0:» cu auuu «duo! on» mo
aouaonvu osu wauuooa .auuau
Icou awaso ogu wuuosvoum no
owuua «an wcuusv aduul as»
”caudal new acouuuvaoo as»
ucdxuoso .nnoauaowdanu
aqua! mo can» can ouauua
loan o:u no ouauuuonIUu
.cnosnnoau- ogu mo zuuuanv
ouoooun :owuuouunmu

0:» unau0uucoz .:o«ulo
swaanu Huuoa cu neuun
oouaaa as» we acuauodu

asu no Houuaou Auunoao
Annamau
nauuauov a.ou vagawnuu
us“ No «sauna» noou

noun scuuostHQ Rood
.A.ouo .oou0u ucuaouuun
Ions .uuu0u acuxvounv
nuuaunoo wood»: no
:uusouua Haouansooa

now unuuouucoa o>uu

luauom .Auouu cuaa
:o>uu00uuo: «any

mm osu no uuauaoo

vovao: a mo newcouu

luoon aﬁu now was

won“: mo cowuaau0uov

no aonmov 0;» new

 

moozuoz coma

I'll

sag“ any»:

away “on
nuanuﬁgoo Cu when
unuuaaauno ups. on»
.snuu usual Ou a.m¢

a:u no Edam nus»
coauaowammo mo noun
any on no Ionvo wsu
luau nauuun duoououu
on» no sous:
anaconda nuuoa
auscuauuoum a mo
ugu no mun nuohce
lunsv on» :45» no
uaw>ouman on: ash

 

uncooum

auouuanso egg
on Amav can
"cannon as»
no unencuul

on» we :04.
nosva noon

IOUHOK van 0? ::quuavaum
acunUq—aa< u=u>zgzea 2:» mcw>0uneu cwumuo

Um :cwunumus1u U. azuuzo 0‘

 
 

no aum. cqzo-0h uzu cu mauaaumm
on new mcomauz vacuouuuum< wcuuncuaaau mo mvosuoz

mun—«5h 0‘
new coouax

muaaunu
UH «0 ucwu

HUdeoo
Dunn”:

n:n[;ud 31 10]

n1q1suudsau

ZOHH

zunundmog
jcxnaanazs

I
l
l

- 126 -

FORtoffﬂﬂAl.USE(MVLY
The Major Kinds and Causes of Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Failures ar
Eliminating Them

Methods of Eliminating Asccrtained Reasons for IC

Failures in the Following Stages

 

 

shaped" leads
(Al-Al system);
a structure
with "tab"
leads (Au-Au
system); the

use of aluminum
wire instead of
gold; local gold
plating of aluminum
bonding pads

Lind of 1C Reason for ,
Failure 1c Failure 1c ————h——————-°“““' ‘c F“”““"5“"‘ IC
Design Improving the Imprnvnng Applicntb
Production QC and Rejec-
Proccss tion Methods
application to
a plate and
the melting-in
of the metal.
The Kirden- The sub- Reducing the Accelerated Avoid long
dall effect stitution temperature tests of test term opera
and the for- of single during ther- structures tion or at
nation of metal sys- mal compres- with Au—Al age of the
transition stems for sion welding contact con- IC's at th
metal com- the Au-AJ of gold wire nections at maximum pe
pounds. bimetallic leads to the elevated tem— aible temp
AuxAly, in systems: aluminum BP's perature or tures of t
the region a struc- heat and technical a
of the weld ture with electrical fications (
"petal- loads 125° C). Th

of a heat a
to reduce t
amount of c
overheating
cially for h
power linear

and L81 circ
CIA-RDP82-00850R000600020041-9

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(0‘1- 11"

as.» man—av nova: 0H 9? mo ouoauuadmurmw
mono." 0.3. 9.3.02.9 .1335 no on: «Fm.

6933 335302.
mo oucuano 0.3
053.5qu 3 0:38
Iuoaaoo 30: 05

 

 

 

 

 
 
   

 

 

0.3.: a =0
:32: :95

 

 

$3259:— MOu v0 20:.
I252: 0.5: 05 £30." cud: no
no Houucou o» anal-v EEG—co
.2236 2:550 Hana-3:3: ago
.coEaUSA—au
on no noun: :33: owned :33: no
Ada c.“ occauuo 1392. 9.53 :vanusaluauon:
Lagoon—o use“: no oouuov no“: .33 £300....
I303 05 an Han—«.23 luau: no 2—3 0:0»
@0332. no: 3596 2.» 9532—0 25 £23 303 05 3
95 5.33 0H uwuuuoov 0.3 no noon twang-So oooao no.3
0:... no 023.." cognac: 23 mo 15..— on» now H8305 nuoolooouo
Havana—.00.- ucuuaou 8393 063333 :H "an: 0.53 «An x693
9.36553 :ouuosvoun NOS use 9.33: no we: 05. no down—03.0: van” and:
.|.|| . J 8 3 S
ave—to: no: :39; .0. w m n
uuonwx can On. ..::u:_x.._m cuqmun 1m .M m.
cauuuwﬂaa< 45.5.2.5 23 “3:89: 3 2:34....» o.— unazwm 0 w m M
5.22.3. ..::.C75...... 2 .525 n3 noun...“ 3 no 332 w. wan M
II 11 .I. .I
no 3m 5333..- 05 5 n95.33— m. a
3 new 2.3:»: 35330: 9.35553 mo 305.»: M
|||||||||||||II II|| ! 9.2:. 55553....
HO “haw, UCN mﬂhﬁdwdm Uu—JUBHU UOMHLwOUCu nOUUa—UCOUHEOW uO nﬂwﬂﬂU OCH “ﬁr—HZ hOHQZ USP ON me<H

 

-126-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020041 -9

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
Eliminating Them

TABLE 20
o
\-
3
q 3 2
33-3.; Kind of 1c
3 g g 0 Failure
u o c —
a a a
u E a h
u o o c
m 0 ac—

 

 

The Major Kinds and-Causes of Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Failures

_—_—______—

Methods of Eliminating Ascertained Reasons for
Failures in the Following Stages

Reason for -“
1c Wm 16 ———L——-—-——m 3323‘? “E“: “£33231?“ 10
Design P b t ! ‘ ﬂ Appllo

Production
Process

QC and Rejec-
tion Methods

 

 

Intermittent Movement

break in a
wire lead

(in a plas-
tic pack-

age)

HBLDED
CONTACT

CONNEC-
TION

Short cir-
cuit (in-
cluding an
intermit-
tent one)
in the wire
lead at the
edge (cor-
ner rib) of
a chip

of the wire
lead relative

to the chip

because of

thermal ex-

pansion of

 

 

__———-——

Input quality
control of the
wire. Visual
checking of

the Ic wiring
under a micro-
scope. Checking

the electrical
parameters of the

IC with a slow
change in the
ambient tempera-

the plastic

Considera- The use of The use of

hle ten- a structural equipment

sion on design (pack- which guar-

the Hire age) with a antees the

lead low position- maintenance
ing of the of the requi-

chip relative site sag of
to the contact a wire lead
pads of the feed- during 16
throughs. The use assembly
of dielectric (for
example, polyamide)
films which protect
the surface of “pet?
al-ahaped" leads,
turned towards the
chip

ture

Visual checking
under a micro-
scope of the assear
bling of the 10's.

1001 production
process testing
(centrifuging)
5(I3(H31C1AL.USE(JNLV

onus» Iona an.
none ou- cum»
Incananc Eumu

umuuoouomv
no noccqa vcn
unmuouql ashtt

ad sum: namno on.
oouaam can no cam»
nooaosm unsou> wood
.czum I cum: ovauo
onu mo Annoy. on» no
show «:3 uoﬁou 2:
9.28:8: .23

ovmuo Una sum: oou=uoshuc
cu uncao adv uuo>0a vac

ounauaooua noon 0:. u-uuu
no you ovm> 0:» no «new
loan sums: «05¢:0u l—mu
acomumv amsu «nu «0
ucou known» «onto can no

a saw: Auduol onu I05um~0uona docovmoumou
cmnucmunua nouuav use wcmxuoz
nsovcma uuoucoo osu .momuou magnum smooch on»

.A.ouo.~quoa «nu
mo acmsuuo uaouuv
In: .cuo-ucoo um!
use ovaaoua cu am

no huuamn usual on» unuuaul

nos) qua-hoouuml

no conducoamc

 

 

 

 

 

 

on» .on0uo mama
Ion no aqua: ozu
mo nemumoonov
huouocuamuo-

 

gouucou no oomu-vcaon ozu Inn. 0:» no mo acmunam
333.. u. 33 13.2- 05 2.3. 23 L55 63.8
o>muoo~om mo ~0uu:09 auuu-sa no acmumaoa o>mu0090un
.«AIMmV onooaouomi non o>muoouuo can can
couuoono mamas-o. a upon new nlﬁmw #0
:uM: A.ouo .onou- nououuupso nuul 0:» uo
madden no cemumo mama-you sum: anocxomzu
.uooo.on Ionov uo no>o~ .uaou unolumsvo «in No
Ou xooo.o~ Ixuwnuv coma-omaaac woman usual cmunu Isl
"acmuno Edam dunes way no osu mo cam» omuno osu
nmmmcuaa :Em# aouucoo humaoso Iqomuma- 05H «0 oowozo
nunnnnllnunuuu1|nnnIII-Iulna:mummmmmnammmmmmuulnuulnnnunuunuluulnnal1|IInunlulununununlunnnunuluu:unnunuu
vounoa-v ouuﬂov
anomadsool me cause
oouoonq on» new cuum non-um
«moo-ouoml I an» mama-Vua
nova: sauna on» 1:. acmpmuoo
mo unmxooso no auauaac
unnam> nood as» acm>ouaan
avenue: sown noououm
|U$ 0 CO ~.....~u.a3 3.—
:o«ucwwaaa< nuwumzuzww 9:» acu>owaem cuwwoa

usuwaoa

 

mo cum

:zuunuduasu u. uzqnao
case—now 0:» 6“ «unaduwm

  

up no“ mcomaom nosununuuw< unauucuauam mo «vegan:

In: .aamu 0:» son
a» canine duom uoanzoo
ncuzoolv «on. .333. :4:
aoMuooouooouu taco admw zmzh

osu am coda umsu a
noavou ”coca no sauna
Iona
numzzoo
9049200
muse I Queen:
cu oudllv
“coma-goo:
I. on 3 s
o o o a
J 8 u 1
1m um. .m.
uuaauam cu ousaanu 3 w w m
new common Um. mo 95% mm m. m
M. a
J
D

 

- 128 -

FOR 0Ff1ClAl.USEtoNLN
.AoH 0:»
u=m~AEOooo can: an.
ouaan 0:» cm new
unamuucau 0:» and
130050 nun: Boga
on ounﬂuv uoomua
-58 no .3323
noun 0:» ooavau
Ouv cucuoavaOo
.ouauahoAHOu adamant .aumm nauul Emma GMSu ha
vou¢>o~o an us osu «Gauges ovum nonunoo ozu
ouaouuso Avouuanv now «com» «o :ooooomhp:
uooumv o» ouaooauo umvcoo as» no acmuucmlmuu
you .aaoua moduou no coda-um! ash .«tnlumw
oaAm-umlhon as! Imago .d0mu aqua! ozu cu
Iqua can unmuoou naumnucuua accede gunman

.n.uH 0:»
no ououaaIu-A
uuomuuoouo as»

- 129 -

FOR¢0FFRJAI.USE(MVLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
 

mo coco=~u¢m nuoucm .ouOuosvaoo uo>0umuuaa 0:00i uo huan «OH
o>muauoc a mo same can» sum: sum: nous» lunnnoua osu nuanzoo
cocoon. osu nouauoauu. uoOu no luau». ad convoy cuv :AHm
"oucouwauu uuocu oouauoaooo< auouusvnnu pagan omuu Zuza
Icon on. ouau .ouOuoavuOu uo>ou uoumm loouOMv acme: .
names uucwuno l—«u smnu no 0:» no .ouvo ommsu as» new
nmso 0:» owamsuuo uaouovcs ogu new cam» mcmuwoo gnu
«0 samuOOuOua van ouqauv alumna Innate :ucm Icoao—amno
ooauuan voou sauna no 0060.90 Isuooao: a a no :Omu
".3933» can ham Axoo~ uo comuoav loavouuam
aaomacsouﬂ anon. acmuao louuam 0:9 05H .AaoMu
uncuoqmamu-o Imumcmuiu «@000 .um unmzouo Ianmauauoi
uncomuonovmocoo menu“! «Jumuno :05: amen. Ho>u~muuas
avasuoz coda «wouOHm M.W W W
I00 N CH =3._u.13 ream J . 1
5.332%? Haﬁz?” 3: wagoras awamao MMM m
UH. . . . UH 0.2.5me 0— what—um..— H 1. n
mxngom Elizﬁuark U. L555 no.“ condo”. 0“ we 95% m... .n...“ W H
mm aum =a30a~om 0:“ cu mouauumm MUM l
uH haw acoacux vwcuuuuoum< wcduncqeﬁdm uo moosuwz m
FOR 0F11C1AI.USEIDNLV

.auwu: nut!

Inwavo omuouuooao
ms» cm ouauquon
lav» uaomaaa osu

uamosvuu vac

sumo anus I mum

I.

A.

usuaaom

nuauoauooam «0
ounce an amﬁo
ozu co ou:u
lauonaou 3:!
nqua 0;» mo
cemuuavom

.:0mu
homo ucoaumnoo
uwuouuoouu
van cousvoﬂ

mo mania-n-
.uouuaoo hum

luqav OH uaauu
aumuav "coda
nonmaanu on no
noun». ”an :«
uuuuuao .uouuu
uuo>v ocomuwv
:aoo uumuauoao
doomuuooao
o>moooono no
cam-sauna ash

 

noduauudaa<
us

no nova o:u
.ououo>Oo noun
mom—on mo ooh»

10v noouxomzu
aﬂmmv sum . mam
no: luau menus
as» mo acmugoa
no. acmunomuaaq
osu uo douuaou
>um~qdo .oaoun
uozou 05

mo ouauo>ou
noon suws add“
nus» luaumas
team-nu swung

- can... cu
luau noun! osu
mo unmade! van

noduQOMAAAI 0:»
new oaomumvuoo
on» «caucuwao:

.nomuooooou-
van oceanmaeo
uaOu van anus

Iauaouol azu cm

noxwan acouuao
can eunumo> uo

:oMuocwImmo ash

 

avenue: cod»
nuanox can 05

 

uou aeowumv swan huuuno
ncoo on» no camu¢>muuu
cemuuu nonumn a num:
nmamuao auauoa no cocoa
.naaouu Aug-uua u~a~.:u
momgou cg» aﬂudaomuuav
uu cucuosv mo ouuaaunaa
Icoo any mo sum3v nauwu
auaom nahoumuasl
macaw “oomumunnam no»
ooocsomgu Imam. can 35mm
aslmuma noun-a .:00
who... Ouv Imam. Sum)
acuauuonsu lacwsbua
«emu-you namnov .Auwuoa v n v
sum: anus unuouosvsoo «I0\AII no~.~
.aaaoo an“ aﬁmu awn“ u.v ﬂqmuouqa
1o: oﬂumm new con: unuoavuoo
gages 0:» anomnOunl uo luau swan
no acmu acmuoouoo osu mo coma
Iuowamn< qumuao Icuumlonuoouo
maumuon A n
nosiv uOu
loavuoo a mo
nusousulehan
ouonmloo
uncuuavaoo
luau nmsu
I gaaouSu
ucouuao mo
~0>u~ gum:

 

 

 

uncuOHL
:cuuuavoum

uca>zgasu 9:u acu>oun§H nuance on: 1h UH
:zqunu.uatu U. m=uuan on ma.

new condo:

 

monoum uc.&€-om ozu ca managing
UH ham mcoaamm vocwnuuaum< wzuuacuauuu uo vaSuoz

ousauwm
U_ u0 vcda

HOB

1099200

OJHIIUJ 31 10’

Sewn
ZHIP

 

alqzﬁuodsau
aunuodmoo
1010130113

- 130 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can own; so
soon OAu oom4¢

«an oven :0
one: «nu 00m:

usuaaoa

05» «cu owned
anumuuouuo van .Iumu aque-
u¢o£ vauu>oao an 0:» mo ouaaoauuo
Aua>oumunsa we. osu ovauuov uoa
u~uumnv cucuoav noov gums: ocean
luau lama amau than 0H cu lama
Sum: nouauushua omuuuuaomv sham

and.» a an Aoaao
u-uos usucmVuou
nosvnoo :vovao~:
uool any auaouSu
unaccov uaou
nuao unmnmlmama
no ooOAhaa ogu

you» mo ouoou
vo»nuu—ouo<
.noaouc

madden u. auaumu
nonaov cucuuachu
lama can» 0:» no

Ian: umuon~o an ham snow: nauonv

wamhunnn mo luau unaccououm
covooun on» "ovuavcauo cumoov
uso numxuca «Au ucwuuu. nos:
.Aaoomumo cucuuschu as» no
onu 9» one.» «com-calms own

oucmzouo usouovus taco amaso oz» uuoloou «nu mo

van ounﬂdv noomna
usual no 0050.9.
0:» new 0500.
Iouoml scouuno

:- have: unmgo
and couanm mo
acmuoomocm uuaom>
noo— .quuoavcoo
Inmu nm£u can

we «am. such»

any acmxoosu
.#A.ouo .coomuma
«ta 0» can»

tam: uucuGOo mo
nomuavason «As

an a—mu s cm
oxuauoouoml

neozuoz coda

«gamma ago 00

couuQUuqaa< acu>zazs—

ou |llIII‘lllllllllllllllllllllu

:squ:u_hszm o. asuuao

 

 

no aum canoadom us» cu mau3~uwm

«amusvoun mo nomuoOuoo an!
ou-uo on» adv nmuao .;a .ouo
EU :2! 6%: . 33
as» unmade! alumw own»
u0u anomumv Ioouomv acme:
ICOU USU HO OOIMMSI iuwu
somucnmluuao Adams on» new
.ouauoshuo .uamucoo unmua>
umuuu no Ian-an nanomum
humusoEOlb: I‘ve no Body

as. oumo loav0uu=m
amen» «gnu ugh .A.uuo
nooon Inﬂux-l .0: .:<v
on» ouaaoa coauououa
cu camuao cowoaummv
umgnan Iamu as» now
unuoa awn» ascmaadq
IIIIIIIIIII: .lIIIIIII .IIIIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIIII
woououm
:3 a .1.- 9..—
D:u wwu>omaﬂﬂ cwumoo
UH ouadaau UH unaduau

you comma“ UH .0 ncuz

 

UH ucu n:0mc~¢ vwcuouuoum< wcauncuauau no avenue:

I‘\||||I¢I|l|

MOB
nobnzoo
:Anw
ZHIH
ll
1.838
0001
15W]
ddn
[.009
3001
830
4.1.01
00.1.0
Ill. 1|
[0
n
J
3

° 131 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.gmu

Inuuao 0H acmusv ago-no
num>uo on» 0» o>mun~ou
.550 0:» «0 950-0:
uoaou 0:» «cu ovm>oun
nom;: .uumooo an aqua
:03: can scum»... 3:0
osu u. ouuomvouu ouau
sauna-ﬂu as» wamoavuu
.A:0mu.uuauouul ~o>o~
Imuual sum: nouau
luau». amv ono>o~
vacuum and unumu

can no cucuoavuoo

aamu amsu no noun.

onu mo unmnouua

on“ no sauna»

umoooa 0:» namvaao

Iowa .Aou60mvuum

gnaw: maﬁa-awuwuov

FOR OMGAI. USE ONLY

332.380 luau don—.0328

amp—u yo 60.3 . am

.33323 no nauaumwsoo on» E
damn-co omuuoouomv aumumlmuao

2.3 no >301;qu
on» mama-Imago
on. 33053.3 Us

.59.: nay
103.600 015.
lam-Bo.— IS!

-l32-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 
 
   

uo 35399.53 Lus- 2.»
aum_«aqm~ou we numumam_
:33 23 91.83. a no}...
tau-o mo ooonusn n TN uo
30,5qu :03 uuououm m. m m. m
c3333.? :00?“ 2:...0? :93..5v?§ .3300 I“ .m m
«32.3....— 2: 3:269..— 0 u m 1
u.— . UH ousdasm U.— ouazum a a n
mxuwaoz :::1..;.S_.m o. .325 new cooaux Um no 9:; ....... .H w m
mu 3m 53020... or: 5 «0.53am ”M .I
3 new 332.: vacunuuwuﬁ. wean-"SSS uo 3.052. m
D
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wees» nuanav
nowuxoan 0:» Idea 0;»

.wuadauo .ouonunoo vovmoa on»
uovn: ovum noun
no cameo
05¢ no ouuuo>oo
ouuonuos ocuno unauouuuau

.oNH anon no unaadca
=0 09°C
«nu oom«* .Aaxqou ouuaa mo oouuov wnuou>oum .«aa.9uu

.nbﬁnu nouaau

6233.535 53 a 9:
luaond .a.0H

Ouou «masqua

do 5 «.3 «5H:-

Semi .«33 it

oauuoodouv nude:
0:0 mo lawn equal on» no
as» oucuuaa any new

«0 Alan ouuol unuuﬂv noun unadunou uuuuu>

Isuaa onu lacuna Haaowuqvva

1.5.. of 9.33...

.Aouua uouuuoo ouaa wanna mo nouuosvouuua
can no cabana: Iﬁliuuoo 05H .uouaou .uoau
any uo asnnuu was qua» Iuoo ounu>aqa taco nauoau
.Hdou ounxoun IonuauouOJQ 0:9 lawn! no Hausa oaadu Ion vouaooauu
uo «no» a own-u unuusvv angina now-aha noun cu auoau cu done: a mo

coo soda: .u.ou Hauunqnoul and on» no
no cocoons. ail mo snowman osu huuauaaoaon
nu0£u and Honda: now unoooouonl Una uuuuond
use»... wag-35:. a .623 £3 Lin 6.3
.ooaunau 0H ouuuuououv any adduce-

:o On «nan-«cl on» no new» ou uoaua

uo :oaoauuna as» loonoaa unauu> ouuaxo-a

mo auaaapao-on. need .uucou
usu ovauuona ou ucnloo omuxoaa
uauinuavu owuouu any vac 0H

Iooao no Inna:
onu mo maid-on

 

an we ooauuna
neuuouau oz» mo

 

 

no canon olnuu Hana!
Ion-co was sung nomad
henna-on ago lauds! £943

.naaso any

acuuaono no a5:«HSH¢

Inca wove»: coauuu ozu nu
you any unuuuounl no
In». Hauul nouoouuou duo
came“. a Ialozoonuooao
uo oouogu ulsuﬁiuad we

saw .1nou nouaouuou Anna
:0 vouch Alo£o «ousuauol
vac oucaaﬂlau
luau no cowbue
«la Suva uou
loavnou Baum

5:: 9: uo

ulnau can»

 

can-ﬂue: Honouu muaanodu can we huaaasv o‘u no unoﬂ aaauounl osu
Iavvc mauusuu< Acuunoo huuanao uauaucuuan nuuuanou mo aoauouuou
Illlllll‘l . l!‘||‘|.ll I‘I‘Ill' I|I|II|
avenue: coda unencum
nounoz can 00 :cuuuaaoum
:OHuQUuuan< u:_>:gm§H 9:u acu>0uneu swunua
a mason Um =3qu1JAuazu 0d .cuuso Us uuaawsh 0— Unadaum
x .. you conned UH uo vaux

 

no cum cuaoddou 0:» cu uuusauu
Du wan acoaaud vucwauuoua< wcduucusuuu

m

   

no avenue:

.I‘llllllllll‘llll‘ll‘l

\

“JDIIUJ 31 10;

n|q1suodsau

sch
IODQZDO
Sunk
ZHIB

1Unuoduoo
lulnzanxas

- 133 -

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.oun anon
no auoa

0:9 aom«

.nouuuua
nan mauuouou
nuw3.uaosaw=vo
nu Hugo! as»
we couuaowuaa<
.noonxowau aw
.wuooa Huuuuuooao unannouun: on“
van ousuuuonaou o» unuusoau no .Alaau ouuu
«unconuo new auo>oa ooomuaa as» locunwv «nu aw
aciuauwauauoa ucouau uou Baum cabana: maucoao
luau :ooauoa ouoaucoo ounuoououv new unannouo

sun: nousuunuua uoou cowuausouw o>wuoauoo o>u .abuzwa uunuaoo
no ouoou vouauououu< n0>¢duouna nuooumo «no: can we :lbuuon:

.aousuoauua uaou osu no coda oooozo cu van «any: 0:»

maﬁa: ouuoucoo ogu no Iouwunaa onu unawnoon we unouo>ou huOu
ooaououoou Huowuuouuo you unouuuv ow 03¢: luuuawuanus uuo>om

wan unauoOH .«aauonu 1:00 0:» mo 11- nHo>ou acuuanuuuuuoa

 

 

 

 

 

Inoo suuocuova: «soc coauuuwlwuno unauouuav henna on» no .ono>on
new: onu mo maﬁa: anu .nuoauuoo mo ouOu uuouuavcoo H-uoa coaunnua
no ounuo>ou no ouuuov Ho’oauounw loavuou o:u as» no now tunnel and

van ouunxowgu Inwuv suaouon dawn :003uun usuuo usouovas uuouuav no
mouoa 0:» no nouu quono wuuaomo uuoouaoo Audubon unO>oa uuouuav
Iaoudmmq on» «0 “aka aovcwa ogu aw Cunaunou couuuuwuunuui Idea 0:»
Icon huwdoso .auocunou acowuwvaou once luau Mason one cu sooauon
nova: unusuao novuas ugunouo and no: seasiv nuoouaoo nova: nuuuuuoo
on» no Houusou hug ouauzouo madam uaovaw: coco ou osu mo new
aucso .ouooucoo nova: o>uuuon uuuuauua. ousuuau «uouu Ianoun was
oaovcua «cinema now :00 as» no lAuu dang taco H¢>ouuouua oonduouuou
naouuuncou «nu ma nowuooaoo nos-nuunal 0:» no huuuuse «uuuuuoouo
unauOuucoa uoauum unwouuo no on: any unannounauaoaa uoacouocu

avocuoz coda muououm

nuoﬁox vac ua :cuuuava»
cauuaoudnn< acq>zumsu azu acu>0uaaw :wqaoa
0H ou uuaaaam u~ unauumm

uxquua

me man: can mouauuqm unauuuo vouqumuucn nouuav=09usom no munauu van

 

:::.......::.£ 0.. .525

no mum cwaouuom ozu cu nouauumm
0H you acowcox vmcuauuoumd ”cauucuauam no muogua:

 

 
 

   

Such cuuaauauau
mvcuz “on”: azu

MON £0060“ UH MO «vs-«Z

 

 

a[q;sundsaa
:uauodloa
1n1nzanaas

DJIHIL’J 3] 10}

 

ON u4n<P

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lanai! unuwuno an nova:
cause vac uduaua on» .nuoouuua one cu
no nouuooaoaw «a:a«> nuuauuoo uwaao any
NOOH .uuouosuuou luau unwosvoua no omega
away can no own» :«ouu can nag Imam genus
usu neuxuozu .*A.uuo on» ad mauunoa you
.aounﬁwn us» ca «30v anewuwchU as» no

uuuuou uo owouo>oo luau! ogu unseen
we oouwov .waucxowcu cu Esau any»:
_ .58 in a 9:2. 55 2.» «Sign
swan aqua! may mo «an new aneuuuvaoo
Inn»: was couuuvuunna can no coauun
can no nonuaou Au“ auawuno .Annvuo
nunsa .aaouo madman wowucu as one»
we ouauo>0u coon luavcou ozu a“
nu“: lawn :«zu cannukun nova
.ahouﬁcs vocwauw Iguana Managua
ouuan a ousuua nuance cuu
cu luau owuuUumi oouuhuoaaa
on» no «saunas uauuauou saw:
was acuuauuunna ucuﬂnwavo ca
0:» new occuuwvcoo alnwu awannuoa
2: 9.2032: no 8333::

III/I'll

avosuoz :ouu amauoun
luwhox van 00 ::~uv:795m
scannednmn< uc—>:Lzsu 2:» w=u>ouaE~

    

 
 

OH I: ::muau~ua:u u. u:qu3o

. auuuuw acmroqqom

om you means»: vuc‘aupau

.uuaucoo a
auscuzu Hu>u~
acouuau an“:

ohaqu=u 0"
new :omaox

in

auaagmm
0~ no ucqz

MOB
Ionnzoo
xdnm
ZHEH

/

olqysuudsou
1unuoduog
lnxnznnljs

anlycd 31 10]

~ 135 -

FORtOFFKJAL USE4DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.QNH «man

:0 GOOD
any uum««

wxpmaox

 

oau mo huuaaav on» «ooawuao nosnoosa “ouauuapna couuawo

waaxousu .aﬂau can» a do again we seam a

uzu mo oouuuao

nuoauav on» :n nodes uuuuuouaav mo unduaoo onu on usage can»
ownounouuwl mo yuan on» unuosvoun Amoumv luououv I u« undo:
Icon ozu uuuxoogo how ocowuiv ooauusu nuaounuuvmsonsa no
.aaqu uuuuuoaowv taco can no ovaxo an undo: canoooououa

ugu uo owouao> couuwuuaauno no cow» smacks» neuoavcou

abouxaoua on» no .Hoou nuqnn a nonvouu
Ho>oa onu mausuuzo up anugo and I:« ask
nouaaa as»
no coauuan
«nu ou uuulav

saga can» 0:»

unauuozm .nao .uouusvaoa
I>0H ﬂowuanud hon—nos
IHIuOB 0:0 HO HO Ouduuo

mucuu:vcoo 19:» «cu

.uuouusvcou Hayes wcuuuo>oun no .«¢naduu onu sonny ou nouoav
«a» mo :wcuuuoeo: coonusm ounuuoaoau no: man osu Inca lawn

no mucoon ugu wan
onouaouuwl a noun: muonooau uo unquaoo

ooauasuaon as:

any now wagon muse ozu waauavanv can» a

an neuoavuoo uo nauuwau

B=:oo> Icowudooa an nouoﬂ Edam luau uuozn

8.3”. of mo .83 «o 3326 no .3326 55 2: we was 813
nuanced Huanu> NOOH Iouucw ash leuucu 05h :w:«~a¢ﬁm= unuuasnm

.au0uuavcoo 0H osu no
$323253 :33
launch no Ha>ou oau

ouuaauou cu uvuoa
Haowuuuouw van
Hulhonu voua>
luau uu couuaumn
luau»! Ho>onquusi
:uw: mouauoanuu
unou mo oquu
vouuuoaoou<
.maouo mowaou

 

 

 

avozuaz coda unoccum
no» no“ vca 00 :3 u .453 a
noduowﬂann< uc_>;;:5H uzu acu>9uqsu :wwmao

 

:zqunuqaanu U. uCuhao

 
 

mo 3m 53325 9; c.— nouauumm
on no“ mcomcvx vwcdauuwum< wcduacueuam no moonuuz

aha—«5m Us uuaaamm
new cannon Us “0 we“:

.uuucd 3| JOJ

a[q1300dsaa

«OF
Ionnzoo
SAHh
ZHIH

Junundmoa
1n1n33naas

 

- 136 -

FOR|JFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

.950 000. A533:
0000030.“... 0:0 I030! H0530?!
mo huwudnduu 3-. sad: GUM—504590

59.0000 030030.20 a.“ conga-5
0:0 0.0.2.0002V 00 H0>0H0005v 0.30
030.— H00w0000H0 can Iooaowv 0:0 no Baum

0.5000093 0:0 .0.“
5.2.0.0... 0030—.
30H 0 003000 00

8.02.0 H3005 00
00:02.30 new 00:03
:0 0 :o 00 000-.

Hw>0uuwnanwwwu>0n 000002300 a000-
000500300 0000 no 0:0 «0 non—.0

00000 0000003004 0:0 uﬁnnuoalm
.0203." 0x0: 050 no $00!:—

33 030- 2.0 0o 30 2: n80

coauﬁaomoe 00 .3an No.8 no 00.300
00000000 35:000.“ Ian—«00.:— 000....

000 003.: 0300 {02.50 50...:
I33 00 $53090 0:0 950000.50 5— «OH
«53033 .0300 05. .3383 00: A5380
.02 002. .023 0 3.3.0 0.30 303.3 0:0 mo 5:
no 000: 9:0: A0300»: 000.02.. 000.3 .0080: 0:0 5:9
002. 009. $0003 H0530?- 1800 «can: 00 0.8 0.5080 .
:0“: 0005009000 “0300.305 £0.25 00:20
:3 omega—0:00 30001005 I55.— 500m
100-. «c 00000 0:0 .30 00 3300500000.“!

039 a“ hHAGHOUAOO IQQDOOHQ ﬁOﬂu .DUUOMOV H0>O
.couuauauaﬂ H03." Ioowuanl Baum 90.2250 «0
luduqn 030 HO Edda Qhauﬂuogu Danna—ham USU
0.200303 0:0 30..” “0.30302— 003 000.3

no cox-.0330 00053 050: 0003301000

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

209:0: :30 00000.:— W W mu no
I00n0z .05.. 09 :30035.& 1 m .w m
03000203. 4 . 4 a Rs 03009 I n o a
00 I. ....5w.u.:...s.0. .._0ﬂ.lc.0wo a 00 9.30:... 00 0.5.32 3 w m M
9.0053. .00 .0 a u 0. 3.. a 03 00:01 00 00 0:02 wamwm m
00 gm 330:0... 0:0 3 000300..” ”W 1.
n: 03 000003. 005000003 33055; «a 00050: m
a

- 137 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Methods of Eliminating Ascertained Reasons f
Failures in the Following Stages

'f 16 Reason for During IC Fabrication

Ire 1C Failure IC Improving the lmnrnving
Design Production QC and Rejec- APP!
Process tion Methods

 

 

 

 

choice of the
optimum ratio

of the thick-
nesses of the .
metal and dielec-
tric films (inter-
level insulation
in structures
with multilevel
metellizetion).
Reducing the
thickness and
width of the

thin film con-
ductors of the
first intercon-

nection level
(with the condition
that J ; 2'105 amp/cmz)
for the purpose of
reducing the probability

of cracking the protec-
tive dielectric film
during thermal shocks.
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

.Anxqou
.A000 0000“ 000 0000000 .u0aa000
0nd 00ou ou Inouou .HH000V 00000 0Hu00000 00000
0008000 0 00000 .000300u no 00000 000000 nauu000
000 sows: .0.0H ouuuo0 0:0 00o 0008000 no H0>0H
00 00000000 H0! Ind—.0000 on 000 an 00.2 0 05.000:
nuo0u 000 H00u00 A000 00000000 000 .0.0H 000 000
0000.0 magnooum 90.3008 $0000 [—000 no 00009:—
0000000 00» 00 000 000000 0000

.02 0000 0.800.“: 000 no I100.— 000 00000“
00 0000 50005000.“."00030 000000000000 000 .
00... 00a: moan—.3 0950000 00:00.3! mo «0A0000H 0:»

00000000000: 000 00.000000.“ 000 no use»:

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 
 

000000 A0300 «0 5030000000 000 0030 «on.
0:00.. mo 0000000 0.: 05030000 ...o 0.30 000—80
05 now .0000 .0.0H 000 00 I03 000d» 5:
.6000. 0 0000: 00.3000 0.3 no No.3 22:.
0000000 0.30 000000.? 10.500 on no no In: 0
0» 000 ca 0000 I00 000 0o ooau I000 00005000 000: 0000000
I000 0.500on :00000.“ H0035 no 00000 0000 000
.0000 000 00 33.30000.— noon 000000930 Ice-00 000 no 00.3000 .300 0 mo
003000.30 000 00300.:— 3 0003000 000 000 00.33000 00.3050 000930 000
In: 0000 00.23 00:00:00 On 00 no 0000000 000 .0330 I000 H0030 0o 00000
0.30 0000: 3000 00 00.3000 HRH—000.." 000 no 00» 03000.3 #000 00 no.3 0309—
0000 000 00003000 H0030 05000.3 05 mo .«o 3.300.. no 0000000 I000 no 03...
0.." 0300000 $000 0000.330 Houucou 3.3000 000 w0u>ouaau 1250.“ 05. Inquuouuugw
000000: 00.? 0000000 Wm. M K.
I00n0 000 03.0.5 0.5 J 1
00000030040 uwgsuzww 2.0 wcw>owaau 0.3000 mm .m m.
3 . 3 0.5200 n: 00330... S n n
ash-20¢ :14 naughaﬂn— O.— .th30 M0.“ Gonﬂﬂm UM uO ﬁduﬁ Mm Ms). w M
00 30 02.520..- 000 0.“ 00.5300 U m. .I
UH .30 0000000 0053.002 00:05.33 no 00050: m

 

305 53353
no. 233 000 0000300 300:0 000000000“ 030000500000 no 000000 000 000.3. 00—0: 05. ON uAnE.

 

.- 139 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- 1&0‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.aua anon no
ouoa osu oom‘c

.oNH ouun no
«no: osu 00m.

l‘IIIIIIIIIIII

.uouuuoaoun uuau

noon 3!... 2: «o 533
noun and huaauau an» oval
Iauno o» ovaou unauuuonIUu
wouo>ouo an :oouuuu ogu
cu ouonunoo oulzo saw:
OOHSUOBHUO “.09 NO 08000
vouououuoud .nouauwauuu
noon wean: announce
oulzo Isa no ouaaunuauu
Houuuuomuo osu uuuxoozo
.¢n.ouo .iuuu «duo!

«nu no ouauoauua uSu

nu nouddno unanuwuovn:
we soon 0:u uuudunoo
oulzo on» no can. ocu

nu aﬁnnouzuIUHol nou
luau. HauoH no down onu
«nouumwo ozu cu unbvcwa
uuuuuoo ozu no nuance
r53 3» 3 5d 2:

cu nxouuo ounce-ouuna

no sown onu 1:0 noun
ovuxo :1 we aqu¢>ou

mo oouuoov saw I mo
33.. 3 I”: 3:33
«Au uo «gaudy: can
nouuuowamaa onu mo

 

. Q03 5:.

H4 no coauoaou ozu
mo oosuoopv :ouuaau

cu ooduouo aooanaa

61.3» .nowﬁ .uoamv
nauuu uuuuuououv
saw: ooduuso

auau usual any

uo awuuuaoo
unaud>uooua
uncouuuvvo «0
coau0510hunu ash
.Auunuuoo use

no guuuod on» and
Ioaouoau van sun“:
0:» unannouucav
noun nonunou

 

banana: osu acuxooso Hul«umo «nu
IIIIIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIIIIIu
avasuoz coda muouOua
loonax can 05 ::du9360um
coauewﬂaas< acu>shzgu 9:» acu>ouaau cuwmoo

«sumac:

no man: can «unaduam nuaouau vouauu0ucu nouu:

 

:zuuaumh::m o. acuhnn

mo uum cascauom azu ca uuuaaaam

on new mcomaux vocaouuoum< w=duncue«nu uo muosuu:

no acuuoavou any
.oaoauoaan cum
3: S 25 .33
nousuoauuu :«
haauuuomaa .moHHa
vauoouso a anus
acuuou cowosuuuv
as» no canons»
unauaul osu vac

 

Bananas! «so .Acou
cuca :ouanao sedan 0;»
osu no God» £u=Ou£u
nuumulouuuuuo acauuoﬂv
”nocuaou oaino coauoqan
oz» zuaousu sun on»
Ho>uu ago» we wauuuau
luau saw: < luau uuosm
«unﬂaam 0H uuzﬂuam
no“ coumum an no vcga

35 5 $558

010(304 31 JD}

HO<HZOO
UHzlo
“OH
loanzoo
luxﬁm
OH
A<Hmz

 

ntq1suodsaa
1unuodmog
1n1n13n11s

 

occuuauw no momzau new uncua uoﬂuz 05H

ON udndH

-m-

POI OFFICMI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

338. on» 323 L38 we .5.» .83 «03-3 2:
taco: .A.uuu .oaoa ooomunn as» I quad» mo nouuuonoun
lauds» emu .couuouu now awn mo ounoau osu no main“:
Inuonou neumv 0mm niuwu an“ In. cauona Iauauu “canon
on» no nouuuon lawnunauo noosn .oun «nun nounuo>aw
tong voquwouno osu no noau nadno uouv "lawn ouuu
acauauou uo unoausa unawannu madam new» luoaoav osu
as» new aouaauunw on» you mu luuua-uu mo auouuov
houuuﬂo ham nuouuwv lodge—uou 0;» mo 60.335 and one
1:00 onu ucwxuosu use uaaxuoa nouuau ash ncﬁauuaoo
Ana—awn canon
van ouauvoau0u=«
.anauv awuqu
amassed mo canny
ouaucu osu uao
onuaounu n.0H oAu

Joana—own «0 13¢ 9.306
ogu :« Have «no: Gnu mauxoosu
no «09—. I 02:3 4.30 .l: 403:. o>wu00uouav
and £0.33 .30“ no 1230 5530.23 zen—cow anode: a:
aoaaouuo aqauogu unanswaou mo on: any Omsk
vac Maui—£00! Icou :ouﬂou: «o Joana—02— 0.3 no loan

acauuawaaau .u.0n cocoons 0:» new aqua own-Inc:
«nu no 003%.. 23 3:939:00 on. on» «o huwagu
cu «canyon ouau Ixooa no sauna any acuoaouuun

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Iago! no >u«u«a«u luau Hauuouuq .nunacuaducoo no .Aaxoou
uoon osu avaauoun vac auuanaooou ousoconaoo qua ugh» :ao«=v
cu auacs new! .unwnu no ouuuuau Ixoan van nouan Edam ouuu
Ina-Go 0.303003 23 no anaconda Lagos .2550 Ioououv ozu oudouuau
mo uaaaoou uuuoa ozu mo huuaaac osu mo and mo ooauuao ouqxnon
an»: Hacouuuvn< osu ucwxuozo radonu ﬂamenco vauucuauuaoo eon-onus"
avenue: no“; 2300.5 N. W m m.
conuozaac. :3?»— an... .00 5.4.33.9... cwuuun ”W .m m
".52....5: 23 wagouasu 3 u u 1
Sigma 0— 5.33.131..— 0. 3.3.5 3 95:5" 0.— ouadwm .1 a m n
. . you Samoa 3 no 2.3. u. m a m
00 can 9.3030... 95 Ca wwnajah ”M. I
U! now means»: vwcqnuuoum< acquncuauam «0 «vegan: m

- 162 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iil'ii'l'!‘

uxuoaux

 

acuuaumuaa<
on

 

 

 

.ouonaooluu nuwxuo:

on» no manna-ands

8.63: ﬁt. 39.

¢>quoouounv =uloou
cacao: no on: can .hune
.A.uuo .ouauoauuo 1:503 aouunu
.mqu nauuav uuhuuonouv Gnu land. Nadwlum
Iaouwawu any «0 Guam no neuu90uuon on» no new»
luau Gnu an auoauugo .omuaao unapo- Iuoaoun «Au
huﬁ>uuusvuoo uouo>nw sauna nu nuu no huwnwn
nonunionnq uau cu UH Inuav any: one anuo any do
on» no 135332.: 3.5:» :02: 333.53
osu vac ouauosuua mo: Beau owuuoOuouv uo>o~ucunn
can we nouuuonoua can a aduhnmnu we we niauu
mo 9:33.. on» o»!- oooooun 05 26 232.5...

nan-o cu .onan Huuuuu unaxuoa .Iaum Iona no down

loono an no ouuoooun owuuooaouv unawaaao onu
any a« ucnluuouu egg no noun-o new unowu
and: an ousuonxn :«unaw ozu On nuvnou van
new Acousuosuun mo: nodua ouuaan ovonuua
no unannouo nuuav 0:» no and can no
ocuauoauua noon «0 tanouo oSu no oununuuau

.IuOOuou and Dual:

 

 

 

 

.lnuu
OﬂHUOUHUHv
ecu no al=Ho>
onu au one“
Indy «0 acuu
quoou vououonooot saunaav on» on» how lawman cu 03v

 

nau>oﬁaln uuuuunoou< Acuauoahun no:

twaiu:Ou cu use .omn on» no .Aaoﬁu a you cucuuo>
a“ saws: Aoouau uaouxo«Au can quﬂlaquUV unozoouzu on»
Iosuuo and» unwoav noNA uo nouu «Hana! mo Hu>o~ onuv
lawn uuuuaunowv quucoouou an! «Hulda uo hu-vcaon
osu cu Jun-nu luuao oau una cacauuo you nowuauano-
avosuaz coda aaoucum
lounad v:a ua :cuuuazcum
aca>suasa 9:u acu>ouaeH cuunuo
0H wusuwam 0“

::quau~ua=m u. acquan

he cowaoz

 

no aum cutouaom us» ca wouaﬁuwm

0— you acouuuz vacu0uuoua< «aquacueuam mo avosuoz

0H

wusuuwm
no vcwx

DJHIIUJ 3] Jo}

afqgsuodsaa

_~HHh
OHMH
IONAMHQ

:unuoduoo
1n4n13n11s

llllll'll'llllulli"-l'|!"l'-

 

-143-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0‘1WC1AL UGIICNVLN

I953 “nouns-coon
cud pub-:53... ma.“
4:593 "gun-u van
aoauuoaunnu Hausa

.uuoquuu uuuusv nouuanooav
Iqanau Um no nouauo huuoauuooao can
AH- n« nouuanooav tau. unnaquc n.0H
huuouuauaao uau-uu osu uuououn ou .A.ouo
=53». n.0H 2—» .9500! no .3995 on» no
uuououn an no»: noun-unuaoaala cucuouuou «ca
Indus mo nouunucoa 3:. .nouu luau—«H .uovouv
nods-u any .0H 0;» noon acuunoauao o>auo¢u0unv
new :ouuoo- acuuao Iona Hauunzoou conﬁne one»
luuuuoau Haudusuou 0:» hp vouuuﬂ Iao> goddamn .oouun£u
osu an oouuaauoa -u.n coonu no.0 sung “on” ..*o augoﬂuu
asawuuu on» voouuo us. soap: Auaau noun nous: nova. uauauo
sown: .Aaouu-uoao nuaou noououa .Auouauusuuu “Auouuuuono
uuolnaauo oauouu acuuosvoun and mo: new»: 1:. unauuou
nood- .»~niu.aa u«q: nusauudv .uoou ..oa can unauauv uaxaaa
.Houuaoo huuaaav .ooxaau ownuao> Huuauuuoao causouuu Hm; unanno> "Adana 2AM»
uanauv nonunuaanaa no ounces: 0:» unwusv canon hen-«oonoov uauuooao«v OHHH
«a canon. Hun nu new nouuoonoooa OH on» 0» 0H onu on on» :« huuuaou quamua

ensue OH osu on vac unclaanvo cowauuo> and In“ snail-Ho lady Ho>ia ounu
.ouuu~o> uuamdaaa 9.0» can ago: nuanno mo and“ acaoauavva nae» annuouau
no huuaupuuoon nous-non no tuninoom 0:» no acuuosv anon aaluxua
as» «nun-caaaau coauuuauauuou unausauoum nouuaa asp on» auaoooonu

.A:Bauu Assoc
oeuuooaoav 0:» ca canon ausoununzoaaa can coda; oamoooouoaa .naauu osu «o Ixuoun uuuu
suaousu nouoavcou Esau nag» onu.uo nauuuonm: shuns osu ooov aunnouuo uuuuloououvv uuao

:uOuoavcoo Ida.— ﬂdsu... Beacon. 0.5 a.“ on 009—qu Olin can. luoaoav 30A luau HHS-m

 

 

 

 

 

 

llll‘lll ||I|I

      
   

 

ave—to: no.3 330: W m m N.
I J
cowuuuzaa< no?“ van .8 :3 “93.3.— :nuaoa 1M 40. m
o.— ucgsgcsu 2: wagon—mas u..— ouadau 0A 2.333— 0 u u 1
939-3— :..:....4.3...._ 3 .325 nan canvas 3 no “.51. w. WWW
no 3m calcaaom a...» 5 «95.35— ..H N l.
UH we“ «com-“mm cucuuuuouﬂx 9:35.33 uo avozuoz m

. eons cﬂuacﬁawﬂu
no 933 can mousing :3qu 33533 33393363 uo nomamu van 2:52 nonwz on... 3 ~35.

 

- 146 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
>f IC Reason for
Jrc 1C Failure

the pernic-
nih‘l p. elec-

Nethods of Eliminating Ascertained Reasons ﬂ
Failures in the Following Stages

During [0 Fabrication

IC
Improving the Improving
Design Pruductlun QC and Rejec- Appl
Process tlon Methods

 

 

ducing "grounded"
bracelets for
operatore; trans-
porting the cen-
eettee with the

10's only where
"shorting inserts"

are present, which
bridge all of the

re leede; maintaining
the humidity in the
production atmosphere
at a level which pre-
vente the accumulation
of high etntic elec-
tricity potentials on
equipment and personnel,
etc.

The same methods as
section "Thin film c
(see the entry "Big!
through a thin film
plete conductor bur:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.oﬁuaauov guwsv
Chauoaul 050

ad nuouuov nudge

uHo>ov van uduuau

.ounouuau cassava locum no huuuaa«o

mo Ho>ou .noquow anon on» naduauo

luauUqusu choose Iona accuuuucoa

nuuo> on» no Inca Iauov 0:» ac mucus

.Ho>oa owuuao> asbo tauuaku on» On

laden; unnouuuaan uncanny nouosu .OH 0:» new

cnn use no Honuaoo nuav we huuuasu Hauuou-a an: .ouo
huuuasa .ncouuocan 0;» mo auaah0u nuuuuo osu .anomwa Haunuuano
gun can no sumac «nu ncoo uuuuuo unuuuoaoa onuv Hoauouaa
Iaov .uouusnuuuowv use acuuaooa 60:3 uuauuom houoavnooﬁavo
coaunuu:Uu:oo zuuuanau “onouuuvcoo lean naugu uo osu mo ouauoauuo

"Aoouuuaouun vac nousu :owunvuxo huaaaaauo canaanuohuo ozu nu mama
Iosuuo uaou no on: any can acuoau can oaoauou uuoauov “nouwuona «DB
ugﬁusaoaav acouuou -uav use as“ couoauugv any uoauauuuv as» no nopazao
cauoauuuv no annual lane: .uaouu no ouuuuuuou aouuaauowv I no Inxum
nun-A oz» unauOuuco: Iauomo conaam luqnaso as» ousuoonv oucuuo> 4 no
.hnauuuosuquuogn nuwv on uoaun no uaqnov nsouxaoua on» no mszuzﬂgu

any we Houucoo hug ouuga ozu vousuoauuu Ho>o~ on» an now» m>~mm<m
lasso .uouaaalou no couuaaalau uo uuouxo luavou naught». 92¢
3359589:— taoo on. 0333 2.3 on. .30) languages.— 05 gg

onu mo Houucoo can no can“ as unsound aw ouuouov mo
5.3.30 $.30 Isaac 3.9.30 and.“ auoou 0.51005 hawk-a
.33 303 can :5. 952.25.:— Iov Hausa nu.“ 9.1—2. a
.058 .3332. «0 «con»...— 05 toanuu no no 930336
unouV acouuuucou . you zuudusv cocoaauaw A:o«u«.au-m:v
noun-Jud» of 3933533 0333.» :ooauu: "nun-u
onu nuance—"an: Iona unw>ounan osu 9:33. Ion coauogn

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
   

«vogue: co: unoccum mm m. m.
qunum new 09 539.553.; .0 .m n
noduqowaaac‘ 252:5...“— 2: dag—>395 :wwmua 0.5:: 0.. 0.5:: MW w. m
9:33“ o 5.35.43: 3 .325 he cooaom on go 05.... N. MN N
no 3w 316:0..— 05 cu won—.33 . WM 1
UH “3 acomcwx 353303 33656:... no 23.32. M

 

50:9 :uuocwﬁuuu
no 933 can magnum 339:0 nouns—wane” nouuauzouusom we 9326 van 2252 penny. «5. on ~49:

 

-146-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

don-nouoood .AJuo Java.“ on» we haw»:

I233 u we 53: Conn . H . . nuns: 1003.3
2: .8323! 9.18 . _ . IS .3332:
no 83333.: Ea .3- .3352:
30:03:00.3". ovum .33 £332..— 2—»
Juan .3832!“ :1— wo tow-693 uo a.“ Booms
5&3. uni—ow 05v no.5» Icon»: 32. no .3303
luau. £532.95 .31 you .325 0332.3.
nacho.— nouwauuuv mo uni—ow an. H3323:
anon-Ian!— nuothaaouu quno of no 3 EBB—no.5
£00.? 23 9:33:8- ooaono 05. nusoununnagh

6.3 no :90!
toad 03.qu mo .oounuoauun
ououoﬂaucn H3 “3305.: no

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

. nuns-30.5033 Banana.— 2:
oau no Au...— auhouucoo 0.3 =8
133398...." 130an 0:... we.
.32 9.2 we 3a.: 2: -0828
£302. NO 002- unaauluouov uSm
Juno—.033 uaou 1.5.. on» now. 62.: 983 428395.... . < mo
9.52. 35.30 «2332.3. Iona... ﬁnal. nu.— ..uuaua: mun—gum
05qu no can..." 31!. ac no: «a menu come—v A: ”3QO
Incuuuuaso 2: 95 1033.3 on» though 3.50.. 5 5:36 nun-l g
1100.8 .3390»: nan—53:3 0.3 no log—00v omen!" loam «>300 Eh:
uouosvaouin non-0093 60.3%.; 6326:.» 2.» no 330!
5 3.0333 dozen—yous luv 23 mo 8.3023 :32— :33
no.2. no 5330—. coaguuwv 9.5002. 3 lacunae 33 003.0 05 no
05 9.2330: 0:» gang In“ 9:38. 5 09.15 auaawaauoan
.233
«dawn-«Inc.—
05 «360023 .
2.6.30: so: 3092; w: W m N.
Icon... .3 E. 9.1... an x
scuuuWHHnn< «mans—LN”. 9.2 whu>ownﬁu cmwnun 95:3,.“ 0.— ouszum MWW m
. 8 n n
ulna-.0“ zawuazuark n: .3530 new :Omwux UH mo vaux w. you w... N
no can 53030..— 05 5 3.5.38 ”M .I
2 gm 2.233. 2.53303 wcuuacuiaum no 3550: m

 

aoﬁ £355:
«a who: can 3.5:: 338.3 33535 33393333 uo noun—6 van was; .5231. 2; 3 33:.

 

-147-

FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY '
FORIOFFKJAL.USE(NVLV

.munsoan «so we uooaos
nu£u onu aw mane as» no .Ou osu
maduaou can we huuuuav new ouaaunuo
on» no uoquuoaonw new guinea»
”53> RSH .3596 133.. v5
quucoo needy n.0H uuouuoo «nu
vasoucuu an Had: no nuuwuuu

an n.0uo .uaono nluuauzool
new uo>uuomauav isaunul «Au
nounaou uouu maﬁa: unausaoo

undo“ uouucoo uov no «nouns:

.ounwon

.83

and >.£u can:
.ou can so canon
cuo>o uaoundauoz
.A.ouo .nuquuoo
mauuav Anna as»
no muunaxo .uouu
Iooucoo vosau no
cauuoaao onu a“
none: can oouu
Ia>¢o uo hon-5:

.wuowuuuwann- lac: muse ou nunu onu now and nonunou canon 0 mo ou3¢o

on no noun». Add
ca uncaucouuaoomo auoucanouﬂ on»

use mo nowaouuo nsoan on» an wean» no «any noun ”can
noduauoao vacuunu

uaouazouu as» h; «case-nu .uuquqoa wcuuuoa new nuance. new cu «use o>wu

wouuuahon no: who novaon menu 0»
nous: 0H can On page no nooUOHn cu nuna osu suouso mo

ovaoa aquacusooa coauosvoua as» new oaouuuv
no cowuaouaano mo unsaniuuon Inca can luau»: and :uuaouua Ado nuzo on» no

25 9.2.33: 2: 2.2315:

 

 

 

 

 

 

.ououoauuun “noun
Iazaouuooao nuns» no
auuuunuuo on» 300:0 ou
«coca Haowuuooao can
Husuozu vaua>aao

ou ouaoonuo new
oncoIoHo o>uuon

saw: nouauuauua

you» no nuuou

 

 

«vogue: :oHu anouOum
looms“ van 05 :a‘uuazaum
coauQWH~mq< ucu>shmsu 0:» acu>oua5~

usuusoa

 

 
 

 

5413:..5. u.— .5.qu

no cum cuzoanom ozu cu muu:~uam

Inca muse ozone! uuu

 

cu new «comma: vacuouuouw< acquacu2«~m no mvozuoz

 

 

 

 

 

Hu<Hzoo
Inoo novnon muse mango:
muno
coouuo again 09
”nowuooaaou novao: saga Luau
gauges uoqucoo osu no 0:» Iona
uﬁﬁughmmwoum nmmlamwwm uoomnnaauuumellllll
.Aouca cabana - um
Ho>o~ nuance 30H
a no oosnuonv
huu>wuusvaou as»
«o ao«auo>u«
cu ououowoauuu
III I: a a S
O D 0 so
1 s I J
cannon 1M .M n
8 232a 3 3:3: 3 m m... m.
“8 883. 8 mo 25. u mum m.
”NM 1
n
J
D

- 168 -

FOR1OFFHJA1.USE(NVLY
Methods of Eliminating Ascertained Reasons for IC

Failures in the Following Stages

“*“d °f 1c Reas°n f°‘ During 1c rubricucgun

 

 

 

 

 

 

Failure 1C Failure [C to
Inproving the Improving
”9513" Production ac and Rejec- “PPI‘°°‘1°'
Process tion Hothods
High thermal High thermal The same methods as in the preceding section.

resistance resistance
of the IC. of the chip
to chip
holder con-
tact (small
effective
contact joint

area, large
thickness of

the glue
layer in the
case of a
glued joint,
etc.).

 

 

 

’oor herne- Unsatisfac- Predomin- Refining the Input quality Precluding ]
:ic seal of tory quality ant utili- conditions control of the mechanical :

:he 16 of the weld- zation of for sealing packages for and char-31 I
>ackage. ed or sealed 1c types 16's to confer-icy to loads on the :
sean. which are assure con- the require— 1c which are I

hermetic- fornity to nents of the not pernittedby
ally sealed the tech- technical spe- the technical

by welding. nical spe- cifications specifications,
cifications (including the in all stages
(with respect absence of of 1c applica-
to the hernetic cracks, tiona.
seal, external sheared
appearance of places and
the 10's, etc.). other mech-
anical damage
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

09—0 HON 00.2.»: 960.

c A-UUU
.oucocoaiou caused;
no couaouuou vac uuav

.waaxuan .oualav Aquacunooa
woounlopsuaaoa mo soda ogu nauv a.uH
kuoonu an mud: venouaau no coauuoauca
hhoooouoa can auunm Haauu> .Aaxaou sauna
cacao :« vouauoguou .ouuavoahouaw .Hausov
Isa n.0H uo ouauOum aoudu ounxaoa no
.huuﬁﬂlﬂ: uﬂﬂuAIQ unadu onwuco ozu .ouaulwoﬁ
vuua>oao cu n.0H mo usozmaousu c.0H can uncanasauuoo
mo unauoaxw on» man osu no Aqua ouuaa nananoon on ans.
nuco>oua no omeguam anon on» wcuxousu noqxo unauauu 0H

.u.0u onu mo ozu we Amusioa

Ignace uncouuuoHo uuuuuoa ozu hem lacy ouuuusu musu

uo madden» aﬂoaudvcou USU and as» no cauuuou
uuuuﬂho: ﬂoccuu usuuno .oucocoa Iona 3:3ax-E Ivu>
van< .nuuca unoa :500 cu owuadv gong ou nlaau ouuu

Iauavo ouaouuooao

mxuaaam

van woaowu nooaouv w>uuoououo

:« acuuuuuauocu than =m«0u0u mo HauaoaoHnmaa mo

yams» acquav song osu new and acauouaanna as»
n.0H 0:» noun luau. uwuoahon on you acouuuvcoo
mucaawuuucoo uo nouua aoaaaau-ua van oo:a«:£oo»
wcuzmwa mauouao on on» uawxoonu Us» ucwuaawuao

caguuuuann<

 
 

U

.A.ouo .moaon as»
no anon uwuoauo:
0£u nauaoconlou no
owcwuoou sauna «no
no >uudaav can
wwocxo«:u on»
“mucoconaoo cu
avenue: cod» unoccum
nuanou was no ccuuuavaum
ucu>zgasu 9:“ wcu>ouaeH cwuuoa

u“ IllIIIIIIIIIIIIlIIIlIIIllIIII| UH

::uuauqua:u u. unquao

 

mo mum cu>o~_om osu cu nouanuwm
u no» «comaum coauouuoum< mcduncus«~m uo muosuoz

 

.wuououauau
nnoau mo oouwa
osu ua osoauo

uuanasw Us
new condom

ouaadum
om uo vcuu

l

an[!U;| 3] J0]

mu<xu<m
0H

nlqyuuudsau
aunuoduoa
1r1n33n135

- 150 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kind of 1C Reason for

Failure

Corrosion
of package
components

Leaks and
corrosion
of thin
film con-
ductors
due to
poor mois-
ture inu-
nity of an

Methods of Eliminating Ascertaincd Reasons for IC

Failures in the Following Stages

1C Failure 10

Design 1mprov1ng the

Product inn
Process

 

 

Unsatisfac- Predominant '
tory qual- use of cera-
. ity of the mic packages
coatings of with external
metal packages leads made of
(gold, nickel, corrosion re-
etc.): small sistant mater-
coating thick— ials.
ness; the pre-
sence of pores.
microcracks,
incomplete
coverage; mech-
anical damage
to the coatings.
Chips off of
glass insulators,
exposing portions
of metal compo-
nents of the
package which
are not coated.
Poor protection Choosing molded

of the chip compositions
against the with increased
intrusion moisture inau-
of moisture. nity. The intro-

duction of supple-
mental protection
for the surface of

a chip or assembly

During lC Fabricatiun

lmpruving
QC and Rejec-
tion Methods

 

IC
Applicatior
ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020041-9

2007(02109:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

|l|||||llllllllllllll|ll|lll||lllllll

 

 

 

 

 

 

-152-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ClA-RDP82-00050R000500020041 -9

2007/02/00:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

   

 
 
 

 

 

Jung—06m
onu cucu
030.323
:muUuOu no
coin-run":
6330960
88.22. $38:
On owl-in U.—
.ousuoahuu
onion.— onu .
.oowuxuwn man no mo saucouuo .oxaoun
:ouuanuauus ”sauna no cause
uuucuaououm Isooﬂ uoom uuuu uuosm
$.30 .33»
.ovunoav .5333 Jana—02.
madam ugnu ouuouaa
Iooaoﬂv mean: a 5. 0H
3230: :0: 333m m. M W m
nuanwz «E... 00 5.3.5.5.; m d n
sandman—9‘ - «Swiss. 3: wagging; cmwmoa 0.53.; u.— 0nsdum Mm m m
mung—.3— ._..qu......_.3_.._ 0. L535 .uOu condom Um no 3.3— m... Mum... N
no cum 3.30:0m 0:... 5 I953...“— WM I
0“ new acomcux nag—wanna: 95355; HO 2.650: n.
IIIIIIIIIIII .35 5.3553”.
mo 933 9:... 3333 3:85 33.33.: “onus—363.com mo momsau 2.3 2.52 “Omar. 2.9 cm 3mg.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
IN)! 0!?1CJAI.IJSEZ(MNLY

-During the process of operating the radioelectronic equipment.

In a first approximation, the ways of eliminating the major sources of IC failure
were mentioned in Chapter 3, which was devoted to a discussion of the kinds, causes
and mechanisms of IC failures. We shall consider the factors which have an impact
on IC reliability in more detail, as well as ways of boosting reliability in all
stages of IC design and applications.

In Table 20, which is compiled based on the generalization of extensive statis-
tical testing and operational data on Ic's, the analysis of failed 10's and

numerous research studies of the causes and mechanisms for their failures (see
Section III), the major ways of improving the reliability of individual structural

components are indicated which determine IC reliability as a whole during 1c
design, fabrication and application.

3. Integrated Circuit Reliability Assurance During Design

Assuring a definite reliability level during the design stage can be achieved
only with the condition that such a production process is chosen that the major
factors which have an impact on the reliability of integrated circuits of the
particular class are thoroughly taken into account:

--The requirements placed on the electrical insulation of the individual circuit
elements;

--Optimal methods of fabricating internal circuit contact connections and assuring
their reliability;

--Production process scatter and instability in the parameters of the active and
passive components of an to;

--The production process suitability and maximum possible degree of automation of
a given fabrication process, assuring the production of products of uniform

quality, etc.

Besides the selection of the optimal technology, the choice of the optimum IC
design is of extraordinary importance, where this selection is made taking into
account the dominant kinds and mechanisms for failures characteristic of the given
class of Ic's. The following play a great role in this respect:

--The correct choice of the raw materials for the fabrication of the planar struc-
ture;

--The optimal selection of materials and methods of applying dielectric films for
various purposes (passivating, electrical insulating, protective films, etc.)
for the purpose of assuring reliable electrical insulation of the elements

from each other, protecting the structural components against mechanical and
chemical damage (corrosion) and stabilizing the chip surface;

--The use of special methods directed towards preventing the occurrence of surface
inverse conductivity channels, and accounting for the possible instability of
IC parameters due to phenomena at the surface of the chip and at the si-sioz

separation boundary;

--The optimum selection of materials, designs and production processes for pro-
ducing the contact connections - thin film conductors and resistors, ohmic

- 153 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWJR Ol1ﬂ€lAl.USEZ(M§LY

contacts to the silicon and welded contacts of flexible conductors to the chip
and package feed-throughs; (it is necessary in this case to first of all use
those metallurgical systems which make it possible to eliminate negative pheno-
mena related to the possibility of the formation of undesirable transition metal
compounds in regions of contacts between different kinds of materials ("gold--
aluminum", "aluminum--Chromium", etc.); secondly, use such metals or multilayer
films for the formation of thin film conductors which allow for a substantial
reduction in the probability of electromigration of the metal, as well as chem-

ical and electrolytic corrosion of the materials);

--0ptimization of the configuration and geometric dimensions of thin film conduc-
tors (the absence of sharp gradients over the width of the conductors; minimiza-
tion of the current density by means of widening the conductors, especially in
the most "loaded" sections; avoiding conductors with a length exceeding the
"critical" value, eliminating "bypasses" of the contact pads by thin film con-
ductors, etc.).

Moreover, it is essential to correctly choose the following:

--The spacing between individual elements and the distance from them to the edges
of the chip;

--The manner of fastening ("seating") the chip to the chip holder of the package,
which assures adequate mechanical strength, low thermal resistance of the con-
tact and immunity to mechanical stresses during thermal cycling, which occur
because of the differences in the temperature coefficients of the materials
which are in contact;

--The structural design of the package, which assures a low thermal resistance for
the [0, a good hermetic seal and structural strength, as well as high corrosion
resistance, which guarantees IC reliability when operated under such environmen-
tal conditions as elevated humidity, a sea fog, etc.

During the design stage. it is also necessary to provide for a sufficient safety
margin with respect to the IC parameters, which makes it possible to assure its
reliability for a specified time given the condition of a certain instability in
the values of the electrical parameters of individual components during 1c opera-
tion in a permissible range of ambient temperatures. An important factor in assur-
ing reliability during the design stage of an IC is the widescale utilization of
basic technological processes to realize the selected 1c design. This makes it
possible to most fully utilize all of the advantages which are provided by compre-
hensive standardization and unification.

As an example which illustrates the complexity of the problems confronting the
designer and developer of an 1c, we shall cite the widely known problem of assuring
the reliability of contact connections between the chip and the package feed-
throughs [27, 06, 129-132]. The basic difficulty consists in having a comprehen-
sive approach to the solution of the given problem. One of the cardinal methods

of preventing the formation of undesirable transition metal Au,Al compounds in

the welded contacts of integrated circuits is the utilization of single metal
systems to produce the contact connections in the 16's.

- 15b -

FINICHHHCIAI.USE‘ONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of a 1c design with "tab" leads [28,130, l3l] is promising in this regard.
Chips with thin film multilayer conductors based on gold with sublayers of differ-
ent metals (platinum, titanium, palladium), needed to assure reliable ohmic con-
tacts to the silicon and high adhesion of the conductors to the substrate (Figure
30) are used in this 16 structural design. So-called "beams" [tabs], electro-
lytically thickened extensions of thin film gold leads, extending out beyond the
edge of the chip, are used to make the contact connections of the chips to the
package conductors. The chips are mounted on the ceramic plates of the "working"
surface downward, while the tab leads are connected to the gold thin film inter-
connections of the plate by means of thermal compression. A completely single

metal, extremely reliable system of metallic contact connections is obtained as a
result.

Figure 30. Schematic drawing of an integrated
circuit with "beam" leads.

Key: 1. chip; 2. Dielectric film;
3. Titanium; 4. Platinum;
5. Gold; 6. Plate; 7. Current
conducting gold track;
8. welded contact.

 

A second method of eliminating the possibility of the formation of AuxAl transi-
tion metal compounds at the contact pads of a chip is dispensing with go d as a
material for the wire leads in favor of aluminum. However, one must take into
account in this case the fact that since it is necessary to create contacts not
only to contact pads on a chip, but also to package feed-throughs in any inte-
grated circuit, then just replacing the gold leads with aluminum ones will not
alone completely solve the problem of eliminating transition metal compounds in
integrated circuits sealed in packages with feed-throughs made of gold plated
Fernico.

In this case, it is necessary to replace the material used for the package feed-
thrcugh with a different one which does not yield transition metal compounds in
contact with aluminum which have undesirable properties (brittleness, increased
electrical resistance, etc.).

An IC structural design with petal shaped leads [132, 133] made of aluminum foil
has been developed at the present time for this purpose.

The insulation of the petal shpaed leads on the chip side with an elastic

polyimide [sic] film possessing good dielectric properties is used in this IC
structural design for the final solution of the problem of preventing short
circuits of the wire leads at the edge (corner) of the chip (region 5 in Figure 31).
The use of a polyimide film makes it possible to simultaneously overcome difficul-
ties related to the necessity of mounting the chips in a package with a low posi-
tioning of the feed-throughs (relative to the "working" surface of the chip) in

a number of cases. By way of exalple, one can point to the structural design of

- 155 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY

aultiple chip VLSI circuits, in which the chips are mounted on a ceramic plate

with thin film conductors applied to it as the interconnection wiring between the
chips.

Figure 31.8chematic drawing of an inte-
grated circuit with petal
leads.

“ Key: 1. Chip; 2. Dielectric
film; 3. Thin film
aluminum conductor;

4. welded contact;

5. Edge of the chip;

6. Aluminum petal shaped
lead; 7. Polyamide film;
8. Package feed-through.

 

To simultaneously eliminate the corrosion of package components, it appears
promising to use ceramic cup type DIP packages with corrosion resistant external
leads (feed-throughs), made from an alloy which does not yield undesirable transi-
tion metal compounds with aluminum, which is used in the given structural design
as the material for the flexible internal leads of the Ic [137].

Another example of the broad possiblities open to an IC developer as regards the
selection of ways of improving IC reliability can be the classical problem of
aluminum metallieation at relief steps with its tendency towards failures because
of electromigration [27, 28, 139, 140].

To exclude this failure mechanism under actual conditions of long term operation
of high power 10's with an elevated ambient temperature, the IC designer has an
entire arsenal of techniques available to him (see Section III and Table 20):

--Improve the effectiveness of the coverage of steps by means of applying aluminum
in equipment with rotating substrates or by deposition of aluminum on a station-
ary substrate from several sources;

-"Smoothing" the si02 relief by means of etching it in a buffered etchant
(which is not desirable of the sharp degredation of the electrical insulating
properties of the oxide film) or by preliminary "smoothing" of the edges of
the conductor of the lower layer of metallization (which leads to a substantial
reduction in the cross-section of the thin film conductors of the lower level
of metalliaation and should be compensated with a corresponding increase in
their width);

--Quality control of the coverage of steps by means of studying each plate in a
scanning electron microscope;

- 156 -

FOIKOIIICIAI.1EHE(MVLY
FIHICMﬂﬂCJAL USICCNVLY

-The utilization of other quality control techniques for the coverage of steps
with metal and the immunity of the thin film conductors to electromigration
processes (for example, accelerated tests for the purpose of quality control of
thin film conductors, which are performed on test structures: testing based on
the current pulse level which leads to a conductor failure, or testing under
forced thermal and electrical loads);

-Selecting an aluainum application technique which assures a large grained
homogeneous structure for the metal film;

--The introduction of additional surface protection for the aluminum conductors
with a thin film dielectric (8i02 or A1203), however, one must take into account
the fact that to assure more effective protection (including anticorrosion) of
the entire ship surface, it is preferable to apply an 3i02 film, since, as a
rule, an A1203 provides only for local protection of the aluminum; on the other
hand, it must be kept in mind that H08 sturctures are more critical to the
application of SiOz, and protecting the aluminum with an A1203 film is more
promising for them;

-Using aluminum doped with impurities which reduce the electromigration rate
(silicon, magnesium, etc.);

--Diapensing with aluminum as a material for thin film conductors and replacing
it with multilayer films based on gold, molybdenum and othermetals with a higher
activation energy for the electromigration process.

Depending the specific requirements placed on 10 reliability, the conditions for
IC application (temperature at the chip, maximum current density in the worst
case, etc.) and the limitations on integrated circuit cost as well as limitations
imposed by other IC structure components or other failure mechanisms, the designer
makes a compromise decision which though it does not reduce electromigration to'

zero, still substantially minimizes this undesirable process.

9. Assuring IC Reliability During Their Manufacturing Stage

We shall consider yet another factor which governs integrated circuit reliability:
observing the technology layed down during their planning in the production stage.
The main goal of production quality control is the assurance of a satisfactory
and stable quality and reliability level for the Ic's by means of a carefully
thought out checking of the production process for their fabrication [27, 32, 113,
120].

Production quality control, as has already been noted, is accomplished through
the comprehensive application of different techniques. The main ones of them are:

--Input quality control of the raw materials, semi-finished products and complete
components;

- 157 -

FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(HULY
FINICHWHCJAI.US£IDNLY

--Quality control for conformity of the production process parameters to the
requirements of the production process documentation (including the state of the
working atmosphere, the conformity of the production process equipment, working
tools and accessories);

-Intermediate quality control of batches of plates (using "working" plates,
"satellites", test structures) between operations ("operation by operation");

--Production process tests and rejection;

--Systematic quality control of the finished product for conformity to the require-
ments of the standard setting documentation for the 10's.

He shall treat the indicated methods of IC reliability and quality assurance during
the process of manufacturing them in more detail.

In summing the results of analyzing Ic's which failed during various tests, a
conclusion can be drawn that the major causes of typical failures are:

--Nonconformity of the quality of the raw materials, semi-finished products and
complete components to the requirements of the designer and production process
documentation for the Ic's'

--Deviations from the technology, which occur during the process of fabricating the
10's because of operator errors, errors in the production process and monitoring
and measuring equipment, poorly worked out individual operations in the produc-
tion process cycle or insufficiently ineffective quality control and rejection
of products with hidden defects [27, 32, 115, 138, 141].

Input quality control of the materials, semi-finished products and complete compo-
nents used in Ic manufacture makes an important contribution to reliability
assurance of the 10's [27, 161]. During the input quality control step:

--Hicrocracks, crystallographic imperfections and other defects are found in the
plates of the starting semiconductor material and are tested for the value and
uniformity of their electrophysical parameters (thickness, specific resistance
of the epitaxial film (based on the plate area), the distribution of impurities
over the depth of the layer, etc.);

--Defective 1c packages, having cracks and sheared-off placed in the glass insula-
tors are detected and rejected in a timely manner as well as nonconformity of
the thickness and quality of the metal coatings to the requirements of the
engineering documentation, mechanical damage and contamination of package parts,
etc.; '

-Hechanical damage and other defects of the gold and aluminum wires used as the
material for the flexible leads of the intracircuit wiring are ascertained;

--The conformity of the quality of the chemical materials (acids, bases, organic
solvents, photoresists, etc. as well as the energy vehicles used in IC produc-
tion to the requirements of the engineering documentation is determined;

- 158 -

FOH:OITNC1AI.USEIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-Defective glass plates intended for thefabrication of photographic templates,

which are an exceptionally important tool used in 1c production are detected and
rejected, etc.,

i.e., a complete check is made of the incoming materials, semi-finished products
and complete components to assure that they are up to standard: that their para-
meters conform to all of the requirements of the standard setting engineering
documentation.

Nonconfornity of the quality of delivered packages and epitaxial layers [137] to
the requirements of the technical documentation for the integrated circuits
represents the greatest danger from the viewpoint of reliability. Thus, for ex-
ample, numerous types of packages do not stand up to exposure to the production
process conditions of assembly (such defects as unsatisfactory quality of the
welded contacts to the feedothroughs, peeling away of the metal coatings of the
leads, chips in the ceramic and glass insulators, etc. appear during the assembly
process), and do not meet the requirements of the quality control section for the
integrated circuits as regards moisture immunity, mechanical strength, shelf-life
under field conditions at elevated temperatures or stability to exposure to other
environmental factors.

In this regard, it is of exceptional importance to assure such a situation that _
the requirements of the standard setting engineering documentation for all mater-
ials, semi-finished products and complete components used in the production of
lC's are no less stringent than the corresponding requirements of the standards
setting engineering documentation for the IC's. This in turn requires coordinated
actions by suppliers of the raw materials and complete component products for lC's
as well as designers and manufacturers of integrated circuits.

Only in this way can a solid basis be created for the manufacture of a product of
a specified level of quality which is uniform in terms of its properties and
characteristics.

One of the effective ways of assuring the output of high quality integrated cir-
cuits is improving the level of production process quality control.

A significant number of IC failures is related to an unsatisfactory condition of
a planar structure surface, defects in metallization and welded contact connec-
tions. The causes of such defects are most often damage to and contamination of
the planar structure and structural components of an IC, which:are caused by
violations of production conditions:

--Violation of the requirements for vacuum hygiene at the work positions;
--£levated humidity and dust contents of the working atmosphere;

--Inaufficiently careful washing of the plate with the structures prior to the
main operations of diffusion, oxidation and photolithography;

- 159 -

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NULY
IN)! OWFICIAL.IJSEZ(MULY

--Insufficient drying and cleaning of the vehicle gases, and the oxygen used in
the diffusion and oxidation processes;

--Careless handling of plates and photographic templates during their transporta-
tion and work operations in IC fabrication;

--Insufficiently careful preliminary treatment of the vaporizers used for the
vacuum application of thin film 10 elements;

.-Poor quality control and untimely replacement of photographic templates, tools
and fittings, used during the assenbly operation, etc.

All this leads to the fact that the grown oxide film can contain a significant
number of defects (pinholes, microcracks, impurities and foreign particles, intro-
duced into the oxide, etc.), which reduce its electrical strnegth or expose the
silicon surface, something which leads to the occurrence of shunting leaks and
short circuits of the thin film conductors of various levels to each other or to
the surface of the silicon in the defective regions of the planar structure. More-
over, the presence of the indicated defects leads to the appearance of diffusion
tubes and other defects, related to “parasitic" ("false“) diffusion at points of
local bear places on the surface of a semiconductor plate.

The contamination of the oxide surface or the presence of hmpurities and contami-
nants in the oxide film itself degrades its unsking and passivating properties,
unavoidably leads to the increase in leakage currents shunting the p-n junctions,
promotes the formation of surface channels with inverse conductivity, and as a
consequence, brings about gradual conditional and even complete failures of the
integrated circuits during their testing and operation.

Another source of surface contamination is gas and moisture absorption by the
planar structure surface, which leads to the apperance of charges in the near
surface regions of the oxide film, which also serves as a cause of the subsequent
occurrence of surface channels in the active elements of integrated circuits.

Increasing the quality of purification of the chemical reagents (acids, bases,
organic solvents, etc.), the deionised water and vehicle gases, as well as the
filtering of the photoresists used in the production of the integrated circuits,
the use of special cabinets and "clean", which assure improved parameters of the
'working atmosphere and the basic operations of the technological process of fabri-
cating the 16's (especially during photolithography and loading the plates into
diffusion furnaces); strengthening the quality control of the parameters of the
atmosphere in production rooms, the purity of plate surfaces and IC chips, etc. -
all of this together makes it possible to substantially reduce the density of
defects and charge level in an oxide, as well as the contamination of chip
surfaces and package conponents and improve the quality and reliability of inte-
grated circuits, especially very large scale integrated circuits.

Careless handling of plates and chips, the use of unprotected metal tweezers with
sharpened working surfaces in production, rough setting of the probes when checking

- 160 -

lilt¢ﬂﬂﬂCJAl.lﬁﬂi(ﬂﬁlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the functioning during the stage of quality control rejection of structures on
plates, which is accomplished using amicroprobe manipulator also cause failures of
16's because of mechanical damage to thin film conductors and contact pads.

Inadequate checking of the geometry of the working areas of needles and other tools
used to weld flexible leads to a chip and to feedthroughs of an 10 lead to a
violation of the welding conditions, since the specific pressure in the region of
the weld contact in this case is practically uncontrolled. A result of this is
either poor mechanical strength because of incomplete welding of the welded con-
tacts, or overwelding and a small contact joint arsa. Both of these lead to
breaks in the contact connections under certain conditions.

A cause of failures related to local overheating of chip components, separation
of the chip from the base (the chip holder) of the package, and short circuits

of the wire leads to each other can be the careless seating of the chip or incor-
rectly lining it up during mounting on the 16 package base.

since a significant percentage of the observed failures is related to operator
errors and inadequately objective quality control during individual IC assembly
and sealing operations, possibly more complete replacement of manual labor with
mechanical operation and automation in the indicated production process operations
are effective methods of reducing the failure rate and improving lc reliability.

An important means of boosting to reliability is effective quality control of

the products and major parameters of the production process between operations
and establishing correlation functions between them based on the determination
of the major criterion parameters for 1c reliability.

The reliability criterion parameters include both the electrical parameters of
the finished 1c and the electrophysical characteristics of the individual compo-
nents of its structure (including the planar structure chip).

A systematic comparison of the results of testing between operations with the

mean statistical indicators of the process and the results of IC reliability tests
makes it possible to determine the norms for the criterion parameters of IC
reliability and estimate the permissibility of deviations in an operationally
timely manner which have occurred during the fabrication of a sxacific batch of
products. This in turn makes it possible to certify the technological process and
subsequently make a judgement concerning the stability of the reliability level

of the integrated circuits being produced based on the estimate of the stability
of the production process for their fabrication.

A major tool for improving the quality and reliability of the 10's being produced
is the continuous analysis of production process rejects, a comparison of the data
obtained with the results of production tests (including technological) of the
10's and subsequent operationally timely correction of the conditions in those
operations in the technological cycle which are responsible for the appearance

of the defects ascertained in the output products. In this regard, it is excep-
tionally important to develop and implement methods of express quality control

- 161 -

FOR(NHWC1ALIHHBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the operationally timely and objective estimation of process parameters as
well as nondestructive quality control of semifinished products and finished Ic's
for the purpose of a timely determination and rejection of products with hidden
defects. For this, it is essential to have automated high performance monitor
and measurement equipment in all of the major operations of the technological

cycle of IC fabrication.

The major methods of quality control (including nondestructive) used in IC produc-
tion to measure the Iain parameters of individual components in their structure
are given in [116-117, 124-126, 137, 138]. The great diversity of existing test-
ing methods and the high requirements placed on the objectivity of the primary
information and its operationally timely retrieval and processing, which are
needed to assure control efficiency, as well as on the precision of the estimation
of the quality level and the acceptable confidence level of integrated circuit
reliability and quality prediction confront the designer and manufacturer of
integrated circuits with a number of problems [125, 126].

First of all, there is the selection of the requisite system of parameters and
characteristics to be monitored to provide for effective quality control. Since
it is practically impossible to check all of the properties in all of the stages
of 1c production, it is necessary to select an optimal set of parameters and
characteristics. which would make it possible with minimum expenditures for
their measurement to assure the checking of the functioning of each 1c under
specific applications conditions, and test for hidden defects which lead to
early failures or the degradation of the stability of IC properties with time.

In this case, it is exceptionally important to correctly determine the production
process stages which are critical from the viewpoint of IC reliability, and

based on this, to develop technically substantiated and effecient criteria for
the rejection of potentially unreliable IC's during the stage of their fabrica-

tion.

This makes it possible to reduce the volume of quality control measurement and
test operations to a minimum and to resolve the problem of optimizing the check-
ing with respect to a specified quality level of the 10's as well as the expendi-

tures to assure this.

Secondly, the volume of information needed for quality control increases signifi-
cantly in step with an increasing level of integration and functional complexity
of integrated circuits and the increase in the requirements placed on their

quality and reliability.

The number of parameters of the production process, planar structures and finished
Ic's, which must be monitored during the manufacturing process, amounts to several
hundreds when figured on a per integrated circuit basis. In this case, the
complexity of the measurement techniques necessitates the use of special computer
controlled data and instrumentation complexes for the testing. Since the pri-
mary information collected during the course of the testing should be processed

in an operationally timely manner for the purpose of generating the correcting
control actions, the range of computer applications will steadily expand in this

sphere. .

- 162 -

INIR‘OFFICIAI.IJSE1(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thirdly, the problem of group prediction of the level of reliability and quality
of IC batches fabricated on a certified production line using the basic production
process takes on special importance. This is forecasting which is based on the
computer processing of extensive quantities of information on the 10's and

their structural components, collected .during the process of manufacturing and
subsequently testing the finished IC's, as well as special test structures. These
data are supplemented by apriori information on the quality and reliability of
the structural design and production process analogs of the 10's being checked
(including the applications of IC's under actual conditions), utilizing knowledge
of the mechanisms and quantitative characteristics of the degradation processes
which occur in integrated circuits. Such forecasting makes it possible to elim-
inate or curtail the volume of a series of tests and obtain integrated circuits
with a guaranteed level of quality and reliability.

At the present time, the following quality control techniques for testing between

operations have proved out quite well and are widely used in integrated circuit
production:

——E1ectrophysical methods (probe methods of measuring the parameters and charac-
teristics of thin film and semiconductor elements and materials; measurement
of the volt-ampere and volt-fared characteristics of circuits and components
of 16's; removing and staining microscopic sectional slices, etc.);

--0ptical methods (visual inspection, optical microscopy - including interfero-
metry and a light scanning probe, etc.);

--|-.Jectron microscopy techniques (scanning electrol microscopy in various modes;
x-ray microscopic analysis);

--Therma1 methods (thermal resistance measurement, chemical heat indicators,
etc.);

-—x-ray techniques (radiography and X—ray television imaging);

--Leak detection techniques (mass spectrometry, bubble methods,etc.).
Additionally, new quality control techniques are being developed and introduced
into production:

--Laser and holographic methods (laser ellipsometry, laser scanning, laser inter-
ferometry, holographic interferometry, etc.);

--Infmred techniques (IR interferometry, IR ellipsometry, 1R radiometry);
--Liquid crystals;

--Acoustic noise methods '1 other techniques; (the specific features and capabi-
lities of the major qua--.‘y control methods indicated above are treated in
5 6. and for this reason will not be cited here).

The development and implementation of new progressive methods of technical diag-
nostic work (including nondestructive testing methods) makes it possible to

improve the efficiency of a quality control system even more for integrated
circuits, given the state of the art in microelectronics.

-163-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With an increase in the functional complexity and level of integration of IC's,
difficulties of quality control for finished IC's rise substantially: measure-
ments of their electrical parameters, reliability tests and analysis of causes

of their failures for the purpose of reliably determining structural components
which have failed and defects in them responsible for the failure [27, 30, 32,
115, 144, 145]. From this point of view, the most promising method of improving
testing and quality control efficiency, as well as estimating the reliability
level of IC's is the concept of using test structures in all stages of IC planning
and fabrication, a concept which has become widespread at the present time [76,
141-162].

We shall briefly treat the quality control system for integrated circuits during
their production, based on the utilization of statistical monitoring of the
technological process parameters and the characteristics of the IC's by means

of test elements, structures and test "satellites". The wide scale use of test
quality control methods makes it possible to maximally distribute the quality
control operations over the entire technological process of manufacturing the
integrated circuits.

It becomes possible in this case to substantially reduce the volume of the "out-
put" quality control of finished IC's and the objectivity of the testing and

the operational timeliness of the use of the obtained data in correcting the
technological process are improved. Simultaneous with this, the utilization of
quality control methods based on test elements, structures and check "satellites"
substantially reduces the possibility of creating additional defects (cracks,
dirt) in the "working" regions of the IC's, i.e., the product quality control
technique is practically nondestructive.

A test structure takes the form of a specially designed chip, which incorporates
various test elements, as a rule, not tied into the working circuits, and which
make it possible to monitor the parameters of the physical structure of the IC
for various values of the factors acting on the IC [28, 30, 32, 113, 11.0, 141-
142, 152].

The listing of test elements of a test structure can include both elements of a
special configuration intended only for estimating the parameters of the physical
structure and their stability when subjected various loads, as well as actual
components (bipolar and ms transistors, diodes, resistors, etc.), employed in
the IC's. The indicated elements can be provided in unit amounts or in the

form of regular structures (circuits, blocks), figured in tens (or hundreds and
thousands) of elements of the same type in one test structure, something which

is necessary to estimate (or predict) the quantitative indicators of Ic reliabi-
lity based on the determination of the reliability indicators for the major
structural components of the IC's.

The standard set of test elements, as a rule, incorporates:
3) Elements for checking the parameters of the physical structure:

"MOS capacitors in various oxide layers, intended for checking the oxide proper-
ties;

-1610-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Schcttky diodes, etc.:
«MOS transistor of special configurations;

"Diffusion regions of special configurations, intended for checking the para-
meters of the diffusion processes and the characteristics of the planar struc-
tures;

—-‘l‘etrode transistor, which makes it possible to segregate the surface and body
currents in a planar transistor, etc.;

b) Actual structural elements:

--Groups of bipolar and ms transistors (working and "parasitic") of various
geometries;

--'l'hin film conductors, contacts between conductors of different levels (in multi-
level metallization) and other types of ohmic contacts of various configurations
and geometric dimensions;

«Diffusion or deposited resistors;
«Elements of the interlevel insulation with various geometries;

“working special purpose elements (for example, isolating diodes and other ele-
ments in the input circuits of the 16's to protect them against electrical
overvoltagea);

c) Elementary cells ("subblocks"), used as the basic logic gates of the IC's
(especially for large scale integration).

In this case, the test structures can be arranged on each plate among the chips
of "working" Ic's (so-called test cells) or placed on separate plates, which go
through the technological cycle at the same time as the "working" plates. During
the testing, :it is also permissible to use special test elements which are not
tied into the working circuitry, or "working" circuits or elements of the IC
which are accessible for measurements.

One of the possible test structure variants. which can also be used for testing
the parameters of a physical structure (p-n junction doping depth, oxide thick-
ness, etc.), including destructive testing techniques, are the so-called "satel-
Iite" plates ("witnesses"), which pass through the operations being monitored
together with the "working" plates.

Yet another variant of test control is monitoring the mechanical strength of
welded connections by the breakage method, which it is expedient to perform on
"test" chips (which does not preclude the possibility of selective testing of
the strength on the chips of "working" IC's, for example, those rejected because
of their external appearance).

It must be especially underscored that a necessary condition for reliable quality
control based on the utilization of any kind of structure (cells, elements,

"satellites") is their fabrication in a single production process cycle with the
main (“working") IC chips.

-165-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is expedient to provide sets of elements of the same type (transistors,
diodes, resistors, thin film conductors, etc.) which differ from each other
only in the configuration and dimensions of the working regions, during the
design stage of an IC, for the purpose of optimizing the characteristics of
the structural components of the IC's (including the major circuit design ele-
ments) in the test structures.

The accumulation of test results for test structures with large numbers (hundreds
and thousands) of IC elements of the same type in a wide range of electrical
loads and environmental factors, as was noted above, makes it possible to esti-
mate (predict) within a relatively short time (down to 1 year) the quantitative
indicators for reliability which characterize the major structural design and
production process variants of the integrated circuits. In this case, the tests
themselves and the interpretation of the results obtained are substantially
facilitated through the simplification of test equipment, measurement methods
for test structures and the analysis of failed structural elements, something
which makes it possible to simultaneously improve the confidence level of the
results.

An important specific feature of IC reliability and quality testing methods using
test structures is the comparative simplicity and considerable reliability in
detecting and analyzing failed structural elements for the purpose of determining
the causes and mechanisms of the failures, especially those related to group
production process operations during 1c fabrication. This obviously makes it
possible to reduce the scope and duration of a number of technological tests,
which as will be indicated below, are used for the purpose of stimulating hidden
defects in 10's to ascertain and reject them.

The effectiveness of test quality control can be significantly improved, first
of all, by means of designing and introducing, monitor, measurement and test
equipment, specially intended for checking test structures, which should make
it possible to put together sufficient statistics; secondly, by means of the
wide scale utilization of computer processing techniques for the collected sta-
tistical data, which should make it possible to establish the correlation func-
tions between the parameters of the technological process and the 1c quality
and reliability, determine the information carrying criterion parameters for the
reliability, and in the final analysis, design a fully automated comprehensive
production process control system for the manufacturing of 16's of a specified
quality level based on the monitoring of test structures.

we shall once again turn to the control scheme for the production process of
manufacturing lC's. Besides input quality control and testing between operations,
there are also other forms of testing which are needed to guarantee a specified
level of reliability for the output product:

-Production process tests and the rejection of defective products during produc—
tion;

-—Checking the quality and reliability, as well as the classification of good
Ic's with respect to the reliability level.

- 166 -

FOR 0FF1C1A1.1EHE(NVLY
uncuuavcoo
ouaa vac auoaunoo
wood»: as» ea mucouon

hanauuou
S 222. 3% 23
u“ wanna sues: ouoouon

odoauouan auaouou
mo vacancy: on» can
acquucunuucou oouuuam

tected Inte rated C11

Mun—333..— vcw 30932.3
Baum gang no audaOuom can
nauu>oo .uxwoun .nozuuouum

gown
uuuuunom maze acquav uauuo
noun: ouoomov vogue can
>£mauwosu«H0uosm .oaumoua
53:33 0:» mo coaunawuo

luction Process Testing and Rejection m

_3gated Circuits
FOR 0F1ﬂC1Al.USE¢)NLY

noraeauaunoop spxspuaas aq:
JO szuaIaJInbaz o: saaaauszsd
Iaarzzaata aq: 30 £11m:o;uoauou

Detected Inte rated Circuit Defects

 

aSvnaed
31 3Q? “I 9133330

81911338!
an: ;o uorsuvdxa 30
equatorggaoo axnaszad
-ua: sq: Jo Surqaaumsru

aﬁenasd

31 3H: J0 1’39 313
-auaaq an: J0 uoradnxsra

szoaanpuoo
earn pue saoeauoa

paptan aq: u; saaagaa

Ktquasse
91 801ml: than an:
u; Jnaao qatun saaagaa

starzanal uSraao;
go aauasaid aqa pus
uotaeurmezuoa aaagzns

saonsrsaz pue sxoaanpuo:
n11; urq: go (arsoaod pun

saratnaa ‘sqsaxq ‘saqaaezas

uoraearzqu; drqa Surxnp
anaoo qqun szoagap aaqao

pus Kudosﬂoqartoaoqd ‘atrgozd
uorsnggrp an: ;o uotzdnzsrq

TABLE 21. [cont.]

aougxns
dtqo an: o: azuuea

Icrxaaeu Joaanpuoaruas an:
u; uotaaagaadu; Iaznaanans

Kind of Production

Process Test

 

 

 

+

+

Exposure to linear

loads (centrifuging)

+ +
+
+
+ +
+ +
+ +
+ +
+ +
+ +
+ '+
+ +
l I A
E II ﬁll) 3|:
0: out-- no
0 0.30 Odﬂﬂhﬁ-ﬂ
0.:- .4 . Hay-c an
5» our.) >0 v I! 0
... ngaoﬁmza.
o H H- .
5 503 gﬁuoog'go
H on Ian-cu «H
23 .. W 5"
Evan 0-30 H0
«.40 OH sun 3.:
u a 0 ad to c u
33:, ~22 seats: at
HUI-l {Eu-.4 mquun >0
- 168 -

Ft”!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lEi!(ﬂ¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A complex of production process tests occupies a special place among the measures
which assure the output of high quality IC's. The major goal of these tests is
to ascertain potentially unreliable IC's in a timely manner in the concluding
stages of their fabrication. Additionally, information is obtained in this case
which is needed to control the technological manufacturing process, since in

this stage, it is comparatively easy to establish the correlation between the
parameters of the technological process and typical kinds of production defects,
and to determine the requisite corrective measures, directed towards the elimi-
nation of the ascertained sources of the defects.

Visual inspection of the chips and bases of the integrated circuits following
mounting (prior to hermetic sealing) under a microscope is one of the most impor-
tant rejection methods, since it makes it possible to detect in a timely manner
numerous production defects which occur prior to the final operation of sealing
the IC in the package. Typical defects which can remain unnoticed during the
checking of the 10's for functioning and electrical testing of the integrated
circuits, but which are revealed during visual inspection under a microscope
(with a magnification of about 100x) are the following:

-Defects in thin film resistors and metal conductors (mechanical damage, defects
in the photolithography - insufficient etching and overetching of conductors,
corrosion, layer separation of the thin films, etc.);

--Defects in the oxidation and photolithography (local defects in the oxide, in-
correct matching of the photographic templates, excessive etching or underetching
of windows in the oxide close to the diffusion, the exposure of p-n junctions,
etc.);

-Defects in scribing and separating the plates into chips (cracks and breaks in
the chips, etc.);

--Improper fastening of the chip to the chip holder;

--Defects in the welded connections and wire leads (small welded contact area at
the contact pads, adjacent wire leads which are impermissibly close to each
other or welded contacts too close to the edge of the chip, mechanical damage
to a wire, etc.);

-Contamination of the surfaces of a chip, leads, package components;

--The presence of foreign particles and other defects.

However, one must point out that the subjectivity of visual inspection, as well
as the ambiguity of rejection criteria for some kinds of defects at times reduce
the effectiveness of this type of quality control and necessitate, first of all,
the refinement of existing methods of visual inspection for the purpose of improv-
ing the objectivity and confidence level of the inspection results, and secondly,
the use of additional kinds of production process tests and rejections for the
purpose of more reliable detection of 10's with production defects (especially
hidden defects) [27, 145].

Technological tests include the following [27, 32, 36]:

--High temperature treatment of integrated circuits to stabilize their parameters;

- 169 -

FOI:OFFNJAJ.IKNE(H§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Thermal shock, thermal cycling, mechanical shock and centrifuging (or several of
these effects) for the purpose of checking the immunity of the IC structural
design to a cyclical change in the temperature or mechanical loading:

--Checking the hermetic seal of the lc's;

-—Thermal and electrical conditioning of the 16's;

-—Checking the electrical parameters of the 16's (including under extreme temper-
ature values: the maximum and the minimum permissible in accordance with the

technical specifications for the 10);
--Visual inspection of the IC's.

the system of to technological testing is established as a function of their level
of reliability which must be guaranteed. In accordance with the requirements of
3.5. military standard HIL-STD-883, which has become widespread in foreign prac-
tice, the production of integrated circuits of a set level of reliability, as

well as the sequence, composition and conditions for the production process tests
are clearly regulated as a function of the class of IC reliability (A, B, C).
Class A integrated circuits. in accordance with the definition of HIL-STD~883 are
"devices intended for operation under conditions where repair or replacement of
the components is extremely difficult or impossible, while reliability is of
critical importance", i.e., in on-board space or aircraft radioelectronics equip-

ment (REA).

Class 3 integrated circuits are intended for applications in radioelectronics
equipment, although the repair of it is possible, it is difficult, and reliability
is an important factor governing the operational indicators of the rsdioelectronics

equipment.

Finally, Class 0 integrated circuits are characterized by a low level of reliabi-
lity (as compared to Classes A and B) and are intended for applications in equip-
ment, which can be repaired easily, while reliability does not play a great part.

The sequence and some of the conditions for the T5004 technological tests of
HIL-STD-883 are indicated in Table 22 [32].

As can be seen from Table 22, a substantial increase is observed in the scope and
degree of severity of the technological tests, in step with the increase in the
requisite level of IC reliability.

The indicated types of technological tests are intended to ascertain hidden defects
in integrated circuits, including those which occur during the process of hermetic
sealing. In this case, the following major types of defects are detected:

--Contamination of the oxide film, surface of the chip and package components,
which leads to instability in the 1c parameters (primarily because of the
appearance of inversion or ion leakage currents);

--Hicroholes in the dielectric films under thin film conductors of single and
multiple level metallisation;

--Unsatisfactory quality in covering the relief steps on the chip with metal;
- 170 -

F0l_0iIIChULlﬁ§E(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«Poor ohmic contacts to the silicon ("metal to semiconductor") as well as between
the thin film conductors of different levels (in multilevel mstallisation);

-Poor mechanical strength of the welded connections;

«Poor mechanical strength of the contact between the chip and the chip holder
of the package;

«Unsatisfactory hermetic sealing of the welded and sealed seams and the glass
insulators of the IC packages;

«Mechanical damage and corrosion of package components and other defects of the
integrated circuits.

The indicated defects are usually not successfully detected during visual inspec-
tion and in the process of checking the electrical parameters of 10 chips on the
plate, since a more or less long time and rather high load levels are required
to reveal them.

In this regard, one of the most effective methods of technological testing is
thermal and electrical conditioning which takes the form of IC testing during
overall exposure to an elevated temperature and electrical loading. which simu-
lates worst case conditions for IC application [27, 30. 32, 143. 11.8]. This

TABLE 22. The Sequence of Production Process Tests (Method T5004) for
HIL-STD-883 as a Function of the Integrated Circuit class

Integrated Circuit Reliability Class

 

 

 

Kind of Test A B C
Heat treatment to stabilize
the parameters 2!. hours 24 hours . 24 hours
Thermal shock ‘ 15 cycles 15 cycles 15 sycles
or

Thermal cycling 10 cycles 10 cycles 10 cycles
Mechanical shock 20,000 g — --
Linear accelerations 30,000 3 30,000 g 20,000 g
Test of the hermetic seal - + + 4»
Exposure to critical
electrical parameters + -- --
Thermal and electrical
conditioning 168 hr + l68hr -

72 hr
Final quality control
of electrical parameters + + 4-
X-ray testing + -- -
Exterior visual inspection + + +

__________—__———————————————-—-——

-17l-

maoshmtussomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kind of testing makes it possible to ascertain the majority of the types of
early (“burn-in") failures, such as:

«Elevated ion or inversion type leakage currents;
-—Breakdowns of p-n junctions with hidden defects;

—Short circuits due to defects in the dielectric films;
-Short circuits of wire leads to each other and to the chip;

--Breaks due to mechanical damage or corrosion of the thin film components and
flexible conductors, etc.

When selecting the optimum conditions for thermal and electrical conditioning, one
must primarily be governed by the structural design and production process features
of the integrated circuit as well as the specific kinds and mechanisms of failures
inherent in the integrated circuits of the specific class (series or type).

TABLE 23. The Choice of Temperature and Electrical Modes for the Thermal and
Electrical Conditioning of Integrated Circuits as a Function of the

Dominant Kinds of Failures

Reconended Thermal and Electrical Conditioning Mode
Electrical node

Kind of 1C Failure TI C

Elevated leakage currents Static mode (the feeding of as

(because of the formation > 100 low a potential as possible to

of inversion channels) the p-type bases)

Short circuits of the wire I“: (in actor'- Static mode (feeding the maxi-

leads to each other and to dance with stan- mum potential to the leads

the edge of the chip dards documen- relative to the IC substrate)
tation)

Breakage of thin film con- Tm (in accor- Static mode (feeding forward

ductors (because of burn- dance with stan- bias to the maximum number of

out in local thin places) dards docunen- p-n junctions: the maximum per-
tation) missible current flow). Dynamic

mode (for 10's, the power die-
sipation of which depends sub-
stantially on the switching

frequency).
Corrosion (chemical and 50-90 Static mode (feeding the maximum
electrochemical) of the permissible positive potential
metal and resistive films to the IC leads)
with the action of
contaminants
Breakdown of a p-n junction Tmax (in accor- Static mode (feeding the maximum
(because of hidden defects) dance with stan- permissible reverse bias to the
-——————————_ dards documen- maximum number of p-n junc-
Short circuit in the dielec tat 1°“) . tions).

tric film

____________________————-————————-—-———

-172-

FOR OFFICIAL (Bl ONLY
ETHICHHHCIAI.USEGDNLY

The most effective conditions, which make it possible to ascertain defects leading
to the failures indicated above, are shown in Table 23, which was compiled on the
basis of generalizing the materials of testing, operating and the results of ana-
lyzing failures and studies of mechanisms of the typical 10 failures [30, 60, 147-
149].

In order for the conditioning to be effective, it is essential to carefully think
through and work out the procedure for these tests. Thus, for example, in the
case where the presence of two or more fundamentally different failure types or
mechanisms is characteristic of an integrated circuit of a specific series (or
type), where different temperature and electrical conditions are required to
ascertain these types or mechanisms, it is expendient to employ a "combination
mode" of IC thermal and electrical conditioning, i.e., to perform the given
production process testing in several stages with changing conditions.

Researchers working with LSI HOS integrated circuits [30] also note that the
existing differences of opinion concerning which conditions for thermal and
electrical conditioning are more effective for such integrated circuits (static
or dynamic conditions), have no firm ground to stand on, since neither of these
tests make it possible to stimulate numerous kinds of failures, because of the
fact that the majority of LSI integrated circuit components cannot be loaded in
the corresponding manner.

There is as yet no single point of view concerning the duration of thermal and
electrical conditioning. In the 0.8. military standard HILPSTD-883 for integrated
circuit testing methods, various durations of thermal and electrical conditioning
are recommended, right up to 250 hours [32, 36, 150]. At the same time, accord-
ing to different sources [32, 169, 143, 1&8], up to 90 to 95% of all 16 failures
which can be ascertained by thermal and electrical conditioning are observed _
during the first 100 to 168 hours, and by the 168'th hour, rejects reach an

almost constant level.

The average percentage of defective integrated circuits which can be detected
during thermal and electrical conditioning amounts to 2.6 to 51 of the total
number, although depending on the IC manufacturer, this percentage can fluctuate
from batch to batch in the wide range of from 0 to 20% [30, 39, 163]. '

Detecting the indicated 90 to 951 of potentially unreliable integrated circuits
makes it possible to reduce the failure rate of 16's during their subsequent
operation by approximately 1.5 to 2 orders of magnitude [149, 150, 143]. However,
according to the data of paper [143]. the cost of integrated circuits which have
undergone thermal and electrical conditioning. and certain other kinds of expen-
sive technological testing, increased by a factor of about 50 times, while the
delivery timeframes increased by a factor of 2 to 3 times. In this case, about
251 of the number of 16's which failed during operation were acknowledged as
potentially unreliable, but were not ascertained during rejection testing because
of its inadequate effectiveness. This example clearly illustrates how relative
the estimate of production process and rejection testing is and how important it
is to compare the additional costs incurred by rejection testing with the "cost"
of Ic failure during subsequent operation [27, 32, 164].

- 173 -

IIHICNWWC1A1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the latest data, the cost of 168 hour electrical conditioning of
integrated circuits performed by the company using the integrated circuits
following their input quality control can be significantly reduced: down to

5 cents per IC [1&3], however, as before, this kind of testing remains extremely
labor intensive and expensive, comprising the bulk (about 30 to 601) of the out-
lays for technological testing and rejection of integrated circuits [32]. The
necessity of making a careful economic analysis for the purpose of determining
the permissible percentage of defective devices in delivered batches of IC's

is obvious from this.

TABl£ 24.

Integrated Circuit Class With Special
Integrated Circuit Reliability Checking
or Cost Indicator Industrial c B A §Selectionz
Failure rate, xlo'8 hr"1 30-100 10-50 3-8 2-5 1
Relative 1C cost 1.0 1.3 1.8 2.8 4-6

 

An estimate of the cost of technological testing, which has been made by several
foreign 1c manufacturers [27, 32, 169, 143], makes it possible to approximately
determine the level of expenditures for IC reliability assurance (without consider-
ing the outlays for improving the structural design and fabrication technology of
the integrated circuits). Generalized data for a comparison of the relative costs
of IC's with their guaranteed reliability level are presented in Table 24 as a
function of the volume of the technological tests.

In order to correctly estimate the true effectiveness of measures to assure IC
reliability, and in particular, the effectiveness of technological testing and

rejection of potentially unreliable IC's during their production, it is necessary
to analyze the costs of increasing IC reliability as part of a whole with the

analysis of the cost of possible IC failure during various stages of its applica-
tion.

TABLE 25. Comparison of the Costs of Detecting and Removing Defective Integrated
Circuits in Various Stages of Their Application for Four Classes of

Electronic Systems
Cost of IC Failure at Various Stages of IC UseI §§

 

Class of Electronic System During Input During Assem- Under 0p-
(Area of Radioelectronic Quality Con- bly of Elec- During Sys- erational
Equipment Application) trol of the tronic Equip- ten Tests Conditions
IC's ment Units
General purpose 2 5 15 50
Industrial use 6 25 45 215
Military 7 50 120 1,000
Space 15 75 300 200
million
- 176 -

FIHR(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(HNLY
IN)IIOFTHCIAL.USEZ(N‘LY

A governing factor in this regard is the cost of detection of defective integrated
circuits by the customer during input quality control or when they are ascertained
during the installation and alignment of units, system testing or under conditions
of equipment operation. The costs of detecting and removing defective integrated
circuits in the indicated stages of their application are compared in Table 25
[27. 144] for four classes of electronic systems (according to function): general
use, industrial service, military and space hardware.

It can be seen from this Table, for example, that a space system manufacturer can
allow himself 15 times the outlays in hardware as compared to a manufacturer of
caneral use equipment for the practical prevention of 10 failures during the

stage of installing the units. In later stages of the application, this difference
becomes even more pronounced.

Attention should be drawn to the fact that besides the economic expediency in the
determination of the optimal system of technological tests and in the selection

of their conditions (the load levels), it is essential to also work from consider-
ations of guaranteeing the preservation of the nondefective integrated circuits.
It is well known that some kinds of tests (thermal shock, mechanical shock, etc.)
are service life tests in a number of cases. Unjustifiedly rigorous conditions
for the performance of such tests incorporated in the rejection (or technological)
testing can lead to the opposite effect: to the exhaustion and a reduction in the
reliability of the "conditioned" Ic's [37].

In conclusion, the exceptional importance of a comprehensive approach to the proi
blem of reliability assurance for integrated circuits during their fabrication
must be underscored. Just check and rejection operations alone do not allow for
attaining high 1c reliability indicators, especially for LSI integrated circuits,
if there is no unified effective control system for the technological process,
which operates on the basis of a systematic development and realization of the
corrective measures to eliminate ascertained sources of failures, as well as

a system for continually improving the 10 designs.

10. Reliability Assurance for Integrated Circuits in Their Applications Stage

As practice demonstrates, the incorrect application of integrated circuits is one
of the major sources of their failures. According to existing data [27, 32, 36,
35], IC failures during the process of installing, debugging and operating radio-
electronic equipment complexes are related to the incorrect choice of their
operational modes, and violations of the requirements of the standards setting
documentation. For this reason, reliability assurance for integrated circuits
during operation consists in the correctness of their application. Properly
designed radioelectronic circuitry will always meet the requirements of high
reliability. For this. there are various means available to the designer to
achieve the optimum circuit design solutions.

The following are numbered among the major methods of increasing the reliability
of radioelectronic equipment using integrated circuits:

- 175 -

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-Designing the radioelectronic equipment, taking into account the maximum easing
of the operation modes of the Ic's incorporated in it;

--Selecting a radioelectronic equipment fabrication technology which prevents
impermissible effects from acting on the integrated circuits during their
installation in units, adjustment and technological testing ("run-ins") of the
radioelectronic equipment assemblies and units;

--Additional hermetic sealing of the radioelectronic equipment or its individual
units (assemblies) to prevent the exposure of the IC's to elevated humidity,
contaminants, corrosive environments. sea fog and other undesirable environ-
mental factors.

From the viewpoint of easing the operating modes, it is quite important to reduce
the temperature at the integrated circuit chip for the purpose of minimizing
temperature dependent failure mechanisms which reduce the reliability. It is
expedient for this to reduce the ambient temperature in radioelectronic equipment
units as much as possible and to provide for the use of power IC's with heat
sinks.

It is promising during the equipment design stage to limit the maximum electrical
loads on the IC's and to take special steps to protect the IC's against current
and voltage overloads, which can occur during radioelectronic equipment fabrica-
tion and operation.

The choice of the manufacturing technology for radioelectronic equipment should
also be based on considerations of preventing factors from acting on the IC's
which are not provided by the standard setting engineering documentation (exces-
sive mechanical loads, :he use unrecommended methods of fastening and mounting
integrated circuits on circuit boards, washing mixtures, which have a harmful
effect on the IC's. etc.).

Moreover, it is necessary to make provisions for special measures directed towards
protecting integrated circuits against static electricity discharges during their
installation and subsequent operation as part of radioelectronic equipment.

 

TABLE 26. _ .___________
I ' 5- In 'nsr‘"
p“ (0 In Pu!"
a s I m
__ 0.9 0.0: l 0.09 0.34
0.99 l 0.90 E 0.90 0.90

To maintain integrated circuit reliability indicators at the level necessary for
the construction of highly reliable radioelectronic equipment, one must in every
way avoid using lc's under cvmbination load conditions, vhich have an extremely
unfavorable impact on their reliability (for example, simultaneous exposure to
an electrical load and the maximum permissible temperature and ambient humidity).

- 176 -

FOR‘OFF1C1A1.USE(MVLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

0f no small importance in assuring the reliability of rsdioelectronic equipment
designed around integrated circuits is information on 1C reliability, which is
taken into account in the calculation of equipment reliability. Using understated
reliability indicators in this case complicates the task of designing equipment
with the requisite level of reliability to a considerable extent. The calculation
of rsdioelectronic equipment reliability based on Paepx [P ppe ] with a confidence
level of 9* substantially understates the reliability [151Y. Galues of the upper
confidence limit for the probability of nonfailure operation, Puppe , at P* - 0.95
are given in Table 26 for several trial values of the probability of nonfailure
operation, Pgn. as a function of the relationship: S - [ln Pup er(t)]/[1n Pt ial
(t)]. The difference between Puppet and P 1 can reach an orSer of magnitude
and more. In this case, the calculated reliability level proves to be greatly
understated. Thus, using operational indicators for integrated circuit reliabi-
lity in calculations of the reliability of rsdioelectronic equipment is the most
correct approach which assures an objective estimate of the anticipated reliabi-
lity of the equipment.

- 177 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER VI. Metrological Support for Integrated Circuit Reliability and Quality
Control

11. The Role and Place of Hetrological Support in the Quality Control System

ways of assuring integrated circuit reliability were treated above. The list of
them would be incaplete and the plans for improving reliability of little effect
if metrological support for quality control was not included in them.

Integrated circuit fabrication quality basically depends on the state of production
process discipline during production and the implementation of the installed
technology. Effective monitoring of the observance of the technological process of
integrated circuit manufacture assures the timely rejection of defective units from
the aggregate of manufactured IC's. Quality control precision plays a decisive part
in this case.

As follows from the preceding sections, very stringent requirements are placed on
quality control facilities. In order to exclude errors in estimating the values

of the 10 parameters being monitored, improve the confidence level of test results,
achieve uniformity in the methods monitoring and evaluating reliability, and conse-
quently also reproducibility of the quality control results, it is essential to
have timely metrological supports for the measurements and tests.

Hetrological support is one of the functions of a quality control system. This
function is directed towards assuring unity, precision and reliability of product
quality measurements [167, 186].

Hetrological support for the economy is understood-to be the "Establishment and
application of the scientific and organizational principles, technical “hardware,
rules and norms essential for attaining unity in the requisite precision of the
measurements", in accordance with COST l.25--76 "State Standardization System.
Hetrological Support. Basic Principles".

The scientific foundation of metrological supports is metrology: the science of
measurements, as well as the methods and means of assuring their unity and the
requisite precision. The equipment basis of metrological support is cowrised of
the systems for assuring unity in the measurements, state reference standards, etc.
The organizational basis for metrological support is the USSR Hetrological Service.

'lhe effective performance of metrological support functions by a comprehensive
product control system makes it possible to reduce rejection losses, iwrove the
quality of the output product, increase the yield on capital and the utilization
factor for scientific equipment and production equipment, as well as achieve
maxim uniformity in quality evaluation and lay down the conditions governing
the other components of labor efficiency I186].

-178-

FOR OF' \L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Basic Principles of Hetrological Support for Integrated Circuit Reliability
and Quality Control

Integrated circuit quality control consists in checking for the conformity of the
properties of IC quality to the requirements of the engineering standard setting
documentation and is composed of measurements, tests and alternative criterion
monitoring. The latter is distinguished from measurements in that during quality
control by this method, the fact that the quantity being measured falls within a
specified tolerance range is established with a definite confidence level. Measur-
ing the quantity provies for establishing its numerical value with a certain error.

The means of integrated circuit quality control are messureuent tools (meters,
transducers, as well as measurement installations, systems and auxiliary equipment),
test facilities (test complexes and systems, chambers, test stands, nmchines,
instruments and installations as well as auxiliary test facilities) and quality
control hardware (flaw detectors, displays, gauges, quality control sorting
machines).

The metrological support for integrated circuit quality control (also including
reliability) consists in establishing the scientific and organizational bases for
the testing, selection as well as the setting up and utilization of the hardware,
regulations and norms needed to achieve a reliable estiaate (within a specified
precision) for the conformity of the product quality indicators being monitored to
the established requirements for the assured unity of the measurements and tests.

Metrological support for quality control is accomplished by means of setting
standards for the listing of quantities being monitored, precision standards for
the measurements and the reproducibility of the test conditions, the methods and
conditions for the measurements and tests as well as mthods of estimating measure-
ment error, the metrological characteristics of the measurement and the test
hardware, the classes of precision of the measurement hardware, the technical
requirements placed on the methods and means of metrological supervision of the
instrumentation and test equipment, and the methods of quality control and esti-
mating the reliability of quality control facilities.

Another form of metrological support for quality control is the design and correct
utilization of the calibration base as well as the selection and setting up of the
quality control facilities which meet the requirements governed by standards.

It is difficult to hypothesize the attainability of measurement and test unity
without certification of the methods and facilities for quality control including
for the subdivisions and specialists engaged in this work. For this reason, certi-
fication of the procedures for the performing measurements, test techniques, as
well as metrological and test services and centers is yet another very important
form of metrological support for quality control.

And finally, the last of the most inportant forms of the activity considered here
of industrial enterprises and metrological and test service\ is the state inspec-

torate and departmental supervision of the observance of standards and technical
specifications, as well as of the inplementation of the metrological rules and the

-179-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE|0NLY

status, application and reliability of quality control facilities (including state
tests of measurement and test facilities).

The precision and unity of quality control, which correspond to the requirements
of the technical documentation, are attainable given the condition that the
adopted units for physical quantities are used and uniformity is assured in the
quality control by the use of standard temninology, classification and reference
data on the properties of substances and materials.

Considerable basic literature has been written concerning the methods and means

of providing for precision and unity in measurements and quality control. The
contents of metrological support for various kinds of measurements are being
constantly published in the pages of the journals IZMERITAL'NAYA TEKﬂNIKA
[INSTRUMENTATION ENGINEERING], HETROLOGIYA [NETROLOGY] and METROLOGIYA I TOCHNYYE
IZMERENIYA [METROLOGY AND PRECISION MEASUREMENTS]. For this reason, without
repeating the general principles, we shall consider the specific features inherent
in integrated circuit production which are responsible for the requirements
placed on the metrological support for the production of these products, and
determine its contents, standards and organisation.

It is more difficult to provide for measurement unity in microelectronics in

other sectors of the economy. The specific features of metrological support for
the production of semiconductor integrated circuits are expressed primarily in

the very high requirements placed on the ranges and precision of the measurement of
integrated circuit parameters (they are practically comparable to reference stand-
ards) as compared to other sectors of industry, as well as the high requirements
placed on the quality of the materials, semi-finished products and product

packages and the increased requirements on the precision with which the fabrication
technology is observed.

Practically all of the existing kinds of measurements find application in inte-
grated circuit production. Moreover, a large number of specific measurements not
used in otherfields of science and engineering are employed in microelectronics.
These are measurements of the rate of growth, weight and thickness of a film, the
surface of quality of a film, the type of conductivity, the specific resistance
of a semiconductor material and the distribution of doping impurities in the body
of a semiconductor, as well as the volt-ampere and volt-fared characteristics of
p-n junctions, voltage and current levels, pulse delays and widths, the frequency,
phase and nonlinear distrotion of signals, etc.

The necessity of careful operational quality control in the manufacture of inte-
grated circuits and control of the prrluction process is dictated by the distinc-
tive features of the production of microelectronic devices of this class, the
major one: of which are the great labor intensity of integrated circuit fabrica-
tion (there are 30 to #0 major operations counted in just the technological
process of Ic manufacture alone) and the necessity of assuring practically defect
free production in each operation. It is indicated in [6] that to obtain a yield
of 30 percent good integrated circuits, a good product output of no less than

97 percent must be achieved in each operation.

- 180 -

IN)! 0dﬂﬂ€lAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOI.0FFNJAL.USE(MVLY

The unst important condition for obtaining a high percentage yield of high quality
10‘s is the purity of the environment, the materials and work positions. without
effective monitoring of the purity of the materials used and the ambient medium in
each technology operation, the attaining of the requisite production indicators is
unthinkable: labor productivity and production economy; the specified quality and
reliability of the output products also prove the unattainable.

To manufacture high quality integrated circuits, it is necessary in a number of
cases to use silicon with a specific resistance on the order of 10 to 100 ohm - cm.

Water occupies an important place in 10 production. Hater of a high degree of
purity is used for these purposes. Deionized water, having a resistance of 10 to
20 Mohm is considered satisfactory.

Cases occupy a no less important place in integrated circuit production.

The tolerances for the IC parameters employed in the course of the production
process have a substantial impact on the percentage yield of integrated circuits.

Figure 32. Distribution of rejects as s
(3) function of reasons for rejection.

,7 (e) .7. $23»;

  

'30] Key: 1. Electrical parameter;
E”, 2. Breakage of contact
(A): . connections;
§ 1 . External appearance;
“7 . Other.

Rejects, relative units.
By the customer;
By the manufacturer.

ou> but

It can be seen from an analysis of the typical distributions of the values of the
resistances of diffusion resistors in a single 10 that a tolerance on the nominal
value of 1101 provides for a resistor yield of 561, and with a tolerance of :52,
the yield is 302 lb]. This in turn places very stringent requirements on the pre-
cision with which the geometric dimensions and parameters of the physical structure
of the diffusion resistors are observed. Moreover, dimensional effects in the
region of the ohmic contacts of thin film conductors to the diffusion resistors of
the integrated circuit should be carefully taken into account. Thus, for example,
the contact resistance of thin film resistors should be minimal and not exceed

2 to 10 ohms for an area of 625 umz. A resistor 25 um wide is fabricated with a
permissible deviation not exceeding five percent, which means it is necessary
during the pracess of monitoring the geometric dimensions of the resistors to
provide for the measurement of quantities of down to one micrometer.

- 181 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reproducibility of resistors is assured by the reproducibility of the surface
resistance of deposited films. During the deposition of a film, its resistance is
continuously monitored. The requirements provide for a precision in the reproduc-
tion of the surface resistance of films of less than one percent along a plate and
two percent from plate to plate.

When fabricating capacitors of the metal-oxide--semiconductor type, the thickness
of the oxide dielectric is monitored, which fall in a range of 50 to 100 nm. The
capacitance of such capacitors amounts to 320 to 640 pP/mmz.

The inductance in integrated circuits varies from 0.1 tu at quality factors rang-
ing from 1 to 10.

A maximum total deviation in the dimensions of no more than 5.5 um is permitted
during the photolithography process. These include: the tolerance for the original
of 0.6 um; the permissible deviation during multiplication of + 1.2 um; the pre-
cision in processing the photoresist of 1.2 um and errors in matching the photo-
graphic templates of 2.5 um.

These are only a few of the examples which characterize the requirements placed on
measurement precision in the production of semiconductor IC's. The requirements
placed on measurement facilities used for quality control in integrated circuit
fabrication during their manufacture are governed not only what has been presented
above. The microminiature dimensions of integrated circuits place unusually
stringent requirements on the contact and hook-up assemblies of measurement hard-
ware. Thus, for example, the probes of measurement equipment should make contact
with the surface being studied through a hole in the oxide layer on the order of
12 - 12 um. For this, the point of the probe should have a radius not exceeding

5 pm, while the spacing between adjacent probes should not exceed 50 um.

The mass nature of the production of the product considered here requires not only
precise, but also rapid measurement of the parameters. In order for the rate at
which the measurements are performed not to slow down the rate of growth in labor
productivity in microelectronics, measurement hardware should have a high operar
tional speed.

The limited possibilities of using general purpose standardized instrumentation
in microelectronics are responsible for the necessity of designing of special
measurement gear. In this case, its design should even run somewhat ahead of the
development of new types of integrated circuits.

The incessant growth in the products list of semiconductor materials used for the
fabrication of new types of integrated circuits and the practically incessant
process of inproving their manufacturing technology makes it difficult to provide
modern measurement methods and hardware in a timely manner for production, which
meet the requirements of the engineering standards setting documentation.

A great deal of work has been done in recent years which is directed towards
accelerating the pace of development of meterological support for the national
economy and microelectronics in particular. The reference standard base has been
strengthened, the precision of numerous reference standards has been improved and

- 182 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the ranges of the quantities which can be measured have been extended; the crea-
tion of a state service of standard samples and a state service of standard refer-
ence data for the properties of substances and materials has been started; new
prototypes of high precision instrumentation have been designed. The system of
territorial organs of the State Standards Administration and departmental services
has been further expanded. Along with this, there are still serious defiencies in
this most important work in the microelectronics sector of industry which are hold-
ing up further progress. There are practically no prototype units for a number of
the most important kinds of measurements or the requisite meterological base. A
serious obstacle to further improving the precision and reliability of measurements
is the lack of certain standard samplesuof semiconductor materials.

The lag in the meterological support for measurements in semiconductor micro-
electronics generates violations of the meterological regulations and a failure to
observe the approach to the design of quality control facilities established by

the standards. Among the most frequently encountered violations of general metero—
logical requirements are those which are due to the failure to resolve procedural
questions of certifying new quality control hardware. The negative consequences of
such a situation are exacerbated by the widescale use of equivalents in integrated
circuit quality control. Load simulators, which themselves should be checked anu
calibrated with a periodicity of up to two to three times per work shift.

Providing for measurement unity under these conditions proves to be extremely
difficult. The doubtful reliability of the measurement results then impedes the
further development of this most important sector of the economy.

Improving the level of integrated circuit quality control is substantially retarded
by the failure to understand the role of meterologicsl support for quality control
tests in the system of quality control meterological support. Moreover, the quality
control test facilities, along with the measurement hardware, play the part of quan-
titative quality control facilities. We shall consider the neterological aspects

of testing, taking into account the fact that this question of quality control is
not well worked out.

Integrated circuit quality consists of properties which characterize functional
capabilities, which segregate it from a number of similar ones, as well as proper-
ties which govern thc operational possiblities. The physical quantities which
characterize the functional properties of integrated circuits are practically all
measured by means of measurement facilities. The majority of the Operational pro-
perties of IC quality cannot be measured directly. The reliability of integrated
cirCUits, heat, moisture, cold and vibrational imnunity, as well as certain pro-
perties of the quality are determined by means of test facilities, which create
physical fields in the space surrounding the product being tested, causing definite
structural or physical and chemical transformations in the objects being studied,
and by means of the built-in measurement hardware, make it possible to estimate
with the requisite precision the response of the integrated circuit to the per-
turbing forces and the conformity of circuitls operational properties to the re-
quirements of the engineering standard settind documentation.

The tests of [101] are broken down into research and quality control tests. The
former are performed for the purpose of studying the possibility of producing the

- 183 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

requisite properties in the integrated circuits, while the second are performed

for quality control. Depending on the problem being solved, the test operation

has the nature of a research study, or serves as a means of establishing with a
certain error the numerical value of the quantity being monitored. In the latter
case, the test operation is similar to the measurement operation. In the process
of testing for reliability, non-failure operating time, shelf-life, moisture im-
munity and operational stability in the presence of moisture as well as immunity to
solar radiation and fog, fungal resistance and other tests, values of the physical
quantities or their derivatives with respect to time are determined. For example,
lC reliability is defined for operation in a definite electrical mode and ambient
conditions by the number of failures per unit time. Approximately the same thing
can be said about operational stability during vibration and similar quality pro-
perties, which characterize the capability of the product of performing its func-
tion in the presence of external perturbations. All of them, strictly speaking are
estimated in terms of the number of failures over a definite period of exposure to
the perturbing force, or at each power level of the force, i.e., during the testing
of the product. This indicates the active role of test equipment in estimating

the property of quality. Test facilities not only generate the external effects
with which the tested unit is brought to the state needed to solve the measurement
problem (for example, resonate of 16 elements when estimating vibration immunity,
activating the major and minority carries when estimating thermal stability), but
also the given quality property of the product is estimated by means of the
measurement hardware either directly or indirectly.

In order to bring the product to the requisite state, in other words artificially
reproduce conditions close to operational ones, the testing facilities reproduce
the physical fields in the space surrounding the unit being tested. If one takes
into account the fact that measurement instrument measure the size of the physical
quantity only at one point in space and only for one of the vectors of the applied
load, then it is easy to come to the conclusion that testing is the only method of
quantitatively estimating those properties of product quality which characterize
its ability to stand up to the destructive effect of the resulting forces composed
of several force vectors acting in the ambient space. During quality control tests
of a product, the testing facilities which reproduce the standardized exposure
levels for the test object play a joint role with the measurement gear: in the form
of quality control facility. The problem of assuring unity of the tests is more
complex than the problem of assuring unity of the measurements, since the metro-
logical support for the tests incorporates the assurance of precision and unity of
the tests as well as adequacy of the test facilities in addition to the metrologi-
cal support for the measurements [186].

In speaking of the unity of tests, we shall have in mind the uniformity of the
methods of performing the tests, the monitoring of test modes as well as recording
and evaluating the results obtained taking into account the fact that errors in
setting and maintaining the test conditions, and measuring and recording the results
are known within definite confidence limits and fall within the range of the spe-
cified tolerances.

~184-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we shall term those test facilities adequate, the standardized metrological charac-
teristics of which, having an influence on the test precision, conform to the set
requirements throughout the entire duration of the test, while the assigned measure-
nent facilities are graduated in legallly stipulated units and maintain their metro-
logical properties constant during the testing period.

Testing precision is assured by the opthnsl setting of standards for the listing of
the test mode parameters being monitored as well as the requirements placed on the
precision of setting and maintaining the test conditions, the methods of monitor;
ing the test parameters, the implementation of the standardized node, as well as
the adequacy of the testing facilities. Setting the standards for that enumerated
above is accomplished on the basis of an analysis of requirements placed on the
quality of the products being tested and the requirements placed on the precision
of the tests, the design of the test unit and the known physical failures and laws
governing their occurrence as well as the development and timewise distribution
with respect to the type of load exposure.

Unity of the tests is assured by the following: the selection and establishing of
the derivatives of the units of the quantities employed for the test mode charac-
teristics; establishing the kind of effect, the sequence for their realization and
the standards (range of test loads and duration of exposure); the designation and
providing of identical test conditions for products of the same type; suitability
for the use of the test facility and test results; by the state insepctorate and
departmental quality control for the inplentation of the standards and the tech-
nical specifications for the test methods and facilities.

The adequacy of test facilities is achieved by establishing and setting standards
for the precision characteristics of the test facilities which have a direct
impact on testing precision, as well as the requirements placed on the methods

and facilities of the metrological inspectorate of testing equipment, the require-
ments placed on testing facilities, the regulations and standards for test equip-
nent design, the methods and facilities for certifization and checking test ma~
chines, chambers. stands and instrunents; and nethods of calculating reliability.
It is natural that in addition to setting standards for that enumerated above, the
performance of state tests for standardized and metrological certification of non-
standardized test facilities. as well as the state supervision and departmental
control of the status, application and reliability of testing equipment during

operation is quite important in assuring the adequacy of test facilities.

The following serve as the most important standardized metrological or precision
characteristics of test facilities: the precision in setting the physical quantity--
test mode parameter (FV—PIR) [PQ-THP], the permissible deviation from the standard-
ized value of the PQ-TMP, the error in maintaining the PQ-THP and the nonuniformitv
in the distribution of the PQ-THP being reproduced by the test facility. The
standard concept "setting precision” is understood to be the precision in repro-
ducing the PQ-THP, specified by the engineering standard setting documentation. In
other words, the precision in setting in the PQ-THP is the difference between the
values of the specified PQ-THP and that reproduced by the test equipment while the
error in maintaining the PQ-THP is the deviation in the actual value of the physi-
cal quantity, which characterizes the test mode, from the specified value during
the testing process. The permissible deviation from the standardized value is the

- 185 -
FOR 0FF1C1AI.lEﬂi(HVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

difference between the physical quantity at the control point and at any other
point on the teat platform (the useful volume) of the test stand or machine (cham-
ber), while the nonuniformity in the distribution of the PQ-THP is the difference
between the maximum and minimum values of the reproduced physical quantity, meas-
ured at any two points in the useful volume of the chamber or test stand (or t
machine) platform at any point in time [186].

The priority task of metrological support for integrated circuit reliability and
quality control is improving the reliability of the tests. This problem is being
solved successfully with the introduction of automated quality control systems.
These systems make it possible to increase the confidence level of quality control
results while substantially reducing the volume of check operations and curtailing
the quality control labor intensity. Automated test control systems (ASUI) have
already been introduced and are successfully functioning, which control the opera-
tion of five climatic chambers for 56 days practically without the participation
of an operator. Automated test control systems provide for maintaining the speci-
fied test conditions in the chambers, shutting them down at the exspiration of the
preprogrammed time or in the case of breakdown. The systems are designed around
information and control computers.

The task of metrological support for quality control using nondestructive tech-
niques comes up as one of he priority problems at the present time.

Presently, nondestructive 1 -lity control facilities are practically not at all
subjected to metrological augervision. In the better case, just as in the case of
test facilities, they are checked, calibrated and certified by their owners. In
this case, different owners use different methods, which do not agree. If one
adds to what has been said that fact that certification is accomplished using only
working measurement tools, while new samples of nondestructive quality control
equipment as a rule, are not subjected to state tests [105], the pointlessness of
attempts to assure the precision, reliability and unity of quality control using
nondestructive methods becomes obvious without the implementation of state metro-
logical supervision and departmental metrological monitoring.

It is necessary to standardize the methods for state metrological inspection and
departmental metrological quality control of the technical condition of nondestruc-
tive quality control equipment during the operational process. The development of
new hardware for nondestructive quality control of integrated circuits should be
accomplished with the participation of the metrological scientific reiearch insti-
tutions of the State Standards Administration, and their production should be
sanctioned by the State Standards Administration.

13. State Supervision and Departmental Monitoring of Hetrological Support

In conclusion, we shall consider the procedure for implementing state supervision
and departmental monitoring of metrological production support.

The procedure for implementing state supervision of metrological production support
for a product is regulated by the "Temporary Procedural Instructions for the

- 186 -

IN)! 0WWﬂC1AI.lEﬂB(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Implementation of State Supervision of Hetrological Production Support for a
Product"*. This document is published as a supplement to the "Instructions for
State Supervision of the Implementation and Observance of Standards and Technical
Specifications". It governs the procedure for preparing and perforsdng checks of
metrological support for the production of a product, where these are accomplished
in the process of state metrological inspection, as well as the rules for complet-
ing the forms for these check results.

A new form of state supervision of measurement equipment is expert evaluation of
the reliability of measurement facilities.

Expert evaluation of reliability is accomplished in accordance with EU 8.8-7?
[Procedural Instructions 8.8-77] "Procedural Instructions for the Performance of
EXpert Examination of Measurement Facility Reliability", which were worked out in
developing the standards for the State Standardization System and the State System
of Measurement Unity Assurance. This document defines the tasks of expert examina-
tion of measurement facility reliability, the procedure for presenting them for

the expert examination and the performance of this work, and sets the overall tech-
nical requirements placed on the formating of the results obtained.

Various organs of state and departmental metrological services perform expert
evaluations of the reliability of measurement instruments, systems and complexes.
During expert metrological evaluation of the engineering assignments for the devel-
opment of master and Very important working rossurement facilities, this problem is
solved by the metrological institutes and the metrology and standardization centers
of the State Standards Administration. They render the expert evaluation of the
reliability when analyzing the materials of state acceptance tests for measurement
equipment, as vell as state qu-lity control tests if these tests are performed in
connection with the end of the period of validity of production authorisation for
measurement equipment. In the other instances of performance of the state quality
. control tests, this inspection function is formed by the territorial organs of the

State Standards Administration.

The metrological services of the head and base organizations of the ministries and
departments are engaged in the expert evaluation of reliability in the stage of
rendering expert metrological opinions on the technical assignments for the deveIOp-
rent of measurement equipment.

In the stage of state acceptance tests for measurement facilities, the expert

evaluation of reliability is made in accordance with the authorized technical

assignment for the development of the reasurement equipment and the draft of the
technical specifications. In this case, the calculations of product reliability
or the materials of the definitive reliability tests are analyzed and the project
plans for the quality control test procedure for reliability testing are analyzed
as well as the charts for the technical level and quality of the product and the

operational documentation provided by GOSI 2.601-68 "YeSKD. Operational Documents".

 

*
Moscow, Izdatel‘stvo Standartov, 1974.

- 187 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In contrast to the case considered here, during state quality control tests of
measurement facilities, the expert evaluation of the reliability is made in accord-
ance with the approved documents: the technical specifications for the product,

the procedure for the reliability quality control tests, tests and the chart for
the technical level and product quality. In this case, the materials of reliabi-
lity tests of previous state or quality control tests, as well as operational
documentation are also considered.

Among the technical documentation in accordance with which the expert evaluation
of the reliability is made, there can be other documents which contain information
on the reliability of the object subject to expert evaluation.

The steps in the work are covered by the procedure. In the first of them, the
presented materials are checked for conformity to reliability requirements provided
by the valid state standards and other standard setting docunents. Based on the
results of analyzing the presented materials, an evaluation is made of the correct-
ness of the selected listing and standardized values of the reliability indicators.
At the same time, conformity to the periodicity of the metrological servicing of
the measurement facilities to the standardized values for metrological reliability
indicators is assessed.

The reliability calculation is evaluated in subsequent stages in the process of
rendering the expert evaluation of the reliability during state acceptance tests,
while in the process of acceptance and quality control tests, the substantiation
of the procedure f.-r reliability quality control tests is analyzed.

The correctness of the confirmation of the reliability indicators by the relis-
bility test results and by other.methods is evaluated in the concluding:step.

The results of the expert reliability evaluation, when rendering the expert
metrological opinion on the technical assignments for the development of measure-
ment facilities, are set forth in the expert conclusion. In the case of state
quality control tests, they are reflected in a document of the commission, while
when considering the materials of state tests, in a general conclusion drawn up
in accordance with NU 8. 2-71, which governs the procedure for formating and ana-

lyzing the materials with the results of state tests of measurement facilities.

lb. Centralization of Tests: a Ray of Improving the Level of Metrological
Support for Quality Control .

The development of testing subdivisions in industrial enterprises up to a level
which provides for the performance of the complete set of tests called for in
the standard setting documentation in step with the further increase in the re-
quirements placed on product quality and the increasing complexity of testing
methods caused by this is becoming economically disadvantageous. Along with the
appearance of new types of tests, techniques and equipment for their performance,
the products list of test eat ipmcnt is growing as well as the complexity of test-
ing facilities, the production space set aside for the tests and the consuption
of all kinds of energy and materials. In the majority of cases, the revision of

- 188 -
FOR OFIWCJAl.lEﬂE(HﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

methods and standard programs for tests is accompanied by an increase in the dura-
tion and cost of the tests. For some kinds of products, the length of tests in-
creases by several times. Thus, for example, the testing time for the American
"Tires" earth satellites amounts to 50 percent of the time expended on their con-
struction. As a result, the enormous material resources are deflected away from
the production of the product to quality control. Testing expenses in machine
building amount to 10 to 15 percent of the overall outlays for the construction of
a product. In electrical engineering production, they reach 30 percent, while in
semiconductor production and microelectronics, they even reach 80 percent. The
funds which could have been used to implement measures directly targeted at improv-

ing the quality of the output product are expended in evaluating its quality.

The expenditures are not always justified in this case. In a number of cases,
funds are expended for testing, the low confidence level of which is known before-
hand. In the production process, quality control techniques are frequently intro-
duced which can be counted amoung superfluous testing. In this case, cases of
product failure which have successfully passed all of the tests are not at all un-
common in practice.

If we add to what has been pointed out here that in this case, the load on design
organizations and plants producing the test facilities, increases at the same time,
then the picture is complete.

One of the real ways of resolving the contradictions indicated here is the central-
ization tests.

Concentrating the requisite equipment and personnel in specialized test centers,
transfering a number of organizational functions and quality control for the out-
put product to them which are now performed by various base organizations for
metrology, standardization and product applications. as well as by industrial
enterprises, will assure attaining obvious advantages. One of the most important
results of centralization will be a unified approach to the evaluation of the
quality of the products being tested, and as a consequence, an improvement in the
confidence level of the assessment. The level of scientific research and trial
design work will increase substantially in the field of testing methods and hard-
ware. The quality of the development of standards and governing technical mater-
ials for the requirements placed on tests and methods of their performance, the
standards and rules for metrological supervision as well as techniques of evaluat-
ing the results obtained will increase. Their will be a real possibility of
automating work on the development of testing programs, controlling the tests,
recording and analyzing the data on the quality of the products being tested using
computer equipment. The demand for custom made test equipment will fall off
sharply and some difficulties will be eliminated in and of themselves which are
due to the lack of testing facilities and the necessity of expanding their produc-
tion. It will become possible to concentrate skilled test personnel and to ﬁnprove
the level of their training.

And finally, as a result of test centralization, favorable conditions will be
created for the formation of a technical policy in the field of standardizing re—
quirements placed on quality control and testing methods.

- 189 -
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result, material expenditures for product quality control will be reduced by
many times. Industrial enterprises, freed from the performance of tasks not natural
to them, will be able free a portion of the production areas and personnel engaged

in testing for the needs of production, and to concentrate their efforts and equip-
ment on the working out and refinement of the production processes and the design of
the output products. The conditions for assuring the unity of the tests will improve

immeasurably.

The most expedient form for centralization of tests is combining small, low capacity
testing subdivisions and enterprises and the creation of state, intersectoral and

sectoral testing centers.

The economic justification for the design, placement and construction of test
centers, their specialization and the scope of their work should all be treated

primarily from the viewpoint of economic expediency.

Minimal expenditures for testing and transporting the products being tested with
minimal timeframes for the execution of the work should be used as the criterion of
the economic efficiency of test centralization.

A calculation of the economic efficiency of test centralisation within the frame-
work of a scientific production association in one of our domestic microelectronics
industry sectors shows that as a result of centralization, the annual profits can
be figured in hundreds of millions of rubles [178].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Kclosov A.A., et 31., "Poluprovodnikovyye tverdyye skhemy" ("Hard Semiconductor
Circuits"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1965.

2. "Mikroelektronika" ["Microelectronics"l. Edited by N.P. Bogoroditskiy, Moscow,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1965.

3. Valiyev K.A., et al., "Elektronnaya Tekhnika. Ser. VI. Hikroelektronika"
("Electronic Engineering. Series 6. Microelectronics"], 1967, No. 6.

4. Hadland G.R., et al., "Integral'nyye skhemy. Osnovy proycktirovaniya i tekhnologif‘
["Integrated Circuits. Design and Technology Fundamentals"], Translated from the
English. Edited by A.A. Kolosov, Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1968.

5. "Integral'nyye skhemy. Printsipy konstruirovaniya i proizvodstvo" ("Integrated
Circuits. Design and Productions Principlea"], Translated from the English,
Edited by A.A. Kolosov, Moscow, Sovetakoye Radio Publishers, 1968.

6. Valiyev K.A., et a1., "Taifrovyye integral‘nyye skhemy na HDP transistorakh"

("Digital Integrated Circuits using HOS Transistors"]. Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio
Publishers, 1971.

- 190 -

FIHR()FFI(1AI.UGI2(HVLY
10.
11.
12.
13.
110.
15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gavrilov R.A., Skvortsov A.H., "Tekhnologiya proizvodstva poluprovodnikovykh

priborov" ["Semicouductor Device Production Technology"], Leningrad. Energiya
Publishers, 1968.

. TRUDY INSTITUTA INZHENEROV P0 ELEKTROTEKHNIKE I RADIOELEKTRONIKE [PROCEEDINGS

OF THE IEEE (in translation)], Moscow, 1969, No. 57, p 9.

Hoeneisen 8., Head C., SOLID STATE ELECTRONICS, 1972, Vol. 15, No. 8.

Al'tlnan, ELEKTRONIKA [ELECTRONICS], 1974, Vol. (.7, No. ‘0.

Al'tman, ELEKTRONIKA, 1975, V01. 68, No. 16.

Khorton, et a1., ELEKTRONIKA, 1975, Vol. 1.8, No. 3.

ZARUBEZHNAYA ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA [FOREIGN ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING], 1974, No.5.
ZARUBEZHNAYA ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA, 19710, No. 10.

ZARUBEZHNAYA ELEKIRONNAYA TEKHNIKA, 1974, No. 3.

ZARUBEZHNAYA ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA, 1975, No. 6.

ZARUBEZHNAYA ELElITRONNAYA TEKHNIKA, 1973, No. 7.

"Hiniatyuriutsiya i mikrominiatyurizatsiya radioelektronnoy apparatury"
["Hiniaturization and Hicrominiaturization of Radio Electronic Equipment"],
Edited by N.A. Barkanov and 1.8. Likhachev, Moscow, Mir Publishers. 1965.
Prangishvili I.V., et a1., "Hikroelektronika i odnorodnyye struktury dlya
postroyeniya logicheskikh vychislitel'nykh ustroystv" ['Microelectronics and
Homogeneous Structures for the Construction of Computer Logic Devices"], Moscow,

Nauka Publishers, 1967.

Lennon J., "An Analysis of Potential Avionic Reliability Improvement Through
Microelectronics", Wescon Technical Papers, 1966, Vol. 2.

Hoskovitz C., "Integrated Circuits in Action. Part 3.", ELECTRONICS, 1966,
Vol. 39, No. 26.

Bumgart V.F., et 31., "Obzor materialov mezhdunarodnogo kongressa IBEE, 1965"
("Review of Materials from the 1965 International Congress of the IBEE"],
RADIOELEKTRWIKA 2A RUBEZHOM [RADIOELECTRONICS ABROAD], 1965, No. 27-28.

"Status Report of Integrated Circuits Reliability", "Microelectronics and
Reliability", 1965, Vol. lo.

Bridges J., "Integrated Electronics in Defense System", PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE,
1964, V01. 52, No. 12.

"Proceedings of the 12th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control",
1966, 25—27th Jan.

-191-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

bl.

#2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”The Seventh Annual New York Conference on Electronic Reliability, 1966", 25 -
27Lh, Jan.

Pitti 5.6., "Slagaycmyye nadezhnosti poluprovodnikovykh priborov" ["The Compo-
nents of Semiconductor Device Reliability“], PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE. 1964,
Vol 62, No 2.

Pek D.S.. et a1, "Nadezhnost' poluprovodnikovykh priborov na firme Bell System"
["Semiconductor Device Reliability in the Bell System"], PROCEEDINGS OF THE IBEE,

1974, Vol 62, No 2.

Heitornuhite R.F.. et a1, "Obespecheniye postaVok vysokonadezhnykh poluprovod-
nikovykh komponentov“ ["Assuring Deliveries of High Reliability Semiconductor
Comoonents"], PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, 1974, Vol 62, No 2.

Colburn Ye.D.. et a1., "Nadezhnost' HOP BIS" ["HOS LSI Reliability"], PROCEED-
INQS OF THE IEEE, 1976, V01 62, No 2.

Synorov V.P., et al.. "Fizicheskiye osnovy nadezhnosti integral'nykh skhem"

[“The Physical Principles of Integrated Circuit Reliability"]. Edited by
Yu.G. Miller, Moscow. Sovetakoye Radio Publishers. 1976.

Vakkaro I.V., "Trebovaniya k nadezhnosti poluprovodnikovykh priborov pred'ya-
vlyayemyye Hinisterstvon oborony SShA" ("Requirements Placed on the Reliability
of Semiconductor Devices by the U.S. Defense Department"], PROCEEDINGS OF THE
IEEE, 1974, Vol. 62, No. 2.

Khaniter, ELEKTRONIKA [ELECTRONICS], 1969, Vol 42, No 13.

Saito M., et 81., REVIEH ELECTRIC COMMUNICATIONS LABS, 1973, Vol 5, No 5-6.
ELECTRONIK ZEITUNG [ELECTRONICS NEWS], 1975, Vol 4, No 7, p 36.

Brauer J.B., HICROELECTRONICS, 1969, June, p 17.

Gallo H.D.. SAE PREPRINT, a.a. N 710798.

Fuqua N.. RAC Internal Hemor., 1972.

Nouak T.J., in "Proc. 1967 Annual Symp. Rel."

Hauarath D.A., Fleming D.C., in "Proc. 1968 Annual Symp. Rel."

Matare 6., "Elektronika defektov v poluprovodnikakh" ["The Electronics of
Defects in Seniconductora"], Moscow, Hir Publishers, 1974.

Aleksandrov L.N., "Kinetika obrazovaniya i atruktury tverdykh aloyev" ["The
Structure and Formation Kinetics of Hard Layera"], Novosibirsk, 1972.

A3. Plantinga H., IEBE TRANSACTIONS ON RELIABILITY, 1969. Vol. ED-16, No 4.

- 192 -

INJR10F1W(1A1.1EHE(NHLY
44.

45.

46.
47.
48.
49.

50.

51.
52.
53.
S4.
55.
56.

57.

58.

S9.

60.
61.
62.

63.

64,

65.

66.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Seligson, PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, 1969, Vol 57, No 9.

D'Orl', ”Tekhnologiya tolstykh i tonkikh plenok" ["Thin and Thick Pill Tech-
nology"], Moscow, Mir Publishers. 1972.

Blake, PROCEEDINGS OF THE 1355, 1969, V01 57, No 9.

Balk, Eldridge, PROCEEDINGS OF THE 1533, 1969, V01 57, NO 9.
Shneybl, Kin, PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, 1969, V01 57, No 9.
Brewing G.V., et al., "Phys. Failure Elsctron.", 1966, Vol 4.

A. [sic], "Failure Mechanism of Gold-Aluminum Integrated Circuit Bonds",
NESCON TECHNICAL PAPERS, 1965, V01 65, No 9.

Cunningham J.A., SOLID STATE ELECTRONICS, 1965, Vol 8, No 8.

Philofsky E., SOLID STATE ELECTRONICS, 1970, V01 13, No 10.

Berger U.M., et a1., PHYS. FAILURE ELECTRON, 1966, Vol 4.

Rossiter 1.1., in “Ninth Annual Proc. Relish. Phys. Synp.", 1971.

Philofsky E., in "Ninth Annual Proc. Relish. Synp." [sic], 1971.

Hakim E.B., Nalinovsky 6., in "11th Annual Peoc. Reliab. Phys. Symposium", 1973.

Edfors H.C., In "Proc. 1972 Annual Reliability and Haintainability Symposium,
1972".

Terri, Nilson, PROCEEDINGS OF THE 1383, 1969, V01 57, No 9.

ZARUBEZHNAYA ELEKTRONNAYA TEKENIKA [FOREIGN ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING], Special
Issue.

Black J.R., IBEE TRANS., 1970, V01 BD-17, No 9.
Joseph R.R., et al., in "Eighth Annual Proc. Reliab. Phys. Synp." 1970.
Schlacter, H., et 31., IEEE JOURNAL SOLID STATE CIRCUITS, 1971, SC-6, No 5.

Nazarov I.N., et a1, "Elektronnaya tekhnika. Ser. 3, Nikroelektronika"
("Electronics Engineering. Series 3. Hicroelectronics"], 1975, No 1.

Metts, PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, 1969, V01 57, No 9.

Andre, et a1., "Composants electron haute fiabilite" [sic] ["Nigh Reliability

Electronic Components"], Colloq. Int. Toulouse (1972), 1972.

Brandeﬁie G.V.. et 31.. PHYS. FAILURE ELECTRON., 1966, Vol 4.

- 193 -
FOI.0FF1CLA1.USE¢DNLY
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
'73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.

81.

82.
83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Paulson H.H., in "11th Annual Proc. Relish. Phys. Synp.. 1973".

Clough U.L., Collins J.H.. HICROELECTRONICS, 1973, V01 3, No 11.

Satake I., et 81., JAPAN JOURNAL APPL. PHYS., 1973, V01 12, No 4.

Devaney J.R., in "Eighth Annual Proceedings Reliability Phys. Sylp. 1970".
Black J.R., IEEE TRANSACTIONS, 1969, V01 ED-16, No 4.

Spitcer S.H., Schwartz 8., IEEB TRANSACTIONS, 1969, Vol ED-16.

Santoro, Tolliver, "Tekhnologiya tolstykh i tonkikh plenok" ["Thin and Thick
Film Technology"l, Moscow, Hit Publishers, 1972.

Prabhaksr 6.8., et 31., IEEE TRANSACTIONS 1973, R-22, No 4.

SOLID STATE ELECTRONICS, 1973, Vol 16, No 12, p 1399.

JOURNAL OF ELECTROCHEMICAL SOCIETY, 1973, Vol 110, No 4, p 521.

ELECTRON. DESIGN, 1973, V01 21, No 6, p 54.

Schlegel 5.5., et al., in “Eighth Annual Proc. Reliab. Phys. Syup., 1970".
Grey, PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, 1969, Vol 57, No 9.

Schlegel 3.8., Schnable,G.L., IEEE TRANS., 1969. Vol 30-16, No 4.

Goryunov N.N., "Svoystva poluprovodnikovykh priborov pri dlitel'ncy rebate
i khranenii" ["The Properties of Semiconductor Devices During Long Tarn
Operation and Storage"], Moscow, Bnergiya Publishers, 1970.

Atalla H., et 31., BELL SYSTEM TECHN. JOURNAL, 1959, No 3.

Schlacter H.M., et 31., 1338 TRANSACTIONS, 1976, Vol 30-17.

Krigler R.J., Deveny T.F., in "11th Annual Proceedings Reliability Physical
Symposium, 1973“ [sic], p 153.

Eccleston H., Pepper H., NICROELECTRONICS AND RELIABILITY, 1971, No 10.
Attardo M.J., Rosenberg R., JOURNAL OF APPLIED PHYSICS, 1976, No 41.

White, "Tekhnologiya tolstykh i tonkihh plenok" ["Thin and Thick Film
Technology"], Moscow, Hir Publishers. 1972.

Kaverznev V.A.. et a1.. "Staticheskoye elektrichestvo v poluprovodnikovoy
ptonyshlennosti" ["Static Electricity in the Semiconductor Industry"],
Moscow, Energiya Publishers, 1975

- 194 -

FIN!(NHHC1AI.IEHI(NWLY
89.
90.
91.

92.

93.

9b.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kostychev 6.1., HIKROELEKTRONIKA [MICROELECTRONICS], 1971, No 6.
Berg 8., et al, in “11th Annual Proc. Reliab. Phys. Symp., 1973".

Yefimov I.Ye., Kal'man I.G., "K voprosu otsenki kachestva i nadezhnosti
integral'nykh tverdykh skhem" ["On the Question of Estimating the Quality and
Reliability of Hard Integrated Circuits"], ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA. SER. IV.
[ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING, SERIES 4], 1967, No 6.

Yefimov I.Ye., Kal'man 1.0., "0b odnoy storone problemy nadezhnosti poluprovod-
nikovykh integral'nykh skhen" ["On One Aspect of the Problem of Semiconductor
Integrated Circuit Reliability"], is the book, "Sb. Nauch. trudov po problemam
mikroelektroniki" ["Collected Scientific Papers on Problems in Microelectron-
ics"], MIET [Moscow Institute of Electrical Engineering], 1968.

COST 8.054-73 GSI: Metrologicheskoye obeapecheniye podgotovki proizvodstva.
Obshchiye polozheniya" ["State Standard 8.056-73 CSI: Metrologicsl Support for
Production Preparations. General Principles"].

GOST 8.010-72. GSI: "Obshchiye trebovaniya k standartizatsii i attestatsii
metodik vypolneniya izmereniy" ["General Requirements Placed on the Standardi-
zation and Certification of Measurement Performance Procedures"].

"Obespecheniye nadezhnosti poluprovodnikovykh ustroystv" ["Rel iability Assurance
for Semiconductor Devices"), Edited by A. S Savina, Moscow, Mir Publishers, 1964.

Kouden 3., "Statisticheskiye metody kontrolya kachestva" ["Statistical Quality
Control Methods"], Edited by B.R. Levin, Moscow Fizmatgiz Publishers, 1961.

Shor Ya.B., "Statisticheskiye netody analiza i kontrolys kaohestva i
nadezhnosti" ("Statistical Methods of Reliability Quality Control and Analy-
ais"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1962.

Kalabro S., "Printsipy i prakticheskiye voprosy nadeshnosti" ["Principles and
Practica1 Questions in Reliability"), Edited by D.Yu. Panov, Moscow.
Mashinostroyeniye Publishers,, 1966.

Ponomarev V .P., Frolov L. 11., "R01' avtomatizirovannoy sistemy upravleniya
ispytaniyami pri kontrole izdeliy elektronnoy tekhniki v protsesse proizvodstva"
["The Role of an Automated Testing Control System in Checking Electronic
Products During the Production Process"], ELEKTRONNAXA TEKHNIKA. SER. 8,

1974, No 7 (25).

COST 13377-67: Nadezhnost' v tekhnike. Terminy. ["Stste Standard 13377-67:
Reliability in Engineering. Terms").

COST 1650h-76:Kachestvo produktsii. Kontrol' i ispytaniya. Osnovnyye terminy
i opredeleniya" l"State Standard 16504- 74: Product Quality. Monitoring and
Tests. Main Terms and Definitions"‘.

- 195 -

INHRCHﬁHCJAl.USE(MMLY
102.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.
11k.
115.

116.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kal'man 1.6., Kovalenko A.S.. Kurnikov 1.3., "K voprosu ekonomicheskoy otsenki
effektivnosti trenifovki izdeliy na nadezhnost'" ["On the Question of an
Economical Estimate of the Efficiency of Reliability Conditioning of Products"],
NADEZHNOST' I KONTROL' KACHESTVA [RELIABILITY AND QUALITY CONTROL], 1971, NO 1.

. COST 15667-70: Kachestvo produktsii. Terminy. [State Standard 15467: Product

Quality. Terms].

COST 16962-71. lzdeliya elektronnoy tekhniki i elektrotekhniki. Mekhanicheskiye
i klimaticheskiye vozdeystviya. Trebovaniya i metody ispytaniy [State Standard
16962-71: Electronic Equipment and Electrical Engineering Products. Mechanical
and Climatic Loads. Testing Requirements and Methods}.

COST 8.001-71. CSI: Cosudarstvennyye ispytnniya sredstv izmereniy [State Stand-
ard 8.001-71. 651: State Tests of Measurement Facilities].

Reese 1., "Reliability Prediction for Monolithic Integrated Circuits", ARINC
Res. Corp., Publ. No. 9&7-01—1-1163, 1971, Nov.

Kal'man 1.6., "Vozdeystviye faktorov vneshney sredy na apparaturu i elementy
["The Effect of Environmental Factors on Equipment and Components“], "Metody
klimaticheskikh i mekhanicheskikh ispytaniy" ["Climatic and Mechanical Testing
Methods"], Moscow, Znaniye Publishers, 1971.

Petrovskiy A.A., Yesyutin A.A., "Organizatsiya ispytaniy na vozdeystviye
klimaticheskikh faktorov" ["Setting Up Tests for Exposure to Climatic Pactora"],
IZMERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA [INSTRUMENTATION ENGINEERING], 1975, No 5.

banner A., Griffin 3., "Ispytaniye radioelektronnoy apparatury i materislov na
vozdeyatviye klinaticheskikh i mekhanicheskikh usloviy" ["Testing Radio Elec-

tronic Equipment and Materials for the Effect of Climatic and Mechanical Condi-
tions"], Moscow-Leningrad, Energiya Publishers, 1965.

Malinskiy V.D., "Kontrol' i ispytaniya radioapparatury" ["Monitoring and Test as
Radio Equipment"], Moscow, Energiya Publishers, 1970.

COST 9763-67: Pribory elektronnyye izmeritel'nyye. Obshchiye tekhnicheskiye
trebovaniya [State Standard 9763-67: Electronic Measurement Instruments. General
Technical Requirements].

Pushkarev 6.1., Rettel' A.I., Gorodetskaya N.K., "Zamena udarnykh ispytaniy
ispytaniyami na lineynyye peregruzki" ("Substituting Linear Overloads for Shock
Load Tests"], IZMERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA, 1975, do 5.

ELECTRONICS, 1971, No 9.

Dokuchayev Yu.P. et 81., ELEKTROMNAYA PROMYSMLENNOST', 1972, No 7.

Crigor'yan V.G., ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST', 1972, Mo 7.

Makuagon, ELEKTRONIKA {ELECTRONICS}, 1971, V01 44, No 8.

- 196 -

FI”!(HHH(1AI.USE(NVLY
117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.
123.
124.

125.

126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.

138.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fistul' V.I., et 81., ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST' [ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY],
1972, No 7.

Harris L.A., JOURNAL OF APPLIED PHYSICS, 1968, Vol 39.

Shinods 6., et al., in "Proc: Sixth Int. Conf. X-Rsy Optics and Microanalysis"
Osaka, Japan, 1971.

Thornton P.R., et 81., IEEE TRANS. ELECTRON DEVICES, 1969, Vol ED-l6.

Beaulier R.P., et al, in "Proc. 10th Annual IEEE Relish. Phys. Symp.", Lss
Vegas, 1972, p 32.

Behera S.K.. et al. [sic].

Electronics, 1972, No 2. [sic].

Rabodzey N.V., Lyubimov Ye.H., ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST', 1972, No 7.
“Fiziko-tekhnicheskiye metody nerszrushayushchego kontrolys elementov i
priborov elektronnoy tekhniki" ["Technical-Physical Methods of Nondestructive
Testing of Electronic Equipment Components and Devices"], in the book. "Sb.
Nauchno-tekhnicheskogo Obshchestva radioelektroniki i svyazi imeni Popovs"
("Collected Papers of the Scientific and Technical Society for Radio Electronics
and Communications imeni Popov"], Moscow, 1969.

Proleyko V.H., ELEKIRDNNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST', 1972, No 7.

Schaft H.A., in "llth Annual Proc. Reliab. Phys. Symp., 1973".

Brauer J.B., et sl., in "Eighth Annual Proc. Relish. Phys. Symp., 1970".
Gianelle W.ﬂ., PHYS. FAILURE ELECTRON., 1966,'V01 4.

Lepselter M.P., BELL SYSTEM TECH“. JOURNAL, 1966, Vol 45.

Eleftherion H.P., WESTERN ELECTRON. ENG., 1967, Vol 11, No 4..

Grossman, ELEKTRONIKA, 1974, Vol 47, No 10.

Skrupski, ELEKTRONIKA, 1971, Vol 44, No 3.

Skrupski, ELEKTRONIKA, 1971, Vol 44, N. 8.

White 6., in "llth Annual Proc. Reliab. Phys. Symp., 1973. p. 94.

Bullis, Skeys, PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, 1969, Vol 57, No 9.

Anazaspyan V.N., et 81.. ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST', 1972, No 7.
Kontsevoy Yu.A., Kudin V.D., "Hetody kontrolya tekhnologii proizvodstva

poluprovodnikovykh priborov" ("Production Technology Quality Control Techniques
for Semiconductor Devices"], Moscow, Energiys Publishers, 1973.

- 197 -
FIN!(NWHC1A1.USE(NVLY
139.
140.

141.

142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.

149.

151.

150.

152.

153.

154.

155.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reynolds, et al., PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, 1974, Vol 62, No 2.

Pinon T., "Composants electron. haute fiabilite [sic]" ["Righ Reliability
Electronic Conponents"], Colloq. Int. Toulouse (1972), Paris, 1972.

Nazar'yan A.R., et 81., ELBKTRONNAYA TEKKNIKA. SER. 3. MIKROELBKTRONIKA
[ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING. SERIES 3. MICROELECTRONICS], 1972, No 1.

Karnazinskiy A.N., MIKROELEKTRONIKA, 1974, No 7.

Lorandzher, ELEKTRONIKA, 1975, Vol 48, No 2.

banner, Lombardy, ELEKTRONIKA, 1971, Vol 44, No 18.

Schoonsrd J.H., et al., ERGONOMICS, 1973, Vol 16, No 4.

Miranda, ELEKTRONIKA, 1968, Vol 41, No 17.

Brown 6., "11th Annual Proc. Phys. Synp., 1973“.

Kemeny A.P., HICROELECTRONICS AND RELIABILITY, 1974, V01 13, No 2.

Barber D.E., O'Connel E.P., "NATO Conference on Reliability Testing and Relia-
bility Evaluation", Hague, 1972.

Shor Ya.B.. "Statisticheskiye netody kontrolya kachestva i nadezhnosti promysh-
lennoy produktsii" ["Statistical Reliability and Quality Control Techniques

for Industrial Products"], Materials from lectures given in the Polytechnical
Museum in a senina on reliability and progressive product quality control
methods, Moscow, Znaniye Publishers, 1968.

Brauer J.B., ELECTRON PRODUCTS, 1969. August.

Kkhambata A., "Bol'shiye integral'nyye skheny" ["Large Scale Integrated
Circuits"], Moscow, Mir Publishers, 1971.

GOST 1845-59: Pribory elektroizneritel'nyye. Obshchiye tekhnicheskiye
trebovaniya [State Standard 1845-59: Electrical Measurement Instruments.
General Technical Requirements].

COST 8.002-71. GSI: Organizatsiya i poryadok provedeniya poverki, revizii i
ekspertizy sredstva iznereniy [State Standard 8.002-71. GSI: The Organization
of and Procedure for Testing, Modifying and Rendering Expert Evaluations of
Measurement Facilities].

GOST 8.054-73. GSI. Metrologicheskoye obespecheniye podgotovki proizvodstva.
Obahchiye polozheniya [State Standard 8.054-73. GSI. Metrological Support
for Production Preparations. General Principles].

- 198 -

llll(lﬂﬂC1AI.USE(MVLY
156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

Arapenkov A.P., et al., “Ispytaniya i poverka kontrol'no-izmeritel'nogo
oborudovaniya dlya proizvodstva integral'nykh skhem" ("Testing and Calibration
of Quality Control and Measurement Equipment for Integrated Circuit Product-
ion"], HETROLOGIYA [METROLOGY], 1973, No 10.

"Hetrologicheskiye sluzhby ministerstv i vedomstv. Tipovyye polozheniya.

RDTP 5&-75--RDTP 57-75" ["Hetrological Services of Ministries and Departments.
Standard Regulations RDTP Sb-75--RDTP 57-75"], Moscow, Irdatel'stvo Standartov,
1975.

Arapenkov A.P.. Bogoroditskiy P.A., Bondarevskiy A.S., ”Nekotoryye voprosy
metrologicheskogo obespecheniya kontrol'no-izmeritel‘nogo oborudovaniya dlya
IS“ ["Some Questions of Metrological Support of the Quality Control and Instru-
mentation Equipment for Integrated Circuits"), ELEKIRDNNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST'
[ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY], 1973. No 6.

Kal'man 1.6., "Hetrologicheskaya attestatsiya ispytatelnogo oborudovaniya i
kachestvo produktsii" ["Hetrological Certification of Test Equipment and
Product Quality"], STANDARTY I KACHBSTVO [STANDARDS AND QUALITY], 1974, No 3.

Kipnis A.H., “O nadzore za ispytatel'noy tekhnikoy" ["On the Inspection of
Test Equipment"], IZMERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA [INSTRUMENTATION ENGINEERING], 1975,
No S.

Popov V.V., Chepsykin V.A., "0 proyekte GOST 'Metrologicheskiy nadzor za
sredstvami ispytaniy. Organizatsiya i poryadok provedeniya'" ["On the State
Standards Draft: 'Metrological Inspection of Testing Facilities. Organization
and Procedure for Implementation'"], IZHBRITBL'NAYA TEKHNIKA, 1975. No 5.

Prolov L.N., "Nekotoryye zadachi tekhnicheskogo obsluzhivaniya sredstv
izmereniy i kontrolya parametrov izdeliy elektronnoy tekhniki" ["Some Problems
of Technical Servicing of Parameter Monitoring and Measurement Facilities for
Electronic Equipment Products"], ELBKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA. Ser. 8. 1975, No 3 (33).

Vasil'yev Ye.A., Prolov L.N., "Sostuvlyayuahchiye metodicheskoy pogreshnosti
izmereniya dinamicheskikh parametrov integral'nykh mikroskhem" ["Components of
the Procedural Error in the Measurement of the Dynamic Parameters of Integrated
Circuits"], ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA. SER. 8, 1974, No 6 (2h).

"Vremennyye metodicheskiye ukazaniya o poryadke gosudarstvennogo nadzor za
metrologicheskim obespacheniyem porizvodstva produktsii" ["Temporary Procedural
Instructions on the Procedure for Inspection of the Hetrological Support for
Product Hanufacture"], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Standartov, 197$.

"Instruktsiya po gosudarstvennomu nadzoru za vnedreniyem i soblyudeniyem
standartov i tekhnicheskikh usloviy. RDIl-72" ["InstrucLions for the State
Inspection of the Introduction and Observance of Standards and Technical
Specifications. RDIl-72"], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Standartov, 1972.

Hardin V.V., et 31., "Gosudarstvennyye ispytaniya - osnova povysheniya kachestva

"ypuskayemoy produktsii"["State Tests: The Basis for Improving Output Product
Quality"), IZHBRITEL"NAYA TEKNNIKA, 1975, No 6.

- 199 -
INJR‘OFF1CIAI.IISIICNVLY
167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

17k.

175.

176.

177.

FOR OFTWC1A1.USHE(M€LY

"Koapleksnaya aistema upravleniya kachestvon produktsii. Rekonendataii po
razrabotke i vnedreniyu v ob"yedineniyakh i na predpriyatiyakh" ["The Compre-
hensive Product Quality Control System. Recolnendations for Development

and Introduction in Associations and Enterprises"], Moscow, Izdatel'atvo Stand-
artov, 1976.

Zaks A.M., Malykh V.A., Mif N.P., "Metrologicheskoye obespecheniye tekhnolo-
gicheskoy podgotovki proizvodstva" ["Metrological Support of the Technological
Preparation for Production"], IZMBRITBL'NAYA TEXENIKA [INSTRUMENTATION
ENGINEERING], 1973, No b.

Rekomendatsii po postroyeniyu i funktaionirovaniyu sisteny gosudarstvennogo
upravleniya kachestvom produktaii na haze standartizatsii (kontseptsiya i
oanovnyye polozheniya) ["Recounendations for the Design and Functioning of

the State Product Quality Control System Based on Standardization (Concept

and Basic Principles)"]. Moscow, VNIIS [All-Union Scientific Research Institute
for Standardization], 1975.

Kruglov M.I.. Kryzhanovskiy I.D., Golant M.Ye., "Organizataiya robot po
sozdaniyu yedinoy sistemy goaudarstvennogo upravleniya kacheatvon produktsii"
(“The Organization of Work on the Creation of the Unified System of State
Product Quality Control"], STANDARTY I KACHBSTVO [STANDARDS AND QUALITY],
1976, No 1.

Lebedev 6.1., "Metrologicheskoye obespecheniye proizvodstva v sistene
upravleniya kachestvom" ["Metrological Support for Production in a Quality
Control System"], IZHERITBL'NAYA TBKHNIKA, 1976, No 6.

Mallin U.R., "Avtonatizataiya netrologicheskogo ohespecheniya upravleniya
kachestvon" ["Autonating the Metrological Support for Quality Control"],
IZMERITBL'NAYA TEKHNIKA, 1976, No 6.

Golovashkin M.A., Mikhaylenko V.D., Mif N.P., Shkabardnya M.S., "Metrologichea-
koye obespecheniye priborostroyeniya“ ["Metrological Support for Instrument
Making"], IZHBRITEL'NAXA TEKHNIKA, 1975, No 10.

Kiparenko V.I., Zaks L.M, Mif N.P., "Razvitiye standartizatsii v oblasti
metrologicheskogo obespecheniya narodnogo khozyaystva" ["The Development of
Standardization in the Area of Metrological Support for the Economy"),
IZMERITBL'NAXA TEKHNIKA, 1975, No 9.

"Osnovy standartizataii i kontrolya kachestva" ("Fundamentals of Standardization
and Quality Control"), Edited by V.V. Thachenko, Moscow, Izdatel'atvo Standartov,
1973.

GOST 1.1-68. GSS: Organy i sluzhby atandartizataii ["State Standard 1.1-68. GSS:
Standardization Organs and Servicea"].

Kal'man 1.6.. Martynov G.K., ?Povyaheniye effektivnosti kontrolya kachestva"
["Increasing Quality Control Efficiency"), STANDARTY I KACRESTVO, 1973, No 2.

- zoo -

FORtOFiiCIAl.lﬂﬂE(HVLY
178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

FOR1OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

Ksl'msn I.G., "Bkonomichesksya effektivnost' tsentralizatsii ispytsniy
promyshlennoy produktsii" ["The Economic Effectiveness of Centralizing Testing
of Industrial Products”], HETROLOGY, 1975, No 9.

Donde Yu.Ya.. "Hetrologichesksys sluzhba i kontrol' kschestvs produktsii"
(”The Hetrological Service and Product Quality Control"), IZHERITEL'NAYA
TEKHNIKA, 1971. No 3. .

Hslikov I.H., Zaydenberg M.G., "Sprsvochnik inzheners-ispytstelya sudovoy elck-
troradiosppsratura" ["Hsndbook for the Marine Electrical and Radio Equipment
Testing Engineer"). Leningrad, Sudostroyeniye Publishers, 1976.

Kiparenko V.I., Popov V.V., "0 nettologicheskon nsdzore zs ispytstel'noy
tekhnikoy" ["On the Hetrologicsl Inspection of Test Equipment"], IZHERITEL'NAYA
TEKHNIKA, 1973, No 9.

Donde Yu.Ye., "Organizatsiys netrologicheskogo nadzors as izneritel'nyn
i ispytstel'nyn oborudovaniyen“ ["The Organization of Hetrologicsl Inspection
of Measurement and Test Equip-ent"]. IZHERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA. 1974. No 9.

Kizim V.D., "0 nadzore zs ispytstel'noy tekhnikoy" ["On the Inspection of
Test Equipment"], IZMERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA. 1972, No A.

Kotlysrov V.I.. "Opyt raboty metrologicheskoy atteststsii sredstv ispytsniy
v Estonskoy SSR" ["Operstional Experience with Hetrologicsl Certification
of Testing Facilities in the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic"],
IZHERITEL'NAXA TEKBNIKA. 1974. No 3.

Ivlev A.I., Zaks L.H., "Sovrenennyye printsipy rszvitiys sisteny metrologiches-
kogo obespecheniys nsrodnogo khozysystvs" ["Hodern Principles of the Develop-
ment of the System of Hetrological Support for the Economy"), IZMERITEL'NAYA
TEKHNIKA, 1973. No b.

Ksl'msn 1.6.. "Osnovy netrologicheskogo obespecheniys kontrolya kachestva
produktsii priborostroyeniys" ("Principles of Hetrological Support for Product
Quality Control in Instrument Haking"], Moscow. Znsniye Publishers. 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo standartov. 1979.

8225
C80:

816M080

- END -

- 201 -

INHICHﬂHCJAl.USElﬂVLY