FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10012
25 September 1981

Worldwide Report

ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

(FOUO 5/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN

Nitrogen Oxide Emission Controls for Diesels To Require
13 Percent Cut
(JAPAN TIMES, 30 my 81) .........

EAST EUROPE

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

High-Quality Industrial Dust Filter Developed
(Jiri Albrecht; TECHNICKY TYDENNIK, No 16. 1981)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050062-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NITROGEN OXIDE EMISSION CONTROLS FOR DIESELS 1'0 REQUIRE 13

Tokyo JAPAN TIMES in English 30 May 81 p 2

[Text]

to the

:-.: :rleuds.

The Environment Agency
decided Friday to introduce a
new emission control standard
in im to reduce N0): con-
centrations in exhaust lumes
trom large diesel engine trucks
and buses by 1.: percent lrom
the present levels.

The agency also decided to
Introduce a new noise control
standard also in m: to reduce
noise levels oi trucks and
microhuses with a load
capacity ot 2 to 4 tons by three
phons.

The agency said permissible
levels 0! .\'0x concentration in
evhaust
diesel engine trucks and buses
and new noise levels at the
trucks and microouses would be
announced in August alter
consultations with me Trans-
sport Ministry.

NOx emission control stand-
ards ior auto exhaust :umcs
were ttrst introduced in l- .3.

Passenger cars are new
subject
emission control standards.
Trucks. microbuses. and other
gasoline engine automobiles as
ucil as a certain type or diesel
engine vehicles are now subjet‘l
um and 3977 control

iumes lrom large

to the i978 SOs

1

FOR 09» Tf‘Y ‘ '

largetrucits and
d'tterent type a: d
Viiil be subjeCt I
control standards.

As a result. a‘
gasoline and diesel
WI“ be subject t
emission control s
mm. the agency sal

The llrst nnl:
standard was ant
passenger cars in
last year lor colon
nextyear.

.\lost oi the largt
buseshaveadlese
is driven by dlrec
tuel into the
chamber.

it has bcen cat
ticult to reduce
centration in exhal
suchtrucksnndbtu

However. the i
Agency's adviser:
recently tome up i
that it has becomt
leasnble to re
emissions lrom tlt
hy in percent by i
new mnhthttoo c
improving our not:
and tool injection s.

Japan's automi
ship was :27 mi'lion

"ct- mu V

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02IOS: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050062-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007i02l09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050062-4

COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

5000/4530

run tlrrlblAL var. UNLt

at March lotto.

Ol thus ltpure. 904.000 buses
and trucks. sllghlly less than 3.5
percent. have dlrect tnjection
diesel englnes.

However. accordlng to an
estimate made by the agency on
the hasls o! a survey In Tokyo
and three adjacent prelectures.
such trucks and hum ac-
counted the 10.3 percent 0! the
total NOx emtssluns.

Therefore. much expectation
has been placed on the reduc-
tion ol auto S03: emusslons
through the Introduction of xm
control stanaards tor such
trucks andbuses

L'nder the planned noise
controt standards. trucks and
mlcrobuses With a loading
capacity of 2 to 4 tons are
required to reduce lhelr noise
output by three phons beglnnlng
In tom.

However. small t'ehlcles
uetghlng less than 3.5 tons.
much are more numerous than
the mcdlum-sue automobules.
are to he exempted (tom the
19m control standards because
at technleal dmlcultles ln
reduelngthetrnolseoutput.

THE JAPAN TIMES 1981

PlaanutN

The Cablnet Frlda
on a plan to relorm c
.-\n' Pollution Law lr
restrlct aggregate a:
nitrogen oxldes I:
areas.

L'nder the plan tlI
thent ts to carry on
mlssthle level 0! so:
each area and each
requlred to coop
mtrtctlng the concel
NOx for the area.

At present. each
requested not to discl
above a glven allowal

Aecordlng to the
plan. the total amot.
”stem mll he applle
ward: at Tokyo. .‘
atltaka. Chotu. l
Knmae ITotom. \
Kawasaki. Yo
tKanagawa Pre:
Osaka. Sakal. Toyon.
lzumlotsu. hlorlguch
Yao. Ncyaaawa. .\
Dalto. Kadoma.
Takalshl. ngasl
Shljonawate. and
man Prelecturel.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050062-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

czsmoswvma

HIGH-QUALITY INDUSTRIAL DUST FILTER DEVELOPED
Prague TBGINIGKY TYDKNNIK in Czech No 16, 1981 p 9

[Article by Eng Jiri Albrecht. 08c: "An Important Stride Toward Protection of the
Atmosphere"]

[Text] Particulate matter from a wide variety of industrial sources is increasingly »
polluting the environment. causing considerable harm. Separating equipment which
varies widely in effectiveness is used to trap it. Accordingly, industrial filters
based on intermittent trapping of the particulate matter on filter fabric and re-
moval of the dust layer from it are coming to the fore. The main advantage of in-
dustrial filters is their excellent separating ability: while mechanical (cyclone)
separators allow hundreds of milligrams of particulate latter per cubic meter of

air to pass and electrical filters at their best pass 50 to 100 mg/m3, industrial
filters purify the air to 10 to 50 lag/I3.

Industrial filter research and development is concentrated in the Research Institute
of Air Engineering in Prague. While before 1970 the development of industrial
filtration was backward, in recent years it has had much success. The institute
has completed development of the Pinet standard series of modern filter fabrics,
working together with the Wool Research Institute in Brno, and has put it into
series production at Nitop Himon. At the same time, the institutes have completed
development and started product n of the an industrial filter, which decreases the
output concentration to 20 mg/m . This has concluded the first comprehensive stage
in the long-term plan for development of industrial filtration, bringing Czecho-
slovakia to the level of advanced foreign producers of filtration equipment.

that About Fine met?

Research and development have also aimed at a radical decrease in particulate matter
in industrial filters and at capturing so-called "fine particles." The institute
has accomplished the state plan assignment "High-Efficiency Filtration for Industrial
Purposes (1977-1980)," aimed at developing a new high-efficiency filter which would
give output concentrations below 1 lab/III3 throughout the. lifetime of the filter
fabric.

It is well known that the Pine: woven filter textiles make it possible to decrease
output concentrations. But we know from experience that in actual operation. even
when they use woven filter fabrics. domestic and foreign filters have output con-

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centrations on the order of 10 to 50 mglm3. Before work began on the assignment,
all of the factors affecting the output concentration were identified: the quality
of the filter fabric, its shape, the regeneration method used on the dust-covered
fabric, the reliability of the attachment of filter textiles under operating condi-
tions, the design of the separating baffles between the clean and dirty sides of
the filter, and the reinforcement of the fabric.

All of these factors were analysed in detail and the findings were used to design
the no: filter. For high-efficiency filtration. the new textile Pinet-PBS-MNZ
(produced by Nitop Himon), which fully meets all requirements and demonstrated
satisfactory characteristics in tests using Spongelit test dust, was developed. The
experience gained in monitoring the operation of the earlier m filter was used in

the design of the m.
‘No Possibilities for Regeneration

During development, a bag-type filter insert of new design with a filter surface

of 25 us node from one piece of filter fabric 23 meters long was tested. The ease
of producing these liners and the minimum length of the connection eliminate the
danger of high leakage which frequency occurred in hose-type connections. The baffle
wall between the clean and dust-covered side of the filter is nanufactured in such
a way that leaks are prevented in the production process. Tightenese of the filter
textiles within the filter during replacement and operation is an especially im-
portant latter. For example, changing the filter hoses in earlier filters is ex-
tremely toilsone, and the quality of the work depends only on the care with which

it is performed. Experience shows that individual hoses are often incorrectly
clamped. The clamping of the m filters is different from that used in the m.
The new so-called "two circuit“ clanping sakes incorrect fastening impossible even
by unskilled personnel. The m is regenerated by reverse blowing either with air
from the surroundings of the filter or with purified air free the blower output.

The filter has the same design for both methods,' and output and connecting parts are
added. The positive-draft part of the air-engineering equipment may be operated in
the case of m filters regenerated with purified air, by using a separate blowback
fan.

The institute devoted particular attention to reinforcing filter fabrics to make
them keep their shape. A synthetic reinforce-exit usable at air temperatures up to
90" c which is being prepared will considerably decrease overall labor inputs re-
quired by the filter. '

During the development process, four In l0/100 filters were also produced. The first
has been in use in the laboratory of the Research Institute of Air Engineering in
Prague as part of its neasuring line. The measurenents obtained using Spongelit
test dust on an m filter fitted with the high-efficiency Pinet-PBS-lu/NZ fabric
surprised everyone participating in the assignment. Such low output concentrations
(in the thousandths of a milligram per cubic meter) had not been expected even in
extremes of optinisn these excellent filter characteristics had to be tested in
industry. It was decided to install filters at Solo Susics, which planned to

return the purified air to the working area, at Kovohute thisek (where the dust that
had to be separated was extremely fine), and at the Zamedelsky Agricultural Purchase

and Supply mterprise Milin.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

btcellent Operating Results

At Solo Susice the dust is exhausted from lines where Sololit boards are sanded.
The grinding dust is one of the finest and most clinging types of dust. Measure-
ments were made during 1979 and 1980 at filter speeds of 6 cm/sec and 5.2 cmlssc.
The average output concentration for 66 measurements was 0.0065 mg/m3 and the
average pressure losses 682 Pa (filtration speed 4 cnlsec) and 979 Pa (5.2 cmlsec).
The experiments showed that the no; filter could be used in the wooddprocessing
industry when the purified air was to be returned to the work area. Energy savings
in a single winter period amount to 15 percent of the purchase price of tin filter,
so that the users recoup their investment is less then 7 years.

The non filter has been in use at Kovohute thisek since 1979 to trap particulate
matter from an electric arc furnace used in the production of silicon. The dust is
extremely fine, with an average particle size of 0.29 micrometers, and with 85
percent of the particles smaller than 0.5 micrometers. A filter from the French
Prat-Daniel company is in use there. The no: filter is now in operation under the
sane load (filtration speed 1 cm/sec) and is connected to the duct between the
cooler and the Prat-Daniel filter. In December 1979 the m was connected to the
automatic unit controlling the Prat-Daniel filter and has since been operating
simultaneously with it. By the end of 1980 it had been in operation for 5,600 hours
and 22 measurements had been made. The average output concentration was 0.049
nag/n3 and the average pressure loss 2.10M Pa. Comparison with the output concentra-
tion from the Prat-Daniel filter. which ranges from 20 to 60 mg/m3, indicates un-
ambiguously the quality of our filter.

The fourth no filter was produced and installed by workers in the shops of the
Agricultural Purchase and Supply Enterprise in Prague (KUD [Kraj Maintenance Shop]
Uhlirske Janovice) in accordance with documentation that was furnished. In this case,
the effect on filter quality, i.e. on its high efficiency. resulting from manufacture
by different producer was studied. This m 10/100 filter using Pinet-VL/POP filter
fabric was installed in the grinding compound production area of the Agricultural
Purchase and Supply Enterprise plant in Milin, and since Decenber 1979 has been
separating particulate matter from transport routes and equipsent for the production
of fodder mixtures (two-shift operation). By the end of last year it had been in
operation for more than 600 hours; the average output concentration was 0.031 nab/m3
and the pressure loss was 956 Pa (filtration speed 2.1 cm/sec).

Production in a Repair and Maintenance Shop

F103 filters have been tested in facilities where the dust to be separated varied
widely in character and fineness. The su-ary value of all output concentration
measurements is 0.026 nag/m3. There were no malfunctions, and with the exception of
the collection mechanisms the filter requires no maintenance, and its production
entails no subsupply other than the electric nature that drive it. Any ordinarily
equipped shop can produce it. A lifetime of at least 15,000 operating hours is
expected for the bag-type filter liners.

In complete set of technical specifications. including a description of the filter,
the range of uses, performance characteristics, weight, principal dimensions and
connector dimensions, installation instructions. and electrical control design sug-
gestions and circuits, has been developed. A coaplete set of drawings and produc-
tion documentation for the type series is available. But the greatest problaa is

S
n-‘onn OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFiCIAL USE ONLY

production of the filters. According to its operating plans, by 19810 W [Air
Engineering Equip-ct Plants] Hilevalm is to produce eight m filters. Many anter-
prises which urgently need the. will be producing than in their own shops according
to the institute' a docmentation.

Thus a new high-efficiency industrial filter which returns air to the surroundings
with a much lower than usual impurity content has been prepared. The output con-
centration far below 1 tab/n3 places our m at the top of current industrial filter
development worldwide. We know of no producer abroad who offers a filter with con-
parable characteristics.

The high-efficiency m industrial filter is an inportant success of Czechoslovak
research and development. Its use will radically linit particulate matter in many
industrial operations and thus will decrease the harm done to the natural surround-
ings and human health by industrial discharges.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Senna ”Manama an slouho [um ru- mm tum - !, mum!
on — 2. "more! «wrung - 3. nun! you“ - 0. mm 092m: - s,
"we! lulu - 6, mum Roman -- 7, ﬁtment tot-arc -- l, Imam tomo-
m-— 9. "gamma ummu - u. opium! an - u. Inﬂuenced poem-
Dl - 12, unmdtor - 33.

The high-efficiency m industrial filter.

Key: 1. Filter Musing . 8. Filter chamber
2. Inlet section 9. Outlet chamber
3. Bag-type filter liner 10. Regeneration th
l3. Inner reinforcement 11. Output section
5. Outer reinforcement 12. Blouback duct
6. Sealing bar 13. Blower

7. Inlet chamber

8480
cso: 5000/3022
IN)! OFFICIAL USEZCNULY

SAUDI ARABIA

BRIEFS

DESALINATION PLANT--Nagoya, 22 Hay (JIJI PRESS)--Ishikawakima-Harina Heavy Indus-
tries, Ltd (INI) will ship 1.5 units of sea water desalination facilities, which
have been recently completed at itsAachi plant in Chita, to Saudi Arabia next
Tuesday. It earlier landed a 53-billion-yen (about $265 million) order for a
total of 10 units from Saline Hater Conversion Corp of the desert kingdom. The
equipment with multistage flash distillation process is capable of desalting
23,600 tons of sea water a day. The remaining 8.5 units will be finished by
February next year. These facilities will constitute part of the world's largest
sea water desalination plant to supply industrial and drinking water to a huge
industrial complex (the second phase) now under construction at Al Jubayl. [Text]
[Tokyo JIJI in English 1409 GMT 22 May 81 OH]

050: 5000 END

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY