FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/10382

2 March 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 5/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily froa foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNIRG OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOR BE RESTRICTED FOR OFEICIAL USE ONLY.
HGPLMDE REPORT
TELecomxcmous POLICY; RESEARCH AND Devemmur

(P000 5/ 8 2)

Cameras

ASIA

JAPAII

Foreign Missions To Be Allowed To Operate Radios
(Kidio Sakskibere; SANKBI smun, 19 Feb 82) .....‘......

USSR

Communications mring llth Five-Year Plan
(In. B. Zahara"; mm, NOV 81) oeoessooeooooeeoo

WEST EUROPE

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Intelsat To Launch Three More Satellites in 1982
(Pierre Langereux; AIR &' 003408, 18 Jan 82) ............

ITALY

Cmicetions Switching: Levels, mjectivee, Activities
' (Paolo de Fern; WI“ 8 WCAZIM,

NOV-m0 81) eoscoooooooosooooooooooooeooeoooeeossosooeess

-g- [III-W-l‘Ol

FOIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY
PCRBIGN MISSIONS no 38 ALLOW!) To OPERATE RADIOS
OHZZlOSl Tokyo WEI-Slim in Japanese 19 Feb 82 Homing Bdition p 1
[By reporter Kijio Sakakibara]

[Text] The Posts and Teleco-unications ministry has decided to revise the wire-
less telegraphy act to permit foreign embassies and legations in Japan to have
their own radio conunication facilities. The decision will be included in a bill
of amendments to the act which is being prepared by the Kinistry for Subnission to
the current diet session. The nevision is also designed to enable Japanese diplo-
natic establishments abroad to have their own wireless cc-unication facilities.
under the "principle of reciprocity." so that in the future such consumicetion
disruptions a: that which happened to the cheesy in Poland can be avoided. All
conunications with the Japanese hbsssy in Warsaw were disrupted for nearly a
month due to the suspension of general circuits under the nertial law rule.

According to the Posts and Teleco-unications Ministry. there was a strong request
free the Foreign Ministry to authorize foreign diplomatic establishments to oper-
ate their own radio stations. '

Article 5 of the present wireless telegrapby act stipulates that "a foreign govern-
nent or its representatives" are not licensed to operate a radio station; under

the principle of diplonatic "reciprocity" Japanese enbassies abroad also were not
allowed to haw. their own radio facilities by the govern-ants of the respective
countries.

Japanese anbassies abroad have thus been depending solely on general co-unciations
circuits for their conunications with the Poreign liinistry in Tokyo. Troubles
occurred in December last year when the nertial law rule in Poland suspended
operations of the general circuits for nearly a month. cutting all contacts with
the embassy and causing problems in the efforts to protect Japanese nationals as
well as in other areas.

This prompted the Foreign Ministry to review the need for the nation's embassies
and legations abroad to have their own radio col-aunication facilities. and to
strongly ask the Posts and Telecemunications Ministry to revise the wireless
telegraphy act. As an initial step, the Poets and Telecomnications Ministry
decided to delete the phrase "a foreign government or its representatives" free
the text of article 5 of the act. Possible amendments to other related articles
are also under study.

080: 4120/163

[’0]! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIC-{T1018 DURIM 11TH FIVE-YEAR PLAN
Moscow minimum in Russian Vol 36, No 11, Nov 81 pp 4-5
(Article by Yu. B. Zubarev, USSR deputy minister of communications]

[Text] The 64th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution has now
passed. During this year. the entire country has lived under the influence of

the 26th Congress of the Emmi-t Party of the Soviet Union, which eta-earned the
results of the 10th Five-Year Plan and adopted national developuent plans- for

the 11th Five-Year Plan. Major tasks have been placed before Soviet Science

in tense of accelerating scientific-technical progress and iaproving the

welfare of the Soviet people; specific tasks have been defined for individual

increased in 1980 by nore than a factor of 1.9 over 1975, and a nunber of critical

cable and radio relay links were put into operation, including a multichannel
radio relay link along the Baykal-hur Haiu Railroad Line.

scribers now have access, has increased. nest rayon centers have auto-atic
telephone collunication with their oblaat centers. The assignment for the
development of telephone couunicstione in cities and rural areas was overful-
filled: the number of network subscribers increased by about 6 million. The
assignment to double the network used to receive newspaper calms photo.-
telegraphically at decentralized printing locations was fulfilled ahead of

accelerated the printing of newspapers at remote locations and nade it inde-

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

newspaper PRAVDA is now delivered to 901 of subscribers on the day it is pub-
lished. Prototype message switching centers (TsKs-T) have been put into opera-
ion. The indicators for bringing channel switching capacities of the Nationwide

to 802 of the country; territory containing 862 of the country's population is
covered by television broadcast. The entire television tramitting network
proviies color tranmission, and the network which fer!» central television pro-
grams via the new "Raduga", "Bkran" and "Gorisont" cmunications satellites has
been expanded significantly. The wire broadcast network continued its develop-
nent, with over 80 million wired-radio outlets in place by the end of the Five-

into operation, 108 junction enterprises have been mechanized, and 991 of city
delivery sections have been switched over to mechanized delivery.

to comunications, this is especially enphasised on the part of forming the
national unified autonated commications system During the lﬂth Five-Year Plan.
the USSR Ministry of Communications together with the Ministry of Industrial

In order to develop the primary backbone comunications network, high-capacity
coaxial cable transmission systems have been created: the K-l920-P, which trans-
mits, over a nor-a1 cable (2.6/9.1: in) with four type lots-6 tubes, 3840 voice-
grade channels; and the K-3600 system which peruits groups of up to 17,500
channels to be accoundated on a type m—s/o cable. The 4 and 6 GR: KURS radio

which carry television, telephone. radio broadcast and newspaper colunn channels,
have been developed for the backbone systeu. The ’llolniya" systen. which trans-
mits via satellites in high elliptical orbit, which makes it possible to trans-

mit progress and maintain telephone canunications with high-latitude locations
in the country, is still in operation.

FOR OFFER“. USE ONLY
(1.2/4.6 In), which can carry digital signals at 8.468 and 34.368 “bps (120

and 680 telephone channels, respectively). This equipment has undergone testing
on specially built experimental omnications links. Since the testing indi-
cated satisfactory results of operating the new con-unications sytems, they
have been recommended for industrial production. Radio relay equipment opera-
ting in the 2 and 8 on: range has been created for these systems which can carry
300 voice grade channels or television channels in the was trunk, and ”Oblast'"
equipment for telb‘phone cosmunication.

New digital 1101-12 (soon to be IKE-15), m-ao, “Zena", and Im-IZO (which saves
significant amounts of cable and copper) are in atmive use for local, city
and urban telephone networks. Time-multiplexed radio relay link equipment will
be introduced - the "Blektronika-llTs" which operates in the 11 on; range and
has a 8.468 prs pcm multiplaing system. This system is now being tested on
an experimental link.

Switching equipment is an important component of secondary communications
networks. During the 11th Five-Year Plan, new quasielectronic stations which were
developed late in the 10th Piveerar Plan and have been put into production, will
be put into operation along with the already well-developed K 50/200 and 100/2000.
ATSK-U and ANTS crossv-bar switching equipmlmt already in use in all branches of
comunications (rural, rayon. city and long distance). This includes the "Kvarts"
exchanges for city and long distance co-unications, and the ”luck" for rural
and rayon networks.

Channel switching equipment in directvdialing. subscriber telegraph and data trans-
mission systems will continue to be introduced into telephone connunications.

In addition, a message switching system - a new highly efficient telegraph conv-
munications system - will also be introduced more extensively. The first years

of operation have already affirmed its high technical and operational indicators.
The new "Kurok" electronic telegraph switching exchange, which is expected to

be put into operation by the and of the Five-Year Plan, is also under develop-
ment. Telegraph equipment is being improved significantly: the development and
assimilation of 50 and 100 baud electromechanical alphanueric teletype machines is
reaching completion. The use of ink-type facsimile machines ("Shtrikh") will be
developed further. The development of radio broadcast and improvenent of its
quality will occur primarily on the basis of existing technical facilities. as
well as re-equiping existing stations. In order to develop television networks,

a group of high performance remote-controlled unattended tranuitters has been
created: the I‘Il'nen'-2". the ATRs-S/l, television relays, etc.

The development of all conunications branches during the llth Fiveerar Plan
will thus occur to a significant extent on the basis of new technology. In
addition, besides introducing new facilities which have already been created. it
remains to develop and create new, more sophisticated comnications technology.
The main tasks in this area are determined by a goal-oriented integrated pro-
gram which provides for the creation of the next generation of coaxial cable
systems - the K-10800 frequency multiplexed system. the Hal-1920 time-nultiplexed

FOR OI-TlchL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systen. as well as mastery of the production of 1104-4080 equipment. An im-
portant direction for technical progress in the area of developing transmission
systens is the creation of a fiber optic comxnications system. kperinental
optical links carrying digital streams at 2.068 and 8.648 prs which were created
during the 10th Five-Year Plan have indicated the applicability in principle of
the components and optical cables which have Men developed. During the 11th
Five—Year Plan, fundamental problems of creating equipnent and cables for oper-
ational fiber optic links nust be resolved so that they can be introduced ex-
tensively by the end of this, and the begmning of the 12th Five-Year Plan.

The integrated progran defines tasks of developing and producing equipment. as
well as a number of indicators regarding the volume of introduction. which in-
poses definite obligations for the construction of new consunications facilities
on the part of introducing new technology.

Hark is underway to create the new generation of "Elektronika-evyaz'" radio relay
equipment for oblast communication links in all frequency ranges allocated for
those purposes. The developnent is being done on the basis of the ‘latest
achieve-ants of domestic radio electronics, nicroniniaturiution and stripline
technology. It is expected that these will be introduced extensively by the

end of this Pive-Year Plan.

The tasks imposed by the 26th (1950 Congress are grandiose. Soviet cos-unicators.
recognizing the responsibility they beer for the further development and per-
fection of communications facilities and systens and their role in nanaging the
national economy, will apply all of their efforts and knowledge in order to
fulfill honorably the plans of the party and of the people.

COPYRIGHT: "Radiotekhniks", 1981

6900
080: 5500/1015

5
FOR omcw. us: ONLY
NEW? '10 LAUNCH T8338 DDR3 SATELLITRS IN 1982
Paris AIR & 00908 in French 18 Jan 82 p 33

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Third Intelsat 5 Satellite to be Operational in
March 1982-]

[Text] The third teleco-unications satellite (P3) of the Intelsat 5 series,
launched 15 Decelber 1981. will be put into service in March 1982 over the Indian
Ocean. Initially, the satellite will be positioned at 15 degrees East to be con-
trolled by Telespario's earth station at Pucino (Italy). Subsequently. it will

be repositioned over the Indian Ocean at 62 degrees Bast. over the Atlantic Ocean
to replace the Intelsat 5 satellite currently in service which will then serve the
Indian Ocean region. The telecouunicatione demand in this region is growing very
rapidly—to the point where the 6.000 telephone circuits currently being provided
by Intelsat 4A are close to saturation. The new Intelsat 5 satellite (1.870 kg)
will have a capacity of 12.000 telephone circuits and two TV channels.

Intelsat states that its satellites (Intelsat (A and Intelsat 5) currently in
service are carrying around two-thirds of the world's tranaoceanic teleoonunica-
tions traffic and alsost all overseas television transsissions.

The next Intelsat 5 satellites will be launched this year frca Cape Canaveral
(Florida), using NABA's Atlas-Centaur rockets. The fourth Intelsat 5 (N) is to
be launched in March 1982 and the fifth Intelsat 5 (1’5) in May 1982. The sixth
satellite, which will also be the first of the ilproved Intelsat 5A version, will
be placed in orbit in December 1982.

Intelsat plans to launch a total of 15 Intelsat 5 and 5A satellites. sis of which
during the next 2 years. These will be followed in 1984 and 1985 by six more
Intelsat 5A satellites. These launchings will be divided up between American
Atlas-Centaur rockets (10 satellites: Pl to rs and P9 to P13) and European Ariane
rockets (5 satellites: P6 to PO and PM to P15).

In 1986. the first satellites of the new-generation Intelsat 6 series (40,000
telephone calls). the build-r of which is to be selected in March 1982. between
Hughes Aircraft and Ford Aerocoace. These satellites will be launched by the
Shuttle or by Ariane 4.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

9238
C80: 5500/2096

POROFF'KgALUSEONLY
MICATIONS “INSIDE: swans, ouscrrvss, ervrrrss
Turin ELE‘i'l'RONICA B WICAZIWI in Italian Nov-Dec 31 pp 227-23‘

[Article by Paolo de Perra, doctor of engineering, central director of 8‘!!! [Tele-
phone Finance Corporation , Rome: 'Switching in Italy: Levels, Objectives, Activi-
ties") '8unary" as publ dhed in nnglish]

[Text] Su-ary-Switching in Italy: Levels, Objectives, Activities. The situae.. :.
tion of Italian telecoununications is firstly considered, and in particular the
evolution of the last two years. The present guidelines. oriented to a future
unique multiservice network, are then described. Indications are given on the
conversion process (in the network and production plants) from analogue to digital
techniques, mainly regarding switching (transit exchanges and local exchanges).
The topic probless are considered, concerning network planning, cos-Ion channel
channel signaling, digital subscriber lines. Some recent trends in systes evolu-
tion are shown, with particular mention to both UT 10/3 of ITALTBI. and the con-
centration of activities on a systes of Italian origin. with reference to
telephony, a chapter illustrates the results of electronic exchanges in operation,
the technological activities in software (mainly high level languages) and in
hardware (mainly microelectronics) and to the most recent switching system
develop-ants. Another chapter describes the new telecomnicatiohs services:
circuit and packet-switched data, teletsx, videotel, slow-video, videoconfer-
ence, etc. special mention is given to the philosophy of a multiservice inte-
grated network, that is a network open to the interconnection of systems, even of
different nature. [and of Sumary]

 

" This article is the translation into Italian of the paper presented by the
author at the ”International Symposium on Switching' held in Montreal (Canada)'
21-25 September 1981. This paper was Italy's contribution to the opening and
orientation session of the Symposium. During this session, authoritative
representatives of the seven most advanced countries in this sector (Canada,
France, Germany, Japan, Great Britain, Italy and the United States) presented
papers describing results achieved and the teleco-Iunications developmental
outlook in their respective countries.

Typewritten manuscript received 5 October 1981.

MOMCZALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Introduction

The switching situation in Italy and the outlook for its development were dis-
cussed by Prof D. Gagliardi in the opening session of the 188 [International
Switching Symposium] held in Paris in May 1979. The memorandum presented on that
occasion contain: such information that adequately describes the Italian situa-
tion.1 The conclusions reached in that document can be very concisely smarized
as follows:

Switching Outlook in Italy as of May 1979
situation:
"A certain number of manufacturing firms;

"Switching centers almost exclusively of the electromechanical type (a few
senielectronic automatic transit-traffic switchers);

-Scattered use of digital techniques in transmission systems.

Plans:
«Direct change tron electromechanical to digital system:

"Specifications oriented toward future developmental changes internal to the
systems.

Objectives:

--Introduction of digital techniques to the extent of 50 percent in the urban
area and 80 percent in the interurban area by the year 2000;

--Oonconitantly progressive introduction of new services beginning in the early
1980's:

"Rapid evolution of international switching for every type of service.

Frequent references will be made in this paper to the foregoing memorandum, with
the twofold ail of confirming the foregoing orientations and of pointing up. in
80.2 cases, new initiatives that have been undertaken since then from the stand-
point of speeding up and better rationalizing the implementation of those plans.

2. Telecanunications Growth

As regards telephony, at the end of 1978, there were in Italy 11.4 sillion sub-
scribers and 17.1 million telephone sets. At the end of 1980. there were 13.0
million subscribers and 19.3 million sets.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In terns of ratios to population, these figures represent a growth of from 20 sub-
scribers and 30 sets per 100 inhabitants in 1978 to over 23 subscribers and 35

sets per 100 inhabitants as of mid 1981.

These figures can be related meaningfully to the GNP [Gross national Product] per
inhabitant. Figure 1 shows. in this respect. how Italy stood at the end of 1979
by comparison with some other European countries. The area of each dot is pro-
portional to the absolute telephonic component of the GNP for the country to which
it relates.

This situation brought about the drawing up of the Italian telecommunications plan
for the 1980's. Governmental bodies, social forces, manufacturing concerns and
operating agencies are constantly trying to achieve a balance among factors of
diverse natures: Economic, financial. service, employment, and so forth.

Pressures for accelerated growth stem from various factors. These include: The
substantial current backlog of requests for subscriber services. involving in many
cases long waiting periods: the conviction that telecommunications are an important
infrastructure, essential to the improvement of the quality of life and to the
production of higher levels of income, particularly in peripheral and less devel-
oped localities; energy savings; and the need to shore up the telecolmmnications
industry. thus attenuating unemployment problems.

On the other hand, the upward thrust on growth is being moderated by the need to
ensure the economic balance of the system through adequate while not excessive
rates for services as well as by the need to pacethe-rates of growth of plant
initially to conform to the capacity of industry for converting to the production
of modern systems in large quantities. In summary. the currently planned growths
in subscriber services are shown graphically in Figure 2. which also shows in
lighter lines. the previously projected growths announcediJIParis. Under current
projections, service densities in 1990 will be 30 subscribers and 57 sets per

100 inhabitants.

Figure 2 also shows traffic projections. Interurban traffic in particular is
expected to grow; an increase of over 160 percent in international traffic during
the 1980's is being projected.

The 1980's will also see an expansion of mobile radio services: conversational:
vehicular paging and personal message. The first of these types of service is
actively used in most of northern and central Italy's major cities and highways
and its use is spreading to Southern Italy. The second type is in active use
throughout Italy. Terminals for these two types of service now number 2,500 and
and are expected to total some 28,000 by 1990. The third of these types is still
in the experimental stage; our projection is that by 1990 around 5 percent of the
population in urban areas will be served by terminals of this type.

Telex service is also expected to increase substantially during the 1980's. from
the current 38,000 subscribers to 95,000 by 1985 and 150,000 by 1990. The pro-
jection. however, is meaningful only until 1985, in that.thereafter, new services
will be available such as teletex, facsimile. word processing and others.that will
adversely affect the further expansion of telex service.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As regards data services, the figures given in Paris are confirmed. The number of
terminal installations increased from 50,000 in 1970 to the present total of
80,000 and is expected to grow to 250,000 by 1990. Based on a ratio of 2.4 : l,
subscriber terminals should total around 600,000. This figure includes datafax
terminals (facsimile between data network subscribers); it does not include,
however, videotex terminals.

POr the latter type of service, called VIDEOTBL in Italy, the projection is around
350,000 terminals by 1987. The service is still in an experimental stage, as will
be discussed later, and is expected to be made available to the public by 1983.

Experimentation is also under way, and will be discussed further below, on other

services such as teletex, now-scan video and teleconferencing. Substantial use
of these services, howevcz, is not foreseen until the second half of the 1980's

and a projection of the number of terminals is not yet available.

3. Evolution of the Network

Theneed has long been recognized for an integrated services digital network
[ISBN (in Italy, [0118)], even though as a long-range objective, rather than having
different networks for different services. For many years, however, it was pos-
sible to introduce digital equipment only into the transmission sector. Only
recently have hardware and software technologies evolved to the point of rendering
digital switching systems economically viable, particularly with respect to

local switching.

This means that only beginning now will it be possible to start the large-scale
deployment of those local exchanges throughout the country that are basic to the
building of an effective ISDN. Then, by interconnecting these exchanges via a
superimposed digital network, it will be possible to offer subscribers, on a
gradual basis, those advanced services that an 1808 can provide. A certain length
of time will necessarily be involved, however, in the evolution of these two pro-
cesses, in the penetration of the market by these new digitalized systems, and in
their gradual adaptation to providing not only telephony but other services as
well.

Under these circumstances, the need to accousodate demands for new services (parti-
cularly switched data services) has led to the prior introduction of specialized
facilities. 0n the other hand, it has also been considered necessary to avoid
future incompatibilities between current facilities of this nature and the future
network structure. The solution was actually to first draw up the basic specifi-
cations for the future lSDN. The most important characteristics and connotations
were identified and are now sufficiently consolidated and tested. These character-

istics and connotations subsequently became the basis for specifying the special-
ized facilities.2

In short, our evolution toward a network characterized by a high degree of inte-
gration of the various ISDN services is proceeding along the following guidelines:

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
«Large-scale digitalisation of existing plant facilities:

--Specialialised facilities to acccemdate demand for new services without delay:
dz"...

«Compatibility of specialized facilities with the future requirements of the

ISBN.

4. Digitalization of Plant Facilities

As regards transmission facilities, the degree of penetration of digitalised sys-
tems at district levels will be about « percent by the end of 1981. This figure
is expected to be around 70 percent by 1985, through the use of digital systems
on physical bearer facilities (copper or optical fibers) or on microwave links.

For longer distances, the process of digitalization is already under way. It will
proceed initially on the basis of 70- and lio-smit/sec systems, going to
higher-capacity systems subsequently. significant development is also projected
in the urban areas, where an intensive digitalisation program has been started,
using micro-coaxial cable techniques. l9-Gllz microwave links and. optical-fiber
links are to follow very shortly.

with respect to optical-fiber systems, experimentation on various applications
has been under way for some time now. Planning calls for putting numerous pilot
plants in service on live traL-fic over the next 2 years. Optical fibers are’ ex-
pected to replace copper gradually not only in urban and district areas but also '
on long-haul systems. Their application may well be limited (even in a country
the size of Italy), only for reasons of policy, by digitalized satellite systems,
as will be mentioned later.

As regards switching, at the time of 168 '79 the introduction of time-division

or frequency-division local exchanges with capacities of l,000-2,000 lines, suited
particularly for containerized use, had already begun. As regards interurban
exchanges, about 15 percent of their terminations were of sesielectronic tech-
nology. As of today, the number of small-capacity electronic exchanges of this
type has grown.

Figure 3 shows the localities that will be served by various tens of thousands
of lines by the end of this year. But what is more significant is that in 1980
the digitalization of trunk switching was initiated, with the putting into
service of a Proteo nus exchange in Milan and an AXE exchange in Naples. As
Pigure 3 also shows, the digitalized trunk-switching exchanges are rapidly
proliferating, and by the end of this year the various manufacturers operating
in Italy will have already installed or be in the process of installing lo ex-
changes of this type.

As regards trunk switching, it is expected that the process of conversion of
production will be canpleted by 1985: This is to say that, beyond that year, no
trunk equipment will be furnished that is not digital—technology.

11
ms 0PM“. USE ONLY
I'UK UI'DILIAL UBI'. ONLY

The key point, however, remains that of local digital switching, and it is in
this highly relevant area that the process of "acceleration' mentioned above and
a solidly based replacement plan will be maximally pressed. Figure 4 provides a
comparison between today's projections as regards production of local exchanges
and the modest ones exhibited in Paris. Correspondingly, it is projected that
by "the end of the 1980, 30 percent of all subscriber lines will be connected to
digital exchanges.

It is easy to imagine what impacts this acceleration process will have on planning
of the interconnecting networks in metropolitan areas as well as in the areas of
ledium- and low-density subscriber services.

On the one hand. the digitalization of certain parts of the network tends to set
off a chain reaction toward a more rapid digitalisation of other parts of the net-
work; optimization can also affect the allocation of transmission-line stages, the
scaling of exchanges in tandem, the allocation of facilities, the organization of
maintenance operations. and the advancement of dates by which new services can be
made available. On the other hand, the existence of nondigital plants very far
yet from being amortized, and the financial effort required to replace them, tend
to burden and slow the process and to maintain the ”status quo' (at least to a
break-even point). The results can vary widely according to specific areas and
different situations. Hence, the choice of a suitable technical and economic
digitalization strategy constitutes for the Administration one of its most press-
ing problems) Obviously, the principal factor is the competitiveness of the
digital local exchanges.

Another important aspect of our planning has to do with our ability to effectively
offer something more than basic telephony or Pars [Plain Ordinary Iielephone Ser-
vice]: that is, new and sophisticated telephonic services, data services, and so
forth. If digital switching modules are to be installed nationwide for these
purposes as well, our planning must take into account the existence, by the end
of the 1980's, of new-technology modules in every locality of a certain size.
Their interconnection will then be a requirement of some importance, particularly
as regards ccs [Co-non Channel SignalingJ.‘

It is expected that a nationwide CCS network will be in place by the mid-1980's
and able to interconnect a significant number of exchanges distributed throughout
the country (Figure 5) . In view of the current' multiplicity of conventional
signaling systems, our objective is to achieve a uniform telephonic signaling
method based on the 0cm No. 7 system” and capable of satisfying the demand for
services other than telephony.

Still another important aspect is that of the distribution network or, in other
words, that of the digital subscriber lines. Two categories of multiple-service
subscriber lines have been specified in the IS!” structures: That of large private

————._

'* A CCS system recounended by the CCI'H.‘ [Or international links and designed to
be used also domestically within the various countries.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
digital networks with access via a 64-kbits/sec multiple-channel structure, and
that of snail private networks with access via a limited number of individual
subscriber lines (including the single-line case). Both types are being studied
and tested. especially as regards their architecture and reguirenents for verti-
fication.

5. Systems

Traditionally. the telephone switching systems installed in Italy are supplied
by feur manufacturing companies that have existed in Italy for a long time com-

plete with research units as well as production units: ITALTBI. (of the 8TBT
Group): PATH! (L. H. Ericcson); FACE (ITT [International Telephone and Telegraph
Companyl); and 6TB. The largest share of the market is that ITALTEL, with over
so percent. To this list must also be added rats-ma, a recent entry in the
area of switching.

with respect to the situation as of Iss '19, each of these manufacturers has in
the intervening 2 and 1/2 years, had undertaken to develop and perfect his own
products, to create ' new devices. and so forth. The results achieved by then
have given rise to various interesting contributions submitted to I88 '81.

First, however, due cognizance must be taken of some important accowliehuents and
new orientations that have taken place between 158 '79 and the present.

From the standpoint of technical evolution of products. the event that appears

most interesting and pronising for the 1980's is the introduction of a new ITALTBL

product--the so-called UT 10/3 exchange, which is the first second-generation

product of the PM family. We egbgtsntive contributions submitted to 15$ '81
D

constitute its certificate of birth.

By comparison with the preceding generation. the birth of which dates back to

the rec [International Conference on cmunications] held in San Francisco in
1975. the UT 10/3 represents a noteworthy departure. This departure clearly has
some of its origins in the technological evolution that has taken place, above all
in its use of VLSI [Very-Large-Scale Integration] components and in the architec-
ture of its controls. But important origins of this departure also spring from

a reexamination, together with the SIP [Italian Telephone Company]. of the system
specifications. The result was a new systenic approach, oriented toward the ISBN.
highly nodular. flexible and suited for use in networks in general and not only
the Italian one.

Figure 6 gives some idea of this exchange. An exchange of this type is currently
being tested in 519's "Volta' central office in Milan. An assembly line, to an
appreciable degree automated. is expected to be in place shortly. On this basis,
a certain number of exchanges of this type can reasonably be expected to be in
service in the network by the forthcoming 188 '84.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhile Italian industry went ab0ut proving itself capable of independently design-
ing its own products. the extent of the efforts necessary to adapt existing sys-
tems to the demands of national managements as well as to independently aevelop
original systems became increasingly evident. An important decision was taken

in this regard by the appropriate governmental bodies. The decision was aimed at
coagulating all such activities around a switching system of Italian origin, even
though this might mean by way of agreements between national and foreign manufac-
turers. Generally speaking. there is now a trend toward a reduction in the number
of systems. '

In short. in compliance with the mentioned decision, an agreement was worked out
and was signed between ITALTEL and TBLBTTRA, providing among other things for
cooperation between the R a D laboratories of the two companies in the forthcoming
development of the above-mentioned second-generation system.

6. Tests. New Devices and New Developments

The purpose of this chapter is to furnish basic information and a few comments
regarding the technical activities that have taken place in Italy between Iss '79
and the present. Chapter 7 will furnish further information and comments on
parallel activities devoted to new services.

Tests: As shown in figure 3, the introduction of the first electronic exchanges
was purposely distributive over the national territory. thus involving vast sec-
tors of the operating organisation. This made it possible to obtain data in
actual practice and over a broad base with regard to the response of the equipment
and of the organisation in terms of service-restoration-time patterns, with re-
gard to utilization of employed personnel. and so forth.

The point that warrants underscoring. particularly as regards the exchanges devel-
oped within the STBT Grou?*** is that the introduction into the network constitu-
ted only the final, though highly important. step in a long process. During the
preceding steps, from the drawing up of the specifications to the production

stage and on to the testing phase, throughout the operating structures. there
were created numerous interactive nuclei of persons. who are now prepared to draw
on the findings or these field tests and to put them rapidly to fruitful use. A
typical example is the speed with which the results of the initial live operating
tests were converted into significant improvements in restoration times and in the
efficiency of the personnel.“

New Devices: In this domain as well. the close cooperation among the various
functional units. in the form of rapid interactive reactions between one unit and
another. produced fruitful results. for example. there was the joint development
of new devices based on SDL [Specification and Description Language] for opera-
tional uses such as the verification of completeness of a specification. the
maintenance of software. and so forth. Now, the same devices are being used in
manufacturin applications, in view of their utility as aids in the development
of software.

 

is. The STBT Group has the advantage of a structure similar to. though differing
in size and environment from, that of the Bell System, comprising within
itself functional R a D. productional and operational capabilities. '

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Reciprocally, a system based on an SDI. editor, a CHILL concurrent compiler. and
a conand language designated L-CIIILI. was developed by 11‘er as a supporting
device in the design and development of software. Now, this same system will
enable the user to operate independently on data structures as well as on opera-
tional programs.10

In general. the two important factors are: The close interaction among R e 0
structures, pied'uctional as well as operational, and the experience gained in the
development of innovative projects. With respect to the latter, it was proved
once again that to gain a‘ truanunderstanding of the‘greater or lesser inortance
of implications relating to a given sector, an essential condition is that one
actually construct something within that sector. '

Still within the domain or software-development devices, TRLB‘H'RA has enhanced its
own capabilities in the domain of engineering sethods relating to software pro-
ducts tor large systems. A high-level language for this purpose was developed and
has been used since 1980.11

Lastly, as regards the production of hardware, the prime importance of acquiring
the capability for developing L81 [Large-Scale-lntegration] components has been

confirmed. It is correspondingly and equally important to be capable of designing
new architectures that will maximise the advantages that can be derived from‘the

use of these components. Particularly active in this regard are the 868 and the
CSELT [Telecommunications Research and Study Cent:er].12

New Developments: During the past 2 and 1/2 years, substantial further efforts
have been devoted to the study and development of new products and to the improve-
ment or existing ones.

With regard to the nurse system, mention has already been made or the second-
generation UT 10/3. Concurrently, however, first-generation products, including
the CT 2 terminal exchange and the TN 16 transit exchange, have undergone consi-
derable technological improvements. The TI 2 ordnange for transit and operator-
assisted services is also now being upgraded by the introduction of a higher-

capacig digital-connection network to meet the special requirements of ITAL-
CAB“.

Aside from the norm system, two further activities in this domain merit special
mention:

--The upgrading of the operating and maintenance performance characteristics of
the digital transit exchange developed by Term; ‘

--The related development, within the STET group, of a system designated the ESCT
for the real-time supervision and control of the existing long-distance telephone
network.15

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. More Advanced Telecommunications

As mentioned above, it is planned to offer new services connensurately with the
gradual introduction of digital urban exchanges. For certain services. however,
specialized facilities will be introduced on an advance basis.

As regards data, as was indicated at 155 '79, the introduction of circuit-switched
as well as packet-switched data services, with adequate availability of optional
features. will begin in the early 1980's.1

As of today, it is planned to put into service during the initial months of 1983
a first circuit-switching network that will be known as the RFD [Telephone and
Data Network]. The related plants, including interconnections with the telephone
network, are now in the test phase. The transit exchanges are located in a few
large cities; the relate-controlled concentrators are installed in B7 important
localities throaghout the country. A new type of concentrator. using digital
technology and particularly suited to networks of this type, is currently under
development by mm.“

Paralleling this, orders have been placed with industry for three hubs and several
dozen ACP's [packet adapter-concentrators] for delivery by 1982 .

The distribution of data services subscribers is expected to be as follows in
1983:

Subscriber terminations: ' (Thousands)
--on circuit-switching network 8
--cn packet-switching network ‘ 12
--on direct links 60
--on the switched telephone network and RFD 40
Total 120

As has been indicated above, all new service developments are being undertaken
from the viewpoint of their integration into the ISBN. For example. the above-

mentioned ACP's were developed by CSBLT and ITALTBL in such a way that they will
be easily absorbed into the raw.”

Fundamentally, in the design of the Isbu, the telecommunications network may be
viewed as transparent lake into which the information can be transferred (digital
connectivity) but not limited to this. with technological evolution, new
"islands” will surface within the network (Figure 7) and will justify the alloca-
cation of facilities in it for such as packet-treatment of message-oriented
coumunications services, and thus even the memorization and treatment of the
informational content.

16
FOI<0FFRJII.USE(NVLY
0n the one hand, this involves a series of efforts to rationalize the allocation
of necessary facilities to the individual services and to enforce a strict
standardisation of interfaces and equipment specifications. 0n the other hand,
this is the only way the public network can be made effectively an open network
offering maximized facilities for communication between individual terminals. and
between terminals and the facilities of the network. This is the concept embodied
in the term 051 [Open System Interconnection], in the sense of a network open to
interconnections between systems even though these may be systems of different
natures. In this concept. all new services are viewed as part of a single ser-
vice, namely, the public telecomunications service.

Italy devotes substantial resources to the pursuit of an international standardi-
zation, convinced as it is that every unilateral initiative constitutes not an
advance but rather a. delay of progress.

Particular attention is being devoted to subscriber and network interfaces. 'iwo
contributions submitted to 138 '81 refer to work currently being done toward a
rationalized standardization of subscriber accesses to the ISDN.15'13 One contri-
bution is devoted to multiple-service ccs.‘ Another refers to current develop-
mental work on adapting a digital telephone-switching system (In 1240) to stan-
dardized interfaces for other services.)-9

Other work currently under way is being devoted to experimentation.

As regards teletex, a service test is in the course of preparation in the form of
an electronic mail experiment. After an initial phase limited to post offices and

to a few large-scale subscribers, the service will be extended gradually to other
subscribers.

With regard to facsimile, once the standardization phase has been completed there

are no plans as yet to include specific facilities for this service in the net-
work.

Worthy of special mention is the experimental work to be done on VIDEOTEI. and on
its potential market in the Milan area beginning in the first half of 1982. The
future standard has not yet been decided: for the moment, experimentation is being
based on Prestel technology. with a view to rendering it more 'open" to accessio-
date also interconnections between data banks and VIDM'BL centers via the net-
work. The experimental phase will involve some 1,000 subscribers and some 100
information providers. The service is expected to be made available to the public
by 1983. .

Still regarding video services, developmental work is proceeding on a slow-scan
video system using a 256 x 256 standard and 64-kbit/sec transmission with reduced
redundancy. It is expected to find applications in the field of remote surveil-
lance (for example, vehicular traffic intersections) or in association with tele-
conference services, and so forth.

In the field of images in motion, plans call for the start of an experimental
videoconference within a few months. Two subscriber videoconference rooms are

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY

being prepared-one in Rome and one in nilan. Speed of transmission will be

2 Hbits/sec. Opening thus is the 'digital wideband" era, the era of speeds great-
ly exceeding 64 kbits/sec. Such speeds will be found useful in the future to: not
only images in motion but also for other video services (for example, the projec-
tion of slides during teleconferences) and for updating of files, etc.

The subject of digital wideband is being pursued diligently also because of the
current unavailability of distributional digital facilities at high bit rates.
This, among other things, imparts a stimulus to the study of a satellite capable
of providing wideband digital connectivity over the entire national territory.

The design of a satellite of this type is currently under way, to provide wideband
services and to serve as an alternate facility for the carrying of any other type
of signal, and particularly telephony (for example, in case of natural disasters).
in enhance its competitiveness, the satellite system should be equipped with a

switching capability that can be shared, as necessary, between ground stations and
the satellite itself.”

8 . Conclusions

The current status of switching in Italy have been set forth, as well as the
developmental work that has been done or is being done in this sector. The infor-
mation submitted on this topic to I53 '79 has been used as a benchmark. The
correspondence between the evolution under way and the previously indicated lines
of advance has been confirmed.

The fact is that these lines of advance are still being closely monitored and
brought into convergence by government bodies, social forces, manufacturing firms,
and operating agencies in an ongoing effort to find a balance among variOus
factors of diverse natures: Economic, financial, service, employment and so
forth. New actions undertaken recently in this domain, toward acceleration and
greater rationalization, have been discussed.

Studies, projects, and results with regard to the technical aspects of the situa-
tion have also been discussed, reference having been made to the numerous contri-
butions of Italian origin submitted to 158 '81.

BIBLIWRAPHY

l. Gagliardi, 0., "i'elecornunications Switching in Italy: Present situation and
Development Prospects (18$ ‘79).“ BLETTRONICA B WICAZIONI No. 5,
1979 p 187.

2. Mossoto, c. and Micciarelli, 5., ”Technical Aspects in the Implementation
of a Public Switched Network for Data (188 '79).“

3. Mazzei, U. and Biciocchi, 8., "Prospects and Strategies for the Digitaliza-
tion of Local Areas of the Italian Network (183 '81).

18 _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4.

Se

6.

7‘

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Romagnoii. M. and Others, “Prospects for a CCI'i'r No. 7 National Con-on
Channel Signaling Network (188 '81).“

Parodi, R. and Others. “Evolutionary Steps 'nowards an Integrated Services
Digital Network (ISDN) (188 '81).“

Galimberti R. and Others, “PW System: An Overview (188 '81).“

I‘-

Dal Monte, s. and Israel. 3., "mom System 01‘ 10/33 A Combined Local and
'i‘oll Exchange (188 '81).“

Magnolfi, G. and Others: “PW System Test and Operating Experience
(188 ‘81).'

Saracco, R. and Others, “Application of OCI'i'i' SDI. tor Software Development
and Its Maintainability (188 '81).“

Rosci, G. and Others. “CHILL Programing System: Implementation and Opera-
tional Aspects (188 '81).“

Borsotti, A” “A Method for Bngineering and Production of Large Software
Systems (188 '81).“

Melindo. P. and Others, “1.81 Components for Digital Dine Stages (188 '8l).“

Balduoci, R. and Rina, 6., “PW System: 1-1-5 Exchange for Direct Dialing.
and Operator Services (188 '81).“

Carra, 8. and Morganti, M., 'mrn Operation and Maintenance (185 '81).“

'riribelli. P. and Others, “Maintenance and Operation Upgrading of the Italian
Telephone Network by Means o! Real-Time Control Systems (188 '81).“

Ciccotti, M. and Others, '81»: A Time-Division Subscriber's Line Stage tor
Digital Exchanges (188 '81).“ '

Corsi, N. am] Others. “Design and Pertormance of Subscriber Access Equipment
for Packet-Switched Networks (188 '81).“

Montemurro. R. and villani. 3., “Customer Access to the ISDN Facilities
(158 '81)."

'rreves, s. R. and 'nolusso, 6.. “Text, Image and Data Integration in a Dis-
tributed Control Digital Voice Switching System (188 '81).“

Preti. R. and Others. “Integration of a Satellite Switched System with the
Terrestrial Network (188 '81).“

[Graphs and illustrations follow]

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key :

1. 80138611“!!! per 100 inhabi-
tents.

2. GNP per inhabitant - in
s thousands (1979).

-. Areas of dots are propor-
tional to the total nulber
0: subscribers in their
respective countries.

um"

(mm: on. no

 

4. Local calls.
5. Billions of calls.
6. 138 1979 forecasts.
lonal—tochmlogy
:0: lines.

-technology sub-
1 in“ .

3 terms”.

  
 
   
    

  

Z

IIIIIIIEii
IIIIIIIiIlI

I'-
==! (3) o muon- Iu um

02 0| U I W

8

  

   

8

(1) mm m um 1mm:

Pig £~ macaw of local exchange: to be provided.
Key:
1. Disttict ‘

CCS new“-
- Fig 7-mde1 of. 1801!.

he netwoxk or specialized facilities.

' BRI-HJIZIONI m

ELMSIONB ITALIAN

23

mommmeomiv