FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10268
20 January 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 3/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OTB

JPRS publications contain information primarily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign~language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

r

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10268

20 January 1

REST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 3/82)

Cameras
RONQIIC
ITALY

Problems, Experiences of Regional Innovation Policy
(Cristiano Antonelli, Franco Hanigliano; mums, llov 81) .......

POLITICAL
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Mauroy. Others See Need for European Defense Pillar
(Jerome Dumoulin; Um, 1: Dec 81) .

FEDERAL REPUBLIC or GERMANY

Bernhard Vogel on Budget. Coalition, Peace Movement
(Bernhard Vogel Interviev;8'1'm, 3 Dec 81)

Boerner Stands Firm oz. Frankfurt Airport Construction
(Rudolf Mueller. Peter Eoebel; 8m, 3 Dec 81) ................

CSU Favors Expulsion of Peace Researcher Hechtersheimer
(wolf perdelVitz; msnec 81) OOOIOIOOIOOOOOIOOIOOOIOCOIIOOO

SPAIN

Conflict Between Carrillo and Basque Cc-uniats Detailed
(Cmo 16’ gnov 81) OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOIODIOOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Lerchundi vs. Carrillo. by Angel 'and Gorka Iandaburu
Single Class Consciousness, by Ruiro Pinilla

-a- [III-WB-ISOPOI

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
place spontaneously in some industrial systems of
small ﬁrms with strong characteristics of spatial spe-
cialisation. territorial concentration and horizontal
integration.

In these cases technology transler was a major

(actor in the development ol those industrial districts

A concise review of major empirical ﬁndings shows
how technology transfer. localisation factors and
previous industrial structures interacted in an evolu-
' process.

It Prodi [16] and [12] studied for over ten years
the introduction and diffusion of some process inno-
vations in the industrial district of Modena. in this
case there were low ﬁtted-capital requirements and
high productivity levels: the area was specialised in
the production of bricks and building materials. Con-
aequently in the 605 and 70s the whole of industrial
district experienced a fast grown. with the birth ol
many small ﬁrms and became a strong center for the
production 0! building materials with a consistent
tlow of exports towards Europe.

Studies on technological changes in the textile
sector in the late sixties emphasise the strategic role
of process innovation in textile machinery and the
radical changes in the inputs and in the intermediary
products.

In this case technology transfer made it possible
lor rare-existing small. firms to survive though the
industrial intra-and-interlirm organization of the di-
vision ol labour had radically changed. [10]

P. Marir‘ ouerved the impact of new cutting tech-
nologies on an old and traditional activity such as the
extraction of marble in the Pisa surroundings. He
later deveioped it into a theoretical model. i.e. the
substitution ol vertical with horizontal integration
and the increasing complementarity of external and
internal economies of scale. |l7|

According to F. Del Monte. the introduction of
process innovations tn intermediary products was at
the base of the growth of the furniture seetor nearby
Pesaro. {6]

Similar processes were observed in the northern
regions of the country. even if the industrial stntcture
was not the same.

The small ﬁrms in the above mentioned cases were
independent undertakings. with full entrepreneurial
autonomy. working within a framework of spatial
cooperation and integration. it was possible to ﬁnd
firms specialised just in a limited phase of the pro-
ductive proces of one item. They sold their pro-
ducts on competitive mrrltets with many sellers and
many buyers. [l7]

In the northern regions of the country we have
clear cases of large firms subcontracting small firms
with vertical ditfusion of innovations [5|

In this respect empirical evidet given by the
machine tool industry. Enrietti et al. analysed in
depth the introduction and diffusion of innovations
in the engineering sector nearby Turin. with special
reference to the relationship between large firms sub-
contracting small ones. [7|

it would therefore appear that territorial concen-
tration and spatial specialisation played an important
role in maximising the rates of diffusion and dissemin-
ation of new technologies.

Special features of industrial structures and market
forms i.e. small size of firms. a number of s perfect v
tiny intermediary markets. strong subcontracting re-
lations and low barriers to entry sustained technology
transfer as a part of a more complex evolutionary
process.

[.2. The Limits of Spontaneous Technology Transfer

Experiences in these industrial districts with small
firms have shown that autonomous technology trans-
fer was at the same time induced and seriously limit-
ed by a number of factors:

a) the availability of a technological supply of in-
novations. substantially exogenous to the systems of
these tirms;

b) a structural gap between the institutions which
produce new technologies and firms which introduce
and diffuse innovations:

c) the small size of ﬁrms active in the diffusion
and dissemination of innovations:

d: the strategic relevance of spatial dimension in
these diﬂusion and dissemination of innovations:

e) the fundamental role played by market forces
in the processes but were not able to sustain tech-
nology transfer beyond the borders of these indus-
trial districts.

In other words it seems that diffusion and dissemin-
ation of innovations was limited to a few special cases
Law 25.10.]968 No. I089 and Law l2.8.1977
No. 675 art. No. IOJ l. lMl received from the go-
vernment 950 billions lire since I968 to provide
pants (up to 40%; and shared ﬁnancial costs tup
to 80%) for research projects in firms.

40% at this amount should be attributed to firms
localised in the South. [Ml Fund is a clear example
of a passive instrument in which firms must take
the initiative to aslt lot the ﬁnancement. No assist.
ance to the lollotv-up oi the research-project is con-
sidered: [Ml has not been developing any dissemin-
ation or crossed-information role.

The screening of the project is fully centralised.
Conequently the quota to. the South has been
utilised up to now only for the 26% of the resources
against the 40% available. A quota of 20% of total
resourgas; has been reserved. at a national level. to
small ﬁrms. At the end of I980 only the I695 had
been utilised.

2. Special programs tor RdtD in the South

Lati- 2.5.1976 No. l83 art. No. 8. Within the
Law l83 tor the South in special ogratntne to su-
stain RdtD activities in the Sout‘lf has been esta-
blished.

Local ad hoc consortia among government bodies
and local Universities can be founded and ﬁnanced
to promote R&D projects together with industrial
leasibility studies and the training and eventual em-
ployment of some 4.000 scientific manpower.

380 billions lire are available for this project
which is however still at a starting up ievel for the
lack of a coordination framework at ministerial level.

In some Regions. namelv Paglia. Calabria and Si-
cily.itseemsthatthepmgr=mmehassotnechances
to induce the streghtening 0! direct linlts among local
universities and ﬁrms with beneﬁcial etierts tor both.

3. incentives to Laboratories Localth

Law 2.5.1976 No. 183 art. No. 13. Within the
sameLawaspecialfundhasbeencreatedtopro—
vide grants (up to 50%) and shared ﬁnancial costs
(up to 70%) to stimulate the localisation of new
nan Laboratories in the South. Few Laboratories
have been localised within the framework of the law
and most of them are integrated in large ﬁrms in~
corporates! in the North. A serious limit to the
elioetiveness of the Fund results lrotn restrinctions
pond to non-economic-public bodies to talte the
initiative.

Spill-over has been modest with scarce ellects of
horizontal diffusion of innovation or creation of
scientific entrepreneurship nearby. Laboratories intact
remained strickly linked and vertically integrated
with large ﬁrms active in the North.

8. Technology transter
tiatives which have been taking place in 70s.

In two cases Regions approved Regional Laws
to sustain technology transfer. This is the case of
Friuli Venezia Giulia which. with the R. Law
3.6.1978 N'47. provides grants up to the 30% of
total costs. for the localisation or the enlargement
0! Research Laboratories and lot research projects
of regional interest.

Sicily. with the R. Law 4.12.l978 NS? and 58.
provides grants and shared costs up to the 50% ot
total costs of researches devoted to the development
of solar energy technologies in Sicily.

In most cases Regions decided to establish institu-
tions to support locally those cases of autonomous
technological transfer. This is for instance the case
of Piemonle with FINPIEMONTE. Lombardia with
CESTEC. Emilia-Romans with ERVET.

In some case local government bodies together
with loul Universities promoted the establishment
of a technological center mainly to spread some spill-
over eﬁccts around scientiﬁc centers. This is the case

of CSATA. nearby Bari and Bari University. CRI‘I‘A.
nearby Pisa and its University. and CRAI nearby
Cosenza and the University ot Calabria.

Finally private undertakings were established to
sustain technological transit... mostly at a cooperative
level such a CNOS Tecnoservizi by Conﬁndustria
with centers in Genova. Roma. Torino. Purina. Trie-
ste. Ascoli Piceno.

We limit here to talte into account three cues
only. within which we ﬁnd instruments to sustain
RatD activities at a regional level and technology
transfer.

I. FINPIEMONTE

FINPIEMONTE is a ﬁnancial company jointly
owned by Regione Pietnonte (majority ot shares)
and representatives of ﬁrms associations and local
government authorities.

Finpiemonte hu already developed three projects
to stimulate RaD activities and technology transfer
for ﬁrnts localised in Piedmont: a new programme
will be launched in the next months.

a) Stimulation of technological supply

Important research laboratories of large firms
(FIAT. Olivetti. etc.) are localhed in Piedmont.

Some evidence shows that these laboratories pro-
duce much a larger and a wider amount of techno-
logical innovations than those actually introduced in
ﬁrms of the group. This surplus of innovations is
usually patented but unexploited. Nobody in fact
takes care to loolt for a commercial use of these
Iiccncies: in the Research Lab. such functions are
not even considered. in the ﬁrm technologies are
evaluated only [or eventual application. outside the
Small ﬁrms can apply the Technological center to
solve technological problems on one side. On the
other hand the Technological Centers perform an
autonomous role of dissemination and cross-infor-
mation among all ﬁnns.

Technological centers have thus a double role to
cope with a demand for technology already expressed
by firms. and to stimulate a new demand for tech-
nology.

3. CESTEC

Regione Lombardia is trying to develop an experi-
ment hall-way between those of Regione Piedmont
and Regione yEmilia-R omagna. CESTEC has been
founded as a body to act as a Technology Center
and as a Technological Services Provider.

CESTEC has been founded as a proﬁt institution.

CESTEC has thus two major roles: on one side it
performs directly RJtD activities for group of ﬁrms
or sectorial associations. on the other side it organises
RM) activities for ﬁrms. i.e. acts a link between a
demand for technology expressed by ﬁrms and a
potential supply for technology existing in public
and private Research Laboratories.

4. TbeDebateoatheModelsoftheltaliaaReglanal
Innovation Policy

The attempts to assist technological change at a
regional level in many countries seem to correspond
to two main models: [8]

a) a centralised model. in which regional inno-
vation policy is conceived as a mean to circulate
information and resources. so as to stimulate the
introduction and diﬁusion of innovations at a re
gional level. along criteria and lines elaborated
centrally;

b) a decentralised model. with a series of auto
nomous activitirs based on direct involvement and
participation. i.e. organizations to stimulate the in-
troduction of innovations according to the particular
features of their economic and industrial setting.

lnltalyinthelast6~7 yearsadebatetooltplace
between those in favour of decentralization and those
against it and for centralization. [8]

On one side the Regional Governments. or at
least some of them. tried to prove the innovation po-
licy was a regional matter. On the other hand pro-
blems of resources, dishomogeneity of the country's
economic conditions. the particular problem of the
underdevelopped 50th became the arguments in
favour of a centralised model.

Both models have positive and negative aspects.
The demtnlised model makes it possible to focus
on the speciﬁc characterists of technological change
in each area. For instance programs to assist the
vertical diﬂusion of innovations have been developed
in Piedmont, programs to assist horizontal diﬂusion
have been introduced in Emilia-Romans. Coopera-
tive research among medium-sine firms has been
stimulated in Lombardy.

However a decentralised model seems to stiller
because there is no overall national strategy concern-
ing innovation and economic policies. Clearly. in
italy the main objective of any national economic
policy is the effort to reduce the existing unbalance
of economic conditions in different parts of the
country. Special eﬁorts at a regional level may take
place. to sustai \ firms or sectors which would other-
wise naturally - warm southward.

Furthermore regional innovation policy within a
decentralised model may suﬁer in many cases due
to the lack of opportunities to stimulate vital intra-
sectoral technology transfer because of the diﬁerent
and remote localisation of upward or downward
industrial activities.

A decentralised model clearly implies some dupli-
cations of eﬂorts: it has not a global outlook on the
rate and direction of technological change as whole.
and opeiativc dimensions are often below the thre-
shold of the efficient size.

On the other hand a regional innovation policy in
a centralised model may stimulate technology trans-
fer by modifying localisation criteria of research-
intensivc activities. and thus favor less developed
regions. The main purpose of the centralised ap-

proach in italy was in fact to induce lirms to localise
their innovative activities in the South. It was hoped
this would produce a spill-over effect on the
surroundings.

Only in some cases it can be said that in spatial
spill-over took place. Mostly the effects were limited

'to few local subcontractors with scarce dynamic
consequences.

The second negative consequence ol the centralis-
cd model is the lack of instruments. procedures to
stimulate small ﬁrms to apply for the public sustain.

The implementation of a centralised suffers for
the fact that small firms and less industrialized re-
gions are not able to evaluate their technological
needs. Consequently they cannot choose the right
technological opportunities. express demands or
technology and gain access it the centralised instru-
ments.

The lMl-Fund for technological innovation has a
compulsory quota of 40% of total resources avail-
able. for firms operating in Southern Italy: only 26%
have been utilised. The paradoxical result is that a
substantial part of the total resources cannot be
touched. In the meantime over 69% of the projects
to be financed have been submitted by firms from
two regions: Lombardy and Piedmont.

In other words where the local technological ca-
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007l02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500020037-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The real ”burnt-r fur a regional innovation policy
ilumld be like calm It) reproduce artiﬁcially those
princesses of technological trawler and those econo-
mic and technological condtlt'ons which took natu-
rally place during the seventies in a few areas and a
Iew sectors.

Such a project would then imply:

at the effort to establish new links among diﬂerent
regional clusters and sectors. so to eventually create
new conditions for the ﬂow of interindustrial dimi-
sion of innovations. It scents necesary to reproduce
in new sectors those conditions of physical and com-
mercial contiguity among activities as for instance
textile engineering and textile chemistry in testiles:

b) the etlon to revitalise and extend intraindustrial
horizontal diffusion of innovations in new industrial
districts in which a capacity for new imitation pro-
cesses still exists but has not yet been exploited. This
implies to create a demand for technology which
lirtns were not yet able to express. and what is more
ditﬁeult. to act as a dynamic factor engendering
spatial processes of imitation and dilfusions within
new industrial districts:

ct the elIort to control with technological criteria
subcontracting between large and small firms so to
create new room for vertical processes at intrain-
dustrial diffusion at new technologies.

The creation of v Boise di Como Terzi - where
technology-intensive subcontracting may he assisted
and fuvnrised. scents to be an useful instrument.

5. Conclusions

It seems necessary to go beyond the alternattse
centralised/decentralised model and to build a more
complex model based on.a network of local insti-
tuttons with high degrees of authonomy and ruin-fl-
potion uttegrated in it national system and interacting
each other within a global framework managed by

a Central A Cy. _

Recently ﬂroup of expert. on behalf of the Mt-
ntstero per il Coordinamento delta Rieerca Scientiﬁ-
ea c Tecnologica. has presented :- protect to establish
a National Information Ccnlct and a National Com-
mittee for Iht.‘ Technological Information and the
Technology Transfer. lldl

The National Information Center should consu
substantially in a Central Data Bank providing tech-
nological inlormation to Territorial Institutions and
retrieving and crossing inlormntion on the demand
lor technology in dillerent pans ol the country set
up by the Territorial Institutions.

The National Committee should have the role of
Advisory Board to the activities of the National
Information Center. and to suggest new guidelines
tor the national policy to sustain technology transfer.
This project has not yet. been presented to the Par-

7

Iiatnent and some ne
loped since then to
of the National Info:
It seems in fact me
a policy to sustain th
the bulk of a region.
A National Inforn
at the same time the
logy nansfer and the
at a regional level.

It scents thus necee
ed model for a tegi
technology transfer I
based on:

I) a Central Ag
such as:

i) retrieval. diffusio
logical inlorniat
Institutions:

ii) organisation and
tutions of resout

i Rab activities i
iii) transmission to

guidelines and st-

vation policy an

reactions from '1'

and reshape nati

2) a network of 'I'
cine functions such a

i) brooIting activitie
domestic and for
ii) dillusion of techn
supply of qualini
gical patients;
iii) supply of advanc
such as new prr
evaluation. aasit
the productive
activities of mo
iv) screening of re
ﬁnanoement by

Such a National In
missing linlt in the
Italian regional innov

m

II) M.VV.. Rieerclte
baron. De Donate. Bat
III MRI. Mswglorn
l3] 0. Auto-sells. F. I
am dt' evil-pro alum
min In Italta. . L'Indt

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02l00: ClA-ROP02-00850R000500020037-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[4] G. we». U. Colombo. G. Lonnvoochio, 0.3. lot.
uli.l.c:pcmuuonolom£ml.ihi.uilnoo 1900.

[5] A. 0.4 Moon. M. Rollo. homologi- c Moira-aw
Munro, mm Tot'no I977.

[61 F. Del Monte. L’lndum'o dd nubile Mlle ' ’
di Roma: an Mollo li tmt‘lﬂ «lemma. c h
Mambo .. 4/911.

[7] A. Sodom cl 1].. 1A Ila-nonunion: MW
much-mun. F. Audi. Mil-no mo.

m FAST. Still 44' Ioulbilua (I Am dunno Manolo per
il tmkn‘wmo madam. (Bon- di studio m on
conwdelmiohmporﬂcmmwdcmmouooooiu-
ﬁllet e W). Mihno 1979.

[9] FAST. CSATA. kan‘nwnli ICCIINO'I'CI' c nlluppo.
I'Muﬂ'llk M New“. Bari I977.

[10] Fodausilc. ll mm: null: “billion-tn in Itdlo.
F. Angeli. Milono I900.

Ell] I. Fm. L'lnvaulonc m-nolnplco. ll W
Mihno ma. .

IIZI R. Gallo. IL Pndt. Ellen: ll u'lnnmralmc mo-
Iugm null. m Mann-k. - livin- di W o
Politico Mario): 9. 2/1976.

IIJI 3. Gold. 1’“th Diﬂulnn in I .- Ro-
worcll Noel: and Ska-roman. Journal ol
Economic- :. Much 19!].

[Ml Mhiuuo oer il Cooroimto dello Rim union-
Iilioo "would“. Mama per I'luuou'oac di un Calm
Null-mole lnlonuolico e di un Colman Nada-oh pa
Halon-nun: 0 ll Troika-mun Tnnnlolln. Ron I900.

IISI F. Moulding Problem! dl «walla c ”lulu dol-
rlnmw'ou null mud mom on mi 0 in In-
Iio. in R. Ptodi. F. Goobo (- con 0. Per m rim-mn-
Uau r Ila-union: («Malaria Hollow. ll Molino. Bo-

loooo I980.
"6| R. Prodi. u dill-aim dell: Imlml ull'lndu-
:m'o unlit-o. ll Mulioo. 1910.

[I1] I. Vonldo to con . Rummmuonl induuloll
a rapport! no hum. Manic: «Ml-niche r maid" n!
lmmranmn 3mm. F. Audi. Milne I919.

‘GARCO Sc EDIZIONI

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MAUROY, arms SEE NEED FOR WROPEAN DEFENSE PILLAR
Paris L'EXPRESS in French to Dec 81 p 116

[Article by Jerome Duloulin]

[Text] "I an undoubtedly the Prime Minister of change." said Pierre Mauroy at the
Institute for Advanced Studies on National Defense (IIIEDN) on 1‘ Septenber, "But
there is at least one matter which requires continuity: the imperatives of defense.

In this realm the already seen is definitely superior to "constant and continuing
reform." The revival of the "EU [Western European Union] by the Socialist Party is
due--as it was under Ponpidou 8 years ago--to a with and a fear: the wish for a
French—style EurOpean unity and the fear of a serious danger to key elements of
the country's security.

The wax was founded in 1951. at the urging of Pierre Hendes France-after Paris re-
jected the plan of a European Defneae Conunitr-in order to provide a framework
for German ream-eat and bring together the European nelabers of NATO. The HEU is
still the only European assembly with jurisdiction in defense matters. And, as
such, it is anathema to the Columnists.

On 14 September a coununication from Pierre Hauroy befroe the IBEDN: "Europeans
should think." he said. "about the possibility of a political group with an auton—
omous defense." On 17 November, before the Defense Comittee of the HBO, the
Socialist deputy from Pas-de-Calais. Lucien Pignion, pointing out Europe's relative
weakening and the increased Soviet threat, advocated a "European defense area
which would enable us to finally (...) build the European pillar of NATO." This is
a concept dear to the old Socialist guard and was often mentioned by Robert Pon-
tillon, who until recently was responsible for international affairs and defense

under Pierre Hauroy .

Finally, Georges Lemoine, Secretary of State for Defense, in an interview with
MATIN DE PARIS, and then again before the HE!) assubly. recalled that the “EU is
"the only recognized legal entity which unites seven European countries1 in an

1 France, Great Britain. Federal Republic of Germany. Italy, Holland, Belgiun
and Luxembourg

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

alliance of mutual assistance in case of aggression." And he referred explicitly
to the statenents made at the uni in November 1973 by Michel Jobert, who was then
Pompidou's Minister for Foreign Affairs.

There is a striking continuity in these statements. In 1973 Jobert expressed two
fears and made two assertions:

"The fear that the arms control negotiations between the two great powers will
extend to the French and British nuclear forces. Leonid Brezhnev is demanding
today that they should; the Minister of Defense, Charles Hernu, in his statement
to the IHIN on 16 November, tried to prove that "this is not in the interest of
the USSR."

--The fear of seeing a zone with a special legal and political status created in
the center of Europe: the old Rapscki plan of the denuclearization and neutraliza-
tion of the center of the old continent, which would leave western Europe in a
position of extreme weakness vis-a-vis Moscow. This is what the Sovietswechoed
by the PCF in Paris--are now calling "the real zero option."

"The assertion that loyalty to NATO is "in no way incompatible with Europe's need
to be responsible for its own defense." On one hand, it is a matter of not relying
blindly on the American guarantee, and, on the other. not skidding along the path
of the Rederal Republic's 0stpolitik. President Francois Hitterrand seems very
much aware of the risks of a new Ger-an "national neutralisn." And he has often
expressed the wish for a general review of the tasks of the Alliance.

“The assertion that France's strategic nuclear force, "due to its deterrent role,
contributes to the general strengthening of the Alliance. thereby increasing Europe's
contribution to the comon effort." This reasoning was solanly approved by the
Allies the following year in Ottawa, but it now confronts the Socialists with a
terrible dilema. One school of thought, more pro-NATO, dwells—with Mauray—on
what the Giscardians called "enlarged deterrence." Everyone is careful not to use
those words, but the idea is there. Another school of thought, more nationalistic,
reasons-«with Hernu—in terms of "sanctuarization." It contends, not illogically,
that this is the only way to avoid yielding to the Soviets' wish to include French
nuclear forces in their reckoning of western vectors.

"Since the Europeans want to talk about security,‘ cries Claude Cheysson, Minister
of External Relations, "We must revive the "EU!" Paris supports the WEU's wish to
set genuine cooperation in motion in Europe in the realm of defense. Whether this
is a concrete project or a pious wish—-neither London nor Bonn are fans of the

WEJJ-—the suggestion is meant to exorcise France's fears about what it considers to

be the foundations of its security.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 s.a. Grocpe Express

9855
C50: 3100/ 182

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BWWD NOEL 0" 311mm, MAIJTION, PEACE HOVDIDIT
- Hamburg STE“ in German 3 Dec 81 pp 256, 258

[Excerpt from intervieu with Rhineland-Palatinate Minister-President Bernhard Vogel
by STERN editors Heiner Brenner and Felix Schmidt: “The Coalition Is Doing Itself
In"; date and place of interview not specifieg7

[$er cw Minister-President 3mm Vogel of Mains told 3mm
shy he does not intend to help the Bonn government out of its
difficulties, how he visualises the dialogue with the younger
generation and share he intends to make corrections in his educa-
tional refom pmgras.

srmn: It isn't only the federal government that's in bad shape financially; the
mates are, too. Isn't the Union - uhich supplies the head of govemmant in six
states — cutting off its nose to spite its face by rejecting the austerity laws
in the Bundesrat [Tipper House of FRO Patna-61!]?

Vogel: There's a joint responsibility for the federal, state and municipal bud-
gets. It's for that very reason that us objected to he package of legislation, for
although the federal government thought about itself, it gave practically no con-
sideration at all to the states and cities. Furthermore, we're against increases
in taxes and assessamts of any kind. He have to cut expenditures, not increase
income. Once the federal government realises that, a eoaproaise can be discussed.

3mm: CDU heads of states have proposed cuts in support for schoolchildren and in
social assistance. 80 now it's hitting the defenseless and the very poor.

Vogel: I see it differently. I think it's necessary basically to stop supporting
schoolchildren she can live at hone. In the case of social assistance, we advocate
cuts to ease the dzrain on aunicipal budgets.

STERN: Isn't there more behind this rejection than nests the eye -- nalely the
hope of having the coalition break up over these issues?

Vogcl: The coalition won't break apart when the CD0 vents it to, but only when it
no longer has a community of interests. The coalition is doing itself in.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sl'L-ml: If the CW had to assume resmnsibility for the government, would the
chancellor's name be Stoltanberg or Kohl?

Vogel: The cw/csu group in the Bundestag elects the chancellor. If it should
come to a change of administrations during this legislative term, I have no doubt
that the parliamentary group will elect Chairman Kohl as chancellor.

STERN: Herr Strauss recently paid a call on Herr Schmidt. Has there perhaps talk
of a Grand Coalition between CW and SPD during this meeting?

Vogel: I don't understand the fuss over this meeting. A few weeks ago the
chancellor spent an hour and a half with me in my office. That conversation didn't
shake up the republic. After all, it's a completely normal thing for the chancellor
and the minister-presidents to talk with each other....

SEER": ".15 a Grand Coalition also talked about then?

Vogel: No. In especially threatening tines - which I don't see now -- I could
picture a government made up of all the parties, but I associate bad memories with
the Grand Coalition....

STERN: ...which ones, for example?

Vogel: with the Grand Coalition between 1966 and 1969, there was no longer any
effective opposition in parliament. Anyone who wanted to raise any criticism had
to find other forms of confrontation — extraparliamentary opposition, for instance.
I venture to assert that the alienation of the younger generation had its origins
in the time of the Grand Coalition.

STERN: For several years the younger generation and the CD0 didn't talk to each
other. Now your party has Just made an effort to resume the dialogue at its party
congress in Hamburg. Has this a unique occurrence?

Vogel: Hamburg was certainly unique in tens of the way in which a party congress
talked with the younger generation. But it mustn't stop there. Right now we need
a thousand little Hanburgs so we can continue the youth dialogue at the lower
levels of the party as well.

S'l‘L-RN: will your party colleagues talk with anyone who has questions for the CDU,
or is the dialogue to be conducted only with selected young people, as was the
case at the party congress?

Vogel: Anyone who asks questions for the purpose of entering into a serious ex-
change of ideas, and also of listening to answers, can take part in a dialogue with
us -- without qualification.

STERN: A guaranteed peace is a central problem for broad segments of the youth
population. Uhat can the one offer the peace movement?

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Vogel: He have to cone to grips with the positions that are represmted there
instead of simply ignoring tha or dismissing than"

STERN: ...as your party chair-an Holnut Kohl did with his contention that a “popu-
lar front" was demonstrating on 10 October in Bonn....

Vogel: ...He.lnut Kohl didn't put it that way. In that daonstration of $0,000
people, you have to differmtiate betweaa the initiators, between those who appealed
for participation —- anong than were organizations that have bem Judged by the
federal interior minister to be antidenocratic -— and those who attended, the major-
ity of when certainly had nothing to do with con-waists. It's uncalled for to tar
these people with the sane brush and shove then into a category where they don't
belong.

STERN: You' re an advocate of doing away with the practice of examining the moral
views of conscimtious objectors. The 0110's party congress went along with you.
what might the long-overdue reform of conscientious objection look like?

Vogel: My state will present a reform proposal. The important thing here is that
there be an increase in the number of substitute service billets, so it will be

guaranteed that every conscientious objector will be perforaing substitute service.
You can’t limit substitute mice to he social sphere; you have to broadm it....

STEIN: ...for example?

Vogel: thironncntal protection suggests itself. Those who are perforling substi-
tute service can do something for our woodlands, for our rivers, and they can do
landscape maintenance. And we'll probably have to make the torn for substitute
service about 6 months longer than that for nilitary service.

OOPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AG & Co.

71.58
cso: 3103/15?

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

30mm smms FIRM on summer amour oousmuc'rrou
liaaburg Still!!! in German 3 Dec 81 p 292
[Article by Rudolf Mueller and Peter Hoebel: u Tough Hessian Chops woody

[text] th Minister-President Holger Boomer does not intend to
allow a referendul on the runway construction.

licsse's Minister-Presidmt llolger Boomer (SPD) retained as tough as nails. Dee-
pitc massive citizen protests, he declared before parliaaent last week in Uiesbaden:
"construction of the west runway is inevitable." The hopes by environsentalists of
still being able to prevent the disputed nannoth project at Frankfurt airport by
means of a referendum were swept away by these words froa Boerner: “This petition
is unconstitutional."

The initiators of the referendum hope to achieve the following result with their
bill: The Hesse State Planning Law would dictate that the Frankfurt airport may be
expanded only within the Frankmrt city liaits - but part of the planned "west
runway“ is situated on land belonging to Ruesselaheiu. This dipulation would be
binding upon all authorities and oomunal parliaments nor-ally involved in this
planning. Moreover, conservation organisations would be accorded the right to file
suit in administrative courts if the .vironnmt should be mdangered by the airport
construction.

Since this bill would lake it impossible to enlarge Frankfurt airport as intended,
Ilolgcr Boerncr is fighting it with all his night: "A runway opponent can continue
to be a runway opponent, but...anyone who calls for violence or seeks to blackmail
a democratic government is putting an axe to the roots of our denocracy."

The final authority that could still change Boerner's hard line would be the Hesse
State Court. But the sinister-president even has a perspective on this eventuality:
"The state government is confidaatly awaiting the verdict of the court.‘I

ilis optiaisn is justified, for there are no runway opponmts on Hesse' 9 highest
court, to which the state legislath elects high-caliber Jurists -— Judges, attor-
neys and professors. The president of the State court is Kerb-Heinz Nieders: he
simultaneously heads the Hesse Administrative Court (VGH) in Kassel. And he has
thus far struck down all 101. appeals against the runway project. Judge Ruth Stum-
wittrock is the full—tine chairman of the "Runway Division" at the VGH. Judge
Virgilio Rolleri is the legal representative of Hesse's economics sinister in court

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cases involving the runway. And Judge Johannes Strelitz used to be an 9!) interior
and Justice minister in ‘Jiesbaden.

The Hesse state government has never left any room for doubt that the public would
not be permitted to vote on the runway. Even weeks before the citizens marched
to Hiesbaden with their 23,249 signatures, the Boerner ministration had sought
an expert opinion from law professors Willi Blueael and Michael Rollenfitsch from
Speyer. The result: They found that the bill which the citizens' action groups

wanted to put to a vote was in violation "of the Hesse state constitution and the
Basic Law."

The professors pointed out that "the federal government“ has “exclusive legislative
authority" ovm‘ air traffic; for this reason alone, the bill presented by the citi-
‘zcns' action groups was in violation of the Basic Lav. But they said that the bill
hould be unconstitutional even without this exclusive authority, because it arbi-
trarily restricted the jurisdictions of communal parliaments and was thus in viola-
tion of the communal autonomy guaranteed in the Basic Law.

fray. He vigorously denies that the federal government has responsibility for
Frankfurt's airport: "The bill of the citizens' action groups provides for re-
stricting the area of the arport to the city limits of Frankfurt." Thus, only prob-
lems of area planning are involved, and these are exclusively state concerns. He
says the federal government can only say hou something is to be built, while it is
up to the states to decide uhere it will be built. He maintains that he planned
law does not violate communal planning authority. Moreover, nowhere does it say
that no plebiscite may be held on a zoning law.

Backup fire is being provided by Halter Schwenk, the federal Transport Ministry's
aviation expert. This year he published the "Handbook of Air Traffic Law’“
page 253 reads as follows: "Planning authority for airports lies with the states.

Boernor the tough Hessian is concerned less with the experts' dispute than with the
"unconditional safeguarding of the constitutional state" in the face of the frac-
tious citizens. His position is that there must be "no self-made law"; the state
government will therefore "resist in the interest of our state" all "attenpts to
exert pressure." In other respects the chief executive is not so delicate:

For instance, 1.5 hectares of woodland surrounding the airport grounds have been

cleared, even though the state government had given these assurances shortly before-
hand: "Not a single tree must fall outside the planned area.";

Co ntrary to legal regulations, conservation organizations were not brought in on
the technical planning operations;

”case's minister for environmental affairs has never approved the overall construc-
tion of the many, although this is a stringent requirement;

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ahantytoun put up by the runway opponents was ranoved and destroyed as the
result of a police order from Frankfurt. The Frankfurt Administrative Court exp-
pres:- at! this opinion on the action: "Potentiy illegal." This is because the

:mnnLytoun uas situated on land belonging to Ruessolsheim and would thus have been;
the affair of the Rucssolshcill construction authorities.

(DPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AG & Cc.

71.58
cso: 3103/ 157

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CSU PAVORS EXPULSION OF PEACE RESEARCHER IBCHTBRSHEIHER
hamburg STERN in German 3 Dec 81 pp 262, 264

Article by Holf Perdelwitz: "Expulsion Rather Than Dialogue‘I-o'rhe Hechtersheiner
se is an Example of the Politiciana' Intolerance of Am Critics"]

Frext] When peace is the issue, the CSU loses self control. "If they want a fight
again, just let then start," said its secretary general, Ed-und Stoiber, threaten-
ingly on the fringes of hamburg's CDU party conference to the liberal wing of the
sister party. Because the unthinkable had not only been thought about by then it

had even been put into words: after the 081] had slapped a party exclusion hearing

on its unpopular nenber, peace researcher Dr Alfred Hechteraheiner, the CDU's district
organizations planned to offer him a new political asylun.

This was already the second expulsion proceeding against Hechtersheimer this year.

The first one was concluded on 14 May with a conpronise which inposed restraint on

both sides for the future: the scientist was to keep his distance froa like-minded
leftwingers in his battle against the NATO counter-arming progran; the party on the

other hand was to regard Mechtersheiner's criticise of arns policy as his privilege
o conduct independent research. But the conpronise started falling apart on

i0 October when the scientist ends his speech during Bonn's peace demonstration.

To Bkkehardt Voigt, chairman of the 0811's defense policy panel, this finally made
Hechtersheiner one of the "false prophets who use scientific research as a cover to
play Moscow's gene by serving as useful inbeciles." If the Bavarian defense nan
had only known that 2 days after the denonstration the peace researcher had had a
3-hour tete-a-tete with Ambassador Vladimir Ssnyonov in the Soviet residence in Bad
Godasberg, he would surely have concluded therefrom that the Occident was in danger.

Despite this, eat-officer Hechtersheinsr's concept of homeland and country is bone-
conservative, certainly much more conservative than that of the majority of the (:8!)
leadership. This has however some surprising consequences for security politics:
"Anyone who today refuses to enter military service can use the argument that he
wants to defend his country-mot to annihilate it." Also: "Defense equals pro-
tection; but protection does not equal the annihilation of the other side—that
smacks of a cowboy nentality." That is why to him it is obvious that in the age of
weapons of mass destruction security cannot be attained nilitarily, but only by
political neansnan insight which is increasingly being discussed within the can
And 1:; youth affiliate.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Young Union is therefore urging that the peace researcher be welcomed into the
CDU. Says Hechtersheimer to STERN: "In starting this process the CSU has removed
itself from the discussion about peace and securityv?

Both events-~probable exclusion and possible exile--appear to be predestined.
Hechtersheimer, a vehement and expert critic of current security policy and of
NATO's counterarming with new nuclear medium range weapons for western Europe, is
disturbed by the image of a monolithic CSU whose eagerness to arm might even win
the respect of 0.5. President Ronald Reagan. Hithin the CDU on the other hand, at
least such thoughtful men as former Secretary General Kurt Biedenkopf have started

a thought process to the effect that for the FRG, defense with nuclear weapons would
be tantamount to annihilation.

Says Mechtersheimer, who entered the ranks of the Bavarian CSU by immigrating from
Berlin: "Intellectually I have always remained in the CD0." As a result, the
brilliant air force officer had always been suspect to his new southern party com-
rades. Unwilling to compromise. he had more faith in the power of arguments than
in beery old-boy conspiracy. It was therefore practically a miracle that in 1973
he became the CSU Landtag candidate and therefore automatically a delegate. This
happened even though his intro-party rival at that time was the then Bavarian
peasant leader Otto Freiherr von Feury. Strauss himself had to help out to ensure
a hair's breadth 21-19 vote victory for the head peasant: "We must support the
peasantry--intelligence we have ourselves."

Hechtersheimer'a membership in the CSU's defense policy panel did not last long.
Because not only the food suppliers are the fair-haired boys in Germany's south;
there is also that part of industry which helps the Bundeswehr to live up to its
recruiting slogan: "We sell security."

The Free State is the center of the German arms industry. And one of the center
pieces of this branch of the economy is the aerospace company Hesserschmidt-Boelkow-
Blohme, known as HEB, main German manufacturer of the Tornado fighter aircraft. It
was therefore most undesirable to have, of all things, a member of the CSU,

Alfred Mechtersheimer, come out with the most unfavorable criticism to date of the
miracle bird (STERN No. 13/1978: "The Plucked Bird"). According to him, the
Tornado was much too expensive, of limited use to the Bundeswehr's requirements, and
was being built more for political than for military reasons. This incisive prog-
nosis has been justified by events.

These criticisms were all the more weighty since Mechtersheimer was at the time still
a lieutenant colonel in the air force. There was of course a quick change in this
status, with energetic assistance by the Social Democrat-led defense ministry.

When Hechtersheimer applied for 2 years' unpaid leave to conduct scientific research,
as every officer is entitled to do, Minister Hans Apel himself denied the request.
as persistent rumor has it. Hechtersheimer, unbending as always, took off his uni-
form, renounced any pension claims and joined the Max Planck Institute in Starnberg
as a scientist.

The new man infused new life into moribund peace and conflict research. It really
needed that, because its work hardly ever was anything more than a repeated rehash

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of well-known prior publications. Original thinkers like Carl-Friedrich von
Heizsaecker, Dieter Senghaas or Horst Afheldt were rare exceptions to the rule.

For that reason, no peace and conflict research, unlike in mny Western countries,
did not exert any notable direct influence upon government policy.

And even this noderate influence is being significantly reduced. Union-governed
Laender Bavaria and Lower Saxony, to be followed by Baden—Vuerttsmberg. are quitting
the "German Society for Peace and Conflict Research" which is partially funded by
the Federal Government and the Leander. And the Max Planck Society dissolved
Starnberg'a Institute for Life Conditions of the Scientific and Technological
Society when its director, Carl-Friedrick von Heizsaecker, retired; it had been the
not highly esteemed conflict research institute in the no. Hechtersheimer, one
of the intellectual prime novers in Starnberg, was fobbed off with a short—tern,

poorly paying contract. It appears that there is an effort to stifle the "smoldering
fire of peace discussion."

But Hechtersheimer's argunents have in the seantins been widely heard. He has found
private sources to finance a part of his research, among them the many lecture tours

which he uses to fight for a "European“ security policy which has very little in
canon with goverment policy.

The Max Planck Society's Sternberg operation has in the meantime been designated
the Institute for Social Sciences. But the Society. which continues to be supported
almost exclusively by taxpayers' funds, is still detecting too such enthusiasm for
peace and security. In Starnberg there will shortly be distributed stationery with
a new letterhead: "Institute for Social Sciences (being disbanded)".

Fortunately, other projects of the widely dispersed m Planck Society have not been
touched by budget cuts. Among then: the extremely important investigation on how
songbirds can be taught to whistle folk songs.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AG 8. Co.

9273
CSO: 3103/158

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONFLICT BETWEEN CARRILLO AND BASQUE WS’IS DETAILED

Lerchundi vs. Carrillo
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 9 Nov 81 pp 45-48

[Article by Angel and Corks Landaburu]

[Text] Below a large banner with the words National Assembly, Leftist Unity,
National Reconstruction of Basque Homeland, Burocouaunism" and before an already
convinced audience. Carrillo lashed out harshly against the current general secre-
tary of the EPK [Basque Conunist Partyl-PCB: "Lerchundi's irresponsibility is
that he began to negotiate alone with the Basque Left. behind the PCE's back. The
Lerchundi faction has ruined the possibility of leftist unity."

Lerchundi replied that afternoon with a similar attack: "These men. who have
shattered the EPK. have demonstrated their inability to solve Basque problems and
even the inability to obtain an assembly. thus they had to turn to Carrillo to
fill a movie theater."

By his visit to the Basque country last Sunday, Santiago Carrillo personally conveyed
the PCB Executive Comittee's endorsement of Ramon Ormasabal and officially confirmed
the schism among Basque coenunists.

The presence of the PCB general secretary. accompanied by Nicolas Sartorius and
Jaime Ballesteros, in Sestao and at the assembly held by the secessionist faction
opposed to Roberto berchundi and the leadership which resulted from the Fourth
Congress. confirmed the decision made several days earlier by high comamist leaders
to dissolve the EPK Central Co-sittee and to appoint a provisional leadership more
amenable to Carrillist views.

This endorsement of the Omzebel faction. which runs counter to the process of
convergence with the Basque Left-En [expansion unknown]. that was being pursued
by the EPK's present leadership. was thus made official before 2,000 persons
assembled in the Amezaga movie theater in the manufacturing town of Sestao.

Battle for Nubers

The Sestso assembly, which soon turned into a rally, made it possible to bring

out into the open the battle for nusbere. which has been the main bone of contention
in the crisis between the two factions. the "Carrillista" and the "Nationalists,"
from the beginning. The presence of about 2,000 people in Sestao, most of whom

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were old members past the age of 40. actually facilitated the possibility of deter-
mining the ratio of forces between Ormazabal and Lerchundi. Thus if the EPK has
about 4,500 members in the Basque homeland today, it seems safe to say that the
factions. and the various organizations. currently share that membership almost
evenly.

The dissolution or expulsion of the EPK Central Connittee took place on 26 October
following a meeting held in Hadrid by the Secretariat of the PCB Central Col-ittee.
This decision. which brought about the final split between Madrid and the M
leadership, was made after a month of intense arguing, in which the "Carrillist"
faction did not accept the process of convergence with the BB [Basque Left]-BIA

or the decisions of its Central Comittee, but did demand that a special congress
be held.

The EPK Central Comittee. with a majority of Lerchundi supporters, rejected the
scheduling of this inediate special congress and considered it possible only after
the integration process was completed. It also penalized several members of the
secessionist wing, including Ornazabal. Tueros and Latierro.

With the dissolution of the Central Comittee, the wishes of Basque "Carrillists"
were granted: The PCB Cantral Comittee's explicit support guaranteed their
secessionist policy and enabled them to organize another parallel party. 0f the
65 members of the present EPIC Central Comittee, only 19 became members of the
new provisional committee appointed by Carrillo.

The EPK general secretary, who net with his associates that same night, considered
the expulsion to be a crude maneuver, stating that ”Santiago Carrillo and the PCB
leadership have encouraged the m's division and the alteration of its policy.
Unable to do so democratically. they have resorted to patently illegal. authoritarian
aethods. thus the responsibility for the schism is exclusively their own."

The split was then final and each opposing faction made great efforts to regroup

its supporters.

According to Miguel Quintas, a political official of the Urola region. the process
and crisis within the EPK had been developing since the Fourth Congress was held
and was subsequently confirmed in the 10th Congress in Madrid. The Urola group's
"political intuition" brought on an inediate reaction from the area's commist
officials, who were the first in the Basque country to voice their opposition:
"Forging ahead of other groups, we oppose this text and demand that a special
congress be called."

However. in the opinion of both Miguel Quintas and Nestor Raw. an old PCB member
and now an official of the Zarauz organisation. "Neither our separation from the
PCE nor the organic dissolution of the party in the Basque homeland can be accepted
under any circuastanccs." Rapp stated more forcefully that “we wanted to rejuvenate
the party; they were given key posts on the Executive Co-ittee and despite the
confidence which we showed in them, they did not do likewise. They believed that
we were going to act like sheep, but they were wrong."

A serious split also took place in the capital of San Sebastian. Thus Ignacio
Latierro, the leader of the "Carrillist" faction in the province, following his
defeat in the Fourth Congress, made a harsh counterettack today: "I was convinced

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that matters would end up where they are. The climate of the Fourth Congress was
already an indication of the merger with Eli-BIA. He saw how the process of betrayal
was ap aroaching."

At party headquarters in the coulune of Portugalete, the largest headquarters in
the province, old party members, some in retirement, were caught up in endless
card games while the younger members, most of them loyal to Carrillo. prepared
for the group's meeting.

In the opinion of Dionisio hugics, a 53-year-old Babcok Wilcox employee and a party
member since the 1960's, the merger between the leadership of EPK and BB-EIA "is
not a convergence. it is a cop-out. we did not negotiate in this instance, we

gave up." Proud of his eight Basque surnames. Dionisio said that Basquism should
not be confused with nationalism: "I am more Basque than Garaikoetxea, but I con-
sider myself an exploited worker and I am therefore with the PCB."

Jose Gil, a 65-year-old Andalusian, Angel Antmes. a 37-year-old l’attremaduran and
blast-ftn'nace foreman. and Manuel Pelipes, a 76-year-old former anti-Franco campaigner,
all agree that the present EPK leadership has betrayed its promises with the PCB

and that they will never accept their-departure. "We counmists must be columnists
before anything else and being comunist is the most important thing. We do not
reject leftist unity, but we reject our party selling out to the Basque heft."

According to Roberto Lerchundi's group, supported to a large extent by Alave,
Navarre and Guipuzcoa and by the groups of greater Bilbao and other areas in the
province of Vizcaya. these accusations are unfounded and the secessionists, by
their position, have dishonored the agreements approved by the majority in the
last congress.

The need for convergence with the Eli-BIA emerged after a clear process of analysis
following the election defeat suffered by its party in the last elections. The
Lerchundi faction, now a majority of the leadership, noted several months ago that
the political process in the Basque homeland was different and that it would re-
quire a different approach. The group thus reached the conclusion that leftist

state parties had made a mistake in their policy concerning the Basque region and

that with only lo percent of the vote, they could not attain power through an election.
It was therefore necessary to redefine party strategy and to strengthen the left

on the basis of a union of nonantagonistic forces.

For Txemi Centers, a Workers Omissions leader and a current member of the EPK
Executive Comittee. the analysis made sense: "we realized," the young Bilbao
economist remarked. "that the process had to be accelerated after the Fourth Congress,
because we saw that following the 10th Congress in Madrid, the PCB would begin

to isolate the faction in favor of change. because the BIA was going to hold its
congress and we would have found ourselves with another party. There was no more

time left; we therefore decided to play our card of 12 September."

In the Basque region, the "Carrillist" faction, sure of Madrid's support. went
on the offensive. The sale of the weekly Wilt, the official organ of the BPK,
was banned in prooOrmazabal groups; rowdy picketera boycotted several meetings
of leaders; discussions concerning the first draft document for the merger between
the BPK and BIZ-BIA were terminated. Roberto Lerchundi's articles in HUNDO 0BREBO

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

were criticized while Ormszabal and his allies had extensive coverage in the official
PCB publication. Ties were even quickly established with relatives of party where
on the left bank of the Bilbao estuary. These rather undemocratic methods, according
to the Ierchundi faction, resurrected "the PCE’s meddling and old Stalinist methods."

Santiago' s Threats

According to Lerchundi. the schism was inevitable and its history dates back to
September 1980. "Tomas Tueros. Ramon Ornatabal and myself were owned by Santiago.
During that meething, Carrillo told us that there were only two alternatives: either
we would let ourselves be dragged down by an independence movement and terrorism.
something which the PCB could not allow. or there would he a merger with the Basque
Left. Be prop need to us that the Seventh Resolution of the congress be changed

and I refused. Annoyed. Carrillo told me that just as he had made a sacrifice.

3 years ago. to Ornazabal of the m General Secretariat, now I would have to try

to bring about party unity. adding that the important thing was unity. even though
the party was mistaken in its policy."

Following that meeting, Lerchundi said that Carrillo began to hold secret meetings
with Ormazabal and his allies. right after the Fourth Congress.

"Several days before the 10th Congress," Lerchundi said, "Carrillo asked me again
to reorganize the Basque Executive Conittee. When I refused, Santiago warned
me: 'I'm going to go after you in the 10th Congress.”

Following this split, the two EPK factions both scheduled congresses for this month,

on 15 and 22 November. Although lerchundi will have the support of most of his
party's cadres, as well as that of the membership's professional and cultural groups.
Ramon Ormazabal and his supporters will group together a large part of the working
world. most of them immigrants, and the important support of the Workers CoI-iasions
leadership.

Single Class Consciousness
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 9 Nov 81 p 47

[Article by Rauiro Pinilla]

[Text] Many people are shocked over the terrible internal war from which we Basque
comunists are suffering and by the confrontation between some of us and the PCB.

But not only did this have to happen, it will also prove beneficial. It is enormous-
ly sad, because it means the breakup of a family, but it will be beneficial in the
long run. It cannot be termed merely a conventional struggle for power. but rather
a struggle between two concepts of power, between two concepts of the party. It

is a struggle between those who wish to perpetuate a party with a strong governing
apparatus and those of us who are seeking a political group whose power would be
distributed down to the lowest levels.

The 10th PCB Congress did not approve any of the proposed changes which we comunists
of particular nationalities or regions submitted to it. We are accused of being
nationalists, independence advocates. mavericks. we are none of those things and

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I an none of those things: at least not insofar as middle-class nationalism is
understood. which is the only kind of nationalism that we have in the Basque region

today.

One of the ultimate goals of the new EIA-EPK political force is a peoples' Europe
in a socialist Europe. following a total development of self-goverment, of self-
dctermination. of which our present constitution is s first step.

One of the conditions which the PCB specified for giving us its blessing on the
alliance with the Basque Left was that the resulting group would declare that it
was Eurocomunist. The hell with conditional I prefer to act like a Burocomunist
rather than just be called one.

Comunists outside the Basque comtry have told me: "At least you have an immediate
way out (union with the BIA), but what will we do if the PCB deserts us?" It is
impossible to talk about leftist unity and limit ourselves to sunicipel agreements
with the P803 [Spanish Socialist Workers Party]. The PCB would have to be amenable
to the establishaent. in the Basque region and anywhere else, of a new united leftist
force, as would the P803.

In the Basque country, we are trying to unite two working worlds, the nationalist
and the socialist. which have thus far been irreconcilable. in a single class con-
sciousness. No one has taken this project seriously, except perhaps, among the
comunists. Juan Astigarrabia. a minister in the Basque government of 1936. But
he was expelled from the party when the domestic and centralistic policy was
established, which has led us to today's almost testimonial EPK, which adds to the
dead weight cannon to any party that .is behind the tines, its separation from so
individual a society as that of the Basques.

Thus this is the state of leftist unity in the Basque country. This is the up-
to-date record of the principle of eliminating the gap between nationalist and
socialist workers. Santiago Carrillo has to understand that this is extremely
fortunate as a step toward socialism. Even though it entails painful splits. His
"national reconciliation" in 1956 also implied a break with an outnoded comunist
past. I ask Carrillo-—to whom Spanish democracy owes so much—to be amenable to
our "national Basque reconciliation."

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Information y Revistas, S.A.

11915
080: 3110/36 END

2%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY