FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10244
8 January 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
more

Jras publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and mterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was suamrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OP
MTBRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(P000 1/82)

CONTENTS

TERRORIS‘
SPAIN

Detention of Key Terrorist Nay Prustrate New ETA Strategy
(cho 16, 23 Nov 91) OCOOOII...OOOOOIOOOIOOOODOOOCOO...

POLITICAL
FBIERAL REPUBLIC OF Gm

Juso Chief Piecyk Interviewed on Pacifism, SPD
(Willi Piecyk Interview; comm: DELLA SERA, 9 Nov 81)..

FRANCE

Regis Debray Reflects on Political Philosophy
(Regis Debray Interview; LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR, various

data?» ono...coo.a0.0.0.00oooooooona-ooaaoooooooooc.0000.

I TALY

Makno Opinion Poll on Present Government
(mnato speroni; IL mm, 13 Nov 81) OOOOOOOOOOOOIIOOOO.

PORTUGAL

Portuguese Economic, Political Circumstances Surveyed
(Carlos Caceres Hontciro; CAHBIO 16, 16 Nov 81) .........

-a- [III-WE-ISO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ("'th IAI. U3}. UNIJ

SPAIN

Ordonez Explains Desertion From UCD, New Party's Ideology
(Francisco Fernando Ordonez Interview; GAMBIO 16,

15 NOV 81) 00000coconoooooooooonoooooooooooooooooonooooooo

Carrillo Defends His Methods of banning PCB
(38":in camllo Inteme"; CAKBIO 16, ” Nov 81) no.0.-

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TERRORISM SPAIN

DETENTION OF KEY TERRORIST HAY FRUSTRATE NEH ETA STRATEGY
Madrid CAMBIO l6 in Spanish 23 Nov 8! pp 55-6&

[Text] If the Antiterrorist Central Brigade, a branch of the General Headquarters
of Information, had not arrested Juan Antonio Madariaga Brezuma, the head

of the information commands of the military wing of ETA [Basque Fatherland

and Liberty] in Madrid, just l2 months ago, a bus filled with commissioned

and noncommissioned army officers would have been blown to bits before this

coming 20 November, the anniversary of General Franco's death.

The military wing of ETA had chosen as its target one of the buses that

leave the army Ministry on Prim Street every morning between 0730 and 0800
hours and after picking up various groups of commissioned and noncommissioned
officers in downtown Madrid, take Castellana Avenue to Csstilla Square and
then continue along Colmenar Viejo Highway to the El Goloso Barracks.

According to CAMBIO 16's information, two of the army's most important units
are quartered in these barracks: the "Alcazsr de Toledo" and "Asturias 31"
regiments, both belonging to Armored Division No I.

This division, which has more than 14,000 men, 210 tanks, 66 cannons, 122
artillery pieces, 290 armored vehicles and more than l,500 support vehicles,
is the Spanish Army's most important unit, and it could take Madrid militarily
in a matter of 2 hours.

The ETA terrorists' planned assassination of some 50 commissioned and non-
commissioned officers from the Armored Division was nothing more and nothing
less than a bid to achieve what ultraconservative sectors had been trying

to do long before 23 February: "move" the army against our democracy and
constitution.

Appointment in France

"Dictatorships are obviously the best medium in which terrorists can engage
in proselytism," a high-level Interior Ministry official told CAMBIO 16.

The plan to dynamite the bus carrying the army officers was communicated
to the information conmund of ETA's military wing in Madrid last September
by the Basque terrorist organization's three top leaders: Domingo Iturbe
Abasolo, alias "Txomin," the number one commander of the military machine;

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Lorenzo Santiago Lasa Michelena, alias "Txiquierdi," the head of the illegal
cammmnda, and Jose Luis Ansola Larranaga, "Pello e1 Viejo," the head of
the information division.

Maria del Carmen Gonzalez Penalva, one of the members of the infatuation
command in Madrid and who is currently being acught by the police, was in
charge of contacting the ETA leadership in France.

After a rendez-vous in a cafe in Saint Jean de Luz, "Txomin," ”Txiquierdi"
and "Pello el Viejo" ordered Gonzalez Penalva and her companion, Juan Antonio
Hadariaga Erezuna, to put aside all plans that they had under way and to
devote themselves exclusively to the search for a bridge or a sewer along
Colmenar Viejo Highway into Madrid where they could place between l00 and

150 kilos of "gone-2" to dynamite one of the army buses heading for El Coloso.

The information had to be in BTA's possession by mid-October in order for
it to have enough time to decide on the final positioning of the charges.

Jose Antonio Hadariago Erezuma, the head of BTA's information commands in
the Spanish capital, was unable to carry out the plans. Ten days after
the Basque terrorist organization's top leaders had met in southern France,
agents of the Central Information brigade captured him on Orense Street

in Madrid. his companion, Haria del Carmen Gonzalez Penalva, fled Spain
with the police hot on her heels.

Change of Strategy

Hadariaga Brezuma's arrest did, however, help State Security Forces to famil-
iarize themselves with BTA's plans in Madrid and, in particular, with their basic
guidelines, Which at present entail a major change of strategy. According

to the studies done by the Interior Ministry on the information gained from
Hadariaga, the ETA's military wing plans to abandon isolated attacks on srmy
officers, commanders and generals and to assault them as a group.

“The ETA, which has so far gone about shooting at individual Armed Forces
officers and generals," one of the Interior Ministry's main analysts pointed
out, "has now realized that picking off victims one-by-one is not going

to 'move' the Armed Forces and that they need to undertake more ambitious
activities. Therefore, they are going to attack the Armed Forces as an
institution."

The government has charted its own strategy to counter ETA terrorism. For
the past 2 months the police has focused all of its efforts on wiping out

all of BTA's infrastructure in the interior. The terrorists' operational
capacity has thus been greatly reduced, as well as their chances of launching
amajorattack in which several commands of action would take part simul-
taneously.

2
FOR10FFﬂ3A1.USE(HVLY
The fact that ETA allegedly intends to attack the army as an institution
does not mean that it is going to stop killing individual military officers.

The State Security Forces are well aware of this, as they found more than
50 file cards on army and navy colonels and generals among the papers that
Hadariaga Erezuma had in his apartment on Hadera Street in Madrid.

Through Madariaga Erezuma, ETA's military wing had maintained almost permanent
surveillance of the army officers living in the military housing on Santa
Engracia and San Francisco de Sales streets and were familiar with practically

all of the vehicles they used. the routes they took, their work hours and
their established habits.

For example. the terrorists knew that a major general who until a short
time ago lived on Santa Engracia Street took the same car every day: a blue
Seat-124. They were also familiar with his routine: He left home between
0945 and 1000 hours, got in his official car and then, a couple of hundred
meters past his house, turned right onto Haudes Street.

After studying his route thoroughly for a month. Juan Antonio Hadariaga
Erezuma marked one of the "yield right of way" signs on Haudes Street with
a cross. This was the exact spot to assassinate the general, because his
car had to come practically to a stop there to let the cars coming in the
opposite direction pass.

The King as a Target

Also found in Hadariaga's possession was a similar plan to assassinate Army
Chief of Staff Jose Gabeiras Montero; ETA knew where he lived, the kind

of official car he drove and the number of police escorts who accompany
him everywhere.

Two other high-ranking military officers were also under "permanent surveillance"
by the information commands of BTA's military wing: Generals Jose Juste
Fernandez, a 63-year old nativelofhadrid and the former commander of Brunete
Armored Division No l, and Felix Alvarez-Arenas Pacheco, a 68-year old former
army minister.

But the terrorists were giving "priority attention“ not only to the army.
Among the documents that the police seized from Hadariaga in his apartment
at 57 Madera Street in Madrid was a gray folder with the words "Royal Family."

Inside it, agents from the Superior Police Force found an extensive report
on King Juan Carlos's overseas trips and a detailed study analyzing the
security measures that the monarch customarily takes during his vacations.

In other folders the police found extensive documentation on the suppliers
to Zarzuela Palace. the royal residence, as well as detailed information
on a number of persons close to the royal family. One of them is the Marquis

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
a‘vn \us abllw was. an.“

of Alburquerque, Beltran Osorio y Diez de la Rivera, Juan de Borbon's secretary,
who was under surveillance for a month and a half. hadsriaga sent the infor-
mation on all his movements to ETA leaders in France.

By all indications, the ETA's military wing wanted to set its gunsights

on King Juan Carlos or well-known figures close to his family or professional
circle, as happened last May with Lt Gen Joaquin de Valenzuela, the commander
of his military picket, in order to force the monarch to institute harsher
rule in the country, which would benefit ETA's interests.

Surveillance of 600 Individuals

In addition to the king and ranking military officers, some 600 others have
been under surveillance by the terrorist group, which was planning attempts

on their lives. The reports on these individuals (politicians, judges,

newsmen and businessmen) were found in a more than 2,000-page file divided_
into 45 folders of different colors, which the police discovered in Hadariaga’s
possession when they arrested him.

According to police estimates, these 65 folders contain the license plate
numbers of more than 1,000 official, unmarked and private vehicles and the
addresses of at least 800 homes that the ETA had put on its lists so that
it could later select its targets.

The police also found in the Hadera Street apartment detailed diagrams of
Carabanchel, herrera de la Mancha and Zamora prisons, as well as two huge
maps of Madrid dotted with fOur different color thumb-tacks. The map showed
the exact location of the homes of the four categories of persons whom ETA
was planning to assassinate. The red tacks represented judges; the green
ones, Superior Police Force officials; the blue ones, military officers,

and the black ones, journalists.

The file, considered the most important confiscated from ETA over the past
IO years, also contained some surprises. For example, the Basque terrorist
group kept an up-to-date index-card system on the country's main political
parties: the Democratic Center Union, the Spanish Socialist workers Party,
the Spanish Communist Party, Popular Alliance and New Force.

Party Headquarters

These cards listed the sites of the various party headquarters, the arrival

and departure schedules of their main leaders, the model and license plate
number of their vehicles and the security measures that some of them employed.
This information seems to indicate that at some point ETA might have entertained
the idea of firing on Manuel Frags lribarne, Santiago Carrillo or Felipe
Gonzalez.

1;
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SM ONLY

In late March I980 the Basque terrorists also had plans to take the life
of Fernando Abril Martorell, who was then economic vice president under
Adolfo Suarez's fourth 1dministratiou.

According to the information that this magazine had access to, in mid-February
Madariaga Erezuma, the head of the ETA information commands in Madrid, happened
to discover where Abril Martorell lived in the northern part of Madrid.

For a month and a half, Madariaga kept the former vice president under surveillance
once or twice a week (so as not to arouse suspicions among his escort car

drivers), and he learned that Abril Martorell's vehicle, a Seat-l3], left

Pedro Muguruza Street between 0930 and 1000 hours and followed the same

route: Pedro Muguruza-Padre Damian-Paseo de la Habana-Paseo de la Castellana.

Driving his own car, Madariaga covered the same route as Abril Martorell's
official car some 20 times and came to this conclusion: The ideal spot to
assassinate him was at the entrance to the tunnel that connects Paseo de
la Habana with Casrellana.

Prime Minister Adolfo Suarez beat ETA to the punch, however, In the summer
of 1980, he renounced his confidence in Vice President Abril Martorell,

who thus left the administration, and the terrorists automatically abandoned
the plans they had formulated to kill him.

Magistrates

National Court Magistrate siro Garcia Perez also had a terrorist command

on his heels for 2 months. Madariaga Erezuma had located his home on Rosario
del Pino Street in mid-I980. Garcia Perez, who had a police escort, according
to the ETA report, drove a yellow Seat-126 at the time and often changed
routes to his office at the National Courthouse.

Sometimes he went by Cuzco Square, down Castellana and up to Colon Square,
and other times he detoured onto Orenae Street.

"The best spot to execute him," Madariaga Brezuma wrote to ETA leaders,
”is a 'yield right of way' sign on Orense Street." ETA was unable to carry
out its designs, however.

Shortly after the report got to the group's leaders in France, Judge Siro
Garcia Perez moved, and the terroriSts were unable to locate his new home.
They did, however, find out where Ricardo Varon Cobos, the regular judge
in Court No l at the National Courthouse, lived.

Varon Cobos was not listed in the 1980 Madrid telephone directory. But

the ETA military wing knew that prior to his post in the National Courthouse
he had been assigned to other courts in Madrid. The terrorists then looked
in past telephone directories and found out his address and telephone number.

5
son orncm. use om:
A'Va\ vaahv‘aw have. use..-

Ricardo Vsron lived at the time in the Ventss district. Outside his house
was s newspaper stand, and every 2 or 3 days Madsriaga Ereauma bought s
pape: there. As he leaned against s doorpost and read his paper, he watched
the Court No l judge get into his official car and head for Salesas Square.
the site of Madrid's courts.

On 25 September, when the police arrested Madariaga on Orense Street in
Madrid, he had just been conducting surveillance on Prosecutor Miguel Ibanes
Garcia Velsaco and Police Commissioner Andres Gomez Margarida, the former
superior chief of police in La Coruna and adviser to the single Antiterrorist

Command.

Some months before. the commando chief had also been following other judges
and prosecutors, among them Jose Maria Gil Albert, the government attorney
general, and Ricardo Mijas Palscios and Jose Antonio de la Camps, Madrid
court judges, whom ETA intended to assassinate.

In contrast. they were planning to kidnap Eduardo Aznar Costa, a businessman.
The ETA military wing had even pinpointed the spot: at the door to his office
on Alcals Street, between Independencia Square and cibeles. It remained

for them only to set a date.

The terrorists, who had been monitoring his every movement, knew that the
director of Aznar Shipping lived in a housing development on the outskirts

of Madrid, where it would be very difficult to accomplish their plans without
the police being alerted within 5 minutes. They also knew that he arrived

at his office around 1100 hours and usually left at 1300 hours.

According to the ETA information command's report, Eduardo Asnar drove a
green Mercedes and was almost always accompanied by a Renault-l2 as an escort.

By referring to the I977 Finance Ministry lists and "Dicodi," the "heraldic
guidebook" of Spain's entrepreneurs, the ETA military wing knew of the Aznsr
family's fortune and had found out that Eduardo was the president of Ferarco,
Nacional Hispanics Aseguradora and Conpania Espanola de Pinturss "Inter-
national." He was also an adviser to the Urquijo Bank and the managing
director of Aznar Shipping.

Other Businessmen

The same kidnapingvfor-profit scheme included other Madrid businessmen:

Luis Valls Tabener. a member of Opus Dei and president of the Banco Popular
Espanol; Santiago Foncillas, president of the Businessmen's club, Preciados
Galleries and the multinational corporation Westinghouse; Antonio Enrich
Valls, president of Carten and Aceros de Vizcaya and a board member of Bank-
union and Union Levantina, and Eloy Cenaano Martinez, the director general
of Michelin.

6
FOR orncm. use ONLY
The most complete file card, however, was on Basque businessman Luis Olarra,
the owner of Bodegas Olarra, Aceros Olarra and a former royal senator.

To judge by the information in the dossier that the terrorists were keeping

on him, the ETA was interested in all of his movements around Madrid, where

the businessman from Vizcaya, whom the organisation has threatened on several
occasions, generally takes lengthy vacations, ensconced in the home of relatives
or friends and surrounded by bodyguards.

The terrorists had all this kind of information on CAMBIO 16's main executives,
on the editor of DIARIO 16, Pedro J. Ramirez, and of BL PAIS, Juan Luis
Cebrian, and on the political correspondent of the Miguel Yuste Street paper,
Miguel Angel Aguilar, the former editor of DIARIO 16.

Among the bits of information found in ETA's possession (five pages hand-
written by the head of the Madrid information couumnds) were the license
plate numbers of official CAMBIO I6 cars, the arrival and departure times

of the magazine's top executives, and their home addresses and phone numbers.

The ETA military wing also had extensive reports on the editor of BL PAIS
and on journalist Miguel Angel Aguilar, reports drawn up over a period of
several months of investigation and surveillance around Madrid.

I'All of this clearly shows," one of the newsmen in question told CAMBIO

16, "that the blind terroristsin BTA'smdlitarywingare worried about only one
kind of press, the only press in this country that has the democratic legiti-
macy to combat them with the only weapon that journalists have: their type-
writers.”

COPYRIGHT: I981, lnformacion y Revistas, S.A.

8753
C50: 3|]0/66

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JUSO CRIB! PIBCYK INTERVIEHED 0N PACIFISH, SPD

Milan comm DELLA SERA in Italian 9 Nov 81 p 2

[Interview with Willi Piacyk by Pietro Sornani: "We Don't want World Bar III To
Start in Gernany"]

[Text] Hilli Piecyk, "June", leader. explains the success of
the pacifist novenent. he believes that Bonn can do som-
thing to disassociate itself fron Reagan's policies.

Bonn-'l‘he wave of pacifisn which has beset West Germany in the past several nonths
has surprised political observers by its alplituds. and raised a nudaer of ques-
tions, cone of then disturbing. on the fate of the nation. they persons have
interpreted the mvenent as a rebirth of Gernsn nationalisn. aining to reunite
the two German states by virtue of their neutrality.

I have asked Willi Piecyk, one of the leaders of the pacifist novenent and presi-
dent of the Social Denocratic youth organization, for his opinion on the matter.

me “Jusos,” as his organization is generally known. number 350.000 and speak for
the party's radical wing. 0n various occasions in the past they have given their
leadership a good deal of trouble and. still today, they openly dispute policies

followed by the government and Chancellor Schnidt.

A self-educated forner police-an. Piecyk looks younger than his 33 years. Under
his seening ingenuity. however. lurks a considerable political acunen.

Violence and the Left

[Question] The 1 October denonstration in Bonn was a great success-but a suc-
cess for whom?

[Answer] For everyone. For us because we had to combat the opposition forces of
the party. Our greatest success was a total lack of violence. A lot of people
associate the Left with violence, and they hoped that sou untoward incident
would afford them a pretext to denounce the denonstration.

[Question] Has it changed anything?

[Answer] Certainly. The Christian Denocrats had been talking about creating a
"popular front" but, with that enormous crowd that turned out for the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UIfILIAL UN: UNLI

demonstration, they had to call off their plan. Schmidt must have realised that
the pacifist movement is much stronger than he thought. The demonstration, too,

started a discussion on our security policy, and made people understand that a
nuclear war is indeed possible, and that it can be limited to Europe, just as

Reagan pointed out .

[Question] You. don't think, then, that the demonstrators' attitude was purely
negative?

[Answer] Absolutely not. How can you say an attitude is negative when it calls

for a denuclearized zone in Europe? If anything, some of our slogans were too
idealistic, but that is only natural in nanifestations of the kind.

[Question] Is pacifism part of a broader novement, with ar-ments only one of
its preoccupations?

[Answer] Pacifism should be put within a global political context: the dialogue
between North and South, and the battle against social differences, both in

Germany and on the international scale. But right now, we consider the most
urgent issue to be the stockpiling of am in Europe by the two superpowers.

'lhe National Question

[Question] Pacifism is common to many European countries, but in Germany it has

different characteristics. Would you say that it could be a short cut to
reunification?

[Answer] In the past, the national question in Germany was nonopolized by the
Right. Adenauer often spoke of reunification but, in fact, he carried out a
policy that divided the country more than ever. All over the world. the Left

has always upheld people's right to sovereignty, from San Salvador to Chile, but
that has never happened in Germany. Yet, neither of the two Ger-an states

enjoys full sovereignty, and Reagan showed that in his decision on the neutron
bout. Reunifying Germany and setting up a denuclearized zone are part of SPD's
program, even if Schaidt forgets that sometines.

[Question] Is it true. as we read in the papers, that a new nationalism. also
leftist, is becoming entrenched in Germany?

[Answer] Not in the strict sense of the word. But people have cone to realize
that another war. if it comes, would break out in this country. It happened
twice in the past, and it can happen again in the future.

[Question] By opposing Euromissiles, are you harming 81’!) by playing into the
hands of the Christian Demcrats, who favor them? Isn't this a contradiction?

[Answer] The SPD is not the government. The problem is to maintain the party's
identity, not to keep it in power. A question like that of NATO missiles must

transcend political interests .

9
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR 0|-'|-‘l( 1“. USE ONLY

[Question] There is a lot of talk about "Operation Zero.” Would the USSR
accept it?

[Answer] I hope so. We do not know how such the USSR is willing to concede;
therefore, in order to find out, we nust negotiate. me difficulty here is that
negotiations require so much time, and NATO is couitted to install the Iissiles
by 1983. Even the Americans accept "Operation Zero," but it is not clear whether
they really want it or whether they are exploiting it in some sort of tactical

p10!-

[Question] Will you stage protest demonstrations during Brezhnev's visit at the
end of this month?

[Answer] Like other groups, we will undertake some sort of initiative, but we
have not yet decided in what form. We are in favor of Brezhnev's visit, but we
are against the Soviet SS-20's.

[Question] Would you say that SPD has lost contact with the population of
Germany. particularly the young?

[Answer] Not the entire party. 'lhe government has made many mistakes in the
recent past. thus inducing the people to adopt a psychological attitude that
sparked the pacifist movement. Certainly it is not the government's fault if
Reagan is in the [bite House, but it can do something to disassociate itself

cospletely from his policies.

Reconstituting the 5?!)
[Question] Is it necessary to reconstitute the SP1)?

[Answer] Yes. While it is still in power, 3?!) must recover its identity. begin-
ing at the base. SPD's single alternative is a better SPD. We have no guarantee

that if it passes to the opposition. the party would be capable of bettering its
program; to the contrary, the facts show that when it was in the opposition, it

leaned more to the Right than it. does now. In any event, I am not sure that in
1984 (when the legislative term will normally expire), SPD will still be in the

saddle. If it is not, in my opinion, that would be no tragedy. Unfortunately,
most people who vote for SP0 are insensitive to the most pressing issues, like
pacifism; they like the small, everyday issues that affect their interests more
directly. This is true especially of the working class.

[Question] Is there a leadership problem in SPD?

[Answer] Everyone knows that Brandt and Schmidt differ in their political views.
Brandt has a broader vision; his "0stpolitik," for example, has left its mark on
German history. We mst realize, however, that the situation is more difficult
today. Schmidt errs in behaving as if nothing has changed, as if no econonic
crisis existed in Germany and the rest of the world. Instead. he persists in
believing that it is still possible to maintain constant growth. As I see it.
890 today must confront two problems: the pacifist movement and unemployment.

If these problems are not resolved, things could go badly for our party.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
oaoo- oon..-. so. I .n u... o

"No" to Buronissiles at the SPD Saar Congress

Boar-At the Saar 890 Congress last night, the great njority of delegates dis-
approved the installation of medium range nissiles in Heat Germany. in protest
against the rum decision of 12 Deceaber 1979.

In a resolution passed by 80 percent of the delegates, the Saar SPD asked the
Soviet Union to reduce the nuaber of its atomic warheads aimed against Europe
to the 1978 level, and objected to the production of neutron bouts as well as

cheaical and biological arns.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editoriale del "Carriers della Sera" s.a.s.

9653
080: 3104/51

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (lI‘TK‘lAI. l'SlI‘. ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

REGIS DEBRAY REHECTS 0N POLITICAL mnesom

Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 10 Oct 81 pp 106. 107, 109, 112, 113, 116,
121. B3

[Interview with Regis Debray by Jean-Paul Enthoven: "Regis Dabray'sc-Long. larch"]

[Text] Prom Che to Hitterrand? From the Third World to high
public office? From leftism to social democracy? These, ap—:
parently. are Regis Debray's contradictory itineraries. Never-
theless, by publishing. very recently. in the Gallimard publish-
ing house. the book on which he worked for 10 years-"Critique
de 1:: ram pontique" (Critique of Political Reasonl—the
new adviser to the president of the Republic takes the risk of
finally saying who he is and what he thinks. Jean-Paul Enthoven
met him in his office, in the executive mansion.

Regis Debray: The essential thing, for me, is to know how to differentiate between
what lasts and what does not last. And a book can last. It can—it should-vhold
out against the moods of the moment. With regard to the rest...

(The "rest"? In view of the circumstances, it is difficult. however, not to take
it into account. Seated under the president's portrait, behind a desk decorated
with acanthus motifs, and while ministerial limousines come and go on the gravel
of the executive mansion. Iegis Debray is no longer only a young man already less
young and vaguely restless. His moustache, forurly Nietzschean, has been disci-
plined. The knot of his tie has been drawn tight. Everywhere. file folders, tele-
phones. embassy calling cards. noiseless presence of secretaries and ushers.)

Regis Debray: Having said that. if one wants, like me. to reflect on politics.
it is not a bad thing to rub shoulders with everyday practice. That is an expe-
rience that an intellectual would be wrong in neglecting.

(Then I say to myself: Debray. but which one? Depending on the date, there are
several versions: The coerade of Fidel, of Allende. or the novelist liked by the
Femina ladies? The prisoner of Camiri or the irascible essayist who legislates,
in Paris, on the treason of the clerks? The "dangerous leftist" mentioned by Ameri-

can columnists, or the "adviser" who received me, one Wednesday, in the palace
where he lives his new life every day? After all, those who knew Hslrsux in Terruel

before finding him again, 20 years later, in marble halls. know that nothing is truly
improbable in the field of reincarnation. Sierra? Bolivia, a lyric illusion?

12
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
Milt “Fl-"It 1M. USO-Z "NIX

when one has never gone there, it is ticklish to reproach those who come back from
there for no longer being there. Regis bebray, the undesirable, the petit-bourgeois
caught between two fires and four walls, is from now on a master of high officialdom
at' ‘hat is the way it is. Can it have been forgotten. since the time of the moral-
ists, that men are sometimes as different from themselves as from others?)

Regis Debray: I have always thOught that an intellectual did not have to produce
"ideas," but rather transform his ideas into practical activities, incorporate
them in reality.

LE mum. OBSERVATEUR: Could that mean,- for you, that nothing has really changed
since 10 Hay? -

Regis Debray: What has changed, what has changed me, is that I have learned to
be more modest. Since that date, I have discovered how much I did not know. The
state, as a thought category, was familiar to me, but Ihardly knew the everyday
state.

And if I speak of "modesty," it is purposely. He intellectuals tend to believe
that we are entitled to produce the truth. Now, I have discovered that. in the
submerged part of the state, in the so-called "public" administration—and which
is. after all, not very public--there are people never shown on televisioa. People
who, because of this. are nameless and who conceal a mass of experience. of subtle—
ties, of maturity of which I had not idea. I assure you that the breed of the
great civil servants deserves consideration.

LE NOWEL OBSERVATEUR: Then, from this point of view, might not the "Critique
de la raison politique" that you have just published lag somewhat behind yourn-ex-
perience?

aegis Debray: I do not think so, insofar as this "kitique" is a theoriet's book
and not the book of an intellectual.

LB NOUVBI. OBSERVATEUR: Which means.. .

Regis Debray: That the theorist is, differently from the intellectual, the one
who tells the truth with no concern for the effects of that truth on his life and
on the life of others. The theorist is a geomatrist or a psychoanalyst and he
could in no case be held responsible. In this connection, and to anticipate your
objections, I take upon myself the cleavage that there may be between my work as
a theorist and my activity as an intellectual. There is the whole difference be-
tween them that separatesa manual on geonetry from an architect's plan.

(The "geometry manual" weighs. in this case, 468 pages. You proceed in it by de-
grees through a "dialectics" and an "analysis" that profess to be without conces-
sion. The project? To answer this question: "th must men talk nonsense as
soon as they live in a group?" Therefore, it is a question, in this "Critique."
of going back to the source, toward the obscure "situation of the possibility of
collective delirium." Debray. a Kantian in spite of himself, specifies: "For
a long time, politics concealed politics from me (...) Not in the sense in which
one train conceals another. but in which that train conceals the rails on which
it runs. There are many runs, many speeds, but only one railroad—or station of

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFIFIAI. IISI-Z 0le

the Cross.' Re even adds, moreover, that his long tracking sign at nothing less than
expressing "mankind's political unconscious." The vastness of the task disconcerts

a possible skeptic. He should tell ourselves: Debray works here in magnificence,
and of all the deliriums that he makes compatible in his demonstration, the one

that drives him to rise so high--to rationalize irrationality, to think the uncon-
scious or to name the "constants" in our history, is not the least strange.)

LE NOUVBL OBSERVATBUR: th is is possible to read, from the first page in your
book, that ”the one who engages in an action is different from the one who theor-
izes on the general conditions of that action"? And, farther on, that "this duality
must be cherished passionately, like a secret weapon?"

Regis Debray: True. But "secret weapon" does not mean capability, held in reserve.
of contradicting oneself. of reversing one's judgment. It is simply the "secret
weapon" of freedom and ofone's rationally unjustifiable choices.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Then, what can the "intellectual" discover in the field
of politics of which the "theorist" was still unaware?

Regis Debray: It is less a question of discovery than of verification. And what
I verify is that the power is. first of all, an administration of impotence.

LB NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: That kind of paradox resembles the rich man's contempt
offortune, the graduate's indifference toward diplomas.

Regis Debray: Wrong. When I say that the power is only an administration of im-
potence, I describe it at the minimum. It is, in fact. a system of relative in-
potences that balance each other and that produce a decision at the end of the
circuit. I knew that the mythology of sovereign, oaniscient power was suspect.
Now I know that it is false.

Of course, I would be wrong in measuring the impotence of others by my own. Since
10 May, I have had, personally, no power and I am always surprised that power is
attributed to me. After all, here, in the executive mansion, there is only one
person who, in addition to his authority, has real power: the president. I have
no more to say in this connection.

(He had let me know beforehand: "We talk about my book and that is all." The
rest, evidently, comes under the obligation to respect classified information.
Nevertheless. we should like to know what really happened in Angola Sweeksearlier;
what he said, or did, at the United Nations, in the White House, where he was re-
ceived at the end of September by Dick Allen. the chairman of the National Security
Council; what he thinks, or knows, about the Franco-Mexican stands on El Salvador,
on Cubans in Africa, on the Cheysson-Arsfat meeting. It would be, nevertheless,
less inconsequential than to vaticinate loftily on the summits of a "critique"

that convokes Gregory VII or Emperior Constantine. But Debray does not understand
it like that. He has been in the executive mansion for 4 months and he has been
writing his book for 10 years. In his opinion. therefore, there is no question

of establishing the authority of a "position" for himself in the machinery of state,
in order to make his theory on politics legitimate. Thus, he will inform anyone
wanting to listen to him that the "president's adviser" does not necessarily re-
semble the philosopher that he can be. He has no doubt that file folders are not
bundled like concepts.)

11:
mn omnu. use ONLY
LB NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: When Francois Mitterrand was elected, he put his 7-year
term under the gaze of three illustrious deceased persons. At the same moment,
who were the heroes of your own Pantheon?

Regis Debray: At that time. like everyone,'l was in a state of withdrawal, and.
in a state of about to find a forgetten history. Francois Hitterrand helped us
find ourselves. Heroes are less important because of what they are than because
of what they allow us to rennin. And with Giscard. national identity was breaking

up.

Having said that, I reached the point. a long time ago. of respecting, in heroes,
only obstinacy, consistency and capacity for solitude. Therefore, I like the desert
crossing of a De Gaulle or of a Hitterrand. I like the fact that those men were_
scorned for so long by those who now shower praise on them. But allegiance to

De Gaulle was akin to mystical veneration. Loyalty to Hitterrand proceeds from

a feeling of respect. I prefer that.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: Basically, in year opinion, political commitment depends
more on feeling than on ideas. Lyricism-or "respect“--inspires more decisive
convictions in you than reasoning.

Regis Debrary: That has always been true, for me as well as for a society in general.
The “International" has produced more Marxists than reading "Das Kapital." From

this point of view, we are lagging far behind in a knowledge of the emotions--
hatred, love, passions--on which our convictions are based.

As a theorist, I do not have to produce a "truth" superior to other truths. I
must explain. and only that, why there is belief--collective or individual-~in a
"truth" that may be logically weak. It is a question of breaking away from the
attitudeof.a judge who. on the overhang of history, distributes his blessings or
his curses. I say, on the contrary: Hitler. Stalin. Khomeyni exist and we cannot
impugn them like exotic monsters. Let us leave the naivety of the Illuminati, who
believed that intelligence can dissipate evil, that it suffices to pursue Jesuits.

or perverse spirits, in order to give birth to a just, reasonable society. No,
the matter is more complex. Let us ask ourselves, rather: why must men unite

not by virtue of a clear. distinct idea, but rather to make concessions to the u
least rational part of their nature?

In this sense. actually. politics depends less on logic than on emotion and the
strength of an idea is derived there. first of all, from its lyric capacit'.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: When a personis interestedlessin truth than in actual
lies, he is completely cynical.

Regis Debray: The "cynical" tonality is inherent in every activity and in every
project of knowledge. In my book. I have kept only one principle: we must rid
ourselves of the ideal of good and evil to understand what happens. in a group,-

' as soon as there is a stake and effects of power. By shunning any value judgment,
1 try to conduct myself. with regard to the nature of power, like an anatomist
confronted by a tumor. And 1 admit, as a premise, what common sense saysvvpolitics
makes one mad, savage. dangerous-and I add immediately: nothing‘happens without
reason.

15
FOR omcm. usz om
um; UH" In t at u\l \

Then. what is the reason for this endless irrationality? I state that Our age
seems to me more cruel but no less mad than others: Saint Bartholomew or goulags,
religious wars never end. Now, if the atrocity of our customs is ageless, let

us ask the only valid critical question: why most men act irrationally? Because
all that resembles a history full of noise and furor;“from where does the eternity
of that noise and that furor come?

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: In your opinion, there is no question of envisaging the
possibility of a pacified, reasonable society? Not the slightest golden age either
upstream or downstream?

Regis Debray: The group is misfortune. The collectivity is violence. And we
shall not come out of it. In other words, every project that puts forth society's
self-organization-or the disappearance of power authorities—~or self-management
in the quality of metaphysical strangely resembles concepts devoid of historicity.
Most often, exorcisms of a magic type are what promise us, once more, and under

the outward appearance of a criticism of the morrows that sing the Marxist version,
other morrows singing the Castoriadis version.

These hymns depend on incantation and I do not recognize in them a beginning of
experimental versification. Once more, through them. the impotence of men in society
to think about their impotence is observed. And then. morality. like discourses,
nauseates me.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Is it not preferable for men to feel obliged to praise
good and curse evil?

Regis Debray: That does not prevent morality from starting and finishing only
with action. and not with words.

(when Regis Debray convokes his army of shadows. he gives way with pleasure to
his oldest inclination: to discredit with a mood. with a word, with a sneer all
that is not authenticated in the history of men by heroism and by blood. One feels
judged. then, by the yardstick of a sublime, distant martyrology. One feels that
one is ridiculous and badly judged by the High Court of Tragedy to which Debray

is admitted. To do what there? Those who succeed, like him, in capitalizing on
the misfortune of the world always make an impression. They-—he--seem to tell

us: come now, no salvation witlaut a cross, no redemption without an abominable
execution. I have wondered for a long tim whether Regia Debrr,‘s real peculiarity
did not result from that very Christian fondness for suffering and sacrifice under
our de-Christianized latitudes.)

Regis Debray: Sacrifice is what makes sacred and, in order to understand politics,
it is possible, then, to become a theologian without risk. In this respect, the
basic thesis of my "Critique" is that there are two histories in one. Up to the
present time, it has been possible to analyze the history of men in their relations
with nature rather correctly. But the other history, the history of man's rela-
tionship with man, is still an enigma. While the first history is evolutive, the
second one does not budge, does not pass on. That means that the history of man
reverts back to a fixed. circular. repetitive time by immobilizing man.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)" OFFICIAL I'SI" ONI.\'

In this sense, the group's misfortune. is a constant and politics would be the science
of its management. In this area,the very notion of "progress" is illusory. Today,
no one is a better politician than Demosthenes could be in the loth century BC or

the Assyrians 3,000 years before us. The time of politics depends on an eternal
present.

LE sown. OBSRVATEUR: That "eternal present" greatly resembles the "ht-an nature"
of the philosophers. 0n the other hand, at present, it is rare to have recourse
to it....

Regis Dehray: Not at all! At present, return :to nature is in fashion. Let us
not fall from one intoxication into another, from too much history to too much
nature. Having said that. as a reader of Lucretius, Spinoza and the Stoics. the
"order of things" exists. in my opinion.

LE NOWEL OBSERVATEUR: That is an unexpected revelation. Until this recent book,
you were still believed to be a Marxist.

Regis Debray: what does that mean? Obviously, I am not a Marxist when I am a
philosopher. And if I take an interest in painting or in death, Marxism has nothing
to teach In.

On the other hand, if I have to analyze the mechanisms of profit, in France, in
the 1880's, or the struggles for power in Argentina, I obviously an a harxist.
When you construct a triangle. you all are Euclidean. Therefore, when you make
local political analysis, you all are Marxist. Of course, with regard to the vision
of the world implied by this local analysis I am not a participant in it.

(What is given here as an established fact-~‘bf course"--might surprise those who
still remember some aphorisms of the former Lenist-Castroist Debray. But the times
are far off when the rhetoric of the Teachers College student was cast in the molds
of a "revolution within the revolution." and in the tempo of the attack bugles.

By entering the publishing house of.callimard, in the very prestigious "Bibliotheque
des idees" [Library of Ideas]--where he becomes the neighbor of Herleau-Ponty.
Koyre, Foucault and Sartre-~the militant's style seems to have taken on itself

more decorum, more strictness. He retains from Marxism nothing more than the tone
and sarcasm of the young Marx. the one whose formula. steeped in Hegel and Feusr-
bach. likes to loop back on itself and to produce small local explosions in reason-
ing. The situationists had already tested the effectiveness of this literary style
that convinces more than it demonstrates and whose harmonics Debrsy has been ex-
ploring since "Les Rendez-vous manques" [The Missed Appointments]. his best book.
perhaps. writen 6 years ago "for Pierre Goldman." From then on. our author has
been quoting Saint Paul more often than Lenin and. without departing from the requi-
site asnctities, his new Holy Family no longer has the appearance of the old one.
Patristics and the history of art are more important to him than the fluctuations

of ground rent. The Councils of Nicea have replaced the congresses of Goths or
Basle. Believing that Rome. definitely, is no longer in Rome and that Debray——
frantic-~has decided to think, first of all, against what he was).

Resin Debray: Yes, I did not stop writing this book for a long time, while I was
publishing other books. It is not. I hope. a "book of ideas," but rather a "work
of thought." Not fireworks. A painful childbirth in the ancient manner. An ethics

17
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of disappointment, of movement in the wrong direction, had made me postpone its
publication at the time of the great anti-Marxist confusion in these last few years.

1.3 NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: Could not Regis Debray let himself cease being Marxist
like—or at the same time as--everyone?

Regis Debray: I especially did not want to howl with the wolves. All the less

so, because their howling resulted more from a political strategy than from a desire
to know. What else was there to do, except remain silent and wait--even if it
means asserting oneself counter to one's own pursuits--in the face of the Hisereres
of the unfrocked who were chorusing on the majority stage of the moment?

Therefore. let us be earnest. Marxism was the rule in intellectual circles until
1970. Then the fronts were reversed. The fashion, and even the legitimacies of
thought were then geared to the distance put between oneself and Marxism. It was
really too easy to let oneself by carried off by that wave. And then I had no
desire to become a "new philosopher." That is all.

I suffered greatly from the cliches that I dragged along behind me at that time,
from that archeohoyscout. thirdworld "position" to which I had been assigned by
controversial discussions. It was constantly necessary to react. to be in a
hurry: it is law of the environment. Hence the advantage, the intense advantage
of prison.

[.8 NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: “here you were, from that point of view, more free than
when you came out?

Regis Debray: In fact, prison is the last place where it is still possible to
think in peace. There is time to rulinate there—-remember Nietzsche's "cows"--
to make oneself a double stomach there. and it is all the same more valuable than
to glean among ideas.

And then, in prison, you define yourself with regard to yourself and no longer

with regard to others. There. there is no longer any room for theatricala--anger,
indignation. One day, I shall write a "Praise of Prison," but I can state right
now that one of the causes of the drying up of leftist thought comes, evidently,
from the fact that leftists have no longer been put in prison for the last 40 years.
Have you observed that everything that has been "thought" in socialism comes from

a jail: from Blanqui to Gramsci, Rosa Luxemburg and Kautsky, not to mention Kuron
and Hodzelerski. the latest beneficiaries of the privilege of prison introspection?
A great wrong is done to many people by letting them discourse in the street, give
five interviews a day and go from one meeting to the next. The pace of political
activity in modern liberal societies produces too many decerebrated persons. There-
fore, I am attached to my prison stock and I indeed hope that one day I shall be
given an opportunity to replenish my supply.

LB NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: You say that you discovered the importance of the history
of religions in prison at Camiri.

Regis Debray: Chronologically, my liking for the history of religions comes from
my fondness for painting. I have entirely forgotten the catechism, but I remember
the smallest musem that I visted as a child. Now. painting--Cimabue, Giotto and,

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI Uta as use. nun. .- ....

especially, Tintoretto-is Christianity, whether one likes it or not. were not

the catacombs painted in fresco, which is rather odd, because it was a question

of struggling against idolators who worshiped emperor's statues or pictures? Be-
sides, as Christians by heritage, we are the beneficiaries of a historical miracle--
the miracle of of the Incarnation—and from which all our modernity—and our power-
is derived.

LE NOW OBSERVATEUR: In what way?

Regis Debray: Christianity gives us the authorization, obliges us. to seek a word
behind all flesh and that is a fundamental innovation. Alexandre Koyre had an
interesting theory in this connection. lie said that the mystery of the Incarnation
had made scientific research possible, to the effect that it was no longer. through
it, a sacrilege to find logic in phenomena and a "reason," divine at that time.
behind the fall of solids. I shall even say that our desire for political consist-
ency--to base our everyday behavior on an idea of the world and to give a sense

to things of the city--is the. small change of the mystery of the Incarnation.

Early Christianity bequeathed us a formidable means of producing theory. Added

to that is the fact that a Camiri chaplain put in Ily hands a biography of Gregory
VII. And that enabled me to understand the century. Yes, in Caniri', I was thinking
of Canossa.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: That does not lack elevation, but agree that it has only
a renote connection with what you were living.

Regis Debray: Wrong. I did not understand comunisa, that is to say, ideocracy,
until I understood what happened at Canossa. Without an analysis of what is pro-
duced by the theocratic merger of a temporal power and a spititual power, it is
impossible to find one's way in present-day geographies. It is impossible to under-
stand how and why the sole fact of believing that one holds a universal truth in-
cites to taking iron and fire to the four corners of the planet.

LE NOWBL OBSERVATBUR: Therefore, fron Byzantine caesaropapism to czarist auto-
cracy and to comunist "ideocracy" there probably is only one single history, ac-
cording to you.

Regis Debrsy: One single lineage. in fact. that goes back to Constantine, who
proclaimed the dogma of the Incarnation. After all, Christianity is what has ac-
customed us to the idea the God had'only one son. Now, the path is familiar from
unity to exclusiveness and to totality. In this connection, I find that they went
a little too fast, in the Heat, in getting rid of totalitarianism-and of its des-
potic versions--in the East. In this respect, I should like Christians, in general.
and Catholics in particular, to have a little more nemory. They should begin by
sweepingin front of their own door, that is to say by reflecting on Gregory VII,
before giving lessons of tolerance.

LP. mum. OBSERVATBUR: Historians, those who deal with facts, with details, are

not going to like that kind of transition from a medieval pope to a party secretary.
Those are somewhat rapid productions, factitious syntheses perhaps.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Regis Debray: False process. "hen a biologist takes the cell's chemical plant
apart he does not discredit the soologist. The basic logic of the living being
does not mean that an elephant. man and a nightingale Inst be confused. There
is, therefore, a history of religions, but' the religious has no history. That
is what the history of religions teaches.

LE NOWKL OBSERVATEUR: Then, nothing has probably changed in our heads, in our
customs, since the great Babylonian myths?

Regis Debray: why do the statues of Phidias move us? Why does Shakespeare talk
to us today? Nevertheless, the slavery production method has passed. just as de-
finitely as the transition from feudalism to capitalism and, in spite of that,
these works are contemporary for us.

Therefore, an "emotive stratum" has to subsist in man, beyond the vicissitudes of

his history. Then, what causes time to have gaps. fadings, syncopes at certain
times?

1.8 muvm. OBSERVATEUR: Therefore, has the relationship between the religious phe-
nomenon and the esthetic phenomenon driven you to reflect on the timeless aspect
of men's history?

Regis Debray: At any rate, that is the basis for my attempt, in my book, to under-
stand a certain number of things: the group, authority, fanaticism, and so on.

LB NOWEL OBSERVATEUR: Let us recapitulate. With Christianity, we have the mystery
of the Incarnation, therefore. the Mediator. Because that is incarnate in the
religious order. it is also incarnate in the political order.

Regis Debray: The group will never finish with the figure of the Hediator, because
it owes its identity and permanence to him. Everything is there and that is pre-
cisely the point that I wanted to stress and on which to base my demonstration.

LB ROWE}. OBSERVATEUR: That is your "nugget," so to speak.

Regis Debray: Exactly. The fact that a group can grasp its own identity only
through someone who represents it--therefore, who become necessarily charismatic
by virtue of this--and who offers it the grace of being in contact itself through
another seems to be an insurmountable fact. 'And that operator of cohesion seems
to me to be, in turn. a constant in every power structure.

LE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR: Therefore. the figure of the Mediator is probably one of
those great immovables of the political phase, a kind of ice flee always resembling
itself that travels indifferently fron the Agora to Red Square in the form, for
example, of that personality cult from which it is probably impossible to escape.

Regis Debray: We must not exaggerate anything. History can modulate the necessary
cults just as for an individual the fact of growing up and of becoming "normal"
consists in managing the Oedipus curse. It is better to know that something in

us wants to kill papa and marry mans than to discover it at a crossroads. Thus.
the dismantling of the political unconscious does not free us from the curse lying
there. It enables us. nevertheless, to manage it in the best possible way, lucidly.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1M. USE ONLY

when the laws of gravity are known, that does not prevent apples from dropping,
but. at least, we know what awaits us if we jump out of the window.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: Hhatright do you have to decree like that what is constant
and what is not?

Regis Debray: In the name, precisely. of what history teaches me. In it, it ap-
pears. evidently, that any society without a strong belief is a dying society.

The religious aspect, therefore the political aspect, is-—if you wish-othe disease
of the group, but the cure for that disease would be the death of that group.

‘LB NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Then. why must there be belief in a group? You just raised
that question without answering it.

Regis Debray: That obligation of belief is not a moral imperative, but, rather,
a logical necessity. It is deduced from what I call the group's "nonfulfillment."

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: That requires some specific explanations.

Regis Debray: With the notion of "nonfulfillment" I am generalizing in the political
order what Godel's theorem-states in the logical order. Now, this theorem demon-
strates that "no system can establish its truth without resorting to a factor that

is Outside it." In other words. no system is demonstrative of itself.

Therefore, I am trying to illuminate the social system in the light of that, because
there is a system nature there, what. then. is the outside factor that is going

to make it possible to establish its truth? Hence, the figure of the Mediator.

that is to say, of the charismatic chief.

LB NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Then. does that mean that it is rational for there to be
irrationality in a group?

Regis Debray: It is. in fact, a naturalist explanation of the social supernatural.
And. for a materialist like me, that is not a neglible result. It makes it possible
to reject just as well abdication when faced withthe ineffable--rspsody on the
“return of what is sacred" and company--as the stupidity of Monsieur Homais for
whom religion is merely the stupid childhood of mankind. It is possible to expel
the Jesuits and even God Himself. They will come back in through the window. That.
for example, is called "real socialism."

LB NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: Thus, the Mediator would-guarantee the group's closure
by offering it transcendency. But what transcendency?

Regis Debray: There, it is up to politics to come into play and to provide an
empirical content for that transcendental category: ayatollah. secretary general.
president of the republic. head of free France. Let politics choose. Transcen-
dency can come indifferently from a mystical incarnation, from the socialist myth,
from universal suffrage. It is simply necessary for the Mediator to represent
something other than himself: Proletariat. Justice. Rights of Man, Allah, whatever
you wish. Political freedom consists in choosing between those capital letters.
Obviously. I prefer the capital letter Mitterrand to the capital letter Brezhnev
or Reagan. A very appreciable technical difference, but the effect of one and

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘K 1M. USE ONLY

the same logical structure in which each one is a "lieutenant"--therefore "holds
the p1ace"-—-of another.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Hence, the concern; for any politician whoever, for pro--
ducing--or even of manipulatingn-transcendsncies.

Regis Debray: Hence, especially. t1: interest of death in politics. As soon as
something dies, it produces, in the system, a hole toward the beyond and transcen-
dency is swallowed up in it. That is why burials are always strong phases in poli-
tical activity. All the people who narch then are content, in spite of their af-
fliction, because they know that, thanks to death, they form a group. Every societ:
begins by being a Society of the friends :of the deceased, because every society
needs to believe in a transcendency that will terminate it and dissolve it.

LE mum. OBSERVATEUR: If we admit the validity of that observation, what kind
of belief would then have to :be produced so that "things will go well" in our so-
cieties?

Regis Debray: Precisely, "things do not go well," because effective beliefs are
no longer produced. Consequently, contraband beliefs are increasing in number--
just as at the end of the Roman Empire-«without offering any lasting coherence.
For a long time, I believed that Marxism might be the great founding illusion for
our age. Now, I am indeed obliged to observe that it is makeshift. In the his-
tory of religions, Harxism-leninism is, evidently, a poor relative.

LB NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: You used to say, formerly, that the saints and apostles
of our times were Guevara, Rosa Luxemburg. Trotsky or Politzer.

Regis Debray: It is true that at a specific time communism had a great mythical
fertility. It still has it, to a considerable extent, in the Third World. In
this connection, in matters that are socially sacred, Afghanistan and Poland are
undoubtedly opening up a new age.

Confronted by that, our democratic societies are confessing an undeniable—and
dangerous-emotiona1 weakness. This tepidness, this lack of capacity for sacri-
fice nay cause uneasiness with regard to their future. When the sons of Blum
are able to oppose the sons of Lenin with their own Fifth Regiment--the one that
defended the University of Madrid to the death--then, without any doubt, we shall
be able to be a world alternative.

LB NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: Therefore, according to you, the worth of an idea would
be evaluated by the number of people ready to die for it?

Regis Debray: Not its logical value. But, rather, its gravity, its political
earnestness. That is to say that ideas weigh less, in practical history, than
images and myths. But that does not mean that there is no logic in the order of
the myth. A leftist cannot worship death as a redeemr or a transfigurator. His
slogan is "Hurrah for life!," but La Paaionaria says the opposite with her famous
"It is better to die standing than to live on one's knees." Now, a system of de-
ductive ideas isinot what makes a man or a society, kneeling, stand up again one
day. I believe that it is, rather, an imaginary quantity of convocation.

22

FOR omcul. US! ONLY
FOR OFF“ 'MI. USE UNI.‘

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: Then, you should appreciate the fact that two of the three
founding heroes under whose auspices the new 7-year term has started are martyrs.

Regis Debray: Cult of the great ancestors is the short circuit of life, not the
mrose cult of sacrifice. I wrote once: memory is-revolutionary, without knowing
that the statement would prosper and it would one day take shape in the street.

In our country. The ceremony of the Pantheon to which you referred bears witness
to the fact that France has stood up again. It might be said that this country
has stood up again, by. bringing Francois Mitterrand to the presidency, because

it did not want to die as a nation. This country, your country, my country, our
country in short. Do you realize it, To be able to say at least once in.your
life, holding your head high: "France, ay country." If we had only recovered
that pride, nothing of what we shall do together will have been in vain.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "1e Nouvel Observateur"

10.062
CSO: 3100/129

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1.“. PS? ONIJ

POLITICAL ITALY

MAKNO OPINION POLL 0N PRESENT GOVERNMENT
Milan IL nonoo in Italian 13 Nov 81 pp l2-lS
[Article by Donato Speroni: "Spadolini: Seven More"]

[Text] He inspires trust: his policies bring hope for
success in the fight against inflation. Even the insti-
tutions seem to be viewed more favorably. But the IL IONDO
Makno poll shows that taking advantage of this will be
something else again.

In only 4 months, Council President Giovanni Spadolini has succeeded in establishing
a solid consensus in national public opinion. His administration has succeeded in
increasing trust in government institutions and nay even be having some success in
the fight against inflation. The government, which has a lay, non-church affiliated
presidency, is projecting a positive image whose benefits accrue not only to the
Republican Party, of which Spadolini is the secretary. but also to the Socialist
Party and its leader Bettino Craxi.

Once again, the new IL IONDO-Makno poll shows the new trends that have appeared on
the Italian political scene and the shifts that have taken place in Italian public
opinion. To take the poll, Makno uses the same 3,000-person cross-section of the
county's social and demographic composition. Thus, the risks of casual fluctuations
from one poll to the next is significantly reduced, and comparisons can be made with
less margin for error (the poll is now in its 4th edition; for the previous ones, see

ll. muoo No 24 (1980) and Nos 5 a 6 (1981)).
Government and Inflation

The Spadolini cabinet has sharply reversed the sample group's opinion of the governaent.
While governments with a Christian Democratic [DC] presidency never surpassed a maximum
of 18 percent favorable rating, Spadolini has won the approval of 28 percent of those
polled, and he belongs to a party that has only 3 percent of the vote (see graph No l).
The negative responses have dropped for the first tine to 43 percent. An analysis of
the data shows that the jump in popularity relative to Arnoldo Forlani's government is
due mainly to the favorable opinion held by women: it has doubled and almost balances
out the opposition (28 percent to 36 percent); it is due also the increased favorable
opinion among 20-year olds and the elderly (39 percent for, 31 percent against) and
Southerners. Even in the Northwest, which showed the least trust in government under
Forlani (11.3 percent), there is much more credit given to Spadolini (27.6 percent).
‘Ihe heaviest negative results for Spadolini came from central Italy.

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(in: No 1| Is the present government suited to solving the countr ‘s roblems?
Y P

(1) yes (4) October 1981
(2) no (5) June 1981 (7] June 1980
(3) don't know (6) January 1981

l‘diuclo governo 6 aduﬂo

a rlsolvou I problem! dol «use?
4) (S) (6) (7)

mom ' M ﬁg.
. IL! I”! lit III I!
-1 1x, vet-n m I :1 I

       

[Graph No 2] Is its anti—inflation policy effective?

(1) Ineffective, like that of the preceding governments
(2) Even more ineffective

(3) Effective to contain inflation

(4) Rather effective, but insufficient

(5) Don't know

I olﬂcau la sua polilica
nol confronli doll'inllcllono?

ﬁlm" In «mo-u

_ ‘3.)

 

2d
FOR OFHCﬁL USE ONLY
Besides the increased acceptance of a government with a lay presidency, the poll has
measured public opinion on how well the fight against inflation is going. Indeed,
this is the main task confronting Spadolini's government. As inflation also results
from expectations, positive opinion in this area would indicate that Spadolini has
the battle half won. In general, favorable opinion is 46.3 percent and unfavorable
only 28.7 percent (see graph No 2). But only lo percent think that Spadolini's action
will suffice to contain inflation. Women are less optimistic than men: 51.8 percent
of men think Spadolini's policies will be effective or at least more effective than
past ones. while only 40.7 percent of women share this conviction.

After Spadolini

many signs of a new shift in public opinion in favor of lay parties. Among the pos-
sible council presidents (see graph No 3), there is a strong surge for the present one
(from 3 percent to l7 percent. with marked popularity among people over 45) and,
besides him, the other lay leaders: Marco Pannella, Pietro bongo, Bruno Visentini,

and Valerie Zanone, not to mention Craxi, who has regained 8 points since his abrupt
decline in popularity in June. The ascent of lay leaders is confirmed by possible
government coalitions: a possible DC~lay party alliance, with a Socialist in the Chigi
palace has gained support (from 5.3 to 7.4 percent) and is increasing especially in
the Northwest. where it has reached 13.3 percent, with an increase of 7 percent.

As for the Communists, theshiftof the PCI seems to have been absorbed at the grass
roots. While the number of those questioned who would like to see Enrico Berlinguer
become council president has increased more than 6 percent, a government based on a
DC-PCI coalition has fallen from 26.8 to 19.3 percent. This is a difference of 7 per-
cent, which has shifted entirely toward a government of the left without the DC.
"Essentially," Makno observes, "Communist opinion has turned towards making the PC!
compatible with a possible alternative, whereas it was divided in previous polls
between supporters of a government of the left and those who yearned for national
unity. This process of consolidation has caused an opposition consensus to form
around Beriinguer."

There is even something new for the DC: the preferred choice for council president
includes leaders Giulio Andrcotti, Arnaldo Forlani and Benigno Zaccagnini. 0n the
other hand, Francesco Cossiga has shown a recent decline.

Parties

Graph No 6 shows for the first time a tripolar situation that, if translated into
votes, would surpass Craxi's wildest dreams: the DC, PCI and PSI [Italian Socialist
Party] are at almost equal strength, thanks to the PSl’s surge (up 2.4 percent above
the already high level of June) and the DC's slump (down 5.8 percent). If we add to
the Socialist vote that of the Republicahs, who have shown a sharp increase (up 2.9
percent). Liberals and Social Democrats, the lay sector portion comes to 35.6 percent,
by far the strongest political grouping in the country. But these findings are tem-
pered by the observation, well known to political scientists, that lay voters are
explicit in declaring their vote only with respect to Christian Democrats, lBl [Italian
Social Movement] members and, especially. Communists.

26
IWJR 0F?1C]Al.lﬂﬂE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cal figure is best suited to be cc
rs)

Qua-lo pononoggio pumice
é phi adult. can.

presidpnio do! consiglio?
(Mo 0 one mood.)

 

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Qual 6 In formula di governo pith ado".
a risolvoro l problem! do! 9.080? =

Game I. Int-kl

Gonna an" In 0:

0:- I'c-uwifnm

Oct. _._1un_ (5)_

”53V 'T'u? (p)
[Graph No 6] What party do you think is closest to your own ideas?
(Percentages in parentheses are those from the June 1981 poll)

[Partyabbreviations from top to bottom,

PRI
ran
iPLl
MSI
PDUP
PR
DP
ultre
listc

Quule parﬁlo riﬁono phi vieino all. use Idea? .

m pennies: in puma! rapid/an mule 5' Mb ad Mn ’8!

 

    

Italian Republican Party
ltalian Social Democratic Party
Italian Liberal Party

Italian Social Movement
Proletarian Unity Party

Radical Party

Prolctarian Democratic Party

others

29
son OFFICIAL use ONLY

in lower right corner]

[sec

m3§§8zﬂ

"112.56.”
ma 2,: (2,1)
mm: I
POupl s 1,3)
914.1 (3.3)
mums!
mulls-1.2

(1.51
um mm It“. Us}. ONLY

Some 43 percent of those polled refused to respond to the question concerning their
preferred party. Of these, 21.3 percent declared that no party is now close to their
own ideas. It may be supposed that void and blank ballots come from this area.
Abstentions have been increasing with every election.

The analysis indicates that the people polled who are unwilling to choose a party
are eSpecially women (44.3 percent), younger than 20 years old (43.2 percent), and
people over 45 years of age (43.8 percent up to age 55, 48.9 percent thereafter).

But the regional breakdown is quite alarming: in northwest and central Italy, inclu-
ding Milan, Turin, Genoa and Rome, areas that usually anticipate voting behavior that
spreads to the less developed regions of the country, abstentionism has reached 50
percent.

One of the poll's questions makes it possible to confirm that the Italian electorate
remains characteristically stable: only 4.4 percent of the sample actually stated
that they would no longer vote for the party they voted for at the previous election
(in June 1979). This is one of the most stable of all data, because from one poll
to another. over a span of months, the figures vary by a few decimal points. The
sample shows that a Solomonic judgment prevails: the party they voted for has done
some good things and some bad (from 30 to 31.7 percent in the last two polls) or

at least had done what it could (from 25.9 to 28 percent). Only 17.2 percent (16.4
percent in June), however, said that they party they had voted for met their expecta-
tions.

How has opinion changed concerning the major parties? Here too, Makno observes,

"a trend has appeared that is favorable to the lay parties: the PSI has marked an
increase among the number of those polled who have changed their opinion for the

better (19.7 percent)."

This fact, Makno states, "is relevant because it indicates an area of potential
sympathy (or at least non-aversion) and shows an increase relative to preceding
polls. where improved opinion held steady at about 15 percent. But the PSI has

also shown an increase in the area of worse opinion (25 percent), which seems attri-
butahle to the high profile of conflict that the Socialists have shown toward other
parties in recent months.

'ﬂhe PC) anleL in any case. both show a clearly worse opinion profile. Better-opin-
ion responses remain at 6-7 percent. with an area of worse opinion steady at 25-30
percent. Essentially, then," Makno comments, " of the three major parties, the PSI
seems to be the only one that has a consistently favorable opinion trend: the other
two remain at best on the defensive for what they have already gained."

The Most Important Issues

Terrorism, inflation, unemployment. and lack of houSing. These four came out clearly
in previous polls in answer to the question "What should the government he doing right
now?" (everyone questioned could give up to four answers). But this time, the sample
gave various answers. First of all, terrorism has significantly lost importance, going
from 67 to 41.5 percent of the responses. Fear of terrorism remains strongest among
women over 45 and in central Italy. Concern about unemployment grew (from 49 to 51.9
percent), with a general bulge in the 20-24 age group (66.7 percent) and in northeast
and central Italy (about 60 percent). The South is more resigned: the problem is felt
by only $7.2 percent of the sample, 4.7 points below the national average. At the
same level as unemployment (5l.9 percent) inflation ranks as a problem, but it is
considered less pressing by about 5 percent. Women, who are considered to be most

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NM Urn! 1:". unc- Ill‘O-O

sensitive to price variations, have caused the change in the figures for the inflation
issue: their rate of concern-has fallen from 65.8 to 49.6 percent. It also seems that
the inflation issue has diminished especially in the northeastern regions, falling
from first place (70 percent) to last (40 percent) among those who mention it.

The housing problem has also dis
from 41.3 to 32.6 percent (the hi
25~34 years old) and has been su

played a tendency to dispersed responses. It fell
gh point of 39.3 percent appears among young people
rpassed by the problem of drug use (32.9 percent of

the sample, as opposed to 32.6 percent in the previous poll). Most concern about
(36.9 percent) and among young people up to 19 years
of age (44.2 percent). Among the other priorities, increasing importance is given

drugs is felt in the Northwest

to health reform (17.6 to 23.6 percent.

with a significant bulge of 36.7 percent in

central Italy) and to school reorganization (from 14.4 to 16.7 percent). There is
also a net increase in the demand for introducing the death penalty (from 6.1 to 12.4
percent, with a bulge of 23.9 percent in the northeastern regions and a hollow of 2.2
percent in central Italy): there is an especially consistent demand for initiatives
toward peace: from zero to 18.8 percent, with the strongest support among young people

up to age 19 (28.8 percent).

[Graph No 7] In what directions should the government be moving right now?
[column headings, from left to right]: October, June, January 1981

(l) terrorism

(2) pensions

(3) housing

((4) prices

(5) health assistance
(6) une-ployment

(7) drugs

(8) schools

(9) police reform
(10) death penalty

 

team (1)
Mom (2)
Cu 13)
how (4)
Assistant-united. (
Noam-one (6)
Droo- 17)
swu- (s)
HonnapalaefQ)

Pena a. mom ( l
awanmuhouuul(l
tqnnanaumo (l
Concuduo ( l 3)
Agalomamamo cooco
Home eleﬂotele
Wic- pmcdenmla ( 16) 2.3

Pomogatla

(ll)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)

 

dinaloui il ”tome
doweogbosubﬂo?

5)
329

7.0
0) 124
l) 5.2
2) 1,0

3.7
(14) 1o!
( 15) 64

(17) 3.1

Muslim-one penance ( 18) 14.3
ﬂcoumzlone zone human ( l9) 18.1

Humane“

(20) 16.8
31

industrial relations

abortion law

the concordat

updating laws

electoral refer:

presidential republic

pornography

public morals

reconstructing the earthquake zone
peace initiatives

  

15.9
17.:

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
The Most Accepted Institutions

Italians (or at least those who make up the sample) seen to be showing renewed trust

in institutions. Although 4 months ago, when the question was asked "What institutions
are contributing to the good of the country?" (to which the respondents could give two
answers),on1y one institution (the church) got more than 15 percent of the responses,
this level is now reached or surpassed by 7 institutions. First place is held by the
independent presszit had 29.3 percentin Januaryand slid to 12.9 percent in June at
the height of the P2 scandal, but it has rebounded to 33.5 percent.

Its strongest credibility is in central italy (from 14.7 to 41.7 percent) and in
southern Italy (from 9.8 to 35.2 percent), and among the youngest age groups (47.8
percent of respondents between 25 and 34 as opposed to 23 percent in the previous poll).
Second place goes to the presidency of the Republic with 29.3 percent, more than double
the figure in the two previous polls. This is a sign that Sandro Pertini's style is
being increasingly accepted in public opinion, despite the occasional irritation it
provokes in some political leaders.

Although the church rose from 22.2 to 26.8 percent, it fell to third place, followed
by the unions, which, with approaching contract negotiations,areshowing a very strong
capacity for gaining favor (from 2.2 to 18.1 percent). The unions are followed by the
police (from 14.3 to 15.6 percent), the judiciary (from 7.7 to 15.4 percent), and
“municipal police (fro. 5.9 to 14.9 percent). Even political parties (from 6.6 to 11.2
percent) and the RAI [Italian Radio Broadcasting and Television Company] (from 2.3 to

9.2 percent) are enjoying the increased benevolence of Italians for their institutions.
The Unions and Automatic Wage Indexation

The renewed favor enjoyed by the unions shows up clearly in another question (see graph
No 8). In general, the proportion of Italians who view the unions favorably has risen
from 8.3 to 12.2 percent in recent months. This is the first time that opinion concer-
ning the unions has shown signs of improvement, and it is confirmed by the drop from
31.8 to 26.5 percent in those who view unions unfavorably. Improved opinion is par-
ticularly strong in the Northeast. where favorable and unfavorable opinion balances

out at 22.9 percent.

[Graph No 8| Now Have the CGIL-CISL-UIL Been Doing in Recent Months?

(COIL = Italian General Confederation of Labor, CISL - Italian Confederation of Labor
Unions, UIL = Italian Union of Labor]

( 1) positive Qua! a In Music». swollen
( 2) negative no.“ uulml mos! do Coll-ash!!!”

(3) positive 6 negative
(4) irrelevant

(S) don't know

(6) October 1981

(7) June 1981

(8) January 1981

 

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

A specific question in the last poll concerned automatic wage indexation. Only one
respondent in ten favors keeping it as is. Some 20.5 percent would like greater
protection for more skilled workers: essentially, a one-point increase on the basis
of wages. But the largest component (30.7 percent) was for increased protection for
all categories of workers. It is no surprise that the opinion for differentiating
the wage indexation scale is centered pretty much in northwestern Italy, which is
the lost industrialized and has the highest office workers' salaries, while an equal
scale for all is most popular in central Italy (41.2 percent).

[Graph No 9] Should Automatic Wage lndexation Be Changed or Not?

(I) kept as is (4) all categories of workers strengthened
(2) pore protection for more highly (S) changed somehow
skilled workers (6) don't know

(3) abolished

ll mesa-dame doll- secla mobile
we eumbido o no?

 

As we put together the figures on this question, we can see that only 20.2 percent

of the respondents favor eliminating or weakening the inflation-insurance mechanisl,
while a bloc of more than 40 percent wants it kept unchanged and strengthened by main-
taining its present feature of equal aid to all. Another 20.5 percent would accept a
revision of wage indexation only if more highly-paid workers could be given greater
advantage. There is, therefore, very little roan for finding a solution to the problem
of labor costs due to wage indexation. This shows that the Spadolini government still
has some complicated tasks facing it, even though it has not yet displeased Italians.

COPYRIGHT: IL WNW 198]

8782
C50: 3104/48

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PORTUGUESE ECOMHIC, POLITICAL CIRCUI‘STAMES SURVBYED
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 16 Nov 81 p 12
[Article by Carlos Caceres Honteiro]

[Text] Anticipating what could become a new power bloc in Portugal for 1984 or
1985, each day sees stronger signs of rapprochement between Francisco Balsemso's
Social Democratic Party (PSD), which is part of the government ujority, and the
Socialist Party (P5) of Mario Soares.

0n the one hand, after a meeting Mario Scares had with several PSD ministers, the
Portuguese press spread rumors that the social democrats are not excluding the pos-
sibility of supporting the socialist leader in his candidacy for the Presidency of
the Republic in the elections 10 years from now. On the other, in die discussion of
the constitutional revision, which is taking place in the parliamentary cousittees,
important agreemnts are taking shape between the government and the socialist oppo-
sition which, for certain, is becoming increasingly divided, particularly with
regard to military questions. It was agreed in Parliament that the cox-sander
general of the armed forces will be appointed by the president of the republic but
at the suggestion of the government.

Some observers think there is a possibility that a new kind of party may emerge,
called "presidential party," capable of bridging the gap between the two majority
formations of Portuguese political life. However, the one who, in principle, would
be called upon to become its natural leader, the current president of the republic,
Ramlho Eanes, has not given the green light to any initiative.

0n the other hand, the government could very well be especially interested in not
having an opposition which is too hard at a time when there are increasing symptoms
that the economic situation is tending to worsen. Could it be a circumstantial
pact aimed at saving face? Perhaps, but with results which might be far-reaching.

The budget now being discussed may involve very deep cuts, especially in the area
of public spending. That would be one of the more significant consequences. Joao
Salgueiro, aged 67, a liberal technocrat who, 10 years ago, belonged to one of
Marcelo Caetano's regimes, is now the strong man of the economy and finances of
Pinto Baisemao's government and appears inclined, very rigorously, to demand the
application of heavy restrictions in drawing up the next budget.

31;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Economic Recession

The public debt for 1982 is about 660 billion escudos. The Bank of Portugal has
just published a report in which it speaks openly of a worsening of the balance of
payments. The prospects point to a reduction in income from tourism, a decrease

in remittances sent by emigrants, a reduction of exports and an increase in imports.
In short, it is the phantom of econmic recession with all its severity in a year in
which agriculture did not achieve its minimum production and the management associa-
tion of industrial enterprises sounded the alarm several times.

To all these black clouds must be added concern about the process of membership in
the Cannon Market. ‘lhe BBC wants Portugal to accept restrictions on the export of
its competitive textile production and also on the circulation of emigrants.
Salgueiro recently left a sumit meeting of BBC foreign ministers in Luxembourg in

a moment of outrage and considered its deannds so unacceptable that he began to speak,
apparently in all seriousness, of seeking "alternatives to the Cannon Market" for

the Portuguese economy. “hat alternatives? No one knows. But it is certain that
Portuguese public opinion is beginning to view the country's entry into the Canon
Market as an increasingly remote reality.

COPYRIGl'l': 1981, Informcion y Revistaa, S.A.

8568
C80: 3110/51

35
ron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

0RDONEZ EXPLAINS DBSERTIOﬂ FROM UCD. NEH PARTY'S IDBOLOGY
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 15 Nov 81 pp 39-60

[Interview with Francisco Fernando Ordonez. former minister of justice and UCD
member. by Jose Manuel Arija; date and place not given]

[Text] Many of those who were. until yesterday. Centrist coreligionists and some of
the party leaders are breathing more freely. He has finally left the party.
Francisco Fernando Ordonez. 51 years old. a lawyer and economist. first severed his
ties with the government—-the few he had as ninister--and finally bolted the party.

Criticized as outspoken and unthinking. accused of personal ambition, he was.
however. the protagonist of the two chief reforms carried out in these past few
years: fiscal reform and the divorce law.

Now he is gone. along with nine other deputies and six senators. to found "Democratic
Action." a future party ideologically situated. he says. "to the right of the P503
[Spanish Socialist workers Party] and to the left of the UCD [Democratic Center
Unionl." He won the race for the position of "buffer party" between the two big

political groups in the country.

[Francisco Fernandez Ordones] My leaving was in response to a political decision.
a judgment about the country's general situation. rather than to a sum of aggrava-
tions, which would be easy to enumerate. but I do not wish to do so. It is a
question of a conviction: Spain has big problems with no answers. and it continues
to need that political clarification which was begun in 1977. -

We believe the 060's original idea has exhausted its possibilities. Re have carried

on a tough struggle within the party to defend our positions. Today those positions
have been sidestepped. or when we did succeed in asserting them. it was at a

tremendous or destablizing price. and to this was added the constant attempts of
the traditional Spanish right to make the UCD a classic rightist party.

[Question] And this was demoralizing?
[Answer] In that atmosphere of pressure. we thought it easier to fight in the same

way for the things we believe in from outside the UCD. and that therefore with our
withdrawal we were contributing to clarifying and stabilizing the political system.

36
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Then it was not a sudden decision?

[Answer] He had been discussing it among ourselves for some time. until I arrived
at the conclusion that I should leave the Kinistry of-Justice. I remained with the
present administration almost exclusively to finish up the divorce law. The

decision to leave the party was made jointly and by persons of the same political
line: what we might call the liberal left or the social democrats. that is posi-

tions which are not socialist. but which do favor change and reform.

[Question] Did you consider the possibility that the democracy might be destabilized
by your withdrawal from the UCD?

[Answer] The UCD made an attempt at settlement when it created the so-called
"mission of salvation." But the only result was a mediocre document. which I com—

pared to prescribing an aspirin for cancer. That was not the way. The way is
ideological clarification. in which each one takes up his position and tells where
he is. That is what we have done. and moreover. with a constructive spirit.

There is only one condition for clarifying areas: that it all be done while
maintaining parliamentary stability. and we will sacrifice whatever is necessary to
preserve that. If the only purpose of our operation is to stabilize the democracy.
it would be ridiculous to produce the opposite effect.

[Question] From what you say. it appears that the UCD has no remedy, and that more
"clarifications" will be forthcoming.

[Answer] The experience of the past few days demonstrates that the UCD's problems
were deeper; I have resolved not to discuss the subject of the 060 from this time
forward. It is a matter of mental health. Now, what we are working on is formula-

ting the new plan‘that we are going to propose. We hepe that. with our withdrawal.
the civilized right will organize. because we are in another political space.

[Question] Did President Calvo Sotelo understand your withdrawal from the party?

[Answer] Calvo Sotelo saw clearly that we were a first expeditionary force for

the political regeneration of everything that is to the right of the P803. or
rather. of everything that is not socialism. It appeared to President Calvo

Sot'elo that all this would have a positive result. if we did it intelligently. What
was absurd, in my opinion. was to keep instability institutionalized. an instability

the people no longer profess to believe in.
[Question] Have you registered yet as a political party?

[Answer] At this time we are an independent political platform studying the
eventual formation of a political party. He will study this calmly, because there

is no hurry .

[Question] What would be the political and sociological profile of your party?

[Answer] It would be basically a reform and lay party. which would take the
position of a real center. in the liberal. social democratic and radical area. He

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR UH-"ItML USE ONIJ

would have to include the aspirations of a youthful public. a high percentage of
women, the urban salaried electorate. cadres. officials. liberal professionals and
certain types of businessman who are beginning to support us because they are aware
that they must bet on the future in a positive manner and not with a defensive and
coarse business attitude.

[Question] It would be a choice similar to Anna's radical-republican group?

[Answer] We have an Azanist base in the idea of regeneration and modernisation of
Spain held by Azana's followers, the Free Education Institution or Giner de los
Rios. Here we have what is left of the intellectuals. but we also have another
side. which is technocratic: I myself studied economics and finance all my life.
Spain's current problems are not the same as they used to be. At this time the
problems concern the developed society. industrial reconversion, public administra-
tion. etc.

[Question] How did you choose the name "Democratic Action"?

[Answer] That is still a temporary name, but it has the advantage of having echoes
of the old tradition of Republican Action or. more recently. of the party of
Dionisio Ridruejo. Because action gives the impression of initiative; because it
is a question of trying to construct democracy in its deepest sense and because.

in addition. it has no ideological problems. That is. we don't want to come out as
a social democratic party. to avoid creating identification problems.

You have to distinguish between social democracy as an ideological base. which is
what we said in our first document. and social democracy as a party. He may have
that base. but we have no reason to play the role of a social democratic party.
He also include the old liberal Spanish left. radical groups. etc. To raise only
a partial ideological banner would be to leave out much of the type of group we
hope to form. because there will be people who are not social democrats who will

want to be in on this operation.
[Question] What would you say are the points which distinguish you from socialism?

[Answer] We are different because of the way our group was created. Socialism
comes from the left and from workers' organizations. Our group comes from the
middle classes. the bourgeois intellectuals and the cadres. 0n the other hand.

the two have a common goal: reform and change. The problem will be how deeply
and in what kind of reforms we get involved.

Since we are not socialists. we are concerned from another point of view. For
example, we do not agree on what we might call the grand program of the P803; that
is not our horizon. because we have a view of utopia different from that of the
socialists. we are also different because we are against the nationalizations.
although we do have plans for cleaning up the public sector. control of public
expenditure. a change of image for public enterprise. reform of the criminal code.
and to see that fiscal reform is not sidetracked. etc. That is, we are not willing
to play at pseudoreform. but our reforms would be made from more centrist positions.

[Quest ion] With that goal, then, do you not have difficulty in participating in a
coalition with a socialist government?

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0“ Off“ IAI. Ue‘l‘. UNLI

[Answer] Uhat I believe is that we cannot continue with Spanish Manicheisn. where
a party which is to our right participates in the government. as for exanple in
Germany. what is important in political parties is their own structure and their
own historical background. There would be nothing wrong witha coalition with the
socialists. But our party is not going to be born with a vocation to coalition.
but rather as an independent body.

[Question] To participate in elections one lust have substantial economic and
financial support. Do you have that yet?

[Answer] It is true that our oppooition and our potential will also depend on the
support we find in that area. However. we will make our choice with absolute
generosity, with no cards up our sleeve; therefore we will have to look for economic
support. Fortunately, not all the businessmen are like the leadership of the 6308
[Spanish Confederation of Business Organizations] . and we have young businessmen.
concerned and active, who could support our idea, which is very simple: either

Spain changes and adapts to what is going on in the world, which is a real tech-
nological industrial revolution. or this country will be left to administer a

historic decadence.
[Question] Are you going to hold your Constituent Congress soon?

[Answer] He have not yet thought about that, because we are in the planning stage.
What we want now is for wholesome people to join, people who are already politi-

cally formed and who can contribute something. It is not a question of going out
to sign up so many thousand members. not at all. It is a problea of contribution.
of segregating ideas and of asking proposals for the country. We want voters. of

course. but just now we want people who will work.
COPYRIGHT: 1981, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

8735
C50: 3110/45

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

CARRle namms nrs muons or ammo pct
Madrid cumo 16 in Spanish 30 Now 31 pp 66-67

[Interview with PCB leader Santiago Carrillo on PCB policies and difficulties. by
CAHBIO l6 correspondent Jose Phnuel Arija; date and place not given]

[Text] The latest rebellion in the PC! has been settled by expulsions and sanctions.
The renewal sector sought a confrontation with the secretary general, but Carrillo
read then the statutes and put then back on the right track. Santiago Carrillo tells
CAHBIO 16 his reasons for deciding to expel the transgressors. "I. had no alterna-
tive," he says, "for a party without discipline crumbles."

According to Carrillo, the renewers wanted to establish a parallel leadership and
acted as an organized faction: "No party tolerates those things." A recent experi-
ence, an error conitted a few nonths ago, and the firs intention not to repeat it,
were fixed in the mind of the secretary general of the Spanish Communist Party.

Antoni GUIIERRBZ, FORMER LEADER 0? m PSUC [Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia],
had tolerated the emergence of factions anong the Catalonian commista, and the
result was that the pro-Soviets soon took over the party. The decision could not
be repeated. Acting with legality, a new infantile disease of couunisn threatened
the party: denocratitia, as Carrillo hinself said. Hence, the crisis.

Santiago Carrillo [8.0.]: It was a purely a conjunctural notive, the crisis which
arose from the so-called new Basque left. It cane fron farther back. The 10th
Congress opted for s Burocomunist policy and a duocratic party without tendencies
or organized factions. But there were two groups. the dognaties and the renewers,
which were defeated; and the latter did not accept their defeat.

I do not understand how a certain sector of the press can be astonished that fee-
tions are not accepted in the Connunis Party when no political party in the country
accepts then. however, the fact is that the party which the berchundi group is
going to enter not only condemns Burocoulunisn but also continues to proclaim its
position against the Constitution and insists that only in terrorist: can there be
a cease-fire and at the sane time a naintensnce of independent positions. I ask
myself: "If the PCB had accepted a nerger with a group which speaks and expresses
itself thus, what whould not have been said of the columnists!"

CANDID 16 [cm]: How would you sunarize the differences between the officialist
Euroconnniats and the renewers?

ho
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8.0.: I believe tha‘ the differences nay appear somewhat obscure inasmuch as the
renewers do not naintain a different political plan and even say it is the sane.

The differences are limited to whether or not there should be organized factions in
the party, although they even say they do not want factions. In short, in the PCB
w: have the inpression that the only thing the rmewers want is to change the leader-
s ip.

616: They also criticize the lack of internal democracy in the P03.

8.6.: That is a criticisn which is easy to answer, for in its preparation and de-
velopment the last congress was a nodel of transparency and denocracy. and I an
not the only one who says this. All the journalists who attended say the sane.

What we cannot have in the Mist Party is two leaderships: one elected at the
congress and the other which, in fact, is self-appointed and which, it appears,
takes different positions. Lack of denocrecy occurs when the ninority tries to
impose itself on the majority.

616: Do you believe the differences with the renewers will continue or, on the con-
trary, that there will be a possibility for understanding?

8.6.: We can reach an understanding on one condition: that the party's agreements
and discipline be respected. we shall not make any deals to reach an understanding;
but if they abandon their attitude of open conflict with the party, our will would
be to reach a point where the sanctioned comrades could again be active in the
party. It depends on them, for a party without internal discipline crumbles.

€16: was it necessary to go to the extreme of expelling the Madrid city councilmn
from the party?

8.6.: It was a test of strength which I do not understand. I understand that the
councilnen would defend their positions within the party and their qualification

as nanbers of the sane. I nust say that those sanctioned by the P803 [Spanish
Socialist Workers Party] had more of a party attitude. for they preferred to abandon
their positions and continue to hold the party's menbership card. In contrast, these
friends who call themselves co-tmists value position over nubership.

That they made this reverse decision, preferring position to party nubership, I
cannot understand and, from the standpoint of PCB ethics, 1 have never known this
to happen. If. tomorrow, someone said to ac or to thousands of nilitants: "Which
do you prefer: an identification card as deputy or an identification card as a
member of the party?” I would choose the party, for, above all, 1 an a mist.

616: Then the expelled councilnen are not good cos-unists?

8.0.: If they were, they could have comitted the error and even renained in their
position; but they would not have stood in the way of their replace-ant in the city
council. And here we have the question as to whom the elected council-en repre-
sent—relatively unknown voters or the party? According to political ethics and the
laws, persons elected through a candidacy represent the party and that is how the
voters choose them. They do not vote for then because of their none, for they are
persons who are sore or less known, but because they are candidates of the party.
They owe their responsibility to the party.

In
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

616: You say that the renewera are organized, but they deny that they are acting
as a faction.

8.6.: But what is a faction? When a periodical, the foremost among the leftists,
is, in fact, its spokesman; when there are horizontal and marginal meetings not
compatible with the party organization; and when money is collected inaaauch as
Lerchundi's activity in Nadrid and press announcnents cost money; this certainly
speaks of an organization from all viewpoints.

Obviously, if they admitted that they are organized, they would be acknowledging
that they are working as a faction; and this they will never confess. But it is
evident that they are organized and are operating in that nanner. The problem is
that they are foraing a faction without purpose. I would understand the dogmatics.
But among triads who assert that they have no political differences, alleging only
internal democracy, their work does not make sense. That labor is going to melt
away like a brittle sugar bar within the party if they do not clarify their attitude
and tell us precisely what they want.

C16: Aside from the lack of internal democracy, are they not also criticizing the
leadership of establishing policy in accordance with the prevailing situation with-
out a clear strategy?

S.C.: The only party which has a line so coherent, so coherent that it is repeated,
is ours. From the beginning we said that the 06!) [Democratic Center Union] could
not make the change by itself, and we added that we needed a coalition government
shortly after concentration, and now we are returning to a coalition. That is to
say, a government in which the Left participates. That has been our constant poli-
tical offer and now, since that kind of government did not emerge, the change was
not the profound and serious kind it should have been. I see no sound reasoning

in that criticiaa.

(:16: If there are no reasons to criticize the internal democracy or the political
line, is it then an open conflict by the renewera against Carrillism?

S.C.: In 1956 there was a crisis in the leadership which caused veteran leaders to
abandon their posts. Afterwards, until 1961, there was also the so-called pro-China
split. And the pro-China group engaged in launching that of Carrillisn, for they
thought it was more vulnerable to say Carrillist than to say PCB leadership. Then,
in 1968, after that of Prague, the pro-Soviets made another split and also ganged

up against me .

It was easier to attack Carrillism, which does not exist and is not a reality, than
to attack the leadership as an entity. The renewera are pursuing this same tactic,
thinking that to break up the leadership it is necessary to break the code of the
General Secretariat. Today it is I; if tomorrow it were another, it would be the

samc .

(:16: The present crisis could danage the commnists in the next election. Are you
taking that into account?

S.C.: We are restoring order in the party; and the way we would lose the election
is if we continue the pandemonium we have had up to now. But if the party reestab-

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lishes discipline and presents itself united at election tine, we shall not only
not loss but win votes.

0163 What is the present situation of the pro-Soviets in Catalonia and, in general.
in the PCB?

s.c.: What we speak of pro-Soviets. I distinguish between those who are carrying
on organized work, more or less controlled from wherever, and a use of party aili-
tants who, through their training and other factors. may sympathize with none as-
pects of the policy of the USSR. It will be difficult for the organized group which
follows directives foreign to our national interests and to those of the party to
continue, for it has another type of obedience.

The P806 has entered a phase of normalization. Prior to the Pifth Congress, organ-
ized factions were permitted, which greatly damaged the party and started the crisis.

616: And you considered that event when you sanctioned the renewers.
8.0.: Certainly. I do not want what happened in the P806 to happen in the party
as a whole. There was a disease in the PSUC-dmcratitisnwhich nanased to permit

the organization of factions and which, when they wanted to take stock, had gained

ground and transformed the party. In no way do I want this to happen now in the
Con-unist Party.

comment: 1981. Infomcion y Revistas, s.A.

8568
050: 3110/ 48 END

[:3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY