APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100020001-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020001-7

FOR OFHClAL USE ONLY

JPRS WM“
1 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N HESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 9/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020001-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information use
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrieed or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or. transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. ‘I‘imea within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
eies, views or attitudes of the v.3. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIWS

JPIS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Inforamtion Service. Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recmended that the JPIB number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Rearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.3. Government Printing Office, Hashington, 0.0.
201002.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, aria, M691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North clebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
Luv N-
no

e “(A

TWSMTIONS 0" WESTERN EUROPE,

pon ' 1e
1 Pebru 1979

    
   

          

 

    
    
     
    
      
  
   

(F000 9/79)

 
 

. Petlomlu «mum... Neale end Adda“
Joint Publication Reeeerch Service

1000 North clehe Rood .
Arlington. Virginie 2220l

l1, Soon-coin. Ocunludoo None nod Mdnee

  

Tho eoriel report conteine politicel/econonic infomtion on "est European
energy. finance end tredo policy lettere eo well on develop-onto end trends
in the doctrine. progreu end problem of tho nejor coo-Ionic: portion,

including their reletiono with co-miot pertiee outeide the ﬂeet Buropeen
erce. ' -

   

 

           
     
       
       
   
   
       
   
 

 

y «do end Ion-rot Acolyoie. e- Deutipeen

Political Science Llotcrnetionel Affeire __Luxenhourc

Sociology _Auotrie _lletherlende

Propegende _Belgiu _Norvey

Bcononice _cenede _Portugel

Energy _Cyprue _‘_8poin

lnduetry _Donnerk Lﬁmlen

‘l‘rede _Finlend _8viturlend

tinonce LPreuce _‘l'urkey

_Greece _llnitcd Kingdom

in acumen/Curbed to... Iceland _Veet Genny

   

m. cosm ﬁeld/Coup 5c, so, 10

Mellohéliey Sentence:
For Officiel Uec Only.
united Number of Copiee Aveileblo Prom JPRS.

um "lob-i! OICV. 8"]!

  
 
 

    
      
 

  

m “ “" °‘ """
k . I 55

mo Bonn um: or nanooucm "‘°""°‘ "”‘"”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8256

1 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE

(POUO 9/79)

Comm

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

FRANCE

ITALY

SPAIN

linden-nu Analyaea International Currency Proapecte
(10.0 Tham.‘ BUNPA AWIV, ‘0 D“ 78) eeeeeeeeeeeeecveo

Reeponeibilitiee of Armamente Delegate Outlined
(AIR 6 wsms, 6 J.“ 79) O...OOO...OOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOO...

Socialiete View Cmiat Participation in Leftiet Union
(Jean-Pierre Cot; u: mum osssxwmun, 8 Jan 79) ........

Brief a
PC!" e 13th Congreee

m be Malia Reply to PCI on Today'e Capitalia-
(Ugo 1.. Malta Interview; com mu 838A, 23 Dec 78) ..

PSUC Divided Into 1’”, Anti-'Leniniet' Factione
(mm 16' 26 D's 7‘) IOOOOOOOOOOOICOOOOOOOOOCOCCOOCCOOCOO

ETA Affiliated Baeque Leader Interviewed by Italian Magazine
(Federico Krutvig Sagredo Interview mm, ll; Nov 78) .

Major Shakeup in Maeeadorial Poete Reported
(mm 16’ 17 me 78) 0.0...0....OOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0

Britieh ﬂietorian Anelyrea Conetitutional Guaranteee, kishte '
(am MU: (”3.81388 DELLA st“, 22, 23 “C 78) eeeeeoeee

PAGE

10
12

15

16

29

32

66
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020001-7

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

oomrs (Conttnuod)

mu.
080 in Di inculuu

M031!

Brief.
Hut Swedish snout“

- b .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100020001-7
FOR OFI'ICIAL USE ONLY

INTIRNAI'IG‘AI. AFFAIRS

moms MALYZES INTERNATIG‘AL CURRENCY PROSPECTS
Bonn WRG’A ARCBIV in Ger-en 10 Dec 78 pp “7-751.

[Article by Leo Tindenene, prile ninieter of Belgiu- iron April 1971.
to October 1978. heeed on e report delivered by the euthor in Septuhcr

et the Tokyo Inetitute for Foreiun Policy: ”Internetionel end Europeen
Currency Perepectivee”)

[Text] In 1973, while holding the office of uinieter of finence, Preei-
dent Valery Giecerd d'Betein; ie euppoeed to heve eeid: ”Pomrly the
currency proble- ue e concern of the experte; plene vere nede thet
repreeented e curioue nixture of eophieticetion end inconpreheneibility.
low it hee beco-e e proble- for the govern-unto end thue e topic for
diecueeione non; the uricue etetee."

Never before in the poetver hietory of Ionetery policy hee thie r-erk
been no unqueetionebly true ee now. At the emit conferencee of the
chieie of etete of the European (lo-unity in April 1978 in Copenhegen end
et the beginning of July in Dre-en. the diecueeion iocueed on currency
problene. Like'iee, et the unit neetin; of the Heetern etetee in July
1978 in Bonn. currency problem repreeented the hey topic. At the
neetinge betveen Prise Hinieter ‘l'ekeo Pukude. Preeident Ji-y Certer ad
tederel Chencellor Ileluut Sci-idt, currency probleoe vere elveye on the
egende.

And thin in quite neturel, eince the nonetory eituetion increeeingly
eii’ecte the internetionel trede. the econooic conditione end thue eleo
the velfere of the verioue netione.

It ie tro- thie politicel viewpoint thet one not ccneider the ettcpte
to etehilire the reletionehipe betveen the Europeea currenciee. He vill
firet plece the Europeen endeevore in the lerger context of. whet hee to be
done on the slobel level, in order to reeeteblieh e nonetary eyetel.

Secondly, we till diecuee the reeeone underlying theee ettcpte. the crit-
ici- voiced in one quertere. and the hietoricel beckground. Pinelly,
1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we will enelyre the reeulte of the Dre-en or.“ conference, where eignifi-
cent progreee wee nede in regerd to the eetehliehnent of e zone of nono-
tery etebility in Europe. '

Toward e New lnternetionel Honetery Syete-

he regerde the preeent internetionel Ionetery eyetel, the queetion erieee
no to how to overcoue the iebelencee in peylente end correct the eurplueee
end deficite. ‘l‘he experte cell thie en edjuetnent proceee. In the Orgen-
itetion for lconaic Cooperetion end Developeent (0m). theee probleee
ere deelt with by Study Te. 11: which ie heeded by the Jepeneee linieter
of Finence Dieteuhuwe. Ae ie well known. in the lretton Uoode Syetel.
which for over 25 yeere rendered good eervicee to the world econoey, ehort-_
tern belence of peyuente deficite were for the noet pert corrected through
internel neeeuree, i.e. prieerily through nonetery end fiecel policy. A
country ehowing e deficit ueed to eubject iteelf to etricter hudgetery end
nonetery diecipline. ly reetricting doneetic dnud. reeourcee were Iede
eveileble for eaporte; ilporte were reduced cud thue equilibriu wee re-

etored. Only in the event of e perticulerly eerioue iebelnce in peylente
wee e foreign trede-oriented eolution edopted. i.e. e chmge in the ex-

chenge rete.

‘l'hie eyetee collepeed prieerily beceuee the externel edjueuente were not
cerried out in e wey eppropriete. 0n the one hend. the United Stetee hed
for too long tolereted e coneidereble deficit without reeorting to depre-
cietion. ‘l'hie wee eede poeeible on account of the eutoeeticelly eveileble
finencing: ‘l'he doller etill ie reeerve currency. 0n the other hend.

eoue countriee thet ehowed e beluce of peyeente eurplue refueed to re-
velue their currenciee end tried to neutreliee the effect of thie eurplue
on eonetery policy. ‘l'hue the eonetery eyetee crested by the Iretton Boode
Agree-mt euffered froe the feet thet et tieee it wee .epplied too rigidly.

Since 1973, eonetery policy hee gone to the other extre-e: Bxceeeiye
flexibility end generel fleeting of the Ioet inortmt currenciee. Such
e eolution hed long been rete-ended by the theoreticiene. Anglo-Saxon
ecedeeic circlee hed elveye been inclined towerd the View thet in order
to correct peylente eurplueee aid deficite it wee eufficient to let the
currenciee floet. ‘l'hey felt thet currency reweluetion could elieinete
the eurplueee end thet deprecietion could quickly reduce the deficite.
Thue it would no longer be neceeeery to influence do-eetic deeend.
Honetery end hudgetery eeeeuree were no longer to be eeployed for eolving
belence of pepente probleee, but only for internel purpoeee euch ee
econoeic growth, qlopent policy end price etebility. ~

Actuelly, in the leet 5 yeere the peylente inbelencee of the induetriel
countriee were enonoue. Apert fro. the effecte of the oil crieie, the
induetriel countriee' belencee of peernte ere influenced lore etrongly
by the growth of doeeetic deemd then by exchange rete fluctuetione. ‘l'hie

2

_POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

i. due to the fact that the exchange rate fluctuation. effect inport. and
export. only gradually. wherea. a riee or decline in doueetic denand
quickly influence. good. turnover and .ervic...

‘l'he develop-ent of the Japenaee econoey i. a good example in thie regard.
Deepite the .pectecular revaluation of the yen, Japan continue. to accuu-
late i-enoe pay-ent. .urplu.e.. The en. goee for Switzerland anduto a
leeeer degreeo-for the Federal Republic of Genny. In contraet, the
herican dollar depreciated greatly, and the United State. incurred con-
eiderable deficite.

‘l‘hu. it we. an illu.ion to aeeue that the pay-onto balance could be re-
.tored through the exchange rate approach alone and that currency floating
could .olve the problene. txchange rate adjuetlent can produce the re-
eulta de.ired only if internal neaeure. are taken concurrently. In
countriee .horing a chronic deficit and a high rate of inflation. currency
devaluation ie advieable only if it i. accoupenied by aeeeuree eieed at
reetricting doneetic delad. ‘lhi. ie what bec-e apparent in the la.t
few year. in meat Britain.

Incidentally, currency revaluation will reduce a balance of pay-ente
.urplua only if it i. accolpanied by Ieeeure. ailed at pronoting doneetic
expaneion. In the abeence of a concurrent .tinulation of doleatic demand,
a currency revaluation will lead to decreaeed profit. in the export
.ector and to a elowing of economic activity, and thi. in it. turn will
negatively affect inert. and further increaee- the eurplue. Coneequently,

one ehould welcu. the pup-pricing neaeurae recently adopted by Japa and
the Federal Republic of (Benny.

At the en. ti... however. the countriee .howing pay-onto deficit. nuet
likewiu take neaeuree; thi. goee eepecially for the United Stat... which
could reduce it. deficit through an appropriate energy policy. l'heee
etepe that ehould be taken by deficit a. well a. eurplue countriee will

help reduce the Malance in paylente and bring about greater nonetary
.tability.

Thee. coneideration. regarding the overly rigid application of the bretton
Hood. Syeten and the obvioue ahortconinge of a nonetary eyete- characterized
by an exceeeive influence of exchange rate. lead to a third aethod of in-
proving international currency reletione.

Thi. third eolution we. taken into coneideration a. early a. the end of

1975 in the "Tindelane Report" on the European Union. Fortunately. theee
coneideratione have eince attracted greater attention. For thie reaeon,

we will develop the topic in greater detail. a; the one hand, it goee
without eaying that unueually .harp exchange rate fluctuation. will have

a dieturbing effect on international trade and will introduce a eenee of
uncertainty into econuic activity. It i. very difficult for the entre-

preneur. to predict in tern. of .the local currency the price of the

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

inported raw uteriale ueed for producing th.ir good. or the proceed. of
the eel. of thee. product. abroad. Theee extraordinarily wide fluctua-
tion. are one of the cauee.--albeit not the only chem-underlying the
preeent econonic crieie.

0n the other hand, it nuet be conceded that it would be unrealietic to
erpect for the near future a return to a global eyeten of fixed paritiee.
‘l'he expeneion of international capital treneection. due to the interne-
tionaliretion of .cononic life he. aeeued .uch dineneione that a return
to a global eyeten of fixed paritie.--euch a. exieted under the lretton
Hood. Syeteno-ie highly unlikely.

So whet inprovenent. could conceivably be rude? There are two aepecte
that deeery. coneiderationa

The firet aepect of a gradual return to greater international nonetary
etability ie the .ubdivi.ion of the world into large zone. characterized
by etable nonetary interrelationehipu in then. ton... the exchange rate.
would be nor. etable due to inproved coordination of econonic policy.
There are three principal zone. that .hould be coneideredx A yen zone, a
Buropean zone and a dollar zone. At the European O-lt neeting in Bruen,
the foundation. were laid for a European ton. of nonetary .tability,

The .econd aepect would be the attenpt to re.trict to a mini..- the ex-
change rate fluctuation. between thee. U11". zone. and at the en. tin.
to en.ure a high level of econonic activity through i-proved coordination
of the econonic policiee of the three ton... eepecielly in the budgetary
and nonetary .ector.. A. i. well hnown, nonetary policy directly affect.
cepitel traneaction., and fiecal policy ie of crucial i-portance in regard
to the developnent of doneetic demand.

In the attenpte to inprove the nonetery eituetion in regard to thee. two
aepecte. Japan and Europe in capany with the United State. can play an
important role. The European etatee nuet try to .tabilice the relation-
ehip. between their currencie. and they ehould all perticipate in a progr-
ained at econonic recovery. Jepm. too. can Iehe a contribution by etin-
ulating it. econcuy and opening it. border. to inporteg th... n.e.uree
would reduce it. eurplueee and keep within limit. the fluctuation. of the
yen in relation to the dollar ad the European currenciee.

tinelly. it goee without eaying that the United Stet... too, could nah. an
inportant contribution by reducing it. balance of pay-.nt. deficit-
prinerily by taking energetic neeeuree in the energy .ector-o. by nor. .-
phatically checking inflation and by pureuing a .uificiently .trict
nonetary policy.

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Monetary Heeeuree in Europe

Ilaving preeented thie eurvey of international nonetery problem, we will
now diecuee the epecial role to be played by Europe in regard to a enlution
of theee problene. Firet of all, we nuet ex-ine the rationale underlying
the European nonetary plane: eubeequently, we will diecuee certain critical
co—ente that were nede in thin regerd; finally. we will preeent a
runny of the conclueione reeched in Bruen by the European Council.

The Reaeone Underlying the Bfforte Toward Honetery Stability in Europe

Stable monetary relatione are of great inportence in bringing about eco-

nonic recovery and in reducing unenploy-entuproblene that the European
countriee are very nuch concerned about.

It ie beconing lore and lore apparent that the nonetary inetability in
Europe hae e deflationery effect on the econoniee. The abnornally aharp
appreciation of cone currenciee haa led in hut-ope to a coneidereble reduc-
tion of profite in the export eector and to en indiaputable drop in regard
to eelee figuree. The fact that in 1977 the Federal Republic of Ger-any
wae repeatedly forced to adjuet downward ite growth rate repreeente une-
quivocal proof of thie theeie.

In thoee countriee, in which the currency wae depreciated too eeverely in
relation to the etrong currenciee, thie depreciation hae an inhibitory
effect on econonir recovery. Theae countriee are afraid of etinuleting
the econony when inorte are on the increaee. Thie pute preeeure on their
balance of pay-ente and eventually leeda to further currency devaluation.

Thue, the low growth rate in countriee diatinguiehed by e atrong currency
operatee like a atraightjacket on the weak-currency countriee. Horeover,

the uncertainty in the currency eector hae by iteelf an inhibitory effect
on invent-ent activity and econcuic recovery.

Coneequently, an increaee in nonetary etebility ahould have a poeitive
effect in regard to the enploynent eituation end econonic recovery. An
increaee in nonetary etability ie aleo an incentive to pureue a sore ex-

pedient induetriel and trade policy than would be precticeble within the
fruework of e nere cuatone union.

In diecueaione with bueineea leadera, one again and again heere the col-
plaint that due to the continuing exchenge rate riek it wee difficult to
eetablieh enterprieee of European dineneione. It in difficult for the
entrepreneure to calculate in terne of their own currency the right price
of imported goode. It in aleo difficult to eetinate in tone of local
noney the proceede frcn export goode, the price of which in calculated in
foreign noney._ Due to thin uncertainty, the entarprieee do not reaiite
the full potential profit fro. a Iarltet encomaeeing all of Europe.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It ie eafe to eay that ae far ae the negative effecte on the develop-ent
of trade are concerned, the exchange rate fluctuatione have taken the
place of the forner cuetone frontiere. An increaae in nonetary etability
could greatly pro-ate induetriel developnent and eerve to Iaintain an

open trade policy.

Greater monetary etability ie aleo a neane of fighting inflation. An ex-
ceceive currency depreciation i-ediately reeulte in higher inport pricee.
In countriee with index-controlled pricee lid wagee, theee inport pricee
quickly affect the general price level. ‘l‘hie goee eepecially for free-
narket econoniee, in which foreign trade accounte for a large ehare.

Furthermore, it ie eelf-evident that any increaee in nonetery etability
in Europe would inprove the functioning of the agrarian narket which due
to the exchange rate fluctuatione hae been eubject to eevere dieruptione
in the leet few yeare. finally-curd thie ie by no name the leaet i.-
portant arguent-o, progreee in regard to the nonetary union ie bound to
epeed up the proceee of the political integration of Europe. he early cc
1909, the French economiet Jaquee Rueff wrote: ”lurope will be unified
on a monetary baeie or not at all." One need not accept thie without
reeervatione. But it cannot be denied that progreee in the field of
nonetary policy would be an inportant etep ahead for Europe.

The Objectione

A large nr-ber of objectione have been raieed againet the current efforte
in the field of nonetary policy:

Frequently, it ie pointed out that in view of the entrene divergence
between the ratee of inflation in the European countriee, it would be pre-
nature to launch the nonatary union. The reply to thie arguent ca be
emarized in four pointe:

Firetly, one nuet realize that the exchange rate nechaniue can have only
a linited effect if they are the only inetruaent of coordination. Ap wee
pointed out above, it ie imperative that the introduction of a vote. of
exchange rate etabilitation be accqanied by a real coordination of
econonic policy in other eectore, eepecially in the field of internal
capital fornation, but aleo in the field of budgetary policy.

Secondly, it ehould be conceded that due to the exchuge rate ”chalice
an increaae in nonetary etebility on help to promote econonic convergence.
‘l'hie wee evident already in the European "enake," whi -.h conprieee the
currenciee of Germany, Den-ark and the Benelux countriee and to which

the Norwegian krone hee been linked up. The enake hae definitely brought
the varime currenciee cloeer together, eince affiliation with the enake
proauppoeae in every participant a certain degree of diecipline.

6

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore, we would like to point out that the recent paet hae been
characterized by a renewed convergence of the economic develop-ent of the
European etetee; thie ie prinarily due to decreaeed inbalancee in pay-ente
and leeeening differencee in regard to price hikee. One need only mention
here the fundaental inprovenente in Great Britain and Italy.

Finally, the new exchange rate Iechanien notwithetanding, the potentially

peraietent great differencee between the ratee of inflation will affect
the exchange retee.

According to a eecond ob Jection, euch en arrange-eat would deprive the
varioue countriee of all freedo. of action and would repreeent a loee of
eovereignty. In reply to thie argument, three pointe can be nade:

The recent evente in the currency areae affected by the uneteble dollar
rate were an indication of the linite reetricting the individual nation
etate. 0n the other hand, if they eetablieh the European nonetary union.
the European etatee would in a body recoup at leaet part of the loot
power. '

Furtheriore, eole countriee that had encountered difficultiee had to
eubnit to the perenptory injunctione of the International Monetary Fund.
In doing eo, did they not give up such nore of their eovereign authority?
Ie it really aeking too ouch to call for a linited tranefer of authority
to the European level. particularly eince ouch e tranefer will be coupled
with neaeuree ained at strengthening Ruropean eolidarity?

And finally, we would like to repeat that fro. a technical point of view
the planned tranefer of authority doee not entail exceeeive injunctione
cowl-icing intolerable coercive neaeuree.

Finally, there it the objection that progreee in the monetary eector
would be poeeible only on a global level, within the fr-ework of the

International Monetary Fund and on condition that an agree-eat will be
reached in regard to the dollar.

In reply to thie arguent, one not firet of all point out that the re-
etabilitation of the dollar will obviouely greatly contribute to Ionetary
etability in Europe and on a global level. It ie 0 fact that the eztrene
fluctuatione of the dollar have exacerbated the teneione between the
European currenciee. In collaboration with the United Stetee, Europe
Inuet continue ite efforte and eupport any move likely to increaee the
etability of the dollar vie-a-vie the European currenciee. But theee

efforte ehould be a conplenent, not an altemtiwe, to the intra-Europeann
efforte.

Ae wae pointed out above, an iwportant factor in regard to the return
to greater international etability ie the eetablietnent of large etability

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eonoe conducive to etoble exchongo retee. Thie con contribute to on in-
prowed coordinetion of the oconoeic end nonotery policiee in theoe :onee.
thuo preventing encooeiwo fluctuotione between the otrongor currencieo or
groupo of currencioo.

‘i'ho Subotence of the Ire-on Agree-onto

ln Ire-en, the chiofe of etoto exenined e deteilod plen concerning the
ooteblioinontof ozone of Ionetery otebility in Europe. ‘ihoy wore ogroed
thet thio plen woe to fore the booie of o technicol etudy which would be
conpleted by 3l October l97d end which would contoin ell the roguietiono
concerning the operotion of the oyeton. On the booio of thio etudy. the
Suropeen Council in lrueoeio io to odopt by the end of l978 the oppropriete
reeolutione end errengononte.

Tho lronen plon caprioeo three porter

I. An enchengo rote nochonion .IIOO ot etebiliring the roletionehipe
between the turopeen currencioo. ‘ihio oyeton ehould be ot leeet oo etrict
oe the "enoke." In principle, the interventiono will be cerried out in
the currenciee of the porticipont countrioe.

2. The introduction of o Buropoen currency-echo NI [Europoen lionetory
Unit)». the prooent Buropoen eccountin; unit which in foct coneiote of
the currencieo of the co-unity. 'i'hio m io to be uood ebowo ell for
money trmofore non. the nonetory inotitutiono of the ac otetoo. In
other wordo, the control bonito ere ouppoood to be oblo to coke their pey-
nento in m, whoreoo up to now the inetruont of trenofor hoe elloot
elwoyo been the dollor. ‘i'hooe M oro to be booed on funde which oro do-
poeitod by the control bonito M which oro portly node up of cold end
dollere (ea. 20 percent of the cuotouery reoeryo fund of the control
benho) end portly of currencioo of the nonbor ototeo. ln tbio ceoo,
however. the m ore to be convertible into e notionol currency only if
the recipient country nooto the oconouic conditiono ottoching thereto.
The ioouonce of M in return for gold or dollere will be coco-ponied by
e co-onoureto reduction of the control benk rooorveo.

3. The eotebliolnont of e turopoen lonotery fund which io to develop
into e control bent.

Conc ludin; Ronorko

The inotobility of tho intornotionel nonotery oituetion hoe o her-ful
effect on the world oconc-y end io one of tho couooo underlying the
preoent crieio. Moreover, the coincidence of nonotery inotobility end

incroeoin; unocplopent inteneifioe in any countrioe the protectioniot
tendenciee throotonin; the world «one». Iinelly. the nonotory in-

otebility heo o negotiye effect on tho legitiueto intereoto of the do.
volopin; countrioo.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in conoideretion of thie denger. the induetrielired countriee met et any
price delonetrete their eoliderity end reeolve. The Buropeen efforte in
the nonetery eector ehoold he coneidered the firet etep in the retorn to
greeter internetionel nonetery etehility. Along with theee eitorte towerd
the eetehlieh-ent of e Suropeen Ionetery union, the perticipente met
ehow greeter deteninetion to coordinete the luropeen econoliee. ‘i'heir
eiiorte will then be for the generel benefit of tho world «may.

Aeide iron thie Buropeen contribution. en increeee in nonetery etehility
on e glohel eoele preeuppoeee .reeter eiforte on the pert oi the United

Stetee in regerd to the reduction of ite penente deficit end on the pert
of Jepen in regerd to the reduction of ite lone eurplue. Coneequently,

Jepen'e recent decieion to tote pup-prising oeeeoree ie very ouch eppreci-
eted in Borope.

lneofer ee eech one of the lerce induetriel countriee purpoeerully con-
tributee to oonetery etehility end to the recovery of the world econo-y.
they will ell help to prolote the well-being of hundrede of Iillione of
people in both the inductrielited end the developing countriee.

comma: 1978 Verle; iner lnternetionele Politik us, Bonn

0760
080: 3103

9
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'OR OHICIM. USE ONLY

FRANCE

RESPONSIBILITIES OF W8 DELEGATE OUTLINE!)
Paris All I 608308 in French 6 Jan 79 p 13

[Text] A decree of la Dace-her which appeared in the official gazette
of 24 Deco-bar 1978 set the responsibilities of the general area-ants dele-
gate.

The general aments delegate:

Prepares. submits for the approval of the minister for the Arnies and
causes to be executed the programs of study. research and manufacture
of araanents within the fraaework of the objectives defined by the
Defense liinister and the nilitary progra-ing established in tens of
the needs expressed by the quartermaster generals. The general delegate
takes into account particularly the ailitary specifications defined by
the quartermaster generals for new neteriel. The general delegate pro-

poses to the ninister technical and industrial actions to be taken on
the international level;

Causes repairs of an industrial nature to be executed at the request
of the quarternaster generals concerned;

ls responsible, by delegation of the Defense Minister, for ensuring the
protection granted to the concerned ainisters over the organisations
subject to control by the state. This control is especially extended to
the nationalized aerospace industry. But the general ananents delegate
is also responsible for the control of private enterprises working for
armaments.

The general delegate for armaments provides, except for special provisions,
the vice presidency of co-ittees or councils presided over by the ainister
having to do with research, studies and prograes of araaeents. lie also pro-

vides the chairmanship of restricted proceedings of these sane co-ittees or
councils.

The general armanonts delegate manages and administers the nilitary corps
placed under his authority. lie exercises vis-a-vis other personnel affected

by the general ans-ants delegation or put at its disposal the responsibilities

10
NR OFPICIAI. USE ONLY
)‘0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

given hla by the special texts. llo prepares the draft budget for the depart-
aents placed under his authority. Ile participates in the manage-ent of the
area for which the depart-outs placed under his authority are responsible.

The general anauents delegate is assisted by a deputy and has at his disposal
a staff, of ailitary advisers appointed with his agreement by the quarter-

naster generals. and charges de aission appointed by the minister as proposed
by hia. He has authority over the inspector of aruaents and over the tech-
nical inspectors of anaaents. He may request the ainister to cause to be

executed by the any lists investigations that coae within the area of his
responsibilities.

comuarr: Air 8 Cosaos. Paris. 1979.

8946
C50: 3100

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

SOCIALISTS VIBN WIS? PARTICIPATION IN LBFTIST INION

Paris [.8 NOUVBI. OBSERVATBUR in French 8 Jan 79 pp 28. 29
[Article by Jean-Pierre Cot. Socialist deputy froa Sevoie: "he lust Be Aware")

[Text] Only the truth is revolutionary. especially when it is not easy to
speak it. When the Socialist Party questions itself several weeks after the
Nets congress, it is necessary to recall that laxia. Unity of the Party will
not be achieved in conﬁlsion. but in clarity. The difficulties will not be
resolved by strokes of procedural cunning. but by posing the probleas in depth.
In that respect. will we have the courage to take a clear look at reality? Or
else. succunbing to the teqtation of the new roaanticise. will we seek rehage
in e didoourse that persists in ignoring reality?

No one can any longer be maware that the "Co—en Program of the Left" was
signed in 1972. whereas the present France is the France of the Barre plan.
At the ties there were 300.000 unequoyed; today there are nearly a lillion
and a half. The growth rate was around 6 percent per year; it has fallen to
3 percent. Inflation, which was about 5 percent. has dowled since then,
while the accmlated indebtedness of the Giscard budgets exceeds the for-er
10.000.000.000.000 francs.

In this unsettled context. the Conunist Party's atteqts to get votes in 1977
and 1978 oddly unbalanced the project: transforming into a demanding six-eonth

pregran what was a progra- te be applied in five years.

Today we have to pose the problem: do we continue to scrutinize the text that
has no great relation to present reality or do we build the progran the French
are expecting for the 1980's? bet as be throughly understood. It is not a
question of questioning again the nationalisation-planning-self-aanegeaent
triptych. terns of the break with capitalise, but one of defining it in a red-
ically different situation. Strictly, not coqlacently.

On one can any longer be unaware that the Ce-lnist Party broke up the Union
of the Left in September 1977. No one has the right to act as if nothing had
happened. to repeat "Union! Union!" as if the incantation could replace the
reality or resuscitate it by some magic property. It is a question of rebuild-
ing the Union of the Left, patiently and tenaciously. Starting with the basic

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
construction that alone bears the workers' hopes and that is for this reason
more necessary than ever. But knowing that it is more difficult than ever.

The Conunist Party has locked itself into a division logic. from which it
cannot be extracted by a silple change in the proportion of electoral strength.
it is necessary for all workers to force it to change its position by raking
its present attitude untenable.

The Conunist Party today is the only leftist organization to have a systeaat-
ically anti-unitary practice, to dispute in action and every day the Union of
the Left, even while proclaiaing the reverse. It is necessary to take up the
conflict on social ground--the tagging along innocently extolled by some would
run counter to the sought-after goal-oand coalesce the unitary energy. in or-
der to condemn the Comnists to union. Concrete proposals toward the Con-
nunist Party should follow later.

No one can any longer be unaware of the world crisis. the collapse of the in-
ternational monetary systea, the mltiplication by five of the price of oil.
the general economic recession with its train of confusion and protectionist
attelpts, the wavo of nationalism and chauvinisl. Jacques Chirac and
Georges Marchais. bound by a strange alliance. stroke the jingoisa sentiaents
and reawaken the fear of the hereditary eneay by means of the iaage of a Ger-
man Europe. We have no right to act as if nothing was happening, to let this
discourse develop until it reaches our ranks. even while we protest our good
European sentiaents.

The German question backs the Socialist Party into a corner. For my part, 1
consider it too iaportant to be treated parenthetically with considerations of
doaestic policy or. even worse, of congress strategy. 0n the whole the nat-
ionalist talk works, underlining the bases of a still recent over-the-Rhine
deaocracy, awakens dangerous forces and gives then a credibility they were

not hoping for. By undermining European construction, this nationalisa is
throwing Germany into the arms of the United States, unless it is into the
ans of the Soviet Union. Is that what we are looking for? if so, we need

to say so clearly.

The sane nationalist tc-ptation drives some to refuse Southern Europe, to op-
pose the expansion of the Co-on Market. A singular concept of international
solidarity-oto go back on a conitment clearly subscribed in 1972 within the
framework of the "Co-on Program." whereas all the forces of the left in
Spain are deaanding lenbership for their country in order to consolidate its
deaoc;atic regime. the French left has no right to say no, except by denying
itsel .

Finally. international solidarity is put to the test in our relations with the
third world. One cannot at the sane time deaand a new world econonic order
and reject any change in the international division of labor; denand aore jus-
tice in international trade and extol an egoistic protectionisa in order to
solve our difficult internal problems. To give a rather uncomfortable exal-
ple, we all know that steel is basic in the effort of industrialising the
third world countries. Are we accepting this fact, with all the consequences

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it brings with it. or are we seeking to naintain the third world in a pre-
industrial condition? Socialist solutions exist: codevolopaent agreements.
international planning for production. respect for the international organiza-
tion .ttsndards for labor. etc. The dilem is nonetheless posed. Have we

decided to solve it?

No one can any longer be unaware that we lost the elections of last 12 and

19 March. Since then the Socialist Party's leadership has been locked into
silence. as if paralysed. Today the too-long-spurned debate lust take place.
not to bring Judgnent on a past. but to prepare for the future. For to re-
peat is not enough. Ho are fuiliar with the danger of a discourse on the left
which, for lack of coping with the real would cone to cover conproaises and,

under the pretext of fighting the Giscardian goverment. would help it.
COPYRIGﬂ‘: 1979 "Le Nouvel Observateur"

8946
(:80: 3100

16
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR ONICIAL 088 ONLY

mac:

BRIEFS
PCP'S 13TH CONGRESS-~1he 13th congreee of the PCP will teke plece fro-

10 to 13 Key 1979, e: the Centre Sport“ of Selnt-Ouen [northeeetern

suburb of mm] where 1: an held in 1976. [Text] [Perle PARIS MTG}!
1n Punch 19 Jen 79 p 79]

680: 3100

15

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

PRI LA MALTA REPLY TO PCI 0N TODAY'S CAPITALISM
Milan CORRIBRB DELLA SBRA in Italian 23 Dec 78 pp 11-12

[Interview with Ugo Le Hslfa by Alberto Ronchey: "what Is Capitalism Todey?
Ls Halfa Answers Barlinguer and Anendols"; date and place not given]

[Text] Does s capitalist crisis exist? whet is capitalise
today? How can we interpret the shock suffered by western
industrial econoaies following the international nonetsry
system and petroleum crises? why is the instability of the
Italian economy more serious then thst in other western
industrial societies?

These questions are the subject of s tenacious discussion
promoted by the coemunist left. The discussion is parallel
to the confrontation between Italian political forces on
the eaargency government and on future prospects. They
are not aaraly theoretical questions. or of no interest to
practical aen, whether these be line engineers or bankers.
trade unionists or businessmen.

According to Ugo La Hslfs's analysis reported here by
CORRIERZ DELLA SBRA, the discussion on what is called
capitalism is today clouded in Italy by conceptual backward-
ness and verbal nisunderstandings. Rather he presents an
explanation of capitalisn as a simple "instrument" that can
be directed by different impulses or conditioning so long
as they do not contradict each other.

The thoughts and practical observations by La Helfa. inter-
locutor and also contradictor of the left. are based on his
nuaerous experiences: Prom research work in the research
office of Rsffaele Hattioli‘s lenca Con-arciale [Commercial
Bank] in the years of the great crisis to the first report
drafted for the De Gasperi governaent on the systea of state
participation. from trade liberalization decided upon in
1951 as foreign trade minister, to the ”Note" of 1962 as
budget minister on distortions in Italian development, from

16

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

antiinflationary measures as treasury minister to the recent
battle for admission of Italy into the EMS [European Hone-
tary System].

Alberto Ronchey questions him and comments on his answers.
He has already dealt with the controversial subject of
”capitalist crisis" in CORRIBRB DELLA SBRA and in a tale-
vision debate with Giorgio Amendols.

l -- Ronchey--In his speech at Genoa. Enrico Berlinguer spoke of "obsolescence"
of capitalise. Franco Rodano prefers the new word "fuoriuscita" [flight]. In
L'UNITA, Giorgio Auendola maintained that a "general crisis of capitalism
exists." Claudio Napoleoni wrote that we are in "no man's land" in Italy
today. It is no longer capitalism but still not socialism. Pietro Ingrao, in
his latest book "Crisis and the Third Road" speaks of a crisis of the social
model. of state economy which has prevailed in the west, only of troubles and
difficulties in the nations of the seat. In a recent discussion. you said
instead. that the capitalist system is sorely the industrial system and that
you believe this is neutral per se. "hat did you mean by this?

Ln Halfa--It is necessary to add to the episodes you recall. the case of
socialists such as Lombardi. They too speak of the crisis of capitalism. I
have given much thought in recent years to terminology referring. on one hand.
to countries with "real socialism" and on the other "the capitalist system."
Accepting such definitions. even the non-Leninist left forgets that e classi-
fication of this kind can only be made if we return to the very old concept
that holds that capitalism exists where there is private ownership of the
means of production and socialism where there is no private ownership. But

if this is accepted, what progress have we made? Really. are the capitalist
and socialist systems distinguished on the basis of private or public owner-
ship of the means of production? Yet the left in general, even those so-called
ideologically up-to-date critics. consider those nations capitalist in which
privately owned means of production move the mechanism.

"by. then. do I consider the mechanism neutral?_ Because one system as well
as another is affected by the forces of the political structure and social
struggle. ﬂow the theory that considers political forces. and even trade union

forces, as superstructure. while the basic structure is capitalist. seems to
me entirely without foundation. ‘

Political and social forces provide the stimulus. Naturally the stimulus
depends on the character of the individual forces. low, this capitalist system
has been capable of receiving stimuli. That is, when we speak of what the
social desocrecies have done we say that they have corrected capitalism. More
precisely. what sort of stimulus has it provided? Since they did not claim
that the distinction between private and public ownership was fundamental, and
therefore could choose whether or not to establish national osnership. these
socio-politicsl forces have brought about a redistribution of incoae.

17

rue orrrcm use out!
Now it is said that there is a capitalist crisis following the increase in oil
prices. but that is not a capitalist crisis. When the system suffers an out-
side ispact on raw asterials. it is not the systea that is placed in crisis,
but distribution of incense which the politicalvsocial forces have esployed in
order to absorb the blow.

RoncheyuNewertheless. it can be recalled that the price increase for raw
uterials, like the four-fold increase of oil prices. is not a cause but an
effect of the phenonenon which Anerican sociologist Daniel Bell, called the
"revolution of rising expectations." This phenosenon, which is widespread
in the sore productive economies. was largely bait for those inflationary
tensions that are the consequence of cowetition for distribution of income
in western societies. After many years-«bout 20 yesrsuof such tensions.
when because of inflatiOn the Third ﬂorid could no longer accept the terns of
trade between the west which was an exporter of industrial products and the
nations that exported raw materials. on a propitious occasion such as the
You Kippur war. there was not only an external disturbance of western ncchan~
iess. but this was provoked by the way the western aechanisas functioned.

Ls halfauYou talk of rising expectations. It is clear that production was
strongly “insisted to encourage distribution on the donestic aarkst. Then
the expectations concerning the doaestic market were added to the expecta-
tions of the Third World. It is clear that in the Third Horld cowarison
with the standard of living of the western saasea has aroused these expecta-
tions. in fact. I aust say that even socialist nations such as China today
think of everything but keeping their societies in a primitive state and
therefore they coepete to achieve an advanced degree of industrialisation.
But it met be established precisely what the Third world expectations put
into s state of crisis. The problsn of oil is that the western systea is
deprived of the use of cheap raw materials. The Arab nations have obtained
a redistribution of intone because they have had a monopoly position and they
have i-posed it. Do we want to support other areas of the Third World?

Very well. we need do nothing but restrict the commtion potential within
the systea. Therefore, to speak of a crisis of capitalism when it is a crisis
that affects the social less of the western world is a conceptual error

that leads to distortions. The oil prices indicate that the cysts. is
receiving external stiauli, but it is not capitalise that lust be aware of
this, it is the logic of political and trade union control of the system that
must be aware of it. And how is it possible to support the other pre-indus-
trial nations? An absurd situation is reached when capitalise goes to build
a plant in the Third world. where there is labor, and this is called exploi-
tation. Instead. capitalism through these transfers, pushes the Third Horld
forward, exercising leverage on the low cost of labor.

Ronchey-«Concerning use of raw laterials, on the other hand. it can also be
recalled that, for exaaple, petroleus is good so long as a sarket capable of
absorbing it exists in the industrial world, and it is produced because there
exists a technology that emerged from the industrial world that can produce
it. Therefore, the price of oil. rewalued again in recent weeks, is what
liar: defined specifically as income from sonopoly or position.

18
FOR OFFICIAL “SB 0313
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

La Halfa--I want to emphasize the concept that when the price of raw materials
from the underdeveloped world increases. the power of consumption of indus-
trisl societies is limited but the system is not affected. New. to what do
we refuse to adapt? At this point we find a straw man. known as capitalism.
upon whom to unload all responsibility. The crisis of the aid philosophy

of capitalist nations is now being discussed. But that crisis refers to how
the social democracies have posed the problem. what have the social democ-
racies done? They have provoked stimulus of the system presupposing. for
example. the relatively low price of raw materials and letting capitalism
implement a distribution on the basis of growing consumption on a vertical
order. Naturally. if outside influence is exercised. this distribution can
enter a critical phase. But it is not a crisis of capitalism. it is a crisis
of how the leftist forces have seen the terms of the problem. Now suppose
that I want to aid the Third Horld and make interest-free loans assuming

’the financial burden for it. If I grant Egypt an interest-free loan. as a
consequence I reduce consumption by the population of my country. Then
capitalism, the productive system. receives its stimulus from the Third world
market instead of from the domestic market.

In Russia Productivity Is Very Low Because Incentives Have Never Bxistsd

2 - Ronchey--Then what is called capitalism is merely the industrial system.
that is. an instrument. But the instrument in itself does not err. .It can
be used wrongly in the same way that it is not the computer.that errs. but the
programmer. The machine can be used in various ways. Its ownership can be
private. mixed or state. as happens in eastern Europe. It is a matter of
seeing how and through what ownership systea it functions best and produces
more. but to assign blame to a machine is animism within the framework of a
theological concept of economy. Is this what you mean?

ls Malfa--Bxactly.

Ronchey--Giorgio Amendols speaks as though the instrument had a soul. In fact.
he went so far as to assess it in L'UNITA with this phrase: "The survival of
capitalism infects the whole world." Amendola considers capitalism even re-
sponsible for world underproduction in terms of the 7 billion people at the end
of the century. as if the problem of dealing with population growth is the re-
sponsibility of only one oart of the world and not also of the USSR. China.
Cuba. '

La Halfa--Even here I think things are said that are not true. Let us suppose
a confrontation between the USSR and India. what distinguishes the two nations
from the point of view of world problems? The USSR has infinite resources.
even though they have been used badly or not used at all during the Czarist
period while today they are exploited through a system whose production is low
because of bureaucracy and lack of incentives. Nevertheless. the Soviet
Union's power resides in the relationship between population and resources.

In fact. the relationship between population and resources in India is
frightening. This is a natural condition that can be corrected. but in order
to correct this it is not true that the capitalist system must be abolished.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USB ONLY

The system can be stimulated so deeply as to create a crisis in nations used
to a high standard of living in order to achieve improvement where the stand-

ard of living was lower. There is a refusal to recognize that this is the
problem.

Certainly in India's case the problem may depend. as in the case of Czarist
Russia. on the inability or failure of an entrepreneurial class. that is. on
the lack of personnel capable of developing a capitalist-style productive
system. and therefore it is due to backwardness. Perhaps. Nevertheless. a
revolution can be undertaken and aims proposed that are more modern than
Czarism. but not more modern than the exploitation of resources. In short.

the difference in natural conditions does not depend on capitalist expecta-
tion. There will be margins of exploitation that can be corrected. Certainly,
for example. the exploitation of rubber in the colonies was useful to Holland.
but holland did not perish because it no longer exploits rubber. It found

the solution to the problem precisely in the entrepreneurial spirit inherent
to the productive system.

Hhat must be clear in western societies is that the system can be affected
by different stimuli. so long as they are not contradictory stimuli. Stimuli
may increase private consumption: By continually increasing salaries. private
consumption is stimulated. And this is naturally absorbed into the system.
Or. by limiting private purchasing power through an incomes policy, an accumu-
lation of public resources can be achieved: Then a different direction is

imposed on the system. whet cannot be done. is to inject incompatible logics
into the system. This is pure nonsense. -

Ronchey--Hany reply that they would accept an incoace policy, but this is
impossible in view of the "rising expectations" of the working class in the
capitalist system, or more precisely. in the industrial system. Also because
effective instruments to moderate consumption of other classes do not exist.

La Halfa--If the policy is. as I believe. not a superstructure but a funda-
mental structure. when action by the government and trade unions is designed
to achieve certain objectives. it does achieve them. If I want Fiat to become
oriented towards certain types of consumption, I must tell them first and I

must not create a kind of competitive consumption. It is an orientationsl
maneuver that must be mastered.

Ronchey-Sylos Labini. in his "Essay on Social Classes" observes that today

the wages and profit precisely defined in Italy total less than 50 percent of
the national income. More than conventional conflict between salaries and pro-
fits. there is today a conflict between salaries and the incomes of inter-
mediate classes who are not directly productive and often parasitical.

La Halfa--I was the first in Italy to say that the workers were sacrificed for
this kind of policy. But the spread of parasitical classes is a purely politi-
cal creation end I must say that it responds to a backward mentality. In fact.
parasitinm is more frequent in underdeveloped societies than in developed
societies” Then why complain about capitalism? The trade union. when it was
advancing demands within the productive system. found resistance because

20
[OR OYIICIAL 088 out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

naturally whoever is responsible for making the system function has limits;
instead it broke through into public institutions where almost no one keeps
track of things and where everything is much easier. Therefore, what are they
talking about?

Ronchey--Undsr the same roof with the confederations there exists the worker‘s
salary as well as many trade-unionized parasitical incomes in the government
and semi-government sector which are a burden upon industrial wages. This

is a contradiction. which the confederations themselves should deal with.

La Halfs-At first in Italy there was an increase of the so-called privileged
parasitical remuneration with a very high cost that fell upon the shoulders
of the working class because the businessman. burdened by high taxes to main-
tain unproductive public apparatuses. tried to unload them. Then the workers
began their action and this system. which is neutral. suffered stimuli which
were incompatible. I recall that years ago I engaged in polemics with
Moravia. who had written in one of his articles that ours is a Bourbon state
because Fist wants nothing but a Bourbon state. I asked why must Fiat want

a Bourbon state. from which it would gain nothing but higher costs. If
anything. the political forzas desire a Bourbon state. My opinion is that
when a political class does not understand these things everything is ruined:
First the administrative apparatus and then the productive system.

Ronchey--You may have observed that now even the language of Chinese leaders
seems more realistic and pragmatic than that which still prevails among those

_who speak of a "general crisis of capitalism." 'Deng Hiaoping. on watching
the Island of Singapore transformed by 2 million Chinese emigrants into a '
little Asiatic Switzerland commented: "He will not have your standard of
living even by the year 2000." In Tokyo, where he went to sign the Sino-
Japanese treaty. he recognised the impossibility of denying Chinese economic
backwardness and said: "It is useless for an ugly woman to pretend she is
beautiful." there have been "tasebao" [wall newspapers] containing questions
like: "Why is our economy not on the level of that of Taiwan run by the
Chiang Kai-shak clique?"

Is Halfa--Hore than pragmatism. it is the understanding of how a productive
system functions.

Ronchey--Lucio Colletti defines the thesis of a general crisis of capitalism
as "an ideological illusion." which to a great extent derives from Leninism.
In a debate published very recently by Latersa. entitled "Socialism Divided."
Colletti says: "I believe that the view of this crisis now depends upon
assuming Lenin's analysis of imperialism as valid. Here, decisive weight is
attributed to the thesis of 'the last stage' of capitalism, the talk about
'putrescence' and 'parasitism'." '

But Lenin has only translated this ideological vision onto the terrain of
so-called imperialism. I believe the origin of misunderstandings about how
the capitalist system works is to be found in Marx.

_ 21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Ronchey--nut Marx warned that capitalism cannot exist without continually
revolutionizing the means of production. therefore relations of production.
therefore the totality of social relations. In fact. he started with the
statement that it had generated "productive forces whose number and importance
exceeded what nould have been done by all past generations."

La Halfa--lut Marx's analysis did not perceive the real dynamics of the sys-
tem. nor did it see its terminal development as the point of the catastrophe.

Ronchey--Schumpeter also foresaw a catastrophe. although of a different type.
when he wrote that capitalism produces a social atmosphere hostile to itself.
which in turn produces policies that do not permit it to function.

La Hslfe--Certainly. by establishing a hierarchical relationship within the
business system. capitalism also produces these attitudes. But it produces
them with the decisive concurrence of ideological prejudices. I would like
to know why Japan did not experience this feeling of intolerance to the sys-
tem to the same extent as other nations. I believe there was a different
ideological influence. And the Americans? They do not have the feeling of
dependence. of subserviance in revolt. Instead they have a sense of the
different function exercised in the productive system. therefore there is no
rehcllion against the entrepreneur. everyone does his share. and they ensure
for themselves a standard of living they consider satisfactory.

Ronchey--In Italian common language there prevails what hex Haber already
defined as ”the ingenuous definition of the concept of capitalism." According
to Heber. the thirst for profit. the aspiration to earn as much money as
possible. in itself has nothing in common with capitalism: "This aspiration
is found among waiters. doctors. coschmsn. artists. ladies of easy virtue.
corruptible employees. soldiers. bandits, crusaders. gamblers, beggars. we may
say all sorts and conditions of men. in all times in all the nations of the
earth." What distinguishes capitalism instead is the profitable organisation
of labor. Nevertheless, the "ingenuous conception" still prevails in Italy
and in South America and is widespread in France itself. and in general in

the Catholic countries. Instead it does not prevail in nations more influenced
by Protestants even if the question of whether Usher's explanations are really
persuasive is controversial. But that notion of capitalism contributes to
provoking rebellion and the conditions that prevent capitalism from function-
ing. To the point that. between maximaliaation of losses and the totality of
social conflict. we have the worst of what is called socialism and of what is
called capitalism.

La Halfe--I will tell you something else regarding ﬂax Heber's concepts. what
is typical in the capitalist productive system is the desire to reinvest. I,
for example. see businessman who could live a life of ease and luxury but who
rise at 6 am. go to the plant. study. run to the markets. Yet often there is

a feeling that even there there is a creative passion, as in the politician
or the artist.

The Leaders Are in a State of Crisis

3 -- Ronchey--During his lifetime. Keynes said that if the temptation to run
a risk did not exist-~the satisfactif? of building a plant. a railroad. a

ma nnrrsas IIQI hm“
'0R OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

fnrm--thcre would not be many investments as the pure result of cold calcu-
lation. Ihwevar. look at what Claudio Napoleoni says! that in Italy today we
are in a "no-man's land." and that is true to some extent. The fundamental
law of capitalism was suamnd up by Haber in a famous example: "For six pounds
sterling per year you can have the use of 100 pounds. provided you are a man
who is known for his foresight and honesty." Now. instead. in lcaly credit

is granted because a public or semi-public enterprise in financial difficulty
cannot be threatened by bankruptcy. thus multiplying the destruction of
resources which could be used for the general good.

Ln Mnlfa~-Let us set aside public enterprises. and let us take the system of
private ownership. There is the accuaulation. reinvestment. broadening of
the market. But there is also a better standard of living. If I consider
the coaplex of incomes and then consider how Agnelli lives. what do I care
about this?

Runchey--1he argument carries with it two questions. First: If for example
in 1945 Fiat had been nationalised or handed over to Pinmeccanica. what would
it be today? Second: Some high individual incomes can pose ethical-social

or psychological problems. but how much do they weigh on the economy's quan-
titative seals?

La Halfa--Hhen you go to the Soviet Union and hear that the bureaucratic
organization wastes an infinite amount of resources and energy. you learn that
certain individual incomes cost a lot less than the non-income of the bureau-
cratic system. Now. let us speak of the public sector in Italy. One of the
things I have noted in Italy is that In! [Industrial Reconstruc-

tion Institute] functioned so long as it was modelled on the organization oi
the so-called capitalist productive system. "hen did It! stop functioning?
when degenerative elements. introduced precisely by the political forces ard
trade unions. shifted the model of public enterprise away from a position )f
competition in relation to the private system. That is. at a certain point
we had a system of public companies. which is similar to the Soviet system.
which produced very little. Add to this that when the entire system is s:ate
controlled. as happens in Russia. at least production is low for everyone.
But in our country two systems coexist which are in flagrant conflict.

Ronchay--lf we consider factors in Italy that made the capitalist industrial
instrument largely unusable. I should also like to recall some notes by

Guido Carli in the ”Interview on Capitalism" with Eugenio Scalfari, in which
he observes that Italian society oscillates between backwardness and advance-
ment. The primary backwardness is in the administrative apparatus. public

and social services. in areas of inefficiency and parasitism that impose
suffocating burdens on industry: ”however. on the level of values. ideologies.
needs. we are very advanced. Re have the most advanced feminist movement in
Europe. the strongest European communist party. the most combative trade union
in Europe. the most revolutionary student movement in Buropa. the highest
nuaber of college graduates in Europe.” Carli said. "This is a situation that
I define as schizophrenic.“ but these same factors. assessed in this way by.
Corli. instead induce Pietro Ingrao to ask himself in the essay "The “asses
and Power” whether the Italian case is not one of backwardness or exaggerated

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ml OHICIAI. 088 01“.!

edvancansnt concerning problana that are naturing in other nations as veil.
It is understood that for Ingreo. Italy is perhaps in the vanguard of an
historical process tending to change western societies. The ease concept
is repeated and developed by Ingrao in "Crisis and the Third Road.” where
he discusses the crisis of the social sodel. of scone-y. of govern-ants
prevalent in the vestern world.

be halfa—It is useless. it uses to no. to attespt theoretical flights.
There is nothing in what happened in Italy that could indicate a vanguard
noveesnt. 0f vhat? A political class sust consider--and in this I consider
layself sore harxist than asny--hov the productive syetaa works. Marx's
sathod involves analysis first of all. If ideas about how the system func-
tions are not clear. it is useless to say that you are in the vanguard.
Certainly it can also be said that vages are an independent variable. but
this leads only to the conclusion that vs don't know hov to ensure the future
for youth. don't know how to increase investment because us did not know how
to seasura the capacity of the systes in respect of the stinuli we produced.
The crisis is precisely here. There is tell: about a sees educational systss
and a sass society. but what is this society really? In Italy we have a
society vhich is a for-less sass. Not a sees society. but its caricature.
Hhile the productive system was being weakened. access to higher education
was being liberalised. This was a contradiction in terse. Then they say
that the crisis involves capitalise. But it is the leadership class vho do
things that do not sake sense.

It Is llot the Systea That Cannot Solve Problems: It Is the Govemsents
That no not Govern

Ia -- lloncheyul don't know which theoretical school can be followed by those
vho consider certain objective conditions. largely quantitative. as banal
data. In any case. Ingrao naintains that Italy is a "laboratory" in search of
a "third road.” an expression vhich in addition to everything else is poorly
chosen because the Creche were the first conuniats to use it. But Norberto
bobbio has already observed how difficult it is to pretend to be those who
found laboratory solutions for the future. in respect to the sore advanced
nations. in a backward nation not only in economic institutions but hoseland
of the Mafia. of patronage, the soot atrocious terroriss. In L'UNITA. liagio
do Giovanni has insinuated that those who use the concept of backwardnass are
conservatives. often interested in confusing conflict vith bachvardnesa.

Yet when there is a situation of conflict that does not sake aesns co-en-
suratc to ends. it leads precisely to backwardneas.

La Helfa--Possessing an instruaent that could have been used for certain ends.
we disorganized it by overloading it with ispossibla burdens and creating
expectations in s vscuus. The result of this is that the social crisis
increasingly turns upon itself. As a result. at a certain point. even the
PCI can no longer bear the crisis. As soon as it enters the systes it is
charged vith betrayal. This is the result of not having given enough thought
to things. Capitalist has desmstrated that it can and has supported the
incrcnec of raw asteriala because it acts. I think the true problea of these
industrialsocieties is that the rising expectations cannot continue. Those
expectations out be halted in order to insert new generations into the

26
FOR OHICIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

econonic process. If not. it is not the capitalist systea that does not
succeed in solving its probleas. it is the governeents that no longer succeed
in governing. And I should like to propose another exasple of these diffi-
cultiea. At a certain point. even technological progress is pushed by wage
pressures. But we must be careful that this process does not accelerate
technological processes beyond the potential of a society. Esployaent. which
at one time was only our problea. is in feet becoeing e lore widespread problem.

Ronchey--ls this the danger of a technology that is pushed toward an excessive
capital intensity and to en ebsorbtion of labor that is too low?

Ls Hslfe--Yes. and so long as the need for esploynent is absorbed by so-callad
tertiary services. the crisis is not always visible. But we suet be wary of
technological acceleration in a country that hes extensive uneaployssnt or
black [unreported] labor. This black labor. or what is celled the subsergcd
Italy. is still a resource for which even the cosnunists can take pleasure

#n the credit balance of peysents. But for ell of that it is e subsersnd
tnly. '

Ronchey--lt is always repeated that the situation of conflict is a phenosenon
of all industrial societies. But there is often the risk of confusing physio-
logical conflict in other countries with our own which is pathological. In
italy the crucial question hes for sons ties been the pratansion of entici-
psting innovations to solutions regarding nations that have far more advanced
institutions. It is sufficient to recall that table by Giorgio Fua in "Is-
ployaent end Productive Capacity: The Italian Reality.” the net stock. the
fixed capital of enterprises per cspite in various countries, is cospered.

In 1960 Italy's index was 100. trance 162. Gernany 177. the United Kingdoa
169. the United States 267. Yet beginning in the 1960's there already were
deeends for the "European Salary" neglecting the entire logic by which wages
are correlated with productivity. which in turn is correlated with the use

of fixed capital.

Ls Hslfe-ln fact ey criticise of those d--~4- 4- thet the points of arrival
and the points of departure cannot be confused.

Ronchey-Resding Ingreo'e essay. the first objection cones precisely froa
Marxist theses which hold that the eost developed industrial nation does
nothing but deaonstrete to the less developed nation the iasge of its future.
It will not always be this way. but how can the reverse happen? The known
response to such objections in general is that one seat be aware of "vulgar
Marxism” or theoretical econoaics since the develop-ant of productive forces
is not the only problem. It certainly will not be the only problea. Would
it not perhaps be a sufficient but not necessary condition? '

la Hslfe-At a certain point we becoae aore Marxist then the Marxists in
examining reality.

Ronchey--But they, who so speak are often literary or eaotional Marxists. have
a aentsl reservation. a profound prejudice. "hat they really think. and st
tines do not say openly sorely out of politeness. is that history in any case

25
IO! OPYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is on their side. And you are the enemy of the people. you oppose the desires
of the people. Altogether then you are confronted with this. only this. Some
time ago. following a discussion with Amendola on these subjects. the film
director Elio Petri telephoned me and said: "Listen. what do you plan to do
with the poor after all?" I replied that the poor have increased in recent
years. therefore I am concerned precisely about the poor. An intellectual

of the left has written that by reasoning on the basis of data. no considera-
tion is given to the fact that the world also has feelings. irrational impulses.
If it had been up to us. Anna Karenina would not have thrown herself under the
train. she would have boarded the train. I replied that perhaps in a short
time the train will no longer pass through here.

La Nelfa--He made the dynamics of the productive system the center of our
analysis. If they depart from this analysis. they move their forces in a
vacuum and recommend ideals that have no possibility of success. But their'e
is not a feeling. it is a pure ideological error which leads society to dis-
integration. This was a nation of high industrial development. in the sixth
or seventh place. Now. while we are losing that place. we are planning on
proposing to the Europeans a reduction in working hours.

Ronchey--A kind of double standard is developing. For example. Eugenio
Scalfari wrote a book. ”The Ruling Race." illustrating the failure of Italian
aid policies. But then he protests with indignation. in a discussion on EH8.
because Giscard d'Eetaing and Helsut Schmidt conceded nothing out of Italian
aid policies to the European process. Is this not a contradiction?

Le Halfa--Not only is there contradiction. but at times I have the impression
that we are speaking about our probless as if the others did not know where
they come from. we claim to objectiviee our difficulties. while the others
know very well that there are not only objective difficulties, but also those
that depend on our subjective behavior.

5 -- Ronchey-The other European governments often have seen the-solves as the
"rich man's club." which is wrong by definition. Isn't this also an expres-
sion of homage to the Leninist conditioned reflexes? .

La Halfa--That could be said if we think back to the ideologies superficially
inherited from the past. The Leninist ideology could serve a country that'
had enormous resources. a large number of 9or1ers. a backward leadership class.
This experience has no value for us. Even admitting that we lust study what
happened in other times and places. we must above all examine the kind of
society in which we function. what are its constituent elements and what are
the mechanisms to interpret and perhaps correct then. But we cannot escape
elsewhere. in the world of Leninist conditioned reflexes. or in legends of
self-administration. as the socialists claim. But does it see. to you that I
could substitute this mechanism with aelf-adainistration? If it were up to
so I would give them the self-administration of the railroads.

Ronchey--Then. aodern technology is far more cosplex than the railroads. In
order to understand how such an experiment in industrial self-administration
costs. today it is sufficient to take a trip to Yugoslavia.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

In Mnlfa--leek at the self-adeinistretion of newspapers. it does not seen to
so that seall aeounts are sufficient to finance them. And. in demanding self-
adeinistration. what does this doctrine of pereanent conflict neon? In order
to have s dialectic between forces. the objectiVe eust be clear.

Ronchey--It seems to no there are two different wave lengths. You analyse
things on a rational level. but here eyths and symbols enter into play. And
we cannot see a prageatic turning point. In past years in China. Deng Hiaoping
wee reeeved froe office because he had said: "It makes no difference whether
the cat is black or white: it is important that he know how to catch eice.”
Today Deng prevails in China but in Italy we continue to discuss whether the
cat is black or white. that is. we discuss ideological symbols. And here I
owe you on objection. You have always said that it was not ieportant at all
to ask the coeeunists to renounce Lsninise. They can keep their Leninise so
long as they stage one less strike. And instead, if they keep Leninise. it
is more likely that there will be one more strike.

is Helfa--I said that recalling that the catholic Church. even in renewing
itself had to maintain sanctuaries and tabernacles. It has deeonstrated this
to us over thousands of years. It euat be understood that a party. even when
it renews itself. cannot obliterate a picture.

Renchey-New let us state an hypothesis: That eany communist leaders know
these things very well. even better than we do. After all, the capitalise
that functions as you say could also be what soee along then describe as
socialise. And after all. if at the origin of capitalise there is the capac-
ity to exercise leverage on what Adan Smith described as self-interest in

the service of the general interest. already in Seith's bible on capitalise
it was explained that self-interest had to be properly understood: And today
the self-interest that is well understood. durable. certainly is not that
consumerise which you call "vertical development of individual consueption."
Let us suppose that the problse of the comeunista is something else. They
are between the opposition and the government. For the tine being. they
cannot take over geverneent. and they cannot return to the opposition. Ihey
know that they are wearing down and in this phase of discourage-set in their
militant base. equipped with certain conditioned traditional reflexes. they
have to say that indeed they are in trouble but their perennial enemy. capi-
talise. is dying. they have to say this. Therefore. the offensive on the
subject of "general crisis of capitalise" is a work of ideological coefort
and the most difficult test the PCI has faced in 30 years.

La Nalfa--It would be less dangerous to say that Marx is right and his thinks
ing is always valid. To say that capitalise is in a state of crisis and we

will replace it generates an expectation. If I told the worker that capital-
ise is in a state of crisis. he interprets this as he must interpret it. that
is. that that organization of production must be eliminated. how. if I give

the iepression of not being able to eliednate this. it is useless and dangerous
to create this attitude.

Ronchey-Also because no one ever told us how to eliminate it. Rather. already
in the 1960's Luigi Longo had said that coeennists in Italy were not seeking

27
POR OP?ICIAL US! ONLY
'OR 0P7101AL USE ONLY

new areas of state control. In recent years Giorgio A-endola end the 03898
[Center for Studies in Econonic Policy (rc1)] have confirmed that the problem
was not at all acre state control. Then Berlinsuer proclailed that capitalien
had to cone to an end. Aaendola announced the general crisis of capitalise,
and what did the people understand? That a nixed econo-y must be defeated.

La Helfe--This generates forms of hetred. unleaehee conflict. and their own
policy because difficult. That is. a picture. a tabernacle can be retained;
I repeat that the Church maintained ell. but care lust be exercised in deter-
mining uhat prevents the precise evaluation of conte-porary problems.

COPYRIGRT: 1978 Editorial del "Corriere delle Sets" s.a.e.

6036
680: 310‘

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8PM

P300 m IMO PRO, M-‘LBIIIIS‘P' FAMOUS
Madridclmo 161n8panilh24boo78p34

[Text] omomu. there no factions in the me [harm
Socialiat Party of Catalonidf. the party of Catalan comniete.
levertheleee. the Inniniete were viotoriono at the laet party conference.

Gregorio hopes Rad-mic. the preeident or the P800. and Antoni Gntierren.
the eecretary general. are cmetantly wine that “there ie no {notional
war“ in the m; however. th. etand npported by the Leniniet eeotoro
non out in the Latent conference of the party or Catalan Oomniate.

'lhe moeal involved enclueive unherehip in the Vorkere Condeeicne
(coco) and It the on. tine an end to eupport tor the unified teacher.’
and mm adninietwaticn vorhere' unicne (norm and mo). he debate
vae lengtlw and norm. in. mum vote mm 104 in favor of the
propooal. 71 acainet ad 11 nbetentiona.

name-ammo

One or thoae Iho voted against van intnre P500 donut: mm when. who
will replace renaming Antoni Gutierrez. Iho prefer. to devote hi-eli' to
Ontalan politice. lune: co-ented to thin mine that "all opinion-
are valid in the P300. and after they are «um and voted on.-the one
that gets Nority banking will be heeded by the not of the m. He
went tohaveanopen debateon muthing. but ithaetohrincue
together” otherviee, the natty nidnt eventually break up.”

Even thaw: he woe horn in the Madrid dietrict or Levapiee. MS
considers himself 100 percent Catalan. The eon of n lei‘tiet ahinietrative
employee. he began reading Victor Hugo md Anntole trance an n .all child.
After studying nt the Piariet eohool Ln Oorrnle, he entered induatrial
echcol and earned the degree or enert eooonntunt. Parallel to hie
ehndiee. he eleo hem hie yolitioal career. \Ihich landed hin in Jail
undinexile. n1956hevaeplaoedonthehdninietrnive Oo-ittee

oi‘ the PM. Be did not get an identification card until the year thnt
mam. nemgrantedapaeepowtin1976.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH’ICIM. USE ONLY

A fellow prieon innte of Miguel Hernandez and a olcae briend oi‘ hope:
Railundo. lune: i‘eele that the catalan Col-miet Party ia at preeent

in the aidat or a tranai'onationt “We are putting aeide the longatandiog
eeotarian emu that we inherited iron our tine in the underground.
There are a great new differing idea in the party now. but there are
no faction” it'e out of the queetion."

In the view oi‘ the mm. deputy. \Iho will not be able to take hie
coat in Parlialent until the end oi‘ the nonth becouee ci‘ bureaucratic
probl-a, people began talking about Leniniet and eooial democratic
i‘noticne "aa econ an we etarted debating Point 15 in the Oomniet
Party bylawe. which dealt with abandoning the ten Leniniel. ihia
inane ha been einplii'ied a great deal and. mrthenore, it, well. it,
well, it doeen't exiat." he et-ered laughing.

ureaeed in a dark-brown turtleneck eweater and a twill weave woolen
Jacket. mines wanted to lake it quite clear that in the P500 at preaent
”there ian't aw eort oi‘ nonolithio approach; on the contra-y. we have
an ongoing. open and enriching debate.”

A Can of "one

He then amoumed: "we have now begun the atruggle minet intranaigenoe.
we cannot allow there to be individuale who wait to inpoae their ideae

on the mority. which, unfortunately. had been happening in recent

tinea. Intraneigenoe ia like terrorian, because it hae a spiraling
effect, and then no one can atop it. It's a really eorewed up thing.
anditwindaupbeioga real-en. withinaticnalthingegoingon.

and than political problue are muhadowed."

Higuelllma.tdaohaealeoworkedinthe0cmniet?artyinindnluoia

and the Baeque country. ooneidera hineeli' a Moot-min iron head to
toe. althomnorethanonce'lhavebeendeecrihedaatheheadot

the Leniniete." Deepite everything, however. he thinke that Moo-min
still has new thinge to reeolves ”he truth in that new thioge that
used to be inwiolable have been queetioned. and therefore we have
theoretionl gape to bridge.“

He ie eepeoialla intersected in the coupons that the Italian Oo-Iniet

Party in going to hold early next year and tech that in political

nattere the Italian are very astute: "at the next oongreea they are

going to take the ten Kerwin-Minin- oat oi’ the bylawe, but there

will be a olmee that will continue to anpport it 'ae a utter oi‘
oonooienoe.’ In other words, they're taking it out in order to carry
forward their policy. but they aren't going to have the connontatione

that we had here. becmae they'll continue hacking it. albeit mbolioally...
Hhathappenedtoueie thntwepudloditthmubyforoe.odwehad

our problue became of it.”

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE OIL?

Nance reele thet e free now or intonation ie eeeentiel in e petty:
“Me N. there lo no reeeon tor epeouleticn." Me. during the PSUO‘e
eecond conference in the eiddle or thie eonth ell or the neetince were
open-door. “So whet? 'lhe world didn‘t cone to en end, herdly. end
new-en were ehle to find out ebout ebeolutely everything." he procleined.

Felling Hex-h {or the 00!) [Month Center anon]

The ccnterenoe‘e pclitioel resolution. inch wee pee-ed with 223 votee
to: end 10 ebetentione. expreeeee greet concern “over the cnoerteinty
end indeoieion thet ere conditioning the Note politioel nature”
end eooueee the non or having not yet drewn up en electorel celender.
or not ooeplying with the ﬂonolce Peote. oi‘ remeing to nesotlete the

new econolio peote end or denying enthcrity to pre-entonoey entitiee.
eepeoielly the Beeque country.

“to: condemn); tee-north end etteopte et en ticn, the cetelen
Comniete thet they would eupport e HOD-P803 Spenieh Bocieliet
Uorkere Perv covert-eat thet proeieed to inplelent e W- worked
out by ell the perlienentery coupe.

The ettention ct cetelen co-nniote, however, ie rcoueed on the mioipel
elections, in which they would like to run together with the Sooieliete
end D-coutio convergence, Mol'e petty. Although e united Punt could
cone ehout in cell towne eepeoielly. became in new oeeee e We petty
ie meble to ton e teen due to e leak of people end reeom'oee, unity

ie elnoet iepoeeihle in let-pr tome. It wee lunee'e opinion thet none
thu. the Socieliete end Mol‘e neticneliete. they could gene: 70
percent of the votee. but the Sooieliete ere etill heeitent ebout enoh
en option. llcnen oo-ented thet they etill do not hm e oendidete for
let-colon. elthccai there hed been tell: of Jcrdi Sole Me.

8743
080! 3110

31
DR OFFICIAL us: OIL!
I'll" (WVNHAI. 03R ONLY

SPAIN

B‘I‘A AFFILIATED BASQUE LEADER INTBRVIBNBD BY ITALIAN MAGAZINE
Rona PANORAMA in Italian 14 Nov 78 pp 229, 231. 233, 235, 237, 241

[Interview with Federico Krutwig Sagredo by Glen Piero Dell'Acqua in Val
d'Aosta. Italy; date not given: "Always and Only Basque")

[Text] How is Basque terrerisa different froa other European terrorisns?

How have relations between the Basques and the Spanish changed since the

death of Franco? ﬂow can the Basque issue be resolved? One of the historic
leaders of the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group] answers these questions.

Last July there was talk of outright civil war: a war between the Basque

people and the authority of Madrid, which represents that ‘95panishness"
that the Basques reject, calling for regional autonomy as their ninieue
objective and for national sovereignty as their taxi-up objective. hhat
touched it off was a pol ice charge upon a group of young Basque nationalists
at the bullring in Paylona, Navarra. where they were attending the second
bullfight of the fiesta of San Pinino. Free the arena, .where the crowd
was at first divided over the youths' denonstration but quickly united
against the police, the battle spread into the streets. Free Paaplona

it spread to the other Basque cities and to all Spain. There were 2 killed
and 200 wounded, a bloodbath followed by a spiral cf attacks and repression
that continues up to the present.

At the center of the conflict between the Basque country and Spain is an inde-
pendent, clandestine organisation for-ed during the Franco years that has
turned the heritage of Basque nationalisa into an aread struggle. that are
the roots of this arsed nationalist! ﬂow is Basque terrorise different fro-
other European terrorisasf How have the relations between the Basques and
the Spanish changed since the death of France? lhat are the prospects for
solving the Basque question?

PANORAMA asked these questions of the lost prestigious leader of Basque
nationalisa, Federico Krutwig Segredo. He was born on a fare in the Bilbao
province in 1922, is considered one of the historic leaders «of the El‘A.
studied linguistics and is for-er secretary of the Academy of the Basque
Language; in the 1950's Krutwig was forced to leave Spain, where he was
accused of insulting the govement and inciting sidwersion. He went into

32
FOR OMCIAL USE OIILY
FOR OPFICIAI. USE ONLY

exile in France and Belgium. where he now resides. Krutwig profoundly
influenced the development of Basque nationalisn with his writings:
"Buscony. a Dialectic Study of n Nationality" (Buenos Aires, 1962),
"Bascony and the New Europe" (Bayonne. 1974); for soae tine he has been
working on a political fantasy novel, which is "rather long, much nore
than 'War and Peace'; it tens what future European society will be like."
It will be published in 2 languages, Basque and Spanish.

Xrutwig Sagredo answered PANORAMA's questions during a vacation spent in
Val d'Aosta before returning to his hoaeiand with the passport he had
finally obtained fron the new Spanish government after a quarter century
of exile. Here are his answers.

[Question] Mr Krutwig, what do the Basques want? What is the substance
of the Basque problem today?

[Answer] The saae as always. Up to 1860 the Basque coantry had its own
laws, which were different froa those of the rest of Spain. We want then
back. it has had experience with the Castilian adainistration and has
found its own is much better. it has had experience with the Spanish
police and consides it neither aore nor less than an occupation force.

it has seen the French Basque country alaost depopulated. there is less
work there, and has been able to do nothing; it has even had to accept
the immigration of a half aillion Spaniards, which is a huge percentage
out of 8 million Basques, beyond all reasonable liaits with the danger

of fonenting a racist backlash.

why not create a balance between the 2 Basque regions on either side of

the Pyrenees? Because there is a border down the middle. isn't that crazy?
Even the BBC is considering the problen of econonic coapleaentarity between '
bordering regions in different countries.

[Question] how do the Basques differ from other European ethnic minorities?

[Answer] The Basques represent not only an ethnic unit but also a language.
culture. traditions and a historical unit because of its coanon law created

by the "fueros" and "conciertos," i.e. by autonomous adainistration. Above
all. unlike almost all or all other minorities, it also represents an econoaic
unit. This is the central point. Occitans and Bretons are ninorities, but
they belong to France. The Flemish are 2/3 of the population of Belgiul.

but the other 1/3 rules them because in Belgium the apex of the social pyramid
is French-speaking. Peoples are considered what their rulers are. and also

in Val d'Aosta the head of the people has been ltalianized.

[Question] And in the Basque country is it the opposite?

[Answer] No Basques have our heads on straight. The Basque middle class.
not all but aost. have not gone along with the Spanish government and have
reaained Basque. This means that Basque society has been able to produce
its own. riper fruit and is capable of governing itself. But Spain does not

33
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

want to understand that. Although It Is known that 3 or 4 languages are spoken
on the lburlan peninsula, only one ls recognized. Basque is no longer forbidden
at school as it was under l'ranco, but it is still considered a foreign language
as far as the press is concerned. Publishing in Basque costs 40 percent nore
than in Spanish.

"Madrid Doesn't Understand"

[Question] llow aware is the Basque population of this diversity. i.e. of its
own identity?

[Answer] in Europe today the cultural issue eeerges at the level of the masses.
In Africa the aaia problen is still getting enough to eat. but not- in Europe.
That is why the peoples' thoughts turn to culture: we Basques have every right
to develop our language and culture, which are peaceful setters. It is a problea
of denocrecy: if we have, and we do. the right to make our contribution to the
developnent of the country we live in. we must be able to speak our own language.
it is not a letter of a difference in pronunciation. It is a utter of different
constructions and syntax. in the Basque country today only 35 percent of the
people speak Basque and only 20 percent read and write Basque because Franco
crippled the teaching of Basque. and the church agreed with his at the tine.

But all this is coaing back to haunt then. The nest determined separatists

are precisely those who do not speak Basque because they have been deprived.

They feel theaselves linguistically defrauded. You realize how such your health
is worth when you lose it.

[Question] The center of Basque national in used to be considered to be the
Euskadi, which includes the 2 regions of Guiputcoa. with San Sebastian as its
capital, and Viscaya. with Bilbao as its capital. but the big sass deaonstra-
tions of last July started in Penplona during the fiesta of San Fir-inc. Paa-
plona is in Navarre. llow cone this involve-eat with Navarre?

[Answer] Historically, Navarra is the original region of the Basque country.
it used to be called Basconia, and Paaplona was named lruna, which loans capi~
tal. and so it is indicated on the ETA Ilp. Thus, Palplona is the historical
capital of the Basque country, not Bilbao or San Sebastian. However, Bilbao
is where industrialisation began. while the rural ideology prevailed in Navarre
even under the First Republic. Hence a feudal spirit still unifests itself
occasionally in Navarre, and progressivise and conservatism coexist somewhat
as in sooo parts of Japan. Still. the events of July in Paqlona show that

Paaplona is senstitive to the sane problels as all the rest of the Basque
country.

[Question] Doesn't it seen to you that the police intervention at the "plaza
do toros" in Palplona, which was the spark that set off days of denonstrations
in the whole Basque country last July, was a provocative act?

[Answer] Not only provocative but stupid. How stupid Madrid's policy is in
its confrontations with the Basque countryl In Navarra there is a center-right
govern-ant, but that of Buskadi is center-left. Nadrid should have every
interest in dividing the two regions and opposing Navarra's adainistrative

and political (la-ands. Instead, the opposite is happening. llhat was the

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

result in Paaplona? First, the people talked, then the police intervened
and then everybody united against the police. Even a baby would understand
that a policy of repression is stupid.

But they don't understand that in Madrid. They hate the Basques. lhen

hate takes the lead, they don't act intelligently but neas things up instead.
That is why I say the Spanish governaent is being made a joke of by the ETA
these days.

[Question] In what way? Does this mean that since the death of Franco
nothing has changed in the relations between Madrid and the Basque country?

[Answer] The ETA was very popular in the Basque country during the last 15
years of the Franco dictatorship because from the beginning it held high the
banner of revolt, protest and anti-fascist rebellion against the repression
of any huaan rights or autonomy. The death-of France in 1975 began a period
of uncertainty. Fran the ETA's point of view, this period might have been
dangerous. If Madrid had understood the Basque problem politically, the ETA
alight still have continued to exist as a clandestine organization, but it
would have lost much or all of its popularity. The ETA understood this and
was prudent. They ceased guerrilla action for several Ionths, but the central
government was not able to take advantage of this opportunity, and guerrilla
operations were resumed. Suarez's Spain has inherited froa Francoise, besides
being Franco's offspring, an intolerance and incouprehension of everything
Basque that does not bring in money to the governealnt.

[Question] Can you give some exaaples?

[Answer] That of not naming a Basque to the presidency of the local government
of Navarre, and they had available a bourgeois registered with a bourgeois
Catholic party, a law and order nan of the kind they like; the Madrid poli-
ticians found it were convenient for the Deaocratic Center Union (the party

of the head of government, Adolfo Suarez—~editor's note), which is purely a
party of the center-right, to vote for a Spanish socialist.

[Question] Mhat do you think is the solution to these problems?

[Answer] The separation of the Basque regions from Spain and France and
the unity of the Basque country. There is no doubt about that, but it is
not something that can happen today, nor should it. Toaorrow, yes, in the
context of a really united and federated Europe. I do not believe in an
abstract separatisa; it would be meaningless. Europe must cone sooner or

later to a division of sovereignty within every state and to a federal union
of all the states thus formed.

The federal government will concern itself with ailitary probleas, foreign
affairs and general economic laws. but the individual states will have to

think about the other things. Moreover, this trend towards restoring auto-
noay to internal states ("devolution," as the English say) is already'wide-
spread in Europe, e.g. in Geraany and Italy. The Italian regions are a bit

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

too nunerous and too snail. but the principle has been accepted. I have done
studies on the best and nost governablc basic national units. and the optinm
diaonsions are those of states with 3-5 nillion inhabitants with capitals that
have 300,000 to half a aillion inhabitants.

[Question] Then everything has to start over...

[Answer] It's not as hard as all that. In ltaly. for es lo. it would be
sufficient to reduce the number of regions to s or 6 and 11 ewise in Spain.
giving these states their proper political weight. True, the federative ideal
is still far off. and Europe is asrking time, but the people are not at fault.
Rather. the governnents are, France's specially; it is the real enemy of the
new Europe. France insists on enphasising at every turn its own independence
and is pursuing an anti-Europe policy. The other countries. not so nuch.

The large states for-ed in the past century are still less sensible and less
capable of facing up to their responsibilities.

[Question] The theme of the future. then, is nationalisa?

[Answer] If that aeans the concept of nation as a people. as a basic coa-
nunity, yes. For the French, however, the nation is the govement.

[Question] Doesn't the world situation. which is in the nuclear age, suggest
a lot of caution in this direction?

[Answer] Precisely. The states are preatonic entities. The atonic boob has
caused the peoples' national consciousness to nature. True, the world is
divided into opposing blocs of states. but what other reledy could there be
for this than the fragmentation of fictitious sovereigntiesf It is no inven-
tion of nine that the people existed before the present states. And they
still exist, don't they? Even the unity of ltaly is a relatively recent
phenooenon.

"lie Are Not Terrorists"

[Question] Won't the states you lention finally lake a union of the rich.
leaving the poor to their fate?

[Answer] Has the unification of ltaly by any chance solved the problem of
the South? It is nuch better for a people to develop its own resources by
itself than to expect outside aid that any not cone. It has not cone to the
South of ltaly as it has not cone to the South of Spain. They have to do it
themselves. for they lust do or die. when you wait for sonething fro- out-
side, you end up doing nothing. The first thing that ought to be awakened
in a people is the spirit of initiative. 1 on also opposed to a policy of
aid for the Third world. Aid fits a Christian. Catholic conception of charity,
but soaetines to be good Christians people do bad things. I have seen it
happen. l was in Algiers for a aonth. The people have to do it theaselves
or die. and I think the people don't want to die.

36
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] All right. but no governaent is ready to do what you want. which
is for thee to give up a part of their sovereignty.

[Answer] Oh yes. of course; I know that all too well. No country. no poli-
tician will wake up unless they are blasted with dynaaite. They just want
to keep on as though nothing were the utter. in this context. I think the
ETA has done and is doing something. If Spain entered the Coaaon Market, 1
do not know how happy they would be in Brussels to eabrace along with it
tho tense situation that now exists in the Basque country. It is an exaaple

that eight be contagious. The lrish lllA sealed to be dead a few years ago,
but it cane back.

[Question] Do you think it is still possible to resolve the Basque issue
by deaocratic leans?

[Answer] Not only do I think it is possible but i hope so. Not to hope for
a peaceful solution to such an iaportont problem would have to mean a person
was intoxicated with violence. Still speaking frankly, though. I must say
the solution does not depend on the Basques. I say have every desire to
engage in a dialogue. but if you don‘t agree, we won't talk. The ETA is
not a thing in itself: it is only a response to the Spaniards' desire to

do hare. When it comes to terrorists. i say the ETA is not terrorist but
anti-terrorist. It is merely a protection against the terrorists of the
Spanish governs-ht.

I knew very well the people and ailitants of the ETA, and there is not a one
aaong then who is a terrorist. who likes violence for itself. Nor do i.

In fact. i dislike violence. But if a robber cones into ay house and i say,
without attacking hie, only. "No. you can't do that." there is already a
conflict and a confrontation. if the Basques gave in whenever the Spanish
wanted the:- to, they would be finished. Finished in every sense of the word.
That is why we have the ETA.

[Question] Do you have first-hand leaories of the founding of the organisation?

[Answer] No, i had already been abroad for several years. It was, in fact.
when ay book "Vasconia" appeared in 1962 that l beca-e the soul of the ETA.
but it was not through any Iaerit of aine. it was through the Ierit of France's
einister of infonation at the tine, Manuel Frags lribarne. Nobody. or almost
nobody knew that the ETA existed because under Franco everything was hushed up.
However, Fraga lribarne played it up by ordering a newspaper to print sons
pages on the ETA that said. along other things. that ay book had given the ETA
an ideological basis. They even printed soue quotations free it. Although

it was not exactly what Praga wanted. people read this excellent explanation
with great interest, and any young people found the ETA this way.

[Question] haven't you gone back to Spain since 1952?

[Answer] Officially. no. I returned secretly in various months in l967 and
participated in the second part of the 5th Assembly in Guetaria, a snail area
near Zaraut (San Sebastian). The Assewa net in an old house, 200 Deters
free the police station. I coordinated work in the ideological section.
This was a period of intense theoretical study on what a clandestine lovelent

Mn Ann-nea- .c—n -.-..
l’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ought to do or ought not to do, on the kind of structure to be adopted and
the weapons to be used. Others then went and bought then. I don't like
weapons, but you can't fight a war without thou. Then I worked at keeping
the ETA in touch with other aoveaents because we aust not get were isolated
but have contacts with other people.

[Question] With what love-ants. exactly?

[Answer] For exaaple. with the Algierian Liberation Front and the Irish IRA.
In the latter case, it was aainly to acquire or exchange ares, even though
the IRA is not for a united Europe and the ETA is.

[Question] Here there sothor contacts. e.g. with the Ger-an RAF [Red Arny
Faction (Boader-Moinhof group) 1?

[Answer] No. l have to say not. Anyway. the ETA can't be said to enjoy
auch credibility with these groups and grouplets of the new left, perhaps
because the ETA is automatically popular. and this goes against their mind-
set, which is aore or less wrapped up in Marxisa. In general they are
people who overestiaate themselves and think they have to accoa'plish sole
aission. In Ger-any everybody was against then precisely because of this:

you can't carry out a policy if nobody accepts it. I call it negative
terrorism

[Question] llas the ETA had close ties with Algeria for long?

[Answer] No, I don't think so. All the liberation aoveaents represented in
Algiers enjoy an alaost diploaatic status, but when I was there, at least.
besides being invited to dinner I don't think there was anything else. One
thing is sure: the ETA has never received a lira «fro- anyone. Even today
there are newspapers that write that we take aoney from the CIA [Central
Intelligence Agency] and free here and there. That's silly. The ETA finances
itself. It doesn't want anything froa anybody because if you give then

an inch, they'll take a mile.

[Question] What aodels did you use in your writings?

[Answer] The Chinese and Vietmese revolutions. I studied attentively the
organisational foras of the Vietnaaese liberation noveaent and took frol it
some structural ideas that, I aust say, have stood up well in the ETA.
Secondly, it was necessary for no to eliainate the Communist or Spanish
type infiltration that had already been noted. I thought these structures
would last a few years at nest, but they have lasted longer.

[Question] However, infiltration or at least division and outright schisls
have been a part of the whole history of the ETA. '

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH'ICIAL US! OliLY

[Answer] Yes. but this is a logical development. At the tine of the 5th
Assenbly the ETA had already had a schisn with a Trotskyite group. l was
furious with then because they kept making the sane old aistakes. 1 Iain-
tained that as a liberation aovenent the ETA should have national liberation
as its first and fundaaontal objective with the social struggle as second
priority. That group. on the other hand, wanted to liberate Spain first,
nake it socialist and then reap a bonanza for the Basque countries. I have
always opposed this position: the Basque country aust pursue a policy of
independence with its own liberation as its ultiaete seal.

[Question] As a result of this, has the ETA continued to maintain these
positions?

[Answer] The strongest group. the nilitary group, yes. They don‘t do auch
politically but they can work together with political groups; they are priaarily
a nationalist group. They are ordinary people. usually workers. That is the
real nucleus of the ETA. The others are fm more or less detached sections.
particularly the "pelis-ailis" group. which is the politico-nilitary ETA.

l have always been against them because they reason according to the logic

of the Russian revolution. In Russia it was necessary to use Csarist offi-
cials because revolutionary nilitary leaders were lacking; then it was a

good thing to have political coanissars. But in the Basque country the naili-
tary leaders are already well oriented politically, and there is no need of
political conissars. Politicians senetiaes create dangers for the others.
Politicians and intellectuals nay do great work in their respective sectors.
but they get scared when it comes to taking action. Fear is a huaan thing.

so we must not use these people in action. he nust especially not give in

to their desire to be always interned about everything, to know everything.
Ithen they are caught. we know they will talk sooner or later. The best way

for there not to talk, therefore, is for then not to know. That is why the

ETA military group is always separate from the others--for reasons of security.

[Question] lhat do you think of the two high any officers killed in Madrid
on 21 July in reprisal for the deeds of Pamplona and San Sebastian? Don't
you think these attacks light play into the hands of the right?

[Answer] The ETA only wanted to show that the Spanish any is not as strong

and invulnerable as it wants people to believe. As for the right. I do not

see what advantage they can derive from it. The extreae right group in parlia-
nent is a small group and will not becoae any bigger because of it. Then too.
things are auch different free what they were when Franco took power in Spain.
and they are ouch different abroad, too. As for public opinion. you have to
reneaber that every ETA action is frowned upon by the Spanish and approved by
the basques, which is natural. The people who care about the fate of the Basques
in Spain are not very strong. They are only a few individuals. lhen it cones
to a war between peoples, though, divisions are usually very clear.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

in 1914 even the anarchists took up arms to fight the German enemy, and Jean
Jnurcs was left almost alone to preach against war. Bven Marxist parties do
not defend Basques' rights in Spain today. The Spanish Conunist Party has
always proclaimed the Basquos' right to self-determination and has oven written
it into their program, but they hcven't said a word about it since the moment

they set foot in parliament. That is another good reason for the Basques always
to remeﬁer that the problem exists.

[Question] Last 20 August, two members of the Guardia Civil and two armed
policemen were killed in the Basque country, in Galicia and Catalonia. if
the Spanish government decided to withdraw the police gradually and replace
it with the army. would this be accepted by the Basques?

[Answer] I think so, provided the present police forces in the field were all
withdrawn. The people consider this special corps a real enemy. 1 don't think
they would have so much animosity against the army.

[Question] Does the ETA have the sympathy of the people?

[Answer] Certainly. Many citizens have hidden and are hiding ETA guerrillas
in their houses. "any spokesmen for the Basque National Party aid members of
the ETA. They earn-a lot of sympathy especially as a revolt and resistance
movement. much less as a political organization of the extreme left. The B'I'A
has blundered repeatedly in politiciting itself too much in this direction,

but I think it decided recently to reconsider its political alignment. The
strength of all liberation movements is in nationalism. not in making too clear
a political choice. it is the same way in the Third World. The ETA has had
representatives of all non-church forces, including liberals and . leftist

Christian deaocrats, as has happened in the Italian Liberation Co-ittee. for
that matter.

[Question] How many ETA militants are there?

[Answer] That is hard to say. There are the leaders, the militants and the
sympathiters. Even these categories overlap. The ETA certainly accounts for
for more than one in a thousand people, i.e. more than 3,000 people.

[Question] llhy did you not go back to Spain right after Franco died?
[Answer] I wanted to see which way the wind would blow.

[Question] How is it?

[Answer] A little better than before. but not well. I would be happy if every-
thing could be worked out peacefully.

[Question] Mr Krutwig, are you sure the Basques aren't somehow pursuing a utopia?

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl’. ONLY

[Answer] if the Basques give up on theaselves. they will be assinilated and
eliminated by the Spanish. if the Basques succeed in getting their own govern-
ment. they are ready to get along with everybody else, including the Spanish
and their culture.

MAP CAPTION

This is the Basque country that aspires to national independence: 4 provinces

in Spanish territory and 3 in French territory divided by the Pyrenees frontier.
a unit forned by the inhabitants' coauon origin and language (Eusltara, the origin
of which is known only to be non-lndo-Buropean); about 700,000 Basques live in
the country itself. and 2-3 million are scattered around the world. it has a

sol id econoay: tourisa in the north and south. on the French and Spanish edges

of the enclave, industry in the Spanish provinces rich in iron ore. with ship-
yards and netaiworking plants.

iNSET
The No Souls of the ETA

How the Basque independence noveaent was born and developed. Difficult rela-
tions between saall bourgeois and workers.

1952: A group of Bilbao students publish a pamphlet entitled ERIN ("Do It").
Along then are Jose Manuel Aguirre, Benito del Valle. Julen Madariaga, Jose
Luis Alvarez Euparanza "l'xillardegui." The latter gives the organization the
naae ETA the following year. ideologically, the group is inspired by classic
Basque nationalisa, especially that of Sabine Arana Goiri (1865-1903), an inte-
gralist and traditionalist Catholic who set the countryside against the capi-
talist cities and advocated an independent, federated Basque state aade up of
the 7 provinces (Guipuzcoa. Alava, Viscaya and Navarre on the Spanish penin-
sula and Laburdi/Labourd, Bernabarra/Lower Navarre and Zuberoa/Souie in France).

l956-S7: Awakening of the working class (originally the "coaisiones obreras"),
politicizution and gradual radicalitation of the Basque snail bourgeoisie
whence the leaders and staff of the ETA will cone.

l956: At the world Basque congress, held outside of Spain. Federico Krutwig
Segredo, who is already secretary of the Acadeay of the Basque language,

speaks on the subject of guerrilla war as a possible aeans of obtaining Basque
independence.

1959: The ETA is constituted officially on 31 July ("Euskadi ta Askatasuna,"
Le. "a free Basque country made of free Ian") and publishes a clandestine
organ, ZUTIK ("Arise") and defines itself ideologically as an ”abertzaie" or
nationalist group, which is also democratic and non-sectarian. The ETA adopts
violence as the only possible response to Prancoist violence and as a slap at
the pacifisu of the Basque Nationalist Party (but the first violent actions
occur only in 1961). '

lei
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1962: The first asseahly of the ETA is held abroad in May (now that Francoise
has tho ETA in its sights, all its loaders have gone abroad) and is defined

as a "revolutionary Basque aovonont of national liberation" that demands tho
proclamation of Husknrn ns tho "solo nntlonnl language." is against any dic-
tatorship. "both fascist and coamunist" and favors the "federalist integration
of Europo based on nationality."

in October. Kederico Krutwig Segredo's book appears in Buenos Aires: "Vasconie.
estudio dialoctico do una nacionalidad." signed with the pseudonym Fernando
Sarrnilh de lhartaza. it contains 2 theories: that of a new. progressivist
nationalism that identifies national opporession with social oppression and
tho theory of revolutionary struggle conducted after the exaaples of Algeria
and Vietnam.

1963: Second asseably of the ETA. abroad in March. A conflict emerges between
a anlority party. which is nationalist and third-world oriented. and a minority
party. which is socialist-worker oriented. In October, attelpts at strikes in
Bilbao and the Basque country; Prancoist repression and destruction of the in-
ternal organization of the ETA.

1964: The ETA booklet. 'ﬂhe insurrection in Euskadi." is published in Bayonne.
in the French Basque country. It supports the war of liberation.

The 3rd asso-bly of the ETA. in April and May, institutes the position of full-
tiae, paid ailitant.

loss: The 4th assembly of the ETA. in summer. the first held in Spain. it
creates a political office and lakes a first, positive report on links between
the ETA and the Basque population. At the sane time, another uork of krutwig's
appears, 'ﬁhe Basque Question." which identifies progress with nationalisa.

1966: First part of the 5th ETA assembly. Pour spokes-en of the political
office are expelled for having supported the Trotskyite faction. called Bta-
berri, in San Sebastian.

1967: Second part of the 5th assembly. Concerning the thrust of the strikes
in the Basque country, the ETA's left wing prevails, identifying Basque nation-
allsm as an aspect of the world socialist revolution.

196B: ETA ailitants kill Police Commissioner "eliton Mansanss. a notorious
torturer. in Irun on 2 August. Madrid unleashes harsh repression in the Basque
country.

1969: Repression continues all year long throughout Spain. Arrests. numbering
l,953. involve many ETA Iilitants.

1970: The 6th asseably, disavowing the Sth. declares itself against the "His-
panification" of the Basque struggle. The trial of l3 ETA leaders and 2 priests
takes placo in Burgos in Deceaber. An ETA group (5th asseably) kidnaps the
honorary Nest Ger-an consul in San Sebastian (he is liberated in Germany on

24 Deceeber to show that the "ETA is not a band of irresponsible fanatics").

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’I'ICIM. USE ONLY

On 28 December sentence is passed in Burgos: 6 are cendoaned to death. Franco
commutes the death sentences on 30 December. ‘

197l-72: These ere the years of conflict between the 5th and 6th ETA assemblies.
a conflict that is resolved in favor of the 5th assenbly. The left prevails.

In fact. the left had captured in Deceaber 197l an industrialist who. though

he was Basque. behaved like an inflexible boss. 'The history of the ETA."

says an organization aagetine, "has been an uninterrupted. difficult dialogue
between snall bourgeois nationalists favoring armed struggle and the workers."

l973: Sixth ETA assembly, which cancels the preceding 6th. On 20 Deceaber
an attack is made against Franco's heir apparent. Admiral Luis Carrero-llanco,
who is blown up in his automobile in Madrid.

The success of the strikes of December 1974 reinforces the politico-military
wing of the ETA. which decides to integrate the armed struggle with the less
movement to the detriment of the exclusively ailitery wing. which calls for

freedom of action independent of the aasses.

l97S-77: The post-Franco period gives the ETA 2 problems: the first is whether
or not to maintain clandestinity and is resolved by remaining clandestine.
especially because the exclusively military wing opts for autonomy; the second
(the attitude toward confrontation with the Spanish government) is discussed
by Krutwig in the interview. in the letter of relations with the other poli-
ticsl forces. the ETA recognizes and is recognized by [AS [expansion unknown].
a coordinating group between the Basque forces and the extreme left.

HHOHD CAPTION

The bullring in Panplona. Here in July 1978, during the fiesta of San Firmino,
there occured the first serious incidents between police and Basques in the
post-Franco period.

COPYRIGI‘I': 1978 MINI.” WOO!!! EDITORB S. p. A.

8782
C50: 3i04

’03
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ER omom 083 ONLY

”All

MOB W Ill WWII“: mm mm
Mid 00131016 in email!) 17 Doo 70 D 41

[lost] Adolfo Sun-o: om! hio liniotoc oi' toroin mam. limolino

Goon. no in favor oi‘ undortokiu o vim roorunintion of
Sponioh cbmioo ovoroou.

Sums. uho ooo-o to how diooovond tho "doli‘hto' oi' Ionian policy
oinoo hio i‘irot trip ohm“ loot you (to Woo and tho Unitod Btotoo).
io ontortoininc tho poooibility of o ruliool ohm in tho oriontotion
or Sponioh o-boooioo mroooo.

in initiol indiootion of tho Sponioh ”notion-H" intoroot in tonic:
policy nttoro m hio involvoooat in tho oppoinhont oi‘ o m of
politiool coho-noon. Iho m not omor diplonto and mo hovo nov
tokon ovor mo: pooto in touign ooi-vioo.

Doopito tho oppooition oi' emu diplo-oto. in rooont no W
pooto hovo n unlod by politioim tiod to tho m “erotic
communion orbyoonovoll-houtinroooutoidothomt

what with thoirovnpolitiool noodondthoooaiidonooothidaor
”o

'l‘ho Diplomacy oi “Conoonouo'

lnthoriuttvoouoovohovolooonodo.thotonoroo-omoliniotu
“Moi-euros. obrothon-in-lov of limolino OroJomi out»: ottho
nonwomummotthosmohmuwmm, onoot
tho-ootoovotodpootointhooonioo. oniﬂmolJiIoooodohuo.
thoi'onorlohorniniotor. Mimthomtootupo'oni coon-if
chautododviththolm.ondinovitohlyithuoollidodviththo
SponiohhbuqhooaodbymulonitovhiohhMoouttmvith
intmotionolomiutim.

mmmndllmlhoaoycolondocﬂnjolnbommm
mmmmumummuu. mooponto ouoo. Honda.
groan-mot him ‘Piomo'o Pooplo'o Socialist Party. is o

protoooo: oi' political low ind vill ma. tho diploma: ot 'oonoouuo'
with m viovpointo.

M

m omom. 083 can
mu "”1!!an UHB ONLY

Manuel Prado y Colon de CarvaJal. who is close to King Juan carloe and
has replaced Jose Maria Moro at the Iboro-Anoricen cooperation Center.
will bring to diploaacy the technical econcaic and aanageaent know-how
that is absolutely necessary for the great Latin American political
adventure that the crown wants to undertake.

At the acnent. Marcelino OreJa's autonomy in the area or appointeente has
been significantly affected by 8uares's interest in keeping a close
watch on forcign policy. with which. accordim to a nusber of his
colleagues. he is "i‘aacinated."

The attention that Snares has for scae nonths been devoting to doaeetio
policy issues the constitution. the ”consensus.” the reterendus.
inveetiture... hae prevented his no. starting up the wideranging
reorganisation plan that has been talked about at Santa Crue Palace.
the seat 01‘ the Spanish Foreign Affairs Ministry: the plat is keeping
a good number or career diplomats up in the air lunch as they fear
the unnecessary proliferation of political ubaseadors.

As far as these political aabaaeadora are concerned. there are indications
that our representative in Mexico. Luis Coronel de Pelna. Marquis de
TeJada. is about to resign. his diplosatic performance has left moh

to be desired. and in the wake of the king's trip it seess that he
personally asked to be relieved. Diplcaatic sources m that he will

be replaced by Joce Maria Moro. who was suddenly disnieeed as the
prenident of tho Ibero-Aaerican Cooperation Center.

Another political ambanaador. Juan Antonio Saaaranch. the Spanish
representative in Moscow. might also be relieved it be is. in fact.
appointed the Foreign Ministry delegate to the 1982 World (hip Oo-ittee.

Oranges in the Americas

is part of a first Snares-inspired diplonatio answer. the Spanish
eobaeaies in Mexico. Cuba. Bolivia. Colo-bis and a Central Alec-ion
country are supposedly going to be overhauled. Such charges are

tied in with the new plans for Latin Aeerica and would be followed by
additional diplomatic changing-s oi' the guard in Liberia. Gabon. Angola
and ‘l‘ansania. The changes will be important in these Ai‘ricsn countries.
given the Pbreim Ministry's new plans in connection with the mican
continent and'in light or a possible trip there by the king in 1979.

The appointlent of Jose Hamel Ulrich as aabaseador to Algiers would leave

the Beaded poct vacant. \hich would supposedly be taken by Suaranoh‘s
predecessor in Moscow. Rafael terror.

COPYRIGHT: 1978. CANDID 16

8743
0308 3'10 (.5

DR OFFICIAL 083 OILY
POI! Ol'l’ICIAl. USE ONLY

SPAIN

“ITISN NIS‘I‘ORIAN ANALYZBS CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEBS, RIONTS
Milan comm DELLA 3m 22, 23 Dec 78 p 3

[Article by Nugh Theses: “Juen Cerloe Like Blitebeth 117“]
I 220cc 78 p 3]

[Text] The fundsnentel stete cherter spproved by the
referendun eeeee to be e revised end corrected version
of the unwritten British Constitution. The euprene
co-end of the erned forces grented to the king will
not count lore then the euthority of the queen over
the United Kingda Arey.

Nugh Tho-es. the greet English historien. hes written
this erticle (whose second pert will be published to-
norrow) concerning the new constitution epproved in
Spein by the recent referendun. Tho-es, who begins work
es s contributor with OORRIERB. is s nene thet is linked
to Spenish end Letin Anericsn effeire. The Bineudi
Publishing Coopeny hes published his "history of the
Spenieh Civil Her." (1963), end "History of Cube Pros
1962 to 1970." (1973).

The first thing to be eeid ebout the new Spenieh Constitution is thet the
fact thet it wee scconplished is seeeing. For enyone who hes eose feeling
for or ninim- knowledge of history. the leeflete issued by the old Cerliet

perty end the co-uniet perty both urging e ”yes" vote in the 6 Deceeber
rcferendun see-ed surprising.

The second thing to be eeid concerning this constitution is thst now it hes
been fornelly epproved by the nejority of Spenierds. Perhepe the fevoteble
vote wee not ee breed es the govern-ent foreeew end desired; perhepe prope-
gnnde by the governnent on TV in fevor of "yes" wee too heevy; end probebiy.
the Spenierde were tired of voting (they heve elreedy done so three tines in
three yesre: The first tine in Decenber 1976 for the referendun on constitu-
tionel reforI in generel: the second tine. for the genersl elections of June

“6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1977: and the third for this latest referendum). Yet. those who voted "no"
constitute a shall alliance against the people who otherwise would have little
in con-on: Rightiat Catholics. Palangists. revolutionary socialists and
revolutionary basques (the official Basque National Party which is incapable
of freeing itself fron its position of godfather of the revolutionaries hes
recon-ended abstention. and 50 percent of the Basque electorate followed this

advice5 clearly fearful of the physical consequences deriving fro- baing seen
voting .

At first eight. this constitution can sees sinilsr to the British Constitution.
assuning that any written constitution can be so since now Spain has a consti-
tutional hing. a bicsseral psrliasent and s prise sinister to be - selected

by the king on the basis of the majority vote in the lower house. Since the
draft constitution was written originally by ninisters favorable to the king.
which last year was--accerding to the words of Canbio lb. the "actor” of

dasocratic change-oit is reasonable to suppose that King Juan Carlos was the
principal inspirer of this docusent.

The details on how govern-ants are elected or on how it is decided which pro-
vinces lust be independent were added by others following conproaiees and
concessions. but the general lines certainly renain those sketched out by
Juan Carlos. he. in turn. probably was influenced by his fenily's attach-eat
to England and his adniration for Queen Elisabeth ll..

During the years in which he was patiently behind Franco. tolerating the lies
of the world's press and waiting for better tines. this intelligent and reso-
lute Prince presunably was working out sane of the ideas now contained in

the constitution. Certainly. to be able to arrive at a constitutional eonarchy.
he lost have for acne tine. behaved like no constitutional king, ordinarily.
has ever done. The constitution Franco left to Juan Carlos gave his. as head

of state. considerable power although these were less absolute than Franco
had had before he grew old.

franco's Thinking

I suppose that Franco thought that after his death the succession would have
been different: in a ouch-quoted phrase. he told his aide-de-casp and cousin
that everything was tied. and well-tied. together: stado y bien stado (star
is a verb that Iberia airline stewards use to invite passengers to fasten
their seatbelts). he nesnt by this that after his death the elaborate struc-
ture of favoritisn. censorship. inti-idation and control by various police
forces would be preserved by his old lieutenant, Adsirsl Carrero blenco, and
the king would be asked to give the! a huasn face by scans of a campaign in
popular newspapers like "OLA. what would happen if he refused? Hall. Cartero
had a certain influence on Juan Carlos. Pranco probably thought. and if every-
thing else failed. there were other nesbers of the bourbon house who could be
disposed to accept the chance at a kingdos on Pranco's tar-n.

The decisive role the king played in transfer-scion seant that at least one
choice for the future of Spain was excluded. I do not seen so such a republic

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as that the idea of reviving the Second Republic still bothers sone socialists
and is also the nain prejudice of certain fascinating and elderly pereonages
who returned after 1975 following a life in exile with the hope of reviving

a republican consciousness (after all what does republicanisn nean nowadays?)
I neon the possibility of a presidential systes such as developed in France

by De Caulle and by lanes in Portugal or like that which. I suppose. Manuel
Frags. the leader of the Popular Alliance Party. supposedly requested--snd
which he was supposed to have been in a position to request-~if it had not
been for the presence of the king. whether this will really limit the effec-
tiveness of the government resains to be seen. In any case. so long as he
lives. the king will represent an institution with great influence and author-
ity thanks to appreciation for the actions he took and the realiss he showed
beginning in 1975 even though his actual powers are as modest as those of the
Queen of England. In truth. it does not sees that the king was left with

that stinger that bees use in case of emergency and which is available to
the English Ionarch.

For exasple. art 62 of the constitution obliges the King to approve laws. to
convoke and disband parliasent. only in initiative of the government. he
sust sign legislation within 15 days fros approval by the Cortes (art 91).
The referendums can be called (only) upon proposal by the prime minister
following authorization of the Cortes, even if there seems to be the need to
introduce further legislation to explain exactly when the referendum can and
must be called (art 92. par 3). By cosparison. the right to grant honors and
similar acts seen relatively inferior. such as the right "to be inforsed" of

affairs of state. or to chair meetings of the cabinet when the prime sinister
considers it opportune.

what exactly does supra-e cosmend of the armed forces mean? Huch. I would
say. in the first dsys of this constitution. but once the Army accepted the
constitution for all time. perhaps no more than the Queen's commend over the
British armed forces. There is rose to discuss the powers of the king re—
gardlng the naming of the head of government (art 99). since he will take
these steps after having talked about it with party leaders. this particular
sonsrch could at times impose his own views. -

But his formsl powers are modest. Sisilarly. the government will fall only.
it see-s. if it loses an election or loses control of the majority of the

Cortes (art 161). The king plays no role. Only the prise minister can
dissolve the Cortes and call elections.

In general. therefore. the present Spanish constitution gives the prime
minister a power whose rights derive fromthelower chamber of the Cortes
(parliament). This lower house is elected as the presently-existing Cortes
was elected last year by direct suffrage of all citizens over 18 years of
age. both houses of the Cortes have a geographical basis in the old pro-
vinces of Spein. Congress. or the lower house. is elected by a vote propor-
tional to the size of the population of the provinces and consists of 300
to ‘00 mesbers. Ceuta and Helills. last Spanish (and European) possessions
in Africa. are fully legal electoral districts (art 68. par 2). The term

48
PO! OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of congress is 6 years even though (as in England) it can be dissolved
earlier evidently upon decision of the prime minister.

The upper chaaber consists of four senators for each of the ‘7 continental
provinces of Spain with various subsidiary arrangements for the Canary and
Balearic Islands and for Ceuta and Melilla. Senators. like deputies. are
elected for 6 years and can impose a delaying veto which can be overturned
only by the absolute majority of votes in both chambers (art 90). In special
circumstances (art 91). it is also possible to resort to a referendum.

All these provisions. carefully developed. make it seem that the new Spanish
Constitution is a revised and corrected version of the unwritten English
constitution. The official acts performed by the prime minister in the

name of the monarch, however, have no place in the choice of the upper chamber.
Just as the hereditary aristocracy does not have it. Another restriction is
that as a result of the accent placed on the old provinces. the rural elector-
ate will be more generously represented by the urban electorate in both houses.

[23 Dec 78 p 3]

Most of the new constitution approved in the referendum consists of generaliz-
ations. The Spaniards have always believed it necessary to include these in
documents of this kind in relation to the right to work or to study. Many
believe these things more properly belong in economic or social legislation.
The long list of rights and fundamental freedoms (arts 15-38). nevertheless.
could perhaps be advantageously analyzed by those who believe that a law on
civil rights would be useful elsewhere, but the fact that such rights are
formally "guaranteed" in other constitutions (for example the Russian) does
not always mean, naturally. that they have real value. Among the basic rights
there is the right to privacy.

Other friends of freedom will be encouraged by seeing that article 28 not
only guarantees the right to Spaniards to establish a trade union, but also
guarantees that no one can be forced to join a trade union. We hope that

this provision will be maintained in a Europe that is becoming increasingly
corporative.

The sections of the constitution that concern regional independence are the
paragraphs that have already caused the greatest difficulty and which in the
end could lead to the greatest possible disturbances. These paragraphs of

the constitution give the impression that they were pieced together after a
series of compromises without a profound study of the real problems posed

by the coordination of administrative decentralisation with a centralized
state. The compromises among politicians are important. in their way. but
concerning problems of relationships between the Spanish state and its regions.
which have already contributed to unleashing three civil wars in the past 150
years. a long-term strategy is essential and no trace of this is seen yet.

The provisions drafted provide that each of the historical regions--that is
the old domains legally abolished at the beginning of the 19th Century, but

#9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which continue to have a significance in Spain--could ask for self-government
through a considerably conplicated mathematical foraula. This would seen. in
the first place, an independence in some way siailar to a aodified version of
the old Stormont systen in Northern Ireland.

Compromise

The autonomous regions would continue to send deputies to Madrid even though
they have their own institutions. The statute on autonoey gives the local
governaents some delegated powers over a linited number of actions: Variation
of municipal boundaries. tourisn. and public health.

By a strange and unsatisfactory compromise. the autononous government could
also organise a police force to protect its own buildings and plant. but the
coordination between this and other national police forces aust be worked out
later. The autonomous regions can also draft prograns "for their own cultural
life" including teaching of their own language. This clause seems to permit
the Basques. let us say. to iepoae obligatory teaching of the Basque language
in the schools.

This prospect is not so rosy. particularly for the 50 percent of the Basque
provinces inhabited by Castilliens who speak Spanish. Yet. these provisions
are not sufficient for the Basque Nationalist Party. which wants specific
mention of old rights (fueros). as something separate from those of the other
regions. Such rights presumably include the old practice. abolished by France
in 1937, of collecting their own taxes and sending them to the Spanish govern-
ment.

Naturally. the Basque nationalists also want complete control of the police
in their region. At one time the Catalens asked to be allowed to establish
a confederation of provinces in which Catalan was spoken (that is Valencia.
the Balearics. as well as Catalonia) to revive a greater Catalonia such as
existed more or less in the 13th Century--but for the time being they with-
drew this request end finally concretely supported the constitution since
they are a realistic and obstinate people and they know, as Cambo said in

1916. that an independent Catalonia. in effect. would become a department of
trance. ‘

After all. the Basque Nationalist Party by now could also have agreed to a
compromise if it had not been for the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty
Group] revolutionaries who with obvious impunity fire on policemen every
day. rob banks and businesses. extort money for "protection" and in general
pursue the aim of establishing a revolutionary state through terror and
intimidation.

Naturally the legislation regarding autonomy is denounced as insufficient
hy the ETA, but no degree of autonomy evidently would be sufficient for the
newborn of the ETA. because they are revolutionary separatists and have for
so long lived with violence that it is difficult to believe that they can

ever do without it. They are the provisionsls of the the [irish Republican
Arnyl on the Spanish scene.
50

FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Threats or Shootings

Franco's repression in Basque country after 1937. including persecution for
the use of tho basque language. per-its the are to play deceptively on the
esotions of a vast nusbar of persons who. in econosic affairs. are very con-
servative and. in their hearts. are not separatists at all. Against those
upon whose esotions they cannot play. they can exercise threats or shoot
then. In the neantioo. the hadrid governsent was too involved with the
question of tho constitution. and perhaps too anxious to avoid accusations
of authoritarianism to dedicate such attention to tho Basque problem

Many nosbors of tho governnent. after all. are roforned Palangists. who are
anxious to prove their own desocratic credibility. Interior Minister hartin
Villa. for oranplo. practically has never had a nonent in his life when he
did not have an official position (and an official autosobile. as sole ocidly

renorh). both under Franco and under tho king. oinco 20 years ago he headed
tho official association of students.

In any case. by far the oost inportsnt task of tho govern-ant now snot be

the Basque question. In tho past. Adolfo Suarez resolved his problons by
concentrating all his efforts on a single subject. excluding all the others.
and in tho second place. by nanipulating and offering blandishnsnts to his
opposition. Bvon now s concentration would be necessary. but the ease could
be said of a greater desire to risk a teoporary unpopularity and to assume

a strong line. Because at the losent. the ETA has the upper hand in at

least two Basque provinces. that of Vircaya and Guipuscoa. These two beauti-
ful and once prosperous provinces have been reduced to ruins in recent years.
business is in a state of crisis. the price of real estate has crashed at
San Sebastiano. Madrid residents no longer spend their super vacations on
the coast at tarsus. capital is systenatically withdrawn. and the police have
implicitly adsitted that they cannot protect business-en.

Sansone has therefore suggested that the Spanish state abandon the Basque
country to its out devices. This would be foolish and a mistake. First of
all. because the sojority does not want it; secondly because an action of that
kind would constitute a retreat in the face of violence. which certainly
would not fail to have effects elsewhere: in the third place. because dosestic
political effects on the Spanish Array and on the right in genorsl would be
incnlculablc; and fourth. because the creation of a Rogue sini-stato that
would be extremist and revolutionary and econonicelly inadequate would produce
forsidable strategic probless for Spain. for France and all of western Europe.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Editorials del "Corriore della Sore." s.a.s.

603d
(:80: 3104»

51
ron OWICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI ONLY

SPAIN

BRIEFS

030 IN ormcmmuuso [Workere ‘l‘rede Union] hee grove tinenciel problem
due to the feet the: it only covere 30 percent of ice senerel expeneee front

ite duee. Aleo in the forthcoming eonche it will heve co repey any of the
benk credite the: it hee received. The contederel eecretery tor econouy of

thie union hee reeigned hie poeition. [Text] [ﬂedrid memo 16 in Spenieh
ll. Jen 79 p 5]

680: 3110

52

'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

SWEDEN

BRIEFS

FIRST- SNBDlSH SATELLITB--The Swedish Space Corporation is preparing to build
the first national satellite. "ll-Sat", which is to launched in 1982-83 by

a Soviet rocket. Negotiations are in progress with the lntervosaos Council
near the USSR Acadeny of Sciences concerning the launching of the satellite,
which will be manufactured in Sweden. "II-Sat" (Magmtospheric Satellite)
will have as its mission the study of the aurora borealis. as well as reac-
tions between hot and cold plasnas of the aagnetosphere beyond the two ter-
restrial rays. he recall that Sweden and the USSR have already been cooper-
ating for several years in the space field. Swedish scientific experinents
have been taken aboard Soviet satellites and stratospheric balloons launched
froa Kiruna (Sweden) have been recovered in the USSR during joint operations.
The choice of a Soviet lamcher for “ll-Sat" thus marks a continuance of that
operation. However, it is surprising that Sweden. which has been cooperating
longer with other countries in the European Space Agency, did not see fit to
use the new European launcher "Ariane", which will be available at that tine.

[Text] [Paris All! l cosms in French 6 Jan 19 p 35] 8946

EN!)

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY