FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10573
8 June 1982

Worldwide Report

TERRORISM

FOUO 1/82

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
more

JPRS publications contain information prinerily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials froa foreign-language
sources are translsted; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. mere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was smarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ire: originate with the source. 'rines vithin items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the v.8. Govern-eat.

COPYRIGI‘I MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WSHIP OF
“TERMS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
0F IRIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NOTICE

This new ms serial. WORLDWIDE REPORT: 13330319.. is
devoted to internstionsl terror-is- snd antigovsrnnsnt
revolutionary violence. It is POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY snd
includes material on the orgsniution. objectives and
methods of terrorists end the .consequsnces of terrorist
actions. Ice-s on terrorism formerly published in other
JPRS reports will henceforth appear in this report. It
is expected that the report will be published weekly.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
Tenaoalsn

P000 .1/ 82
CONTENTS

SUB-SAHARA]! AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Briefs
Forthcoming Trial of Terrorists

ZAMBIA

Blast Hrecke Court Administration Buildings in mm
(Tm 0? MIA, 11“”82) 00.000.000.000...OOODOOOOOOO

NEST BUMP!

GREECE

Gomenta on Bombing Incidents
(RIZOSPASTIS, 3 Apr 82) OOOOOOOOOCOOOQOOO00.000.000.00...

ITALY

Red Brigades Terrorist Cianfanelli Implicates P10
(“5" 20 “w 82) .OOOOOOOUCIOOCO...OOOOOIOOOOOOOOIOOOOCO

SPAIN

Better Equipped ETA-H Still Effective Despite Isolation
(cmlo 16, 26 Apr. 82) 000.000.00.000...0.000.000.00000..

Desperation Offensive
ETA-H's International Connections Summarized, by

Jose Ma: Herrera et al.
ETA Tactics Deplored, by Ander Landaburu

.-a- [III-WW-l

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'D“ UI'I‘ILIAI. UM UNI-I

Terrorism in Spain
(Alejandro Munoz Alonso; BI. rmommo EN BSPANA, 1982) 17

MOWUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

FORTHCOMING TRIAL OF TBRRORISTs—‘rhe presumed suthors of the boob attempt
against a cinena in Bangui, on 16 July 1981, which had caused three deaths
and the wounding of 32 people, will be tried by a special tribunal "in

the next few days." This trial will be held shortly after the sentencing to
death Saturday in Bangui, of Central Africans. menbers cf the Central African
Movenent of National Liberation [HCLN]. admittedly guilty "of making en
attempt on the internal security of the stste end the depot for explosive
.devices." Two of the five defendants, including Idi Lela, chief of the m.
were sentenced to capital punishment in absentia. [Text] [Brazzsville
BULLETIN QUOTIDIEN DB L'ACI in French 19 Key 82 p A 5]

C80: 6133/ 0006

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 COURT AMMSTMTION BUIIDINGS Ill KIT"!
3 0? MIA in English 11 May 82 p 5

CHIMWEMWE local court administration offices in

Kitwo were on Sunday bloerup by unknown
geopla causing extensive damage to the
U

“ding.
The ofﬁces were blown up in a pre~dawn blast tn
which the roof and doors were ripped off and window

panes shattered.

Mr Noble Dickson Katalnda. the court clerlt told the‘l‘heaol
laohla yesterday that cues for the day had to be suspended
hecauseall the case records werestill lnstdye thedauiaaed building
awaiting lnvettlptlont. . _ _

It was not immediately. clear
what had caused he blast and
efforts to get a lee comment
by yesterday a lemon proved
fruitless.

There was no lndleattan
etther whether poltce had been
to "It: blown up cnttrt

No one was allowed into the
huildinu for lcar o! dealtovlltg

ctldencc nhich might help Sunday momma "g !
tit-"re inwintiont - nu soloud h shout the he
rrnm his assessment Mr uasalee pint-n.
Kannada aid nothln. had At ﬁrst he thought it u
heen taten front the muted m shots hetaa attt
.tll'tcc. by gunmen but when he
He had reported the matter outstde to check he loom
It) police immediately he was too! 0! the M's adulth-
toldoltheincwence. lmﬂo‘ﬂmblﬂw'nupuw
Statlt-n headman Mr dim and window panes.
Edit and Multan“ who lives in The Meat note up mil
a nearby com-r township said 0! Btu-hi township
he was awakened by a loud rushed to the court to run
hana around 05 hours on ulgulrad happened.
0001
2

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GREECE

comm ON BONDING INCIDEN'IS
Athens RIZOSPASTIS in Greek 3 Apr 82 p 16

[Text] For the second time in three days 0.5. Asbassador Stearne became the
target of "unknown borbers." Despite the strict security measures that were
taken, the boaters succeeded in placing a second bod) in the anbassador's re-
aidence. The responsibility for the betting attacks was claimed by the nu
[Revolutionary People's Struggle] "that appears on the scene from tine to time."
The terrorist activity of the illegal state is not sonething new on the Greek
scene where it often assumes criminal proportions. It is enough for us to
reneuber the incidents of arson of the wiser that were stopped only by the
mass mobilization of the people. The culprits, however, were not arrested,
just as those others were not arrested who evened up their accounts with
herbalis, Hallios, Helch, Petrou and Stenoulis. It is the sane wasps' nest.

the same centers of trouble that intervene in the political life of the country
with acts of terrorism and every kind of provocation to serve the current
objectives of local end foreign reaction. Of course, the government of the
Right that fostered all these vipers for all these years, did not permit the
correct direction of the police investigation to discover the ”unknowns". The
present government, however, can do it if it wants to. And it has an obligation
to take all the measures necessary to quash the illegal state.

9306
C50: 4621/299

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "H‘K'IAI. US}: ONLY

ITALY

RED BRIGADES TERRORIST CIANFANELLI IMPLICATES PLO
AL‘201959 Rom ANSA in English 1947 GMT 20 May 82

[Text] Rene, 20 Hay (ANSA)—-A Red Brigades terrorist who turned states
evidence after his arrest last year, Hessian Cianfanelli, told Rome judges
today that another Brigades nsmber on trial had often travelled to France
to contact the Palestinian al-Pateh Organization.

Cianfanelli's testimony on a Brigades-Palestinian connection came at the
end of the sixth week of the super trial of 64 terrorist suspects facing
charges connected to the 1978 kidnapping and killing of the Garistian
Democrat Party chairman, Aldo Moro, and 18 additional homicides.

Cianfanelli was the third self-confessed terrorist to take the stand as
states witness.

In today's testimony, he confirmed in large part the statements made earlier
by the other two "penitent" Brigades terrorists, Antonio Savasta and Emilie
Liberal, in the area of links between Italy's most ruthless terrorist band
and foreign organizations.

He identified the defendant who maintained contact with al-Fatah in Prensa
as Valerio Morucci but said that he could not give information on any
Palestinian shipments of arms earmarked for the Red Brigades.

He said, however, that he had heard of sea voyages to the Middle East for
picking up weapons and referred to another defendent on trial here in this
connection. The same suspect, Maurizio Folini, had marginal ties with
answers of Soviet security organs who paved the way for the Palestinian
contact, according to Cianfanelli.

The trial continues on Monday.

(30: 6131/503

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

3mm EQUIP?- BTA-H STILL mac-rm DESPITE ISOLATIOII
Desperation Offensive
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 26 Apr 82 pp 32-38

[Text] Arnsd to the teeth. the terrorists are gaining
everything.

Coinciding with the possible def.nitive entry of Spain into
NATO. with the end of the trial of the 23 February coupiets,

with the situation of the international crisis and with the
call for general elections in the near future. following

the Andalucia elections on 23 Hay. the ETA-H [Basque Father-
land and Liberty Group-Military Assewly] seems to have
launched what could be a desperation offensive to force the
Madrid governnent to negotiate. while police experts are
saying that these are the final death throes of an organiza-
tion of gunmen on the way to extinction. other observers
point out that we are far froe being in that final phase of
indiscriminate violence which puts an end to alienated groups
of that kind.

On Saturday, 17 April 1982. an hour after mny Spaniards who had watched
Vincent Minelli's "Designing Noun" on television had gone to had, four man
dressed in sports clothes and leather hunting Jackets approached the Rios

Roses telephone central. in the heart of Hadrid. and knocked on the door.

The security guard of the building. in which all the telephone monitoring
services of Basque Country appear to be centralized. saw then through the
grilled window. he thought it unusual for anyone to knock on the door at
such an hour; however. one of the visitors said:

"Let us in. We are police officers. We have cons here to set up a stakeout in
this central."

A nonent later the guard and the caretaker. who had failed to confim the

identity of the strange visitors. were staring into the muzzle of a 14-shot
”Browning" machine pistol.

5
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The unexpected visitors. nenbers of an ETA-m conmando group. deactivated the

building's alarm systems and fanned out on all floors until they had located
and ease-bled the 13-mn guard force.

One quarter of an hour later. when everything was under control. one of the
terrorists ends a mysterious phone call; and five sen. sewers of the sane
co-ando group. showed up at the building.

The nine terrorists then brought about 10 packets of a nitrogenous [exageno]

plastic explosive into the building. This explosive is similar to Plastic
No 2 but does not present the ease handling dangers and deteriorates less.

The packets were distributed on all floors and several electric detonators
were attached to each of then. along with an elarn clock and a Ins-volt
battery. When they had completed this operation. they left the building
quickly.

Five minutes later. the telephone installations were a heap of rubble. twisted

steel beams. sheaves of wires and transistors. having been blown up in an
impressive cloud of smoke and dust.

ETA-n had attained its most important strategic objective since the death of
Carrero Blanco. ' Some 700.000 Madrid telephone subscribers were affected by
the explosion; and telephone communications with Avila. Caceres. Ciudad Real.

Guadalajara. Salamnca. Segovia. Soria. Toledo. Les Palnas de Gran Canaria.
Santa Cruz de Tenerife and foreign countries lost much of their quality.

The following day. thousands of Hadrilenians had to wait long hours at bank
windows to cash a check or verify a transfer. The data terminal which was
housed in the central had also been affected. and 6.000 banking institutions

were deprived of this fundanental service.

The act of violence against the Rios Roses telephone central. one of the nerve
centers of Spanish telephone coulunicationa. was the latest in a series of
terrorist attacks carried out by the ETA-m in several Spanish provinces in a
synchronized coubined manner.

The terrorist escalation. about which CAHBIO 16 has reported in earlier issues.
began on 1!. March 1982 when an ETA-In couando group assassinated two policemen

and one woman who were having lunch at the “Rancho Chileno" bar in Sestao. 30
km from Bilbao. and wounded two other policemen.

In that operation. one of the terrorists was wounded by a ricochet from his
own weapon; and the ETA-m. as a result thereof. decided to suspend the offen-
sive for 2 weeks to give the Bilbao cos-endo group ties to reorganize.

Last Wednesday. at 0750 hours. the ETA-m gave the definitive "fire" order. In
the outskirts of San Sebastian. 200 meters from the Bilbao-Behovia highway,

eight terrorists unpacked an RPS-7 bazooka of Soviet lake and shelled the
Incheurrondo Civil Guard garrison, where over 600 Beneeerita families reside.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The surprise attack. with nediun-heavy weapons. prevented the civil guards-en.
who had two helicopters and highly efficient arnored vehicles in Inchaurrondo.

from reacting quickly.

For the second tine, the Barcelona ETA—n 2 days later again used medium-
heavy weapons. However. in this attack. which took place in the heart of
Barcelona against an any vehicle [niedars]. the terrorists who used another
06-7 showed that they did not know how to operate it. The grenade. frol
which they had failed to renove the safety pin. hit a floor above the ninibus
and failed to explode.

0n the same day. the 31‘s issued its ultimatum "If the police and the Civil
Guard do not get out of Euzkadi [Basque Country]. the ETA will attack the
garrisons with medium-heavy weapons."

The government reacted resolutely: "Hith that would-be ultimtun. the ETA is
not telling us anything new." said Ignacio Aguirre. government spokesnan.
"The governeent knows what the terrorists' plans are and has taken all the
necessary steps."

Qualitative Leap Forward

And yet, before the Ministry of Interior realized that a full-blown terrorist
offensive was underway and ordered a general police alert. more incidents
were to take place.

In Panplona. a relatively peaceful city. a couando group made up of eight
terrorists attacked a National Police armred car with mchine-gun fire and

bazooka shells .

It was 1200 hours on 17 April. One of the bazooka shells hit the armred car
dead center and blew a lO-centineter hole in it near the driver's seat. In
spite of the fact that only the penetrating charge of the shell had exploded.
national police officer Vicente Gareca Lopez was killed and Teodoniro Diaz
Pores. another national police-In and an excellent soccer player, lost his
left leg.

A few hours later. as the news of the Panplona attack was being reported by
Basque radio broadcasting stations. the E'l‘A's weapons roared again. In

Bilbao. the civil guardsnen of the La Salve garrison were attacked with anti-
tank grenades and in Algorta (Guipuzcoa) a Benenerita detachment which was

guarding the installations of a garrison felt the fragnents of bazooka shells
in their f lesh. It was necessary to anputate the hand of one of the wounded
civil guardsnen. Antonio Guerra Fernandez.

The escalation ended on 19 April. a day on which a terrorist comndo group
attacked a Civil Guard garrison in the Guipuzcoa town of Eiber with hand
grenades and rifle fire.

Taking advantage of the dark of night. the comando group escaped; however.

during the exchange of gunfire between Civil Guard and terrorist forces. a
resident was wounded. 20-year old Felix Cid Cepeda.

7
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the opinion of observers. the new terrorist escalation means an important
qualitative leap forward by the ETA—m. During this offensive. the terrorists
not only used medium-heavy weapons. which are more powerful than the pistols
and submachine guns euployed up to now. but also carried out their activities
in a synchronized way and in accordance with a perfectly structured plan.

In 5 days. between 14 and 19 April. the ETA-m carried out eight operations with
a toll of one dead and 11 wounded. with simultaneous attacks in Madrid.

Barcelona. Guipuzcoa and Navarre.

The terrorists did not use more powerful and destructive weapons but increased
the nunber of members in each co-ando group fron four to eight persons as a
minimum.

This emphasizes the fact that ETA-n, in order to carry out these actions. needed
at least 50 gunmen brought in from France and a support infrastructure which
ranged from 80 to 100 additional persons.

Despite the fact that ETA-m can count upon 452 liberated individuals [liberados].
the general impression is that the recent escalation means that the organiza-
tion had made an unprecedented military effort. to the point that the various
commando groups used two different kinds of bazookas.assault rifles of diverse
sources and makes—many of then manufactured over 30 years ago—including
hunting shotguns.

Specialists on the subject of the ETA also emphasize that the organization
lacks technical training in the use of mediulrheavy weapons, which allost
never hit their targets and when they did they failed to explode because the
terrorists had not activated the shells.

Analysts of terrorist activities add another factor to this lack of technical
training: the practice of abandoning weapons during flight.

In the opinion of specialists in terrorist activities. all these things permit
the conclusion that although the ETA has been able to plan and execute a
terrorist escalation on paper. its cot-lands groups. perhaps because they are
made up of very young persons, lack technical training and the motivation to
take action.

What is more. police sources feel that the ETA can only carry out a series of
actions of this scope through general mobilization of its forces and an

expenditure of 200 million pesetas once or twice a year.

The most recent escalation, in the opinion of the same sources. was only
possible thanks to the fact that the terrorist organization during the last
months had accumulated several million pesetas from the collection of the
"revolutionary tax." in addition to the money received from the ransoa of

Bilbao industrialist Jose Liperheide.

With the: money the terrorists also have begun to rearn themselves with
medium-heavy weapons. Of these weapons. the most inortant category is the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EPG-7 bazooka, which is of Soviet make and which the ETA-n purchased from
Palestinian terrorist organizations a couple of months ago.

The EPG-7, a bazooka which is also used by the Italian Red Brigade and was
used in Spain previously by the ETA-pm [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Political
and Military Assembly]. is a weapon that weighs 8 kilos. is a little over 1
meter long and is capable of sending shells weighing 2 kilos 300 meters in

1 second.

Another weapon which the ETA terrorists feverishly try to get and which
probably is now in their hands is the SA-7 (SAN?) rocket. also of Soviet make.

This rocket, which weighs a little over 10 kilos and has a range of 4.500
meters. at one and one-half times the speed of sound. has in infrared
guidance system and is almost infallible. It can down low-flying airplanes.

The Palestinian terrorists frequmtly use this rocket in their attacks; and
ETA-n has attempted to set these rockets through Libya or Lebanon, where the

Palestinian guerrillas are playing a very important role.

A political statement made by Libyan leader Hu'a-Iar Qadhdhafi a year ago to
the effect that he considers the ETA and IRA as the only two liberation move-
ments in Europe demonstrates that Libya is supporting terrorism in Europe.
according to very credible sources.

"Final Death Throas"

While Ministry of Interior sources have told CAHBIO 16 that the most recent
terrorist escalation is the "final death throe" of the beast mortally wounded
by police action, other equally credible sources are evaluating the qualita-
tive leap forward by the Basque gunmen in quite another manner.

The basic and priority objective of the ETA. according to these sources, is

to provoke the government by using all available means with a view to forcing
the government to take a step backward in Basque Country. "That is the only
method they have," the same source told this magazine. "to justify the inter-
national campaign they have undertaken to show that there are oppression, lack
of freedom and democracy in Basque Country."

This campaign which is being carried out by ETA official spokesmen in
Nicaragua. El Salvador. Venezuela. Hexico. Brussels and Denmark is going to
collapse about their ears during the Horld Cup playoffs when it is shown that
the information ETA is disseminating outside Spain is totally false.

In any event. specialists on terrorism are complaining of the fact that it is
becoming increasingly difficult to identify the real objectives of the ETA.
CAHBIO 16 was told: "than the politicians in the organization went over to
Herri Batssuna [popular unity] to devote themselves to the political struggle,
they lost control of the organisation which passed into the hands of the
gunmen." A revealing point in this regard is an incident which took place a
month ago at the Anoeta de San Sebastian motorcycle racetrack during a

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nationalist rally when two medaers of the ETA got up on the platform and
burned a Spanish flag in public. The Berri Bataauna leaders were struck
speechless. They did not know the intentions of the ETA which had used them
to organize the rally.

In its ultimatum to the Spanish state. the ETA. which is threatening to go
back into action with a fury on 15 May 1982. 20 days before the World Cup
playoffs. is making a mimsl demand that even the terrorists know is
impossible to grant. Madrid is not going to withdraw its police from Basque
Country nor is it going to transfer the functions of the Civil Guard and
National Police to the Basque government at this time.

Therefore. it is probable that by means of such an exhorbitant and outlandish
demand the terrorists are trying to find a way to negotiate with the Madrid
government with a view to receiving lesser concessions. such as a new amesty
which could benefit both the terrorists and the "23 February" coupists.

This possibility which is being offered in Abertasle [patriotic] quarters as
very viable is being rejected outright by the central government. "There will
be no negotiations with the terrorists." CAMBIO 16 was told by a Ministry of
Interior spokesman. "so long as Juan Jose Roaon Perez is head of the ministry."

"Not only have they lost popular support but no longer have that support and
information infrastructure which the terrorists had 2 years ago and which the
police dismantled." the spokesmn added to justify the so-called "rounding up"
of the terrorists.

It is true that the Basque terrorists are now lore isolated than ever, that

there are over 500 activists in prison charged with being part of information
comando groups and another 600 charged with crimes of violence and that the

Basque society. principally that segment supporting the PNV [Basque National
Party] and the "Left for Socialism" are turning their backs on the group of

gunmen whom for years they had supported sentimentally and sided with money,
shelter and protection.

However. it is not so clear that this is the end of the ETA. Although many
of these vermin are dying while killing. an upert told CAMBIO 16: "So long
as there is refuge in France, it will not be easy to put an end to Basque
terrorism once and for all."

ETA-M's International Connections Summarized
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 26 Apr 82 pp 38-41

[Article by Jose Ma: Herrera, Jose Manuel Arija, Xavier Domingo, Francisco
Caparros and Rafael Cid]

[Text] No one knows more about the ETA today than the French police and
intelligence services. Therefore. no one knows nore about the Basque terror-
ist organization than the French Government.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The whereabouts of the 700 B'l'Aists-ailitanta. politico-nilitante and
autonomous couandos—residing in France have been pinpointed and are
surveiled; their telephones are "bugged"; all their move-ants are known.
both inside France and outside the French borders.

However. the French police and the SDBC [Foreign Intelligence and Counter-
intelligence Service] (which has a good "intelligence apparat" in Bayonne)
are jealously guarding this information about the international contacts of
the B'l'Aists and their movements. alleging that the col-amication of this
information to the Spanish police or other interested international services
would be "dangerous from the political standpoint."

The Spanish police and other interested services (Italian. German, British or
American services) feel on the other hand that knowledge of the material
infornation about the ETA in the possession of the French would in short
order facilitate its dismantling.

Both the Spanish minister of interior, Juan Jose Roeon. and Comissioner
Manuel Ballesteros have repeatedly asked the French to comnicate to them
the complete file of reports on the international network of support.
sympathies and connections available to the m in its French sanctuary. The
French do not deny, cannot deny, that they have such information. However.
every interview has been a disappointment to the Spaniards. And the fact of
the matter is that the number one international LIA connection is France.

According to a Secret Police detective assigned to Bordeaux. the reason for
this silence is that the French Government does not wish to see the French
Basque Country converted into a battlefield between B'I‘Aists a‘nd organizations
such as the Spanish Basque Battalion or others. Another French police source.
a supporter of greater cooperation with the Spaniards. gave us another story:
certain revelations about the international contacts of the ETA on French
soil could be a harsh blow to the foreign policy of Paris.

There is not contradiction between the two versions; and both sources agree
in washing their hands of the affair, saying that orders to comnicate
nothing had come from very high up. In this regard, there has not been the
slightest change in policy with the change in presidents.

B‘l‘Aist Sympathies

In fact the continuation of the French government's complicity and its
reasons therefor have brought the ETA an entire gaunt of more or less declared
sympathies and support which range from militants and elected representatives
of the Socialist Party (and now also of the French Con-maniac Party) to
Matignon.

For this entire "Left," the Spanish Basque Country is a kind of oppressed

colony; ETA is a national liberation movement; and Spanish democracy is the
mask of fascism. Such thoughts were expressed to us very recently at the
headquarters of the French Socialist Party in Paris. Rue Solferino. by a high

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

official of the majority. Gaston Defferre. minister of interior. had himself
spoken in very similar terms in an interview with 1.3 NOUVEL OBSBVATEUR.

With respect to the request for asylum of the deputy fru H3 [Berri Batasun].
Francisco Leta-anus, his attorney. Michel Prat. told Kiguel Ramos of CANDID

16: "Hitterrand's attitude will depend upon nomliration in Spain. The
French Government cannot fail to take into account the political analysis of

the refugees from Heat European democracies in which there is also persecution.”

The ETA presence in France is large and strong. The history of the
organisation is linked with the border relationship. and from the very first
moment the French sanctuary has been increasingly plagued by nationalist
groups. some of which, such as Iparraterrak. are also terrorist and separa-

tist groups. Compared with French support, aid and complicity. all the other
ETA international contacts are secondary. All of then in fact originate and

develop on French soil and involve activities ranging from political relations
to arms trafficking.

What is certain is that the ETA is very selective in its international
contacts--we are speaking here about the ETA. It trusts no one and in order

for there to be a connection an essential condition is that there be some
kind of parallelism between the ETA and the other groups; and above all an

essential condition for understanding one another is that the other groups
share separatist feelings.

The Irish Brothers

Therefore, the ETA has relations with members of the Baader-Heinhoff ring and
other groups which do not have a God. master or country to call their own.
such as the Red Brigades.

The ETA's best contacts were and are with similar separatist organizations
such as the M (Quebec Liberation Front). the Corsican Liberation Front.and
above all the IRA. In this case. what is involved are old, solid and privi-
leged relations. An authentic collaboration which endures and intensifies.

Quite rightly we can say in this case of parallel histories that the ETA is
acting like the younger brother and favored disciple of the IRA. They have
the same Catholic origin. the same ecclesiastic and above all Jesuit support.
similar splits, similar languages and simultaneous movement toward pro-Soviet

Marxism. They have the same bloody tactics and close cooperation in arms
trafficking. There is no difference between them regards the "military"

prioritv. The "nlsterization" of the Basque Country is a concept which comes
to mind and which has often been espoused by theoreticians such as herri
Batasuna. This is a trap which has been avoided up to now in Spain.

It seems that the first contacts between the ETA and IRA were made in 1971 in
Algeria and continued in Ireland with the head of the Irish organization,
Sean Hacstiofain. A report from the Spanish secret service concludes that a
mutual aid pact was signed in 1972.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A:: a manor of (act. the E'l'Aiatu and the non of the 1M had already had the
opportunity to talk with one another at the 'i‘ricontinental Conference in

Havana in 1966. from which developed the two concrete positions and applica-
tions of the "internationalist" doctrines endorsed by Moscow in 1969 at the
Horld Conference of the Commist Parties that are still in force, according

to a recent statenent by Georges Harchais during the last congress of the
French Commist Party.

Since then, the paths taken by the IRA and ETA have been parallel in their
"ideological" aspects and Moscow-oriented and have not ceased intersecting
one another in arms supply activities. Not long ago, many BTAists arrested
in France were transporting ans for the IRA. Similar incidents had already
occurred in 1972 when Jose Luis Larrsnaga was arrested-«he was working with
the German trafficker, Gunther Leinhausser—and in 1975 when custons officials
intercepted Jose Hendizabal on the Paris-Brussels highway.

The Algerian FLN [National Liberation Front] owed a debt to the ETA which was
repaid when it won its independence. Before that. during the war with France.

the Algerian terrorists had benefited fron the skill and knowledge of the ETA
border crossers when they were fleeing from the French police and took
refuge in Spain.

The Moalen Brothers

Afterward, Algeria made instructors and training camps available to the ETA
and also facilitated its relations with other Moslen nationalist groups.
particularly with the Palestinians. who in turn opened the Libyan door to the
ETAists.

In specialized quarters it is estimated that the information held by the
Spanish secret services on the preamce of ETAiste in Algeria and other coun-
tries of the Moslem world is accurate. What is more. as with the IRA, there
was a certain amount of ideological parallelism between the ETA and the FLN

which for a time was reflected in ETA "doctrine." For a period of time. its
"literature" was very much influenced by the Third World social-nationalism
of Franz Fence and by Algerian propaganda.

Relations with Libya and Qadhdhafi, which were arranged principally through
the intermediary of the IRA, are said to have been less intense. although a
reliable source reported the presence of Apala in Tripoli last year. We are
still talking about the ETA-n. The ETA-pa had more intense relations with the
Moslen organizations. particularly Palestinian or Yemeni organizations; but
that is another story.

Today the relations of ETA-n with Arab terrorism have more to do with the
tangled complex of arms trafficking than with its physical presence in

Islamic lands. However. the contacts are continuing. although they are made
principally in the "international brigades" on the Salvadoran battlefields o).
in training bases of the "red mercenaries" in Nicaragua.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Latin American Brothers

The ERP [People's Revolutionary Amy]. HIE [Hovement of the Revolutionary Left]
and Hontoneros in their day had close relations with the ETA; however. today.
via Paris (Regia Debray) and Havana. the "diplomacy" of the Basque terrorists

and separatist organization is being conducted on the ill-fated Central
American chessboard. with its capital in Handgun.

For a long time the top ETA foreign relations official. Jose Antonio
Urruticoechea Bengoechea. alias "Joau Ternera." was there with an office.
telephone and almost legal representation and may still be there. The man in
the Sandinist capital is his second in con-end. Jose Larrategui Cuadra. alias
"Antxulo." Other terrorists who have passed through Sandinist camps located
between Esteli. Matagalpa and Grinatega are Tomas Linnea Echeverria and Justo
Ortego Ezquerra. The ”mission" also has four or five more representatives
whose names have not been determined. Recently. as representatives. including
Castell. paid a visit. which was fully reported by the newspaper scum. to
Latin American countries in which the ETA has "colonies": Costa Rica.
Nicaragua. Venezuela and Mexico.

It is also known that a group of ETAists up until recently was receiving
training in Cuba as medical corpsmen. The Cubans, because of their more or
less good relations with the Spanish Government. are reducing as lunch as

possible their visible contacts with the ETA which are conducted through
several Spanish persons or groups friendly to Havana or now. more simply.
through the French conduit.

The same could be said of ETA relations with the K63 and the Soviets. Up
until 3 or 4 years ago. KGBers in the USSR Elbassy in Madrid made frequent

trips to the Basque Country and personal contacts with BTAists in San Juan
and Biatritz were detected.

Those who surveil the movements of such personalities say: "Today they are
traveling mch less" and the Soviets "are afraid that it can be proved they
have some contact with the ET " which doubtless would prompt the inediate
closure of their embassy in Madrid. Nevertheless. the anti-Sovietism of the
leftist kind which characterized the ETA's "literature" for years has
disappeared. For example. the ETA has not condemned the Soviet invasion of

Afghanistan nor has it demonstrated the slightest solidarity with Polish
Solidarity.

As a matter of fact. both the IRA and ETA are in the line of "anti-imperialist
movements" that accepts and agrees with Moscow's "internationaliam." which was
defined at the world Conference of the Commist Parties in 1969 and recently
redefined by Harchais in Paris.

ETA Tactics Deplored
Madrid CAMEIO 16 in Spanish 26 Apr 82 p 39
[News councntary by Ander Landaburu: "Prom Shot to Grenade"!

[Text] To what level of insanity and irrationality has the ETA gone to make
public its most recent document. an ultimatum which contains a threat to the

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

families living in garrison houses or in their vicinity? It is not enough for
them to kill a doctor or engineer and to extort [money] from hundreds of
citizens or cause them to flee from the Basque Country in terror; now they
want to show us their "revolutionary Abertzale spirit“ by killing families.
women and children. From a shot in the neck they are moving up to a grenade
through the window.

in this leap forward. as a possible desperate effort to seek negotiation
through an insane and wrong strategy and to replace their loss of popular
support with spectacular actions including the use for the first time of
medium-heavy weapons. we do not know whether the ETA is engaged in a
"desperation" offensive or. as some sources maintain. whether this is the
beginning of the end of the organization.

However. what is being demonstrated is the lack of ethical policy. dehuman-
ization, barbarity. fascism and the messianic and sick minds of the current
leaders of the ETA who have absolutely nothing to do with that group of
idealists who took part in the fifth assembly back in the year 1967. under
the dictatorship.

Leaders who have become skilled in the handling of a pistol instead of ideas.
who have no scruples about recruiting beardless youths from high schools.
youths who barely knew about and much loss suffered under Prancoism. Young
men who call themselves by the mandatory catchwords "socialists or Marxists"
but have not read two books and always substitute training or armed action
for intellectual education. Young men who are only motivated by simplistic
and at times racist "slogans" and who in many cases unfortunately wind up as
cannon fodder or prison inmates a few months after beginning their "revolu-
tionary adventure." Young men. in short. who are promised an idyllic.
independent. socialist. etc. Basque Country but who with the dynamism of
pistols will only get to know a country in stagnation and ruins and immersed
in a wave of madness.

Some time ago the ETA lost the political battle. In Basque Country we are

not ready to accede to conditions imposed by force of arms; and ETA cannot

set itself up as the representative of our people and much less of the workers
because doctors. guards. cab drivers. engineers. merchants and newsman Portell
were assassinated by it.

There is no deubt that at this time the BTAists—or those manipulating them--
objectively are the allies of Tejero. They have become his best: defenders and
prefer a coup because they know that sooner or later democracy and the regime
of freedom. which is increasingly consolidated. will finally smother them.

in the meantime, the ETA will seek its own justification through the dictator-
ship which some are longing for and will continue to encourage the climate 0[
a fascist coup. In this way they will be able to present themselves as the

saviors of the fatherland in a Basque society anesthetized by the blood which

they themselves have spilled. Who will help them then?

It is necessary to isolate the ETA. respond to its challenge. destroy the
myth of its power with valor and courage and convince ourselves that the

15
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

struggle is every day. Only in this way will we be able to cone out of this
situation of stagnation. seniruin and terror. And if the ETA wishes to
negotiate let it say so openly but only after it has definitely stopped its
terrorist activities.

As for Madrid. it is not enough to finally recognize and applaud the efforts
of Buskadiko Esquerra [Basque Left]. the WV [Basque Nationalist Party] and its
its government in this struggle; it is necessary-forgetting party electoral
pettinese--to help the Basque president to assuns his constitutional duties
and responsibilities in police matters as soon as possible. He should forget
about LOAPAS [organic and hamonization law of the autononous process] and
other sinicks so ‘313 as the priority subject is the struggle for democracy
and the status of the autononies which are today threatened by the ETA and
coupism. The rest of the country should understand that herenss Arsallus

stated recently-we do not want dictators. not even Basque dictators.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Informacion y Revistas. s.A.

8143
050: 3110/139

16
FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFFﬂ3A1.UB£(MNLY

SPAIN

TERRORISM IN SPAIN

Barcelona BL TBBBOBISMD BM BSPAMA in Spanish 1982 pp 217-272 and Table of
Contents

[Book by Alejandro Munoz Alonso: "Terrorism in Spain," Terror Versus
Pluralistic Coexistence in Freedom. Tablero Collection.]

[Text] Tablero Collection

Board of Directors: Rafael Borras, Victor Mendoza and Baltasar Porcel
Editorial Board: Maria Teresa Arbo. Marcel Plans and Carlos Pujol

Copyright Alejandro Munoz Alonso, 1982

Planets Publishers, Inc, 273-277 Corcega. Barcelona 8 (Spain)

Collection design and cover by Bans Romberg (Flash Press photo and production
by Jordi Royo)

First edition: March 1982

Legal deposit: 3. 10061-1982

. ISBN 8h-320-7314-8

Printed in Spain

"Duplex, Inc" Printing Shops, Ciudad de la Asuncion. 26-D, Barcelona 30

Index
I. The Shadov of Cain 7
Concept and significance of terrorism 9
Terrorism in contemporary Spain 11
Terrorism at the end of Prancoism 14
The Burgos trial 17
The origins of ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group] 22
From the assassination of Carrero Blanco to the attack on Correo Street 30
The other kinds of terrorisn 34
The terrorism of the extreme right 37
The terrorism during the final months of Francoisn no
17

IOIJOIIICIAI.UEI10NLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

TI. The Challenge

The Arias-Praga phase (December 197S-Ju1y 1976)

Rebirth and christening of GRAPO [First of October Armed
Revolutionary Group]

ETA: betveen the truce and internal problems. The "Pertur" case
GRAPO and the extreme right against reform: the winter of 1977-1978
The tragic week: the Atocha slaughter

Prom provocation to amnesty

A case of marginal terrorisn: MPAIAC [Sovereignty and Independence
Movement of the Crnary Islanns]

III. The Escalation

The strategy of destabilization

The "normalization" of terrorism
Negotiating with ETA

The provocation of the Armed Forces
when ETA acts, GRAPO falls

ETA: kill more to negotiate better

IV. The Response

The great maneuvers against terror

The struggle for the Statute

The French front

Second general elections

New government, old problems

General offensive of terror

A bloody week in May

The Statute of Guernica

ETA (p-n) [political-military] against tourism
A blow to GRAPO

ETA and the Basque referendum

Violence after the Statute. The Autonomous Commandos
ETA (p-m) strategy. The Ruperez kidnapping
ETA against Basque autonomy

V. The Retreat

The failure of the "ETA-State"

The incoherence of ETA (p-m)

The campaign against UCD [Democratic Center Union]

ETA loses nerve

The Front for Peace

The Madrid-Basque government tension

The eternal French problem

The Suarez resignation and the king's visit to the Basque Country
The extreme right against democracy: from terrorism to coupiem
The ETA attrition: the truces
The ETA (m) final escalation. The government against terror. the

international dimension . 251
The tragic week in May 1981. Blow to GRAPO 255’
ETA and Socialist France 258
The great ETA (m) truce 260
A blow to ETA 262
The internal debate in ETA (p-m) on "armed struggle" 263
The end of the truce 267
ETA (n): the return to the attack 269

The Failure of the "ETA-State"

When one studies the topic of conteaporary Spanish terrorism, what is neat
striking is the lasting nature of the ETA phenomenon. While the other terrorist
groups, particularly GRAPO (its leading competitor in persistence) are marked by
their intermittency, taking action, being broken up and disappearing for months,
ETA has always shown signs of an extremely noticeable continuity, interrupted
only by truces the occasion and duration of which have depended solely on the
decision of the terrorist organization. nut, in addition, ETA has distinguished
itself from the other terrorist organizations for its consistency and entrenchment.
Even though on the occasion of the burial of certain GRAPO members, such as
Collazo Araujo or Gerdan Calixto, there have been small groups of individuals
favoring that terrorist group, these have always been very localized phenomena.

Only a very small part of the populace has felt associated with GRAPO throughout
that strange organization's 6-year history.

ETA, on the other hand, has always enjoyed enornous popular support, which has
fluctuated during the various phases of recent political evolution, but which
has been evident from the late 1960's until the present, and night even be
described as massive on occasion. Hess mobilizations of large scope have taken
place in the name of ETA, and among then there have been ddeaonstrations by many
thousands of persons who have hailed ETA, and shouted "ETA Herria Zurekin" (ETA,
the people are with you), or that other terrifying slogan regarding the State
Security Forces and against all "collaborators" with the "Spanish occupier" in
general. "ETA. kill then." The opinion polls taken during recent years in the
Basque Country have always reflected large percentages in favor of "armed strug-
gle" among those associated with the ones who back and justify the existence of
ETA a: a"military organization,” in other words, those who view Basque terrorism
as an acceptable "national liberation struggle."

During the recent phase, wherein ETA-military and ETA politico-military have
appeared quite distinct from one another, there has been little doubt that the
popular entrenchment of these two different branches is-very closely reflected

in the backing given to the two political coalitions, Harri Batasuna [Popular
Unity] and Euskadiko Eskerra [Basque Left]. Nevertheless, it is true that since
late 1979 or early 1980, this latter organization has shown certain signs of inde-
pendence from ETA (p-m), at whose Seventh Assembly (1976) its leading component,
EIA [Basque Revolutionary Party] had its origin.

19
10R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This indisputable popular support will lend ETA some of what most of the terrorist
groups usually lack: a legitimacy. Re are interpreting this term here in the
sense given it by political science, that is, a quality enjoyed by certain powers
whereby their ambition to impose themselves and to exercise authority is accepted
by a populace which justifies it because that ambition coincides with the sociolo-
gical aspirations or beliefs of that populace. This is the type of legitimacy
that the IRA enjoys for the Catholics of Ulster, the Algerian FLN for the Arabs

of Algeria, the Mau-Hau for the autochthonoua population of Kenya or the EOKA for
the Greek Cypriots.

HithOut that "legitimacy" accepted by a sizable portion of the Basque population
the persistence of the ETA phenomenon would have been impossible. Thus. the Basque
conflict is presented to us as a "conflict of legitimacies," because within the
Basque society there coexist, at least, one sector which has attributed that funda-
mental political quality ("the temperament of the city" as Guillermo Ferrero called
it) to the central authorities of Spain, considering anything that would entail a
break with them to be "illegitimate," and another sector which attributes "legiti-
macy" to those who represent the radical ambition for a break with the Spanish
State, e:~n by armed struggle, in other words, ETA. There is still a third sector
which would base the legitimacy on a pact between two sovereign and irreducible
elements: the Spanish State and the original sovereignty of the Basque people.

This contractualist concept constantly crops up in the political literature of

the so-called moderate nationalism, the most perfect representative of which is

the PNV [Basque Nationalist Party].

This attribute of legitimacy is considered by political science as the foundation
of the state. And this explains why a statist aspiration is quite perceptible

in the evolution of ETA. In fact, ETA has acted as an embryonic state, particu-
larly since the early 1970's. This ambition to be a state, and to display the
authority and powers with which states appear to be endowed, has been fostered

by the fact that, especially between 1976 and 1980, the State, the Spanish State,
appeared to be relinquishing its power in the Basque Country. The distinguishing
traits of the state and the exercise of its authority, ceased to be apparent.
There was constant mention of an "absence of the state." And thus there occurred
a power vacuum which has been filled to a large extent by ETA. The very legiti-
nmcy of the Basque autonomous institutions seems to depend on the ETA's definitive
endorsement. A head-on clash with ETA has been avoided and, when violence or
terrorism is condemned, it is done in general terms, without alluding specifically
to ETA, or else the condemnation of ETA violence is offset by a condemnation of
institutional violence or of the PSE's repression.

The first attribute derived from this "ETA legitimacy", from this concept of ETA
as an embryonic state, is precisely that of legitimising its violence. It is well
known that the classic theory of the state affirms that the state has the monopoly
on coercion, only the state can exercise force, and the violence used by it is
legitimized and justified accordingly. Hence, the ETA's violence is "legitimized"
for those who back the organization directly or indirectly. In fact, ETA is
viewed as a holder of that monopoly on coercion, and this explains, for example,
why when a labor dispute is not resolved through the ordinary expedients of nego-
tiation, ETA attributes to itself the "last resort," the use of coercion on
behalf of the side, considered weakest. This situation, which appears quite
evident, particularly in ETA (p-m), means that ETA assumes authority belonging

to the army and the police.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The second state attribute exercised by ETA is that of creating a certain tax
system which takes the form of extortion of businessmen, professional people and
citizens who are forced to pay the so-called ”revolutionary tax." Although ETA
has never lacked voluntary contributions and assistance from sympathizers, at
first ETA resorted to holdups in order to "recover" the funds that it needed to
keep the organization operating. But gradually, as it felt more "legitimized,"

it replaced this procedure, which unquestionably entails risks, with the coercive
"levying" of the "revolutionary tax" which, moreover, afforded far greater income.

At the outset, it was the "Hispanist" oligarchy often established in the residen-
tial district of Neguri which was the victim of the ETA extortion. Hhhy of them
left the Basque Country and settled in Andalucia or Madrid. But on some occasions
ETA purSued them to their new residences. The letter received by the individuals
selected by the terrorist organization as forced taxpayers usually began in this
manner: "The Basque bourgeoisie, that social class to which you belong, cooperated
in the annexation of part of our country to the Spanish State, forgetting its
national origin and its culture, for the sake of its economic interests; a nation
and a culture which belonged not only to it, but to all our people as well."

Gradually, however, the "census" of the forced taxpayers was expanded, first in
about 1978, to include medium and small-sized business owners and, since early
1980, to include professionals of various types or merchants.

When ETA was divided into two branches, both used the same procedure to collect
funds. thereby causing great confusion. Later, the autonomous commandos used
extortion as well. And opportunistic elements and criminals, even in other sec-
tions of Spain, pretended to be from ETA, almost always unsuccessfully, in search
of money from others.

Using this procedure, ETA has managed to collect billions of pesetas. According
to certain statistics, in 1979 alone ETA collected 20 billion pesetas. The
figure may seem exaggerated when one considers the fact that, in 1977, ETA sent
nearly 100 letters (another item of information impossible to check) demanding
the "tax" from Basque businessmen, and that the amounts demanded of the business-
men usually ranged between S and 20 million, and for professional people between
half a million and 5 million. But any estimate in this area is risky and arbi-
trary.

For some time ETA made use of middlemen to collect the "revolutionary tax," but
it gave up the mediation when the Legasa incident occurred in late 1978. The
protagonist in the incident was a builder. Jose Legasa Uburia, who refused to

pay the "tax" and reported the situation to the French police, who arrested three
ETA (m) leaders, including the notorious "Trepa," Javier Aya Zulaica.

In all instances, the ETA letter demanding payment of the revolutionary tax
threatened the"capitalists unwilling to contribute" with execution. And, in
several cases, the threat was carried out. Pbr example, the assassination of
Modesto Carriega Perez, director of the Hispano-Anerican Bank of Baracaldo, on

12 September 1979, was due to his refusal to pay the "tax." And the same motive.
was involved in the assassination of the Count of Aresti on 25 March 1980.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Many of those required to pay the ETA extortion have resorted to the professional
services of lawyers who are "abertzales" [patriots] or close to "abertzalism," and
who have negotiated for some reduction. It is claimed that at times their fees
have been on the order of half a million pesetas.

The information which ETA has on the financial status of its forced taxpayers is
usually quite accurate, and there is no doubt that it uses the services of indivi-
duals who have infiltrated banking establishments, business firms or government
agencies. Sometimes this information has been wrong, and ETA has been willing to
reduce the amount of the extortion and, it is claimed, even to "exempt" completely

from the payment when its victims have been able to prove the real state of their
assets.

In early 1980, ETA launched a new campaign for the tax payment. sending letters to
certain recipients, as we have noted previously. The front pages of the newspapers
featured the case of Juan Alcorts Hair, a Guipuzcoan businessman Hhv, after having
received the ETA extortion letter, refused to pay and sent the entire press a
letter reporting the incident and explaining his refusal to pay. It is noteworthy
that the entire press published the letter prominently, except for BGIN, another
component of the "ETA-State" which printed it as contributed advertising.

In the Alcorta case, there was the fact that one of his sons had belonged to ETA
(p-m) and was married to a sister of "Pertur"; while a niece of his was the widow

of an ETA member. Miguel Gardogui, who was killed in a confrontation with the
police.

In his 1.tter, Alcorta cited the "blackmail which is destroying my country, my
town and my people"; and asserted: "It is difficult for me to understand the inhi-
bition of an entire community faced with such a serious and increasingly spreading
problem." With a courage praised on all sides, Alcorta confronted the ETA menbers'
death threat. Viana, the UCD secretary general in Busksdi, described Alcorta's act
as "a first major seed-planting for a brave collective reaction." But the fact is
that it was like a cry in the wilderness. Garaicoechea had called upon his fellow
citizens saying that it was necessary to take risks, but the atmosphere for assum-
ing that kind of position was lacking.

What Alcorta's action represented individually was matched corporatively by the'
note made public on 1 April 1980 by the Vizcaya Physicians Association, also refus-
ing, in the name of its members, to pay the tax "that runs counter to our human
condition and to the dignity and good name of this Basque people, who can neither
accept nor be resigned to such a state of savagery." A few months later, in Septem
bet, the mayor of Usurbil and PNV militant Andres Bueno publicly read in the town
hall plenum the ETA extortion letter asking him for "2 million pesetas in the form
of a revolutionary tax." Bueno decided not to pay, announcing this at another
municipal session at which all the parties except Berri Lan, a local version of
Herri Batasuna, backed a motion to condemn the action."

* CAMBIO 16, No 440, 11 Hay 1980, "Alone Against ETA," pp 22 ff, and No 461, 5
October 1980, "I Will Not Pay Either," pp 27 ff.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The "ETA-State" was beginning to totter. and the explanation was relatively
simple. The refusal of the "milis" to accept the autonomous system represented
by the Statute of Guernika even as a platform for continuing to progress. as the
"poli-niiis" had done, was causing it to lose the popular support that it had
enjoyed in other times. Its "legitimacy" decltned, because in the minds of
increasingly larger sectors of people weary of the struggle, bloodshed and
terror, the true legitimacy was that of the Statute. This explains why the
"political program" of ETA (m), represented by the so-called "KAS [Patriotic
Socialist Coordination] alternative." has increasingly lost its mobilizing
capacity. because its maximaliat nature is no longer tempting to virtually

anyone. As opposed to the "KAS alternative" the Basque people have unequivocal-
ly chosen the Statute of Guernika.

ETA is being left alone, without "legitimacy," and has embarked upon the insane
path of blind terrorism. Its theory of the national, social revolution has
declined but. like a machine without controls. ETA continues to kill, because
its members do not know how to do anything else.

And when an armed organization is removed from the political area. the inertia
of clandestinity and violence as a way of life inevitably prompt it to become
a "Mafia." Hence it is not surprising that, since 1980, the Mafia-like
features of ETA have become increasingly evident. In this way one can inter-
pret its implication in the world of drugs and a series of assassinations
which have all the features of a settling of accounts; such as the assassina-
tion in November 1980 of Jose Maria Perez de Urreta, charged with being one of
the leading individuals responsible for the distribution of drugs in the
Basque Country. But it was not social morality which prompted ETA, but rather
a typical problem of market distribution. This also explains why several

ETA (m) militants in jail have drug trafficking charges against them.

1he Tncoherence of ETA (p-m)

-.

ETA (p—m). which appeared to have some more solid and coherent ideological
plans. has also experienced the same process of deterioration owing to its
inability to extract from its political premises their logical consequences
that would have prompted it to give up the "armed struggle." Hence the inco-
herent features of the "poli-milis" action during 1980.

In June of that year, as during the previous year, ETA (p-m) began a campaign
against tourism. The nightmare of the telephoned warnings and the ousters

from hotels started on St John's night, 24 June, in Alicante, which was holding
its celebrations; and it continued later in other Hediterranean locations.

ETA (p-m) had annOunced its plan on 20 June in San Sebastian, calling for the
release of 19 ETA members. the expulsion of the director of the Soria jail and
the setting of a definitive date for the Navarre referendum.

The ETA (p-m)'s goals (announced at a press conference marked by the "ritual"
so well liked by the "poli-milis", wearing hoods, with a secret movement of
the newsmen (...),-etc.) were palpable proof of that process of deterioration
which we cited previously.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In an editorial entitled "Terrorist Blackmail and Political Incoherence," EL
PAIS described the terrorist threat ”in addition to a sinister provocation," as
"a notable monument to foolishness and inconsistency, erected, unfortunately,
upon an indiscriminate and massive death threat (...)." It went on to say:
"The desire that, once the bloody series of incidents began, the responsibility
for the deaths would be borne by the Ministry of Interior is a macabre joke,
cynically mentioned by Bandres himself a year ago, when he commented that the
surest procedure to prevent a bomb from exploding was not to set it." The
Madrid newspaper emphasized the "contradictions in the communique (which)
attest to the bounds of inconsistency and inability to reason reached by the
terrorists"; such as that of considering the lack of "support from the left"

a reason not to back a strike or that of considering the strategy of the
"milis" to be "aberrant," as if their own actions did not lack the same support
from the left and were not as aberrant as those of ETA (m). *

Butthis time the "campaign" did not catch the government unawares and, through
an ETA member arrested in early June, it found out about the ETA (p-m) plan.

An unusual deployment of police along the Mediterranean coast prevented the
terrorists from moving about easily. The Congress of Deputies joined the
antiterrorist battle, passing a non-law bill whereby the state pledged not

to agree, in any instance, to the initiation of negotiations with ETA, and

the government and citizens were required to adopt all the measures allowed

by law to halt the terrorist action. The bill had only one abstention, that of
Bandres, according to whom "the one which is the cause of the cause, is the
cause of the evil that has been caused"; which was equivalent to accusing the
government, as well as ETA (p-m), of the excesses of the terrorists, based on
the very odd interpretation by the Basque deputy which contradicted his remarks
of a year before.

The ETA (p-m) attacks in various locations on the Mediterranean coast (Alicante,
Mijas, Puerto Banus) did DOL cause any victims, but did bring on an atmosphere
of terror which was highly detrimental for tourism. The new interior minister,
Juan Jose Roson, showed a determined and by no means compromising attitude
toward terrorism. The ETA members held in Soria were transferred to the
maximum security jail at Herrera de la Mancha. At the same time, three of the
most prominent leaders of Euskadiko Eskerra (Garayalde. Ignacio Mugica Arregui

and Ruiz de Apodaca) were arrested.

The loquacious ETA (p-m) terrorists again explained their "reasons" to news-
men. They justified their action claiming that the progress of the statute

had been blocked and UCD had not kept its promises to the Basque Country.
They also aimed their attacks at PNV, "which will have to count on the armed
organizations in order to govern"; reiterating their desire to continue their

"armed struggle."**

The deterioration of ETA (p-m), and its definitely criminal nature, which
belied its status as a "good ETA" with which some attempted to depict it,
was proven not only by this senseless "campaign against tourisaﬁ which already

*EL PAIS, 22 June 1980, Editorial: "Terrorist Blackmail and Political
lncoherence," p 10.

** CAMBIO 16, No 469, 13 July 1980, "The 'Eoom' of the Bombs," pp 16 ff. and
No 450, 20 July 1980, "ETA (p-m) Speaks: Let Us Tell Lies," pp 16 ff.

2k
spoke with sufficient eloquence of its true nature, but also by another gory
incident: the assassination, on 25 June, of the board member of the Michelin
agency in Vitoria, Luis Hergueta Guinea. The myth of ETA (p-m) as a kind of
"generous bandit" which never did more than shoot at the legs of the "exploiters"
or "collaborationists" that it held in custody, was reaoundingly dispelled.

Those who had considered the deathdealing bombs in Madrid during July 1980 a
regrettable accident were left definitely without arguments to defend "soft"
terrorists whom the implacable logic of violence had led to criminal madness.

The Campaign Against UCD

One of the most significant features of ETA (p~m) is its anti-UCD fixation.
In its statements, it is strange how it often attributes the government's
complete action to UCD as a party. UCD is assigned the blame and the liability.
This also explains why ETA (p-m) has on several occasions aimed its action

at UCD deputies. We are already familiar with the Cisneros and Ruperez cases.
The consolidation of UCD as a target to be destroyed had been made explicit
during July in a communique issued by the ETA (p-m) prisoners in Soria in
which, after claiming that UCD was treating them as prisoners of war, they
added: "He hold UCD as a whole, cadres, militants and members, responsible,
and we call upon ETA to consider this so, making the entire weight of revolu-
tionary justice fell upon that party in its entirety. He urge ETA to respond
overwhelmingly to any action by UCD."

The ETA (p-m) "summer campaign" was preceded in 1980 by an abortive kidnapping,
that of Gabriel Cisneros. In 1981 also, ETA (p-m) made an unsuccessful attempt
to kidnap another Centrist deputy. In the latter instance, it was the Galicisn
deputy, Gomez Pranqueira, whose presence of mind thwarted the ETA members'
attempt. Franqueira put out the light in the room where he was located,
grabbed a pistol from the criminals and fired, wounding one of them.

ETA (p-m) continued its emulation with ETA (m), making several attacks on
headquarters of the Civil Guard, such as those at Zubiri and Aribe, in the
area of its "Navarre campaign." It also continued its anti-UCD campaign by
assassinating Juan de Dios Doval Hateos, a law professor who was fourth on

the UCD slate in the last elections. on 31 October. The third one on that
slate, Jaime Arrese, had also been assassinated just a week earlier. on 23
October. in Elgoibsr (Guipurcoa), this time by the autonomous commandos. On

29 September, another UCD militant, Jose Ignacio Ustsran, husband of a council-
woman from the same party, had been assassinated in Vitoris.

Doval, the fifth UCD member who was assassinated in the Basque Country since

9 November 1978, when Luis Candendo died in Anzuola (Guipuzcoa), caused an
extensive movement of indignation prominent in which was the participation by
his students at the University of San Sebastian who, after holding an assembly,
demonstrated silently on the street. It was the first student demonstration
to occur in the Basque Country condemning terrorism. It was also another

sign of the continuing loss of popular support by the formerly "legitimate"
ETA.

The Basque political parties held a joint denonstration on 9 November, includ-
ing PNV, which had been vacillating. Nearly 30,000 people marched "for peace

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lili£lﬂﬂ€lAl.USE¢ﬂVLY

and against terrorism," and (something unprecedented until then) reacted courage-
ously against a group of 200 pro-ETA individuals, forcing them to flee. Another
unusual occurrence was the fact that the demonstrators applauded the POP [Forces
of Public Order] which withdrew at their request. All of these were obvious signs
that something was starting to change in the Basque Country, and that the "ETA-
State" was disintegrating. According to the Socialist Benegas, it was "the begin-
ning of a people's reaction against terrorism." At the same time, in the Alava
capital's town hall. PNV seemed to be emerging from the ambiguity which had
surrounded it up until then, and which the speech on TV3 [Spanish Television] by
the president of the Basque Government, Carlos Garaicoeches, after novel's death,
had not escaped. The "lendakari" condemned tsrrorisn and cited the moral and
economic bankrupcy threatening Euskadi, but did not mention ETA, so that he seemed
to be commenting on terrorism as a kind of nameless biblical plague. For this
reason, his remarks were received with skepticism.

This assassination also caused serious confrontations among members of the UCD
executive body in Madrid, annoyed because Suarez "would not show his face" and
because he did not even make the gesture of attending the funerals of his fellow
party members. The leaders of what, a few weeks later, was to be the "critical"
sector voiced their dissatisfaction. But Suarez kept his silence, behind which
was only a complete inability to cope decisively with the political problems; an
inability which prompted his resignation 3 months later.

The discontent in the Basque UCD was enormous as well. Many militants left the
Basque Country, and others were preparing to do so. The Centrist party's Basque
leaders "accused Madrid of abandoning them, of excluding them from the decisions
made concerning their region (...), of reneging and of making a deal with PNV
behind their backs." *

The complaint was fully justified. The former minister of foreign affairs, Marce-
lino Oreja, a deputy representing Guipuzcoa, who had been appointed "governor
general" ** a short time earlier, privately expressed his disappointment at the
"State's absence" that was being felt in Euskadi, a power vacuum which the "ETA-
State" had attempted to fill with guns blazing.

ETA Loses Nerve

The loss of popular support, the basis for BTA's "legitimacy," has been proven by
events and incidents occurring in succession, many of which serve to demonstrate
the nervousness existing among the ETA members, who have proven incapable of self-
assurance in the new political situation. The attack in Zarauz on 3 November

must be interpreted as such. On that day, an ETA (m) commando group shot all the

* CAHBIO 16, No 667, 10 N0vember 1980, "Weeping for a Country." pp 28 ff.

** This appointment, from its formal standpoint, was another sign of the govern-
ment's bungling, because the Constitution called for the existence of a "govern-
ment delegate" and not a "governor general." With the passage of time, the reac-
tion from the Basque and Catalonian nationalists and members of other regional
parties succeeded in having the name changed.

26
FOI‘DFFKJAI.USE(HNLY
customers at a bar in Zarauz, aasassinating four members of the Civil Guard
and a civilian sympathizer of the PNV. and wounding six Basque citizens. In
a special session, the town hall condemned the attack, and two councilmen
from Harri Batasuna joined in the motion, one submitting his resignation in
protest against the violence that had fallen on the Basque Country. This was

something highly significant. The next day, over 3,000 people attended a local
demonstration.

The PNV took note of this major change in Basque public opinion, and began
voicing its position against terrorism in a more consistent manner. In its
"batzokis" talks and lectures on terrorism were organized; but everything

was not clearcut. For example, the CAHBIO l6 reporters Ander and Gorka Landa-
buru and Ricardo Herren concluded an article on the Basque situation, citing
the anticipated assumption of an active stance against terrorism in this way:
"Few doubt that PNV has the capacity to do so. But there is, at the same time.
no assurance that it will have the political desire to carry it out." *

Actually. there was information to the effect that PNV did not want a complete
break with ETA. On 25 October, when the conservative businessman Jose Garavilla
Legaza, a member of PNV, was kidnapped, this time by ETA (m0, the party's reac-
tion was forceful. Members immediately began a very harsh negotiation with

ETA which included a threat of reprisals and which ended with the release of
Garavilla, 3 days later, in exchange for a sum of money "agreed upon" in the
talks. Hence, there were reasons not to make a drastic break with ETA. rlhe

old bonds.which had originally united ETA with PNV had not disappeared complete-
1y.

Thus far, we have discussed mainly the terrorist activity of ETA (p-m) during
the second half of 1980. But ETA (a) had also made its presence felt with the
usual methods. It was learned that heading the "milis" were two of the most
dangerous ETA members: Juan Lass Hichelena, alias "Txiquierdi," and Higuel
Angel Apalategui, alias "Apala." We have been greatly concerned with the
latter subject. Ever since. as we had already reported, "Apala" was released
after his hunger strike in the French jail at Baumettes (Marseilles) in July
1977, nothing further was known of him. In October of that year, he was
supposed to appear before the court at Aix-en-Provence, but he did not show
up. "hat had happened to him during all this time? Nothing was learned, to
the point where he was even considered to be dead. One might have thought that
the ETA ringleader took further training in a foreign, perhaps Arab, camp,
similar to what he had "studied" in 1975 at the Algiers Police Academy.

"Apala's" trail appeared again in the summer of 1980. On 12 July, in Orio
(Cuipuzcos), when three Civil Guard cars were attacked by an ETA connando group,
killing two guards and one terrorist, Ignacio Maria Cabirondo, the police
learned that the other two members of the commando group were "Apala" and Jose
Andres Izaguirre Gorguzs, alias "Gogor," another one of the ETA key men in the
subsequent months.

*Article cited in Note 131 of Chapter IV.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Juan Lesa Hichelena, alias "Tadquierdi," was regarded as one of the most

efficient and dispassionate members of the ETA military branch. In his crimi-
nal record the police included the assassination, in July 1978, of Gen Sanchez-
Ramos, that of the military governor of Madrid, Gen Ortin Gil, in January 1979,

and the Hay 1980 attack which caused the death of Gen Gomez Hortiguela, and
that of Cole Avalos Jimenez and Lasso Corral.

On 22 July. in Logrono, "Apala", "Txiquierdi" and the newly appearing "Gogor"
(who had returned on 6 Hay from South Yemen, where he had taken a training
course, procuring a refugee document in France), together with a fourth terror-
ist named Francisco Javier Pie do Hierro normsechea, carried out an attack
intended to blow up a convoy of three Civil Guard vehicles in which a total of
60 agents were riding. Nine packages containing 5 kilograms of "gum-2" were
placed under a bridge, and three of them exploded, hitting one of the buses.
As a result, Civil Guard Lieutenant Francisco Lopes Bescos was killed, and
there were 32 wounded. This was the first attack against this corps outside
of the Basque Country, and it might have turned-out with a real slaughter if
the "gum-2" had not been in bad condition.

Two days later, the same terrorist comndo group executed one of the most
spectacular ETA (m) attacks. This time, the incident consisted of a robbery:

no fewer than 7,000 kilograms of "gum-2" were taken directly by the ETA enters
from the Navy's Soto powder magazine, near Santander. Disguised as Civil wards,
the terrorists had carried out what was considered "the largest robbery of
explosive material in history." The newspapers made estimates of all the
attacks of different types that could be made with the 7 tons of explosives,

and the figures were terrifying. There was no doubt that ETA (m) was planning

a new escalation of terror. *

Approximately 1 month later, on 22 August, the editor of DIARIO DE NAVARRA,
Jose Javier Uranga, was seriously wounded in Pamplona. The journalist’s body
sustained 25 bullet wounds, his "crime" having been to oppose the annexation
of Navarre by Euskadi, as ETA (1:) announced. This attack was related to the
assault on the Civil Guard headquarters at Aribe and Zubiri, on 20 August,
carried out by ETA (p-m), which this branch depicted as an attempt "to force.
through arsed intervention, the acceptance of a referendum wherein the Navar-
rans must decide on their incorporation into the Basque autonomous cor-unity."
It was clear that "milis" and "poli-milis" who differed so much on other
issues were making cos-Jon cause in the annexation of Navarre. **

The ETA (m) assassinations continued during the following weeks. Thus, at the
end of September, four civil Guards were killed in Harquina (Viscays). On 29
September, as we have already stated, the UCD militant Jose Ignacio Ustarat
was assassinated in Alsva. 0n 2 October, the day on which Garaicoechea,
president of the Basque government, was beginning a visit to Hadrid to nego-
tiate transfers, a taxi driver showed up dead in Renteria, and a retiree,
Ramon Coto, gunned down by ETA (n) a few days earlier, died. The next day,

*CAMBIO 16, No 452, 3 August 1980, "The Bridge of Death," p 23, and No 453,
10 August 1980, "Apala in Action," pp 18 ff.

** CAHBIO 16, No (.57, 7 Septenber 1980, "The Battle of Navarre," pp 17 and 18,
and No 458, 110 Septeuber 1980, ”The Navarrans Face Up," pp 20 ff.

28
in Durango (Vizcayn), the car in which the deputy police comissioner, Sergio
Canal, the inspector. Jose Antonio Herenciano, and the driver, National Police
member Jesus hernando, were riding was gunned; and all three were killed.
On Saturday, 4 October, when the Garaicoechea visit had ended, three Civil

Guards from the .traffic group who were preparing to render service at a cycle
race were shot and killed. They were Corporal Jose Vazquez, and guard members
Avelino Palma and Angel Prado.

During the same period, on 22 September, ETA (p-m) carried out one of its
longest abductions. The victim was the Cuban industrialist Jose Abreu, who

resided in Orio (Guipuzcoa). lie was not released until 7 November, and it was
an incident in which observers saw many obscure aspects.

There is no doubt that ETA (n) has attemted to haaper the negotiations between
the Basque government and Madrid: the "lendakari's" 3-day stay in the nation's
capital had a toll of eight deaths, and nine in only 1 week. It appears that
the "ETA-State" viewed with suspicion the creation of an autonomous Basque
political power, and that it sensed that the latter would be a "competitor"

in its ambitions to appear as the representative of the Basque people; and

therefore, with its crimes, it attempted to detract inortance and divert
atten'.ion from the decisive negotiations which took place in Madrid during
the first week of October 1980.

While ETA (m) was killing, uncessingly, the third strange branch of ETA, that
of the Autonomous Commandos, seemed to be attenuating to reach the same height
in the "ranking" of crime. The Autonomous Gomndos, who now added another

adjective to their name, "Anticapitalist," comitted three assassinations on
just 1 day, 23 October. We have already mentioned the assassination of the
UCI) militant in Elgoibar, Jaime Arrese. The second was that of the telephone
representative in San Sebastian, Juan Manuel Garcia Cordero who, after being
kidnapped, was assassinated. The Anticapitalist Autonoms Comandos stated
in a comnique: "He executed him because we consider his responsible for, and
an accomplice of the government in the telephone bugging."

The third death on that dreadful day (it was also on that day that there was a
gas explosion in the school of the Vizcayan locality of Ortuella, which caused
the deaths of 1.9 children and two adults) was that of Pelipe Estremiana, accus-
ed of being an extreme right winger, who was assassinated in Amorebista
(Vizcaya). '

The Front for Peace

The popular reaction against terrorism, and against ETA, was becoming increas-
ingly obvious, to the point where the parties decided to move from the realm of
mere verbal protests to that of more effective action. The demonstration of

9 November that has already been cited had marked the beginning of this reac-
tion.

All the leading parties of the Basque Country, with the notable exception of
Herri Batasuna (PNV, PSB [Spanish Socialist Partyl-PSOB [Spanish Socialist
Workers Party], UCD, BE [Basque Left], PCB [Spanish Commist Partyl-BPK

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Basque Communist Party] and ERA [Basque Carlist Partyl-Carlist Party) reached
an agreement. and signed a document on 16 November in which they expressed
their intention to "continue the campaign for awareness and mobilization among
all sectors of Basque society on behalf of pacification and the rejection of
violence." In this way. the Front for Peace came into existence. EB left

the Front very shortly thereafter.

But that same day. in Eibar, ETA (m) assassinated the National Police member
Alberto Lisalde and his friend, the hairdresser Sotero Mano Pigueras. There
was a meeting held in the town hall there. and all the parties, with the

exception of Harri Batssuna, called on the people to demonstrate against
violence.

Two days later, in Elcano's native town, Guetaria. the residents demonstrated

in solidarity with the head of the Fisherman's Association, the UCD militant
Jose Maria Silveti, who had left the town a few days earlier because of the
threats that he had received ("you will be next," they had told him). His
neighbors, including militants from Berri Batssuna, called for Silveti's return.

A massive popular reaction was beginning to occur repudiating violence. The
attitude of the citizens and parties now seemed to be quite different, and
better than on previous occasions. According to Roberto Lerchundi, the
Basque Communist leader, "the Basque people are telling ETA 'enoughl', they
are shaking off the terror. they are upholding their own dignity as a people.
they are proving that they have sufficient strength to solve a problem as
enormous as that of terrorism in Buskadi." Chiqui Benegas, the Socialist
leader. remarked: "Nothing will be easy. quite the contrary. But at least
many Basques, among whom I include myself, think that it is now time to
start doing sonrthing."

CAMBIO 16 did not conceal its doubts: "Let us not deceive ourselves, the Front
for Peace may prove to be the effective political instrument for defeating
terror, but it could also become another paving block of good intentions on
the road to hell." *

On 15 November, the interior minister himself, Juan Jose Roson, reiterated to
the press the change in the situation. "ETA is running increasingly against the
tide of opinion, and its reaction will be desperate. It is the same thing that
happened to Hitler. It will resort to bunkers and try to destroy everything
that remains." The minister went so far as to praise even Mario Onaindia,

whom he called a "good Spaniard." That same day. EB decided to leave the
Front. because it considered any joint strategy with "statist" parties harm-
ful, particularly in view of the proximity of the BIA Congress. "Our condemna-
tion of the latest ETA actions does not mean that we are in the slightest agree-
ment with UCD or with its policy in Buskadi; quite the contrary." Mario Onain-
dia wrote: "The solution for overcoming terrorism is preeminently political

* CAHBIO 16. No 468, 17 November 1980. editorial, "Front for Peace," by Juan
Tomas de Salas, p 3. See in the same issue the feature article "The Euskadi
Front," pp 35 ff and the articles by various leaders, including those cited
in the text.

30

IV
(...). Only in this way shall we be able to emerge from that dead and street

on which many seek to put us. It is savagery or barbarian: in other words,
a choice between backing UCD and legitimizing the armed struggle." *

In these dynamics of ETA isolation, in addition to the elements which we have
already discussed, other factors of an international nature had to be taken
into account, such as the condemnation by the Socialist International, that of
the Council of Europe and the positive results of a visit to Paris by the
Spanish minister of foreign affairs, Jose Pedro Perez-Llorca, regardless of

the latter event's loss of effectiveness as a result to the so-called Bendeya
incident which will concern us subsequently.

All observers were of the opinion that something important was happening in
ETA and, although they did not share the optimistic view of Roson's state-
ments, they did, like him. believe in a possible new ETA offensive that would
entail a qualitative change in the tsrrorisn carried out up until that time
by both branches of the Basque organization.

Some thought that ETA night be planning to move to urban guerrillas. or action
of larger scope, such as attacks on military headquarters. In the latest
attacks and the most recent documents of ETA, there were elements which could
have corroborated this view.

While others continued to believe that ETA was attempting to force negotiations.
there were experts on ETA who thought that the organization wanted to cause a
standby situation, or even military intervention. In brief, according to this
latter view, there would be an attempt to provoke repression, which would
facilitate the possibility of again winning over a population the Iajority of
which had turned against ETA.

It was also thought that ETA, especially the military branch, might be attempt-
ing to create a situation that would facilitate a coup d'etat. The end of the
democratic regime and an authoritarian involution would represent a "return to
origins" for ETA. In that dictatorship situation, wherein repression, parti-
cularly of the Basque people, would of course have to be anticipated, ETAanmbers
would again be able to move about “like a fish in water," just as in what for
them were the "good" old times.

In fact. it would not be the first time that a leftist movement tried to

provoke a right wing coup. Claire Sterling stresses several times how the
terrorist-editor Feltrinelli believed in the feasibility of another dictator-
ship in Italy, and even once interviewed the fascist conspirator Prince Borghese
concerning this terrorist-coupist context. As we have already noted, the

"red plots" and the "black plots" always fore their intricate scheme wherein it
is not easy to distinguish the one from the other. We are not attempting to
hint at the existence of any tie between ETA and the Spanish coup plotters, but
rather to cite the coincidence of their goals.

*Ibid.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This was no mere speculation, because Mario Onaindia himself stated: "It is an
intolerable situation for everyone, and intolerable for ETA; and we are at the

point where ETA might attempt something as ridiculous as provoking a military
coup."

The strange part about it was that Onaindia not only considered ETA to blame, but
also regarded PNV as responsible. He remarked: "I have the feeling that they
like dabbling in the blood of the country; one has the impression that they are

considering which dynamics would be of benefit to them, so as to prompt Madrid
to give them more." *

Hence, the Basque society was greatly divided, with several different ways of
interpreting its collective existence countering one another. The blight of
terrorism had seriously damaged the roots of coexistence and the curing of the
situation involved not only a problem of institutionalization, but also a difficult
change in public attitudes.

Everything that we have said about the loss of popular support by the terrorists,
with all the evidence of it, does not mean that there were not still groups and
sectors in existence for which violence was the key to their political future.

For example, the "abertrale" magazine, PUNTO Y HORA DE BUSKADI HERRIA, on the

front page and with a photograph, in its December issue, denounced the editor of
CAMBIO 16, Juan Tomas de Salas, depicting him as objective toward the terrorists,
or giving that impression. The object of the denunciation replied thusly: "If

we denounce as an abominable inquisitor one who preaches 'thous shalt not kill'
what is the implicit conclusion to be drawn from that denunciation? That killing
is good, no more and no less. Killing is good. Of course, of course, killing
under certain conditions, behind the back and without risk, indeed yes; but killing
is good when my good friends kill. Killing is good when my redeeming friends shoot
to save the world." **

The Madrid-Basque Government Tension

The relations between the government in Madrid and the Basque government establish-
ed after the elections for the Basque parliament on 9 March 1980 have never been
excellent, and have quite often been very poor. There was nerely a continuation
of the same pattern of relations between Madrid and the preautonomous organ, the
Basque General Council And this was simply the institutional translation of the
various proposals of 000 (and in certain respects those of all the parties of
national scope, or "statist" ones, as the nationalists call them) and PNV which,

in turn, agrees in many respects with the radical nationalists or "abertzales."

* LA CALLE, November 1980
** CAHBIO 16, No 472, 15 December 1980, editorial, "Killing Is Bad." by Juan
Tomas de Sales, p 3.

32
l1)R‘0lWﬂC1Al.ll§li(ﬂ§LY
The PNV's ambiguity has been a permanent feature of national and regional poli-
tical life (we mean the Spanish and Basque). We must interpret ambiguity as
meaning its lack of a stand, its equivocal assumption of a position. Despite
the fact that the horrid term "positioning" is often used by the Basque nation-

alists, there are many occasions when both PNV and its leaders are lacking in
precisely that "positioning."

0n the subject of terrorism, PNV began by giving the impression that it had no
awareness of it at times when, nevertheless, it was protesting over repression,
the so-called "institutional violence" or "state terrorism." Somewhat later
on it began to condemn terrorism, but without a name, without alluding to ETA,
and, moreover, pairing it in ritualistic fashion with that "institutional
violence" which, in the Basque Country and to the nationalists, means "the
violence from them, the Spaniards, against us Basques." Thus, the ETA terror-
ism was automatically raised to the status of "defensive" violence demanded by
the prior attack from the "occupying" state, the "abertzales" would add.

Using this dialectical device (which the most fundamental analysis of content
could disclose in all the "taking of a position" on terrorism originating with
PNV and the "abertzales"), ETA, even without being named, has been justified.
Therein lies one of the factors for its "legitimization." Much later, in

1979, when the PNV members voiced condemnation for terrorism that was surely
sincere and at times unconditional (for example, Arcallus in the Congress of
Deputies on 30 Hay 1979), one cannot help but consider the extent to which
terrorism has been the creature bred in the heart of the nationalists which‘
has grown and even become monstrous, owing to the silence, if not the collusion

and de facto implementation thereof on the part of the Basque nationalist
politicians.

PNV has never said "ETA is to blame" because, after all, as nationalists, they
consider the final objectives to be the same: the complete sovereignty and
independence of Buskadi; even though the method and the time for attaining
that objective differ between the two, and even though the ideas that they
have about the future Basque society are different as well.

For all these reasons, it is not strange that the relations between Vitorie,
established as the seat of the Basque government, and Madrid have experienced
many difficulties. And it would be unfair not to state, right now, that the
responsibility for these difficulties does not lie with the Basque government
alone, because the bungling of the Hadrid government has also contributed to
them.

In fact, for many months the Statute of Guernica was a continent without con-
tent: the Basque government lacked authority to exercise, even though it had
been stipulated in the text of the Statute. There was the issue of the
transfers. The Suarez government, which had been remarkably generous both

when it was time to negotiate Title VIII and Article 2 of the Constitution,
and when it was time to negotiate the Statute, later proved to be stingy
when it was time to decide on the transfer of concrete authority and of the
personal, material and economic resources to make it effective.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem was posed particularly when, after the phase of institutionaliza-
tion (approval of the Statute through a referendum, elections to the Basque
Parliament and establishment of the Basque government) had been completed,

the aforementioned topic of the transfers came up. We shall not attempt to
describe this cowlex process'here but merely to cite certain occasions which,
in one way or another, had some type of relationship with terrorism and which
demonstrate not only the difficult relations.between the Basque government and
Madrid, but also, frequently, the bungling of the central authorities. It

should be made clear that, in this matter, the blame has not resided with just
one of the sides.

We have already mentioned the importance of the visit paid by a Basque delega-
tion, headed by Garaicoechea, to Madrid, during the first week of October.

A series of working meetings took place which, as we know, were marked by a
savage offensive of ETA terrorism in the Basque Country.

There was a certain amount of cordiality in the talks, but the essential prob-
lems remained. On the two most important issues to the Basques, the autonomous
police and the economic arrangements, there was no agreement.

0n 4 October, the day on which the Garaicoechaa visit to Madrid ended, a
significant incident occurred. In the morning, at a press conference, when
the "lendakari" was asked about the "KAS alternative," which we have mentioned
so often, he replied that, "In the realm of principles it could be accepted by
any democrat." In the afternoon, Suarez, who held one of his rare press
conferences, denied what Garaicoechea had said.

Another difficulty in the relations cropped up when the appointment of Marce-
lino Oreja as "governor general of the Basque Autonomous Community" appeared
in the Official Bulletin of the State, instead of "delegate appointed by the
government," as stipulated in Article 155 of the Constitution. Once again an
unnecessary affront on the part of Madrid dimmed the picture of relations
between Madrid and Vitoria, despite the fact that Oreja's skill in avoiding
incidents and his undeniable diplomatic left hand prevented many problems.

The tension, more with the PNV (whose president, lavier Arzallus, seemed to be
jealous of the position attained by someone like Garaicoechea, who was his
creation) than with the Basque government, underwent another critical period
during the last 10 days of November. On 20 November, Buskadi Buru Batzar
(EBB) [Vizcaya Executive Committee of PNV], the supreme organ of PNV, published
a note in which were contained assertions as serious as the following: "If

any reason backs the support from certain sectors of the Basque people for
ETA, it is precisely that of not observing nor believing in the establishment
of a real autonomy." There followed a description of the seriousness of the
economic situation, toward which the Basque government was defenseless, and

it went on to say that that situation was what explained why "there are still
young people who feel that they have abundant reasons for accusing us of
being naive or hypocritical, and for resorting to methods of violent action."
It later called for "the complete DOD and its government" to do what was
necessary to "fulfill the Statute." Otherwise, it continued, "PNV might find
itself in the act of throwing the towel in this difficult political ring."

36
The explosive note concluded by criticizing the Front for Peace, which it
regarded as being "created for the gallery."

As may be observed, in the note from EBB there was a return to the traditional
arguments which implied an indirect justification of the terrorism. In short,
it was a monument of ambiguity which justified those who insisted that PNV
had not just emerged from its equivocal position.

The government, meeting the next day in the Council of Ministers, acknowledged
the challenge from PNV and drafted another note in which it made essentially
the following statement: "It is regrettable that a communique plagued with
ambiguity should attempt to mix and confuse ETA terrorism with the economic
problems besetting the Basque Country (...)." It later asserted: "It is
absolutely inadmissible that there should be an attempt to find political
justification for the ETA's terrorist activity and other violent action."

It subsequently accused PNV of "a lack of solidarity" because of its criticism
of the "Front for Peace."

However, on 22 November, BBB published another note in response to that from
the government, stressing that "The Madrid government has not yet realized
that ETA and its commandos are one thing and the mass of people who back the
proposals on which ETA has based its terrorist position or who support its
actions with their vote is something else."

A few days later, on 25 November, Garaicoechea, in a press conference, answered
his party's BBB rather than the government: "He shall not leave our government
task. We shall never throw in the towel from the standpoint of leaving the
government. If things do not turn out by way of one path, they will turn out
by way of another." He then attached partial value to the "Front for Peace"
although he questioned its usefulness, "when there is a definite forum, namely,
the Basque parliament." *

During December, on 9, 10 and 11 December, an enormously significant event took
place: the first official visit paid by Suarez as president of the government
to the Basque Country. This was the immediate commentary: "It was about time!"
Contrary to what some had expected, Suarez did not take any special "gift" for
Basque autonomy, but there is no doubt that his visit served to unblock the
issues of the economic arrangements and the autonomous police, on which

progress was made.

The visit was depicted as aimed at "reinforcing the presence of the State" and
it was unquestionable that this goal was important. We have already mentioned
the "absence of the State" from the Basque Country, a situation for which the
one chiefly responsible was, of course, the Madrid government. That is why
there was also stress on the dreadful mistake involved in Suarez' failure to
go earlier, also preventing the king, by his position, from fulfilling what
was regarded as one of his greatest aspirations: that of visiting the Basque
provinces.

* See texts of the notes in CAMBIO 16, No 470, in the insets "Suarez: Pirmness
with PNV," p 23, and “War of Notes," p 24.

35
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOP. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Suarez visit was used to advantage by Xavier Arzallus, president of the
PNV's EBB, to make a show of power, not so much in opposition to Suarez, as

in November, but in opposition to Garaicoechea. 0n the very day of his

arrival in the Basque Country. 109 town halls in Vizcaya and Guipuzcoa
controlled by the PNV decided to halt municipal activity so long as the

Suarez visit lasted. as a sign of protest "for the failure to restore the
economic arrangements." Visibly shocked and annoyed. Garaicoechea did not
succeed in finding an explanation for that unexpected "rebellion of the mayors."
And the PSOE itself appeared irritated, blaming Xavier Arzallus who, in turn,
denied that this decision had been made on the high levels of PNV.

So long as President Suarez' visit lasted, ETA maintained a surprising truce,
upset only by the strange abduction, for a few hours. of Roberto Lerchundi,
secretary general of EPK—PCE. which prevented him from meeting with Suarez

at the appointed time, as part of the series of contacts with all the Basque
political and trade union leaders.

The visit by the president of the government had no immediate spectacular
results. but as we have already noted, there is no doubt that it served to
clear the path whereon a solution would be reached for the two most serious
disputes between Madrid and Vitoria: the economic arrangements and the
autonomous police. *

The Eternal French Problem

The claim that without the French “sanctuary" the battle against ETA would be
easier is one of the positions constantly upheld by the Spanish government and
the police circles. It has always been intolerable to Spain that the ETA
members have been able to take shelter in France, which has been turned into

a safe base for their operations and a site for proposing,mounting and prepar-
ing their terrorist activites. Spain has never understood nor accepted the
fact that the ETA militants have been able to benefit from the political refu-
gee statute. even when the establishment of democracy made the maintenance of
that privileged status unnecessary and provocative.

France. for its part, has always rejected its possible implication in the
matter, claiming that it is a Spanish "internal affair," and denying any type
of responsibility. The French authorities have always condemned the "dirty
war" waged on French territory by "uncontrolled groups" close to the extreme
right or by elements acting for the Spanish intelligence services. with the
most hypocritical exaggeration.

As we have already observed, the pattern of the relations with France in this
matter of terrorism has always been identical: agreement between the authori-
ties which eases the tensions. "dirty war" or other incidents which prove the
existence of the French "sanctuary," worsening the relations which heightens

the tension.

* CAHBIO 16, No 672, "Suarez: Trip to the Center of the Terror," pp 26 ff.,
and column by Jose Oneto, "The Arzallus Threat." p 25.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Al the end of 1980, another incident occurred which fits perfectly into this
mold. The visit to Paris by Perez-Llorca, the Spanish minister of foreign
affairs, in November had aroused some hopes. A better attitude was found for
cooperation by the French police, and it was anticipated that the neighboring
country's authorites would give the cases of petitions for extradition sought H

by Spain the same treatment that was being given to those submitted by Italy
and Germany, for example.

But on 23 November a serious incident dashed those hopes and, in fact, led to
a freeze on the accords obtained by Perez-Llorca.

On that day, an unidentified commando group in Nendaya gunned down the custo—
mers of the Hendayais bar, usually visited by Basque "refugees," causing the
deaths of two French citizens and wounding another 10 customers, including
several Spaniards. Shortly thereafter, three individuals violently crossed
the border at Irun, in the direction of Spain, and were caught by the Spanish
services. The presumption that these persons were the members of the commando
group which had carried out the attack made its way into the French media and
the Spanish as well, particularly after the Spanish police, and the interior
minister himself, had noted that these individuals, whom they refused to
identify, were "French subjects" belonging to an intelligence network maintained
in the south of France by the Spanish authorities.

The French reaction was very harsh, and the Spanish ambassador, Miguel Solano,
was called to Qual d'Orsay. Thus, Spanish-French relations reached another
cold point again, which jeopardized the accords reached a short time earlier.

Contributing to the same result was the trial observed in Pau starting on 9
December against four individuals accused of assassinating the ETA member Justo
Eliazaran Sarasola at Biarritz on 9 September 1979 who, according to the report
by the French police, had been sent and protected by the Spanish authorities. *

At the same time, it was learned that ETA was using coupon criminals, some of
them French, to engage in holdups, manufacture counterfeit currency or commit
other crimes. We already knew that French youths had been used for the
"campaigns against tourism," on the Spanish coasts. And the Spanish police
came to suspect something even more serious: "It is not unheard of that, among
so many foreign ETA members, there are some infiltrated by the French secret
services to guide the terrorist activities outside of their territory." **
Hence there again arose the possibility of an express or tacit agreement

among certain elements of the police or the intelligence services of France
whereby the ETA members "would pay for" the facilities for their French refu-
goes with the guarantee that they would never take their terrorist activities
to "North Euskadi," although, according to the Basque organization's "official
doctrine," both France and Spain were to be regarded as "occupying countries."

*CAHBIO 16, No é73, 22 December 1980, "Dirty War on the Border," pp 45 ff.
** CAHBIO 16, No 666, 3 November 1980, "Giscard's ETA," p 33

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The lack of cooperation from France enabled the ETA (m) "high-level staff" which,
according to the experts, did not exceed 30 persons, to enjoy a security that
allowed it to plan the details of the "armed struggle" without any sudden shocks.

The French position was so incomprehensible that Jean-Francois Revel, editor of
L'EXPRESS, devoted to the subject his editorial in the 20 December issue, entitled
"France-Spain: the Sancutary," in which he claimed that "The department of the
Atlantic Pyrenees serves as a 'sanctuary' for the members of ETA (...) who, more-
over. are also conspiring in complete calmness in Toulouse, Bordeaux or Paris."

He then noted that. not only did the Spaniards not receive the slightest coopera-
tion from the French government, but, "on the contrary. they receive a reprimand
every time there occurs on our soil, by chance, a settling of accounts among
killers, which seems difficult to avoid when they are being taken in in such large
numbers." He emphasized: "France continues to allow various embassies to serve as
storage places for arms and to feed the European terrorist networks“; commenting
that France had granted the extradition of German and Italian terrorists, and
asking: "th not on behalf of Spain, which is demanding the extradition. not of
mere accomplices or suspects, but rather of proven perpetrators of many murders?"
He went on to say: "ETA terrorism is, in fact, the most death-dealing in Europe

at present: 500 killed in 5 years, and 140 of these in 1980. One can understand
Madrid's bitterness."

He subsequently discussed the excuse of the political refugee theory, stating:

"It is (...) impossible for the French government to act as if it believed that
there are at present Spanish Basques being oppressed for crimes of opinion."; and
he then cited the "unspeakable reasons" among which he included "the fear of seeing
ETA (...) resort to reprisals in France if it is disturbed in our territory (.s.),
that of seeing the French Basques won over by a feeling of solidarity if their
'southern cousins' are hunted among them (...), and the justified fear of discover-
ing behind ETA powerful Soviet and Libyan protectors, and France finding itself
caught in a war of secret services waged on Spain's account." *

France's implication in the terrorism had already been hinted by the president of

the Italian Republic himself, Sandro Pertini, annoyed by the fact that many
Italian terrorists had taken refuge in Paris or on the Cote d'Azure.

0n 2 January 1981, in an interview on French television, Pertini again referred to
the terrorists' international connections, although on that occasion he accused the
Soviet Union indirectly. The fact that he was addressing the French may perhaps
have caused France to be spared, because he said: "The central organization is
located beyond the Italian borders, but not in France."

A few days later, a "repentant" terrorist, Umberto Hazzola. wrote a letter confess-
ing that he had received training, along with French. Italians and Spaniards, in
a camp located near the border between France and Spain. The instructors

* L'EXPRESS. 20 December 1980, "France-Spain: the Sanctuary," by Jean-Francois
Revel. p 66

38
Ft“!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.lEﬂi(NﬂLY
were apparently from ETA and, according to another Italian terrorist, "they
were impressed" by the effectiveness of the "ETA members" who conducted the

courses: "They gave us kilograms of explosives and taught us how to fire the
Stern machine guns, and we learned many important techniques." *

Nor was the easing of tensions between the governments of Spain and France
helped by the action of the "uncontrolled" commando groups which were in the
habit of using the Spanish Basque Battalion label. On 30 December, a Basque
"refugee" and former ETA member, Jose Martin Sagardia Zaldua, alias "Usurbil,"
was assassinated when a powerful device set in a car exploded.

As a result, the French news media, as well as some local authorities, again
voiced their protests over the impunity with which these commando groups that
were considered to be linked with the Spanish secret services were acting in
France. It was also claimed that the members of these conmmndo groups were
French mercenaries from the former OAS [Secret Army Organization], some of

whom were said to have established their residence on the Spanish Mediterranean
coasts, especially at Alicante.

The Suarez Resignation and the King's Visit to the Basque Country

1981 began with relative inactivity on the part of ETA and with a serious

state of internal dispute in the government party, UCD. The so-called "critic-
al" sector was engaged in a very harsh campaign to harass Suarez, in prepara-
tion for the party congress which was due to take place at Palma de Hallorca

at the end of January.

An air traffic controllers' strike forced the postponement of the U00 congress,
only 48 hours before the time planned for its opening. And, on 29 January,
Suarez submitted his resigantion, to the amazement of the entire country.

A few days earlier, it had been announced that the king and queen would carry
out their planned visit to the Basque Country during the first week of February.

0n the very day that Suarez submitted his resignation, ETA (m) kidnapped
engineer Jose Maria Ryan, technical director of the Lemoniz nuclear powerplant.
The terrorist organization gave a period of 7 days to Iberduero, the company
owning the powerplant, to destroy the facilities, otherwise, Ryan would be
"executed."

An enormous outcry arose throughout the Basque Country and all of Spain,
asking the "milis" to respect the engineer's life. Parties, trade unions and
organizations such as Amnesty International and the European Federation of
Professional Engineers Associations, and the antinuclear associations them-
selves,requested that Ryan's life and liberty be respected.

 

*Sec CAHBIO 16, No 482. 23 February 1981, "Union of Terrorist Republics," by
Julio Alganaraz, pp 49 ff, and No 480, 9 February 1981. "The Terrorism Comes
From the East," by the same author, pp 50 and 51.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'Ul‘ Ul'l'Lbth U): Ul‘bl

0n 5 February, an impressive demonstration traversed the streets of Bilbao,
in solidarity with Ryan. ETA (m) was even offered a delay in putting the
powerplant into operation until a referendum was held. "hat seemed insane

was to explode into the air a powerplant in which 130 billion pesetas had
already been invested.

0n 6 February, ETA (m) announced the death of Ryan, whose body was found a
short time later. At the same time, the terrorists threatened all those who
held positions of responsibility in the nuclear powerplant.

The reaction was unanimous, and grief and rage became evident all of the
Basque Country. On Monday, 9 February, a general strike paralyzed virtually
all activities. Demonstrations were held in Bilbao and San Sebastian. Only
Herri Batasuna remained dissociated from this widespread protest.

DBIA, the official organ of PNV, used for the first time the term "assassina-

tion" to refer to an ETA attack. "While no death has ever had justification,
this one now has exceeded all the bounds of grief, indignation and shock.
Ryan's death marks a decisive point in our history." *

0n the other hand, EGIN, close to Herri Batasuna and ETA (m), considered the
9 February demonstrations a "management maneuver" and "poisoning of the
press."

The Basque Socialist leader Txiki Benegas wrote: "If anyone harbored any
doubts about the features of the ETA organization, the repugnant and abominable
kidnapping and assassination of Mr Ryan has confirmed, even to those who are
kindest in their judgment of the ETA members, that we are faced with an organi-
zation of heartless terrorists, lacking in any scruples, and fascist in their
concepts and methods, whose only goal is the destabilization of democracy and
the destruction of the Basque people." **

While Ryan was still held captive, the king and queen made their announced
visit to the Basque Country. with the president of the government resigned,
and not traveling with their majesties, and with the government's delegate
to the Basque Country, Marcelino Oreja, ostensibly excluded by the Basque
autonomous authorities,the visit was marked by the kingnBasque government
duality. to the point where some viewed in it the restoration of the direct
dialog between the king and the Basque traditional institutions so pleasing
to the nationalists, updated by the new autonomous regime established by the
Statute of Guernika. '

we shall take a brief account of the royal visit from a different side:

"But the political event at that time was the visit which their majesties paid
to the Basque Country, contrary to the views of civilian and military sectors

*DEIA, 7 February 1981, editorial
** CAHBIO 16, No 842, 23 February 1981, "United Against the Fascist ETA," by
Txiki Benegss, p 25; see also in that issue "ETA Trapped," pp 26 ff.

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
which did not consider it wise. The visit took place on 2, 3 and a Pebruary
and its most prominent function was the meeting in the Guernica House of
Juntas beside the traditional tree symbolizing the Basque liberties and privi-

leges of the General Juntas of the "historical territories," that is, of the
three Basque provinces, Alava, Guipuzcoa and Vizcaya.

"The announced presence of the "junta members" of the Berri Batasuna coalition.
close to the ETA military terrorists, who up until that time had been absent
from the political institutions, and who had already demonstrated against the

king's visit upon his arrival at the Vitoria airport, prompted anticipation of
some incident.

"In fact, when the king was about to deliver his address, the 30 Berri Batasuna
members present in the Hall of Juntas rose and, raising their fists, entoned
the 'Eusko Gudariak' which could scarcely be heard because of the reaction

from the other attendees who, with their applause for the king and their shouts
of 'out' to the Herri Batasuna members, thwarted the latter's attempt to
prevent the king from taking the floor, Juan Carlos I, with amazing calmness,
held up firmly and with a slight smile while the incident lasted. Finally,
when the Basque government's service to maintain order had expelled the "Bata-
suna members' and silence prevailed, the king, with aplomb, made a statement
which has become historic: 'As opposed to those who practice intolerance,

scorn coexistence and do not respect institutions, I proclaim once again my
faith in democracy and my confidence in the Basque people.’

"The scene of the incidents in Guernica, carried by television several times.
produced an enormous impact on all public opinion. and enhanced the prestige
and popularity of their majesties, who received thousands of testimonials

of support at La Zarzuela." *

The visit by their majesties and the extensive popular reaction to Ryan's
assassination certainly brought ETA to the worst time in its entire history,
at least in the most uncomfortable situation since the establishment of demo-
cracy. A guarded optimism was perceived in political and police circles
which thought that the time had come to undertake the final offensive that
would definitively break up ETA. But an unfortunate event with which we shall
concern ourselves later destroyed this optimism.

During the entire month of January, the Central Intelligence Brigade had been
engaged in effective action to dismantle the ETA (m) "legal" commando groups,
that is, those which resided in Spain overtly. During the course of this
action, the members of eight of these commando groups had been arrested, and
a large amount of arms was seized from them.

On A February (while the king was visiting the Basque Country. and by pure
chance) the Madrid police detected a car occupied by suspicious persons. When
they attempted to arrest them, the latter started shooting, and two of them
managed to escape. Another, who turned out to be ETA member Oscar Arregui
lzaguirre. was wounded and arrested.

* HISTORIA 16, No 59, "Brief Account of La Villa y Corte [Madrid]," by
Alejandor Munoz Alonso, p 10

bl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE QNLY

Thv pnlivv then learned that they had almost caught in their net one uf the
must dangerous ETA (m) commando groups. the one headed by Jose Andres lza-

guirrc Gogorza. alias "Cogor," whom we have discussed elsewhere in this
chapter.

"Cogor's" commando group had arrived in Madrid a week earlier, from France,
apparently with the intention of kidnapping a high-ranking bank executive

and asking for a large ransom for his release. The commando group had already
established its infrastructure in Madrid, in an apartment and a cottage,

which were discovered, with the arrest of a Swedish woman and another Chilean
woman who had been collaborating with the terrorists. Once again, ETA was
using foreign subjects to carry out its terrorist actions. The Chilean woman
belonged to MIR (Movement of the Revolutionary Left), thereby confirming ETA's
relations with this Chilean extremist organization. Once more the "Latin

American connection" which had'begun during the 1960's with the "Tupamaros"
was detected.

In this atmosphere. marked by a trapped ETA on the defensive, the event which
we mentioned previously occurred on 13 February: Arregui, the ETA member
arrested at the beginning of the month, died in the Carabanchel prison hospi-
tal. presumably as a result of the bad treatment he had sustained. The
scandal, which was major. reversed the situation completely, and ETA was
again able to show the image of the organization with its members tortured
and martyred. Five policemen were charged with this torture, which was at
least partly confirmed by the autopsy. and they were tried and jailed. How-
ever, the causal relation between the torture (possibly a brutal beating) and
the death of the subject in custody was not proven. Police sources attributed
the bronchopneumonia from which the ETA member suffered to the difficulties
in crossing the Pyrenees during theharsheatwinter days, and the "burns"
which he had on his feet. not to the results of electric shocks, but rather
to the semi~freezing caused by the difficult trip in the Pyrenees.

The affairs also caused deepseated unrest in police circles, and there were

signs of concerted action that would have had extensive consequences. Under
these circumstances, moreover, the investiture of Calvo Sotelo as president

of the government. planned for 18 February, was far more complicated, and no
one expected the candidate to attain the absolute majority. which would make
a second session necessary.

The topic of the torture returned to the forefront, and those who had made it

a cause. like Bandres. appeared to be fully justified. The advocates of
“democratization of the State's structures," a phrase behind which was concealed

the notion of a purge. particularly of the police. had new arguments. And ETA
received the gift of a martyred "hero," thus retrieving an initiative which
had ostensibly escaped it after the Ryan case.

The issue of the tortured ETA member, which had been a cause of serious tension
between the Ministries of Justice and Interior, was the subject of a specific
session of the Congress of Deputies held on 17 February. In this way, it

was attempted to prevent this problem from weighing too heavily on the inves-
titure session planned for a day later. The session was long and hard, and

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
wearing, not only on the government in office, but on UCD itself and the demo-
cratic system per se as a whole. It was no mere coincidence that, 6 days later,
the Congress itself was the scene of the abortive coup d'etat which proved to
be the most serious threat to democracy in its scant 5-year history.

The Extreme Right Against Democracy: From Terrorism to Coupism

We have had occasion to observe how, from the beginning of the democratic
regime. the extreme right played the card of destabilization. using terrorism
as a tool. The "Atocha slaughter" was one of the culminating events in this
continuous process that has been present throughout the entire transition and
in the first stages of democracy.

Closely linked with the extreme right terrorism there has appeared coupism,
nurtured to a large extent by the strategy of tension maintained by terrorism
of all ideologies, and a natural destination reached by extreme terrorism.

Therefore, it is no mere chance that this extreme terrorism acquired particular
virulence during 1980, to the point where 27 assassinations caused by the
extreme right throughout that year could be counted. The injuries, explosions
and assaults of all types numbered many more.

We are familiar with the features of this type of terrorism, based on forms
of organization quite different from those of the other terrorist groups that
we have analyzed, such as ETA or GRAPO. "Uncontrolled" commando groups and
rather unrestricted groups of young people associated with legal political
organizations with an extremist ideology have been mixed in these "sinister
plots" wherein the settling of accounts has not been infrequent either.

As we have already noted, this type of terrorism operates with highly diversi-
fied initials, used depending on the circumstances. Sometimes the same group

uses different initials, and at times the same initials are used by different

groups.

We have already observed that the Basque Country, including the French Basque
Country, has been one of the locations preferably selected by the extreme
right terrorists who, while they used the label ATE (Anti-ETA Terrorism) in
particular and the Triple A on occasion, during the early post-Franco period,
have subsequently operated almost always with the name Basque—Spanish Batta-
lion. Therefore, it is not at all odd that of the 27 deaths of the extreme
right counted during 1980, 16 were victims of attacks perpetrated in the
unsque Country. They are Carlos Jauidise Costs, of HB, assassinated in Lezo
(Cuipuzcoa) on 15 January: Manuel Santacoloma, Liborio Arana Gomez, Pacifico
Pica Zuloaga and Maria Faz Armino, killed by the bomb which exploded in the
Aldana bar in Baracaldo (Vizcaya) on 19 January; Jesus Zubigaray, of BB, in
Eibar (Guipuzcoa) on 2 February; Felipe Segarna, of H3, assassinated in
Hernani (Cuipuzcoa) on 19 Apri; Maria Josefa Bravo, raped and assassinated

in San Sebastian on 8 May; Jose Miguel Echevarria, alias "Naparra," of the
Autonomous Commandos, who disappeared on 11 June and whose death was claimed
by the EVE; two gypsy women, one pregnant, and a cleaning employee (Anastasia

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Leal), assassinated on 23 July in Bilbao; Angel Bchaniz, HB sympathizer,
assassinated in 0ndarroa (Vizcaya) on 30 August; Miguel Angel Arbelaiz and
Luis Maria Elizondo, MB sympathizers, assassinated in Hernani (Guipuzcoa);
Pierre Haramendy and Josep Camio, assassinated in Hendaya on 24 November;
Jose Martin Sagardia, alias "Umbil," assassinated in Biarritz on 30 December.
There could be added to this Basque list the death in Caracas (Venezuela) of

the married couple Jokin Alfonso Bchevarria and Esperanza Aranaz, on 14
November.

Immediately following the Basque Country, the city where the extreme right

has most persistently engaged in its activities has been Madrid. During 1980
five deaths were recorded in this capital, victims of extreme right aggression.
They are Yolanda Gonzalez Martin, of PST, assassinated in Madrid on 2 February;
Vicente Cuervo, assassinated in Madrid on 10 February; Jorge Caballero, of

CNT, dying on 15 April after an attack perpetrated on 29 March; Arturo Pajuelo,
who died as a result of an attack made on 1 May; Juan Carlos Garcia Perez.
killed on 6 May (San Bao bar). There occurred a genuine escalation which
changed from stabbings to group attacks, such as the one staged in early May

at the San Bao bar on Arturo Soria Street, where about 20 persons participated
in the attack in one way or another. 0f the same type were the attacks on
educational centers, such as those perpetrated against the Emilio Castelar
Institute (28 April) or the Law School of the Complutense (Alcala de Henares)
University (29 April). Not excluded was the sending of letter bombs, such as
that addressed to the Friends of UNESCO Club on 25 January 1980, resulting in
two serious injuries.

The links of these attacks with the extreme right parties were exposed quite
often. although, in the Congress of Deputies, at the session held to discuss
this type of terrorism on 8 May 1980, Boson declared that they were "actions
decided on by the participants on their own initiative, dissociated from the
guidelines of the associations to which they belonged or with which they
sympathized, appearing to be acts prompted by emotional states and political
passion, without prior planning or reflection."

The representatives of the left expressed their disagreement with this official
version, particularly Sanchez Montero of the PCB, who declared: "All the inci-
dents appear to be based on a premeditated plan." He stressed that, "No legal-
ized organization or party can freely express and defend ideas and serve as

a shield and cover for terrorist rings"; and hence he concluded by requesting
of the government "that the investigation be carried out to its final conse-
quences and expcse the connections, if there are any, between those terrorist
groups and extreme right political organizations." Boson conceded that, "It

is undeniable that those who arouse the most radical political passions cannot
later, to excuse themselves. allege a lack or loss of control over those whom
such passions prompted to act in a disordered and criminal manner."

The objective connection between extreme right terrorism and coupism proceeds
from their idential nature. To paraphrase Clausewitz, we might say that
coupism is a method of fighting against democracy, only using other means.
Coupism is a type of terrorism wherein the quantitative difference makes the
qualitative leap.

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In this connection, the coup of 23 February 1981 (which we shall not analyze
here) was the site to which the terrorist escalation logically led. We have
already had occasion to point out how, at the time of the most serious terror—
ist attacks, the spokesmen for the extreme right brought up the need for
"exceptional measures" or simply called upon the Army to assume power.

The very manner of carrying out the coup of 23-? had,in its concrete implementa-
tion, every aspect of a terrorist act: a non-uniformed armed goup which attack~
ed a public establishment and abducted those present, exerting pressure to
attain certain goals. The only difference from any typical terrorist act lay

in the fact that. in this action, the change in the ownership of power was a
mediate or remote objective, while in coupism that change in ownership is the
immediate or next objective. There was also the fact that many of those

present in the Palace of the Cortes believed that an ETA commando group had
entered. And it is also known that many Civil Guards participating in the

attack were deceived, by telling them that they were going to fight against
an ETA comando group.

The essential identity between coupism and any terrorism, whether it be of the
right or the left, red or black, is proven by the fact that they share a common
objective: the destruction of the democratic order. In commenting on the
terrorists of the "Black International," Claire Sterling says that "they are
hardly distinguishable from the red ones," and cites "a certain homogenizing
training of a Maoist-Nazi type" which both the "reds" and the "blacks" share.
According to this author, their aversion to "Zionist imperialism" is another
aspect in which they appear to be in agreement. * We have already noted, as
Claire Sterling stresses, that the leftist Feltrinelli thought that savage
violence would force "an authoritarian shift to the right (...) which would
open up a more advanced phase of the struggle." He added that, ”the brutal
intervention of the repressive forces would put an end to any dilatory notion
to the effect that the socialist revolution is possible without resorting to
arms." This proposition of Feltrinelli's, which might well be that of ETA
(m), reached the point of becoming, for the strange editor, a "raging obses-
sion," according to Judge Guido Viola, who was the one that investigated
Feltrinelli's death. And we have already mentioned his interview with

Prince Valeria Borghese which, according to Claire Sterling, took place in
Switzerland in 1971. **

The presence of extreme right terrorism in Spain and its connection with the
consecutive attempts at coupism have continued to be perceptible since the
abortive coup of 23-F. For example, on 28 April, three explosions took place
in Madrid, the most powerful of which caused serious damage to the Trans-
alpine travel agency owned by an Italian, Andrea Amieville, associated with
the extreme right. The other two explosions, of lesser size, damaged the
cottage and a car belonging to the same Amieville. The attacks were claimed
by the Revolutionary Armed Groups (GAR), an almost phantom entity known only
from several attacks made in Valladolid (another site where the attacks of
the extreme right had become most persistent) against persons with leftist
links or simply democrats.

3Claire Sterling, op. cit., p 115
** lbld., pp 38 and 115

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlCinL can UNLY

These attacks upon Amieville were the object of different interpretations,
not excluding that of a settlement of accounts. The attackers themselves
(who attributed to the GAR an unbelievable "Marxist—Leniniat“ tendency) even
made reference to "certain plans of the Black International to provoke a
coup d'etat in Spain." *

At that same time, a press report was disseminated concerning the meeting in
Paris. on 2 April 1981. of the European Anticommunist League to study the
Spanish situation. Among those present was the well-known Stefano delle
Chiaie. who mentioned the failure of the 23-? coup because of the "betrayal
and cowardice of certain communders-in-chief," and who "advocated the need
to create armed groups of Spanish youths, for which he proposed the starting
of a process of unification of activist members of the Falange, Youth Force
and New Force. Traditionalist Commuﬂon and National Youth Front."

Also in attendance at the meeting was Sixto de Borbon—Parma, who "sought
economic assistance to successfully complete the action aimed at destabilizing

the order in Spain, as the only means of stimulating the military to undertake
definitive intervention."

The meeting adopted 12 resolutions, noteworthy among which was that to contri-
bute 50 million pesetas for "The Spanish Armed Commandos" (CAB), the one to
negotiate for the purchase of arms in Libya and Czechoslovakia and the one to
select suitable sites for military training. **

The same type of activity was referred to in a report published in CAMBIO 16
in June. noting that "the nee-Nazi party. Youth Front, consisting of 200
radicalized youths who split from New Force 2 years ago, is attempting to
create a secret, illegal military front similar to the armed connmndo groups
of ETA military or ETA politico-military." The report was suddenly issued to
the news media on the occasion of the arrest of several activists from this
Youth Front. ***

Also in June. the police discovered a new attempt at a coup d'etat. in which
a terrorist plan appeared as a basic element.

It all began on 19 June, when a New Force militant, Jose Luis Cuadrado Garrido.
was wounded by the explosion of a bomb which he was attempting to set in Dos
de Mayo Square in Madrid. Cuadrado stated that he had attended a meeting of
the extreme right at which instruction was given on making explosives, and
"slogans were issued aimed at fostering subversive activities directed toward
destabilizing the Spanish political situation."

TTfrTiféTe. 29 lip—til 1981. p a

** SABADO GRAFICO. "Armed Plan Against Spain." by Juan del Valle

*** CAHBIO 16. No 498, 15 June 1981, "The Extreme Right ETA." pp 33 ff.

#6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Allrr this. the police learned that, for 24 June, the king's birthday, a terrorist-
cuupist plan was being prepared that would begin by exploding a bomb at the Nou
Camp in Barcelona, on the occasion of a nationalist gathering. "The Barcelona
bomb. which had been prepared to cause hundreds of deaths and injuries, was really
a diversionary operation for a military seizure, an hour later (...) of the Royal
Palace (in Madrid), where the king’s birthday was going to be celebrated."

Subsequently. the "terrorist-coupists" intended to force the king to abdicate or

go into exile, or, if need be, they planned to kill him. A military junta would
take over the government of the country.

In the event that this plan should fail, an alternate project would be put into
effect, consisting of a campaign of terrorist acts, to be carried out from 24

June to 18 July, the big Francoist celebration, so as to trigger a destabilizing
strategy.

According to a police report, "When no one dares to go out on the street, and
terror takes possession of the populace on a mass scale; when the trains travel

about half empty, and the factories, ports and airports are at the point of coming
to a standstill, someone will have to save the nation: the Army."

As is evident, an attempt was being made to arrive at a coup by means of terrorism,
which was converted into a necessary previous phase required to create the condi-

tions that would "necessitate" the coup d'etat triggered, in turn, by military
intervention.

Shortly thereafter it was learned that the "coup plot" in which a leading role
had been assigned to Jose Antonio Giron, a Franco minister of labor and extreme
right leader, had at least four armed organizations to start up the destabilizing
terrorist campaign preceding the coup d'etat.

The first of these organizations was National Labor Union Action, headed by Jose
Antonio Assiego, who was considered Giron's "armed branch." Apparently, this
individual would lead the "50 men ready for anything, responsible for setting
bombs in the leading Spanish capitals to provoke a crisis situation which could
not be controlled by the political authorities, forcing the Army to seize power."
The police were convinced that this group had already engaged in the purchase of
weapons and the training of its members.

New Force was said to be the second of these organizations within which, and unknown
to its leader, Blas Pinar, there would operate an armed organization with cover

from the security services of that political party, led by David Martinez Loza,
national security chief of New Force, who had already been summoned to make a
statement in connection with the assassination of the leftist youth, Yolanda
Gonzalez, on 2 February 1980, and who was finally tried at the end of October 1981.

Operating in close relationship with New Force was a business firm called Rio
Tajo Iberica, Inc, which police sources and the secret services accused of
being the legal front for the collection of funds to be used to finance and to
create the Armed Commandos and underground activities of Blas Pinar's party.

#7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" I“. USE ONLY

Spanish Palange. of the JONS [Junta of National Trade Union Action], was said to
be the third of the organizations implicated in the ”terrorist-coupist" plot.

These comando groups were reportedly led by Col Ricardo Carchitorena, and not
only were they accused of having taken part in the attack on the San Bao bar on

6 May 1980, which we have already mentioned, but also, under the command of Catchi-
torena himself, they were the attackers of the military government of Madrid on

the night of 23 February. It is a fact that this notorious incident did not evoke
any judicial action.

The fourth of the organizations associated with the destabilization plan was the
Youth Front, which "attempted to set up a military front similar to that of ETA,"
for which purpose some of its members had already engaged in bank holdups in order

to collect funds, and in military training in locations on the outskirts of Madrid
and Valladolid.

All those involved in this new "terrorist-coupist" attempt were eventually released
when it became impossible to prove their guilt convincingly; but Assiego made some
significant statements to the press, referring to the fact that there were plans

for a "national uprising," although denying the existence of extreme right terror-
ism. Assicgo remarked: "Roson- wants to put me in the terrorist camp, and I refuse.

Say what you will, terrorism here is still Marxist and Leninist. We have not yet
gone so far as to kill anyone." *

Although the matter has not been completely explained as this is being written,

the strange attack on the Central Bank of Barcelona on 23 and 24 May 1981 was also
linked with the extreme right "terrorism-coupism." Even though, finally, the offi-
cial account and the explanation from the president of the government himself to
the plenum of the Congress of Deputies affirmed the theory that it was a common
criminal action, this serious attack, which almost halted the nation's activity,
still has some very obscure features.

The link of two of the attackers with government intelligence services and the
reference by one of them to a mysterious Luis Antonio. possibly the notorious right
wing activist, Luis Antonio Garcia Rodriguez, whom we have already mentioned, gives
reason to believe that there are still many aspects of the Central Bank attack
still remaining to be explained. **

In July, a report published in DIARIO 16 described another meeting of the Fascist
International held in Rome on 7 and 8 June, a continuation of the one which took
place at Paris on 2 April. According to this report, the meeting participants had
essentially adopted three resolutions: to keep up the strategy of tension in Spain,
Portugal and Greece; to supply the destabilizing commando groups in these countries
with modern weapons; and to foster the campaign to discredit the government systems
so as to promote subversive action among the Armed Forces.

* For this entire matter. see CAMBIO 16, No 500, 29 June 1981, "The Coup Plotters
Do Not Rest," p 35; No 501, 6 July 1981, "With the Coup at the Heels," pp 28 ff.;
No 503, 20 July 1981, "Giron Trapped," pp 20 ff.; and No 507, 17 August 1981, "The

Armed Branch of Giron," pp 21 ff.
** 0n the subject of the Central Bank holdup, see CAMBIO 16, No 496, 1 June 1981,

"The Mysteries of the Central," pp 26 ff.; and No #97, 8 June 1981,."More Mysteries
of the Central," pp 36 and 37

68
FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE1DNLY
At this meeting. an announcement was made of the appearance of a bulletin
addressed to the Spanish military and entitled "Victory." The key man on

the Spanish side was said to be a mysterious "Colonel Rodrigo" whom the report
connected to the attack on the Central Bank of Barcelona. Another Spaniard

present was a young man named Jordi Font who had apparently attended the
meeting in Paris. *

The ETA Attrition: the Truces

The events of 23 February caused the "historic appeal" which the BIA leaders
headed by its secretary general, Mario 0naindia,issued on 22 February upon
concluding a special assembly held in Lejona (Vizcaya), to go unnoticed.

In the document a cease-fire was requested of the two branches of ETA. BIA had
been studying this proposal since November, when ETA (p-m) assassinated the UCD
leader Juan de Dios Doval. That assassination, harshly criticized by BIA,
marked the beginning of a period of dissociation between the "abertzale" party
and the "poli-milis" which culminated in the request for the cease-Eire.

Mario Onaindia, the leading instigator of the proposal. had made a careful
analysis which led him to conclude that the "armed struggle" was useless.
Despite so much bloodshed, ETA (m) had not attained any of its goals. Insofar
as ETA (p-m) was concerned. the continuation of the "armed action" was becom-
ing increasingly senseless, inasmuch as this branch had backed the statute and
the resultant autonomous development. We have already demonstrated the incon-
sistency of the action of the "polidmilis," determined to keep up an armed
activism that was increasingly less comprehensible in an autonomous context
understood to be a necessary phase.

Onaindia said: "we think that the idea will be late in prevailing, and that the
specter of civil war will have to hover over Buskadi somewhat longer before

the people realize the risk. Our proposal is one course of action, perhaps

the only one."

The rather unfavorable mood of ETA (m) was quite obvious after Ryan's assassina-
tion. nor could much be expected of the erratic line being pursued by ETA

(p-m) which. after the inactivity maintained since December, had on 21 February
kidnapped the honorary consuls of Austria and El Salvador in Bilbao. German

del Sol and Antonio Alfaro Fernandez, as well as the one from Uruguay in Pamplo-
no, Javier Biurrun. The operation, carried out almost simultaneously by three
different commando groups, apparently preceded the abduction of two other
consular agents who had the good fortune to free themselves from the captors..

ETA (p-m )seemed to be jealous of the "benefits" accrued by ETA (m) after the
death of Arregui, and dealt a blow which could have had major international
repercussions in view of the consular status of the hostages.

*DIARIO 16, 3 July 1981, 'The Fascist International Met in Rome," by Claudio
Sussoni. p 8

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR uVFluIAL usﬁ WNLY

As terms for the release of the consuls, ETA (p-m) asked several newspapers
and magazines, as well as television, to publish the reports of Amnesty Inter-
national and the Human Rights Commission of the Congress of Deputies on the
existence of torture. and also photographs of the body of ETA member Arregui.
As the "poli-milis" stated later, it was an attempt "to put the torture and
fascism of the State apparatus in question to international public opinion."

when an argument began in the news media concerning the feasibility of consenting

to the ETA (p-m) demands or not, the major rash attempt of 23 February occurred,
which relegated all the other issues.

Five days later, on 28 February, ETA (p-m) released the three consuls, and
announced "an indefinite truce and acease-fireudthout conditions," in one of
its usual press conferences at which, in the presence of five newsmen, three
hooded individuals, after citing their historical career and their ideological
line, explained their decision to "allow for progress in the political solu-
tions." They added: "One of those times has come when armed action must be
withdrawn and room left for other ways of solving the specific problems."

ETA (p-m) issued an appeal to the "progressive Basque forces (...) to make
certain that the Statute is a platform without a setback." In the comment on
both those who backed the Statute of Autonomy and those who fought it, it was
clear that the "poli-milis" were extending their hands to ETA (m).

Moreover, ETA (p-m) overtly admitted that it had been the abortive coup d'etat
which had prompted them to make this major decision: "He decided on it within a
few hours; at first we were very frightened, as everyone was," the hooded men
remarked. And in the commmnique which was read, reference was made to the
historic responsibility "to dismantle all the enclaves of fascism in the State
and in the society, because a fascist military coup would represent an enormous
setback for the working class, both in political life and in the other areas of
life."

Although the document cited several "guide points (...) which must be resolved
promptly," such as criteria for the negotiations that they proposed (amnesty,
integration of Navarra into Euskadi, the referendum on the Lemoniz nuclear
powerplant and the repeal of the antiterrorist law), the "poli-milis" did not
establish any deadline nor condition, but stated: "Our halting of the armed
struggle is based on the notion that there really exists a dynamics in the
political forces to solve the pending problems over the short term."

Finally. they addressed "ETA (m), asking it to cease its action, "Inasmuch as,
in the current situation, the use of arms is an element which could objectively
preclude the agreements that might be made between the political forces, des-
troying the political solutions." *

To any observer. a very close relationship was evident between 23-F and the
truce, which once again showed the objective connections between terrorism and
coupism. In subsequent statements to CAHBIO 16, ETA (p-m) attempted to down-
grade that relationship, although without completely clearing up certain

*CAHBIO 16, No 484, 9 March 1981, "Farewell to Arms," pp 53 and 54, and "Cease—
fire," pp 54 and 55

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1“. USE ONLY

ambiguities. For example, at one juncture they declared: "without the armed
struggle there would have been no Statute, and perhaps there would have been no

23 February (abortive military coup), at least in the way that it took place."
Later, however, the "poli—milis" acquit themselves of this responsibility, which
they foist indirectly on ETA (p-m). They assert: "We do not think that the ETA
(p-m)'s armed struggle caused the coup to take place (...). And, as our use of
arms has developed, as part of what the constitutional text for Euskadi indicates,
which has subsequently been confirmed, as in the case of the Statute and the
powers, we have succeeded in destabilizing or producing a coup situation to the
same extent that the political action of PNV and the rest of the Basque democratic
forces have succeeded in doing so." As is evident, this is a very peculiar inter-
pretation of "armed struggle," which has been converted into something as respec-
'table as political struggle itself, by the mere fact that it was carried out in
connection with the statutory process, "as part of what the constitutional text

for Euskadi indicates!" The "poli-milis" have come close to constitutionalizing
their "armed struggle."

The gentle criticism of the other "armed struggle," that of ETA (m), is made as
follows: "There have unquestionably been other uses of arms in Euskadi, but we do
not think that they were the main detonator of the major coup attempt either. The
detonator was a class struggle situation, and what Tejero and company claim is
merely an ideological excuse for concealing their nostalgia for Prancoism." In
other words, finally, it is thought that terrorism, any kind of terrorism, has not
played a role in triggering coupism. This is hardly believable, because the
"poll—milis" admit that it was the abortive coup which prompted them to hasten

the decision for the cease-fire that had already been made. All this attests to
the ideological rigamarole in which ETA (p-m) is involved, finding no argument to
explain 23-? other than a trite recourse to "the class struggle situation."

"The cease-fire was a decision which had been made months before in the organiza-
tion, backed by the majority of the organization, for which there were no concrete
dates. These dates were specified, on the one hand, in view of the request from
the Basque political forces for a cessation of the armed struggle, with a public
appeal for this from Euskadiko Eskerra, and, on the other hand, by the coup, which
actually advanced the decision as the situation produced by 23 February changed
radically; in other words, there was an attempt to defend what existed, fascism
again began to be the enemy in all its dimensions and this prompted reconsideration
of the decision as to when the cease-fire should be started."

Moreover, ETA (p-m) stressed that its decision "to abandon the dynamics of action-
repression—action to intervene in the new situation" when the bourgois democracy
and the Statute arrived was not imitated by ETA (m), which thereby became respon-
sible for "a situation opposed to ETA and, more specifically, to ETA (m)." "The
dynamics or action-repression-action have been maintained with the fiendish pace
of armed intervention by the ETA military, which is backing that intervention
exclusively. wtihout offering political solutions." As a result, the "poli-milis"
advise their former comrades: "ETA (m) should hold its Seventh Assembly and, just
as we have done. it must reconsider the tactic of armed struggle in general, and
of course the strategy to be maintained in the future.”

51
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z nNLY

Finally, ETA (p-m) reiterates its conviction that the "KAS alternative" must

be abandoned under the present circumstances. The "poli-milis" claim: "The
problem of Herri Batasuna is that it has been opposing the Statute for the past
a years, and the solution that it demands, the KAS solution, entails a break
with the Constitution. For this purpose, there would have to be a change made
in Title VIII of the latter, and this is a dynamic which BB cannot develop; it
requires the existence of a left in Euskadi, which is impossible at present. In
our opinion, this left must be created with the development of the Statute."
ETA (p-m) regards as essential "the defense of the Statute, which has been
seriously threatened by the coup of 23-? and the program of Mr Calvo Sotelo,
who has already shown his disdain for the autonomous issues upon refusing to
reachagreements in the investiture voting with the autonomist forces such as
the Andalucian. Catalonian or Basque forces." *

The ETA (p-m) decision (which they never called a "truce" nor an "abandonment

of armed struggle," but solely a "cease-fire") was received with relief and
hope by virtually all the Basque political groups except Herri Batasuna.
Arzallus, president of PNV, expressed the view that, "It is time for a statesman
with historic vision, capable of taking advantage of this offer to deal with
whatever there is negotiable in the hand outstretched by ETA (p-m) in order to
provide a solution to the ETA issue.“

Of course. there were some who received the peace offer from the "poli-milis"
with caution; for example, Roberto Lerchundi, secretary-general of EPK-PCB,
who stated: "If the ETA (p-m) proposal is confirmed, I think that it represents
a major change in attitude. However, I view it with caution. The action must
confirm it."

This skepticism was more than warranted, because although, in the communique
announcing the cease-fire, ETA (p-m) announced that it had ordered all its
commando groups "to halt all planned action and to stop that being put into
effect," there was one action which was not stopped. We refer to the kidnapping
of the Valencian industrialist Luis Suner who, it was learned weeks later, had
been kept in captivity at that time by ETA (p-m). Nevertheless. the release

of the three consuls gave the impression that everything that had been promised
by the Basque organization was being fulfilled. On several occasions, the
latter had denied its implication in the Suner case, one of the strangest
abductions which had occurred, while it was thought that ETA (p-m) had nothing
to do with it.

The "cease-fire" of the "poli-milis" suffered a serious threat when, in a
connunique sent to the Basque news media and published on 21 March, ETA (p-m)
suggested the possibility of resuming its terrorist activities.

The cxcuses given by the ETA members to justify their threats were aimed chiefly
against the Socialists. The "poli-milis" wrote: "In view of the critical cur-
rent situation, PSOE proposes to revive the defunct Front for Peace (...);

mm 16, No 1.85, 16 March 1981, "The Statute Disarmed an." pp 49 ff.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in short, it is inclined toward supporting old cliches the ineffectiveness of
which has been more than proven, but this time with the resumption of repression,
which might include more severe standby status than what we have undergone...

(and) more or less unbloody implementation of the Antiterrorist Law." Consequent-
ly, ETA (p-m) advised the Basque political forces "to avoid any temptation to opt
for a policy that would strengthen options which have now definitely appeared as
those yielding to the greater or lesser evils of the 'Tejero coup.'" The terrorist
organization accused PSOE of having backed the right wing orientation and "grand-
national" ideas of 23 February, and concluded by stating that the "PSOE proposal,
if it shOuld become generalized, will prompt us to reconsider our action."

This solution from ETA (p-m) evoked great surprise, even among the political
sectors closest to the politieo-military branch. Mario Onaindia, secretary general
of 51A, said that he was "doubly surprised" because this cease-fire "had attained
the goal of opening up dynamics for negotiation among all the political forces."
Onaindia added that, "Of those proposals, the most interesting one is probably

that of P803 which, for the first time in a long while, offered a reasonable
solution." *

The ETA (m) Final Escalation. The Government Against Terror. The International
Dimension

In any event, the ETA (p-m) cease-fire did not mean the end of terrorism; because
the other ETA, the "milis," who had been urged to put down their arms, rejected

the offer, immediately showing their intention to continue along the path of
violence.

0n 1 March, ETA (m) attempted to blow up two National Police 2 cars being driven
between Sestao and Portugalete; and, upon failing to do so, it shot at them,
seriously wounding one policeman, while two others sustained slight injuries.

A woman who had been passing by the vicinity was also wounded.

Four days later, the police commissioner, Jose Luis de Raymundo Noya, was assassi-
nated in Deusto (Vizcaya). The ETA (m)'s desires were clear. Chiqui Benegas
claimed: "ETA military has sided objectively with the coupists."

But the extreme right was also persisting in its violent plans. Two days earlier,
on 1 Hnrch. Francisco Javier Ansa Zincunegui was assassinated in Andoain (Guipuz-
con). For the first time, two members of the Spanish-Basque Battalion were
arrested. something that was interpreted as a sign of the new style of Calvo
Sotelo who, in addition to expressing condolences to the victim's relatives,

made a sudden trip to Bilbao, where he attended Commissioner De Raymundo's funeral.

ETA (m) carried out another escalation, the most predominent hallmarks of which,
excluding the exploding of devices, were the assassinations of two lieutentant
colonels within a period of 58 hours, in both instances when the victims were

*EL PAIS, 22 March 1981, p 12

53
FOR 0F11CLAL.USE|DNLY
FUK UFFILIAL USE ONLY

coming out of church: On 19 March, Lt Col Ramon Romeo Rotaeche was assassinated
in Bilbao; and on 21 March, Lt Col Jose Luis Prieto Garcia, former chief of the
jurisdictional police of Alava, was assassinated in Pamplona. On 27 March. in
Alegria de Orio (Guipuzcoa), it was the turn of Juan Costas Otamendi, who had
been accused of drug trafficking.

During those final days of March there was a widespread reaction from both the
political forces and the people (30,000 persons demonstrated against terrorism
in Pamplona on 25 March), as well as from the government.

In fact, the government announced the implementation of five types of measures:
1) the Armed Forces would cooperate to "seal off" the Franco-Spanish border in
the Navarra area where the ETA members were in the habit of crossing; 2) a Single
Antiterrorist Command was established in the Ministry of Interior, with Manuel
Ballesteros assigned as its head; 3) the checking of individuals and goods at
certain border points would be intensified; 4) the personnel of the State
security corps and forces would be increased in the Basque and Navarre areas:

5) Parliament passed two bills through the emergency procedure: one on crimes

of rebellion and terrorism, and another on the state of alarm, standby status
and martial law.

The measures showed the intention of Calvo Sotelo (who explained their meaning
on TVE) to face up to terrorism and, generally speaking. they were well received,
although the use of the Armed Forces aroused sore suspicion in Suarez himself,
among others. The penal law, which was called the Law for Defense of the Consti-
tution, also aroused criticism of both a technical nature and regarding its
essence, which attempted both to prevent propaganda through the terrorist and
coupist newspapers (for example, EGIN and EL ALCAZAR) and to punish the activity
of the intelligence commando groups and other types of assistance to the terror-
ists.

During the final days of March there was also a discussion of the constantly
updated issue of the terrorists' international connections. It was then that
there appeared the book by Claire Sterling entitled "The Terror Network," which
we have cited on several occasions. The commentary on the book multiplied,

and there even occurred an argument between the United States and the USSR,
because while the former accused the KGB of being behind the terrorist groups
operating in the West (ﬂaig himself went so far as to make very direct charges),
the Soviet Union accused the American CIA.

Even before the argument began, Stanley G. Payne, a well-known American historian
specializing in Spanish problems, published an article in which he claimed:
"During the past 13 years. while the Soviet Union has promoted terrorism on a
worldwide scale either directly or indirectly, great care has been taken to

avoid an overt link insofar as possible." He also noted: "In Spain itself, the
Soviet activities have reached such an overt level that on at least one occasion
a high-ranking Soviet diplomat has been caught recruiting local terrorists in the
Canaries." Payne also referred to the "French case," citing "the peculiar

policy of the French government of providing protection and, consequently,
support, to the foreign terrorist groups. In this way, the irrational,

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kerenski-like role of France has been an essential contribution to the inter-
national network." *

0n the very same day that this article appeared (2h March), the director of

the Soviet-Spanish enterprise Sovhispan, Yuriy Ivanovich Bytchkov, was asked to
leave Spain. Many Soviets had already been expelled for espionage activities
or for possible connections with terrorist networks. The Spanish secret
services were apparently not disregarding that sector.

ETA's international connections were known to the Spanish police, especially
insofar as France was concerned. Manuel Ballesteros, cLLef of the Single Anti-
terrorist Command, declared: "If the protection that the Basque terrorists

have in the south of France, the French 'sanctuary,’ were to disappear, or if
there were greater cooperation on the part of the French authorities, ETA would
not last even 6 months for the Spanish police." And he subsequently stated:

"Up until now, ETA has been training in Algeria, Libya, South Yemen, Lebanon and,
recently. Nicaragua and El Salvador." **

Independent French spokesmen as notable as Raymond Aron or Jean Francois Revel
did not hesitate to condemn the French attitude as well. Raymond Aron said:

"I believe that the French government should be radically hostile to ETA, and
that it should do everything possible against Basque terrorism, because Basque
terrorism is an international threat. It is part of a dangerous international
movement jeopardizing the democratic community as a whole, and hence there must
be no reservations against that terrorist group. The maximum amount should be
done. Is the maximum being done? Hell, I don't know. The only thing I can
say is that it should be done."

Revel, whose valiant position opposing the French attitude we have already cited
continued to be just as categorical and far more direct: "Terrorism is not merely
a Spanish issue (he said), but European as well. France should have reacted

far earlier, it should have helped Spain against the ETA terrorists (...). The
major enemy of all the present forms of terrorism (he added) is democracy; and

it is clear that ETA has assassinated far more since democracy has existed in
Spain. Insofar as France is concerned, I think that there is a secret agreement
not to allow terrorism to develop on our soil. For example, no arrests have
been made here of Palestinians or Italians, and very few Germans have been
arrested." ***

while Spain did not obtain the needed cooperation from its French neighbor, it
failed to attain understanding attitudes from institutions as important as the
Church as well. In early April, the Basque bishops, the three titular bishops
of Bilbao, San Sebastian and Vitoria, and the auxiliary bishop of Bilbao,
Monsignors Larrea, Setien, Larrauri and Uriarte. published a controversial

35TKET6‘YET‘EZ‘EE?Eh 1981, "The Sources of Terrorism," by Stanley 6. Payne,

p 2

** CAMBIO 16, No 489. 13 April 1981, "Without France, ETA Would Last 6 Months,"
statements by Manuel Ballesteros of the Single Antiterroriat Command, pp 38 and
39

*** CAMBIO 16, No 490, 20 April 1981, “Raymond Aron Discusses Spain." pp 64 and
6S. and "Revel: for Spain and Against ET ," p 67

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pastoral letter in which the ETA terrorism and the use of the Army by the
government in the antiterrorist battle appeared to be put on the same level.
Mention was made therein of the "military actions" of ETA and the terrorist
assassinations were called “deaths caused in the name of an alleged revolution-
ary justice or strategy."

The matter of the pastoral letter evoked an immediate reaction from the govern-
ment, whose president summoned the Apostolic Nuncio of the Holy See to Honcloa.
The incident gave reason for certain publications to concern themselves again
with the old issue of the connections between the Church and Basque nationalism.*

ETA (p-m) maintained its truce, but still made some armed appearances. On 27
March, two members of that organization attempted to penetrate the women's jail
in Barcelona, pretending to be lawyers. The "poli-milis" tried to free their
comrades Carmela Barandiaran and Maria Elgoroibe, who were serving a sentence
in that prison establishment. They did not attain their goal, and the ETA
members ended up by surrendering.

A few days later, on 15 April, the Valencian industrialist, Luis Suner, who. it
was learned then, had been kidnapped by ETA (p-m) on 12 January, was released.
The abduction lasted 3 annths for the person who, judging from the statements
of the Finance Ministry, was the richest man in Spain.

On several occasions ETA (p-m) denied being responsible for the kidnapping, and
the police themselves confirmed that the Basque organization could not have been
involved: a series of details seemed to preclude that possibility. Different
data learned (the presence of a woman in the commando group and the weapons)
inclined others to continue believing that the "poli-milis" were behind the
kidnapping, perhaps, it was said, backing some group of Valencian independence
advocates. Specific mention was made of a group called "els maulets," a small
party organization of the "armed struggle" which had been known of since 1979
from painted messages which appeared in Valencia and Alicante, summoning the
people "to arms." In early January 1981, with members of other parties of the
extra-parliamentary left, there was also formed a coalition called Popular Unity
of the Valencian Country, which came to be the political front for "els maulets"
that would operate as a military front. In short, it was a new implementation
of the ETA (m)-Herri Batasuna plan. **

0n the same day that Suner was released, the San Sebastian attorney, deputy
mayor of the San Sebastian city hall and member of Euskadiko Eskerra, Pedro

Ruiz Balerdi, was arrested at the Irun border. He was carrying 5.5 million
Belgian francs which he was attempting to bring into Spain and which, he

claimed, were his share for having served as a middleman in the Suner kidnapping-
Balerdi, who was one of the defenders in the historical trial in Burgos, had
also served as a mediator in the Ruperez kidnapping.

* (mm '1'fo 743—489, 13 April 1981 "ms Te Absolvo", pp 18 m; sum GRAFICO,
No 1,244, 8-16 April 1981. "The Bishop Grapevines," pp 8 and 9, and "The Black
Doss;er of the Basque Church." pp 10 ff.

** CAHBIO 16, No 478, 26 January 1981, "Who Kidnapped the Hock King?", pp 40
and 41, and No 479, "The Valencian ETA," pp 34 and 35

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ETA." Balerdi was defended by the legal profession's corporative organs, with the
understanding that the money was coming from the Suner family to which he was
rendering his services, and not from the terrorist organization. 0n the basis

of these assumptions, Balerdi was released a short time later. but a certain
amount of uneasiness was noted in public opinion over what was interpreted as
leniency toward the "ETA lawyers" who were serving as intermediaries in the
kidnapping cases as well as "rendering their services" and even obtaining substan-

tial reductions in the demands on the part of the terrorist organization for the
so-called "revolutionary tax." *

The Tragic Week of May 1981. Blow to GRAPO

Despite all these dubious activities, ETA (p-m) was becoming increasingly establish-
ed in the truce or, as they preferred to call it, the cease-fire. An actual
armistice put an end to the "armed action" of the "poli-milis" exactly paralleling
the political evolution observed in EIA, which we shall discuss later.

ETA (m). on the other hand, continued its acts of terrorism, which caused five
deaths in April, in addition to other attacks of lesser significance. **

The police also learned that, in late March, at San Juan de Luz, ETA (m) had held
an important meeting attended by its top-ranking leaders, Domingo Iturbe Abasolo,
alias "Txomin," military chief; Eugenio Echeveste Arizaren, political chief; Juan
Lorenzo Santiago Lass Hichelena, alias "Txikierdi," chief of the commando groups;
and Isidro Maria Garade Bedialauneta, alias "Hamarru," chief of logistics and
armament. The ETA (m) staff had decided to heighten the ”armed struggle" in
opposition to the cease-fire requested by some "milis" jailed in Soria.

According to the reports reaching the Single Antiterrorist Command. the ETA organi~
zation was attempting to bring into Spain from the "French sanctuary" six commando
groups that were to act in the Basque Country and Madrid. The police services
managed to capture five of the six commando groups, also arresting the drivers of
the TIR trucks and the locomotive engineer of a train on which the ETA members
intended to penetrate "the interior," in their terminology, in other words, Spain.

*Concerning this controversy see DIARIO 16, 17 April 1981, "These Are the First
Consequences After the Release of Luis Suner," pp 4 and 5; EL PAIS, 17 April 1981,
pp 1 and 9; SABADO CRAFICO, "The Devil's Advocates," pp 10 ff.

** The assassinations during April 1981 by ETA (m) were the following: the national
policeman. Vicente Sanchez Vicente, assassinated on 8 April, in Baracaldo, and
Francisco Frances Garzon, killed on 9 April in Bilbao; the retired lieutenant,
Oswaldo Jose Rodriguez, assassinated in San Sebastian on 16 April; the retired
Civll Gunrd lieutenant colonel, Luis Cadalso, also assassianted on 14 April in
Basauri. and the civilian. Jose Maria Latiegui. director of the Moulinex business
firm. assassinated the same day in Usurbil (Guipuzcoa).

57
FOR 0FFK]AI.USE¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The only one to succeed in evading the police encirclement was the "Madrid"
commando group, whose plans consisted of acting in the capital of Spain.

From that time on, the police set up services in an attempt to detect the ETA (m)
infrastructure in Madrid, investigating both persons linked with the Basque country,
for example, soldiers or students, and refugees coming from the Latin American
countries. among whom there were many former terrorists (Tupamaros, Hontoneros,

Chilean MIR members, etc.) based on what we have previously termed the "Latin
American connection." *

The orientation of the probes was incorrect, because when, after the summer, they
managed to disband the ETA (m)'s Madrid infrastructure, it was found that its back-
up network consisted of "progressives" linked with intellectual and feminist groups
which were definitely flan Madrid by origin and background. in most instances.

But, as had already occurred in 1979, it was to be in May that the diabolical repe-
tition of the terrorist attacks with very few days' difference would raise the poli-
tical temperature and public emotion to a degree of maximum tension. Once again

the terrorists struck with such intensity that they seemed capable of destroying

the herculean effort for democratic normalization.

This new heated period of terrorism also represented the umpteenth resurrection of
GRAPO which, as we know, had kept nearly absolute silence for months. Only the

offer of a "cease-fire" made by Sanchez-Cases to the court which was trying him,

the day after the one made by ETA (p-m), that is, on 29 February, had afforded an
occasion for information on GRAPO. The leader of the terrorist organization had
voiced the desire to abandon "armed struggle" if there were certain conditions which,
although he did not specify them at this time, could readily be inferred to be "the
KAS alternative in a GRAPO version," which we have mentioned before.

This "offer" was reiterated by Sanchez-Cases and other GRAPO members during the
sessions of the various trials being held against them for different acts of
terrorism. It might have seemed that the "peace" offered was an indication that
the dismantling of GRAPO was a fact.

Nevertheless, on 4 May, a GRAPO commando group put an end to the life of Gen Andres
Gonzalez de Suso, known for his liberal nature, and that of a national policeman,
Ignacio Garcia Garcia. Almost at the very same hour, the GRAPO "Barcelona" commando
group assassinated two members of the Civil Guard, Sgt Justiniano Fernandez Perado
and Guardsman Francisco Montenegro, at a bar in Ciudad Condal. In the Madrid attack,
the pulice managed to capture one of the terrorists, Avelino Gomez Gomez.

The dual attack occurred at a critical time because, a few days earlier, the leak
in the press of some of the summary statements of those implicated in the abortive
coup of 23 February, in a story which, it was claimed, although nothing was made
clear, favored the coup plotters, had made the issue of coupism timely again.

* CAHBIO 16, No 49a, 18 Hay 1981, "Spain Needs You," pp 28 ff.. especially "2.
Spain Reacts," pp 32 and 33

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Thu CRAPO attacks unquestionably benefited the coupist plans, and therefore
questions were again brought up concerning the true nature of the strange
terrorist group. while some kept insisting that "the GRAPO's final connection
is located in the East," others suspected "an infiltration of elements in the
terrorist organization which are subject to slogans strategically devised by
the ultraright brains."

The repercussions of the GRAPO's twofold attack had not yet subsided when, on
7 May. another attack, this time by ETA (m), heightened the nervousness very
seriously. On almost the same site where Gen Gonzalez de Suso had died 3 days
earlier, on the same Conde de Penalver Street, two terrorists riding a motor-
cyles and using the so-called "Algerian technique," set a bomb on the hood of
the car which was taking the chief of the king's military squad, Gen Joaquin
de Valenzuela, to the Palace of La Zarzuela. The explosion of the device left
the general seriously wounded and killed his companions, Lt Col Guillermo Tevar,
petty officer Antonio Nogueira and the driver, Carlos Rodriguez Taboada. The
fact that the victims were members of the personnel under the king's orders
gave reason to think that ETA (m) was now aiming directly at the person of the
head of state.

Emotion was evident in the atmosphere, which reached a very high degree of
tension. The ultrarightists took to the streets in support of their longed-for
military dictatorship, and the most disturbing rumors circulated. It seemed as
if an unsurmountable point had been reached. The terrorism had gone too far.
The spector of a coup traversed Madrid again.

The next day, at the initiative of the political parties, all of Spain voiced
its repudiation of terrorism and its determination to oppose it at all costs,
with a symbolic act which had widespread repercussions and served to demonstrate
the resolute desire of the citizens to cooperate. At 1200 hours noon, all over
Spain, and for 2 minutes, all Spaniards stopped and kept silent. The cars
driving on the streets of cities, the machines, the radio broadcasts, all acti-
vities stopped; and all that could be heard were the bells and radio tuning. It
was like a unanimous cry, like a loud "enough!" to terrorism.

We know that terrorism had been losing ground, backing and initiative in recent
months, and that the process of its withdrawal had already begun. But if we
had to choose a symbolic moment that would mark the reaction from the citizens
and the withdrawal of terrorism, I think we would have to say it was that 8 May.
It was obvious that neither ETA nor even GRAPO had been totally defeated, but
that was the beginning of the end.

On the same 8 May, the Council of Ministers met, and seriously considered the
possibility of declaring a standby status throughout the entire national terri-
tory. Possibly only the fact that the pertinent law did not yet exist, because
approval or the bill by the Senate was still lacking, precluded this measure.

The resolute desire of the citizens to cooperate was clearly felt immediately.
The day after the demonstration of the 2 minutes of silence, 9 May, the police,
in a spectacular action carried out in Alcorcon, on the outskirts of Madrid,
arrested the GRAPO members who had, on 4 May, committed the attack which cost

59
FOR OF'WCJAI.USEIDNLN
FOR OI-TK'IAI. "SI-Z ONLY

the life of Gen Gonzalez de Suso and that of a national policeman. It was Jose
Jimenez Fernandez, alias "El Tigre," and Miguel Angel Bergado Martinez, who
confessed their guilt and wh) were arrested, apparently thanks to telephone tips
from citizens. The following day, Guadalupe Nunez Morales, member of the GRAPO
Executive Committee and in charge of the organization's liaison, was also arrest-
ed. On the other hand, the ETA members of the "Madrid" commando group, perpetra-
tors of the attack on 7 May, mysteriously escaped, despite the fact that the
police succeeded in identifying them as Jose Leon Mazusta Artidia and Jose Maria
_ Bereciartua Echarri. In spite of this, other arrests were made, both in Madrid
and the Basque Country, which increasingly undermined the structure of ETA (m).

In the following weeks GRAPO received such severe blows that, with all the reser-
vations with which such claims must be made, the police and the minister of
interior himself thought that it was left virtually nonexistent.

In mid-Hay, several GRAPO prisoners had started a hunger strike seeking better

living conditions in the prisons. GRAPO announced that it would back the strike
with a campaign of attacks.

But. fortunately, the intentions of the terrorist organizations did not material-
ize. On 17 June, the Civil Guard discovered several members of that terrorist
organization in Gerona Province, very near the French border. Pour GRAPO members
were killed in two different confrontations. Exactly 2 days later, on 19 June,
one of the GRAPO members on the hunger strike, Juan Jose Crespo Galande, died.

Shortly thereafter, the trial was held against the six GRAPO members accused of
setting the bomb in May 1979 which caused the slaughter at 4% California, :
including the leader Sanchez-Casas.

In September, GRAPO received another harsh blow when the police discovered the
house in Barcelona in which another one of the organization's top-ranking leaders,
Enrique Cerdan Calixto, was living. The terrorist attempted to escape, and was
felled by the agents. A short time later, in Cadiz, another major GRAPO member
was arrested. 0f the terrorist organization's supreme leaders, only Martin

Luna remained at large.

ETA and Socialist France

Mitterrand's victory in the French presidential elections and, in June, the
Socialists' overwhelming victory in the legislative elections, were to require
new proposals in the area of relations with France in connection with ETA.

For a time, the Spanish Socialists seemed to think that the arrival of their
French counterparts in coumand posts would entail a radical change in Spanish-
French relations concerning the old issue of ETA terrorism and the latter's use
of French "sanctuary." During the Giscard presidency, especially during the
final period, Spanish-French relations had been so bad, and not just beéause of
the terrorist issue, that it seemed they could hardly become any worse.

At the time (May 1981) there was proposed a request for the extradition of an

ETA member, Tomas Linaza, accused of seven assassinations. The dossier sent by
the Spanishauthoritieﬁwas so complete and convincing that it seemed difficult

60
FOR 0F11C1AI.USE()NIN
to refuse the extradition of one who appeared accused of such crimes. Accord-
ing to the French procedure, the pertinent court first judged on whether or
not the extradition being sought was in order; however; then, finally, it was
up to the government to decide on the request.

The indications that the French Socialists were not in favor of extraditions

had already been perceived at the height of the presidential campaign. A high-
ranking leader of the French Socialist Party, Claude Bstier, had confided to
Spanish newsmen his view that one could not expect from the new French government
a policy of acceptance for the requests for extradition of ETA members, regard-
less of how well founded they were.

"hen Felipe Gonzalez returned from the Hitterrand swearing-in ceremony, he told
newsmen that "extraditions are not everything," noting that the important thing
was the cooperation of the new French authorities in the battle against terror-
ism. It was not difficult to imagine that he had perceived in Paris a rather
unfavorable position toward extraditions.

These predictions were confirmed on 8 June, when the French prime minister,
Pierre Mauroy, in making statements, expressed this intention of refusing the
extraditions, resorting to the old idea of France as a paradise of freedom and
for political refugees. Hauroy's remarks were like a slap to the Spanish
government, particularly since a Paris court had declared Linaza guilty of very
serious crimes, considering him a "common criminal."

Not only the government, but other political circles as well, including the
Socialists, expressed their surprise. A telephone conversation between Perez-
Llorca and his French colleague, Claude Cheysaon, and a quick visit to Madrid
by the latter, somewhat eased the diplomatic tension, which had become very
high.

In the following weeks, other Basque terrorists whose extradition had been
requested by the Spanish government went through the pertinent French courts
which, in several more instances, agreed to extradition. But it was clear that
the French government, which had promised a complete response, would not consent
to the Spanish requests. In any event, the Mauroy government was postponing
that response.

Opposed to this French position on the issue of extraditions, there was noted a
certain amount of cooperation by the French police with the Spanish police,
which eased the tension between the two governments. * The Calvo Sotelo visit
to Paris in early July attested to this atmosphere of relatively good under-

standing.

Subsequently, the French minister of interior, Defferre, traveled to Madrid, and
the Spanish ministers of interior and justice visited Paris. Following the
summer months, the French capital was also visited by a Spanish technical

*L'EXPRESS, 26 June 1981, "Basques: Justice, Asylum and Law," p 53, and CAMBIO
16, No 098, 15 June 1981, "French-Style Stab," pp 22 ff.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

delegation chaired by the general director of State Security, Francisco Laina,
which included, along with the general director of the Civil Guard, Gen Aramburu,
and that of the police, Fernandez Dopico, the chief of the Single Antiterrorist

Gimmand, Manuel Ballesteros. Understandably, terrorism was the essential topic
at all these meetings.

The results of these contacts were felt very soon. The French administration
required all Basques to regularize their status, as other foreigners were
required to do. This fundamental measure afforded the French authorities an

accurate knowledge of the composition of the Basque colony in the neighboring
country.

At the same time, the members of ETA (m) were notified that the French government
firmly proposed to prevent any terrorist action "in or from its territory." It
was reiterated to them that there would be no consent for extraditions, but at
the same time they were threatened with confinement, no longer on the island of
Yeu, but on the Caribbean island of Guadalupe.

In fact, during October it was proposed to confine in certain French localities,
such as the island of Ouessant. the ETA members accused by the Spanish authori-
ties. The measure met with difficulties owing to the resistance from the inha-
bitants of some of those localities against receiving such guests. Finally,

two small sites in the department of Lozere were designated as a residence for
ETA'memhers.

The so-called “long truce" of ETA (m) which we shall discuss later had one of
its causes in this new attitude among the French authorities. The status of
the French "sanctuaries" was upset, and this necessitated a logistical redrafting.

At the same time, the French police passed on certain information to the Spanish
police. From this source there apparently came the information that the Spanish
police had on the move to Spain by the so-called "Madrid" conmnndo group, which
was intended to take action in the capital of Spain.

But the relations with France seemed doomed to frequent ups and downs. For
example, in early November, the French minister of interior, Defferre, complicated
matters again by declaring, not the intention of the French government not to
consent to extraditions, something already well known, but the French desire to
"accord the right of asylum to the Spanish Basques." The French minister added:
"But (the French government) has committed itself to the young Spanish democracy
to prevent their return to Spain." It was claimed that the decision meant the
imminent release of the incarcerated Basques. The essence of Socialist France's
cooperation with its neighbor to the south was rather slight.

The Great ETA (m) Truce

After the assassination of the three members of the military accompanying Gen
Valenzuela in Madrid, ETA (m) had continued its attacks. Two more members of
the Civil Guard died before the end of May. * In June, another two fatal

*The Civil Guard members Jose Olalla and Manuel Sanchez Borallo were killed in
Lemons (Vizcaya) on 16 May.

62
FOR 0F13C1A1.US£13NLY
attacks took place,* as well as other acts, such as the 50 kilograms of "gum-2"
placed in the university of Navarra, which caused four to be injured. In all
instances, ETA (m) took credit for the incidents.

In July, ETA (m) assassinated four persons ** and, as it had done on other occa-
sions, it began a summertime truce which, in this instance, had to be extended
much longer, giving rise to all kinds of speculation about the meaning of this
strange attitude, changed only by occasional attacks on Iberduero facilities.

For this reason, the summer of 1981 was one of reassuring normality in the Basque

Country. Teurism resumed and the gaiety of the popular celebrations was not upset
by either political implications or deeds of violence.

But no one was overly confident. According to Txiki Benegas, "To the misfortune

of everyone, the reality of ETA must be concentrated more on a tactical retreat

than on the cessation of a violent activity." Txomin Ziloaga, of HB, for his

part. thought that it was "not a tacit truce, but rather a tactical retreat," though
he added: "we prefer not to embark on the issue of ETA. If we say that the summer
hiatus seems good to us, or if we express the contrary view, they will misinterpret
us. For this reason, we remain silent. He do not talk about ETA."

As for Teo Uriarte, of Euskadiko Eskerra, he expressed the following opinion:

"We do not think that it is due to a dismantling of its infrastructure. They may
stop for awhile and wait for events to occur. A disillusionment on the issue of
autonomy would give them a certain strength for another period of violence. This
would he a mistake. Madrid and Vitoria must understand one another. The opposite
would give advantages to ETA (m) which is so much in need of popular support at
present.‘

From all indications, this latter circumstance, the loss of popular support, was
one of the reasons for ETA's inactivity. The Basques had become tired of the
violence. the constant mobilizations, the ultrapoliticization of all aspects of
daily living. The weariness was evident in the small number of attendees at the
demonstrations organized by the "abertzales." Issues which on other occasions
had managed to bring thousands of people to the streets were now only capable of
mustcring a few hundred. Not even the hunger strike of the "milis" confined in
the port of Santamaria had succeeded in touching some sectors of the population
which had previously been aroused by far less. Only the nuclear issue, and
specifically Lemoniz, seemed to still possess a certain amount of mobilization
capacity. Furthermore, certain ETA (m) acts, such as the assassination of engineer
Ryan, had contributed to prompting many people to turn their backs on it.

5ﬁn57ruc those which cost the life of the policeman Maria Jose Garcia Sanchez,
killed in a shooting with ETA (m) in Zarauz. on 16 June, and that of the mutilated
colonel, Luis de la Parra Orbaneja, assassinated by ETA (m) in Irun on 22 June.

** Involving Army Lt Hagin Fernandez, assassinated in Baracaldo on 5 July; that
same day. in Oyarzun, the Civil Guard member, Luis Miranda Blanco, was killed;

on 10 July, in Basauri, the retired Civil Guard member, Joaquin Gorjon Gonzalez,
was assassinated; and on 25 July, in Amurio, the apartment salesman, Felix
Galindez Uria, was killed.

63
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFI‘K‘MI. USE ONLY

Annthrr concurrent cause that might explain the "milis" truce was the breakdown
of major portions of the ETA infrastructure, which had obviously been weakened.
In recent months the police action had been highly effective, very seriously
damaging both the intelligence apparatus and the operational system of the
terrorist organization. in early September, for example, the police arrested
Ignacio Echevarria Landazabal, a member of the "Donibane" commando group; some-

thing which prevented a series of actions which this commando group had planned.
Weapons and explosive material were also recovered.

ETA (m) was hurt by this effective disbanding activity, as proven by the document
found in the Zarauz apartment which was taken over after the shooting which cost
the life of Inspector Maria Jose Sanchez on 16 June. In the document, ETA member
Miguel Antonio Goicoechea Elorriaga. alias "Txapela," a major member of the ETA
(m) leadership and chief of the "illegal commandos," who managed to escape,

complained of the lack of logistical backup and the meager intelligence structure
that he had at his disposal.

A third cause exolsining the ETA inactivity, from all indications. was the deep-
seated internal aebate in which the organization was embroiled. During the summer,
in the French Basque Country, ETA (m) had held a series of meetings on the issue

of the armed struggle, and redrafted its strategy. The example of the "poli-
milis" unquestionably carried some weight and, according to certain speculation.
there would be an attempt to replace the indiscriminate terrorism with a different
selective type that would choose the targets carefully. It was also claimed that
these meetings, which, contrary to what some thought, did not turn out to be the
Eighth Assembly of the ETA (m). had been concerned with the recurrent theme of
negotiations.

A fourth joint cause of what some regarded as a mere "technical truce" was, with-
out doubt, the new French position that we have discussed previously.

Despite everything, caution was the spirit of the police authorities, who feared
a new offensive at any moment. "One cannot chant victory," remarked Roson, on

a trip to the Basque Country made in September. And he added: "I believe that
major steps have been taken, but one cannot preclude further action, because
there is a group of commandos in a position to carry it out, and I think that it
will happen in the not too distant future." *

A Blow to ETA

As a result of the reports which had reached the police, according to which two

ETA (m) commando groups intended to take action in Madrid, the Single Antiterrorist
Command mounted a spectacular operation called "Scorpion" in anticipation of
attacks which, it was assumed, might be aimed against high-ranking military
commanders.

As a result of this operation, on 25 Sep'amber Juan Antonio Madariaga, head of the
ETA (m) intelligence apparatus in Madrid, was arrested. His conpanion in the
intelligence activity, Maria Belen Gonzalez Penalba, alias "Carmen," just managed

to escape.

 

*_0—n the co'i'i'c of_the ETA (m) truce, see DIARIO 16, 11. September 1981, "an Will
Kill Again," by Pedro Conde Zabala, pp 6 and 5; and CAMBIO 16, No 514, 5 October
I981, "The loo-Day Truce." pp 26 ff.

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

While in prison. Hadariaga secretly composed a self-critical document to be

sent to the ETA (m) leadership in France, but owing to an "informer" a search
was made and the document was found. From one sentence contained in the docu-
ment regarding the insurance on Hadariaga's automobile, arrests were made of
several individuals who comprised ETA (m)'s logistical and intelligence infra-
structure in Madrid, a prominent member thereof being the feminist Jimena Alonso
who, according to the police, had been working for ETA since 1977. *

This major action against ETA (m) was completed on 21 October when. at a check-
point set up by the Civil Guard on the Bilbao-Behovia freeway, near Renteria,
the occupants of a car attempted to flee, holding a shoot-out with the Civil
Guard members. As a result of the confrontation, two of the car's occupants
were killed, and the third was arrested. To everyone's surprise. the ones
killed proved to be two important ETA members: Andres Izaguirre Gogorza, alias
"Gogor," chief of the "Madrid" commando group, and Jose Juaregui Altube, alias
"Josechu." The individual arrested, Carlos Martinez Bastarrica. was also an
ETA member.

All these police actions put ETA (m) on the defensive, and represented the
hardest blow that the terrorist organization had received since the summer of
1975. For the first time in 6 years, the initiative belonged to the police,
who forced the ETA members to withdraw. Hence, it is no exaggeration to speak
of retreat.

While the police were continuing to break up the intelligence commando groups
in the Basque Country and Navarra, arresting their members, ETA (m) announced
"harsh reprisals against those who understood only the language of force and
arms." an odd style of speech coming from an organization whose career was a
vast stream of bloodshed. This semantic hardness contrasted with the moderate
tone of a communique disseminated a month earlier. in which a mobilization was
called for 27 September, coinciding with the anniversary of the shooting of the
ETA members "Txiki" and Otaegui, together with three GRAPO members. In this
communique. use was made of phrases such as "lack of a progressive and liberal
desire." or “peaceful dialog," which were unprecedented until that time in the
language of ETA (m). Something very serious was happening within the organiza-
tion that warranted the expectation that the ebbing of terrorism was beginning
to he a fact.

The Internal Debate in ETA (p-m) on 'Armed Struggle'

In the fall of 1981, the reports attesting to the existence of a complex internal
debate, and even major differences, among the members of the two branches of ETA
were becoming increasingly abundant.

*The other individualsunder arrest who were eventually placed at the disposal of
the courts were Carmen Santos Pontela, Amays Andreu Sanz, Aida Chalneta Alonso,
daughter of Jimena, Margarita lrastorza Gogoitia, Dolores Illescas Ortiz, Victor
Garcia-"oz Rosales, Jose de la Paz Sanchez Hontanes and Antonio Hernandez
Rodriguez.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During October, ETA (p-m) held a series of meetings in Biarritz described by the
Political Office as "an urgent, extensive depate on the current problems," in

a lengthy document wherein. on 45 pages, the various speeches were reprinted
almost literally.

The basic issue discussed was "the future of the armed struggle (...), both the
type of armed struggle and the type of organization which needs to be constructed?

Accordin? to the Political Office, light was shed there "on the problems which
the class struggle will pose for us in the future."

Throughout the discussion, two positions were completely apparent: one favoring
and the other opposing "armed struggle." The advocates of "armed struggle" were
apparently a minority sector headed by Jesus Abrisqueta Costa, chief of the Poli-
tical Office, and Jose Aulestia Urrutia, in charge of the armed commando groups.*
The lengthy debate did not result in either an agreement or a synthesis of the
positions. The "poli-milis" cited the need to wait for events and, specifically.
the holding in Hatch 1982 of the constituent congress for the new united party.
Euskadiko Bskerra—Left for Socialism (EB), formed from the former coalition of

the same name, particularly its main component, EIA, and the "Lerchundi sector"
of the Communist Party of Euskadi.

This means that, once again. within ETA (p-m) there was repeated the dynamics of
division, and if the process were carried out in accordance with the old system
that we have mentioned so often, it could be assumed that the "hard-liners,"
that is. the advocates of "armed struggle," would take control of the apparatus.
In this case, it might be anticipated that those favoring the continuation of
the "cease-fire" would end up swelling the ranks of EB. According to others,
the opposite system might occur, with the control of the apparatus taken over
by those opposed to "armed struggle" and the "hard-liners" splitting off.
Presumably, the latter would negotiate with ETA (m) and would end up joining
that organization, as the "bereziak" [ETA special commandos) did in their time.

This latter possibility was less likely because, in addition to the fact that a
convergence between a sector of the "poli-milis" with ETA (m) was difficult,
owing to the abyss created between the two organizations, what sense would it
make for a pacifist ETA (p-m) to survive? As we shall observe shortly, this was
one of the arguments of the "hard-liners" to justify the return to "armed
struggle."

TsI-o CAMBIO 16, No 530, 25 January 1982, "Papa Julio Returns Home," by Jose
Dlnz Herrera and Juan Madrid, pp 18 ff. According to other reports (EL PAIS,
16 February 1982, "The Break in ETA (p-m) Nearly Consulmnsted." pp 1 and 7), the
sector favoring struggle was larger than the "pacifist" one. At the same time,
according to this information, the "hawks" were headed by Abrisqueta, and it
was the "historicals" Aulestia and Goiburu who were in favor of maintaining the
truce.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Let us observe, in brief, the arguments of the two positions that we have cited.
as they were voiced in the October debate wherein there was also a perspicacious
discussion of the problems raised by autonomous development, LOAPA (Organic Law
on Autonomous Process Harmonization], the position of PSOE (which "goes along
with the Centralists" because "it has little political strength in the autonomies
and that is a serious handicap for the time when it comes to power"), the conse-

quences of PNV's hegemonic position in Euskadi ("PNV (...) wants only terrorism
to have a place to the left of it") (...), etc.

Those opposed to "armed struggle" think that, "Despite LOAPA, the truce strategy
is positive because of the social development that it is affording. At the present
time (they claim) there is a political development which, if the truce were to be

broken, would be left uncertain, and this would not benefit the left nor its
political repair."

This sector also notes that, "With regard to the 'milis' our truce has been posi—
tive (because) now there is a proposal for selectivity (in 'armed action'), as had
not been proposed before." 0n the other hand, "That rupture strategy (of the
'milis') has failed (...) because the Basque parliament, the (Basque) government,
etc., cannot be erased from the map without further ado (...). At least something
has been settled regarding KAS."

The "hard-liners" in turn begin with the dogmatic assertion that, "Armed struggle
is needed for advancement in the political process (because), if there is mass
political action, armed struggle has a role to play, just as the general strike
has. just as the parliament has, or just as civil disobedience has.“

in contrast to them, the "doves" respond that, "One cannot analyze whether or not
armed struggle has an abstract value, because that is not real. There is no armed
struggle apart from the concrete political connotations. when it is time for the
truth. one must analyze concrete actions which are incumbent on concrete organiza-
tions, and concrete situations." They go on to say: "The act of breaking the truce
so as to put (armed struggle) into operation again is something lacking in political
maturity on the part of the organization."

They subsequently stress that, "The capacity for negotiation which an armed struggle
might produce does not emerge from military force; it emerges from the political
entrenchment of the revolutionary dynamics per se. There are but few strictly
military matters which have an influence of themselves, one of them being the
neutron bomb; but there are but few besides."

These arguments did not convince the ETA "hawks" who retorted that. "The armed
struggle that is waged in a particular political context and which nurtures a
particular political strategy is proper." And they contrast "the bombs from the
Mediterranean...(which) were a major contribution in the winning of the Statute
when the negotiations were being held," with "the bombs from Madrid" (a reference
to those set in Barajas. Chamartin and Atocha during the summer of 1980), which
are regarded as negative and "intolerable" because, they claim, "a different

political context" was involved.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When the opposing sector argued that "the masses" did not understand nor accept
"armed struggle,” the "hawks" set forth an elitist, revolutionary proposition

of the most completely Leninist nature: "If, with respect to an armed action,

we must propose for ourselves that it be hailed and approved (...) by the majority
of the population of Euskadi, we would have to propose the same proportion to

a program of the left; but there is a program, such as that of EB, which is
rejected by the majority of the population of Euskadi, and one cannot infer

from this that the BE plan is not feasible. Insofar as armed action is concerned,
one cannot consider how many approve of it, but rather whether or not it

increases the possibilities of a revolutionary political line which will continue
to be in the minority for a long time."

On the basis of these statements, it is obvious that it makes no sense to voice
a renunciation, a priori, of "armed struggle" which is one tool, among others,
to be used if need be. In short, "Political solutions must be provided here,
the political parties must negotiate and the armed organization must be prepared
to fan the flames at a given time and to stop when there is a need to do so."

The peaceful sector thinks that, "It is contradictory to say that the truce has
been positive and to break it"; and, concerned over the process of consolidation
of the new party, EE, it states: "The EE Congress would emerge harmed by the
breaking of the truce, and the proces of integrating people into the PC would

be also." Moreover, with the break, "arms would be given to the 'milis' and to

H3, because there has been an end to giving the impression that there is nothing
to be accomplished here without shootings and that political solutions are not
viable." In a categorical and even incisive manner, they go so far as to say that,
"at the present time there is no obvious need for violence," and therefore, "if
ETA did not exist at present, there would be no reason for creating it."

As might be imagined, on the basis of this the "hard-liners" reached the conclu-
sion that, on those premises, "armed struggle will not exist in Euskadi for a
very long time," and that "this would occur only as a result of a coup d'etat
or a terrorist coup." They emphasize, "In view of this, one has to wonder what
sense it makes to maintain this organization."

This argument does not make sense to them, because "Today, the organization must
be a political organization far more than ever before, it must develop armed
struggle in the context of that left and it must have its own practice, distinct
from the party; because a large throng of people will join EE, and it would be
better if far more Joined, but that very fact forces ETA to develop its own

armed policy."

As we can observe, ETA is defined as an "armed vanguard" with a clearcut elitist
concept, and it is considered even more necessary at a time when EE is in the
process of becoming a party of masses. According to the "hawks" ETA comes before
KB. The "doves" opposed to armed struggle put EE before ETA.

The interminable discussion entailed not only the division of ETA (p-m) into two
virtually unreconcilable sectors but, in fact, a break in the ETA (p-m)-EE bloc.

68
FOR‘0FF"JAI.USE(NNLV
This bloc had been seriously damaged at the end of 1980 when the "poli-milis"
carried out their anti-UCD campaign and since EB, under the skillful leadership
of Mario Onaindia, undertook its conversion into a united party with an ambition
to occupy all the nationalist political area to the left of PNV. The most
important move in this direction was the integration of the former secretary
general of the Basque Communists into the new party, at the cost of breaking

the structure of EPK-PCE, whose slight remains, again closely linked with Madrid
after the "Lerchundi adventure," are once more under the direction of Ormazabal.
Lerchundi's predecessor in the leadership of the Basque Communists.

Although the break between "hawks" and "doves" had not been officially consummated,
2 days after the Biarritz meeting, the former held a new session at which they
appointed two chiefs of commando groups with the mission to reorganize the infra-
structure on the inside. Those named were Jose Maria Iza de Unamuno (aged 21),

for Pamplona and San Sebastian, a seasoned terrorist with an extensive record
(Mediterranean campaign, attack on the Berga headquarters), and Ignacio Calvo
Martin (aged 23) for Bilbao and Vitoria, considered by the police as responsible
for several assassinations, who received guerrilla training in Lebanon. The

former of the two was arrested in Pamplona soon afterwards. *

The End of the Truce

It was no surprise to those who had kept up with this internal debate in ETA
(p-m) when, on 17 January, Dr Iglesias was released after a 20-day captivity. by
the CEO of the National Police, and it was reported that the kidnappers were
members of ETA (p-m).

The abduction of the father of world-famous Julio Iglesias had occurred on 29
December under strange circumstances. No one thought of ETA as a possible
perpetrator of the act. and at the same time the possibility of political impli-
cations was precluded. The kidnapping had all the features of a common crime.

0n 7 January, DIARIO l6 cited several possible hypotheses: a publicity stunt, a
mere vendetta with some settling of accounts, a romantic revenge, etc. In no
instance was there any mention of ETA. They went so far as to even doubt the
existence of the kidnapping.

Several days later, it was learned that the kidnappers had asked for $2 million,

and that this information was known since 8 January, but that a "pact of silence"
between the Ministry of Interior, the Iglesias family and the press had withheld

the information to facilitate the police action. ETA still did not appear to be

linked with the incident.

On Sunday. 17 January, it was learned that, at dawn on that very day, the Special
Operating Group (CEO) of the National Police had freed Dr Iglesias in a spectacu-
lar operation. From the arrest of a "courier" who was carrying a letter from the
kidnap victim to his family, the police had learned that Dr Iglesias was being
held by ETA (p-m) in a house that the organization had in the Zaragoza town of
Trasmoz, very near Navarra.

The fortunate outcome of this kidnapping, the first one resolved without paying
ransom and saving the life of the hostage, was a major gain scored by both

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Minister Roson and Ballesteros, chief of the Single Antiterrorist Command, as
well as Commissioner Joaquin Domingo Hartorell, who directed the operations.
The CEO (under orders from Comdr Holgado) added new laurels to its service
record and lent more brilliance to the reputation that it had acquired by the
assault on the Central Bank of Barcelona, being held by armed men, in May 1981.

As a result of this action, not only were the ETA members guarding the kidnap

victim arrested, but also seven more presumed members of ETA (p-m) and six
"milis."

This abduction had some rather unclear aspects, and there was never a rejection
of the hypothesis that the action had been carried out by common criminals who,
in view of the difficulties. turned over the hostage to the Basque terrorist

organization. The attorney for the Iglesias family, Fernando Bernaldez. who
served as negotiator, confirmed this rumor.

There was also speculation that the success of the police had been made possible

by the citizens' cooperation. It was even claimed that both PNV and 88 itself
had not:begrudged their assistance.

In any event, it seemed clear that the police had recovered the initiative and
that the battle against terrorism was showing a very different and clearly posi-
.tive aspect, quite in contrast to what had been customary in previous years.

In a communique made public the next day, 18 January, ETA (p-m) assumed responsi-
bility for the "arrest" of Dr Iglesiss. It stated: "The arrest of a militant

from our organization last Thursday in Bilbao made the thwarting of the operation
possible."

In the same communique, the "poli-milis" attempted to answer those who had been

surprised by the break in the truce without prior notification, and they did so

in this way: "Nevertheless, this does not by any means represent the breaking

of the truce that we have been maintaining since 27 February of last year. The

provision of financial resources is a constant need of the organization; it does
not imply any change in our decision for a cease-fire."

This communique had a very bad effect on the sectors close to BE. Whereas,
according to Javier Harkiegui, spokesman for EB in the Basque parliament, "The
ETA (p-m) return to armed struggle has absolutely no effect on us; since 15
February of last year EE has expressed radical opposition to it." another leader
of the same group made this statement: "It is a total, definitive disqualifica-
tion of armed struggle and of ETA (p-m). People who have to draw from the
trigger in order to eat, and who cannot live like normal persons, cannot be
called "gudaris" [Basque soldiers] or anything of the kind. They are common
'fools.'"*

Much more gently, Juan Maria Bandres, also an ER deputy in the Madrid Congress,
remarked that, “The perpetrators of the kidnapping could be ETA (p-m) dissidents

* Ibid.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who were not in agreement with the organization's line." * As we can observe,
Bandres still refused to remove the myth from ETA, in contrast to the far more
realistic position of the majority sector among the very members of the terrorist
organization. As DEIA noted on 20 January, the two opposing sectors of ETA

(p-m) had been in agreement on the kidnapping to collect funds.

Mario Onaindia quite categorically condemned the kidnapping without any hedging,
considering the break in the truce "an event that will have more of an effect
than one could imagine at first glance on the political situation in Buskadi

and that of Spain as a whole." According to Mario Onaindia, "For ETA (p-m) to
break the truce on the eve of the trial of the military coup plotters is to offer
new excuses for coupism, to do little favor to those who have shown that they
uphold the Statute and to serve to ETA military on a silver platter what would be

its only political success since the split: the transformation of ETA (p-I) into
a merely militaristic organization." **

Just a few days after Dr lglesias' release and the resultant news that ETA (p-m)
was returning to action, although to the "poli-milis" this "did not represent

a break in the truce at all,“ s new blow was to fall on the Basque terrorist
organization.

On 20 January the police announced the discovery of the ETA (p-m)'s largest
arsenal. The arsenal, which was found in a settlement in the vicinity of Bilbao,
had a total of 5 tons of weapons, most of them shotguns, the product of thefts
of arsenals. The find was received with triumphalism, and hastily categorized
by some as the beginning of the end for ETA (p-m).

As a result of all these incidents, and particularly the kidnapping of Dr Iglesias,
the government halted the transfer of the "poli-milis" in custody from the prison
in Soria to that in Nanclares de Oca, near Vitoria. Since the truce began, a

total of 18 members of ETA (p-m) had been transferred to that prison. Neverthe-
less, Bandres, emerging from a meeting that he had'held with Roaon, along with
Onaindia, claimed that the transfer of prisoners to Nanclares would continue,

and that the stoppage was only a temporary measure. *** It was thought that the
continuation of this transfer would support the advocates of the truce within

ETA (p—m) and even a possible future dissolution of the terrorist organization

was predicted.
ETA (m): The Return to the Attack

As we have already remarked, the almost habitual summertime truce of ETA (n)
lasted during the fall of 1981. Only the campaign against Iberoduero had kept
the "milis" active. Several attacks on Iberduero facilities and premises had
been a reminder of the dangerous affair involving the Lenoniz nuclear powerplant.
{TE/Caro 16, 19 January 1982, p s

** CAHBIO 16, No 531, 1 February 1982, "Truce at A11 Cost," by Mario Onaindia,

p 2]

*** Ibid., "The Rebellion of the Victims," pp 18 ff.

7]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But on the very first day of 1982, there occurred an outbreak of violence in
the troubled town of Renteria which marked the end of the period of relative
peace and announced that ETA (m) was returning to the attack.

The occasion was an unauthorized demonstration called by the Negotiators for
Amnesty, on behalf of the ETA (m) prisoners on a hunger strike. Barricades.
shouting, rock throwing, intervention by the State Security Forces and two
persons slightly injured by police bullets were the elements of the incident.
The next day, the town hall approved the resolution submitted by the BB mayor
condemning the action of the Civil Guard. But that was only a warning.

The return of the "milis" to "armed action" occurred 6 days later, on 5 January,
with the kidnapping of the Basque businessman of German origin, Jose Lipperheide,
aged 76, who had refused to pay the so-called "revolutionary tax."

The kidnapping was a show of force by ETA (m) in response to the attitude of
resistance toward the extortion which the entire Basque society was showing.

In fact. during the final weeks of 1981 thousands of Basques from different
occupations and economic levels received letters from ETA (m) demanding of them,
in the form of a "revolutionary tax," amounts of between 2 and 10 million pesetas,
with an average of about 5 million. So many letters were received that it was
even thought that the ETA members had used the telephone directory as a guide.

Among the recipients there were many PNV militants who pressured the party,
requesting an organized reaction. The PNV leaders asked the members not to pay
and did not hesitate to use a threatening and defiant tone. Xabier Arzallus,
president of PNV, stated: "Do they want to frighten us? Hell, everyone will

be frightened." And the "lendakari" Garaicoechea asked them "not to let your-
selves be intimidated nor give in to the blackmail."

At the PNV headquarters, the "batzokis," the tactic of reprisals was even bandied
about, more or less indirectly: "Beware, if something happens to one of our
friends, three of yours, with a stone at their necks, will go to the bottom of
some estuary!" And also: "We know who you are, name by name and domicile by
domicile; it is no trouble for us to make lists." It was clear that the tar—
gets of these threats were the members of Berri Batssuna.

Among the recipients of the extortion letter were the PNV mayors of Guecho and
Santurce. who courageously proclaimed their intention not to pay.

This resolute position managed to overcome the pessimism that the Lipperheide
abduction had caused and, to some extent, represented the attainment of the

goal of Txiki Benegas, secretary general of the Basque Socialists, who wrote:
"The battle against the 'revolutionary tax' must cease to be an act of solitari-
ness and abandonment by those subjected to extortion (...). The resistance of
those threatened must be organized, and they must be protected by a solidary

act by the whole society." *

* CAHBIO 16, No 529, 18 January 1982, "Paying to Live," by Txiki Benegas, p 21.
On the topic of resistance to ETA (m0 and the "revolutionary tax," see in that
same issue ”Hand to Hand against ETA," by Xavier Domingo and Ander Landaburu,

pp 18 ff., and No 531, 1 February 1981, 'Whe Rebellion of the Victims," pp 18 ff.

72
FORiOFFﬂﬂAI.USE(M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Meanwhile. the kidnapping of the elderly businessman, Lipperheide, which was to
a large extent the detonator of this collective reaction, continued, without the

disclosure of news about possible negotiations with the kidnappers nor the
condition of the hostage.

As confirmation of the fact that violence was returning with the new year, on 27
January a municipal policeman, Benigno Garcia Diaz, whom they had accused of
being a police informer, was assassinated in Ondarroa (Vizcaya).

At the end of January, signs began to appear that the Lipperheide kidnapping
might be resolved without bloodshed. In fact, on 5 February, after a month of
abduction, the businessman was released, and it was learned that the family had
paid a sum of about 120 million pesetas. ETA (m) was winning, at least partially,
and Minister Roson stated that the police case could not be considered closed.

Despite this resumed activity, it was thought among certain sectors that ETA (m)
would be willing for some type of negotiation. And it was claimed that the "milis"
were no longer backing the coup d'etst, as had appeared obvious at other times.
According to these reports, certain leaders would be willing to revise and mollify
some points in the "KAS alternative." *

Nevertheless. after the Lipperheide kidnapping, in Basque political circles there
was a dissemination of the notion that, in the potential internal conflict which
was also occurring in ETA (m), this negotiating position which was chiefly that

of the "historicals" headed by Domingo Iturbe Abarolo, alias "Txomin," did not
predominate, but rather the "hard" line of the younger members. According to
these reports, Eugenio Echeverte Aranguren, alias "Antxon," chief of the ETA (m)
Political Office, was the best known leader of this tendency. "Antxon," a Guipuz-
scan from Pasajes de San Juan, slightly over 30 years of age, came from the "poli-
mills" and was one of the “bereaiak” who had transferred to ETA (m) seeking direct
action without halfway measures that the militarists were offering him. As opposed
to the compromisers who were resting in the truce, "Antxon" was calling for a
return to the times of merciless violence.

The predominance of the "hard-liners" in ETA (m) was proven. while the Lipperheidc
kidnapping with a relatively happy ending had prompted some to think that there
was a certain amount of "humanity” among the "milis" after an assassination had
been feared, within a short time ETA (m) showed its true countenance. On 16
February, undoubtedly based on a coldly devised plan, two almost simultaneous
assassinations put an end to the last hope that the truce might be extended. In
the aid district of San Sebastian a retired member of the Civil Guard aged 60,
Benjamin Fernandez Fernandez, was assassinated from behind. Shortly thereafter,
in Oyarzun-Renteria, another Civil Guard member who was returning home after
service, Jose Fragoso Martin, was assassinated in his own car. Every indication
pointed to ETA (m).

According to DIARIO lb (of 17 February 1982), the two fatal attacks were the b-
ning of the ETA offensive associated with the court-martial against the participants

* See the serial article by Jose Luis Gutierrez in DIARIO 16 (l, 2, 3, 6 and 6
February), "Euskadi, Between Fear, Surfeit and Hope."

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the abortive coup d'etst of 23 February of the previous year. On the ease

day. EL PAIS, in an editorial entitled "The Strategy of Death," also claimed

that the attacks "prove quite clearly that the terrorists are not willing to

miss the opportunity that the trial against those accused of military rebellion
affords then." According to this newspaper", the goal of the terrorists was "on
the one hand, to upset the basic conditions of calmness under which the court

must pass judgment and, on the other, to contribute to the agitation that the
pro-coupist sectors are attempting to implenent at this tine." Once again. there
appeared the coincidence of interests and objectives between coupisn and terrorisn.
Both were seeking to put an end to democracy.

The curse of violence, the shadow of Cain, seemed to be spreading over Spain again
and over the Basque Country specifically. But the perpetual return of criminally
shed blood was no longer capable of paralyzing the desire of so many Spaniards,
both Basques and non-Basques, determined to reach an understanding over and above
the differences and disputes. vehemently disposed to escape from the diabolical
nerry-go-round of violence which reproduces itself.

This account concludes with the conviction that the worst has already passed, and
that neither ideas nor weapons can destroy the peaceful coexistence of all the
people of Spain who have shared a land and history for over a thousand years.

COPYRIGHT: Alejandro Munoz Alonso, 1982

2909
(:80: 6000/0002 END

71.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY