APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOO0R0O0100oaoo‘0-O
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000300494

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8346
22 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 17/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R0001000300494
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? rats PUBLICATION 8E RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
J. livrirucnt’e Ara-“um Xv.

  
   
  
  

;, I. u. . .\ . 3, '"
2.125?°“"""°"‘ I M " Jens um“; I

I. Inlr .ml \uI-mir

 

 

:. own l‘ur

rmsxmxous on Human aurora. (rouo 17/79) 22 ”MC" ”79

 

 

7. Awhmh) B. l:ﬂlwnml mum...» llrpc.

ho.

9. l'c-iumu.‘ I)“:- nun-m- Lune and Audit“

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clcbe Reed

Arlington, Virginia 22201

 

I0. Frauen/Tabllmk lime kn.

 

ll. Comma/Gun No. l

 

 

 

_____._.—
n, Spamming cinnamon Nelle and Addie” I). 1": oi Repm 0: Pound

Cnmrd

I s «have

I5. Supplementary Num

 

)6. I\|-\N.It H

The serial report contains political/economic information on West European
energy. finance and trade policy matters as well as developments and trends
in the doctrine. programs and problems of the major communist pal-Lien.

including their relations with communist parties outside the West European
area. '

7. key ‘m-h um "women Mun-an. I70. Dev-"5pm“

Political Science _I\;_lnternational Affairs __l.uxerlbourg
Sociology _Austria ____h'etherlands
Propaganda j_3elgi um __ Norway
Economics __Canadn __Portugal
Energy ___Cyp rus LSpein
Industry ___penmark _x_§ueden
Trade ___Fin lend __Switzerlnnd
Finance Li‘rance _Turkey

_6 reece Limited Kingdom

m. Meant .m Iowa-rum 1m. __Ice land Lacs: Germany
_.I taly

I11. ( 05A" lurid/Clamp SC. SD. 10

 

       
   
 

I3. A\ .IuIAI-nI-(y Nan-hem

For official Use Onlv.

Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

II. 30. ul .‘J‘f‘

73

W. $rrunty< h“ ("in
Rermv‘

l

    

'\"'
. \e- on" '.-J\‘ \lhn
l'a '

iNCI |\'\ll I} 1)

'°"“ "M” "" " "" nus roan an m. awnonocen ”""“"°‘ "“""'

  
       
   

F—
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS J
22 Ma.

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(F000 17/79)

CONTENTS
«TIONAL AFFAIRS

French, Spanish Act 10 Control ETA
(VALEURS ACTUELLES, 5 Feb 79) ...................

Political lmbroglio Threatens Upsuing
(VECRANS AFFARER, 25 Jan 79) ....................

French Pulled on Fueliuss of Nationalism
(L'EXPRESS, 10 Feb 79) ..........................

Poll Results Encouraging. by Albert du Roy
Roots oi French Nationalism. by Paul Cuilbert
Poll Questions and Answers

Poll Conclusions. by Albert du Roy

CFDT's Maire Interviewed on Industrial Strife

(Edmond Haire Interview: LE NOUVEL OBSERVNIBUR.
19 Feb 79) ........... ....... . ..... ..............

Briefs

Super Etcndard Construction
Mirage 2000 Tests
Police Union Warning
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONTENTS (Continued)

More Details Given on Mexican Oil Agreement
(cm81016’ “Feb 79) 0.00.00.00.00000000000000......

SWEDEN

Ullsten Opens Door to Socialists Searching for New Coalition
(Ake Landquist; VECKANS AFFARBR, Jan 79) ............

Inflation Battle Nay Decide Success of 1979 Export Drive
(VECKANS AFFARBR, 25 Jan 79) ........................

UNITED KINGDOM

PRC Interest in Airbus Noted During Varley Visit
(John Elliott; THE FINANCIAL TIMES, 27 Feb 79) ......

PRC offers Barter Deal for Coal Design Study
(Nigel Wade; TNE DAILY TELEGRAPH, 27 Feb 79) ........

WEST GERMANY

Controversy Over Atom Haste Storage Discussed
(Kai Krueger. Wolf Perdeluitz; STERN, 8 Feb 79) .....

FRG Official Reviews Work of PRC-60R Border Commission
(Klaus Otto Nass; BUROPA-ARCNIV. 10 Jan 79) .........

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

FRENCH. SPANISH ACT T0 CONTROL ETA
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 5 Feb 79 pp 27-28
(Article: "The French Sanctuary"]

[Text] A sanctuary for the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group] terro-
rists: the French Basque country. The authorities have reacted. Perhaps
in order to forestall the Spanish special services.

The police took action Tuesday. 30 January. at daybreak. At Saint-Jean-de-Luz.
Bayonne. and Hendaye. about 20 Spanish Basques were arrested. Thirteen of
them were immediately sent to a place of detention in the Alpes-de-Haute-
Provence. The others were escorted back to the border.

All of these 20 nnaqnes belong to the ETA, the separatist organization. In
ordering their arrest. the minister of interior was cooperating with the
Madrid government. which complains again and again about the asylum which the
ETA terrorists enjoy on French territory. It doubtless also wanted to prevent
serious incidents. In less than six months, three attacks were made against
Basque refugees on French soil. A persistent rumor has been crediting the
Spanish special services with intending to settle "a in Israeli" the ETA
problem that is implanted in the Atlantic Pyrenees.

This department has about 15,000 Spanish residents--including about a thou-
sand political refugees who have settled since 1936; and about 300 militants
of the military ETA. who have settled in Labourd province, all along the
Basque coast. from Hendaye uaBayonne. with a maximum density in Saint-Jean-
de-Luz. Some of these "etarrak" [ETA partisans] have a Spanish passport;
others have only a visitor's permit.

Political asylumin the past was granted to them on condition that they
pledge in writing to renounce all political activity of a violent nature and
n0t to illegally cross the French-Spanish border. Martin Villa. Spanish
minister of interior, felt that this liberalism was open tn criticisl. At
each meeting with the French authorities, he repeated:

"Since the most recent amnesty has granted all Spanish citizens restitution of
their rights and freedoms, it is intolerable that there should still be any
Spanish political refugees in your country."

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The French government has conceded this point, again presented by Marcelino
Oreje. Spanish minister of Poreign Affairs, at the time of his recent trip to
Paris. The status of political refugee has been eliminated for Spaniards
residing in France. henceforth only workers having a pass certifying their
status will be admitted. That could be an additional obstacle to the implan-
tation of the ETA north of the Pyrenees.

These political refugees as a matter of fact in great part are clandestine
persons who have been identified by the Spanish police and who go to France
for asylum. Or else "gudaris" (fighters) who come to receive training. far
from the spies of the civilian guard and the armed police. The latter stay
only briefly on this side of the Pyrenees. while the former most of the time
settle here permanently, without, however. breaking the ties that unite them
to their organization.

A third group of refugeea-the least numerous, but by far the moat acti --
consists of members of the "Tactical Executive Commdttee" of the ETA.

Just as the "High Strategic Command." supreme executive organ that works with
the ETA assembly. seems to be a ponderous and static organization. the
Executive Committee, which is responsible for making decisions in a very short
span of time. is operational and mobile. It consists of only about 10
clandestine fighters, all with combat records.

Each is responsible for a specific sector of activities. Thus Jose Miguel
Benaran Ordenana, known as Argsla, who was killed on 21 December, was consi-
dered to be the theorist of the military ETA. Jose Manuel Paguada Gallastegui.
alias Peioto, killed this past 13 January in Saint-Jean-de-Luz, was in charge
of the organization's finances. A certain TXomin, a 36-year old native of
Hondragon. alledgedly is in charge of "interior commandos," etc.

The Basque coast offers living conditions that are almost ideal to these
professional outsiders. The Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz district constitutes a
single agglomeration of more than 200,000 inhabitants. As in the case of

all spas, Bisrrits, Saint-Jean-de-Luz. and Rendaye abound in apartments that
are empty or temporarily occupied. Thus housing matters are easily resolved.
Political refugees, including certain members of the "executive committee."
live there most often with women and children, not always under a false
identity. Some of them work in Basque cooperatives. aided by the substantial
Banco de Bilbao (leading Basque bank and third Spanish bank) and are inspired
by the example of the industrial cooperatives of Mondragon (from which the
majority of the ETA leaders come). Others are employed in local enterprises
that are managed by sympathirers who hire them with full knowledge of the
facts. Basque solidarity greatly favors brothers who are momentarily in
trouble.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An in the case of South Lebanon for Palestinians, the Basque coast is thus a
reliable base for the "etarrak." Training camps were recently set up there.
Several have been seen 20 kilometers east of Bayonne, on some isolated private
properties, in the Iraty forest, the biggest forest in Europe, astride the
border in the region of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port and in the region of Hauleon.

It seems that these camps have now been closed. The base has been transferred
to Algeria, where about 20 fighters allegedly were trained this past year by
Cuban instructors, near Algiers. And if one were to believe the Spanish
press, some "gudnris" are now being trained in the Near East.

Some Basque refugees risk returning to their country. Thus, two armed
fighters who were recently killed in Spain had visitor‘s permits to France
that were still valid. The danger is great, but the leaders beyond the border
have no choice. if they do not want to be outdone by a military base that is
extremely tough and whose average age is lower and lower. It is not unusual
now to see 16-year old boys among the commandos that are arrested by the
Spanish police.

The ETA's base behind the lines in France also ensures a logistical functiOn.
A great portion of the equipment of the Basque commandos in fact transits
through southwestern France, when the purchase is not simply negotiated on the
spot at a high price. The ETA currently has a war fund that is estimated at
more than 300 million pesetas (about 18 million francs). That makes it possi-
ble for them to buy Yugoslav pistols and Belgian FH's, Sten or Marietta
submachine guns, and ammunition by sometimes paying three times their factory
price. This potential market has not failed to attract weapons merchants

of all nationalities. The French authorities recently refused one of them a
permit to locate in Biarritz, itself.

The transitting of this equipment across the border poses little difficulty.
The Basque country has always been a contraband domain. In this connection,
the border police have discovered automobiles equipped with secret hiding
places. Forwarding of merchandise is accomplished in particular by sea. In
September 1978. the freighter, "Allul," was stopped and searched in the
vicinity of Bilbao by Spanish coastguard ships. It was transporting 2.830
PAL 50 guns, intended in all probability for the ETA.

Politically, the ETA receives help from French autonomist circles. The
latter include the staff and readers of the newspaper, ENBATA (SBA BREEZE).
who feel more at home in a cultural fight than in violent activity; the asso-
ciation, Arnai Artea (Among Brothers). that provides mutual aid; and the
small Ehas Party [Socialist Party of the Basque People], of socialist leaning,
which publishes the magazine, ESKUALDUNAK. There is also a group of lawyers

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who sympathetically provide defense for the "chertzsles" (Bssque pstriots)
who are herrsssed by the French police. But all of that represents only s
few hundred sympathizers.

There are three clsndestine orgsnizstione north of the border, which could,

should the occssion srise. support and prolong the ectivity of the Iilitsry
ETA. These are the "Ipsrretsrsk" ("The Northerners"). the "Hordsgo"

("One's All") movement, and "Busltsl Zuzentssuns" ("The Basque Avskening").
These three organizations, with their fluctuating cspsbility. up to now
hsve been credited with about 15 sssults.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 "Vsleurs ectuelles"

680: 3100592

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BELGIUM

POLITICAL INBROCLIO THREATENS UPSUING
Stockholm VECKANS AFFARER in Swedish 25 Jan 79 p 7

lfex§7 The Belgian economy has been treading water--
not least because of the political confusion-and the
problem is growing somewhat this year. However. the
rate of inflation has been brought dour to 6 percent
and the government is trying to stimulate consumption
by lowering taxes, among other things.

The prevailing confusion on the political scene is greatly effecting develop-
ments in the Belgian economy. In October Prime Minister Leo Tindamans

suddenly handed in his resignation and for the 36th time in 39 years Belgium
was in the midst of a government crisis.

The reason this time, like so many times before, was a disagreement between
the two language groups, the Flemish and the Halloons. By establishing a
federal state in Belgium. Tindemans had hoped to largely eliminate these
problems. However, the prime minister met with opposition in his own party.
the Christian Socialist Party, and chose to resign, hoping to form a stronger
government after the next election.

Today the country faces weeks. perhaps months. of tough negotiations in order
to establish a government that has the power to act.

For the time being an important reform bill is awaiting action. Belgium's
steel industry needs to be restructured.

A year ago last November s transitional government submitted a plan to
reorganize the steel industry. But even here considerations must be given
to the clash of interests between different parts of the country.

Belgium is among those countries that have great problems in connection with
their traditional industry. The economy is slow and, consequently. the
growth rate is moderate. In 1977 the gross national product rose by only
1.2 percent. It went up to 2 percent in 1978 and is expected to reach 3
percent in 1979

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
llalf of Belgium's labor force is employed in the expert industry and Belgium

is greatly dependent upon developments in West Germany, Ilolland and France
in particular.

Ilence, the economic upswing in West Germany provides a bright spot. which
is reflected in growing industrial orders. In 1979 the export volume is
expected to grow by 6 percent, while importation will go up by 5 percent.

As a result of the slow economic growth, Belgium's unemployment is remarkably
high. About seven percent of the labor force is unemployed and there will
be no improvement in 1979. There were 300,000 unemployed in Belgium at the

beginning of 1979. This is an increase of between 6.000 and 5.000 compared
to a year ago.

While the high rate of unemployment is one of the economy's greatest woes.
the low rate of inflation is one of its joys. In 1976 consumer prices
rose by more than 9 percent. but by the end of 1978 Belgium had managed to
lower that figure to 6.5 percent. That development is expected to continue
in 1979. At that rate, inflation should stop at lo percent this year,
matching the rate of inflation in west Germany and Holland.

Low consumer prices are partially due to a positive development in import
prices, which. in turn. are the result of an upward evaluation of the
Belgian franc. In order to remain in the Snake-cooperation. Belgium has
had to implement massive support measures. During the past year the
government spent 100 billion francs (about 15 billion kroner) to keep the

Belgian currency on a par with the D-mark. It succeeded. except for a two
percent reevaluation of the D-mark in October.

In spite of the fact that Belgium already enjoyed low taxes, another tax
reduction was implemented at the beginning of the year, thereby raising
the disposable income per household by 1 percent compared to 1978. Private
consumption could go up by 2 percent, providing actual wages increases by
2 percent. "ages have gone up about 2 percent in the last 2 years, but are

expected to increase by 2 percent in 1979.
COPYRIGHT: Ahlen 6 Akerlunds tryckerier, Stockholm 1979

8952
C80: 3109

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

FRENCH POLLED 0N FEELINGS OP NATIONALISH

Poll Results Encouraging
Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 10 Feb 79 p 62
[Commentary by Albert du Roy: "Frenchmen. Are You Netionslists?"]

[Text] Valery Giscard d'Estaing will devote his entire press conference
this Thursday to France's foreign policy. The Elysee says reporters must
not question him about domestic policy.

Very well then! Let's not mention it. But what does he think of the
ruling by the Court of Justice in the Hague. a ruling that Jacques Chirac
says strips France of its nuclear independence? Is he afraid--as Georges
Harchais and Michel Debre are--that Germany‘s economic power may secure

it control of Europe? Does he deplore-~along with the Christian Democratic
leaders of the UDP [Union for French Democracy]--not being able to cove
faster and farther along the road to European integration?

It is obvious. therefore. that when Giscard discusses foreign policy
this Thursday, he will quite definitely also be discussing domestic
policy. Rarely has France ever become so passionately interested in what
kind of relations it should maintain with the rest of the world. For

the past few months. France's serious economic and social troubles have
shown Frenchmen how insecure and dependent they are. And now the pros-
pect of the 10 June European election has interjected this foreign policy
theme into the heart of the national political debate.

Thus confronted with this unusual telescoping of their traditional

partisan disputes into major international issues. are Frenchmen tempted

by a nationalist reflex? Are they liable to withdraw within themselves?
They have previously yielded to this temptation in the past. In the article
that follows [immediately below]. Paul Guilbert recalls nationslism's
leftist and rightist roots. He also uncovers its new manifestations in
positions taken by Chirac's supporters. legitimist Gaullists, communists.
and the CERES [Center for Socialist Studies. Research. and Education].

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But what about the French people themselves? Do they concur with
Harchnis when he denounces the German threat? Do they agree with Chirac
when he asserts that France's interests are being sold out? whom do they
tear the moat: Russians. Americans. or the Third ﬂorid? In a nutshell.
are they afraid of the world tothe point of withdrawing within the nation?

To find out. the Institut Louis Harris-France interviewed them in a most
fascinating poll. each of whose ll questions can trigger its own debate.
Our conclusions drawn from this poll are outlined elsewhere in this issue
[fourth and final item below]. These conclusions may well prove embarras-
sing to political leaders and their staffs.

Let there be no mistake about it: in asking these particular questions.
we enter into the very heart of the most tickliah political debate. For
instance. it would be highly interesting to ascertain whether after the
10 June [European] election. Chirac will be in a good position to oppose
Giscard in the 1981 presidential election. whether Hitterrand or Rocard
will win out in the PS [Socialist Party]. and whether the Hay Communist
Party Congress will in a small measure liberalize or not the internal
operations of the PCP [french Communist Party].

But the major political issue of the moment lies elsewhere. The iron and
steel companies in Lorraine. like the viticulturists in the south of France.
must be the first ones to realize this. The issue in question involves

the redealing of the international economic cards. and particularly the

way France must play its hand. whether in isolation or allied to others.

The image Frenchmen project of themselves in our poll is rather encouraging.
Are they nationalists? They do accept less readily than generally believed
those convenient simplified explanations politicians too frequently offer
then. They are definitely proud of being French. are even flag-wavers

to some extent. but with lucidity.

Certain fears are perceptible. This apprehension is what may possibly
soon rekindle nationalist feelings.

Roots of French Nationalism
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 10 Feb 79 pp 62. 63-66
[Article by Paul Guilbert]

[Text] In a letter to L5 HDNDE. the poet Xavier Grail. a Breton and a
European. observed that "it is highly ludicrous to see so-called interna-
tionalists refer to national independence in such absolute and such fanati-
cal terms as those employed by Hichel Debre and Jacques Chirac. He can
see the outline of Deroulede's [nationalist poet-politician. 18‘6-1916]
bugle in the folds of the red flag."

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR UFllCIAL U52 UNLY

it in true that Georgen Horrhaiu Very recently accuued Giucnrd hy name

of "trying to lay the Flame on foreign .unntricq." thereby immediately
reducing Chirae'u vnrlicr denunciation of the "foreiener'n party" to
more allegory. in the Hunt. communist troops carry vengeful banners
proclaiming: "1870. I914, [9&0. enough!" and "Lorraine will not he sold
out to the his German Konrcrn [trustnl." The (GT [General Confederation
of Labor] calls on Frenchmen to remember the Resistance againot the occu-
pation.

Opposite them. Chirac Htoutly maintains the resolve expressed in his
appeal from Cochin [hospital]: 'TN will fight with all our strength

to assure that after so many oncciilces.no many trihnlationn. so many
lesnons. our generation does not unwittingly give its conucnt to our
country'a decline." With similar vigor. Michel Debre warns his fellow
citizens: "He are being thrown into a venture. short~winded. fettered.
and blindfolded."

There have already been responncn from "moderateu" in the two camps:
from the right. by Jacques Blane. necretary gonr'al of the Republican
Party. and from the left. by Edmond Maire. secretary general of the
CFDT [French Democratic Confederation of Labor]. In very similar terms.
huth denounced the resurgence or "the old demnnu of nationalisn and
xenophobia" in their closeut neighbor. Political parlance has suddenly
deteriorated into "historical" invective. an if to expresu a new spasm
of painful discord in the national consciousnesn and France's memory.

This should not surprise us. because the history of French nationalism
with its partisan ambivalencen. conflicting ideological reference.
tangled currents of opinion. is. in fact, a prciiguration of the current
contusion plaguing all political families conironted by an unprece-
dented crisis.

After Napoleon’s downfall, a strong current Ilowcd throughout the 19th
century until it emptied into the Sedan basin in l870: it was a national-
isn of expansion and revolutionary expectations. and it constituted the
"leitist" opposition to the Restoration and the July Monarchy. As the
ideological heir of :he French Revolution. this nationalism retained
swaggeriog Jacobiniao's flan-Waving chanvinisn and humanitarian oesoianisn.
Hicheict was its poet. A trace of it reappeared in the Parisian hub.

of the Commune and in Julep Ferry's colonial imperialism. The defeat of
1871 gave rise to a second strong current. naoely the nationalism of
amputated territory and revenge. Gaohetta was its spontaneous expression.
Rennn its moralist.

Some 20 years later. it was a new episode: donlangists [supporters of
General Boulangerl accused the "opportunistic" Republic of "failure" and
"betrayal.” Originating in the radical left. this nationalism oscillated
for a time and then settled down in the extreme right. It was an tntipnr-
linmentory and counterrevolutionary nationalism of withdrawal and denounced

0
FOR OFFICIAL ”St ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

both the "barbarians" and the "anti-France." Above all. it was associated
with much philoaOphising about decadence. This philosophiaing produced
such writers as Deroulede. Drumont. and Maurrns. Barres. the novelist of
the uprooted. was the poet of this nationalism.

Hhile avowed nationalism had shifted and entrenched itself within the right.

it did reappersr within the left when the communist party of Thores readopted
the Jacobin tradition in 1934 and L'HUHANITE stopped publishing its anti-
militarist column. It was an on-again off-again nationalism depending upon

the requirements of Soviet policy. But fecundated by the Resistance. it

became truly a people's nationalism in which we find again the two components

of the first strong nationalist current. its chauvinism and its interna-
tionalism. not to mention a virulence of tone comparable to the most excoriative
excommunications by extreme rightist groups.

De Gaulle. an officer philosopher born with the Boulangist movement. had
formed--by sentiment as much as by reason-~"n certain idea of France." his
"idea" represented a mixture of all the superimposed trends of French national-
ism. His language was literally the language of both Michelet and Barres.

his pantheon excluded neither the left nor the right. "There is only one.“

he said in describing the history of France as the most outstanding mentor

of the national heart and soul. Raoul Girardet. an observer of French
nationalism. distinguishes. in the common underlying vein of its various
misfortunes. a dual nostalgia of grandeur and unity: two characteristics

that correspond to the continuous decline of France's international influence
and the almost constant political instability since the Revolution. De Gaulle.
however. performed the clearly anachronistic miracle of gratifying this dual
nostalgia--exorcised as much as exalted--by personally assuming and exercising
political power. By gaining popular consent largely based on foreign policy.
defense. and institutions. he eventually dispelled. not without some difficulty.
the old haunting memories of a humiliated country and partitioned national
territory.

Some 10 years after the General's resignation. his real "orphans" appear to he
those abandoned by french nationalism. Among certain Gaullists. and among
communists too. we see revival of a provocative vocabulary typical of the
nationalism of opposition: the RPR [Rally for the Republic] is starting to
talk like the RPF [Rally of the French People] under the Fourth Republic.

and the PC? has rediscovered the language of its earlier isolation period.

Yet this simplistic observation must not mask a more subtle reshuffling of the
cards of nationalism. Now that nobody any longer believes in the German
menace which was responsible for the century-long heyday of French nationalism.
its substitutes have become denationaliced: along with the entire right. the
Gnullist troop is primarily afraid of world communism. Along with the entire
left. the communist troop is primarily afraid of multinational corporations.
where defense of our independence is concerned. each of the four major politi-
cal families considers itself the one most capable of providing such defense.

10
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under such scattered conditions. how can anyone trace the ponaiblv paths
contemporary nationaiinn might take? The RPR path is blocked by two obstacles
the legitimate government inntituted hy Ganllisn itnelf. and the inability.
inherited from the General. of actually generating strong popular motivation

[or a national grand douign. Then there is a vast following-~ninost as hetero-
geneons as the Socialist Party’s foilowing--wavcring between its joint responsi-
bilities as part of the parlianentary majority and its nostalgia of national
cohesion it emotionally identifies with the unity of ihP Rally.

Language and Soil

if a nationalist type reaction were to develop within the RPR and its

followers, it does seem that it would be expressed around two main themes:
national decline and tin collapse of collective discipline under buffeting

by the crisis. Jacques Chirac noted that "national feelings are asserting then-
aelvcs everywhere and peoples are seeking their identitv in their history.
their, language. and their soil." This is a revival of the age-old theme of

the uprooted.

The same process of "destructuralizing" or hastily "restructuring" French
society could produce a nationalist eruption on the left. Jean—Pierre
Chevenenent of the CER£3 [Center for Socialist Studies. Research. and Educa—
tion]. speaking in the "rebellious" tradition of the socialiut family that some
years ago opposed the CED [European Defense Community], admitted: "If fighting
against industrial dismantlenent and for the country's right to live is the
mark of nationalism. then yes we are nationalist." And Charles Fiternan analy-
zing. as a communist. France's decline. charged: "The strategy of the big
capitalistic interests and the Giscardinn government is preparing trance to
become a dependent. subcontracting. and underdeveloped country during the

third allleniun." what is taking shape. therefore. is a possible shift

toward a clearly Third world type of nationalisn identifying economic and
social protest with the revolt against multinational corporations. A "Mountain"
[extreme party. French Re\olution] theme steaming free an unprecedented situa-
tion in France. namely anderdevelopment.

One of the chief of state's lieutenants. Hithel d'Ornano. proclaimed: "The
expression of the only true nationalisn is internal unity in the defense of
the country's interests throughout the world."

Uniortunntely.this "reasonable" formula does not cover the real anguish expressed
throughout the ages by a nation that is much less self-confident than it
cares to admit. a nation that frequently imagines itself about to be subjugated.

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0?PICIAL USE ONLY

Poll Questions and Answers
Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 10 Feb 79 pp 66-67
[Poll conducted in France 18-24 January by Institut Louis uarris-Prance]
[Text] Question 1: Being French

If you were asked to describe yourself by two or three characteristics. which
of the following would you select as most important?*

The fact of being French 60 percent
Your age 38
Your occupation 35
YOur social class 31
Your sex 26
Your religion 13
Your race 8
Do not know 7

*Total exceeds 100 percent because of multiple answers.

The inpnrtnnce of a person's sex was particularly pronounced aaong women:

32 percent versus 15 percent for men. Among 18-24 year olds. age (53 percent)
prevailed our nationality (46 percent). Among 25-36 year olds, occupation
(67 percent) was nearly as important as nationality (68 percent). Occupation
was also highly important to farmers (64 percent). The fact of being French
was less important to senior executives and the liberal professions (68 per-
cent) and also to middle-level supervisory personnel and white-collar workers
(65 percent) than to other persons polled. Political affiliation had little
influence: communists did consider social class especially important: A7
percent versus 68 percent for nationality. Nationality was highly valued

by UDF (71 percent) and RPR (79 percent) megbers.

Question 2: what is France?

which of the following terms seem to best characterize France in your opinion?*

Liberty 61 percent
Tolerance 33
Generosity 29
Chauviniam 26
Equality l7
Pretentiousnesa 13
Grandeur l?
Improvisation \ ii
Sense of proportion 5
Pettiness 5
Futility A
Imperialism a
Do not know 5

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

*The total cxceedn 100 percent because of multiple answers. The total of the
six qualities was 157 percent. of the six defects 61 percent.

Liberty was selected by only 46 percent of the 18-26 year olds and 38 percent
of the communists. Tolerance was a characteristic for only 21 percent of the
18-26 year olds and 24 percent of the 25-36 year olds. and for only 26 percent
of the senior executives and 25 percent of the communists. Liberty (80 per-
cent) tolerance (£1 percent). and generosity («a percent) were particularly
mentioned by UDF members. chunvlnism was admitted primarily by the young--

35 percent among the lB-Zb year olds and 31 percent among the 25~3£ year
olds--nnd by senior executives (Ab percent) and middle-level supervisory
personnel (33 percent). Improvisation was an essential characteristic for

21 percent of management personnel and the liberal professions.

Question 3: Threats to France

Some persons claim France is threatened. In your opinion. by whom or by
what is France mainly threatened?*

Communism 20 percent
Third World population growth 19
Arabs 17
Multinational corporations 16
Russians 15
Chinese 16
Regional separatism 10
Supranationnl Europe 7
Americans a
Germans 3
Socialism 2
Jews 2
Do not know 27

*Total exceeds 100 percent because of multiple answers.

Party affiliation was the determining factor: Communism (60 percent) and the
Arabs (27 percent) are especially feared by RPR members: communism (35 percent)
and the Russians (25 percent) by UDF members. Socialists were close to the
generalavcrage but particularly feared the threat posed by multinational corpora-
tions (21 percent) and had less misgivings about communism (13 percent). For

the communists. the relative order of the threats was inverted: multinational
corporations (32 percent). supranational Europe (21 percent), the Americans

(16 percent), and the Arabs (16 percent). It should he noted that the threat

of the multinational corporations was stressed by senior executives (19

percent) and middle-level supervisory personnel (22 percent). and that the

Arab threat was particularly felt by farmers (23 percent) and blue-collar workers
(21 percent)

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

Question lo: France's Friends

what country or countries do you consider France's best friend (s) 7*

Vest Germany 33 percent
United States 22
Belgium 20
Great Britain 16
Italy 8
A county of Black Africa 8
Spain 7
Luxembourg 7
The Netherlands 6
Switzerland 5
Other countries including China (3
percent) and USSR (2 percent) 27
Do not know 37

*Total exceeds 100 percent because of multiple answers.

Hest Germany was less esteemed by women (27 percent), the elderly (27 per-
cent). nnd communists (19 percent) than by others. The United States was
particularly esteemed by senior executives and the liberal professions (29
percent) and by RPR members (30 percent). It was not well considered by
communists (16 percent), although only 6 percent of the latter indicated
the USSR and 5 percent China. The 18-24 year olds (23 percent) and RPR
members (25 percent) more often cited Great Britain than did the others.

Question 5: National Symbols
Do you think the national symbols--La Harseilleis. the 15th of July. and the

tricolor flag—-are somewhat old-fashioned, or on the contrary. are they
still as important as in the past?

As important as in the past 56 percent
Are somewhat old-fashioned 39
Do not know 5

The 18-24 year olds (67 percent) and the socialists (68 percent) were those
least attached to these symbols.

Question 6: France's Status

A. Do you believe that at the present time and from the standpoint of its
technical achievements

France holds a respectably average position? 76 percent
France is one of the world's leading countries? 12
France lags far behind? 10
Do not know a
15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

B. From a cultural standpoint. would you any that at the present time

France holds a respectabiy average position? 65 percent
France is one of the world's leading countries? 22
France lags far behind? 8
Do not know 5

Question 7: France's Frestige

"hat do you think of the view that France's prestige in the world has been
steadily declining for a certain number of years?

I totally agree with that view ll)

1 somewhat agree with that view 33) 6‘ percent
I totally disagree with that view 32) 56
I would rather tend to disagree )6) percent

Have no opinion 10 percent

Among those “totally“ or "somewhat" agreeing that France is declining:
18~24 year olds (52 percent). blue-collar workers (51 percent). communists
(62 percent). and socialists (56 percent). Among those denying any such
decline: persons over 65 (52 percent). senior executives (51 percent).
UDF members (69 percent) and RPR members (57 percent).

Questions : Major Future Tasks

in your opinion. which one of the following major tasks should future generations
of French youth apply themselves to on a priority basis?

Transforming relations between men and nations 32 percent
Helping underdeveloped countries 19
Building Europe 12
Accelerating scientific and technical progress 10
Building socialism 9
Expanding the liberal society 8
Do not know 10

Communists favored the building of socialism (31 percent) over "transformation
of relations" (23 percent). oddly enough. it was among RPR members that the
building of Europe received its best score (25 percent).

Question 9: Atomic weapons
In your opinion, must [France's] atomic weapons be used solely to defend French

national territory. or must France use them also to defend its allies in the
event of aggression against their territories?

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Defend French national territory 65 percent
Be used also to defend territories of its

allies in the event of aggression 26 percent
Do not know 29 percent

Slightly more communists (68 percent) and RPR meabers (52 percent) than the
others would limit employment of atomic weapons to defense of the national
territory.

Question 10: Who Defends France's National Independence?

A. Which of the following political parties do you consider aost devoted
to defending France's national independence?*

Communist Party (PCP) 18 percent
Socialist Party (PS) 31
Union [or French Democracy (00?) 23
Rally for the Republic (RPR) 31
Do not know 27

'Totsl exceeds 100 percent because of multiple answers.

Communists massively chose the PCP (74 percent). socialists the PS (62
percent). and RPR members the RPR (75 percent). Only the Giscardians
split their vote between the UDF (55 percent) and the RPR (41 percent).
The PCF obtained its best "independence rating" among the 18-26 year

olds (26 percent). The PS headed the list among middle-level supervisory
personnel (36 percent) and blue-collar workers (32 percent). The RPR
topped the list among senior executives (50 percent» far-era (35 percent).
and small shopkeepers (35 percent).

3. Which of the following social classes do you consider most devoted
to defending France's national independence at any cost?*

Ruling class (”Grande bourgeoisie") 17 percent
Working class 37
Middle class 38
Rural class ("Peasantry") 25
Do not know 18

*Total exceeds 100 percent because of multiple answers.

Each social-occupational category awarded itself the "pals of independence":
farmers (43 percent) to the rural class; small shopkeepers and crafts-en (45
percent). middle-level supervisory personnel and white-collar workers (37
percent) to the middle class; and blue-collar workers (53 percent) to the
working class. Sole exceptiOn: senior executives and the liberal profes-
sions were 40 percent for the middle class, 34 percent for the rural class.
and only 27 percent for the ruling class. a class to which they probably
feel they do not belong.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Political corollary of the above: communists (65 percent) and socialists
(42 percent) designated the working class; UDF (50 percent) and RPR melbers
(54 percent) chose the middle class. More PS members (20 percent) than UDP
members (19 percent) chose the ruling class.

Question 11: Five Opinions

here are a few opinions we have heard expressed. For each one of then. can
you tell us whether you rather agree or rather disagree?

Rather Rather be not
agree disagree know
2 X Z
In the world. there will always be superior
notions and subordinate nations, and in the
interest of all. the superior nations are
the ones who should direct world affairs. 15 56 ll

Hhat does France's political power matter:

its real strength lies in the fact that it has

made possible the works of great writers.

scientists. scholars. and artists. and continues

to do so. 63 21 16

France is overrun with undesirable foreigners
it in no way needs. It would be better to
send then back home. 50 38 12

The 50-66 year olds (59 percent). the over-6S (56 percent), the inactive and
retired (57 percent). blue-collar workers (56 percent). RPR members (59
percent). and socialists (56 percent) were those who "agreed" the seat.

The 25-36 year oldn (49 percent). senior executives (62 percent), white-
collar workers and middle-level supervisory personnel (50 percent). and

the conmunista (51 percent) were those who "agreed" the least.

A French blue-collar worker resembles a blue-
collsr worker in another country more than
n French employer 59 21 20

One of France's great assets is the French
language. It is a language of culture
that is spoken in vast regions of the world 67 20 13

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Poll Conclusions

Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 10 Feb 79 pp 67-68

[Article by Albert du Roy: "A Poll That Runs Counter to the Political Parties"]

[Text] Frenchmen--men or women. young or old, cabinet ministers or street
sweepers-are conscious above all of being French. The national col-unity

is their primary family, the principal term in their description of them-
selves (see Question 1).

This first piece of information obtained from the poll conducted for
L'EXPRESS between 18 and 2‘ January by the Institut Louis Harris-France
among a sample of 1.000 persons. is less commonplace than it appears to

be. Analysis of the "breakdown" of answers by sex. age. etc. reveals four
basic facts:

a. Twice as many women as men described themselves by their sex. This is
evidently the result of the women's liberation movement.

h. Twice as many 18-26 year olds than all other age groups cited their
age. This is a specific characteristic of youth.

c. Some 66 percent of the fsrmers--nearly double the aversge--described them-
selves by their occupation. Hhat vocational activity conditions a person's
life more than the rural occupations?

d. Many more communists than others cited social class, ar0und which all
communist militant activity is organized.

In other words, the persons polled chose as characteristic of themselves

that particular domain in which they "invest" the most. Their energy, their
faith, their life. Consequently, when they select "the fact of being French"
as the foremost of these characteristics. such selection is not insignificant
at a time when a major debate on such theses as nation, independence, and
solidarity is getting underway.

This recognition of nationality is, moreover. quite understandable in that
the nation is a wonderful country (see Question 2). This second question has
to do with France's characteristics: six qualities and six defects, all
carefully mixed. Frenchmen proudly chose the positive qualities: France

is a land of liberty. tolerance. generosity, equality. etc. A person has

to be a senior executive, and hence speak form experience, to note a certain
tendency to improvise. A person has to be young. and think he can do any-
thing he likes. to accuse France of pettiness. A person has to be a com-
munist to a cuse France of imperialism and fail to recognize that liberty is
France's distinguishing characteristic.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After having designated the qualities three times more often than the defects.
it was difficult not to acknowledge a certain degree of chauvinisml

Yet Frenchmen are less jingoistic than some would have us believe. Host

of them do not consider their country one of the world leaders in either
technical or cultural achievements. but believe that it is respectably
middling (see Question 6). The majority even admitted a decline in France's
prestige (see Question 7). This admission was. however. the subject of politi-
cally-oriented disagreement: RPR and 00? members denied any such decline.

"Pnrngons" and "Exploiters"

Party affiliations also influenced assessment of the threats to France
(see Question 3). These affiliations and their influence were. in contrast.
curiously confused when it came to designating France's friends (see Question 6).

In designating the threats, communists replied exactly as expected of them.
Twice as many communists as the average cited the multinational corpora-
tions; three times as many a supranational Europe and four times as many

the Americans. One-third less communists than the average cited the Russians
and, naturally. one-tenth less cited communism.

0n the other hand. when asked to name France's friends. the communists

were much more confused. Even though they mentioned Germany and the United
States less frequently than other persons polled. they also considered

these two countries as France's best friends. Even though the USSR. China.
and East European countries scored less poorly among the communists. these
countries were only slightly mentioned. Combined. they received less points
than Germany alone.

Now in all polls. the communists are those who less frequently refuse to answer
the questions: their ideology almost always furnishes them "pat and ready-

made answers." Yet 65 percent of them refused to answer this question. Do

we need any further proof that communists can no longer very easily distin-
guish between the "good" and the "bad" countries. between the "paragona

and the "cxploiters?"

in designating threats or friends. RPR members. unlike the communists. had
no hesitations. They had the least number of “do not know's“ on these two
questions. This does not mean that clarity reigns among RPR members. A
supranational Europe was deemed a threat by only 9 percent of Chirac's sup-
porters. And they were the most numerous of all to designate Germany. Great
Britain. and the United States as friends. Yet these are the three countries
with whom Gaullists have most often been--and still are--at loggerheads.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another proof of the gap between the RPR's official positions and its
potential electorate is that the latter most frequently selected "building
Burope"-25 percent compared with the average 12 percent--as one of the major
tasks for coming generations (see Question 8).

The PS and UDF are plagued with less contradictions than the PCP and RPR.

In designating threats andfrienda PS members were highly consistent with

the national average; as they were. in fact for almost all their answers

to the poll. As for U0? members. they were nearly obsessed by the danger

of communism--35 percent versus an average of 20 percent--and by the Russians--
25 percent versus 15 percent-~but in no way sensitive to the threat posed by
lultinational corporations: 6 percent versus an average 16 percent. No
greater consistency can be imagined between the electorate and the party

line.

Inconsistencies and Ambiguity

Blectorally speaking. Question 10. "who defends France's national independence?"
contains a few lessons which the parties can draw some benefit.

The RPR profited by the "hardening" of Chirac's position on Europe. But the
P8 was in no way hurt by its pro-European image. Though the two parties

have conflicting positions. both were considered the prime defenders of inde-
pendence.

0n the other hand, the PCP. with the bottom rating. profited by neither its
efforts to dissociate itself from the Soviet Union--in the view of many

people. it is still the real "foreigner's party"--nor its inflammatory statements
against a supranational Europe.

The UDP's situation is more difficult to assess: while each person in the

other political families designated his own party as the best defender of
independence. UDF members awarded their independence rating nearly as much to
the RPR as to the UDF. Perhaps because in that particular electorate. the term
"national independence" is ambiguous, signifying patriotic virtue and political
necessity. but also a symbol of a certain exasperating addiction to the past.
UDP members who believe in the term's positive meaning probably designated the
UDP, while those who define it by its negative value no doubt preferred to
leave the monopoly of that value to the RPR.

Agitation, inconsistencies. ambiguity: from now until 10 June. political
leaders. no matter who they are. will find the issue of national indepen-
dence a most ticklish one to handle.

COPYRIGHT: 1979. s. A. Groupe Express

8051
C80: 3100

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

CFDT'S HAIRB INTERVIEHED 0N INDUSTRIAL STRIPE
Paris LE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR in French 19 Feb 79 pp 28-30

[Interview with Edmond Maire. head of the French Democratic Confederation of
Labor (CFDT). by Claude-Francois Jullien and Lucien Rioux; date and place
not given]

[Text] The entire French iron and steel industry complied
on Friday 16 February with the strike call issued by the
five major metallurgical labor federations. This massive,
powerful, and determined strike to save the regions of the
North and Lorraine heralds a revolt. A revolt that is
spreading and which the President of the Republic. at his
press conference last Thursday, thought it advisable to say
he "understood.“ There is labor unrest in the shipyards of
the Loire Atlantique region and Harseille. The automobile
industry in La Rochelle is also affected. Hanufrance is
desperately struggling to survive. Firemen are demonstrat-
ing throughout France and clashing with police. The time
has come for labor unions to readjust to current conditions.
Edmond Maire explains why in the following interview

given LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR.

[Question] A few weeks ago. you were engaged in a bitter controversy with the
French Communist Party and the CGT [General Confederation of Labor]. Today.
however, the CFDT and Georges Seguy's confederation [CGT] are once again
conducting combined operations.

[Answer] We carried on that controversy because it was necessary. Labor
union action was in danger of going awry. We had to react quickly and
vigorously against the upsurge of nationalism, against the exploitation of
an old undercurrent of anti~cerman feeling that still subaists. particularly
in Lorraine. We were right in doing what we did. Because now in the COT--
and indeed in the PCP too--members are changing their attitude, reverting

to a saner view of labor union action. and refusing to set French workers

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

against German workers. But in the background there is still a de facto
conjunction between the PCP and the RPR [Rally for the Republic] in their
respective efforts to oppose Giscard's policy and weaken the PS [Socialist
Party]. and in their refusal to give their respective strategies a European
dimension.

[Question] Why?

[Answer] It's obvious that they consider it more profitable. electorally
speaking. to indulge national feelings. And further-ore. the co-unists
have a very restrictive conception of the workers Europe. Their total
rejection of the Social Desocrats as potential allies scene that in the
connunist view the workers Europe includes only the co-sunists in Great
Britain. west Germany. and the Benelux countries. in addition to French
and ltalisn consunists. in other words. not very nsny people.

[Question] Could this objective coalition between the PCP and RPR develop
to such a point as to provoke a serious governscntal crisis?

[Answer] I will not make any prognoses. but I cannot see what beneficial
effect a crisis triggered by such a coalition could possibly produce. As
much as we favor a leftist alternative. we are still opposed to any type of
"coalition of the noes" that has no principles. no prospects.

[Question] Doesn't it seem strange to you for the PCP to prefer an alliance
with Cirae than with Berlinguer and Carrillo?

[Answer] When the PCP finally decided not to adopt the principles of Euro-
connunisu. it did so probably because it felt that would have placed its
party in a position of weakness relative to the PS from which it would not
be sufficiently distinct. "hat the cos-unists are now trying to do is
regain the advantage by combating their socialist rivals on altogether
different grounds.

[Question] The PC? attacked you quite harshly. Did you not feel you were
all alone?

[Answer] You are no doubt referring to the silence of the PS. There's no
denying the PS did not sense as much as wt did the danger of nationalisl in
business and industrial enterprises. Besides. the nearness of the European
elections prompts it to take a cautious attitude. At any rate. the CFDT
realizes that when it is a matter of taking issue. in labor circles, with
certain PCF views. it is the only organization capable of doing this.

[Question] You are not surprised. therefore. by the PS leadership's concur-
rence in the PCF's positions, notably as concerns the iron and steel
industry?

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I am not fully familiar with the positions expressed by Francois
Mitterrand on thin nubject. But generally speaking. there are two opposing
ponitiunu.

One pooition holds that consumption should keep pace with production. France
can produce l3 million tons of steel but consume only 23 million tons: what
can he done to increase consumption and absorb this lO-uiliion ton aurpluo?
An if production and consumption were ends in themoeIVes.

The other position. ours. holds that production should keep pace with needs.
Hence we say: What are the real needs in France? What must be done to
satisfy these needs? Thla means we reject the government's argument whereby
steel production must be reduced as much as possible. to such an extent that
it would be quite insufficient in the event of economic recovery. In our
opinion. enough production must he maintained in France to permit economic
development and ensure our country's self~snrflcieucy in this respect. But
neither do we ignore the changing international market and the establishment
of steel production complexes in developing count-lee. If. after thorough
consultation between labor unions and the government, it is acknowledged that
note is indeed overproduction. facilities must first be converted to production
of those grades of steel of which we have a shortage. and then steel-consum-
ing industries must be established in those sectors where national production
is inadequate and where the needs of developing countries are enormous:
machine tools and durable goods. This ought to be enough to safeguard jobs
and save the threatened regions. [f such action were to still prove inade-
quate. then it would he necessary to inntall other replacement activities.
create other industrial jobs. and also establish services to carry out the
personnel transfers that would appear to be inevitable.

[Question] Are you not in a precarious position when. in Lorraine. you engage
in joint actions with the COT who rejects the very approach you have just
described as yours?

[Answer] we have two basic points in common: refusal to allow steelworkers
to become jobless and the desire to reduce the workweek. Where we differ is
in our conceptions of how the French society should develop. The CFDT holds
that there has to he a strong French steel industry. But for us. progress
is not automatically identified with the number of additional kilograms of
steel consumed per capita.

[Question] Violence is beginning to appear in labor's militant activities.
Doesn't this worry you? Are you not afraid that labor unions may not be
able to keep their rank and file in line?

[Answer] "hat is primarily appearing in a veritable revival of workers
combativity. we had been expecting this for a long time. The hope of an
election victory in Harch 1978 and then the apathy in the wake of the left'a
defeat checked that revival. Anger is mounting and becoming a mass

2]
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

phenomenon. Barre and Ceyrac are now reaping what they have sown. Our
problem is to get beyond the stage of manifest massive refusal and open a
way out of the strife, compel the government to back down on the length of

the workweek and the creation of jobs.

[Question] Aren't you being somewhat autocritical? Even before the left's
election defeat. you advocated a "recentering" of the CPDT. in other words.
a return to negotiations. But your negotiations have fizzled out.

[Answer] That's true. National negotiations hlVe produced litrie result on
the issue of low wages and none thus far on length of the workweek or
unemployment benefits. Last year. we prematurely had faith in our expanded
action. We had also believed that employers would realize it was in their
medium-term interest to raise the lower wages--if only to give consumer
industries a boost--and reduce the workweek to avoid outbursts of despair.
Now it is clear that by their strategy of ruthless liberalism. employers and
the Giscard-Bsrre government actually acted as ultraconservatives.

This has not made us slter our course; howeVer. we are keeping the same goals.
And if there is mounting pressure to obtain negotiations. it is perhaps
because our action policy has been able to avoid futile and useless days of

protest.

[Question] But in that case, actually what do you mean by the word "reeenter-
ins?"

[Answer] It means shifting from a political approach to a labor union approach.
It means seeking to obtain results through mass action. results not dependent
on a new political majority's entry into the government. It means no longer
relying on a coalition of parties to promote change but making militant social
and labor action the prime mover of this change. For that matter. a few

months later. the CGT--at its Grenoble congress--partially adopted our
approach. Georges Seguy admitted that his union's approach had been too
abstract, too general. To us that translates into "too political."

[Question] Do you really believe in this change by the COT in Grenoble?
Judging from some of your public statements. we could doubt it.

[Answer] The COT leadership said some courageous things in Grenoble. It is
true. however. that Georges Seguy's statements were not really new. He had
previously made them at the COT metallurgical workers congress in 1971.

Back then. he said: "Re have to dcmocratize. create a dynamic for the
debate." In the years that followed. nothing was done to implement that
statement. Consequently we had every reason to be suspicious and could
have asserted that Grenoble (b no way changed the CGT's real nature. Upon
reflection and after discussion. we took the opposite gamble.

Let it be thoroughly understood: we believe the order for a successful in-
deptth change in the COT are slim. We know how strong the communists are in

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that union. but there in nine a debate among lhone cumuunintu. Ever nince
the Grenoble congress. CCT member» are no longer speaking with but one voice.
tht we do fear In that this debate will end and coanunint CGT aenhern will
again be taken In hand bv their party. If the PCP withd‘nws within ltoelf.
goes It alone to reenpture itw voter support and weaken the PS. and hence
revert to sectarianisn, well then It will be difficult for the CUT to
innlement the policy linen It adopted in Grenoble.

lQuentIonl 1be CCT'x "number one man" and "number two nan"--Seguy and Krasncki.
to none nnoos--have different views. Eren though Seguy In a member of the
PCF'a political bureau. he does appear to be the man who favors a more

liberal and open approach.

[Annwerl Frankly I don't know a thine about the political bureau's internal
debaten. nor ahout those within the CCT's coufedernl bureau.

[Quention] Neverthelens you do at times make distinctions between members oi
the CGT'n confederui bureau. For instance. In June IOIﬂ. after Jenn-Louis
Hoynot. CGT secretary, had releaoed a statement that won almoat an auto-
crlticisn of bin union'n action. you told the COT delegation: "If you

concur In Moynot'n statement, then we can talk."

[Answer] I did not say it in such u provocativo way. what i did say In effect
was: "we have been wondering about certain things. So have you. and what
Moynot has lust written In proof of this. his thonahts are in line with what
we are trying to do."

[Question] when you reluctantlv engage in united action. are you not
strengthening the position of CGT'n "hardlioers?"

[Answer' By rejecting "catch-all" days of protoet, we are not thereby
refusing to engage in united action. That Is a falce interpretation.
Totally false. Our organivatiuna on all sides are recommending united
action.

But we do not want this unity to uupptrna the debate. The fundamental prob-
lem facing our two organizations In the inadequacy of the labor movement's
reuponses. an! In a broader noose. the innJoquncy of the renponse of the
working clauses to the Ctlwiu. He believe we do have some ways and means

of responding: adoption of a new type of development In which workers and
groups acquire greater autonomy enabling them to he responuihle for necessary
chanson: direct labor movement involVement in such new social conflicts as
the feminist movement.tho ocohuicai movement, the "antiproductionist"
movement. etc. Such In our future course of action.

It is not always easy to translate this into [wins of lI-ediate protest or
or responae to a specific Industrial policy. if the CGT is pondering the
same Issues. if it is beginning to realize that a fancy "cannon program" is
not sufficient to solve the deep-rooted problems of French society. well

in? “VFICIAL USE ONL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

then we shall be able to move forward together. This is why we advocate
united action. Not solely for tactical reasons. Because we do not want

any recurrence of the March 1978 defeat. An election defeat. to be sure.
but above all the defeat of a strategy of change. having said this. I am
not sure the COT has taken the same unitary approach we have. Some of its
membern may possibly still think a renovated CGT. a COT for all. is the best
solution.

[Question] The journalist Rene Andrieu recently accused the CFDT of being
the Socialist Party's "messenger boy." Admittedly you objected sharply to
this. but exactly what are your relations with the var

[Answer] Very infrequent. There has been no meeting between the governing
bodies ("bureaus") of the CFDT and PS for over a year. Nor with other parties
for that matter. On the other hand, there are normal and frequent contacts
during the parliamentary debates on issues of current interest.

But let's talk about the Socialist Party. when labor union comrades speak
derisively about the Socialist Party's current debate--they call them
personality problems. internal problems-~i disagree with them. i find this
unfair. We need political parties to help us transform society. But we do
say these parties need to change. how could they possibly do this without
debates? The French Communist Party's discuiaion with its intellectuals.
the Socialist Party's internal discussion are all positiVe develop-eats. He
do not find fault with such discussions.

The fact remains. however. that these debates do seem quite far-fetched and
seem designed to select political leaders and key officials for a future
government more than to define an action policy that attempts to provide
solutions to the problems of everyday life here and now.

[Question] Your understanding with Jacques Chereque. secretary general of
the CFDT's Metallurgical Workers Federation-~a man currently denounced as
a rightist--hns made you the target of cross fire from the rot and certain
wings of the PS.

[Answer] There are. in France, young fellowson the left or extreme left who
blame the CFDT for ovarything. And with good reason. Just imagine. if in
l972,mass moVemeats are able to get Barre to back down and coapel employers
to really negotiate. these young lads will no longer have a part to play.
They claim everything is accomplished through politics. through elections

or the politiro-intellectual avant-garde. in other words through them. And
the labor movement. militant mass actions would prove to them that the
opposite is true. isn't that intolerable?

[Question] Could we talk a bit about Europe? It too is in the future.

[Answer] Let me tell you how i believe Europe influences our labor union
action policy.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us start with the facts and recent economic history: Europe is so
socially and economically intertwined that there can he no lasting great
disparity between the wage situation in one given country and other
neighboring countries. even if Europe protects itself and becomes an
entity capable of autonomous action, which is our course of action. If

one single country achieVes a series of massive social advancements without
having these improvements exert an influence on neighboring countries. that
one country would evidently become less competitive. its exports are going
to decline. its imports increase. What is the answer to this problem? For
the communists. the answer is simple: competitiveness in an employer's
concept. The communists hide behind the denial of certain current factors
of competitiveneas--explnltation of workers. submission to an international
distribution of labor controlled by the dominant capitalist forces--to
reject the necessity of being competitiVe. They want to ignore the fact
that even when we have established workers control of labor. our country
will have to be able to export to the same extent it imports if it does not
wish to become lunlated and dependent.

in their post-September l977 thinking. communists held that if we find
ourselves faced with foreign competition, with competitiveness. we protect
ourselves against this by raising tariff walls. This siaplistic reasoning
finesses on the fact that such protective measures inevitably bring on
retaliatory measures. The outraee is the cloning of borders. But as we
export 40 percent of our industrial production. halting this flow of trade
would be disastrous. Refusal to accept competitiveness means exacerbation
of our unemployment.

We do not in any way draw from these established facts the name conclusion
Bergeron drew from them in a recent interview given LE NOUVBL OBSERVATBUR.
As i understand it, he said: the 33-hour workweek can be obtained in Europe
only all together or not at all. Such reasoning leads to immobillsm. in
contrast. German steel workers have showed us the way. They began by
fighting for the 35-hour week in one specific sector. They were not
successful but did obtain some partial results. And their example is
enriching. Our goal is to create a real community of militant action. to
have any social advance made in one country produce a sort of "domino" effect
in neighboring countries. and to combine national action: and European
actions. national solutions and European solutions.

This then is our approach on Europe. it is also why we support the enlarge-
ment of Europe. Present-day barriers make it more difficult to incorporate
Greek. Portuguese, and Spanish workers in this collective militant action.

[Questionl The CGT apparently does not fully agree with tbe PCP on this
point. on the enlargement if Europe.

[Answer] Nor does it disagree. It has a more circumspect position. in this
kind of situation. the CGT's attempt to maintain a certain degree of

77
rOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

independence--or rather its desire to show that it listens to its minority-
prompts it to do nothing instead of asking an effort to reconcile the
different currents of opinion within its organisation.

[Question] And yet you seen reluctant to say the PCP has in fact again
taken the COT in hand...

[Answer] You would like to have me tell you that, wouldn't you? Some

CFDT members exposed to the negative attitudes or attacks of a few OCT
members may perhaps get to the point of saying: it's all over. the Grenoble
congress has vanished. We cannot say that today. even though it definitely
does seem that the small patch of blue sky will have difficulty expanding.
we will do our utmost to help it expend as much as possible. There have
been some difficulties. And there will be more. He must overcome them.

we lust act in such a way that a dynasic of resurgence can develop. This

is eore important than our small routine labor union problems. Furthermore.
we would not be in the CFDT if we allowed our organizational interests to
take precedence over the interest of the workers move-ent. If we were to
act differently. we would have to change union!

COPYRIGHT: 1979, L3 NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR

804i
cso: 3100

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

BRlEFS

SUPER L‘l‘ENDARD WNSTRUC‘l'lONnAt present. 1') Super Htendard aircraft are
[Inlshed or in the final stages of construction at the Toulouse plant at
the Dassault company; 5 others have been delivered to Flotilla ill’ at
Isrndivislnu whose pilots have flown them more than 500 hours. Flotllln
HF should receive its 12 Super iitendard aircraft by the end of February
after which lv‘lotllias llal' at Landivisiau and UP at liyeres are to waive
theirs in September 1979 and July 1980 respectiVely. [Text] [Paris

LE MONITl-ZUR ill-2 L'AERONAUTIQUE In French .‘iur 79 p 7]

MIRAGE 2000 Th5TS--The two prototypes oi the Mirage 2000 have now ilown
a total of more than 130 hours and additional flight tests are still
being carried out normally. Flights using MOO-liter nuxiliary tanks
were recently carried out; also. low-speed level (light has been
attempted. with flights of 85 and 100 knots mode. AbOVe 20.000 feet.
speeds in excess of Mach 2 have been achieved. with own an altitude of
50.000 ieet havinv. heen exceeded. According to llnssnuit. no motor
problems have been experienced with the H-SJ motor. [Textl IParis

Lli HOﬁlTii'Jll Dl'. l.'-\l;R0.\'o\UTIQUE in French Na! 7‘) p II

EULICI-LUNLON HARElliiG-d'l-t- p‘.i:t:<--.:..:.:.s (the ln'lep-ndeut l-‘ederatiuu [3r
nut-:9; :iu-i the National. Uuim. Lo" E’oiieﬂ) have warned the minister oi‘
the interior that "Jur men will ref-45¢ to put down any demustmtion
()I'S'lﬂizcd t-y Lne mnployci." [foxy :lhrin PARIS MATCH In ﬁeneh 9 air 79

"JO: )i'Jt-

L?"

Fun HFFICIAI. "SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

BASQUE OOWPRY SUFFERS $15va MIDNIC CRISIS
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 11 Feb 79 PP 20-23

[Text] A group of experts called together by the Basque General
Council met on 3 and 4 February in Bilbao to study the relationship
between terrorism and the economic situation.

Ronnn Rubial, the chairman of the Basque General Council, was quite
straightforVanl at the opening session of the meetings of intellectuals
who took a look at the problem of violence 1 week before: “The situation

is serious: employment figures are alarming, and most companies are
on the brink of collapse."

Unemployment, which is above the national average, and emigration have
indeed made their presence felt in the Basque Country, which for natty

yearn took in the manpower from other regions that was searching for
"the promised land."

Business bankruptcies, investor fears, capital depletion, the fell of

major industries and even a drop in consumption todw characterize a
zone that is in danger of becoming one of the country's most depressed
regions, whereas it is now one of the most developed.

A high-level director or a Basque savings bank graphically summed up
the situation for this magazines "If this were a company, we would have
already had to suspend payments...“ the very least.”

Sales Way Down

Luis Olarra, the president of the Confederation of Basque Businessmen,
asserts that "there's no money at all around here wmcre." Agreeing
with him, Anton de Hadsrisss, a lstionalist and the director general of

Petronor, says: ”The period from January to December 1978 was historically
the most pessimistic in the last 10 years."

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

You need only to take to the streets to check this out; while visiting
comercisl establishments in a number of major Basque cities, this
magazine heard dozens of pessimistic accounts.

For example, Juana Maria Beheverria, tho owner of a fabric shop in San
Sebastian, counted: "I sell less every day. I don't see a single
customer for days sometimes. People are becoming withdraw, not only,
I think, because of the economic crisis, but also because the climate
is not right for Ming things."

Ii'his is more or less the View of Corks Arazu, who sells household
appliances in the outskirts of Bilbao; with a glass of wine in hand, he
told CAMBIO 16: "I'm seriously thinking about moving somewhere else in
Spain, and I'm Basque through and through, but the sales opportunities
around here are plus-sting. In w line, where installment buying
predominates, no one dares sign a payment note when they don't lmow
what's going to happen next year. “hat on I saying, next year, next
month!"

The Tommy Gun Economy

The Basque economic crisis does not stem solely from the political
situation prompted by m [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group]
terrorist actions, but no one doubts that terrorism is a decisive factor.
"Ana above all," an expert we. "at present it is preventing any sort
of plan, any possibility of a recovery."

Carlos Solchaga an economic expert of the Socialist Party of the Basque
country (Psos Spanish Socialist workers Party_7), feels that a solution
to the crisis "depends on a solution to the problem of terrorism.
Resolving the latter is not enough, but it is, of course, essential.“

The Spanish Conunist Party (PCS) feels likewise, stating in an
extensively studied economic recovery program for the Basque Country
that an essential condition for implementing it is "the pacifioation
of the country."

The reasons for the breakdown of the Basque Country are clear to the
experts consulted by this magazine: in the first place, they cite the
disappearance, along with the dictatorship, of the conditions that
favored the industrial development of the Basque Country to a greater
extent than other regions of Spain, tariff and credit facilities, etc
that were possible thanks to the agreement between the Basque oligarchy
and the Franco administration. It has been the Basque oligarchs who
have begun the process of withdrawing capital from the zone, which used
to be preferred by them.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly, there is the industrial structure of the Basque economy,

which is basically designed to meet investment demands and to manufacture
raw materials need in investment, which has been one of the economic
areas hardest hit by the upshot of the general crisis.

In addition, the international crisis has affected the iron and steel
and shipbuilding sectors, which are major pillars of the Basque economy.

EPA in cement!

The most important factor at present, however, which is also preventing
an economic comeback for the Basque Country, is doubtless the political
instability triggered by terrorist activities.

The revolutionary tax, the kidnaping of or threats against businessmen

and the sun: involvement in a number of labor ooni‘licts, slow with

its armed activities, have deepened the economic crisis and are preventing
the establishment of the groundwork needed for a recovery.

"Ve're scared," several businessmen told CAMBIO 16, "we're scared, and
that's the worst thing that can happen in economic activity.”

Out of fear, no one dares invest in the Basque Country today, and those
who can and want to invest select other, calmer regions. According to
information gathered by this magazine, in recent months a mnber of
Basque businessmen who have had the chance to expand their industries or
to invest have chosen regions outside the Basque Country to do so.

Naturally, they have undertaken such operations with the utmst discretion,
because, in the words of one of them, “the arm of the EPA is very long."
Bren businessmen tied to Nationalist sectors and who are, therefore,
interested in their region's economic recovery, have chosen to set up

shop elsewhere befause it is impossible for them to secure a minimum
guarantee of security in their own region.

While these developments were taking place, CAHBIO 16's correspondent

in Venezuela, Ted Cordovs, was monitoring the activities there of

the president or the Basque Nationalist Party (PIN), Carlos Garaiooechee,
and former deputy Xabier Arssllus, and reported that over the last 3
years over 1 billion pcsetas oi‘ Basque capital has flowed into Venezuela.

Money on a Round Trip

The economic sectors in which this investment winds up are mainly
metallurgy, construction and the graphic arts, when, according to
Gareicoechea, "in the last 3 years at least 300 Basque industries" have
been set up.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Ihe PIN president does not think, however, that this capital drain is
due mainly to uncertainty or to the climate of violence; "rather, there
has been a shift to other geographic areas. There are incentives in
other countries, althoudt, of course, we should not rule out the
phenomenon of violence.”

In any case, the flight of Basque capital to the other side of the
Atlantic is partly a round trip: the capital that leaves the Basque
Country in fear of violence and extortion returns in the form of
contributions to the PIN after picking up renewed strength in the
Caribbean.

The Downfall Begins

This is one of the main objectives of the trip by the laticnaliet
leaders on the eve of the election campaign, althoudu it was officially
portrayed "as an imitation from the Christian Bnocrats, the winners
of the recent presidential election."

Meanwhile, the downfall has already begun; the dataare there. Between
June 1977 and June 1978. the Basque Country registered the smallest
rise in bank deposits in all Spain. Cuipuzcoa, the province hardest hit
by terrorist activity, had the least growth in all Spain, with 10.92
percent, the national average being 20 percent. According to the
Vizcaya Chamber of Commerce, backlog of orders and stocks were at their
lowest levels in recent history.

In 1977, 648 businesses in the province of Vizcsya submitted notices
of crisis, which affected more than 17,500 workers. In Cuipuaooa, 750
companies had to do the sane.

A highly indicative statistic is that last year the tax index rose 3
percent in the province of Cuipuacoa, whereas it increased 11 times more,
35 percent, in Barcelona, the nationwide average being )0 parent.

National Reconstruction

Elven unemployment and emigration, two almost unknown words in the Basque
Country, have reared their heads. In the third quarter of 1918 the
Jobless level was above the national average, as 80,000 were idle in the
provinces of Alavc, Vizcava and Guipuzcoa.

And since the Basque Country has changed from a promised land into a
battlefield, immigration halted in 1977, and during the second half of
last year emigration hit high levels, which cannot be pinpointed because
of the lack of official data.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As if that were not ﬁMUéﬂl. the mture outlook is not bright. Businessmen,
economic experts, party leaders and people in the street agreed that "we
have to immediately begin economic reconstruction, begin the recovery
before we hit bottom and the breakdown becomes total."

But all of those consulted else expressed pessimism with regard to the
inmediate ﬁxture, which none saw as moderately bright, especially as for
an ending the violence is concerned.

"The worsening of the crisis, " said Jose Maria Baldssano, a representative
of the Bilbao stock market, "is going to cause some noticeable difficulties
in getting the economy moving again." Dal daseno, who recently took charge
of the stock market 1' n the Basque capital, pointed out that the lumber

one factor in moving towards a recovery "in confidence in the ﬁxture,
confidence on the part of busineemnen, lmrestors and consumers."

Madrid in Comand

Parsdoxicslly, the armed activities of the 1m and the calls for
independence by other groups are making the Basque Country more and more
economically dependent on state resources, from Madrid in other words,
and on the solidarity of the other regions of Spain.

"\lhat used to be an important economy," says Carlos Solchsga, "is in a
depression today. In my view, it is going to resemble increasingly the
economy of Asturias, with major state intervention to resolve the crisis,
at least in the large sectors."

The Socialist expert, who has done several studies on this topic,
asserts that the era's policy is not only reactionary in that it

runs counter to the interests of the Basque working class and the
Spanish working class in general, "but also, in a iundamentally
industrial society, like the Basque Country, for which economic
transformations in a short space of time are enomously difficult, it
also encourage: an even greater integration of the Basque econow within
Spain's overall economic picture."

There are already indication, in fact, that state enterprise is
replacing private enterprise in the Basque Country. And this intervention
will increase considerably if Basque business circles continue to hold
back in view of the uncertain situation, to the extent that they endanger
job posts and their own role in the market economy.

Utopian Independence

According to Selchaea, "it is a natural thing for a region to be
economically dependent on the state an in whole," but the paradoxical
thin: in that "this doesn't mean anything to the people who are issuing
Utopian calls for the economic independence of the Basque Country."

1’0
POX OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such an independence is becoming increasingly Utopian, in view of the
real situation. This is what Hadariega, the nationalist from the
Vizceya Chamber of Comeroe, says:

"He went to act and we will act fearlessly in the face of our land's
collapse. If we are able to unite and endure the necessary sacrifices,
we are certain that we can halt our downfall and aggrandize the Basque
Country, thus contributing to the aggandiaement of the other peoples of
the state.”

Thinking Behind Closed Doors

Some 20-odd Basque intellectuals, summoned by the General Council, lost
of then connected with the PCB and P503, spent 2 due in late January

"reﬂecting" in San Sebastian on the problem of violence in the Basque
Country.

Boycotted by the PIN Nationalists, the ”two busy workdays" were owned
up in a. 223 page final document, which a hin-level lember of the General
Council compared to "one of those customary comniques of ccndamaticn
that parties issue.’l

Poor Result

The Basque General Council politician, who asked to rennin anonymous in
order to avoid conirentations, could not help but consent to CAMBIO 16

that "for intellectuals who spent 2 days thinking, the result is quite
poor."

And poor it was: the intellectuals condemned violence in the Basque
Country, taking care not to mention the an by name, and pointed out
that it constitutes "a major obstacle to the attaiment of self-
government and the national construction of the Basque Country.”
Anticipating themselves, they had begun the document by advising that
"this commiquo might seem hasty because it does not contain the
desired nuances.“

They did, however, express the nuance that ”the couplenty of the
problem logically gives rise to different stands, which must still be
taken up and discussed without domatic rigidity in order to thus create
a. greater climate of mtual tolerance.”

But althouyx the intellectuals were very careml in their final document,
so as not to compromise themselves, during their discussions a number
of them dared to bring up the name of the an.

Naturally, the working meetings were held behind closed doors, and when
CAHBIO 16 asked to see the texts of the reports, we were put off and

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL Um: ONLY

:iven venue excuses ("They still haven't been proofteul."). We could not
even find out exactly which intellectuals attended the Ieetings, as if
they were almost clandestine.

France Against the HM

Thirty-four hours after President Suarez delivered his speech at the
Assembly of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, French police authorities
beg-m a roundup of Basque renames near the Spanish border.

It was not just a coincidence; the French authorities decided to not
before the Spanish president leveled harsh words before the Council of
Europe ocainut France's attitude or "protection." A masher of sources
told this magazine that in light of the French police operation, more:
made some lent-minute changes in some or the paragraphs in his speech.

The trench pol ice did not dilly daily. Using the list furnished by
t-linister Oreja to his French counterpart a fa"... veeks ago, which CWIO
16 reproduced, police agents spent from 600 to '10:) hours visiting homes
in lam/one, San Juan de Luz, Dian-it: and nearby areas in search of

remgees.

The outcome was that '] alleged EPA members were handed over to Spanish
authorities, and another 13 were deported to the Alps. where they Inst
appear in police headquarters twice a day, with the threat that if they
leave the department, "they will be handed over to the Spanish authorities."

Among those already handed ovo: to Spanish police are Francisco
Hnrtlnez Apestecaia, who is thought to be connected with the death of
Milled l‘oliee Chile! Joaquin Ina: Pamplona, and Carlos Catalan and
Prmuclcco Garateas, who are all-917:6.” Lh'.‘ top an sen in Navarre.

Prvne'n police, however, were unable to detain all of the people that they
wanted to, some 50 according to reliable sources, including Ava

;’.uJ nice and 'i‘xonin lturbe. Famed several weeks prior, use remeees.
and especially those closest to the military branch of the EM, had
vmxiahed from their hoees. So that all oi‘ the rcmgoes would not vanish
into thin air, the French interior minister did not she prior notice to
his police in the French Basque Country, "in order to prevent leaks."

'n'hen Sm...“ m-riws in Str.wbourg, the French Pbreim Ministry announced
that the political remixes statute for Basques had expired, "because
there is no reason for it anymore, given the democratization of the
resins in Spain, the mnnesty lav, the adoption of a constitution and
Spain's accession to the Geneva Agreement."

Henmdlile, there were demonstrations and commiques in the Spanish Basque
Cour-t1? condemning what were described as "typically fascist measures."

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE “SLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A Sinking Ship

Anton dc Hadarisea, a 56-year old resident of Viseaya who is connected
with the PIN and is the director general of the Petroleos del Norte
(Petronor) Refinery, was recently elected president of the Viscaya Chamber
of Comerce; he compared the Basque Country's economic situation vith
that of "a sinking ship."

Hadariago spoke with omno 16's Antonie Ojeda and said that peace "is
necessary for an economic recovery." The Nationalist businesusn felt,
however, that it was a question of ending not Just ETA violence “but
all violence, in other words, the other violence that is oocurrim here
on well."

This is how the conversation went:

CAI-[BIO 16: What is the economic situation today in the Basque Country?

Hadarinca: Vith regard to Just Vizcsya, which is what I am most fuiliar
with, I have to say that the social situation is bad, the economic
situation is bad and the political situation is bad.

CAHBIO 16: What are the reasons?

Hadariaca: I think that the situation has worsened as a result of the

economic crisis that Europe in general has been suffering in recent
years. We have to look for the reasons for this bad economic. social and

political situation in what happened many, mm years ago, I would say
40 years ago, but longer than 40 years ago as well.

CMBIO 16: Does a solution of the ecomaic problem depend on a solution
to the ETA problen?

Hadariaga: Economic problems are almost never resolved by violence.
The solution to the Basque Country's problem is unity. not disunity.

CANDID 16: You have mentioned that institutional violence mt end as
Wlleee

Madariaca: I think that with a total demoratic process the violence
will undoubtedly end. With a democratization of the city halls and
regional and provincial institutions, I think that we, the people, are
going to feel represented, that we are participating to an extent, and
then most of the social violence has to end.

CAI-{BIO 16: How much time is left to come up with solutions to the
economic crisis?

Mndarima: Uhen a ship is sinking, the deeper it is in the water, the harder
it is to set it afloat again. I think that if we continue our eta-rent
course, there might not be any solutions within 2 years.

oomucm: 1978. came 16 37

8745 POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
C11): 3‘: 10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

none perms arm on umcnt on. new
Madrid ammo 16 in Spanish 4 Feb 79 pp 35-36

[Text] Iligh-lewl executives of American and bare an multinationals
still do not believe that PmEX [Mexican Petroleum , Mexico‘s state-run

oil compamr, which has the world's largest potential oil reserves, has
picked Spain as the "middleman for ite operations: in harem.”

The honch minister of industry visited Mexico in mid-December to offer
Lopez-Portillo southern l-rance as a refining platfors for Mexican orudee
earmarked for Europe. GMBIO 16 also learned that as the year drew to
a close, PBEX received two other offers iron as many 0.8. lultlnational
corporations (one of them being Shell, which has been hard hit by the
crisis in Iran) to set up operations in Rotterdam. the heart of the
Ehmooean Iarket. Nevertheless. on 11 January Jorge Dias Serrano, the
director general of mm. was concluding a series of negotiations in
Madrid with the Comerce Ministry and CAH'PSA [Leasing 00an of the

Petroleum Monopoly, S.A._7 by virtue of which Spain had Just taken the
his step.

Spain, The First (histoner

According to reliable sources consul ted by this magazine, the 510“!!!er
for the agreement had been established last November when King Juan
Carlos visited Mexico in the comptmy of Generoe Minister Juan Antonio
Garcia Diez. In early October Spain and Mexico had signed an economic
pact in the fields of science. technology. mineral resources and the
iron and steel hector. 0n 9 December. Santiago Poncillas and another
high-level CMEPSA executiVe flew home from hence with a prelialnary
oil agreement in their pocket. They had succeeded in making Spain
PHCEx's first foray abroad, and probably its last.

The Comerce Hiniatry had reached an agreement with PM for the
purchase of 5 million tons a year of Headean oil over a 5-year period
stnrtirw; in 1980, which would make Spain Kerico‘e first European
customer (Mexico will supply 18 percent of Spain's crude oil imports
within 2 years). The operation involves some $600 million dollars, and
since it will he carried out under a Commerce ﬁlm-try system of quotes.
Mexico will be linking major purchases in Spain.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another aide to the agreusent in that PM is co-aitted to providing
the Spanish monopoly with technical assistance in hydrocarbons research,
which will give way, during a second phase, to Joint explorations with
cmsn in two Spanish zones: the deep waters of the Mediterranean (south
or the Baleares) and the continental shelf in the Bay of Biscay.

Il‘ho most noteworthy section of the agreement is 9mm participation in
Petroner refinery capital stock. The state-run Mexican colpw initially
intends to acquire 15 percent of Pctmnor stock (13 billion in capital
stock) by investing 2 to 2.5 billion pesetas and over time, to control
one-third of the Spanish refinery. Moreover, Joint investments of 20
billion pesetas are planned, to ohmge the refinery's output pattern

and to boost refinery production from 7 million tons in 1979 to 12
million over a 3-year period.

Petronor is not the only Spanish refinery with which PM has dealt.
Circles close to CEPSA [Spanish Patrolman Company] have told came 16
that "we have been in contact with the Mexicans, and an agreement

wen not reached in the end." He should note that CESA was the first
Spanish petroleum refining company to buy crude from Herieo. In 1918,
its 'l‘ensrife refinery consumed 500,000 tons of crude, and CRPSA plans

to buy 2 million tons in 1979.

PDIEX has also visited Enpetrol's Tarragona refinery, but this is more in
line with its interest in working together with Spain'- petrochemical
industry than with the search for a refinery platform for its crude oil.

who's Buying, 'vlho's Selling

The agreement with Mexico means that some 5,000 Jobs will be created soon
in Spain, in addition to providing it with PM experience and
technology, a more secure supply of crude oil, access to Mexico's
abundant ethylene and the chance to set up several industrial projects

in this regard. 'i‘o Petronor it means utilizing its facilities at 100
inuteed of 60 percent capacity, almost doubling its output of refined
products. CAHI’SA will take greater advantage of the intermediate
benefits of the energy process by getting out of Just the distribution
end.

"rho PM deal is not completely closed,“ CAMPSA sources told thin
mgazine, "because it depends on how the sale of the 15 percent is
worked out. But PM and all of the Petronor partners wont to reach
an agreement above all else."

According to Nemesio Fernando: Cuesta, the Petronor president, Basque
banks and entities involved with the refinery do not want to sell their
share. Reliable CAHPSA circles point out that it some unlikely that the
Basque groups will sell their shares; instead, attempts are being made to
reach an agreement with Gulf so that it will initially sell 15 percent of
its holdings.

oomuom: 1978, cman 16 39

8745
05°: 3110 FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SHEEN

ULLSTEN OPENS 000R TO SOCIMJSTS SEARCIIIN FOR NEW COALITION
Stockholm VBCKANS Al‘FARER in Swedieh Jun 79 p 15-17

[Krticle hy Ake Lnndquiet: "Ul leten'n Piret 100 neye Rent Hell--Thinge

Are New Coming to e lleadf/

_/_7ex_t_7 Lou: Sundey nerked exactly 100 deye eince
Ola Ullnten beceee priee einieter of e einority Lib-
eral. Party government. This period can be dee-
cribed ee an extended honey-oon. lle has been
successful in getting eoet of the pending bille
through Parliament, but now thinge ere coeing to A
head. Ulleten will be forced to deal with eeny
critical ieeuee. euch ee energy. the ereoepece
induetry. the confidence ieeue end. not leeet. the
matter of tax edjueteente. which will fore the beeie
for upcoeing contract negotiatione. .

It was Pridey 13 October 1978 end the place wee Arvfuret palace in Stockhole.
0n the second floor of the palace the televieion wee turned on in Ole
lillsten'e corner office. with windowe fecing the Opera houee and the King'e
palace. It was a direct hroadceet of the parlieeentery debate concerning

the election of a new prime minister.

Ole Ulleten end hie two close eeeocietee llnne Bergetroe end .‘iete Gullere
intently followed the reports. Carl Then came in. The votee hed been

tabulated and the board ehowed: 39 for. 66 against, 215 eeeenting. The
matter had been decided; Ole Ullsten had been elected new priee einieter

and the Liberal Party was now the governing party.

Thet wee the closing vignette to e long government crieie end eleo the
beginning of en unprecedentedly inteneive work eeeeion for the Liberal
Party and ite leedere.

All that is now history. Oln Ullsten'e corner office hee been turned into
a conference root: end the minority goverment'e firet loo deye heve coee to
an end. It wee euppoecd to be e ehort period of dering eeetery end euccee-
eive couproeieee before the election in Septeeber 1979. The every dey

60
PH“ HE’FICIM. USE OSLY
FUR OPFlClAL USE UNLY

working principle of the minority Liberal Party government was to proceed
as if that period would never cone to an and. Such were the speculations.
but that has not happened. yet.

ﬁlls is the record of the party's accomplishments during the fall session
of Parliament: 57 proposals were submitted. 18 of which have not yet been
dealt with. of the 39 proposals up for consideration. 30 passed without ado
and three were subject to slight revisions or additions. The party only
not with six parliamentary defeats.

"Fall Session Undranatic"

Prime Minister Ola Ullsten coenented: "He are talking about pieces of
legislation. The fall session of Parliament was actually quite undraaatic.
The government's proposals as a whole passed." he is particularly pleased
with the passage of the shipyard legislation and the incentive package.

both with only slight adjustments. "These are two iaportan: pieces of
legiulation as far as we are concerned." said Ola "listen.

The party not with the greatest opposition in trying to get support for the
marginal tax legislation. At the same time. the prime Ilnister anticipated
that the tax committee will urge passage of the marginal tax reforl. with
respect to parliamentary opposition to other bills. Ola Ullsten said:

"There is talk about marginal changes in some of the proposals. but this also
ha-pens in strong governments."

Aost oi the parliamentary issues have been decided in committee after con-
sulting with the leading group in Parliament. This group. in turn. consul-
ted with government coordinators. The party's group leader in Perils-ant.
Bjorn "olin (chairmen of the Finance Committee) summed it up: "Everything
has gone better than expected for a nuober of reasons. but the spring
session will be more complicated.”

The reason for the unexpected success is principally this: "any of the
proposals which were dealt with by the new government had already been
prepared by the Falldin coalition. host of the proposals passed because
the three non-socialist parties formed a voting coalition. Furthermore.
many of the proposals were not politically controversial. Legislative

proposaln often torn an integral part of ongoing refore. These go through
Parliament without debate.

however. the parliamentary climate is evpeeted to become more severe this
spring. ﬁlections will be coning up in September. The other parties'
resolutions will collectively for- the backbone of their bid for election.

The national budget will be the first item on the agenda. Helpers of the Lib-
wral Party are somewhat concerned about how Parliament will deal with this
issue. They are also concerned abOut the procedure itself.

Ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1he trouble started while they were negotiating the economic incentive
package. The Finance Committee left the final decision on the marginal
tax reduction up to the Tax Committee. By virtue of a compromise with
the (enter rarty, the proposed tax reduction was cut in half.

Accurdinn to the Liberal Party plan. the package. Including a marginal tax
reduction of 1 billion kroner. would have provided a private consumption
stimulus of 2.5 percent in 1979. According to the present plan. Ingaear
Nundebo anticipates a 2.8 percent increase in private consumption. This
is based on the SOO-nillion kronar conprunise. The other half billion
would have meant an additional quarter percentage-point. i.e.. the

increase would have been more than 3 percent (providing savings remained
the same).

It is easy to understand why members of the Liberal Party are not concerned
about the magnitude of the compromise. Bjorn Molin" "It went in the

right direction. nut it illustrates a weakness in the procedure." The Lib-
eral Party advocates that more power be given to the finance Committee in
Parliament. it should have equally as much power as the Department of
Budget and Finance has within the government and, together, they should
determine the budget. "The problem is the concentration of power within
one single committee." said Bjorn Nolin.

Door Open to Social Democrats

The parties' need to establish a profile before the election will also
affect other important proposals before the spring session of Parliament.
like energy. industrial and regional policies, the aerospace industry and
the confidence issue. But this spring the government will have more time
to solidify the issues before the proposals are submitted in Parliament.
Since nest of the coalition uovernment's proposals have been dealt with.
the Ullnten government will have more freedom to choose which proposals it
wants to deal with, i.e.. the door is more open to the Social Democrats.

Due to the government crisis last fall. parliamentary work was delayed by

2 to 3 weeks. A large number of decisions had to be made in the last 10
days prior to the Christmas recess. Budget matters were also affected by
the government crisis. The Minister of Economy and Budget Ingemar Hundebo:
"we last a few weeks due to the change in government. Our work was delayed
hecanne of the crisis, which upset the somewhat tight schedule we are under.
We were more pressed for time. The conditions surrounding the budget were
almost the sane as in 1976."

Otherwise the Liberal Party has been lucky wlth respevt to time. As far as
party strategy was concerned. the government crisis came at an opportune
time. The most hectic pcrlnd for the new government-November and December--
coincided with local elections. "Fortunately enough. the initial period of
the new government coincided with decentralized party work. Otherwise, our

work would have been considerably more difficult," said party secretary
Gunner Strom.

62
FUR OFFICIAL USE "SLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Liberal Party was also able to convene its annual congress as n ruling
party. In Gunner Strom's words. this also provided ”maximal rewards." By

the end of August party leaders had prepared their statements concerning

all resolutions before congress. After that Ola Ullsten, together with

Goats nohman and Thorbjorn Falldin, became inaccessible until after the
government had been dissolved. Shortly after the new government was formed. the
Liberal Party congress convened in Folkets hue in Stockholm. Three
distinguished party leaders and the newly elected prime minister were

escorted to the podium. where they received great tribute. Interestingly
enough. the prime minister was new to the party leadership.

1he change in party leadership and being the governing party hes meant an
upward leap in the opinion polls for the Liberal Party. Since the beginning
of the year they have gained about 6 percent in the polls. The Liberal Party
now has as much support as the Conservative Party, both holding about 15
percent.

ﬂaking Its Own News

Being the governing party means that you can influence the flow of news.

"Make news." This is an advantage as far as public opinion is concerned. Fur-
lhermure. the Liberal Party has an unusually large press. "The combination
of being able to 'meke news' and having a large press is obviously an advan-
tage," said the head of SIPO lgwedish Institute for Public Opinion Polli7.
Prof Hans Zetterberg.

He also maintained that the Liberal Party gnVernment embodies the political
hopes of an entire generation of non-socialists. 'Mhen the coalition failed.
the Liberal Party was able to convey these hopes. It is not a question
of political issues or personages. just a tangible sentiment. let political
sentiment can have a powerful influence on public opinion and public re-
action," said hens Zetterberg.

Ola Ullstcn: "Our gain in the polls probably shows that people value a
government that can do something. Action pays off in politics. But I do
not assume anything based on opinion polls. but am unconditionally awaiting
developments with respect to our currency."

Decisive-~8ut Powerless

01a Ullsten's ability to make decisions is viewed by many political analysts
as perhaps his greatest asset. But his minority government only represents
39 of the 369 votes in Parliament. how does this affect the public's
opinion about the government's power to act? Par-Erik Bach, political
science professor: "He has made very good use of tactical maneuvers. But

I do not think the government gives the impression of being especially
powerful. 0n the other hand. it does not show signs of weakness either."

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RH! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Haas Zetterberg: "01a Ullsten's decisive appearance is being offset by the
puhllc'u impression that he is powerless because Parliament can change all
his decisions. This is a paradox-a decisive. but powerless prime minister.
But it is difficult to say how the voter perceives this."

After a hectic {all the Liberal Party now faces a politically difficult spring
before the election campaign begins in earnest late summer. The spring
program is massive. Various issues must be decided.ssuch as traffic policies.
industrial and regional policies. regulations concerning faaily doctors.
energy. the question of church and state. forest and steel policies. taxes.
the question of equality in thalabor market. etc.

"This is a rather asbltious program for one government. considering we must

conclude by the middle of Harch." said Ola Ullsten. which is obviously an
understatement.

Also. the government will have to decide the merit of Volvo's agreement with
ﬂurway. 01a Ullsten: "I hope the stockholders will decide. being aware

that long-tern advantages may outweigh eventual short-tern problems." but
economic developments will overshadow other issues this spring. "The domi-
nant issues will be prices. wages and employment," said Ingemar Hendebo.

"a and Ole Ullsten will discuss taxes with the other parties and labor

market representatives. The result will be tax refers. which will provide
the basis for future wage settlements. This will be the govern-ent'a central
responsibility, to create a basis for smooth contract settle-eats with the
aid of tax policies and a low rate of inflation.

Looking Toward the Election

With the economy in balance and a number of the important bills settled. the Lib-
oral Party figures it is well prepared for the election. Based on the
government's program and the party's congressional platform for 1980. the Lib-
era] Party has established a profile prior to the election. Thus, voters

can see a connection between what the party is doing and what it plans to do.

Party election strategists want to build an inage of a party that can provide
a prosperous future and a political balance in the center. without resorting
to non-socialist block politics or class struggles. Ola Ullsten's election
message is: Balance and responsibility in the center.

COPYRIGHT: Ahlen & Akerlunds tryckericr. Stockholm 1979

8952
080: 3109

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SWEDEN

INFUNTION BATTLE HAY DECIDE SUCCESS OF 1979 EXPORT DRIVE
Stockholm VECKANS AFFARER in Swedish 25 Jan 79 p 5

lieng Odds are good that Sweden's inflation can be
contained within the limit stipulated by SAF-lD/PTK.
Actually. the only thing that is required is to hold
inflation at the present level. But there are ele-
ments of risk. For instance, the large money supply
together with the fact that prices hsVe been held
down by artificial means. i.e., vie tax bills.

In order to comply with the second stipulation in the SAF~LOIPTK £§vedish
Employers' Confederation--Norwegien Federation of Trade Unions/Private
Industry Uhite Collar Horkers' Unio§7 agreement, ell that is actually
required is to hold the rate of inflation at its present level in 1979.

According to the stipulation. scn'a consumer price index cannot go up by
more than 5 percent between December 1978 and October 1979. This is
equivalent to the projected 6.1 percent increase over a 12 month period
from October 1978 to October 1979. Generally speaking, this is the same
rate of inflation we had last fall.

The large price increases last year came in January and Pebruary-uhen the
consumer price index rose by 3.2 percent. During the remaining 10 months
the index only went up 3.8 percent. This is equivalent to an annual rate
of 5.5 percent.

however. the actual figure was less due to the small increases in some
months: 0.03 percent in narch. 0.1 percent in June and 0.1 percent in
August. Obviously, the rate of inflation was higher last fall. During
the last 6 months the consumer price index rose by 6.2 percent.

we should be able to stay within the stipulated limit. provided we can hold
the rate of inflation at that level. In the government's fiscal policy
lngemar Hundebo explained that "the government is determined to stay within
the 5 percent increase in prices. But there are certain elements of risk.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.93. 5.9... a: w: @2623
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C ODS UMER PRICES

" Percent increase in
the last 12 months

Stipulated limits
according to the

SAY-L0 m agreement
0 /en - Dec 1978
3 Maximum 5%
| Dec 78-Oct 79
. . maximum 6.2”
I Oct 78-Oct 79
l
L ,
l: e 7 ' 4

The second stipulation in the SAP-LOIPTK agreement
means that the coneuuer price index can only go up
a saxinun of 6.12 in a twelve month period.

is the large money supply. which could easily bring on a l
inflation if the supply grove too quickly. Another is the
ce increases. which are held in check by price regulations

re is also the problee that the "actual” rate of inflation
ter than the rise in the consu-er price index. The net pr:
e.. the consumer price index Iainue indirect taxes and eube:
percent higher in November than a year ago. The correspol
the consumr price index was 7.6 percent. Last fall the N
no]. rate included--rose almost one percentage-point footer
sumer price index.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLl'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore, much of the improvement we have seen in consumer prices is due
to the fee that the government hau lowered indirect taxes end/or increased
subsidies. For example. the general employer tax was eliminated at the
end of June. Furthermore, food subsidies were raised. All these things
heVe helped to hold down consumer prices.

These were all justified measures to reduce inflation. no doubt. But in
order to prevent further increases in the consumer price index-~and thus
stay within the stipulated linit-one of two things will be necessary.
Either the "ectusl" rate of inflation, including the net price index.
must be lovered and/or subsidies incrsesed.

The net price index may be lowered a little, but beyond that the government
must subsidize consumer goods.

hut even if it can keep the rate of inflation within the limit set for 1979.
chances are great that the situation will become worse in 1980 when our
capacity has been exhausted. Mundebo also gives the reasons: a closed
labor market. insufficient investments. high liquidity snd normalized
profits. Thin can lend to inflation pressures and increased wages.

COPYRIGHT: Alhen 6 Akerlunds tryckericr. Stockholm 1979

8952
C50: 3109

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KINGDOM

ﬁtA—‘U ‘

PRC INTEREST IN AIRBUS NOTED DURING VARLEY VISIT
london THE FINANCIAL TIMES in English 27 Feb 79 p 64 ID
[Dispatch by John Elliott: "Chinese Interest in Airbus"]

[Text] Peking-—China has expressed firm interest in buying not only the
European airbus-in which the UK has a stake--but also the British aerospace
type 106 four-engined feeder-liner.

This emerged yesterday at talks between Mr Eric Varley. secretary for indus-
try, and Mr Lu Dong. China's minister responsible for aircraft.

It was also agreed that talks will continue on the possibility o£ selling
Harrier jump-jets to China, despite the UN Government‘s lack of interest in
formal commitments while the Vietnam invasion continues.

British aerospace is also to look into the possibility of China building
parts for the 166.

China also wants Britain to buy up to Sm tonnes of coal a year, to pay for
large contracts being sought by the national coal board and UK mining equip-
ment manufactures on the construction of two big mines.

This was confirmed here by Mr Zhong Ziyun, senior vice-minister for coal.

The mines, in the Tatong area, would be the biggest in China and Britain
would be asked to take half their annual 10m tonnes output either for use
in the UK or to sell to other countries.

It is understood that a group of London merchant banks, led by 8.6. Rarburg,
has organised the necessary credit. The national coal board has also prepared
tenders for a coal research laboratory.

Hr Zhong Ziyn said China wanted to boost its coal production of 600- tonnes
a year to 900m tonnes, by the end of 1985. of this, 10m to 20m tonnes would

be exported.

49
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Countries now being asked to buy coal in return for gaining lining contracts.
In addition to Britain. include Yugoslavia. vhich is seeking work on mines
designed to produce 1.5n tonnes a year, and nonanis. which is chasing 8n

tonnes-n-yesr mines.

The u.s. will also be placed in this category if, as is expected, it bids for
major opencast lining work.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Tiles Ltd, 1979

C50: 3120

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

UNITED KINGDOM

PRC OFFERS DARTER DEAL FOR COAL DESIGN STUDY
London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 27 Feb 79 p b LD
[Dispatch by Nigel Wade: "Chinese Offer Coal. Not Cash"!

[Text] Chinn is offering to pay with coal rather than cash for a design
study it wants the national coal board and a private firm to do for two mines
that would be the biggest in the people's republic.

Zhong Ziyunthe senior deputy minister for coal. said yesterday that China
was proposing barter deals to several countries because it needed to buy a
lot of foreign equipment and was short of foreign exchange.

he said negotiations with the national con] board. which in in a consortium
with Powell-Duffryn. the engineering company. would need time and patience.
he could not say what the value of the contract might be.

The project was discussed when the former trade secretary Hr Dell visited
Peking last autumn and the consortium has since submitted design proposals.

"Goal To Sell"

The vice-minister quoted consortium representatives as saying it would be
difficult for Britain to import cool but that they would like to promote the
sale of Chinese coal on the international market.

In other words. China could pay the consortium with coal from the new mines,
which the consortium could then sell to someone else for cash.

The two mines are planned for Tatung in Inner Mongolia, and each would have
an annual production capacity of five million tons.

Zhong Zlyuisaid that the coal board was only being asked to do feasibility
studies at this stage. but it was possible that British firms would be in-
vited to bid for equipment contracts. Construction would would be done by
the Chinese, taking at least five years.

SI
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

China planned to increase its annual coal production from 600 million tons
last year to 800 or 900 million tons by 1985. “To achieve this target we
will need foreign help," Zheng Ziyun said.

The industry secretary Hr varley, who is visiting Peking. is to have dis-
cussions at the coal ministry on Thursday before making an overnight train
trip to Tatung.

Civil Aircraft

his discussions yesterday covered long-term prospects for selling China civil
aircraft, including the airbus and the British aerospace 1&6 passenger air-
craft which is still being built.

British Aerospace. which is also holding technical talks with China about

the "arrier military jet. believes that the BA 166 could aset China's needs
for feeder-line planes to replace about 50 Russian Antonovs now in use.

In a series of meetings. Mr Varley met the minister in charge of China's

aircraft industry, the minister responsible for electronics. and the min-
ister of railways.

He also paid courtesy calls on the foreign minister.

Hr Varley is to discuss shipbuilding today before travelling to Shanghai.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times, Ltd. 1979

C80: 3120

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"EST GERMANY

cwmovsnsv om ATOH mm: STORAGE DISCUSSED
"mm mm in Comm 8 Feb 79 pp 82-91

[Report by Kai Krueger and Wolf Pordelwi tz: ”Remote Controlled Loaders
Sink llot Atomic waste Into Salt for Good"]

[Text] It sounded like a front-line report: "We are now approaching the
battle for Corleben," anneumed Guanter Hartkopi’, state secretary at the
Federal Ministry of the Interior, when he reported to SP!) deputies in Bonn
on the latest simetion regarding the conflicts raging around the "nuclear
disposal center." The battle is inninent. 'l‘est drillings above the main
salt strata at the Lower Saxon border with the GDR are set to begin in

February.

For the police as well as the opponents of nuclear power the beginning of
drilling is tantamount to the beginning of construction, and the beginning
of construction to the beginning of the war. The factual baokground: The
decision for or against the "Corleben disposal park" represents the decision
for or against the further use of nuclear energy in the Federal Republic,
because nuclear power plants have one serious flaw: They provide "clean
energy“--or so say the advertisements of the electricity producers-Jan
they also produce dangerous radioactive wastes which met be safely stored
somwhere for the next millenim; the term used is ”final storage." Salt
mines, deep urvierground, are considered ideal storage. Interior Minister
Gerhart new: Unless we quickly find a final storage site, we will have to
switch off our nuclear power plants.” Federal Chancellor Helmt Schmidt:
without a domestic atonic waste storage "we came: have nuclear energy
either."

Gorieben. Its scouts calculate that 2,000 demonstrators could be mobilized
wlthin the hour. The defenders of the state should know: his young police-
men infiltrated the resistors, pretending they wanted to obtain their high
school graduation certificates in Goettingen. The two "agents" (cover

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nuns "Hikky" and "lludi") repeatedly but unsuccessfully tried to nail the
nuclear opponents to a line of outright confrontation: "'lhat will cause a

dis turbenco ."

l-‘or fear of riots Gorlobon has become a fortress even before the onset of
construction. The Deutsche Gasellschaft fuer Hisderaufarbeitung von Kern-
brennstoffen (WK) [far-man Company for the Reprocessing of Nuclear Nels],
owner of the "disposal park," met with the Land police authorities in
liannover and noted the following: "The police are firmly persuaded that the
opponents of the project will sooner or later take massive and drastic
steps...lt would therefore be entirely wrong to yield to the concept that
massive security measures might arouse negative iapressions m the public.
The planning staff of the police 'plainly rojected' our prepoaal initially
to begin drilling with fewer security precautions and embark on 'the con-
structlon of a fortified defonse' only when the necessity is evident."

Nuclear energy objectors are to be deterred by the resolute armannt of the
state power: 1,200 policemen and 500 men from the border defense force will
guard the construction site as if the peaceful use of nuclear energy were
inconceivable without large numbers of constantly loaded guns. manners
the Federal Cavemaent has already assured Lower Saxony of financial compen-
sation for any damage caused by demonstrations: This is carried as "cemen-
setlon for remons of equity" in the contract promising the Land M00 mil-
lion of Federal money for incidental expenses in the next lo years. To be
armed against the anticipated general attack by demtrators, the police
are having all woods clearcut within 100 esters of every deep drilling site;
at the same time they are censtructing man-high defensive walls which in
turn will be surrounded by 3 meter high barbed wire barricades. In between
the two will be electrified fences md microphones transmitting every sound,
behind them scarchllghts to lighten up the surramdingsuonly a few kilo-
meters away from the inhuman border security installations of the GDR.

According to the WK it will be necessary "for the iapleanntation of this
concept " permanently to keep under observation a wide area around the drill-
ing sites. something which "should properly be a matter for the police."

The residents of the Luechow-Dannenberg Rural Kreis will have to get used

to living check by jowl with the state security forces. Not that this pro-
:pcct appears to scare them: There are few nuclear objectors in this region.
The majority of citizens in this poor irreis hepe for new jobs and a business

revival .

The Wendish land. {lurked on three sides by the cm and on the fourth by
the erstwhile royal hunting forest of Goehrde. is the Federal Republic's
weakest rural kreis in terms of population and structure. The site of the
"disposal park" was selected not by salt mining or nuclear experts; the
choice was cede by the department for business pranotion at the lower Saxon
Ministry of Economics.

5!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SR ONLY

Official in charge Chojnacltl was given the difficult asuigmaont of choosing
the appropriate salt mine from 23 which appeared more or less soluble. lle
resolved the problem with the hip of a points synteln he himself drew up to
meet-tale and evaluate all criteria which had either been furnished his or
which he thought of himself: closeness to sources of household water supplies,
accessibility of mtorways. nearnoss of nuclear warhead silos, likelihood of
earthquakes or meteorite impact, special features of the construction site
and property rights. effects on the recreational use of the respective area.
and particularly on the structure of the local economy. Leaders on points
were the mines at Corleben on the Upper Elbe. Ascherdorf in the Ensland and
Lichtamoor on the Upper kisser. Aschendori’ was out of contention once secret
test drills had aroused the resident population. Since Gorieben anyway had
a 10 percent advantage, the lower Saxon cabinet sorely had to give its bless-
ing. Chojnacki commit-d after the event: "A cuckoo's egg-ewe did not
chomie ii."

11w "cuckoo's egg" may well turn out to be a tine bomb. Ilanlmrg geomorpho-
logist Prof lickhard Grimel considers such final storage of the radioactive
waste the "worst of all possibilities." Last ween his Goettingen collsague
Prof Albert Guenter Hermann expressed agreement: "From geosctentii’ic as-
pects the worst and mat inappropriate solution conceivable." The sane ap-
preciation is gainirq; ground in America also.

Sons of the stored waste will emit radiation at the temperature oi a boiling
ring at stage 3. and continue to do so for sunny years. Critics fear that
this heat could cause the water contained in the salt to turn into stem.
Should this steam disintegrate the salt, fissures would fans which night be
further enlarged by the amount of the earth. Ground water could invade
such fissures and gradually dissolve the stocks of salt. Professor GriIIIel
coaplains that the Gorieben salt mine is particularly ill suited for final
nuclear waste disposal. lie believes to have fotmd definite indications that
the earth's crust there is still capable of movement.

The local residents are quite content with the site selection. True. the
majority of Federal Germans is skeptical with respect to nuclear energy.
The latest S'nilih' polls ascertained that 53 percent of the population reject
new nuclear paher plants. and that in northern Germany nuclear power oppo-
nents (37 percent) are definitely more numerous than advocates (32 percent).
(STERN, Nos Io7/l978 and 1/1979). But for the time being any referondtn in
Luechow-Dannenberr, Rural Kreis would yield a tremendous yes vote for the
"disposal park."

A poll conducted by the 1M; did show, though, that most residents have very
little idea of thin in fee: lb plamed 10: their neighborhood. Involved in
the Corlebcn scheme is more than surely the construction of a subterranean
atomic waste deposit which is invisible, inaudible and unscented. Plamed'

is the greatest new industrial construction in European history. The pyramids
of the pharaohs would be as nothing by comparison. Construction costs of

the storage within the salt mine have been assessed at Dill.5 billion; the

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M oetimtes another on 10 billion for construction and incidental costs of
plant above ground. Never before has such a sum been planned for a single
industrial project.

The facilities will consist of huge concrete bunkers, up to 60 meters high.
Behind the facade, meters thick and windowless, the spent fuel olemnts of
all German atomic reactors will be stored for months and weeks in cooled
water tanks and gradually sawed apart. Their content will be dissolved in
boiling nitric acid and, by chemical mm, separated into reuisable uranium,
plutonium and waste. Uranium md plutonium will be processed on the spot
into new fuel elements, the waste infused into glass, cement or bitmn and

lowered into the salt caverns deep under Gorleben to be sealed away for all
eternity.

The fuel elemnt receiving station alone will be so vast that the largest
house in the rural kreis would disappear in the basmnt of this 1.0 meter
high ixuiker. August Quis, construction director of Luechow-Dannenberg Rural
Kreis, says: "The drawings indicate internal wall strengths of 3 alters.
That is nearly impossible from the technical aspect. On top of that the
reactor safety coatuission calls for additional security Inasures. Jmt try
to imagine the dimensions of all thiso-it is sheer madness!"

Such thicknesses of concrete are necessary to secure the structures against
crashed aircraft and restrain radioactive radiation. Some experts, Quis
army, them, doubt that the soft soil of the Elbe bottomland can in fact carry
such mscs of concrete. He wrote a letter to the superior kreis director:
"I cannot escape the iapression that we have here an act of ham hubris.

Its failure can be predicted just as surely as it was possible in 1961 to

forecast the failure of the Russian campaign."

Salt dumps will overtop even the giant bunkers. Every year the unsaleablo
rubble removed from the underground construction will fill a football field

to a height of a tower-~a new field each year. Nothing can be planted on
these tips, because soil spread on it imediately becomes salt logged.

liven in the course of the 10-year construction period the Luechow-Damenberg
Rural Kreis--now known as a recreation area for the north German conurba-
tions--will. he radically changed. The present quiet in the region is such
that this rural kreis is the last in Germany not to have even one traffic
light. The Gorleben nuclear factory will change all that. Already in the
mid-1980's (according to a study kept under lock and key) 300 tracks and
nearly 6,000 cars per day will make for the construction site; on peak days
up to 1.0 percent more. Bypasses will have to be constructed around 14 vil-

lages, the road linking Gorleben with Luechow, the ltreis city, will be re-
located, and a rail link is planned to relieve truck traffic.

Particularly affected by the giant comtruction site will be the Lucie
nature reserve. New roads, rails and high-voltage power lines will cut
across it in the northeast. where some of the last cranes to be found in

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Germany now are nesting, and aloe across the southern extension plarmed for
the reserve. Moreover, Just below its western border it is planned to
quarry the nearly 2 million cubic meters of growl needed for the concrete
btmkers. Also adversely affected will be the Elbe Honk-Dramhn nature park
and the Elbow marshes which are to be put mder conservation in accordance
with an international agreement. Both are imdiately adjacent to the site.

Anyone wishing to know what Gorieben is going to look like may get some idea
in the farthest northeast of France. There, 30 km from Cherbeurg, a small
version of the planned nuclear factory stands at Cap de la Hague: The repro-
cessing plant of the state earned "Cogema" company. There-ms is planned for
the "disposal park"--spent reactor rods are ends into new fuels.

Shortly before the end of the year the Federal Research Ministry organised
an inspection tour to the French Cap de la Hague by two dozen labor unionists
from lower Saxony. The visit turned out to be a total disaster: Hardly had
the tour begun when the visitors noticed men on the site. who--dressed in
protective clothing-searched the grounds outside. "A more nothing," they
were told. The "er nothing" turned out to be a nuclear accident. A pro-
tective filter, radioactively contaminated, had dissolved in corrosive steam
and been exhausted into the air via the chimney. The wind waited the ra-
diating and health hazardous fragments across the region.

1V0 divs earlier another incident had far more serious consequences: Several
roam were contaminated when radiant tutorial was transported. Also conta-
minated were seven workers, three of then so badly that they run a serious
risk of developing lug cancer at sow future tim. The balance sheet of
contamination for the previous year: 388 accidents with external or internal
radiation of mrkers or rooms-~on the average more thm one per day.

Since the incidence of accidents surged from 280 in 1973 to 572 in 1975 the
works management has stopped publishing official figures. It became known
nevertheless that a shocking record has prevailed since early 1977: In the
I: weeks from 23 January to 2] February only a single day went by without an
Moment; the alarm was sounded 1.2 times. Five times in a single week was

it necessary to clear the sheds by reason of widely great radioactive cen-
tamination of the floor.

when the labor unionists returned home their Land executive in liamover do.
cided on the following: "Should a similar facility be constructed in Gor-
leben, conditions such as prevail in La Hague would not be acceptable." Yet
the doubts of the unionists (who in the moamiue obtained the support of the
068) will hardly be able to prevent the warmth Corleben project. The Fed-
eral Government has made up its mind about nuclear circulation. Spent nu-
clear elements fron traditional reactors are to be reprocessed into new

fuel which, in turn, will heat the reactors. By this means uranium iaperts
may be stretched by about a third. The plutonium provided thereby is in-
tended later to fuel the fast breeder at Kalkar.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the government's opinion and that of the nuclear industry three factors
advocate this circulation: The highly toxic and darlgerous plutonium-the
explosiw for nuclear bombs-18 stored nowhere more safely than in the re-
actor. The waste remaining after reprocessing is less hazardous that un-
treated waste--although only relatively so: It emits dangerous radiation
for about 1.000 instead of 100,000 years. And the energy balance of the
Federal Republic would be drastically improved: Once Corleben is in full
operation. the recovered residual energy from spent nuclear elements will

correspond to half the German production of hard coal.

Yet good reasons may be cited against reprocessing: It is very expensive,
so expensive that the major German chemical enterprises, headed by Ileechst
and nayer, dropped as too costly their plans for construction of a repre-
cessing plant. And as we have seen in La liague, it is very rislq. More-
over. nobody yet has any real experience how these things work at the tech-
nical level and on a large scale. The German demonstration reprocessing
plant at Karisruhu still spends millions on new test equipment parts.

U.S.President Carter reacted to the technical difficulties-~as yet unsolved--
by stopping, at least for the time being, all American reprocessing plans.
Breakdowns and environmental problems had already caused the three canner-
cial plants so far built in the United States to be either shut down or not
even started up.

in the meantime no permits are issued for new facilities built in accord-
ance with the current status of technology. The British facility in
Hindscale also was switched off after a radiation accident in 1973. It is
doubtful whether the radiating investment ruin will ever become operational
again. At this time, therefore. the French and their plant in La Hague

and another planned factory hold a monopoly in the Hestern world-admittedly
they also have a monopoly of the breakdowns, incidents and difficulties in-
volved. They extract a heavy payaent: They charge nearly mil million for
reprocessing 1 ton of reactor fuel.

The French can afford to charge such prices. The 15 nuclear pater plants
and test reactors now available in the Federal Republic may be operated only
if their "disposal," that is the removal of all radioactive waste, is
secured. Up to now a contract with the La Hague f in "Cogent" was recog-
nized as proof of diSposal for the issue of operating permits required an—
wally-"and at the same time at least one eye was firmly closed. Became
"Cegema" will be tumble to keep its contracts for the foreseeable future.

La Hague can manage only to process French fuel elemnts. Residues from
German reactors contain up to 10 times more plutonium. And La Hague evi-
dently cannot cope with this in the new wing of the plant constructed for

just this purpose.

The only test run using Ger-nun material, barely 60 tons of fuel from the
Static power plant, took more than 3 months. Subsequently the facility had
to be switched off. For Gorleben all equipment is therefore planned in

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE “NIH

double if not quadruple quantities. Such necurity provisionn create prob-
lems: The ii to of this equipment is at best 25 yearn. in sane areas only 7.

lifter that the factory sheds mst be decontminatod and sane of them also
"disposed of."

As the Le Hague facility is in fact not usoahle new, the Federal German

nuclear power plants were compelled to take recourse to a quentional typo of
self-help: 'l‘he spent nuclear elounts are stored in water cooled decay tanks
for several years, because nobody knows wlwre to dispose of the radiant waste

Atomic waste is rising right up to the necks of the electricity producers at
the llesslan Biblis A power plant, for exwmie. They have therefore adapted
the trick of "connect storage": Instead of packing in the decay tanks 2 years
"output" of spent fuel roads. as initially planned, they new intend to pack
6 years output. So far they are still waiting for permission. If it is re-
i'uzzed, llibl is A will have to cut back or cease production within the your.
The alternative is to find someone to take the highly radioactive residue
off their hands. it is contcapiated, therefore, to fill the decay tmlts of
new pmer plants with fuel rods from other reactors which no longer have suf-
ficient storam room. But even that will not do to any larger extent. There
are hardly any new nuclear reactors. Businessmen and increased objections

"Comma" in La llague be able for some time to come to accept any more Federal
Gemen radioactive waste, because "Cogema" storage tanks are also full. And
they are expecting more supplies: 1,600 tons from Japan, the advance guard
of which was landed at Cherbourg last week--te the accompaniment of violent
protests from residents. lly 1985 another 1,705 tons are to be delivered by
the Federal Republic.

however, the validity of these contracts is in some doubt. because they in-
clude a clause giving "Cogema" the right. to return to the customer only

97 percent of the plutonium. As the Federal Government is mare that the
loss of no more than 1 percent of plutonium is involved in processing. the
French obviously retain 2 percent of the basic nuclear bomb material. That
is likely to violate international agreements. The Federal GoverIIuent has
signed the nuclear nonproliferation treaty, France has not. The Federal
interior Ministry is therefore shouting growing reluctance to continue recog-
nizing "Cecelia" contracts as evidence of disposal. The fuel rod deposito-

ries in Gorieben, capable of receiving 3,000 tom, will then be even more
urgently needed.

Yet Corlebcn is already 2 years behind schedule. And political resistance
to the nuclear factory is still increasing. Not the "fast breeder" at
Kalkar represents the entrance to the feared "plutoniun business“ but the
plutonium factory at the Lower Saxon GDR border.

It is even doubtful whether use of nuclear energy will be possible in the
Federal Republic even with Gorieben. The reason: Nuclear paler plants are
not nearly so safe as used to be assumed. Earlier calculations were based

59
FOR OFFICIAL V58 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the American Rasmussen report on reactor safety. This study concluded
that the likelihood of a serious reactor accident was one in a million
years-- just as minimal as the crash of a large meteorite on a city. New

calculations, hmver. have shown that the probability is at least
5-10 tims greater. Last week the Rasmssen report was withdrawn as faulty.

PHOTO CAYI'IWS

l. p 82. The pyramids of the pharaohs are as nothim by comparison: At a
cost of DH12 billion the biggest industrial building couplex of
European history is being constructed in Gorloben. The center of
the dis; osal park is the reprocessing facility for spent reactor
rods. Its attics alone are the size of a village center.

2. p 83. The radiating giant: ‘4th the Corleben "disposal park" nuclear
energy in the Federal Republic is finished. The electricity pro-
ducers in the nuclear reactors are up to their necks in nuclear
waste-~and nobody knows where to get rid of it.

3. p 810. Superscription at top of page: The scale drawing shows how highly
radioactive nuclear waste is fused with glass into cylindrical
blocks and subsequently stored in the salt strata below the faci-
lity. lit a depth of more than 1,000 meters radioactivity gradually
decays-«in thousands of years. Above ground occur radioactive
gases, krypton 85 and iodine 129. Silver filters costim [3430.000
have been developed for the iodine; they hold up for exactly
1 week. Krypton is to be skinned off at a teuperature of minus
180 centigrade, in a liquid state. The problem involved in
handling these gases caused the designers initially to provide
for a waste gas exhaust 400 meters high. They also called for a
buffer zone, 6 km wide, to be kept empty of lumen beings; this
would have mam the destruction of 20 villages in the region.

In the meantime, it is claimed, such drastic masures are no
longer necessary.

0n the right of the page: Storage tanks with liquid atomic waste.
They have to be permanently cooled.

0n the left of the page: Medina-active atomic waste has been
stored in salt for the past 6 years-~in the former Asse II potash
mine near Brunswick. The radiating tin containers can be viewed
through a 80 cm thick lead glass window.

10. p 85. (l) Elevator. It sends down to the depths about 5 glass blocks

per day.

(2) Solidii‘ying facility. Liquid nuclear waste is processed into
solid glass blocks.

(3) water tanks. Here the highly radioactive glass blocks are
stored for at least 1 year to decay and cool off.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5. p 86.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(lo) At lewt 1,000 meters lie botvmm the surface of the earth
and the final storage for highly radioactive nuclear waste.

(5) Concrete plugs. They close off filled boreholes.

(6) Renate controlled loaders. They lower the loss blocks
(temraturo: above 200 degrees centisrade into the bore-
M108.

(7) Tunnel to the next gallery. ﬁnch salt gallery receives
1 year's production of nuclear waste.

(8) Boreholes in the salt. Depth about 40 wters, dimter 35 cm.

The salt tips will tower above the cumtryaide-diailar to this
potash tip east of llumowr: Rubber from the inner earth to nako

roon for atomic waste. For centuries to come no tree or bush will
be able to grov on these tips.

COPYRIGHT: 19 79 STERN

11698
080: 3103

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"EST GERMANY

FRO OFFICIAL REVIEWS HORK OF PRC—608 BORDER COMMISSION
Bonn EUROPA-ARCHIV in German 10 Jan 79 pp 19-28

[Article by Dr. jur. Klaus Otto Nass. until 1976 department chairman at

the European Commission in Brussels. now state secretary in the Ministry
for Economics of Lower Saxony and for a period of almost 2 years, 1976-l918.
Lower Saxony's member of the Border Commission]

[Text] The Protoccol Over the inner-German Border

For a period of almost 6 years. from 31 January 1973 until 28 November
1978. the Commission. consisting of delegates from the governments of the
PRC and the GDR (Border Commission). met at irregular but never too distant
intervals. alternating between towns of both German states. usually close
to the border. before the leaders of both delegations. each for his own
government. on 29 November 1978 signed a document in Bonn which is identi-
fied as a "Protocol" between the two governments.

A contract regarding the foundations of the relationship between the FRC
and the GDR (Basic Treaty) of 21 December l972 had created this mixed
commission. it had given it a dual task: first. to control the border
markings between the two states and. if necessary. to renew or supplement
them. as well as to compile the necessary documentation regarding the
course of the border; secondly. the Border Commission was "likewise" to
contribute to the "settlement of other border-related problems. e.g.,
water rights. supply of energy and pest control."1

With this Protocol, which consists of five articles and a footnote regarding
the Elbe River. the governments sanction the results of all past work by

the border Commission. The Border Commission had submitted a report about
its past work. which is attached to the Protocol as Appendix [.2 Further
attached to the Protocol are: Parts of the border documentation. as well

as a total of 20 agreements regarding other border-related problems. 12

of which had already gone into effect before the signing of the Protocol

and another 7 of which became effective at the time of signing but which

had been (with one exception) in tentative use "beforehand." A few of

these agreements have only local significance for a certain area near the
border. but others would merit thorough consideration. which must be omitted

here because of limited space.
62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prominent among these important texts is the regulation regarding pest
control at the border and principles regarding upkeep and extension of
water resourcos at the border, as well as their water supply installations;
further agreements about iiuhing in Lubeck Bay, soEt coal mining in the
hnrbke-Helmstedt area, which covers land on both sides of the border, as
well as border crossings by recreational boats and other amphibious
vehicles on the Berra and Sonic rivers. As far as the marking tasks of
the Border Commisclon are concerned, it is evident from forber documents
and the report of the Border Commission that 1,296.7 km of border have
been surveyed geodetically. Not yet surveyed are border sectors 7-9
(Elbe River) (approximately 95 km) and a part of border section 24
(Harme Bode) (approximately 1.2 km).3

Peculiaritieu of inner-German Border Determination

The past work of the Border Commission shows peculiarities in at least
three different respects:

First, according to Article 2 of the treaty retirding relations between
the PEG and the Three Powers (German Treaty) of 26 thy 1952, the Three
Powers (France. Great Britain. United States) retained those rights and
responsibilities regarding Berlin and Cermanv as a whole and after the
transition of sovereignty to the PRC which they had held and exercised up
until then within the framework of the Four Power agreements. Therefore,
the government of the Federal Republic was not empowered to agree to any
deviation from the demarcation line of the inner-German border. which had
been drawn by the occupational powers.

The con acknowledged this limited sovereignty in Article 9 of the Basic
Treaty. which provides "that through this treaty no earlier treaties by
them [the FRO and the 60R], or international treaties between two or
more parties concerning them. shall be affected."

This determination was related expressly to the agreements among the

Allies in correspondence between Federal Minister Egon Bnhr and Secretary

of State Michael Kohl. In accordance with this general limitation, both
parties to the treaty stated concretely in the Basic Treaty: "The course

of the border...is established according to the determinations in the London
Protocol of 12 September 1954. Wherever the border deviates locally from
these determinations on the basis of later agreements of the occupational
powers, its exact line is determined and marked by the Commission at the
site in question taking into consideration all relevant facts."4

The practical consequence of this legal position was sometimes costly
research into the intentions of the occupational powers as expressed either
in writing. orally or by inference. Thereby the “customarily used

border" visible in the terrain. which had not been changed after control
passed into German hands, served as an essential guideline.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly: in spite of thin unambiguous binding of the work of the Border
Commission to the allied agreements regarding the borderline. different
interpretations regarding border rights exist on both sides. This diu-
crepancy is openly stated in the Basic Treaty. the introduction to which
expressly mentions the "differing opinions" of both states "on basic ques-
tions. among them on the national question." To the GDR it is a national
border which is subject only to international law.5 The FRO. on the other
hand, goes by the ruling of its Supreme Court. which describes the border
”as a border between two states under constitutional law." with the
“peculiarity that it exists on the foundation of the still existing state
of 'uermany as a whole.’ so that it is therefore a state border similar

to those between the states of the Federal Republic."6

This difference of opinion regarding the legality was in itself without
significance as far as determination of the intro-German borderline is
concerned. However. it gained in significance through the initial attempt
of the GDR to formulate the documentatioa which concludes the past work

of the Border Commission. This attempt failed. as will be shown below.

The "border policies"7 of the GDR are the third notable element. although
it is not the task of the Border Commission to treat them as such. Inci-
dents along the border adversely affected current talks more than once.
The FR“ dalegation tried to contribute to clearing up and avoiding such
incidents. it was beyond the powers of the West German deleg1tion to pre-
Vent the GDR from systematically building up its fortified installations.
even during the last 6 years. The Border Commission has. nevetheless.
contributed to a decrease of tensions at the intro-German border to an
extent which is not yet fully measurable.

About the Problematic Nature of a Comprehensive Document

Determination of the border is at any rate one prerequisite among others
for the prevention of border conflicts. Why did the FRO agree to this
Protocol which, although it clarifies the borderline, does not noticeably
lessen the inhumanity of the GDR "border policies"? This question
ultinmtely contains a criticism of the Basic Treaty, which established the
border Commission and charged it with the determination of the borderline
and the handling of other borderline-related problems. The Basic Treaty
is. however. in the interpretation given by the Supreme Court, the legal
authority; pacta sunt servanda.

But Isn't there a danger that the CDR will attempt to attribute to this
Protocol the character of a treaty. of an international border treaty?
Surely the GDR would like to see the Border Commission as a commission
exclusively under international law. in the opinion of the PRC. however.
what is special about the Basic Treaty (and. therefore. the Border
Commission as well) is "that, although it is a bilateral treaty between
two states which is subject to international law and which has the same
validity as any other international treaty, it is between two states which
are parts of a still existing. if inoperative. encompassing state of a

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UPPICIAL USE ONLY

total (Wrmnny with n honmgeneoua nopulltion..."8 No one can expect that
the “UK will embrace this view. Anyone not wanting to nuppiy the GDR
with the pretext for describing a document as a purely international
treaty would have to nimply reject any negotiations and ngreementn with
the 608.

At any rate. it was advantageous to recapitulate the extennive resultn

of yearn of work of the Border Commission. if one winhes to appreciate

the chosen form of a government protocol. it muut be ueeu against the back—
ground of the interests of hoth negotiating partners. thle ponuibly a
report of the Border Commission could. in no.» respects. have been satia-
factory to the Pederal Republic. two demands of the GDR remain unfulfilled.
namely. the concluulon of a formal treaty and itn formal rntlllcallon.

in other respects. certain aspects of the dlscuneion (which ensued during
the provisional signing of the document in the FRO) over the treaty nature
of the Protocol in the senne of Article 102 of the UN Charter” did not
address the actual problem. The document is. in view or the special nature
of lntra-German relations. not an "international" agreement; in particular.
neither the Basic Treaty nor its subneqnent agreements are filed with the
United Nations. But even if the document could be registered with the UN
Secretariat. the exclusively declaratorv character of the border determina-
tion in the border documentation could in no way be disputed. The decisive
criteria for judging the government Protocol is this question: does the
document contain a conatitutlonai holder determination. or does it merely
give the appearance of an autonomous agreement between the two German states
regarding the course of the border separating them.

Not a Constitutional harder Determination

The answer is unambiguous: No. The more intensively one examines the
wording of the Protocol. the more it Becomes clear that it does not permit
any other interpretation. Even its Preamble makes clear that the entire
document rests "on the bialn of the treaty of 21 December 1972." which had
inbtltuted the Border Commtuaion. taken into consideration are Article 9
regarding rights reserved to the Allies. as well as the Protocol definition
regarding the tanks of the Border Commission. with its express reference

to the London Protocol and later azreemente there between the occupational
powern. in addition. the addendum which outlines the tanks of the Border
Commisaion and the Protocol definition mentioned above are cited five
additional timen (Art 1. par 3; Art 4. par 1: Protocol footnote Elbe No 1;
Protocol footnote Elbe No 2: Report of the Border Commission No 1). One

can hardly imagine a closer interpretation of the Basic Treaty clause. in
which the GDR also expressly acknowledged the principle of a nonconstitutionai
border drawn by the occupational powers. To the contrary. 36 years after the
conclusion of the lmndon Protocol a common text of both German states

refer: to this Allied legal foundation.

65
EUR OFFECIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nor can this interpretation of the text be weakened by referring to the

fact that the Preamble contains clauses which in part appear to be de-

rived from the Final Act of the 6863 [Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe] (e.g.. "refraining from threats of force or use of force."
"lnviobllity" of the border. "unlimited respect for territorial integrity").
or those which belong to the universally recognized rules of international
law. All elements within the Preamble are (also) contained in the Basic
Treaty (Preamble and Article 3, which is the basis of the Border Commission).
and any enumeration in the Preamble of the document is subordinated to the
reference to the Basic Treaty by the preceding word "accordingly" ("on

the basis of the treaty...accordingly in the effort..."). Thus it is clear:
The Basic Treaty is the sole basis for the Protocol. and neither formulas

of the CSCE Final Act nor general rules of international law. but only

parts of the basic treaty. are repeated in the Preamble of the Protocol.

This interpretation of the document as a text which merely notes but does
not change the borderline is confirmed in many instances; such as when the
"existing" border is mentioned (heading. Article 1. etc.). such as when
Article 2 speaks expressly of the "determined course of the border existing
between the PRC and the GDR." and simply by the fact that both governments
have evidently not reached agreement on the Preamble. as in the Basic Treaty.
but rather merely say that they "agree."

Finally, the government Protocol itself does not mention border markings,
but rather confirms that the work of the Border Commission agrees with the
basic Treaty. This border documentation has been available for years at
the Bureau of Survey for the respective border segments. Both sides in
the Border Commission had agreed on the points in time on which they based
their practical measures from the verified. marked and surveyed borderline.

it is unambiguous that the text has neither drawn new borders nor claims
to autonomously redraw the borders drawn according to occupational law.
And in addition: tne document. in contrast to the Basic Treaty. changes
nothing as far as the legal nature of the border is concerned. nor does it
change the legal character of the relations between the two German states.
After the signing of the document. as well as before. these relations

have the same character as that outlined by the Federal Supreme Court
decision of 31 July 1973.

From that it can also be concluded that the FRO cannot be accused of not
having improved its legal position as compared with the Basic Treaty. Such
a basic improvement was not the goal of the negotiations. and could not

be the goal of the negotiations. if tht corresponding intentions of the 603
were to be met with as much success as was actually achieved (e.g.. the

GDR intention to conclude a treaty with constitutional clauses). considering
the initial regulations binding both sides.

There might also be criticism of the fact that the Preamble of this Protocol
did not--as. for example, the Preamble of the Four Power Pact of 3 September

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

197! on Berlin-~eonlnin a pnsnnge like "without damaging their legal
petition." Even such criticism would ninunderstand the character of this
Protocol. which is dependent on the ﬁnale Treaty (especially regarding the
national question and citizenship problems). On the contrary. an 'nn-
upeciiie. general. legal reservation on both sides which deviated from

the Basic Treaty would have given to the GDR a pretext for claiming that the
Protocol had departed from the understanding achieved in the basic Treaty
binding the obligations or the occupational powers. A renervntiou was
indeed included where it was meaningful, namely. regarding the unsolved

Elbe River question.

The Onisuion of the Elbe River

in four border segments (Elbe and part of the Harrbach Horne bode) there
was a failure to achieve an understanding on the borderline determined by
the occupational powers. The probleon relating to the course of the Elbe
borderlu cannot be dealt with in this report. it may suffice to mention
that the Second Criminal Panel of the Supreme Court in justifying a de-
cision. stated on 2 February 197?; "At Elbckil-muter 560.5. according to
historic development. the harder between the PRC and the GDR runs along the
east bank of the Elbe River": the GDR. on the other hand. according to a
decision by the chairman of its highest court on 9 November I977. assumes
a movable border on the river, namely. the lowest point of the valley. that
is. the channel.

As far as the Elbe River is concerned. the work of the Border Commission is
not yet concluded but continues. Both parties are in agreement on this in
the document (Protocol Art l: Protocol footnote Elbe No l and 2). Therefore.
it was not a case of the application of frotocol definition No 3 of the tasks
or the Border Conrﬂssion. which states: "it the Conuisslon cannot reach
agreement on a problem at band. this problem will be submitted by both

sides to their governments. which will settle it by way of negotiations."

By this formal statement. which easentially agrees not to agree. government
negotiations on the Elbe border could be avoided. The GDR, on the other
hand. had a fundamental Interest in continuing work on this problem. es-
pecially since the unresolved Elbe border could be considered a symbol of
the unresolved German question. in spite of this symbolic content. the PRC
could, eyen had to. consent to tlm GDR wish not to change the legal position
outlined in the basic Treaty through this Protocol. especially in compliance
with the above-mentioned principle. For that reason it was able to confirm

that the mission of the Border Coamission. which has no time limit. remains
in existence.

Thus. what in in effect is the expressly stated willingness to continue

the work not only of ascertaining the course of the border but also of

other related problems. for example. the exercise of fishing rights on the
entire river and in the sloughs of its eastern bank. The FRG's interest

in solving such questions was quite intense but nevertheless did not lead it
to question basic principles for the sake of practical solutions.

67
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Avoidable Border incidents

Even in the future the lack of ambiguity which could be achieved at other
border segments through border documentation will. therefore. not be achieved
at the Elbe River. which, incidentally. is a Federal waterway according to
the addendum to the Federal waterways Law of 2 April 1968. But. now as
before. the river is navigated by ships of the PRC and the GDR. in the
Protocol footnote mentioned above. both sides start from the premise that
the trailic treaty of 26 Hay 1972 continues to apply to this area. This
treaty. however. does not regulate in detail the coexistence of ships from
both states on the Elbe River (compare. especially. the Protocol footnote
to Article 23 of the traffic treaty).ll in view of the bilaterally unregu-
lated responsibilities and the unresolved borderline. the potential for
conflict on this river can flare up at any time. The previously mentioned
principles for pest control at the border which were worked out by the
border Commission on 20 September actually also apply to the border seg-
ments in the Elbe region; but. for example. the bilateral obligation it
contains. "to take all possible measures...to prevent the occurrence of
damages to the area of the other state" (Article 6). presumes an agreement
as to where the area of the other state begins and one's own area ends.

For that reason. there is special significance in that part of the Protocol
footnote referring to Elbe-related problems which says: "Until an agreement
is reached. both sides will continue to take into consideration the cir-
cumstance that the work regarding border segments 7—9 has not been concluded."
in clauses. both governments thus declare their willingness to avoid con-
flicts which could arise through the unresolved border question in the Elbe
area. This sentence does not contain a bias favoring a certain course

or the border. not even in the reference to the past ("will continue to");
it particularly does not provide any binding arrangement which goes beyond
the traffic treaty regarding existing practice on the Elbe River. "With

all measures"--rh0se are measures in "border segments 7 to 9." “here the
border runs. whether on the river itself or along the east bank slougbs.
remains open. Additionally. the following sentence contains a reservation
regarding the "interpretation of the legal position."

The value of such clauses is. however. questionable. as long as the views
about a “provocation" at the border are as far apart as they are between

the 60k and the PRC. when the GDR party secretary. Erich ﬂooecker. declares.
"In 1076 alone more than 1.000 provocations and attempts against our border
troops were made by the F86." then be has-~assuming the number is correct--
counted every furrow that a West German farmer has illegally. but not
necessarily intentionally. plowed on 09R soil. Such border violations by
the GDR are not even possible. because the land at the border is not used
agriculturally: rather. there is a continuous belt of fortifications and
barrier installations between the border and the population which is meant
to ptchnt not only accidental. but especially intentional. border crossings
from east to west.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR HFPICIAL USE "NIH

The situation in similar In the border region of the Elbe RIVet; while
anyone may row on or Jwim in the rivet from the west bank of the riVet.
river access from the GDR side is prohibited to private individuals. A

West German pleasure boat which gets into the eastern sloughs is considered
a border provocateur. however. not eVery Nest German pleasure boater

acts as the somewhat dangerous situation demands. if the CDR should desire
a conflict on the Elbe River. it could always create or find a pretext.
Whether all is "calm" on the Elbe River does not depend on what is happening
on the river as much as on the total nature of the relations between the two
neighbors. Clauses like the one cited above are proof of the good will--

at l.east at present--of the signatories. As for the rest. the border prac-
tices of the CDR. as long as they are not fundamentally changed, undeniably
remain' 'a special hindrance to the normalization of reiations."‘2

Future Tasks of the Border Commission

Can the Border Commission help prevent border incidents in the future?
According to the Protocol. the Border Commission continues in existence.
"hen the Border Commission began its activities. both delegations had

stated in Protocol footnotes that the agreements on pest control and

border waters were to go "into effect together with the documents concluding
the work of the Border Commission." its task. however. has no time limit.
according to the Basic Treaty. The future tasks of the Border Commission
will be (besides continued advice on Elbe-related problems) the checking
and. if necessary. replacing of markers, participation in the carrying

out of agreements concluded or prepared by it. as well as "discussion of
further problems related to the course of the border."13 The responsibility
of the Border Commission to contribute to the settlement of border incidents,
which is thus implied. does not limit the jurisdiction of the permanent
representatives in Bonn and East Berlin; neither are parallel actions on
both avenues excluded. But routine methods on the bureaucratic level in

a regularly convening commission are sometimes better suited for easing the
situation than proceedings of a more political nature.

The Protocol now concluded refers expressly to the legal principles which
have applied until now for the work of the Border Commission (Art 6, par

1: Art 4. par 2: as well as "principles according to Article 6" attached

as Appendix 1V). With that it is made clear that this is the same Border

Commission that the basic Treaty instituted and not a new commission based

on this Protocol. To be sure, some policies which until now have been
unofficially in use are not specified in writing; but as before. Article

3. Addendum to the Protocol. and the Protocol definitions of the Basic

Treaty remain in effect. Further evidence of this is the fact that. al-
though work on border segments 7 to 9 is to be "continued. " the decisive

determinations of the Basic Treaty (as, for example. the passage stating that
“the necessary documentation regarding the borderline" must be compiled are

not repeated.

The Border Commission will therefore continue to deal with all problems
relating to markings and the borderline. As before there is no possibility

()9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of direct negotiations between. for example, a "cat Ccrman Kreis administra-
tion or state administration with the corresponding local officials of the
CDR. That does not rule out the possibility that local experts (e.g., a
geodeticist) can be consulted or given special assignments by the Border
Commission. Two reasons are decisive for this concentration of tasks: First-
the centrally organized GDR is totally unwilling to delegate power; and
second, the special nature of inner-German relations includes a central
Jurisdiction of the PRC in relation to the CDR which might even exceed the
general rights of the Federation to foreign representation as laid down in
Article 32 of the Constitution. It even governs matters within the PRC
which are subject to exclusive international jurisdiction: this has been
confirmed indirectly by the Federal Supreme Court in that it declared the
Basic Treaty valid, not subject to modification by state legislatures,

even in those cases in which it regulates international matters (e.g.,
Article 7 regarding cooperation in the cultural field, as well as point

No 10 of the Addendum to Article 7 of the Protocol regarding radio and
television).

As the above arguments have shown, the significance of the Protocol lies,
on the one hand. in the confirmation that the border between the two states
(except for Elbe and Harme Bode) was unambiguously marked and documented
by the Border Commission, and, on the other hand, in the settlement of
numerous. mostly local problems.

The border policies of the CDR are. however. not relaxed by this Protocol;
they continue to borden the relations between the PRC and the GDR. But
the Border Commission has, in the past. contributed to the avoidance, or
rather, settlement of border incidents. It is hoped that it will succeed
in that in the future as well.

The policy of keeping the German question open will be successful only if
both states continue to talk and if misunderstandings and prejudices are
reduced. On the other side, the GDR leadership. for reasons of self-
identity, continues to need a policy of demarcation toward the PRC. which
limits the possibilities of talks. Seen in this light, the Border Commission
does not contribute to the German partition but, on the contr-ry, by con-
tinuous dialog. to increased bilateral understanding.

FOOTNOTES

1. Article 3, Basic Treaty of 21 December 1972; Addendum to Protocol to
Article 1, Basic Treaty. as well as Protocol definition of the tasks of

the Border Commission by both leaders of the delegation, also of 21

December 1972. Quoted in 8631 I1. 1973/1, p 621 ff; EA 1/1973, p
013 ff.

2. Compare Protocol wording and certain attachments on p D3 ff.

3. Compare in detail: "The Border Commission--A Documentation of Principles
and Activities." published by the Federal Ministry for Inner-German
Relations. Bonn, November 1978.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.
9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

COPY

9328
C50:

FOR 0?FICIAL USE ONLY

Protocol Definition (footnote 1).

Compare. for example. Erich Honeckcr. interview by SAARBRUECKBR ZBITUNG,
I9. 20 and 21 February 1978; excerpts in BA 20/1978. p 569 ff (550).

Constitutional Law of 31 July 1973. Constitutional Laws vol 36. p 26.
For an apparently differing opinion, ace Karl Kaiser and Peter Roggen,

'Whe Eastern Policies of the PRC in the framework of Western Politics

of Detente," in "Die internationale Politik 1970-72," Muenchen-Hien
1978, p 179.

Compare "Hoerterbuch zum Sozinliatiechen Stant," Dietz-Verlag. Berlin
1976. p 363.

Constitutional Laws. Vol 36. p 23.
Compare FRANKFURTER ALLGEHEINB ZEITUNG, 27 October 1978.

Compare Dietrich Rauschning. "Pestshrift fu~r Eberhard Menzel. Berlin
1975 p. 692 ff.

Quoted in: EA 13/1972, p 0320 ff (Protocol footnote p D327).

Federal minister for inner-German relations, "Report and Documentation

of the Development of Relations Between the PRC and the GDR 1969-1976,"
p 17.

Compare No 21. paragraph 3 of the "Principles of Art. A" of the
Protocol, p 05.

RIGHT: 1979 Verlag fuer Internationale Politik Gubh. Bonn

3103 5"”

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY