FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10636
6 JULY 1982

Worldwide Report

TERRORISM
FOUO 5/82

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR emu/u. USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
Teaaoaxsn

9000 5/32.
CONTENTS

NEAR EAST ARD NORIE AFRICA

ARMENIA“ AFFAIRS

Arnenian Terrorist Leader Discusses Plans. Contacts
(Zaki Shihab; AL-HAHADITE, 12 Feb 82)

WEST EUROPE

FRANCE

SPAIN

'Action Direct' tie. with Ecologists. Ultra-Left Prisoners Cited
(1.3 mm, 7 my 82) leooeoeeoloobosoooseseessssssssasssoe

Denobilization of Judicial System. Increased Terrorism Seen
(Gerard Nirascou; LB FIGARD, 7 May 82) ....................

Defferre 0n Battle Against International Terrorism
(Gaston Defferre Interview; PARIS HATCH. 7 May 82) ....... .

Changed Style, Future Potential for Terror 1st Acts
(Gerard de Villiers; PARIS HATCE. 7 May 82) . . .. . . . . .. . . . . .

Rue Harbeuf Editor on Syrian Terrorist Techniques
(Valid Abou Zahr; PARIS HATCH, 7 May 82) .

National . International Terrorisa Styles. Prevention Examined
(Antoine Bugev; LATITUDE AUJOURD'HUI, Jun 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Anarchists Said to Have Varied Ties With Terrorists
(Michel Dorcier; LATITUDE AUJOURD'HUI. Jun 82) . . . . . . . . . . . .

Terrorisn in Spain
(Alejandro Munoz Alonso; 31. 11533031an EN BSPANA. 1982)....

11

13

19

26

33

61
mm mm: man nxswsm m. cmrs
won AL-mm in Arabic 12 m. 32 pp 20-22. 19 Ioh 82 p 6

IZrticlc hy Zahi Shihoh: "A Socrct Ar-coian Arw Loadcr to AL-IAHADm: tic 'rckc

Pridc in Sgwict Ancoic hot lino It for Ito lcgligcocc toward tho Amnio-
Strugglcﬂ/

IM/ to: mo than a moth, tho data for tho outing with coo of tho lccdcrc of
tho Amiao Bccrct Any for tho Lihcrotioo o! Annia hcpt chitting Ira cpccific
Appoint-onto co occuioco tc poctpooucotc on othor ccccciooo. Ictwcco thou, tho
waiting proton parvcdcd tho cituotioo. Activity, ”cc thcy coy.“ totally dc-inotcd '
thoAnonianaruy,andocwcaboctithcgaotcappooriaumcua1vcyc. mm
pagcc of tho intcruotioul. Arab and local prccc brought tho rccdar, whcrcvcr ho
wac, thc rccultc of co- opcratico or aocthor thct unborc of thic any wcrc carry-
ing out. in Ironco, Switrcriood or othcr orcoc of tho world.

coo cvoning loot wcch, AL-hAmm woo coatcctcd in itc officc io lairut hy phcnc
and told thot itc ccrrocpoadant wac to wait, with itc photographor Jcccph Iahhlch,
intho corrccpodcot'chcuoouthochaoccthat coaococoighthlcchcothcdoorond
tcho thou to coo of tho eontcrc tho Aucaiao Bccrct Any hoc alcptcd tor hood-
qoortcrc. In fact, aa 1800 hourc wrath“. tho hon rang on! tho door oponcd to
a foirhaircd young Ion, hcawycct cad tall, who cchcd for tho n-cc, thou procccdod
to coy "Arc you ready?"

no i-odiatc anowcr wac ”0: courccuwhoro to?"

(hr qocctioo want mod!

/'_5_ut trout] woo a car when goooral. appuranta waa undictinguiohod, doc to tho atl-
wont of night, which had boom to fall. 'rhrcc young Ion worc woiting for no in
addition to tho driver. Ho got into tho car. chock hodc with than and introduced
ouroolvoo. Thcyacbcductoput-chccnmhoadctocmrmcycc, andthccor
thou wont on. Mo to? Ho don't know!

Artor ohout half an hour. tho car ctoppad in front of a building. wc got out an!
wo want into tho boo-cat at tho hcuo cal wcrc tokco to c roc- thcrc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the young coqenione epologired for thin conduct end eeid,

"You underetend the eecurity neeeuree; the eitnetion de-endo to or no. We hope
the dey will cone when you will vieit no in our libereted rep 'iic, Arnenie!”

One of thee cene forth end introduced ue to the young Arnenien Dinitri Georgian.
who. the French euthoritiee hed recently releeeed error e period of inrieenent
on the thet-3e of. co-itting e "terroriot" ect in lrence.

Arnenien poetere hed been put up. Picturee of young Arnenien non ed wo-en terry-
ins out verioue operetione preced the welle oi the roon. which wee 3 netere by 3
netere, end in eddition there were collectione of brecbree. e onell tepe recorder
end plein wooden cheire.

In e few nonente e tell young Amenien in hit thirtiee teen in. epeeking broken
non-Lebeneee Arebic. He ehook hende with ue end epologired for the deley in the
neetins. llie co-redee who were with ue then introduced his:

"Co-rode llegop negopien (en elieo). one of the Amnien erny leedere who ere epreed
ebout over the world.”

we hegen the convereetion.
AL-Iuml‘m: why wee your orgenitetion eetehliehed‘l

Hosop Ilegopien: The orgenizetion of the Arnenien Secret Arny tor the hiberetion
of Arnenie wee eetehliehod ee e neturel reeponoe to the etete of reveletionery
epethy thet the Arnenien ecene, coneieting of the diepoeoeeeed Arnenien neeeee of
the whole world, wee tufterins tron. It eleo ce-e ebout on e reeponee to the
notionel end cleee repreeoion thet our people here eurtered throughout their tine
in exile. In order for ue to put on end to there two tonne of oppreeeion, it wee
neceuery to pro-ore e revolutionery focel point thet would eon-e the revolution-
ery teoke end hietoric reeponeibilitiee o! liberetin; the Ar-enien citieen. cell-
in; for hie rights in exile end prepering hi- to wage hie etruule elenseide other
struggling peoplee. 1‘heretore the centrel teek of the Arnenien cititen lien in
the proceee of etruggling to liberete hie notion Ar-enie, which hee been ueurped
by the feeciet Turkieh resin.

AL-aemm: Therefore your soel ney be ou-erieed eon

uegop negopien: Liberetion of Arnenie. which her been occupied by the which re-
sine, end the eotebliehnent of e eocieliet eociety in libereted Arnenie.

AL-nemrm: no you believe thet the only neene for reeliting the soele ere
eebotege end terror?

Hegop ungopien: I would like to worn you egeinet repeetin; whet the Heater-n nedie
ere circuleting. Gar nethode ere not deetrnctive; elthough our nethode ere revolu-

tionery, they ere celled deetructive. Since you ere en Areb jeurneliet. let so
tell you thet the eethode o: the releotinien revolution ere deetructive end thoee

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
oi the Areb otruulee in the ore of the Otto-on. Britioh end Prench occupetiono
were eloo destructive. I would like you to correct your queotion.

AL-llMlADl‘l'll: whet io your poeition on the other Arnonien politicel portieol

mop legopien: 0t couroe, our pooition regerdins the politicel portiee on the
Arnenien otege io cleer. l'hey ere without e doubt treditionel pertieo whooe role
ended in exile, heceuoe they hove no prone-o for thio otego of liberetion of our
occwied territory. Their politicel progr- ney oiqu he oo-erieed ee preoerv-
ing ”the Arnenieueoo oi the Ar-nieno.” therefore we founded the Areoniee Secret
Ar-y tor the Liberotiou of Aroenie on port of e cleer progr- end vioion for liber-
etin; tho occupied lend. Ho hove oteyed ewey tron theoe pertieo heceeoe they hove

grown conventionel end hove developed reletioeo with the region where they ere
loceted.

AlcllAIlADll'U: So there io no coordinetion emu: you?
mop llesopien: Aheolutely not. ehoolutely not.

AL-nemm: It io well known thet there in e his Arnonien unity in the United
Steteo. ere it give you oupport‘l Are there eny tiee thet hind you to it in opite
of your leftiot orientetionl

mm aesopien: He hove reletiono with our eeooeo everywhere we ere locoted. hott-
iet-oour orsenitetiou io not what the erten preoo, which cello it "the inter-
netionel left." cleioo it io. tether. it erioeo fro- cc-it-ent end clooe edhor-
once to our Arsenion neoooo end defence of their interooto end our control ceuee,

be they in the United Steteo of A-erice, lurcpe or the Middle Boot. If our edher-
once to the ceuee end our denend for our righto it to he lohelled "leftion," then
we ere leitioto.

AL-Imlmrnl: where ere the euenieno loceted in the world? Hhet io your populo-
tion end geosrephicel breekdown?

Bogop Begopien: the Arnonien neooeo hove e conceutreted preeence in the United
Steteo of A-erice, where their nuﬁer io eotioeted et ehout l Iillion. hit of
couroe puto the Ara-onion co-unity in the United Stoteo in tirot plece in tone
of the number or citizeno in foreign countrieo. rho Arnonien co-nity in Iron
io oecond, thet in Rurope oo o rhole third, end then cone the Areh countrieo.
l‘hio io on for en the ctr-unity in exile goon. where the epprouinete odor of
Arlenion citieeno io lo million. There ere eleo ehcut 3 nillion poople in the
Soviet Republic of Aroenie.

AL-IIMIADITII: Uhet ere the hounderieo of the country you ere telling for?

llegop aegopien: the hounderieo of the country we ere telling for ere in keeping
with thoee eulorood by tho Leuoenne end Some ogre-onto of 1910; thet io. they
encoqooo the following provinceox the Province of lreerun, the Province of Von.
the Province of Uihlio. the Province of Kore. the Province of Ardehen. end but
Arerot. rhio nep wee recognised ot the tine by the Soviet Union. the United

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Stetee. hritein. Irence, end Turkey itself. However, no perty ventured to bring
it into being; they proceeded to ect in tcrne of their own interests only. which
teke pleesurc in peoplee' problems.

AL-RAHADl‘nl: "her in your position on the Republic of Arnenie‘l Do you vieu it es
en enhodinent or the netionel otete you dreen or?

Hegop negopien: He teke pride in the Soviet Republic of Arnenie, earl ue teke pride
in the feet thet it hes struggled end nenesed to ploy e greet role in the context
of preserving end developing Arnenien culture. technology, industry, end so forth.
At the tone tine, ell these resources ere nobilired to serve other peoplee, be they
the other republice in the Soviet Union or the Areb peoples end the oppreeeed
peoplel in “rice, heceuee when the Soviet Union eupperts the relestinien revolu-
tion or the Arsb countries in eny nenner. the lepublic of Arnenie mteneticelly
contributes to thet eupport. here we, es en Ar-enien eecret erqy for the libere-
tion of Arnenie, on record our observetion on offieiele in the Soviet Republic or
Arnenie, which is thet they hove ehendoned the sons oi their country who ere
etruuling tor the Arnenien people in exile end do not perfore their duty touerd
Arnenie's csntrel cense.

AL-EAHADITII: ls thet neent es s threet?

Ilegop Hegopien: No. eheolutely not. It is juet Intent to nehe th- beer responsi-
bility end drew their ettention.

AL-ahml‘nl: "hot is your poeition on the Soviet Union? In your orgeniretion
netionslist or socieliet internetionelist?

Hegop Hegopisn: By determining our politicel etreteg end politicel line, end by
our eveluetion of the internetionel strugglee in the world, we heve defined our
enemy es the fucist Mkish resine, with ell its nilitery end civilien institu-
tione. He elso coneider thet enyone supporting thin regine ielle into the note-
gory of enenies. we coneider ell countries in the socielist world to be the friends
of our people end our ceuse, end ve consider ell revolutionary end lihsretion nove-
nents to be stretegic ellies of our revolution.

AL-HMIADI‘m: Heny orgenizetions heve ebendgned the thod of revolutionery vio-
lence to ettein ohjectivee. including the [telesti Liheretion Greenieetiou.
"hot is your opinion on thet?

liegap negopisn: The Liberetion Oruniution hes not ebendoned revolutionery vio-
lence. Proof of thet ie the fsct thet seen of the detecluents thet ere repre-
sented in the Liberetion arsenizetiou still e-hrece creed conflict es e neens of
struggling for the liberetion of Peleetine end the return of the dieposeeesed
Peleetinien people to their territory.

AL-mmm: The Arneniens hove teced nnny ferns of oppression. why heve the
retelistory operetione been restricted to Mhey elone‘!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
liegep negopien: They heven't. Piret. our ectivity ie not retelietory. no you
eeid. He hove defined our en-y ee the feeciet Mieh regine. with ell ite in-
etitutione. end everyone eupporting thie region. we hove treneleted theee elogene
into ection. He heve etteched Mieh inetitutione, hove etrnck out et the uni-
tutione thet ere eilied with thie regine end hove neneged to nehe one people
mtrel. For eagle, Sqitrerlend eided with the Mieh regine, but recently it
took e neutrel peeition, end we ieened e etetnent, on Jeuery 1902, requeeting ell
detechnente of the Arnenien revolution to etop their nilitery etrihee egeinet Swine
inetitutione throughout the world ad ineide Switurled ee e consequence of
Switzerlend'e underetending of the Arnenien cenee ed ite egreennt to hold e polit-
icel triel of one of our fightere who ie iqrieoned in ite prieene. coeeidering our
fighting on e politicel prieoner. 1 coneider thet thie in e good victory in the
content of the progreee of the Armin ceuee. hence hee eleo by eueptionel de-
cree given the heroee o! the Ven operetion the title of politicel prieonere, be-
ceuee there in no lew in l'rence which coneidere prieenere politicel pereone. It
hoe given then ell the righte ell politicel prieonere enjoy end it will hold e ca-
pletely politicel triel. Theee ere ell the iroite thet we ere gleenieg on behelt
of the etrngglee we ere wegioa.

AL-HAHADITII: Through who:- were the contecte node?

Ilegop liegopien: Ae the trench goveruent eteted to AL-umm negeeine. contecte
ere nede through ite union officiele.

AL-IWIADIE: ileve you held joint neetime with Swine officiele?
Hegop liegopien: Abeolutely not.

AL-nemrm: So how did you reech en egreeuent?

negop negopien: Through interneduriee.

AL-ummrm: whet conditione do you iqoee on turkey to unite pence?

Hegop llegopien: there will be no peece with hrhey except when our territory ie
lihereted in full.

AL-mmnn'a: Hhet ie the neture of your reletionehip with the Arnenien orgenize-
tion "Orly?”

aegop llegopienx There ie ectuelly no reletionehip. we were token by eurpriee by
the Orly orgeniretion. however. ee you know, contecte hove been nede between no
end we net end we held conversetione with the Orly leedere, offering the neceeeery
support. They reelly proved their courege when they neneged to coqel the truth
govern-mt to releeee the fighting nen Dinitri Georgian, who ie eitting with you.

AL-mmm: 1e Beirut e nejor epringboerd for your may to ell ereee of the
world?

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂagop llagopian: Beirut, to no, in like the other capitale of countriea in the

world, aim you knou the nature of the cognition oi the Araanian people. There.
fore one can toy that it u not a najor springboard.

AL-ml‘nl: Are there any relations between yon and the led Brigadee, the [odor
nainhoi Organisation all! the Japanaoe Red Army?

llagop ﬂuopian: "a have already ensured thia eneation in previous atatenoete to
the uorld preea. we have relatione with all revolutionary detachanta that are

ottugglm directly or indirectly to met their paopla'e righta iron the colon-
ialiata.

AL-IAHADI‘m: Do thaae organization receive training in your ego. for inatancef

uagop uagopian: No. They do not need to get trained in our two. they have
everything they need. We have no needa but have everything we want. Ielationa

mg no are equal and revolutionary. we learn iron their euperiencaa and they
learn fro- oura.

AL-lldwn'li: And you-where do you get your training?

Hagan Hagopian: We get our training in our li-itad headquartera and cone. hon
we eay that, you not believe it, hecauae all we need to do ia tire piatole. throw
boa-be and net explooim. Ho do not need big. mmivo cane, hecanoe 0e are not
carrying out a atreet of mountain var.

AL-IIAHADI‘m: What ie your emotion with the Liberation Organization?

Hagop Hagopianx Relations are good. hecanea they ropreaent the laleetinian
peoplea’ can“.

AL-IlAHADm: what ia the Amnian chnrch'e relationehip to you?

Itagop negopian: we take pride in the Armenian church. ae they take pride in our
struggle; here one cannot dietinguiah between the church and revolutionary
atruggle. They are carrying out their edaeion of preaming the holy placee and
churchee in exile, and wa are carrying out our niaaion oi regaining our land and
therefore returning to the land together. He cowl-ant each other. and therefore
we are not Co—Iniata.

AL-nawzm: Do you have Orthodox end Catholico in your redo. or in it restricted
to the Orthodox?

Hagen llagopian: 0f courae we include all groupe in our nova-ant.

AL-namm: “not are the conditione for adorehip in your organisation. ae tor
a the Ar-eniana go?

Hagen llagopian: We naturally have coalition. One can diocnaa ao-e of thoee but
for aecurity reeaone we will not diecnao othera. Sou conditiono of unherahip are:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. eqloto and fun roodinooo to entry out tho molotiono o! tho political,
nilitoty ond nooo ocgoniution.

2. ‘l'ho individul not not hovo oooiol ohligotiono.
3. no not hovo oo- politicol ovoronooo.

‘lhooo oro joot tho thtoo conditiooo thot no rovool.
M-Mﬂnm: loo loony poroonool do you hovo?

Bosop nosopion: Ilo hove portioono in on orooo of tho world. to: unto. oo ooro
oorpriood to find thot ergoniutiono of Anonion orly portioono a popular ond
politicol. otgonitotiono voro brood in not canttioo of tho world, oo io clooriy
mount iron tho novopopoto thoy ioouo ondocoin; tho otly'o political plottorn.

AL-IIMIADI‘UI: Aro thoto non-Amino nonhoro in your auniootion‘!

losop mm: (no onom).
M-Mﬂnm: Hhot porcontoso of tho ornoniono do you roprooont‘l

mmopion: AoonAt-onionaly.onoconovo1ootothottroothoomortvooo
o nilitory torco moivo iron on Alt-onion cirtloo.

AL-Wm: It hoo boon ooid thot you rooort to tho ooo of throoto ogoinot rich
Amniono to tinonoo your octivity. "hot io tho truth of thio ototo-oat?

Bosop logopion: Uootorn popoto hove roiood thio point to olondot our lav-oat ond
thoroforo cruto o clinoto of touioo in housooio Armin circloo.

AL-mmrm: now do you viov Shoykh noohir ol-Juoyoyil'o motivo pooition ro-
goodin; you: orgoniootion‘l

Rosco Bomion: Ho do not ovoiuoto Shoykh Boohir ol-Juoyyil on tho hooio of hio
nosotivo mluotion of our orgoniootioo, no ovolooto Shoykh loohir ol-Ju-oyyil fro-
tho poropoctivo of tho intorooto of our Atomic nooooo in otiootol otooo. No to-
joct octo of out-onion oaoinot ow Arnonion citiun. anon ouch octo occur, our
rooponooiovoryhorohondiooi-odotthooggroooorinhiomho-o. ﬂownt
through o proweotivo phooo in tho poot, but now no no in o ototo of oniotioo.

no hoo ioouod otdoro thot Amino oro not to ho horooood. ond our co—it-oot to
tho orniotico vith Shoyhh Boohir oI-Jt-oyyil oriooo fro- tho notionol novonont ond
tho rooiotonco'o omort to: no. In oddition. ho knovo (on won thot no on ohot
duo ond otriko out ot tho hobonooo Porooo' otticoo in on orooo of tho world.

AL-Wm: "hot io your plan of oction for tho toning otoco?

mop liogopion: tho toot io thot our ptogxon io cloor, ond thot io to conti-oo
to otrugglo to hobo our conoo, which hoo hooa orodiootod tot non thon 50 yooro,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0

mad out. and cooaoquautly to roalioa our goal. in coopotatioo with tho Mioh
rovolutionary mto, tho duh rovolutionary “to and tho Mioh doocrat-
ic political pottioo.

AL-HAHADI‘I'B: Can vo ooon «pact you to cam out now oporatiooo?

Hagop nogopian: Every day than to tho oapoctatiou of now opotatiouo tro- uo. hut
oicouroouovillootrovoal tho oatnroodouotarsotoocmtothoyatotocuoood.

loto

In AL-lmumm'o intorviou with an Armin Soorot Any loada: publiohod in tho
laot ioouo. ocuo niotokoo waro nodo which not ho corroctod. thou ato:

l. ‘lho quoatiou coutainod in tho publiohod tout, phraood "Ara than non-Man
Ina-bozo iuyou: or;anizat1oo“and tho-nova: intho tor-oi ”um," did not
haoically appear in tho intorviov; thio ouhjoct vaa not koachod in any way, direct-
ly or indiuctly.

2. In tho ancuoo to tho quootion "low do you viov shaykh laohi: al-J-yyil’o nox-
ativo pooitioo rogatding your organization?" tho word “lad" 'aa dooppod indoct-
ently; tho paragraph appoarod ao "atiooa (to. tho national m and tho ro-
oiotanco'o mpport for ua" inotoad of "ariooo tro- tho lack.“ an of noto.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

H”! UPPILIAL WE. ONLY

 

Fronch authorities.

Dimitri Georgian was recently relonned by the

37
: 6133/2604
'AC‘IION DIRECT TIES WITH WIDGISTS. ULTRA-1m P31805338 CITED

Paris LE PIGARO in French 7 May 82 p 28

[Article by J.-C. R: "Bastions of the Ultra-beft"]

[Text] Has the meaty of 10 Hay turned the members of the toughest French
terrorist group "Action Directe," who have been responsible for hold-up
murders, crimes and attacks with explosives and automtic weapons, into peace-
ful squatters? Quite the contrary.

0n 9 April, the "squats" of the 18th district-—ox‘ Goutee-d'Or, Poissoniere

house, and Rue de la Charbonniere—received another visit from the police.

However, this time it was not the Special Security Corps or police from the
district station. These were inspectors of the judicial police.

The hideout of "Action Directe,” a clandestine terrorist novenent. had just
been surrounded. It was 1730 hours. Three bulletproof vests, a puapgun,
and a pistol were seized, as well as docuuents end radio equipment in the
occupied buildings.

A few hours earlier on the same day, on Rue Borrego in the 20th district, a
trap laid by the Judicial Police at a garage where a stock of military weapons
was concealed enabled the arrest of Joelle Aubron and hohand Hanani, both
urgently wanted terrorists.

The former is suspected also of having opened fire on the police in 1981
during a hold-up aimed at padding the secret funds of "Action Directs." The
latter had already been caught in an antiterrorist sweep in March 1980. He
had been questioned at a house in Brusc (Var) where members of "Action Directe"
and the Italian "Red Brigades" were staying. In fact, after discovery of the
arms cache on 9 April in Rue de la Charbonniere, the Judicial Police had
expected to capture the nain leaders of the hardocore branch ("political-
military section") of "Action Diretta," i.e. Jean-March Rouillan, founder

of the nova-ant, and his conpanion Nathalie Henson, accused of having fired
on inspectors of the secret police in 1978. However, taking advantage of

a "leak," Henigon and Bouillan escaped in tine on 9 April from the "Peasants
and Workers Group of the 18th District." Under this deceptive title, the
"squats" of the 18th have in reality become the French bastion of anarchism
and terrorism. Appealing to different susceptibilities, they draw dissident
ecologists, ultra-Left groups of soldiers and prisoners, etc.

11
Weapon Used in an Assassination

"Action Directs" had also secretly brought their migrant Alerians. Tunisian,
and Train, all preaching Third World revolution and functioning as a support
network for various clandestine armed struggle organizations.

At the beginning of the year, the police thus discovered that people were
exchanging more than ideas in these "squats." Molotov cocktails were seized.
Rouillan and Henigon were reportedly questioned on the subject for a few hours
then released. Since then, the coooperation between "Action Directe" and
international terrorist novenents such as the "Lebanese Arned Units" has been
confirmed.

One of the automatic weapons in the Rue Borrego arns cache had been used in an
anti-Israeli attack in Paris. and the printshop which put out the "Action
Directe" leaflets was also printing the con-unique of the "Lebanese Arled
Units" which was responsible for recent nurdsrs of two diplomats, one American,
the other Israeli. in France. For the present, the "Action Directe" squatters
have only been charged with "residence violation."

9920
C80: 6131/505

12
DMBILIZATIO“ OF JUDICIAL SYSTBI. INCRKASBD means! 8!!“
Paris LB PIGAIO in French 7 May 82 p 2
[Article by Gerard NirascOu]

[Text] "Insecurity and terroriee don't exist; they are inventions of the
right." Bow eany tiles did we hear this phrase free the opposition prior

to Play 1981? Once in power. the language of the victors hardly changed. For
eonths. for nearly a year. France was described or depicted as a haven of
peace and tranquility in the eiddle of a world in crisis by the president

of the republic down to the lowest state secretaries. as well as by the print
minister. the minister of the interior and the minister of justice. Even

on 1 April. right after the attack on the Capitole, in response to a FIGAIO
editorial which condemned the goveruent'e indifference to the rising cries
wave and nmber of attacks, didn't Pierre hauroy state: "Let's not exaggerate.
France is not teetering on the brink of terrorism."

The change in tone is quite recent. Gaston Defferre. the first to do so.

had. during a harsh confrontation with Robert Badinter over the issue of
identity checks. expressed a view which was eore in line with the deteriorating
situation. Which didn't prevent Francois hitterrand and Pierre Hauroy free
proclaiming loudly. but not without hesitation and confusion, that the Security
and Freedom law would be repealed and that identity checks would be permitted,
except in the presence of the courts. only "in certain places and it the threat
is mdiate." It actually took the explosion in Rue Herbeuf. on 22 April.

to bring about a change to really new language. The night-arish vision of

a devastated street in central Paris. stained with the blood of innocent vic-
tins (1 dead and 63 injured), definitely swept may all utopian dreams.

But between 10 Hay 1981 and 22 April 1982, the harm had been done. In the
frenzy of change and under the leadership of Robert Badinter. the minister

of justice. who. in this instance. was only inplenenting the socialist prograa.
a systematic diseantling of the judicial systee was begun: the death penalty
was abolished. without any replacement penalty being established;

the Court of National Security was elininatad. as was the standing tribunal
of the arned forces; one of the broadest .neeties (note than 6.000 prisoners.
9.000 including cmutations of sentences) was declared. even for dangerous
terrorists; while awaiting its repeal. the Security and Preedon law was drained
of its content by ministerial directiveev conveyed to the public prosecutor's

l3
office. At the same time. the magistracy was taken in hand and "purged."

A number of members of the Hagistrscy Union. closely associated with the new
government and whose Rousseauist and husniat views have permeated the social-
ist breviary concerning judicial and penal affairs. were appointed to key posts.

During the same period; the police force was going through a crisis whose
effects are still being felt today. A witch hunt led to the finger being

put on the heads of almost all departments and major services. As for the
rank and file. tratmatized by an avalanche of official statements in which
they were accused of having served as a militia for employers. of being deeply
racist and of making promises to the far right. they were even more demobilisad
as they helplessly witnessed the establishent of a system in which criminals
would systematically enjoy the understanding and indulgence of judges.

The Campaign Against Terrorism

The attack in Rue Harbeuf. coming a few weeks after the attack on the Capitola.
after the assassination of an American military attache, Charles Ray. and

an Israeli diplomat. Yacov Barsimentov. caused a shock. which was magnified

in public opinion by the constant rise of petty and moderately serious crime
affecting practically every French citizen. whether residing in the city or
the country. The best proof of this: Insecurity. which was ranked fourth

or fifth muong the public's concerns in polls taken a few months ago, is number
one today.

Francois Hitterrand. the president of the republic. has drawn some conclusions.
In his Gueret speech on 2 May. he acknowledged that the problem of insecurity
was serious. "although we must not allow ourselves to become panic-stricken."
He appeared even clearer concerning terrorism: "1 shall personally see to

it that the campaign against terrorism is carried out in an implacable manner.
but with respect for basic liberties." This new tone is also found in the

remarks of the prime minister and in those of the minister of the interior.

But a change in tone is not enough to formulate a different policy. And that
is where the problem lies.

A campaign against insecurity and terrorism is not declared by mere speeches.
Everything is proceeding as though, although the evil has been recognised.
there is a refusal to use effective measures to achieve results.

First of all, it is not a question of going back over the destructive measures
taken since 10 May. measures which leave judges and police particularly helpless
and which constitute an encouragement for crime. And this applies to both
simple crimes and terrorism.

With regard to terrorism itself. examples abound in which the will to combat
it is frustrated in the field by the dominant ideology or, quite simply. by
a number of political commitments.

In the case of the right of asyltm, the government has decided that France

would constitute a country of reference. If the aim is noble. the result
is disastrous. More than 180,000 refugees have moved to our cauntry today.

16
It is unrealistic or hypocritical to think that some of then will not engage
in political sctivisn. with all the consequences which that nay have. Stating.
as Gastonbefferre did. that we will not tolerate a single failure of the duty
of self-control required of then sakes no sense: The police cannot watch

over such a ease of individuals. ﬂouldn't the problsn instead be that of
limiting the influx of these refugees?

In the ease of extradition, France still refuses to sign the Strasbourg conven-
tion on terrorism. The reason: It makes no distinction between a political
militant and a cannon-law crininal. Here again, the reasons. however noble

they say be. are belied by the facts. It is canon knowledge that my Spanish
Basques, who have taken refuge in France and whose extradition Madrid loudly
demands. continue to fight and to naintain Spanish terrorism because of France's

position in this regard. The sane is true of sons refugee nationals of African
and Middle Eastern countries.

And what can Fe said about individuals who: the m and Italy ask us to extra-
dite and who continue. from French territory. clandestine operations against
countries whose denocratic nature is difficult to deny? Especially since
there exists-call experts sake this claim and can prove it-an international
terrorist association which could not care less about borders or ideologies.
All terrorist novenents help and support each other. Agreeing to accept then
on one's soil is the equivalent of encouraging the developesnt of a national
terrorism.

This is what is currently taking place in France, where three kinds of terrorism
coexist and thrive: Basque. Corsican and that of the far left. ls there

any need to recall that two (:88 [Republican Security Companies (State Mobile
Police)] were killed at Saint-Btienne-de-Bsigorry by French independence nili-
rants closely associated with Spanish Basques? Are we to forget about the
legionnaire killed near Aleria by the MC [Corsican National Liberation
Front]. a Corsican extremist move-ant whose ties with certain special services
in the Middle East are clear? Is it pointless to note that the Direct Action
group has been trying to reestablish itself for several nonths and that it
could receive notoriety before long. while bearing in mind the ties which

its nenbers maintain with members of the Italian Red Brigades or Ger-an Red
Army Faction, who have taken refuge in France.

The No Ideologies of the PS

Under these circustances. it is persissible to wonder what could be the out-
come of an antiterrorist c-paign of a socialist govern-ant which is caught

up in certain principles which are not in keeping with a nore and nore exacting
and ruthless reality.

Socialist language concerning terrorism has changed. but concerning crime.
the official doctrine reaffirned by Francois Hitterrandualso in his Cueret
speech-which it was believed had been somewhat modified after certain state-
ments by Gaston Defferre. remains unchanged. There is no question of giving
the police greater authority and no question of showing sternness toward
crininals. It is by changing society that we will put an end to insecurity.
which. at least it is now recognized. is real.

15
The president of the republic stated clearly: "It is through solidarity that
we will put an and to crime ..." In an interview with a provincial daily news-
paper. the sinister of justice. Robert Radinter. also explained on 2 Hey:

“The security of citizens depends less on repressive legal texts--we have a
full arsenal of then-—than on the measures implemented to reduce crime. By
that 1 mean that all actions in favor of maintaining security nust be con-
ceived and carried out with regard for reality. as it exists in this or that
city; district or street ..."

0n the same day. Francois Hitterrand and Robert Badinter reaffirmed in the

same terms what the campaign against crime should be. Both statements are

in total contradiction to the recent remarks of Gaston Defferre. for whom
security must be assured at all costs, including by forceful means. It also
seens that it is here, on this issue. that there are differences and hesitation
within the government after a year of socialist rule. Regarding insecurity-
and even terrorisn--there are two opposite ideological factions within the

PS: One recommends firmness while the other. nore doctrinaire. believes that

a change in society can solve all problems.

There is hardly any doubt that if insecurity should continue to increase--
which is suggested by all statistics for the first months of the year and
barring a suicidal attitude concerning the next municipal elections--the go
government will be forced to review its choices. A change of course that would
not occur without a confrontation within the Socialist Party.

For the time being, after a year in power, we can only note that the battle
for security has largely been lost: Crime has risen and terrorism has in-
creased. while the police are disorganized and the courts are helpless.

Death Penalty Abolished

Four fundamental texts have been rescinded or eliminated at the request of
the present minister of justice. Robert Badinter.

Elimination of the Court of National Security: This was approved on

17 July 1981 by a hand vote of members of parliament. From now on. in
peacetime. crimes and offenses against national security will be examined
and judged by cannon-law jurisdictions and according to the regulations of
the Penal Procedure Code.

when this issue was debated, Robert Bsdinter told the National Assembly:
"French justice must be exemplary. But French justice will not be as long
as its institutions include this special jurisdiction. which is open to
criticism because of its motivation. is unjustifiable because of its regula-
tions and condemneble for its mistakes."

Abolition of the death penalty: This was approved on 18 Septenber 1981 by
a vote of 369 to 113 National Assembly meabers. No substitute penalty has

yet been proposed.

At the rostrum of the sssenbly. Robert Radinter stated in particular: "In
the name of what competence. what diversion is it constantly repeated: 'Thinh

l6
of the victims!’ He think about the victims constantly. but by thus exploiting
their misfortune. the aim is to oversensitiss. to silence reason in order to
maintain the old order of things."

Elimination of the Antiviolence Law [against damage to property by demonstrators]:
This was adopted by National Assembly members on the night of 25 November 1981.
This law. mainly included in Article 314 of the Penal Code. established penal

and pecuniary liability for perpetrators of violent acts.

At the assembly rostru. Robert Badintsr said that this was "a dangerous text"
end condemned "a circustential 1.! which had survived the great fear of 1968."

Elimination of the Standing Tribunal of the Armed Forces (TPFA): This was
approved on 16 April 1982 by National Assembly members.

In an interview with the newspaper LIBERA‘l'lw. Robert Badinter explained: "The

law eliminating the ”PA is an historic text from a symbolic standpoint. since—
like the abolition of the death penalty-wit is one of those laws which break

with a long pest and turn a new page in the history of our system of justice ...
Elimination of the 'l'PFA draws 650 years of French history to a close 110

more military tribunals and no more military judges in France during peacetime ..."

Attacks: A long List

Over the past 12 months. terrorist acts have increased in France. But it was
during last fall that the phenomenon accelerated sharply. The principal attacks
include:

26 October 1981: No bombs. one in Fouquets' restroom and another in front
of the Publicis drugstore on the Chaps-Elyse”.

29 October: A bomb destroyed the Berlitz Cinema on the Boulevard des ltaliena:
three persons injured.

5 November: A bomb exploded in the baggage-claim area of the Lyon railroad
station: no casualties.

12 November: Christian Chapman, the American charge d'affaires in Paris,
narrowly escaped from a killer who shot at him with a 7.65 [caliber] revolver.
Hashington accused Libya.

16 ﬂovember: A bomb destroyed a baggage-claim area in the East railroad station.
Three travelers were injured. Responsibility for the attack was claimed by
an Armenian terrorist organization. the Orly group.

20 ﬂovember: A bomb ravaged McDonald's restaurant on Boulevard Seint-Hichel.
one person injured.

20 December: A bomb exploded in the headquarters of a transportation company.

Botrans. which specialised in trade with Eastern countries. Signed claim of
responsibility: Charles Martel.

17
23 Decenber: "Direct Action" claiaed responsibility for four explosions in
Paris, one against the licensed Rolls Royce dealership.

18 January 1982: Col Charles Ray. ailitary attache to the 11.8. Enbassy in
Paris. was assassinated in front of his residence by several 7.65 [caliber]
bullets. The Anericane accused extremist Palestinian circles.

3 February: No legionnaires were attacked near Aleria. in Corsica. One.
Renato Roaai. was killed and the otlnr was seriously wounded. Several days
later. Paris and the province had two sleepless nights: a total of nore than
150 explosions. The Corsican National Liberation Brant (MC) clained respon-
sibility for all these operations.

19 March: No CBS on patrol at Saint-Etienne-de-Baigorry. in the French Basque
country, were hit with several blasts of nachinegun fire. Jacques Bouiller
died on the spot. while Bernard Roussaria died several weeks later. The attack
was probably nsde by neabers of lparetarrak. the French Basque independence
organization.

29 March: Explosion on the Trans-Europ Express train. the Capitole. while
traveling at 140 lea/hour near Limoges. The device. a high-povered borb. had
been placed in the head railroad car. Five persons. including the sister of
former Finance Minister Jean-Pierre Fourcade. were killed and 27 others injured
more or less seriously. No claim of responsibility and no clues as yet for
the police.

1 April: The offices of an annex of the Israeli hbessy in Paris. on Boulevard
Halesherbes. were nachinegunned. The persons responsible. Joelle Aubron and
Mohsnd Hanani. closely associated with the far-left aovenent "Direct Action,"
were arrested several days later.

3 April: The second secretary of the Israeli Embassy in Paris. Yacov Baraiaantov
«probably an agent of Hosead. the Israeli secret service-was shot down in
front of his residence by a young wonan with several 7.65 [caliber] bullets.

It was proven that this weapon was the sane one which was used to kill Charles
Ray, the Aaerican military attache.

22 April: Explosion of a booby-trapped car at 33 Rue Marbeuf in Paris. in
front of the offices of the pro-Iraqi Lebanese newspaper. AL WATAN AI. ARABI.
A young woaan was killed. 63 persons were injured and danage was considerable.
Interior Minister Gaston Defferre held Syrian services responsible.

11915
CSO: 6131/507

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MC!

um 01' BATTLE AGAINST Imuom MOMS“
Perie PARIS HATCH in French 7 Key 82 pp 30-31

[Interview with Geeton Defierre. ninieter of etete for interior end decentreli-
nation. by Florence Portee; dete end plece not epecified]

[Text] [Queetion] Hr Defferre. you ere ecting prise ninieter. end you heve
eeid thet Prence is currently threetened by internetionel terrorien. whet do

you neen exectly?

Geeton Defferre: There ere two kinde of terrorieu: internel terrorien enong
the French end internetionel terroriee inported tron ebroed. I would like to
renind you thet I begen by enpheeieing thet netionel terroriee in Prence ie
cleerly receding. I etreee the point beceuee this is due to the policy pur-
eued by the eocieliet government eince 10 Hey. Thet being eeid. I eppeel to
the co-on eenee end petriotien of ell the trench, eeking then to underetend
thet it ie fortnnete thet e truce hee been ruched with thoee eutononiet nove-
nente. If the ettecke were to reeune, civil peece would definitely be conpro-
nieed.

[Question] You don't went to be fighting nore then one fire during en offen-
eive by internetionel terrorism?

[Anewer] I en not telking ebout en offeneive by internetionel terrorien. I
will einply tehe (our ennplee. Thet boeb in the Cepitoh-«wee it en ettech by
internetionel terrorien? He heve no proof thet it wee. The teete did not turn
up anything. we heve the feeling thet it wee, however. Then there were the
eeeeeeinetione of en Auricen diplonet end an Iereeli “planet: in this ceee
we know thet they were foreign in origin. And the etteck on Kerbeut Street:

we know the context-a Lebeneee newepeper hed received threete fron Syriene.

We ney heve other cluee tomorrow, but for now, there in every reeeon to believe
thet thie, too. wee en internetionel terroriet etteck.

[Queetion] The French heve the iepreeeion thet if internetionel terrorien ie
knocking et our door, it ie beceuee the eocieliet governeent, with ite policy
of providing e "lend of refuge." hee opened the door wide to Ioreignere.
[Anewer] Giecerd hed to cope with the eene problene thet we ere having. Cerloe
wee in Perie when he threw e grenede into e Perie cefe. the Jepeneee Yukete

19

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Puruya was arrested on French soil. Since 10 hay 1931. terrorists have not
been reentering France as easily as before. I noted during a recent nesting
with the ninisters of interior from Germny, Austria. Italy, end Switzerland
that ny colleagues are having the sane problnae that we are. And that anong
all our Western countries. it is useless to try to decide which one has the
sad honor of being the capital of international terrorien.

[Question] "hat is your thinking and that of the governnent‘t

[Answer] To conbst international attacks. There are several nethods. The one
adopted by the previous government consisted of giving in to threats. For an-
snple, when Carlos denuded the release of the Japanese Yukate luruya, who had
been arrested in France, Carlos threw a grenade on St Gernain Boulevard. and
the result was 2 dead and 30 wounded. ho weeks later. the sane group took
hostages at France's abassy in The Hague. and Furuys was released. A second
example is Abou Dsoud, the Palestinian responsible for the slaughter at the
Munich ganes. lie was arrested on French soil on 13 January 1977 and released
on 17 January. Once again. the government of the tine gave in.

[Question] So?

[Answer] So the question I an asking is whether the nethod that consists of
giving in is the right one or whether, on the contrary. while it nay seen ef-
fective at the nonent, it does not pave the way for tragedies later. In other
words, releasing people who have connitted odious crines really anounts to en-
couraging then to do it again and to putting ourselves in a situation where we
will give in again. On the other hand, standing up to than nay also cause ter-
rible tragedies at the start. But if , while standing up to then. we also adopt
an offensive attitude. we can also strike a few blows of our own against those
cot-sitting the crines and effectively deter thus fron toning to settle their
ovm affairs on our territory.

[Question] You are referring here to the case of the friends of Carlos (Bruno
Breguet and Magdalena Kopp) who have just been sentenced to prison. Their
attorney Verges predicted that Carlos would denand their release. What has the
governnent decided to do about that?

[Answer] On that point, as on the question of the specific tactics the govern-
nent has decided to use to conbat international terrorisn, I cannot reveal ny
intentions to you! If I did, the governnent would lose sone of its possibili-
ties for action. "Secrecy in action is essential," General De Gaulle used to
say—we won't go all the way back to what Machiavelli said. but secrecy in a
fight of this kind is decisive. There is no question of violating it. After
all, all the terrorists would have to do is buy a copy of PARIS HATCH to find
out what we intended to do!

[Question] You have announced, however, that the governnent would he caln and
deternined but offensive.

[Answer] In order to understand our analysis of the problen, let us take the
example of the incident on harbeuf Street. First hypothesis: it was a case of

20

FOR OFFICIAL US ’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

foreigners fighting anong the-selves. If they went to fight each other. let
than do it sonuhare else. The second hypothesis concerns the question of
whether one of those countries has enough of a grudge against France to try to
take revenge on it and to cons strike their blows here.

[Question] what about the first hypothesis?

[Answer] That brings up the problel of the conditions under which the right
of asylue eust be exercised. The right of aeylun is a basic principle to
which France adheres strongly. But free now on. it will be limited to what it
should be, and as a result, those who benefit fron it have no right to engage
in political fights and even less to co-it assaults.

That is why instructions were issued on 23 April for all French diplomats
abroad to be particularly careful about issuing visas. We are also going to
take a census of all foreigners who night be a threat to France's security,
including those who night be here officially. Those whon we feel should not
rennin in France will be asked to leave the territory.

[Question] What if you have reason to think that foreign governnents are try-
ing to destabilize France?

[Answer] Let us suppose-and this is our second hypothasia--that certain coun-
tries would like to take revenge on France and its policy. I notice that the
people who. in general, shed blood and try to impress public opinion to asks

a govern-ant give in do not rest until they are released after they are arrested.
Thank God, France has many possibilities for action in the political and diplo-
netic area. But it also has possibilities for fighting in the field. As a re-
sult, there is nothing to indicate that we will cone out the losers. I cer-
tainly do not want us to be forced into having recourse to violent means or to
the resources of international politics, but France has the right to defend it-
self, and if need be, it will take the necessary steps, whether they involve
political. diploeetic, or police action.

[Question] So is that what you are thinking of when you talk about using the
offensive nethod?

[Answer] Listen. I an talking froe experience. I know about the underground—
! was in it. I headed a network that had three broadcast links with Great
Britain. When the Nari forces got too close and we were on the point of being
caught, we tried not to be arrested. What was true of us is also true of every
terrorist in the world. In our case. we were attacking the occupiers. Today's
terrorists are attacking established regines either because they want the so—
ciety that exists to collapse. or because they are anarchists with no purpose
other than destruction, or because they have a grudge against the policy of the
country targeted. Well. a successful offensive policy "destabiliaes," as the
saying goes. Today the French Government has a duty not to be week. If we
organize effective action against the terrorists. we can deal than a severe

blow.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] You claim that you have not yet chosen either the Giscsrd-atyle
defensive nethod or the offensive method, but everything you say indicates
that you have chosen the offensive method.

[Answer] Both of them can be employed successively or simultaneously in dif-
fering places, countries, or circumstances. hitterrsnd telephoned me several
tines throughout the day on 22 October. The nut morning, he celled me in at
0865 hours to hold s meeting with General Saulnier, his chief of staff; ration,
who heads the 0682; Grimaud, my directeur de cabinet; and Chalet, director of
the DST [Directorate of Territorial Surveillance]. We spent 1.5 hours in his
office. That just shows how personally concerned he is about what must be done
to insure the security of the French.

[Quation] During that meeting, did you deter-sine that the french police have
the means for effective and coordinated sntiterrorist action?

[Answer] I won't make a list of all our services for you. As far as the coor-
dination of intonation is concerned, we have scheduled weekly neetings, espe-
cially since the first threats by Carlos. After 23 April, it was decided at
Francois Hitterrand's request that we would hold daily meetings with all the
intelligence services in my office at the Ministry of Interior. The basis of
action--the secret of success—is first of all to be quickly and well inforned,
and that is why we have the coordination structure under my own responsibility.
He will prepare a summary report every day and send it to the President. When
he considers it necessary, he will call us in for a meeting, as he did this
morning.

[Question] You talk a lot about Carlos. lie in particular seals to worry you.
Does anyone know where he is? One day he is said to be on French soil, the
next day he is reported to he in northern Italy, and so on.

[Answer] The harnful activity he directs leads him to move about a lot and to
make people think he moves about even more. That is one of his weapons. he
has a greater effect on people's thinking by making then think he is present
everywhere, and someday he my succeed in being regarded as one of those mythi-
csl people said to have the gift of ubiquity, being simltsneously in Libya,
South Yemen, Syria, France, Belgium, and God knows where else.

[Question] In your opinion, who manipulates Carlos?

[Answer] It seems to me that at the start, he was used by countries that did
not accept the ideas of a certain number of Western nations.

[Question] Are you thinking of the USSR?

[Answer] I am thinking of Syria, South Yemen, and Libya (it is not certain
whether Libya plays the same role today). The weapons are in fact supplied by
the Eastern countries. Those countries, which disagree with our policy and

engage in espionnage--snd they are not the only ones to do sonhsve tried to
attack our regimes by using their own methods, which are those of terroriss.

The result has been the training of a certain number of men who later, as they

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

becane more important themselves, have continued to form groups which are en-
feotfed to their original leaders or which, trapped by their role, play it with

conviction. That seems to be the case with Carlos. They are the moat danger-
ous ones.

[Question] “by?

[Amwer] Because when one is a terrorist by conviction, one wants to kill and
perhaps to die as well. I say perhaps because when someone-dike Carlos. for
example-has been made a star for several years by the media and becomes a
kind of personality, it is sore difficult to die. So the individual exposes
himself less. Carlos started out by carrying out orders, but he has now become
the No l terroristnthe one hunted by every police force in the world. but
perhaps he still has the will or the ability to carry out "operations" and to
risk his neck. It is not ispossible. I tend to believe it.

[Quution] Do you think that he may carry out his death threats against you?
Has he repeated his threats to you?

[Answer] You know, when someone receives a letter like that one, he doesn't
need a second one to understand what it means.

[Question] Do you think he played a part in the attack on Harbeuf Street?
[Answer] It is possible. At this point I cannot say.
[Question] You seal to be pointing to the Syrians in particular.

[Answer] I have said that the goverment had its reasons for acting as it did.
As you can imgina, we did not decide lightly to expel those diplomts.

[Question] The editor of the Lebanese newspaper said he had warned France that
our ambassador in Beirut, Louis Delanare, was going to be assassinated by the
Syrians. He did nothing about it. Am! our ambassador was assassinated. The
editor was also threatened. Why were the Syrian diplomats not expelled sooner?

[Answer] We were quite certain that nuabers of the Syrian hbassy were going
beyond their role as diplomats, a role that does entitle the:- to provoke at-
tacks. So we knew that they had a grudge agaimt that Lebanese newspaper. The
newspaper was therefore being guarded by the police, and so was its editor.
That is no doubt the reason why the bomb was placed in a vehicle. That type

of crime is undetectable. The bomb injured any people, and it undoubtedly
would have injured many more if it had been placed in the building. because
several victims on the various floors were injured by flying glass. The police
did their job. but unfortunately, one cannot prevent everything. The case has
been referred to the courts, and I cannot say any more about what will be done
or discovered from now on.

[Question] If the police did their job. who didn't? The Hinistry of External
Relations?

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] It didn't have the sane grounds that it does now. Besides, it is not
the job of the Ministry of External Relations to expel diplonats.

[Question] You mentioned the unofficial role that Libya night have playddnor
could have played-~in these terrorist acts. But Qadhdhafi's No 2 nan, Major
Jalloud, is tasking an official visit to Paris.

[Answer] Every opportunity to open the eyes of those governments 'should be
taken advantage of. Who knows whether these talks with the Libyan leaders at
this moment will not save us from troubles to cone and whether the Libyans,
because of their contacts with other countries having reasons to be interested
in terrorism, will not be useful to us? In the fight we are engaged in. all

nethods must be used.

[Question] Let us get back to the means at our disposal on French soil. It is
in the countries whose legal arsenal is weak that tsrrorisn is lost developed

(Italy). Don't you believe in the need to strengthen our own?

[Answer] I don't think so.

[Question] I nean--the Stats Security Court has been abolished. Is it not
necessary to...?

[Answer] It would not have added anything to our possibilities for action.

[Question] No, but restoration of the 12 days of police custody provided by
that court would facilitate investigations by the mining magistrate, would

it not?

[Answer] Listen—108 hours, 5 days, or 10 days of additional police custody do
not change anything. A magistrate can very well conduct his investigation with-
out preliminary police custody of such length. And there is no need for ener-
gency laws. The inportant thing—the basis of everything—is the possibility
of conducting identity checks, and that is what I have been fighting for. To

keep than.

[Question] In what forn, so that they will retain all their effectiveness?

[Answer] I have been insistent about wanting police officers to be able to con-
duct identity checks in specific places if the security of individuals and prop-
erty is in immediate danger. I an insisting on the identity checks because

most of the inportant arrests we have made were possible because of those checks.
we are a socialist government, and everyone knows that we do not want to in-
fringe on freedoms. But freedon depends on security above all else.

[Question] If we want to sun up our talk. can we say that terrorists can be
conbated through offensive action conbined with caln determination?

[Answer] of course it can be conbated in that way! It is when one has the

political will to insure security and to do everything necessary to that end
that one has a clear conscience. Look, if I had started out by bullying the

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

French. and if ve had not taken into account the just dumda of sane of the
provincial inhabitantao-euch as theCorsicsna, the basques, and the bretonsu
I would feel less activated than I do not: to cot-hat the forces of terrori-
with the ntnoat fitness. It is precisely because a special status for Corsica

has been proposed that we are taking steps to insure the develop-ant of regional
ideas and that the govetnnent has the right to be fin. Because l'rance‘a policy

es conducted abroad by the president of the republic is a just and balanced
policy that does not seek either to inoae itself by force or to doninate veal:
nations-«ml even less to drav advantages from thu. It is in the light of

that policy that everyone'a duty, and nine in particular, is to set an ems-pie
of deternination and strength in the fight against terrorism.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogediprease SA

11798
680: 6131/ $11

25

NROFFICIALUSEONIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm 8m, FUTURE POTMIAL m TERROR!” ACTS
Perils PARIS HATCH in Pruch 7 May 82 pp 32-33
[Article by Gerard de Villiere]

[Text] No weeke ago, Gerard de Villiers wrote in these col-
unns: "The five who died in theCspitole did so perhaps becauee
of an obscure inter-Arab quarrel. If so, others will follow."
Events have tragically proven hin right: the victins (l deed
and 62 wounded) of the boobytrepped Opel that exploded at
0902 hours on Monday morning in front of 33 Herbeuf Street
are indeed the victins of a real secret war.

A sevege war has been declared between the Syrian secret services on the one
hand and their enenieenchiefly France, Iraq, and Israelnon the other.

Until the recent peet, Arab terrorists operated in France against non-French
targets. helpless the nurder of 0.8. lt 001 Charles Bay, the murder of Jacob
Abraeinov. edviesr at the Iereeli hbesay, and the atteck on the Israeli trade
niesion.

Over the peat few nonthe, however. that "ordinary” terrain. which successive
French governnents basically tolerated, hae been overlaid with a new kind of
terrorien. directed this tine egeinat the French. Five attacks are in thia
category. In chronological order. they are as follows:

1. The assassination in Beirut of French Anbeesador Dela-ere.

2. The abortive attack by the two terrorists Bruno Breguet and Hagdelena Kopp,
who were sentenced on 23 April efter an incredible-stroke of luck resulted in
their arrest as they were preparing to place a high-powered explosive device in
the city hall.

3. The attack on the Capitals.

d. The nurder in Beirut of Guy Cavello and his wife. Guy Cavallo was s code
clerk at the SDBCB [Foreign Intelligence and Counterintelligence Service] sta-
tion in Beirut.

S. The attack on Herbeuf Street.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Those f iwe attacks all have a canon denoainator. It is alnost certain that
they were carried out at the request of the Syrian special services. Why?

For a very siaple reason: France has been trying for several mnths to strength-
en the Libyan Arty and pushing for the reconstruction of an independent Lebanon.
The Syrians cannot go along with that. They consider any interference in Laba-
nese affairs to be an act of war. So they react in their own fashion. The
first warning was the assassination of Adassador Dela-ere, who was executed by
the Shiite ailitia under the supervision of Syrian officers.

Since that was not enough, the Syrians decided to take the war to France. To
do so, they subcontracted with one of the terrorist groups under their influ-
ence or. if one prefers. sharing their "sensitivity." It seens quite certain
that the group they hired is headed by Carlos, who has worked for then before.
who has nuaerons infrastructures in Europe, and who can call on European ter-
rorists (Ger-an. Swiss, Italian. or Punch) to round ont his troops.

Tint was the case with the first teen sent in to sow terror in France: Bruno
hreguet and Magdalena Kopp. both already on file as dangerous terrorists.

By chance. they were arrested. Carlos-wand it was he--then had a double prob-
lea: to get the- released and to continue the aission assigned to him by the
Syrians. he could send a second teal. Or, as is possible. he could call on
French terrorists to do the job.

(It nust not be forgotten that the weapon used to fire on the Israeli aissionu
a Sten sub-schinegunnwas discovered in a cache belonging to Action Directe. 8
noveaent whose asnbers were all granted aanssty after 10 Hay.) Carlos nsy have
subcontracted the attack on the Capitol to then. The purpose of that attack
was to put pressure on the French Goveruent to free the first teen—Bruno
breguet and mdalena Kopp.

The governnent--to its couplets credit—did not give in. It took Carlos 2 weeks
to organise a new attack, again using a "nixed" Arab-European teen. The wonan
who used false papers in Yugoslavia to rent the Opel that exploded on Harbeuf
Street was not an Arab. 0n the other hand. a witness saw an Oriental-type asn
getting out of that car in the aiddle of the night. That attack killed two
birds with one stone. Perpetrated on the day of the trial of the first terror-
ist teen, it raninded the French Govern-ant that the relentless slaughter would
continue as long as terrorists convicted in France were not released. At the
sane tine, the boobytrapped car was placed in front of the anti-Syrian news-
paper A1. "ATM! Al. MI, thus serving as a serious warning to the newspaper.

It is worth recalling that the attack on the Saint Ger-sin Drugstore on 5 Sep-
tember 1974, which killed 2 and wounded 36, was co-itted by Carlos to asks
France release two Japanese terrorists belonging to his tea. The governaent
of the tine gave in to the blaclmil.

That is where we are today. The attacks are likely to continue for two reasons:
Carlos or those acting for the Syrians will do everything possible to free

their imprisoned accouplices. and the Syrians want France to stop showing an
interest in Lebanon.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we want the blind or isolated killings to stop, we cannot be content with
fine words and statements of principle.

There are two avenues to be explored. First of all, the infrastructures within
the country that benefit the terrorists sust be elininated. That was the nethod
used by the German BRA [Federal Criminal Police Bureau]. It leans putting the
terrorists in the position of fish out of water: preventing than fron finding
hideouts, false papers, weapons, or logistic support in France. This requires
s lot of police work and, above all. political detenination.

Naturally. the special police services can track down clandutine terrorists.
But that is not enough if we do not attack what the Gemsn terrorists called
the "legal peopla"--neaning synpathirers who provide the underground with val-
uable assistance either knowingly or as a result of nanipulation. A few hours
after the explosion on Marbeuf Street, attorney Verges, who was the lawyer for
Bruno Breguet and Magdalena Kopp, was shouting at the nagistrates as follows:

"No matter what verdict you render. ny clients will be out of prison within
3 hours. (08 hours. or 3 nonths. because their friends will not give up."

His cynical and sinister rudeness shows that not everyone in Trance disapproves
of the attacks. It is revealing that such remarks could be made a few hours
after the aassacre on Marbeuf Street and, especially. that the person asking
them was not penalized by the court.

Extrene leftwing nilitants also insulted the court when the sentences were pro-
nounced. The police did not check anyone's identity, even though it is anong
such people that the support for the nest "teens" sent to kill a fat more French
people is likely to be found. But it was by beaver-like work to set up files
on all leftwing sympathizers with the Ger-an terrorists that the BIA was able

to avert attacks and disuntle the leader gang. The French police are capable
of doing the sane. All they have to do is receive their orders.

That action on the national level is not enough if we do not get to the source
of the problel. which lies outside France. And that is the sphere of the DOSE.
French counterespionage saintains ”toten" relations-“that is, reciprocal est-
changes of infatuation with countries abroad. So by cooperating with the
Israeli, Anerican. Caraan, Italian. and even soee Arab services. it can get a
line on the networks and tiny groups and learn the identities of nost of the
terrorists. At this nonent, we night be in a position to reach such an agree-
ment. The Syrians and even people like Carlos are vulnerable. All it requires
is credibility in deterrence and a pooling of resources. It is possible, and
it has been done before. If Carlos disappeared from the French scene for a
while. it was not by chance. he was being tracked down Man”.

What was done before can be done again. The day when the terrorist teens or
those who nanipulate then know that they will get tit for tat will be the day
when the war ends. Because no one is suicidal. And that includes the Syrians
and Carlos Illich Ranires.
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tutorial haa nova: ondoratood any language ascent that of force. It than who
:ovatn Franco do not quickly bacon. avara of that, tho blind terror I111 con-
tinua. and tho blood of innocent Franck poopla 0111 run again.

mum: 1981 par Cogodiptuu SA

11798
080: 61311511

29

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RUB mm BDI‘I'OR 0N SYRIAN WIS? TECHNIQUES
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 7 May 82 pp 32-33

[Interview with Halid Ahou Zahr. editor of Al. "Am Al. AIASI, by Patrick
Porestier; date and place not specified]

[rut] Por 6 aonths the eanagers of the vastly AL HAW
Al. ARAB! had known that an attack on their newspaper was
being planned. On 19 Dec-her 1981, they had discovered
and defused a hoohytrapped package before it see too late.
After that, 2s bodyguards kept watch on the building.

But Valid Abou Zahr, the publication's editor, explains
that the explosion on Harheuf Street was also aiaed at the
French and France's policy in the Riddle Bast. here, for
lack of proof, are his inneraost conviction and hie es-
sunptions.

PARIS HATCH: ﬂow was the attack on Harheuf Street set up?

Valid Ahou Zahr: A consendo group arrived from Syria. According to our infor-
nation, which is based on sources in Beirut and Syria itself. between 100 and
200 persons have entered France and are scattered along the country's chief
cities. Those people are divided into several categories. There are those
who specialise in explosives. others vho specialise in assassinations. and
others who are experts in asking threats.

[Question] Are those co-sndo groups nede up basically of Syrians?

[Answer] No. They are recruited in several countries. Their nuhere usually
use Lebanese passports because it is very easy at present to forge £11-. The
latest wave of Syrians arrived in France 3 or lo seeks ego. Using the pretest
of illness. sons are receiving care at hospitals. Others say they are here to
preregister at a university to learn French, and still others pretend to be
nerchants working in the inport-eszport trade who want to buy French products.
And still others are here as tourists.

[Question] Are they in contact with the Syrian nehassy in Paris?

[Answer] No. They do not contact the anhassy except as a last resort. There
are still several secret services in Syria. There are six or seven intelligence

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centers. Host of the tine, the enbassy does not know anything about what is
going on.

[Question] Then do Syrians cone directly fron Danascus to bring orders to
their agents workiu in France?

[Answer] Absolutely. “hey are separated into several groups which, as I said,
are scattered around in several French cities.

[Question] Why has France becooe the focus for the inter-Arab struggle?

[Answer] Since 10 May. it has been easier to cone to France than to go to the
FAQ. Before, anybody could go to Berlin. Now that is over. Also since 10 thy.
France has boon playing a decisive role in the Hidoast crisis. that policy has
had certain consequences. The Syrians are now trying to kill two birds with
one stone. First of all. they wont to retaliate for the role being played by
France in Lebanon. and second. they really went to give tho inrossion that
there is on inter-Arab struggle on French territory. Let us take the angle
of the attack on Harbeuf Street. Our newspaper opposes the Syrians. They could
respond to our arguents with arguents of their own. We have no tanks with
which to face the Syrian rsgine. Re have only'our pens, but they reply with
terrorist. But all those operations in Franco are actually ainod note at Franco
than at us. When Massador Dolanare was assassinated in Beirut, that was not
directed against Al. RATAN AI. AMI. "hon tho two French civil servants were
assassinated a few days ago. again in Beirut. that was not directed against

AI. HATAR AI. mm. either. And lastly. when tho French hbassy in Beirut was
bonbed. that. too. was not directed against Al. HA'l'Al Al. ARABI. I think that
what exists today is a plan-an anti-French strategy. France is the real tar-
get. And you are going to see other operations against Francs that are ained
at paralyzing its policy in tho Middle East.

[Question] In your opinion. are the Syrians preparing for sore actions?
[Answer] The ﬁrisn services have becone merts in explosives. Boobytrapped
cars are a Syrian specialty. Since Carlos cane on the scene. the Syrians want
to go such farther. France is currently a great power. It not try to deter-
nine whether. behind all this fuss about corlos. there is not a plot to dis-
guise a note coqlex undertaking ained at destabiliaation.

[Question] But Carlos-what is he doing now?

[Answer] The Syrians could easily answer your question.

[Question] Getting back to the attack on Harheuf Street, was there cooperation
between French and Syrian terrorists?

[Answer] Absolutely not. For actions that serious, the Syrians are very care-

ful to nintain secrecy. They are afraid that if a European were caught, he
would reveal the whole operation.

[Question] "hat was the scenario for the attack in Paris?

31

won omcw. use on“
l-UIK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] People nust have arrived by way of Vienna or Ansterdan. They could
easily enter France by car. Others perhaps cane through Switrerland disguised
as businesanen. And the last group case by plane. Entering France is no prob-
1a at all, because those coning here do not carry an weapons on then. They
are given documents and weapons after they get here.

[Question] Through the anhassy'!

[Answer] ﬂow do you think it is possible to get 30 or 60 kilograns of explo-
sives into France?

[Question] By diplonatic pouch?
[Answer] You have answered the question!
[Question] And what do we have to fear now?

[Answer] I will let you in on sonething. I believe that the Syrians are going
to try to kidnap the French asbassador in Beirut. And they will try to ex-
change his for the two terrorists who were recently convicted in Paris. I an
convinced of it.

[Question] Do you have anything to back up your suspicions concerning the
Syrian involvuent in the incident on Harbeuf Street?

[Answer] First of ell, the arrival of so nany of then. Second, the fact that
they sent direct threats. They did it openly. Last 19 Dec-her. they placed

a boobytrapped package in front of the naspaper office. The investigation re-
vealed that they were indeed the ones responsible. The day before the attack.
they were furious at French Television l'a coverage of the assassination of
Anbassador Dela-are. Syrian circles in Danascua announced that that broadcast
was going to cost plenty. They clearly said that if French policy continued
unchanged, they would strike in France. If they had placed the bonb on a train.
CarIos would have been blaned. By placing it in front of our newspaper office,
they in effect signed it.

[Question] la France the target because it naintaina good relations with Iraq?

[Answer] Yes. no doubt. but the Syrians are especially furious because France
is getting involved in the Lebanese natter. They consider Lebanon their spe-
cial preserve. For then, Lebanon is a sensitive spot. The Syrians have been
looking for a pretext. "hen President Hitterrand went to Israel, it gave then
a good opportunity to say that they opposed his policy. France has now sug-
gested that the Lebanese crisis be internationalized. The Syrians will never
accept that proposal. "hen Asbasaador Dela-are established contacts with the
supporters of that solution, Syria condenned hin to death.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Cogedipresse SA

11798
680: 6131/511

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL, Immune“. TERRORISM mus, m1“ umm
Paris LATITUDE AUJWRD'IIUI in French Jun 82 pp 16-18
[Article by Antoine Bugev: "rerrorisn The New Mercenaries"!

[Text] The Capitole. Rue Harbeuf. The terrorists have
fully achieved their objective: to create a psychosis
along s public who had believed France was secure from
this kind of attack. After the initial surprise, the
political establishaent has had to recognise that the
terrorist threat is a reality in France. low can we
deal with this unnatural calanity?

The current terrorisn has its roots in two foreign novenents. In 1962,
exactly 20 years ago, the Uruguayan Tarps-arcs began to show their face. In
1966, it was the turn of the Black Panthers to intrude on the herican scene.

Their social origins—they worked through university campuses-was wall as
the spectacular nature of their operations-«ind primarily at sensation and
at tramtizing the public—nade these two groups the ancestors of mdern
terrorisn.

During their 10 years of existence, the Tupanaros used all kinds of terrorist
nethods: abduction of foreign diplomats for ransom (the Brazilian consul, for
smle), execution of an Ansrican secret agent, and occupation of radio stations
to braodcsst co-Iniques.

Until now the European had felt protected. Their experiencein this area had
been linited to the patriotic terrorism of the liberation wars and the protest
love-ants which energed out of May 1968 in France. however. the "angry ones”
of May were quickly absorbed by a society in full econonic expansion. The
situation began to deteriorate in the 1970's in the m with the header gang.
It would be 5 years later before the Middle Bast became an area subject to
terrorisn.

Berna Club

Porno of terrorisn vary. There are three schools of terrorisn: nihilien, the

ancestor of violent action; national terrorist; and finally international

terrorism Take note, however, that use of the singular in the latter does not
33

summon!
FOR(MHWCJAL.USE(HVLY

prove that there is a single headquarters, with a single leader. This inter-
national terrorism is currently the most important. It is a product of the
national terrorisms which have today lost some momentum thanks to the efforts
of the national police.

In France, we tried too long to ignore national terrorism. After all,

occupying a police station or blowing up a tax collection office is not the
stuff of history, whether the culprits are Bretons or Corsicans.

Since the main objective of western ministers of interior is to have declining
statistics, they are reluctant to include all terrorist sets. This is why
they make some subtle distinctions in categories. "a would hope that within
their very secretive Berne Club they exchange accurate statistics. The
intelligence services have indeed formed a club to meet regularly in Switzer-
land to compare their information in the beautiful and quiet town of Berne.
This enables a fairly comprehensive approach to the terrorist phenomenon.

what do the terrorists want? The human and material assets of the opponent on
his own ground are the primary target. This is true from the IRA attacks in
London to the Direct Action attacks on banks in France. However, we must not
ignore the so-called "external" operations to strike at the adversary outside
his own territory, to destroy his interests abroad. Thus, the Armenians
attack Turkish tourism offices anywhere in the world.

Even more elaborate are the attacks on the human and material assets of the
adversary's allies. The Rue Harbeuf attack can be assigned to this category.
It has yet to be proved that the Syrians were responsible. One of the objec-
tives of this kind of attack is to gain an international audience. Such
attacks are often the tactic of movement which are numerically or politically
weak. The Basques or the Irish, who do not have a recognition problem, carry
out their operations in their own country. This is also true of the Red
Brigades and the Baader gang. Today, we are seeking more attacks on persons,
as opposed to attacks on property as in the past.

The means employed tends to reflect the political nature of the movements
because they do not all seek to have the same effect on the public. The
extreme Right deliberately exercises terror, whereas the extreme Left tries
to influence opinion in its favor. what Mao called "being like a fish in the
water." 0n the Right you use a bomb; on the Left, though it is more risky,
a revolver is preferred.

However, in reality things are not quite that simple. In the complex world

of terrorism, the Bight-Left distinctions are not very meaningful. Bach
movement will operate where it finds the best conditions. who would have
thought that fascist groups like the Hofmann group in the PRC, Column 88 in
the U.K., or the Belgian Rex movement would train in Palestinian camps? Not
in just any camp, it is true, but with the Christian Palestinians. Here there
are a sociological explanation: European wanting to learn terrorism would
rather do so with people who have the same way of life.

Areas of conflict appear to be the only places where terrorists have some
opportunity of operating undetected. The European police are able to keep

in check most of the training camps. Yet, it is acknowledged that Basques train
in lrish camps and vice versa.

34
FOI40F1ICJAI.IINE(H'LY
FORIOFUKJAI.USE¢MVLV

Terrorists and Drop-outs

Close cooperation between police and intelligence services has made it possible
to eliminate almost all the najor national terrorism organizations. The
header gang. the Japanese Red Army, and more recently the Red Brigades have
disappeared froe their countries of origin. "hat have they become? Very
simply, today they constitute the core of what is currently called "interna-
tional terrorism." For lack of a cause to defend. they put themselves at

the service of whomever presents himself. The fact that these drop-outs of
various origins find employers is only a reflection of our violent society.
There is only a fine distinction among the various terrorisms and journalists

often serve as an instrument to convey their own illusions as well as those of
their readers.

One dangerous simplification is to see international terrorism as a single and
unified movement. The public comes to imagine a kind of orchestra conductor
working for an evil world power, and feels threatened by a secret force.

Another objective of terrorism is to force a government to react, preferably
in a violent way, so that the people will be literally trapped between two
fires. How can we respond, then? The French experts on terrorism are effici-
ent and have three tools: the intelligence services. which contribute 60
percent of the antiterrorist effort; prevention, 38 percent; and field opera-
tions 2 percent. Recently, the Berne Club has been meeting more frequently:
the intelligence services are in the forefront of the struggle against inter-
national terrorism. The "new mercenaries" have been dispersing their arms
caches and hideouts more widely throughout the world to escape detection by
the national police forces. and only cooperation among the intelligence services
can keep them in check. The response must be primarily a matter of policy,
thus it is important not to invent "orchestra conductors" or superman of the
Carlos variety. The very delicate task of prevention can only be carried out
by protection of the sensitive points, which are particularly numerous in our
high technology societies. In the final analysis, the government's action
must be effective. The terrorists never take unreasonable risks. The best
evidence of this is that less than 13 percent have been killed while carrying
out their operations.

It is difficult to predict how international terrorism will evolve. If the
number of alienated people continues to increase, then there is a danger that
the phenomenon will increase. The struggle against terrorism will undoubtedly
be one of the major concerns of this decade.

COPYRIGHT: Latitude SARL 4th trimestre 1981-

9920
C80: 6131/514

35

Illl€lﬂﬂ€1hl.llli(lﬂt¥
MOFFICIALUSEONLY

MOB

“01118138 SAID 1'0 HAVE VARIED TIES Hm! TERRORISM
Paris LATITUDE AUJOURD'IIUI in French Jun 82 pp 23-25
[Article by Michel Borcier: "F’rom the Anarchists' Point of View"]

[Text] “Terroriss is not a philosophy but a means. It is not a peculiarity
of anarchists, but the recourse of all persecuted minorities." To an old
"snar" like Maurice Joyeux, there is nothing taboo about the subject of
terrorisa. This Septuagenarian Parisian is to some degree the figurehead of
the anarchist galley. He became a member of the Anarchist Union at the age
of 17, was imprisoned for evading silitary service during Horld War II, and
at the sane time incited two mutinies. Since his release in 1965, he has led
the anarcho-syndicalist minority of the Working Force. Though today running
in demonstrations with the police on [his] tail," he continues to be one of
the sparkplugs of the movement.

Like all the anarchists, Maurice Joyeux does not disavow anything from his

past. He accepts the entire history of the libertarians, and specifically

the great terrorist wave of 1890-1900. At that time, in France as abroad,
anarchism meant the bomb. More than 500 people were victies of attacks:

from Empress Sissi to President Sadi Carnot, from m-bert I of Italy to American
President McKinley. The slogan in style at the time was: "ﬂake the bourge-
oisie give up its ill-gotten gains," "wage revolution yourself," and "Prop-
aganda by deeds," in other words by attack. Donor and his group made liberal
use of it. This marked the triumph of Bakunin's ideas: "The primary element

in a solid construction is to first demolish what already exists."

Are the anarchists therefore advocates of violent action? Certainly not, in
the first place because of their public image. They believe violent action
has harmed them by giving the public a stereotype image of the anarchist as
having a dagger in his teeth and a bod) in his bag. The Anarchist Federation
criticizes the fact that too often it gets all the blame for the acts of the
libertarians, and it tries to disassociate itself from modern terrorism as
"blind and stupid."

Neither God nor Hester

However, its position remains ambiguous. For one thing, there are as many
opinions as there are anarchists, and as many libertarians on the fringe of
the organization as there are in it. The attitudes toward terrorism also

36

”WWW!”
FINIOFFKJAI.USB(H'LY

vary: from condemnation to "friendly nonparticipation," and from sympathy

to open support. An Anarchist Federation leader was definite: "We do not
recognize the Jacobin states or the laws based on injustice and inequality as
having any legitimacy. He are not illegalists but slegalists. we are ready
to carry out actions which are outside legality: strikes, factory sit-ins,
and--why not--armed insurrections." Maurice Joyeux goes further: "An
anarchist resorts to terrorism in order to open a breach, as you do in combat.
However, terrorism does not have to be spectacular. It need not publicize
itself. He cites the example of Pinelli, an anarchist who was arrested in
Italy in 1969. After being taken to the police station, he "fell from the
window" and was killed. A year later, the two policeman who had interrogated
him were shot. No one ever claimed responsibility for the attack. However,
according to Maurice Joyeux, the action had a signature: It was the "anars"
who carried it out. In his view, that is the main difference between anarchist
terrorism and today's terrorism: One must select the target, and not operate
at random, putting bombs in a station or a train.

The libertarians do not regard violence as having an exemplary character.

They give priority to concrete action through the media, social arena, and
daily life. Thus, they are seeking to acquire a better image, while pre—

serving their influence.

How many of them are there today? A thousand or so active members and a

degree of influence over some 100,000 people. It is difficult to tally

people who are by definition unclassifiable. There are many coexisting
tendencies. There are the snarcho-syndicalists, who favor trade union action
and reject politics; the Marxist-libertarians who combine socialism and anarchy;
and finally all those who regard themselves simply as anarchists. Since
"factionslism" is a chronic illness of the libertarians, it is more appropriate
to talk about an anarchist sphere of influence rather than an anarchist move-
ment.

Anarchist Sphere of Influence

At its head is a large organization, the Anarchist Federation. Parallel to it
survive two small splinter organizations. The rest of the sphere of influence
is composed of a multitude of autonomous groups focused around a project or a
theme, and various anarcho-syndicalist minorities in the various major unions.

In 1945, the Anarchist Federation became the successor to the Anarchist Union
of the between-the-wsrs period. It has 400 to 600 members, of whom half are

in the Paris area, and it is divided into groups (10 to 20 persons) and links
(less than 5 people). It is thus present in almost all regions, having a
nuber of strongholds: Paris and its area, Toulouse, Besancon, Strasbourg, and
Brest. It carries out antimilitary and antiparliamentary demonstrations, takes
initiatives regarding social issues, distributes antinuclear material, can-
paigns for abstention in presidential elections, and sets the pact for the

life of its members. The "anars" also have their own press: L3 HONDE
LIBERTAIRE, weekly organ of the Anarchist Federation distributed in 30,000
copies, plus a few local publications here and there, GERHIRAL in Amiens,

LE DIAPEAU NOIR at Besancon, and L'AGITATEUR at Eubenas, in the Cevennea. The
They also broadcast over Radio Libertaire.

37

U0l*0!II(1Al.lﬂil(l'LY
Fill(lﬂﬂ(]Al.lEﬂi(MVLY

Tho federation has to face one problem which is canon to many movements:

How to hold onto sympathizers and members? For the Anarchist Federation remains
u kind of sieve organization. However, those who have once been anarchists
remain receptive to liberatarian ideas; this is demonstrated by the money
collected during fund drives. The age distribution is another subject of con-
cern. According to one long-time member, "At a recent Anarchist Federation
congress it was like being in a nursery. The people were between 18 and 30.
The 30-60 age group had completely disappeared. Only a few old people were
left." The bulk of the membership is between 25 and 35. They stay an average
of about 5 years.

Variations

In the past, the club—like characteristics of the Anarchist Federation prompted
some to leave it. A considerable number chose concrete action within trade
union organizations. The three major unions--CGT, CPDT, and particularly the
Working Force-—all have more or less significant ansrcho-syndicalist minorities.
There is even an exclusively anarchist union, the National Labor Confederation
[CNT]. However, the CNT is a very small minority organization, except perhaps
in a few towns such as Toulouse and Bordeaux. By tradition, there are anar-
chists in the examiners' union and national education where they represent the
"emancipated school" view. They have favoaed sectors such as metallurgy,
construction, and transport. but there are significant variations by regions
and from one period to another.

Other libertarians resistant to militancy, either within the Anarchist
Federation or the trade union movement, should be regarded as being in the
anarchist sphere of influence. They are "outside"--which was the title of
an anarchist journal of the end of the 19th century published by 20 d'Axs-
and get together for a project or mobilize around a specific theme. They
establish book shops, printing establishments, or restaurants. These enter-
prises are usually operated on a communal pattern and are self-managed.
There are examples at Lyon (La Griffe bookshop), at Strasbourg, where there
is influence by the German alternative movement, in Paris (Butte-aux-Cailles
community), and also in some rural districts. In Toulouse, the Mecca of
French anarchism and birthplace of Direct Action, autonomous groups (in
relation to the Anarchist Federation) publish the BASTA and AGORA reviews,
which have some readership.

Key Issues

Hhat are the big causes of the libertarians? Antimilitarism, in all its forms,
is their battlehorse: conscientious objection (refusal of military service),
service evasion (refusal of the civilian service which is the legal substitute).
total evasion (refusal to comply with any formality at all). This is a trad-
ition; however, though all are antimilitsrist, some are strongly pacifist,
while others do not reject violent action. Louis Lecoin is an example of this
nonviolent tendency. Through his activity in the "Committee to Support Con-
scientious 0bjectors"* and a long hunger strike he succeeded in achieving

*Which included A Breton, A Camus, B Buffet. J Cocteau, J Giono, and
Lanza del Vasto.

38

FOIIO!IHC1AI.IEIE(IULY
adoption on 22 Decesrber 1963 of the law granting status to conscientious
objectors. All organizations of objectors and evaders have more or less
direct relations with the anarchists. An Anarchist Federation representative
explained: "They all know that it is the political organization and the

bastion on which they can unquestionably depend to defend than and publicize
their views."

The ecology novenent is also one of their causes. The nuclear opposition
movement is the product of a society which has been police-controlled and
centralized to excess: the anarchists favor use of the "benign" sources,
solar, wind, and others. There is another old theme which is dear to then:
federalism, inherited from Proudhon, which brings then close to the regionalist
movements. This why they often go to bat on the side of the Bretons. Basques,
Alsatians, or Occitans. These ideas and others feature within the overall

social concept: self-management, decentralization. This is the neasure of
anarchist influence.

Today, the libertarians waver between disenchantment and optimism. "In the
course of activity, you realize that tracts and posters are not enoug ." The
speaker. a "youth" who had been in the Anarchist Federation for 5 years, was
on duty for a district group between 1900 and 2000 hours over chips and Coca
Cola. He approved of sons forms of terrorism: "Rue Harbeuf was of no inter-
est to me. however, blowing up the drilling equipment on a nuclear plant

building site--I an in favor of that." The ﬂood is nevertheless on the side
of optiaism.

After a year of Socialist goverment. Maurice Joyeux says: "These people want
to do without a revolution and they will not succeed. The Socialists are

not changing a regime, they are going along with it. And they will be
destroyed with it. After that, cone the barbarians. And we are the
barbarians . "

39

“WWW!”
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080010-7

fUK Ufl‘lt IAL oar. URL!

 

COPYRIGHT: Latitude SARI. 4th crimestrc 1981

9920

(:50: 6131/541
40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080010-7
FOIOMGALUSEONLY

SPAIN

TERRORISM IN SPAIN

Barcelona 31. TERRORISK) EN BSPANA in Spanish 1982 pp 101-142
[Chapter froe book by Alejandro Moos Alonso]
[Text] Chapter III The Becalation

"A handful of fanatics is sufficient to lake us realize how dreadfully fragile

a denocratic society can be when denocracy is not prepared to defend itself ."
Pierre Trudeau. 1970

Sun

The strategy of destabilization.

The "normalization" of terroriss.

Negotiating with ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group].
The provocation of the Arned Forces.

When ETA acts. GRAPO [First of October Arsed Revolutionary Group] falls.
ETA: kills more to negotiate better.

The Strategy of nestabilizstion

0o 13 June 1977, the day of the first deeocrstic elections. Spain found itself.
Many things renained in the past. The denocratic fervor and civic spirit with
which Spaniards took to the streets that day to cowly with their electoral
obligation caused nany to think that a new era was beginning wherein violence
would no longer have a place in our collective life. Democracy represented
precisely the end of "institutionalized violence" which was replaced by the
rule of law. Abuse of authority or overstepping in the exercise of authority
would no longer be fitting. henceforth the power would cone fro- the people,
would be legitimized among the people and would be justified by the people.

It vould render an accounting to the people and would be controlled by the

people's representatives. In short, the state of law was the antithesis of
institutionalised violence.

As we have observed in the previous-chapters, during the final years of Franco-
is. and the early years of the transition, the idea of terrorist as a "response"
to the violence of those in power had cropped up over and over again. Hith
this kind of violence gone, terroris- no longer had a reason to exist. "hen

61

rosomaatmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

democratic channels for voicing needs, aspirations or expectations are lacking,
terrorism appears as a substitute, or abnormal medium for communication. But
when those democratic channels are guaranteed for all groups, implementing the

principle of pluralism, the "raison d'etre" of political violence as a mechanism
for expression disappears.

As we shall note upon analyzing the polls, this view, a real "wishful thinking."
was held by many Spaniards. But, very soon, events occurred, with their sudden
reality, to challenge this exalted notion. The terrorism continued with demo-
cracy, and even reached higher levels than at any previous time.

During the summer of 1977, ETA maintained the truce, but GRAPO again gave signs
of its existence, despite the fact that the organisation's most prominent lead-
ers had been arrested. On 11 July, two bombs destroyed the premises of the
French cultural delegation in Madrid, wounding three persons. A week later, a
GRAPO commando unit kidnapped the radio broadcasting technician Mario Prigenti
at the $33 facilities on the outskirts of Madrid. They were attempting to
transmit a message of a "republican" nature via the 83R main broadcasting

antennas, but they did not achieve their purpose, and the technician was
released.

0n the night of 6-7 August, a 19-year old GRAPO member, Luis Torrijos, kept

seven hostages from the same family in captivity in a house in Madrid. The
mediation by Prof Tierno Galvan put an end to the abduction, and the "GRAPO
member" surrendered without putting up any resistance. This Luis Torrijoa
invaded the house wielding a pistol and shouting: ”The police are pursuing me,

I am from GRAPO.” The phrase was to become notorious as an expression of alleged
popular support. which the strange organization never enjoyed.

Two days later, the police announced the capture of another six members of the
same terrorist organization, including one of its most prominent leaders, Fernan-
do Hierro Chomon, who was accused of having supplied the explosives used in the
attack against DIARIO 16 the previous June. He was also considered to have been
implicated in the Oriol and Villaescusa kidnappings. We shall consent later on
the circumstances that surrounded these arrests, apparently due to the informa-
tion supplied by someone who had infiltrated.

But it was not until the end of September that the terrorism, as if emerging

from a summertime lethargy, made its bloody presence felt again. On 20 September,
a powerful device exploded in the building of the Barcelona magazine, EL PAPUS,
killing the doorman of the premises, Juan Penalver, and causing 16 injuries,
several of which were serious. Shortly thereafter, the Triple A claimed respon-
sibility for the attack. In the communique, it accused the magazine of having
published articles "which left fascism debased."

All the Barcelona news media held a 24-hour strike in solidarity with EL PAPUS
and in protest at what was interpreted as an attack on freedom of speech. A
heavily attended demonstration even approached the civil government, demanding
the arrest of the extreme right wing groups. On Friday, 23 September, the

Madrid newspapers also held a much-discussed strike and a joetmliiat'demonstrstion

42

IN)R<0FFIC1Al.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOI‘OIIWCIAI.USE1CH‘LY

paraded through the downtown streets. The Spanish weeklies published a joint
editorial entitled “He defend freedom of speech." Like the Catalonian press,
they also declared that "The attacks (...) have the common goal of obstructing
the democratic process which has begun in our country." "The unpunished action
of the uncontrolled groups, the existence of parallel organizations and the
brazen operation of extreme right wing groups with international connections

demand from the authorities not only inmediate action, but also a public expla-
nation."

A few days later, on 27 September, the Armed Police captain, Florentino aerguedss
Carretero, was assassinated in Madrid. Although the assassination was claimed

by several unknown organizations. such as OREA (Revolutionary Organization of
Antifascist Spain) and the Party for the Liberation of Spain, it was presumed

to have possibly been another action by GRAPO. As on so many other occasions,
the extreme_right wingers took advantage of the assassinated captain's funeral

to shout against the government and demand the ”Army in power."

These first attacks after the elections prompted commentators to think that the
goal of the terrorists of all stripes was none other than the destabilization
of democracy. Terrorian was no longer viewed as an expression of a desire for
greater liberty, but rather as a atrassgy against the nascent democracy. BL
PAIS, which gave a reminder that, with Captain nerguedas, the number of members
of the forces of public order who had fallen victim to attacks since the death
of Franco totaled 19, noted that "Captain Herguedse' death is an assassination,
without any other possible explanation than political provocation." (1)

According to CAHBIO 16, "The public has been becoming aware of the fact that
there may be clearcut connections between political individuals identified with
the most extreme Prancoist sectors and the proliferation of right wing commando
units, uncontrolled groups and certain special services which have refused to
disappear after 40 years of influence and impunity." It continued thusly: "These
groups, which may show up with a right or left wing countenance (...) have a plan
for political destabilization (...), and have certain accomplices at.their
disposal in a machinery, that of the administration, which is not yet used to

a situation of democratic normality." In the view of CAHBIO 16, it was obvious
that "the goal of the right wing groups of the 'ancien regime' and that of the
extrene small groups rising sporadically to the surface is the same: to put an
end to democracy." (2)

Meanwhile, scarcely any progress had been made in the direction of solving the
Basque problea. The ETA members "exiled" in foreign territory who had no permis-
sion to enter Spain legally broke the hen: On 22 July, 10 of then were present
at a rally held in Dursngo (Vizcaya). Six days later, in an odd paradox clearly
demonstrating the enormous gap separating the legal fron the real, the "Official
State Bulletin" published the decrees on exile. At that time, those "exiled"

had ceased to be such. and although one of them was arrested, the others showed
up at another public function, and even went to the graves of the nationalist
militants to pay tribute to them. No one doubted the tacit consent of the
government.

63

FOIIOFFHJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR(MHHCJAL.USE(MNLY

During the entire month of August, there was a virtually uninterrupted succes-
aion of demonstrations and gatherings in the Basque Country, in solidarity with
"Apala," who had been on a hunger strike since 30 July in the Beaumettea
(Marseilles) prison. He was protesting his possible turnover to the Spanish
Government. Over 300 individuals in the Basque Country started a strike in
solidarity with the prominent ETA leader. CAHBIO l6 expressed the view that
he was becoming "a Basque national hero." Comnittees on Behalf of "Apala"
were crested,-and the "March of Liberty" itself, which toured the Basque coun-
try that summer, turned almost completely into a march on behalf of "Apals."
Hundreds of Basques went to France to visit the jailed ETA member and to
demonstrate before the Court of Aix-en-Provence, asking that it not agree to
the petition for extradition, the second one made by the Spanish Government
within a few weeks. After nearly a month of hunger striking, "Apala" appealed

to the Basque people, proclaiming: "If France turns me over to Spain, it will
only turn over a corpse." (3)

After 97 days of incarceration and 35 of hunger striking, "Apala" was given a
provisional release under court control, without being able to leave the depart-
ment of Bouches du Rhone until his extradition process was heard on lb October.
Then the French leftist parties voiced opposition to the extradition. Specific-
ally, the Socialists declared: "Our position is the same as that of P803
[Spanish Socialist Workers Party], our fraternal party; in other words, we do
not want anything to do with groups seeking to destabilize the Spanish situation.
but we shall not consent to the granting of his extradition either." (4) For
its part, ETA, temporarily inactive, threatened to renew the "armed action" if
the request for extradition succeeded. It did not succeed, but ETA resumed

its bloody activity. As for "Apala," he fled to "a safe place" before the trial

took place. No further news was heard regarding this prominent ETA member
until 1980.

The other two major issues which produced mobilization and the assumption of
positions in the Basque Country during the summer of 1977 were the "uncontrolled"
and total amnesty. The name "uncontrolled" was given to the groups of unidenti-
fied individuals who mingled with the people maintaining a provocative and-
aggressive attitude, particularly on the occasion of the popular festivals in
various Basque localities. The civil governors of Vizcaya and Guipuzcoa at the
time, Salazar—Simpson and Oyarzabal, respectively, often received complaints, ~
and declared their desire to and that situation. But no "uncontrolled" person
was ever arrested or identified. Letamendia, deputy as Buskadiko Bakerra
[Basque Left] representing Guipuzcoa. expressed his conviction that "there are
police among the uncontrolled" and that, in any event, "they are acting with

the backing of the forces of order."

In view of the government's impassiveness, the residents of Amorebieta (Viscaya)
proposed to carry out criminal action, forming self-defense pickets that succeed-
ed in capturing and identifying some of the uncontrolled. From the documents,
notes, weapons and even police badges that were found on them, there was no

doubt of the official nature of those uncontrolled persons who, moreover, were
immediately released upon being turned over to the Civil Guard barracks. (5)

46

FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alnost as much as during the eraser of 1976. the asnesty. particularly in the
Basque Country, was a mobilizing idea. It was requested that Parlianent pass
a total amesty law that would achieve the release of those arrested for poli-
tical reasons who were still in jail. But the cosaon primers also wanted to
benefit iron the advent of denocracy. and so the su-er of 1977 was narked by

uprisings in the jails which, on occasion, caused nearly total destruction of
the prison eatsblisluents.

The meaty was also an occasion for confrontations snong various Basque poli-
tical parties. Specifically, on 8 Septenber, a denonstration was held in San
Sebastian which had been called by m [Basque Nationalist Party] and PSOB

to petition for esnesty and which was set with e cmter-de-onstration by the
scat radicaled "abertzale" [patriotic] sectors. The "exiles" headed by
Teleaforo Honeon who participated in the denonstration of the najority parties
opted to disappear. That day, there became obvious not only the contradictions
existing between the najority parties and those of the "abertsele" left. but
also the internal differences anong the latter themselves. tor axelple. while
the leadership and sons silitsnta of BIA [Basque Revolutionary Party] participat-
ed in the demonstration, other militants of and mathirars with this party,
angry at the leadership's policy, joined the countsr-denonatrstion. Sonsthing
sinilar occurred with the ESB [Basque Socialist Convergence) party. According
to Socialist Deputy mgica. "Uhat happened (...) clearly indicates that there
are two paths in the Basque Country: one being that of the various political
forces which agree with the belief that the objectives can only be considered
through peaceful leans; and the other, that of the fsnaticized groups which went
to destabilize the country against the desire expressed by the Basques in the
15 June elections." (6) According to BL was. "The parties of the 'abertrsle'
left, defenders of ETA, and proponents of independence, have attempted through
uneuvers to downgrade the election results through popular nobilisations which.
supposedly. would cancel then (...). ‘l'he aggravation and irrationality of the
agitators who attempted to break up the denonstration pronpts then, through the
very dialectics of their hallucination. toward positions that are increasingly
indistinguishable fron the authoritarian, antidenocratic mentality that they
are presumably conbating." (7)

however, it was obvious that extensive sectors of Basque society still backed
ETA in one way or another, although acne encouraging signs were beginning to

be perceived. M10 16 wrote: "Hhile in all the seas demonstrations held in
the Basque Country recently, thousands upon thousands of people enthusiastically
chanted the ETA slogan, ‘herria aurehin' (ETA. the people are with you). the
sajority parties and large sectors of the people no longer appear to be in
agreement with sons of this organization's methods." (6) According to the
wagerine. "the protest iron the public" was due to the constant series of
letters received by Basque industrialists asking for thewell-ltnown "revolution-
ary tax," and to the exploding of presises to be used for a school for ansll
children on 12 Septenber, in Bibar. by the ETA nilitsry. ETA (n) claiaed that
the prenises were to be used for the Armed Police station and barracks, but the
nayor of Bibar. backed by the residents. released a commique reiterating that
it was a school for snsll children that was involved, and-'that "any careful
observer can ascertain. if he amines the buildings, that they could not serve
the purpose that is now being attespted to ascribe to then, owing to their
technical features." (9)

$5
POI OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

what appeared quite clear was the receptiveness given to the ideas of the
"abertzale" left by the Basque youth. Sources close to PC! [Spanish Orv-mist
Party] and P802, which were suffering personally from this youth deviation
toward radical positions. were of the opinion that the "abertsale" parties
might well have the support of from 18 to 20 percent of the Basque population.
The great division in various nationalist radical parties explained their alight

parliamentary influence. One example was the 80,000 daily copies circulated
by 36m, spokesman for the most extreme "sbertaale" sector.

horeover. the economic crisis was causing an increase in unmloyment especially
among the youth. The youth jobleeeness was thereby turning into a source for
recruiting ETA militants. The organization offered not only a way of life, but
also that entire aura of heroism that had made "Apela" the most popular idol

in the Basque Country; and, at the same time, the enormous weight of idealism
involved in dedication to a struggle for the people and for the future of
Euskadi.

At the end of the sumaer of 1977, after long, detailed negotiations, the merger
of the "beretsi" comando units, which had broken off from ETA (p-m) [ETA poli-
tical and ailitary]. with ETA (m), the most radical but also the smallest
faction of the terrorist organization, was completed. Affiliated with ETA (m)
were some of the best known leaders, such as “Argala,“ ”Peixoto," "Trepa" or
"Txomin." The "beretzi" contributed the extremely popular "Apale," no less. (10)

From then on, ETA (p-m) became increasingly dissociated from the ETA (m) propo-
sale. condemning its "armed actions" in a tone that would have been totally
unheardoof a few weeks earlier.

Political events became accelerated during the first 10 days of October. 0n
honday, 27 September, the Congress Spokesmen Board included on the agenda a
bill from Psosbackad by the Basque and Catalonian nationalists and the entire
left, on total amesty. Conceived in a very broad manner, it entailed the
release of the members of GRAPO who had kidnapped Oriol and Villaescusa. and the
presumed perpetrators of the Atocha slaughter and, what the Army absolutely
vetoed, the reinstatement of the UHD [Military Democratic Union] military. UCD
[Demcratic Center Union] inedistely prepared another bill, and there began
difficult negotiations while, in the Basque Country, the Pro-Anesty promoters
were preparing a new week of struggle starting on Tuesday, lo October. M
days later, on Thursday, 6 October, an agreement was reached which established
three dates for the amesty: total, up until 15 December 1976 (the date of the
referendum on the Law for Political Reform); for the crimes the purpose of
which was to reestablish democracy or the eutonomiea, up until 15 June; and 6
October for those same crimes, but with the omission of those involving blood-
shed.

But before the Cortes approved the amnesty, on 15 October, several fer-reaching
events took place.

On 5 October. the extreme right wing terrorism showed up again: A device seri-
ously damaged the premises of the Basque nationalist magazine PUNTO Y BORA DB

1.6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

EUSKALBERRIA. published in Pamplona. As in the recent EL PAPUS case, a tale.
phone call claimed the attack for the Triple A, although the anonymous spokes-
man added: "The matter of the name is the least iaportant, because we could
also have claimed it under the name of Spanish-Basque Battlaion or Adolf

Hitler Sixth Cot-sands Unit." As had been suspected, the extreme right used
various labels indiscriminately.

On the morning of Saturday, 8 October, when the head of the Viscaya Chamber of
Deputies. Augusto Unsueta Barrenechea, was preparing to remove the sport clothes
for his usual ball game from the trunk of his car in Guernica, he was felled by
a machine gun fired by an ETA conesndo unit which escaped. The two civil
guardsmsn escorting him. Angel Ribera Navarron and Antonio liernandes Fernandez-
Segura, also died. It had been a year, almost to the day, 6 October 1976,' '-
since his predecessor in the position, Juan Haria Araluce, had been killed,

also the victim of the ETA's hatred. The ETA truce had ended. The bloodiest
period of terrorism was about to begin. In fact, during 1978 and 1979, the
assassinations increased in an insane, brutal progression.

The next day, Sunday, 9 October, all the large parliamentary parties signed the
document which was to be known as the "Dbncloa Pacts”, expressing the democratic
desire to consolidate the regime of liberties, in the hall of columns at lbncloa
Palace.

On that same Sunday, the police of Alicante and Valencia besieged a large group
of GRAPO members who were in an apartment. A total of 11 men, two women and a
three-year old child fell into the hands of the forces of order. The police
had carefully planned the operation several days beforehand, watching the flat
where the terrorists who, according to the official report, «grind the GRAPO
Executive Coudttee, were residing. Among those arrested was Francisco Brotons
Beneyto, who appeared to be the top—ranking leader, and Juan Martin Luna who,
according to the official note, "was in control of the cho units."

According to the reports from GRAPO itself, this blow, the most serious one
received by the terrorist organization, was made possible because "a member of
the civil guard, "Isaac Fernandez," managed to infiltrate GRAPO through the PCB
(r). As everyone knows, both organisations were linked, although GACITA ROJA,
the official clandestine organ of PCB (r) did not admit the organic connection
between them for a long time. The infiltrated individual, "Fernandez," apparent-
ly was the cause of the arrest of the five members of the Regional Conittee of
PCB (r) of Asturias. Later, he joined the commando unit led by liierro Chomon.
In August 1977, when this commando unit was planning to steal weapons at the
Madrid Mobile Depot, all of its members. including llierro Chomon, were arrested
by the police. One member of the co-ando unit, Luis Torrijos, was captured in
the apartment where he had taken refuge, holding the entire family as hostages,
as we explained previously. Only "Isaac Fernandez," precisely, escaped. and
this put GRAPO on its guard. It captured his, and subjected him to questioning
(...). however, after julping out of a first floor window, "Fernandez" managed
to escape. Within a few minutes, the police arrived at the apartment from which
everyone except Luis Alvarez, the presumed executor appointed by "Isaac Fernan-
dez," had fled. On 15 September, GRAPO published a perfectly printed sheet

(07

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

containing a photograph of "Fernandez” and exposing him as an infiltrated "cop."
Months later, when Cubillo was the victim of an attack, it was learned that
"Isaac Fernandez” real name was Jose Luis Bapinosa Pardo, and that he had
served as liaison for the Algeria-Cubillo-GRAPO trio. (ll)

The arrests by the police did not affect the extreme leftist terrorist organisa-
tion alone. Following the attack against BL PAWS, an extensive police operation
was put into effect, resulting in the arrest of a large extreme rightist group

in Barcelona and Lerida. The most prominent of the 12 persons arrested was
Miguel Gomez Benet. chief of the berids extreme rightist group, whom we mentioned
in the previous chapter. This former national councilman of the Movement and
lieutenant in the Franco Guard was the organizer of the training courses for
fascists which were given in herida Province and which constituted a genuine
school of terrorism. Among those captured were some well-known fascists respon-
sible for many attacks, specifically, Juan Jose Bosch Tapies, the pram-ed
material perpetrator of the attack on El. PAPUS. (12)

But no one had any illusions. The terrorists' arrests did not mean the end of
terrorism. CAMBIO 16 viewed it in this fashion: "Fascists of the red stripe

or fascists of the blue stripe will continue to kill and will continue to attempt
to restore the iron rule of oppression in this country. What is probably not
imagined is that a cherished and strong democracy will triumph where the dicta-
torship failed. Now the terrorists can no longer say that they are defending

the people's interests, but rather the infamous interests of their particular

tyranny. They remain alone, they will continue to kill, but sooner or later
the weight of the law will fall upon them." (13)

Once the truce had been broken by ETA, the attacks continued. On 13 October,

in Villabona (Guipuzcoa), the truck driver Jose Manuel Garro Azpiroa died; and
on 17 October, in Lasarte (Guipuzcoa), it was the civil guard, lldefonso Sanchez
Amil, who was the victim of the ETA terrorism. The attacks began to be insigni-
ficant, and the press was devoting increasingly less-space and smaller headlines
to them. On 2 November. it was the Irunv municipal police sergeant. Jose Dies
Fernandez, who was shot to death by ETA (m) bullets. As on other occasions,

the Basque political parties condemed the attack; as on other occasions, the
"abertzale'" left groups kept a silence; a silence which seemed to many to be
concealing connivance and even complicity. A few days later, on 12 November, the
armed police chaplain, Jesus Aurelio Aranguas Gutierrez, and the policemen
Francisco Munoz Madrid and Jose Cavero Duso were killed in a multiple attack.

MPAIAC [Sovereignty and Independence Movement of the Canary Islands) also return~
ed to the "armed struggle" to celebrate the 13th anniversary of its founding,

as Cubillo announced from its broadcasting station, "The Free Canaries Voice."
He also said that "the Guanche [Canary Island] armed forces will begin the

armed struggle until final victory or death." A few days earlier, 16 MPAIAC
militants had benefited from the meaty after havingrremained in jail for a

few months. On 15 December, two armed police agents were slightly wounded by
shotgun fire from an MPAIAC comando unit.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There was increasing concern over the terrorist action to destabilize a regime
such as the nascent Spanish democracy, which was experiencing a difficult phase
marked by the preconstitutional situation. The need to modernize the battle
against terrorism was felt, and it was then that there began to be talk of

creating special co-Iando units of the-German type which had resolved the
hijacking of a German airplane in Hogadiecio (Somalis).

In the psychosis over destabilization that was being experienced, 'it was feared
in particular that ETA or GRAPO would attempt an assault upon the king or Presi-
dent Suarez, which would presumably destroy the complex, difficult effort for
democratic institutionalization that was being expended. Major alarm was
evoked by the fact that a large number of documents, including plans of Honcloa
Palace, the president's residence for several months, to which he had moved
precisely for security reasons, had been seized from the GRAPO members arrested
in early October. The plans contained certain innovations (an elevator connect-
ed directly with the official office and his private room) that had been com-
pleted only a few months earlier. In addition, the discovery of military
uniforsa and a rifle with a telescopic sight caused the police to conclude that
an attack on Suarez was being planned, not the first one detected by the intel-
ligence services. The previous sun-er, a "gum-2" charge had been discovered

in Palma de Hallorca, on the route that the king and the president of the govern-
ment were scheduled to take a few minutes later. In February 1977, an operation
aimed at Suarez' assassination had been detected; and, insofar as the king was
concerned, in October 1977 HPAIAC had set two small, merely "testimonial" explo-
sives on the route that Juan Carlos I was to take on his official visit to Lee
Palmss. The same night, from Algiers, Cubillo proudly proclaimed that "the
impressive royal security service is powerless against us.“ when the king and
queen paid an official visit to Belgium, from 16 to 19 October, a threatening
call was received from the extreme right organization, Black Order, which neces-
sitated the reinforcement of the security measures.

0n the night of 12 November, Honcloa Palace was machine-gunned from a black
Chrysler which took the El Pardo highway at full speed. Although Suarez himself
confirmed the news, the great distance at which the pistol's empty cartridges
were found, about 300 meters from Honcloa Palace, caused importance to be
detracted from the incident. (h this occasion, the stringent security measures
surrounding the president were described. (15)

The atmosphere of violence was beginning to cause concern. Democracy, backed
by the vast majority of Spaniards, as proven by the results of the general
elections of 15 June, was being harassed by two radicalized types of extremists
who did not understand nor want any language other than that of violence. The
incitement to a coup coming from the extreme right we: associated with the
praise for ETA that was heard in the Basque provinces. On 13 December, in
Salsmanca, the New Force leader, alas Pinar, a great aower of discord, asserted:

"Violence is not at odds with Christian sentiments (and) values such as God and
Fatherland must be defending, even with violence."

An attack which evoked particular repudiation was the one which cost the life
of Oomdr Joaquin Imaz Hartinez, chief of the armed police in Pamplona. In

109

POIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this way. ETA (m) took the first step in the strategy for provocation of the

Army which was to be carried out particularly in the menu of 1978. An ETA
militant. David Alvarez, was seriously wounded.

The assassination of comander Imaz was claimed by- ETA (m) in”..a long_communique in
which it stressed: "He shall continue our military campaign against the police
corps which have supported the military dictatorship in Euakadi until they have
been totally expelled from Our Basque territory." PSOE or, more accurately,

the Socialist Party of Euskadi-PSOE, published a manifesto containing what was
possibly the harshest condemnation of terrorism to date. The manifesto-attack-
ed the Euskadiko Eskerra members of parliament (Deputy Letamendia and Senator
Bandres) "who, at the time when Mr Inn: was assassinated. at a political rally
held in San Sebastian (...) were chanting from the platform "Gore ETA” and "ETA
herria surekin" (ETA, the people are with you); which appears to mean that EIA
and those members of parliament were backing the ETA violent action." The
aforementioned where of parliament. gandres and latamendia, issued a public
retort in which, among other things, they claimed that the shouting of "ETA
herria zurekin", when"chanted en masse (...) represents the people's recognition
for a glorious national liberation movement that has been carried out during

the past 15 years in Euskadi. which transcends the action of partial branches
of this organization or concrete action taken by it." (15) DIARIO 16 concluded
by saying: "If they confirm their support for the violent action of ETA, their
place ought to be outside of the Cortes." (16) In a harsh editorial against
ETA, EL PAIS made this statement: "The Basque meters of parliament must estab-
lish their thinking on the future of their people and the ethical and political
opinion that they should now have for an 'armed branch' such as ETA (...). Let
the representatives freely elected by the Basque people clearly define their

or without Rioja? with the French-Basque provinces or without them?), based on
politico-historical analyses made with dialectical materials supplied by the
Parabellum establishment." (17)

Yet before the year's end. ETA (m) assassinated the lrun councilman Julio Marti-
nez Esquerro (on 17 December). On 20 December, there was an abortive attack

on the Lemoniz nuclear powerplant, thereby starting a long campaign that was to
last for several years, with Iberduero, the company owning the powerplant. as

a target. On 30 December. ETA (p-m) stole 300 kilograms of explosives owned

by Riotinto Explosives. Also attributed to ETA (p-m) was the theft of 266 shot-
guns in Elgoibar, 900 kilograms of "gum- " in Galdacano and 250 kilograms of
hydronite in Gallarta. There was no doubt that ETA (p-m) was also readying

to resume the armed struggle. These repeated thefts of explosives brought about
the dismissal of the civil guard lieutenant colonel in Viscaya, and an extensive
police operation against ETA was started.

The Basque Country was submerged in the whirlpr of violence. On 10 December,
the last Basque inmate left jail; and on 30 December the Basque Country was

granted preautonomy. But. as we have already had occasion to note, the poli-
tical.-. gains and concessions were not only incapable of curbing the terrorist
madness, but appeared to act as catalysts for the violence.

50

FOROFFICIALIBEONLY
POI OI'TICIAI. USE ONLY

1977 ended in this way. The toll of the terrorists was by now impressive: 21
killed by ETA. 10 by M0 and seven by the extras right; in addition to some
30 countrysen killed in various types of confrontations with the forces of
public order, the last two during December in Malaga and Santa Cruz de Tenerife.

The 'Rornslization' of Terrorism

The terrorist attacks increased so that in 1978 they becese a usual ”event."
But few weeks did not contribute a death to the tragic terrorist statistics,
and if we consider the attacks of lesser disenaions, the tabulation beconse
virtually impossible.

The public was beginning to be accustoaed to the daily nature of the terrorisa,
and popular enotion or political tension was heightened only in the case of car-
tsin attacks that were particularly significant owing to the status of the
persons who were victins or the nusher thereof. But the typical attack causing
the death of a leather of the forces of public order went unnoticed and bacon--
alnoet a trivial incident. This is proven by the treatment given those attacks
by the news media.

The establislnsent of the preautononous regiee in the Enamel-my raised hopes.
Everyone thought that this was the path, but no one shared the optMss-Lohthink-
ing that the terrorian would disappear i-ediately. And longer deadlines were
set for the total eradication of violence. 21. PAIS wrote: "It is even likely
that the establishnent of the Basque preautonoaous regime itself say be what will
proapt the ETA nilitsry to nount some kind of provocation for the purpose of
checking the autonoeoua process, destabilizing the situation in Eusksdi and
asking involution possible in the rest of Spain. Because those activists, who
have been definitively converted into cot-on assassins, fear the political~encircl¢
nent that is gradually tightening around thee sore than the police encircle-ant."
El. PAIS predicted that when the democratic regise was fully established ("voting
at the polls for their aayore, deputies and governors"),”E'rA nilitary will
disappear fro. the scene in Eusksdi; its reaains, if there are any, will be what
they already are: a gang of gun-en." (18)

Despite these predictions. on 9 January the arsed policeuaen Tones Garcia Sanchez
and Diego Hosquers Header were assassinated in Eibar (Guipuzcoa). At that ties,
however. the center of gravity of the antiterrorist battle had saved to Navarre,
which had become highly sensitized since the death of Coadr Inns. Sane police
chiefs from outside of Navarra, such as the Eilbao chief co-iesioner, Cones
Hargarida, "Conasa'a right are," and the general deputy director of security

and expert on ETA owing to his long stay in the Basque Country, Jose Seine,
participated in a spectacular deploy-ant. Several arrests of preauaed ETA
sedate had taken place early in the year, but the culuinsting-point of the
operation took place on 11 January when, during the course of a search of an
apparently vacant "safe apart-cut," when the inspectors were on the street,
there was an arsed confrontation in which the policesen Jose Manuel Deena Martin
and the ETA essbers Harineo Peres de Vinaeper and Ceferino Seraaols Arregui were

killed.

51

FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
FonlﬂﬁﬁClALlﬂﬂEONLV

The majority political parties took advantage of the occasion to reiterate the
condemnation of the ETA violence, but the "abertzale" left parties. EIA, LAIA
[Basque workers Revolutionary Party], HASI [Revolutionary People's Socialist
Party], the LAB [Basque National Union] trade union federation and other groups
accused the "repressive corps" wnuae latest act had been "the assassination of
two ETA (m) militants in the San Jorge district on 11 January." Other extrapar-
liamentary groups considered the incident "an inevitable consequence of the
police occupation and the systematic campaign of checks, searches, arrestssandain-
terrogations which we in Pamplona have suffered since last Saturday and which

has culminated in the manhunt and massacre of ETA militants." (19)

The battle against ETA was embarking on a new phase typified by increased acti-
vity both by the military and the politico-military branch. The latter had
undergone a period of recowery after the blows sustained in recent months, both
from the police action and the splitting off by "Apala's" special commando units
(bereziak) which, as we already know, had ended up swelling the ranks of the

"mills" as the members of ETA (m) were called. There was also talk of a pact
with the government as an explanation for the truce.

The differences separating the two branches of ETA became more distinct than
ever. ETA (m) gave absolute priority to the armed struggle, attempting to

create a prerevolutionary situation and showing up the contradictions in the
regime which they considered to be pseudo-democratic. They attempted to approach
the people over and above the channels opened by the parties, "so that they will
accept our action and break off from the conventional democracy." ETA (m) held
the view that, "Our people are beginning to understand that the elections were
merely a trap to legitimize as democratic a regime which is essentially a
military dictatorship."

ETA (p-m) considered itself a coercive apparatus backing the action of the
parties. Armed action is only a supplement to the mass struggle, and hence the
action should be selective. In short, only when the mass struggle proves to be
incapable of attaining its demands does armed intervention become necessary.
E'LA(p-m) considered itself a military vanguard of the Basque national and
social revolution.

ETA (m) was almost unanimously criticized by all the political leaders, includ-
ing~ those like Ssbino Arana of the Revolutionary Communist League, or Roberto
Lerchundi of the Communist Party, who had been ETA militants at times. Sabino
Arana criticized acts such as the deaths of Berezadi, Ibarra or Imas, which
"seemed motivated more by logistical causess (the possibility of achieving them)
than by political ones." According to Lerchundi, '1hn ETA activity since the
death of Franco has shown solely and constantly antidemocratic features (...)."
He said: "I claim that ETA is acting against the interests of Euakadi and against
the interests of liberty."

In any event. the intention of both branches to continue the struggle prompted
almost all the Basque political parties to advocate negotiation. It was claimed

that, on other occasions, negotiations had brought results, and the government
was attributed the desire to negotiate and the search for qualified spokesmen.

52

IN)R¢DFFICIAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was even learned that there was a couaunique from ETA (I) wherein it set
forth a "minimal ceiling" for negotiating with the government, but which, in
view of its proposition, made the negotiations impossible. In fact, besides
the traditional issues of total meaty (still) and the "expulsion" of the
repressive corps from the Basque Country, it was requested that the Armed
Forces garrisoned in the Basque Country become subordinate to the future Basque

autonomous government. Under these conditions, it became totally iwoeeible
to discuss negotiations. (20)

Moreover, it was obvious that the ETA modus operandi had changed. The civil
governor of Navarre, Ignacio Llano, declared: "Previously, (their) names or
personal data (of the ETA members) were recorded with the police in one way
or another. However, we have now come upon some names unknown to anyone, and

own friendships or from the persons living with them." (21) They were the
which were very soon to become well known. The members
of these cos-undo units never ceased to lead their normal lives. For example,
after carrying out an action over a weekend (the number of attacks made on
Saturday or Sunday is actually very large), they would return inediately to
their usual activity, making it impossible for anyone to suspect their status
as ETA militants.

The legalization of EIA, a political party which, as we have already explained,
had become an emanation from that branch of the Basque organization, could have
been interpreted as a gesture by the government toward ETA (p-m). The more
progressive press, in general, received this measure with gratification. "The
decision of the Ministry of Interior to legalize BIA, surely the most influen-
tial party of the 'abertzale' left, deserves only praise (...)." It subsequently
stated: "The minority nature of a political option cannot serve as an argument to
keep it outside of the law (...). The independence-oriented principles of the
Basque left offer the threefold feature of being impossible to implement, not
having the support of its own people and offending the patriotic emotions of
many Spaniards (...). But they should not be doomed to illegality on that
account (...). 0n the other hand, what must be demanded of them, and not only

in theory but in practice as well, is the renunciation of the use of violence
and the explicit comitment to cut their ties with the terrorist organizations."
(22) MUN‘DO MARIO, also approving the decision, stated: "The only exclusion
from legality is caused by the use of violence, armed struggle or physical
aggression to make political ideas triumph." (23)

ETA took another step in its caspaim against the Lemoniz nuclear powerplant
by carrying out an attack which failed again and which cost the life of ETA
member David Alvarez de Pena. As in the case of the ETA members killed in
Pasplona. there were demonstrations of protest and claims that the killed ETA
member had the status of a popular hero. The Business Branch of the Bilbao
School of Economic Sciences published a con-unique stating: "He back the ETA's
armed action as the only effective expedient for the acts that have been
connitted.” (24)

But ETA was not the only protagonist in the terrorism during the early weeks of
1978. Two terrorist acts which occurred in Barcelona caused moments of high
emotional tension.

53

MOWUEONLY
FOR‘OFFﬂJAl.US£1DNLY

The first one was the burning of the famous premises of the theater-restaurant
Scale on 15 January. The fire that was set totally destroyed the establish-
ment and caused the deaths of four workers who were inside. Almost immediately,
the police accused the Anarchists and arrested nine persons with that ideology,
who were charged with being a commando unit of the "armed branch" or "military"
sector of the CRT [National Confederation of Laborl-PAI [Iberian Anarchist
Federation] and of the Libertarian Youth. CRT reacted forcefully, considering
itself not only dissociated from the attack, but also the victim of a possible
provocation. CAHBIO 16 wrote: "The Anarchist federation, which rejects all
bureaucracy and maintains only a small administrative system, covered by
volunteers who are not subsidized; (...) lacks the discipline and control
systems which other federations have." Official circles denied CNT's respon-
sibility in this regard, but in areas of the Confederation the possibility

that "poorly trained CNT militants with little political capacity may undertake
excessive types of action" was admitted as real. (25)

A few days later, on 25 January, a horrible crime evoked intense emotion. The
former mayor of Barcelona, Joaquin Viola, and his wife were mutilated to death
after a commando unit consisting of four semi-masked persons, including a woman,
violently invaded their residence at dawn and set a bomb on the chest of Mr
Viola. a procedure that had already been used, also in Barcelona, to assassinate
Mr Bulto, in Hay of the previous year. The terrorists were still in the house
when the device exploded, mutilating the bodies of the Viola couple. The
repercussions of this attack were enormous and there was again talk of a desta-
bilization of democracy. At the funeral services for the assassinated couple
there were again shouts of "Army in power" and "Martin Villa, assassin," along
with incessant hailing of Franco. The extreme right circles stressed the fact
that the Bulto assassins had benefited from the amnesty and were already
released.

In the controversy over the issue of public order and democracy. the extreme
right sectors blamed the new regime directly. 8L ALCAZAR asked: "What is going
on in Spain? The answer is simple and hardly complex: Francisco Franco died
in Spain." And, in the same newspaper, Rafael Garcia Serrano contributed his
solution: "The solution (...) is clear, brothers (...), we must dispense with
this democracy before it ruins Spain and buries all of us." (26)

EL PAIS appeared to be answering the extreme newspaper when it wrote: "These
outcries have undoubtedly aroused among the public the impression that the
terrorists are attaining some of their goals: nervousness among the political
sectors that are nostalgic for Francoism. The recent decline in public order
is a disturbing fact which is related to both common criminality and political
terrorism. The countries without public liberties do not suffer from this
plague, although terrorism and crime are usually practiced in the cabinet
offices and at police stations (...)." It noted thereafter: "It is unques-
tionably necessary to improve the efficacy; of the security services in order to
maintainthis democratic public order, and the law must fall strictly upon those
who violate it." And it concluded by condemning those who were engaged in
"making political demagogy concerning blood which, unfortunately, is now that
of all Spaniards." (27)

56

FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USEiDNlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This editorial is of interest because it reflects a clearcut change of attitude,
not only by the Madrid newspaper, but also in the overall political atmosphere.
There is an abandonment of the idea, so greatly circulated before, that with
democracy there can be no terrorism, establishing precisely the opposite: It

is in "the countries without political liberties" that there is no terroriss,
although there is a "state terrorism."

Moving in a realm of similar ideas, MMMDO DIARIO, after criticizing "the anti-
democrats (who) have been meticulously preparing the list of violent acts so
as later to spit them brazenly in the face of democracy (...), (because) in
order to sell order, the need for it must first be created through disorder,"
concluded: "It is not democracy that fosters violence, but it does quite the

contrary: arbitrating peaceful means for settling the natural differences that
occur within the entire hunan society." (28)

But when confronted with this psychosis of violence, the scientists viewed
matters more calmly. when questioned by CAMIIO 16, the sociologist Amanda
de Miguel commented: "I believe that the violence in Spain is very alight.

If we compare it with that of other countries, the rates of violence, both
political and criminal, are low." Juan Diez Micolas, director of the Center
of Sociological Research, emphasised that, "The increases in violence occur
in times of transformation such as the ones that we are experiencing." The
psychiatrist Gonzalez Duro noted: "It is not that there is more violence now,
but rather that there is a different violence." And all three thought that
violence had come to be the price of liberty. (29)

In the realm of what we might term lesser terrorisa, we would have to cite
several acts by Cubillo's MPAIAC, which was again attempting what he called
"armed propaganda." In January, two members of MPAIAC forced a Canaries
merchant vessel to divert its course to the Algerian port of Oran. The Algerian
authorities did not allow the ship to dock in the port, and the hijackers had

to reach shore by swimming. 0n 1 February, on the occasion of the visit paid

to the islands by Lt Gen Gutierrez Mellado, first vice-president of the govern-

ment, MPAIAC set a device based on "gum-2" in an oil pipeline of the Tenerife
Petroleum Refinery.

However, Cubillo had once again lostnhiscait tsmsu in Algiers, thanks to the
action taken by the P303 leader, Felipe Gonzalez, who visited Algeria as the
guest of the FL“ [National Liberation Front] starting on 27 January. Despite
everything, Cubillo attempted to obtain for his group the status of a "National
Liberation Movement" at the meeting of the GA" [Organization of African Unity]
Liberation Committee which took place at Tripoli on 13 February, and at the
subsequent ministers' meeting to be held on 20 February. A trip to Libya by
the Count of Barcelona, father of the king, was utilized by the latter to
convey a personal message to Qadhsfi which convinced the latter to accept the
Spanish proposition regarding the Canaries.

As had occurred the previous year, the GAB Council of Ministers adopted the
proposal of the Liberation Coaudttee which, along other things, asked for the
consideration of the Canaries as "non-autonomous territory" and suggested a '

55

IN)! OlﬂﬂCIAl.llSli(HULY
F0l:05?1CLALIJSEINVLY

"special assistance" for the MPAIAC, again proposing the sending of a mission
to the Canaries. Also. as in 1977, the Spanish Government reiterated "with the
greatest firmness its total rejection of proposals, decisions or actions that
represent a major distortion of reality and attack the territorial integrity and
national sovereignty of Spain in an intolerable manner." It was inevitable for
Cubillo to consider all this a victory, with sufficient reason. and to comment,
with gratification: "From now on we shall act seriously and on a large scale.
The armed struggle will proliferate because, within a few days. I shall issue

orders to all the commando units to go into immediate action until total
liberation is attained." (30)

This "serious and grand scale" action iaaediately had its first result on 8
March, when an armed policeman, Rafael Valdenebros Sotelo, was killed, the
victim of an attack that had occurred a week earlier, when a device set by the
HPAIAC at the Bank of Vizcaya, in La Laguna. exploded. Cubillo stated that
they did not want the death, and accused the government of being mainly to
blame by not yielding to the HPAIAC's claims. "If it continues with this
policy, there will continue to be victims on both sides." (31)

Shortly thereafter, the HPAIAC attempted to imitate BTA's idea of the "revolu-
tionary tax," and sent letters to Canaries industrialists demanding sums that
ranged from 5 to 25 million pesetas. No recipient paid attention to these
letters. There was also the fact that, at this time, the HPAIAC was regarded
as dismantled, because no fewer than 2b presumed members of the independence
movement had been arrested. (32)

Cubillo's euphoria suffered a harsh blow on 5 April, when the Canaries separa-
tist leader was stabbed at the door of his house in Algiers. (31s) As was to
be expected, Cubillo accused the Spanish intelligence services, and P803 itself,
and the Algerian Government attempted to implicate the Spanish Government in
the sinister affair. Concretely, two Spaniards, Jose Luis Cortes and Jose
Antonio Alfonso Gonzalez, were accused, and were arrested 6 hours after the
assault. Links between the accused and FRAP [People's Action Revolutionary
Front] and GRAPO also appeared, and also with the Spanish secret services,

and hence an unimaginable degree of confusion was reached. He should add that
the seriousness of Cubillo's wounds was not known and. as a result, there
was even doubt as to the reality of the attack.

The Algerian Government attempted, on the basis of the attack, to implement a
campaign against Spain that was to have its culmination at Khartoum. on 2 July,
when the OAU Conference of Heads of State convened there.

In May, when the trial against Cubillo's presumed attackers was held, there
appeared as a key element instigating the attack another Spaniard, Jose Luis
Bspinosa Pardo, a typical multiple agent who was not only a friend of Cubillo
and Boumedienne himself. but also an individual who, having infiltrated GRAPO,
facilitated the discovery by the Spanish police of that terrorist organisa-
tion's hiding place in Benidorn, as we have already noted. This subject, who
had a very long record as a secret agent, had been regarded by the Spanish
services as an Algerian agent and as liaison between Algeria and GRAPO who.
among other activities,had even been a militant in HGT; something which perhaps

56
FOR OFTIC1A1.lEi£(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

explains Cubillo's hatred for P303. Jose Luis Bapinoaa, formerly "Isaac
Fernandez," was condemd to death for rebellion.

Meanwhile, ETA continued its attacks upon the members of the forces of public
order which had, moreover, become the i-ediate target of all the mobilizationa
of the "abertzale" left. "Let them gol'f and "dissolution of all the repressive
corps" were the usual shouts at all the popular gatherings and the slogans which
appeared painted on the walls of all localities in the Navarre-Basque Country.
At the same time, the relatives of the civil guards and armed police suffered
an obvious repudiation which forced them to live in a real "ghetto."

ETA completed this action with systematic, regular assassination. On 27 January,
in Bilbao, the civil guard sergeant, Antonio Gomez Garcia, and regular member
Francisco Rodriguez Garcia were assassinated. On 18 February, in Villarreal de
Urrechua, the victims of fatal attacks were another two civil guardsmen, Antonio
Ravarro heras and lhnuel Redondo Villegaa. On 243 February, in Santurce, it was
a mnicipal policeman, Manuel Lemoa Hoya, who succumbed to the ETA bullets. 0n
3 March, in Bilbao, three armed policemen, Julian Romero Sierra, Antonio Villa-
lobos Rubio and Juan Caspos Santos were assassinated simltaneously. No days
later, on 5 March, in a nacabre escalation of the statistics on fatalities,

five armed policemen were assassinated in Vitoria (liiguel Rojo Aguilar, Joaquin
Ramos Gomez, Jose Vicente de Val del Dio, Armando Doval Gonzalez and Santiago
Canto de los Reyes). On 10 March, in Aduna (Guipuzcoa), the retired civil

guard sergeant, Jose Maria Acedo Panizo, was assassinated.

At the same time, ETA was carrying out attacks of other types, such as those
perpetrated against offices of Iberduero, a company to which it sent an ultima-
tun to stop the work at the Lemondz nuclear powerth in 15 days or it would
blow up the television repeating station in Palencia, which left northern Spain
without television. Other devices destroyed a block of housing under construc-
tion in Tolosa (Guipuzcoa) and a football pool sales stand in Galdacano
(Vizcaya).

As is quite evident, the ETA violence did not only fail to decline. but in fact
was on the rise. This was due to a great extent to the fact that the political
parties, especially those of the "abertzale" left, had not ended up rejecting
terrorism completely. On 30 January, a meeting of the entire Basque left was
held in San Sebastian to study a document prepared by PCB, P803, CCOO [Workers
Omissions] and DOT, wherein an attempt was made to unify views that would
contribute to the pacification of Buskadi. The document called upon "those
who engage in armed violence to put down their pistols in a unified and collec-
tive fashion, and to uphold their political positions through peaceful, demo-
cratic means." Several "abertzale" parties left the nesting, and others remain-
ed but did not sign, because, while- "still in disagreement with ETA's armed
struggle, because they consider it a political mistake at this time, yet jhey
refuse to participate in a demand upon ETA to cease its armed struggle." (33)

Continuing its action, ETA (m) which had on 16 March assassinated the former
mayor of Galdacano, Esteban Belderrain Hadariaga, once more on the following
day set a device in the Lemoniz nuclear powerplant the explosion of which

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

caused the deaths of two workers, the erector, Alberto Negro Piguera, and the
laborer. Andres Guerra Peinado. It was learned that two telephone cells had
announced the attack and no attention was paid to them. Confidential sources
announced that "CIA was apprised of the attack...(because) hours before the
gum-2 that had been set exploded, a call made from the ".8. announced the
attack at the Hestinghouae firm in Rome,s Lemoniz stockholder." (36)

The attack on Lemoniz was an enormous mistake by ETA, because it evoked wide-
spread repudiation. "From nationalist sectors which had up until then shown
discretion toward the actions of the ETA organization to former ETA members

now affiliated with BIA, the 'enough' was unanimous." ETA published a communi-
que with some stupid arguments justifying its action and, in a violent tone,
attacking everyone, including EIA and Senator Bandres who took advantage of

the occasion to give a reminder that "BIA resulted from an ETA congress and

now also represents a political branch of that organization." Some thought

that, with the stupid communique, "ETA became isolated from 90 percent of the
Basque people." (35)

The attack on Lemoniz served BL ALCAZAR in driving home its well-known anti-
democratic ideas: "All those who do not dare to confront ETA, wherever they
may be, and for whatever reasons, are to blame. Democracy in Spain has failed
shamefully against terrorisn, not for lack of means, but rather because of

too much fear." (36)

But the terrorism was not upsetting the Basque Country alone. Madrid, too,
which had not received any terrorist blows for some time, again saw its streets
blood-stained. CRAPO became reborn again fron its sinister ashes, showing an
obvious operational capacity despite the fact that its most prominent leaders
were in prison. On 10 March, a commando unit consisting of three persons machine-
gunned a couple of armed policemen. ssssssinating Agent Felix Garcia Alonso and
seriously wounding his companion, Manuel Blasquez Blanca. ADC,whiohddevoted.its
11 March front page to reporting the incident, claimed: "The mere scant words

of condemnation from the political parties are scandalously insufficient. An
active commitment to concrete, active, declared belligerency has become urgently
needed."

The attack which had the greatest repercussions at this time wes the assassina-
tion in Madrid, on 22 March, of Jesus “added, general director of prison insti-
tutions, who had held the post for barely 4 months and had shown signs of

being of a reformist bent. A GRAPO commendo unit shot him as he was driving

in his official car on a Madrid street. The impact grew because, at the same
time, it was reported by the Ministry of Interior that GRAPO had prepared a
black list of prominent persons whom it intended to eliminate. Some attempted
to relate Heddad's assasination to.the deech;'ona week before in the Carabanchel
jail. of an Anarchist inmate, victim of mistreatment. “hat was clear was the
return of GRAPO to terrorist activities. During April, in Pontevedra, the
police succeeded in arresting two members of this terrorist organization who

gave clues not only to the Haddad assassins, but also to those responsible for
the deaths of Capt Herguedas and the policeman, Felix Garcia Alonso.

58

INHRCHNWCJAI.USEIMVLY
I!IR(MNWCJAI.USE(NVLY

But ETA pursued its insane rate of fatalities until, in May. it reached the
horrifying figure of 22 assassinations, almost representing one death per day.
But let us specify: On 19 March, in Durango (Viscaya), Dionisio Medina Oralla,
a waiter, was killed. On 25 March, two armed policemen, Rafael Bermudea Serrano
and Rafael Garcia Mayo, were killed in San Sebastian. On 13 April. in Aacoitis
(Cuipuzcoa), Jose Larranage Arenas, former chief fo the Movement. was killed.
On 15 April. in Portugslete (Viscaya), Jesus hobo Sato. a municipal policeman,
was killed. On 16 April. in San Sebastian. two armed policemen, Percario
Onebrajo Cabrera and Manuel Brejana Pequeno, were killed. As we have just
remarked. May was one of the moat bloody months in the entire history of
terrorism. Its 22 deaths were nearly all of members of the forces of public
order: armed police (four), civil guard (15), countrymen (three). Among the

latter was a woman, Julia Gonzales Cordoba, who was assassinated in Galdacano
(Vizcaya). (36a)

Negotiating with ETA

It was obvious that ETA, especially the military branch, had accelerated the pace
of its criminal actions. An editorial in CAHBIO l6 signed by Juan Tomas de Salas
commented: "After 15 June. many thought that ETA would continue killing because
that was the only thing it knew how to do.and that it would never give up arms
because it had found in them a perfect accommodationgand that it would deny

the existence of increased liberty in Spain because ETA will opaynoperate like a
fish in water when the dictatorship is reinstated here." But there were others
who thought that ETA (m). through its action, was attempting to force negotia-
tions. "But is also possible and necessary to demonstrate clearly to the Basque
public that peace is impossible And this will not be demonstrated until all

the political efforts have been made on behalf of peace." (37)

Hence, the notion of negotiations appeared again. There were increasing numbers
of individuals and groups which,were willing to undertake negotiations with ETA
to put an end to the insanity of violence. Something similar had already occur-
red previously but surely never as in May-June 1978 had the outcry been so
insistent in favor of some type of contact that would make it possible to harbor
some hope for a solution to the Basque problem. which had become a cancer
threatening to put an end to Spanish democracy.

As we have already noted previously. the conditions of ETA (m) (the branch in
which the idea of the negotiations was concentrated) were known, and the politi-
cians were analyzing them over and over again in a desire to find formulas and
mechanisms that would make the contacts viable.

According to Jose Maria (Chiqui) Benegas, secretary general of PSB-PSOE and
head of the interior affairs entity of the Basque General Council, "ETA'a
conditions are negotiable," although he admitted that the point relating to
the subordination of the Armed Forces quartered in the Basque Country posed
serious difficulties.

One of the politicians least inclined toward the negotiations was the secretary
general of the Communist Party of Buskadi, Roberto Lerchundi, who, in addition
to considering the conditions imposed by ETA (m) unacceptable. expressed the
view (and we must not fail to note that he hisself was a former ETA member)

59
ltlltlﬂﬂC1A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFI-‘IGAL USE ONLY

that, "ETA's long history (...) has proven that while one faction bases itself
on the purely political game, others continue with arms." (38)

in the debate on negotiations with ETA. there was intervention by a prominent
spoken-1: the president of the Catalonian Legislative Assembly, Josep Terra-
dellas, who offered his services as a mediator. The old politician said:

"There is no other alternative left but talking and more talking. Violence

does not lead to anything good. Of course I cannot approve of the ETA's methods.
but we cannot confine ourselves solely to sporadic condemations. There mt be
tall: and negotiation." Tarradellas made a trip to France to meet with Leisaols,
and did not hesitate to cite Catalonia as an example. Tarradellas also criticis-
ed the simultsneous existence of two similar organs: the Basque General Council
and the Basque government in exile. According to the Catslonian politician.

the first step would be to unite these two entities. Later, there would be
discussions with ETA and an attespt made to reach a cease-fire. "I admit that
there have been many gestures node on the part of the government to date.

There has been amnesty; there has been legalization of the 'abertasle' parties.
These are obvious gestures; whereas there has been no curb on the violence on
the part of ETA. But. in spite of everything. we must begin to talk. There

is no other recourse." Tarradellas then went on to say: "The etteqt will

most likely be thwarted and it is true. and I admit it, ETA cannot be reintegrat-
ed into a pattern of civilized society. In any event, it mat be attempted.
because it is just like the patient who is dying and is abandoned by the
doctors. Something must always be done to save him, to cure him." (39)

All these attempts came to naught. The Basque General Council even published a
note accusing Tarradellas of meddling in Basque internal affairs; and the under-
secretary of interior, Jesus Sancho Rot, stressed that "there is no dialog
possible with ETA." not even by intervening persons, and lent the action taken
by Tarradellas a purely personal nature. (60)

Moreover, no one (we have already observed that not even Tarradellas himself)
had too much confidence in negotiations with ETA. According to El. PAIS, "Hr
Tarradellas' initiative, although by no means counterproductive, does not seem
too promising." (41) ABC. also criticizing the note from the Basque General
Council, remarked that. "the Tarradellas initiative (...) destroys nothing
and made no cos-zitment." and. a few days later, asserted: "There cannot be
dialog between those who are attempting (with greater or lesser success) to
make the path of Spanish democracy saooth and those who are attempting to
subvert a legal situation by dint of machine guns." (62)

EL SOCIALISTA took a poll along politicians of various ideologies (Joaquin
Satmstegui, Alfonso Guerra, Telesforo Monzon, Joan Reventos, Carlos Garaico-
echea and Jordi Pujol). all of whom viewed the contacts as feasible. Only
Roberto herohundi. the Basque Co-unist leader, thought that, "Negotiation is
a reward to terrorist and assigns ETA as a representative of the interests of
Buskadi. Therfore, our position is opposed :to the negotiations." (63)

The street riots and incidents continued, in spite of everything, in this
atmosphere of negotiation. Hay was not only the most death-dealing one in the
entire history of terrorism in the Basque Country alone. It was also abundant

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in demonstrations and incidents which quite often used as an excuse the deaths
of two ETA members who were gunned down by the civil guard on 11 Hay in Guernics
when they juwed a checkpoint. The two ETA members lived in Durango. and the
riots in that locality were especially violent, to the point of even interrupt-
ing the period of the Cycling Lap to Spain.

Under these circumstances, the problem of the "uncontrolled" recurred. It was
known that these groups were mde up of extreme right wingers, but also, as

was proven by sufficient evidence, members of the corps of public order. The
problem assumed particular virulence in Navarre, where the political parties

met with the civil governor, Imacio del Llano, who admitted his powerlessness
against the uncontrolled ones. In Guipuzcos, nine armed policemen suspected of
having cooperated directly or indirectly with the "uncontrolled" were transferred
from the Basque Country. But the civil government did not find witnesses who
could nor would provide evidence against them.

The extreme right appeared fully determined to stress the practice of provocation.
This was unquestionably the nature of the activity that New Force organised in
San Sebastian. at the Anoeta pelota court. attended by its national leader,

Blas Pinar. There was shooting in the vicinity of the pelota court and the
police arrested two militants of the neofascist party.

The hopes placed in the negotiations ended on 28 June with the assassination of
the Bilbao journalist Jose Maria Portell. editor of hOJA DBL LUNBS,odf:-Bilbso.
and editor in chief of LA GACETA DBL NORTE. Portell was precisely someone
very familiar with ETA, who was regarded by everyone as s negotiator with ETA.
Juan Felix Bria, a close friend of Portell's and, with him, liaison for the
establishment of the talks. claimed that Rodolfo Martin Villa had given Portell
extensive authority for negotiating with ETA. On at least two previous occa-
sions: at the time of the Arrasate kidnapping in l'ebruary 1976, and at the time
- that the Suarez government granted ameaty in 1977, Porgell had negotiated
with ETA.

Ilia extensive knowledge of the Basque organization had been shown in the two
books of which he was the author, "The lien of ETA" and "Asmesty Obtained."
Some of his information obviously came from ETA itself and. on occasion, he
had been accused of being a member of ETA, or at least appearing as such.

Apart from other methods for meeting, Portell proposed to make BCUA DB wars
the platform for the negotiations. giving ETA itself the opportunity to express
its own views in its pages. Just 2 days before his assassination, HOJA had
published the views of an anonymous group of 62 university members, who consi-
dered the negotiations with ETA "ismoasible to hold."

The death of Portell, who was assassinated shortly before 0900 hours when he
was leaving his residence in Portugalete, caused widespread shock. The first
imressions attributed the attack so some "crazy" counsndo unit hostile to the
idea of negotiations sponsored by the ETA (m) leadership. But a conunique
from this organisation dispelled any doubt, justifying the crime because
Portell was "a specialist in poison." At the same time, it threatened

61

”WIRIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"military action." because ETA ”lacks the legal capacity for lodging complaints"
against CAHBIO 16, DIARIO 16, GACETA DEL “OMB and PBNSANIENTO NAVARRO.

The Basque political parties, 06!), P803 and PCB, drafted a joint communique
which PIN. which was harshly criticized, refused to sign. According to El.
PAIS, PNV was becoming a Hamlet, "willing to reject violence in the abstract.
but reluctant to assume positions for combating it concretely." (’04) CAHBIO
16. in an editorial signed by Juan Tomas de Sales, took a courageous stand
against the threat, stating that ”He shall retain our position until the final
hour," and adding: "Personally, I shall ask you just one question: does the
armed struggle always require killing totally unarmed .citizena behind the

back and by surprise? Even Al Capone, in his battles, sometimes gave his
victims many more chances to defend themselves on an equal footing. The mytho-
logy of the armed struggle vanishes when the victim is neither willing nor
able to defend himself with the weapons of war." Finally, it also criticized
PNV for its "resounding paralysis” and for not being "on a par with the historic-
al circumstances that it was destined to experience." (45)

The journalistic status of the victim of this reverberating attack proapted the
appearance of a joint editorial in the Spanish weeklies stating that the BIA
arguments in its comunique went "directly against the principles of freedom

of speech." and accused the Basque organization of "fearful political inaturity"
and "irrational hatred for democracy and for coexistence." It concluded by
saying: "we shall continue not to discredit ETA. but to denounce an organisation
with a system of values wherein human life does not appear to count at all."

During June, the ETA attacks had not been so overwhelming, although the impact
of that on Portell was enormous, (66); but, because of the urgent nature of
the matter, despite everything the government adopted a decree-law on excep-
tional measures which was approved by the Council of Ministers meeting in
special session on precisely 28 June, the same day on which Portell was assas-
sinated. This regulation was to be in effect until the Cortes, after the
regulatory debate, approved a very similar bill sent to the Congress of Depu-
ties for normal handling. To some, the latter was a more retrogressive text
than the decree-law passed in August 1975, while Franco was still living.
Essentially, it called for the indefinite extension of holding those suspected
of terrorism, with prior permission from the judge. It also called for postal,
telegraphic and telephonic intervention carried out by the minister of interior,
who would convey it to the judge, "giving grounds for the adoption of the
measure."

At the same time, Martin Villa, after traveling to the Federal Republic of
Germany, was briefed on the cybernetic methods used there to modernize the
state's action against the terrorist threat. But in those uses of cowuter
science, some, particularly the opposition parties, saw a threat to liberties
and hence the criticism was not long in appearing.

The violent environment in the Basque Country did not fail to increase as
summer arrived and, with it, the popular festivals in cities and towns. The

San Fermin festivals that year were especially troubled, their highlight being
the unfortunate entry of the armed police at the Peeplona bull ring on the

62

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
INJI¢0i1iC1AI.IJSEL(H§LY

afternoon of 8 July. Thereafter, a series of incidents occurred in the Naverra
capital which caused one death, that of German Rodriguez Sans, a militant in
the Trotskyite LKI [Revolutionary Col-nudist League], and some 150 injuries.
From Pamplona. the incidents moved to San Sebastian, which remained at s
standstill and, at one time, isolated fron the rest of Spain. Another youth,
Jose Ignacio Barandiaran. was killed by the impact fron a bullet. Some claimed
that it was the police who fired, while others said that he was killed from
behind and accused ETA. There was no doubt that the action of the forces of
public order had been regrettable, and once again the arrest of the provoca-
tors who were responsible was requested. The position of certain sectors of
these forces was made clear when, on the same 11 July, a company of the armed
police entered Renteria (Guipuzcos) at a mealtime when the streets were empty
of the demonstrators in solidarity with Pamplona and, in an incredible act of
vandalism. caused destruction in businesses and other establishments.

At the same time, the so-cslled "antiterroriat"tas:orﬂmlreturned to the scene.
0n 2 July in San Juan de Luz, in the French Basque Country, two individuals
machine-gunned one of the ETA's historical leaders, Ion Echabe, and his wife,
as they were just boarding a car, and the latter was killed in the act. The
ETA member was seriously wounded.

In this orgy of bloodshed, ETA also: turned against its own people. On 5 July,
in Zarauz. Domingo Merino Arevalo was assassinated. As in the case of Echabe,
some thought that the extreme right wing might be involved. ETA (m) took
credit for the attack, accusing Merino of being a police confidante and of
having used the name of ETA to extort Basque businessmen and to gntar;the
'abertzale" organizations.

Three days later, on 8 July, when the Basque chaos caused by the San Permin
events was starting, Javier Jsuregui, justice of the peace in the locality and
former local councilman of the National Movement, was assassinated in Lemons
(Vizcaya).

In the end. it turned out that ETA (a) which had seemed totally isolated a few
weeks earlier. was ﬁfinding in the atmosphere of constant chaos and confusion“
the medium that it needed to continue its violent activities.

The Provocation of the Armed Forces

Up until 1978, both ETA and GRAPO had aimed their action against the forces

of public order. The officials who had been victims of attacks performed
duties in these police forces, as in the case of Captain Eerguedas and Commander
Inez.

During the second half of 1978, it was noted how those two terrorist organiza-
tions were directing their fire against the Army and, particularly, against the
highest ranking officers and chiefs. At the beginning of April, CANDID 16
published in its section entitled "From a Good Source“ a note which read as
follows: "Confidential reports in the hands of the police indicate that the
ETA terrorist organization might start operating outside of the Basque Country.
According to these reports, ETA is planning an offensive that would strike at
high-ranking military in the Spanish Army.“ (67)

63

FOIGHﬂﬂCIAl.USE(HNLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Spanish secret services even had information to the effect that ETA (m)

was starting to store in its arsenals semi-heavy weapons of the bszooka and
grenade launcher type. This information gave the impression that the Basque
organization might be planning to establish as future targets civil guard
“barracks" or other military installations. It was even thought that ETA (m)
might attempt the "seizure" of a small locality so as to remain established

in it for a short time. By so doing, it night be trying to take the step toward
the really nilitary phase of the armed insurrection that could force the govern-
ment to use the Army. In this way, there would be occasion for ETA to use the

slogan "military occupation" which the organization's theoreticians had always
considered a mobilizing factor of very extensive scope.

Strangely enough, ETA (m) was not the first to take a step in this direction.
On 20 June, an ETA (p-m) cal-undo unit attempted to assault the Military Govern-
ment of Guipuzcos in San Sebastian, and even managed to overcome some of the
military on guard. The intervention of another officer thwarted the attack

which, in any event, was an operation of slight significance possibly intended
only to seize weapons.

But in was in nadrid on 21 July that the attack which made the fragile struc-
tures of the democratic state tremble. On that day, the Congress of Deputies
had just ended the discussion of the Constitution. Hith the predictable absten-
tion of the PIN deputies, its plenum was to approve the constitutional text
arduously achieved during the previous months. At 0830 hours in the morning,
when he had just boarded his official car, Brig Gen Juan Manuel Sanchez-Ramos
Izquierdo was shot by machine-gun fire. Killed with him was Lt Col-Aide Jose
Antonio Perez Rodriguez. The news fell like a bomb on the deputies who were
arriving at Congress to approve the Constitution. It was the first time that

an Army general fell victim to a terrorist attack. Since Carrero, the terrorism
had never aimed so high.

The plenum devoted much of its morning session to the issue of terrorism which
had just dealt its latest blow. All the spokesmen for the various parliamen-
tary groups spoke, once again condemning terrorism, and President Suarez himself
delivered a speech in which he declared that, "The government will not tolerate
extremist reactions by any mans; the government will enact the legal measures
that are within its reach for the investigation, prosecution and repression

of terrorism."

At first, great confusion prevailed regarding which group might be the one
responsible for the attack. A strange and unknown group, CAP, and the known

but nonetheless strange GRAPO took credit for the attack, but the police suspected
that ETA was the perpetrator, as was actually confirmed later. In any event,

it was clear that neither the victims selected nor the time chosen was fortuitous.
Quite obviously there had been a plan, a plan which sought the destabilization

of democracy and, at the same time, was intended to provocate the Army. Suarez
himself so stated: "Every time we have undertaken a key phase in our democracy,
terrorism has appeared in an attempt to destabilize the country."

66

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the view of many. the last resorts in this plan were located beyond our
borders, and in this regard there were references to the Soviet KGB. CANBIO
16 reported that. "A few days ago, Victor Luis, who is regarded as one of the
superspiea of the Soviet organisation and one of its most powerful and influen-
tial personagea, visited our country." The same magazine added: "Just a few
weeks ago, a high-ranking Spanish leader visiting the USSR, upon meeting with

a member of the Central Cornittee of the Comist Party of the Soviet Union.
could not contain his surprise when he heard from the mouth of the leading
Soviet dignitary the cement that “we would be willing to help you pacify
Euskadi provided we received some compensation (...). The min 'compenaation'

was i-ediately forthcoming: 'Spsin's not joining NATO.” (68) The Soviet
connection was thereby made fully explicit.

Over a year later, in November 1979, when the Soviet foreign minister, Andrey
Gromyko. visited Madrid. he made an offer to his Spanish counterpart. Marcelino
Oreja, that "if Spain desiated from its plans to join NATO (...), the Soviet
Union would be prepared to help combat the most disturbing domestic problem,
terrorism. But. according to Spanish officials. Gromyko also hinted that entry
into NATO would leave the young Spanish demcracy vulnerable to the depredations
of terrorism." (#9) This ruor, denied on constant occasions by the Soviets.
was nevertheless to have factual confirmation in the subsequent evolution of
terrorism, as we shall have occasion to prove.

The other issue that was to be brought up by the attack of 21 July was that of
the possible connections between ETA and GRAPO; an issue that would never be
totally explained but of which rather significant signs were to appear. The
Algeria of Bounedienne, Oubillo's protector and. in turn. a friend of GRAPO,
might well have been the link between the two terrorist organizations. In this
respect. let us note that "Apala's" presence in Algeria had already been detect-
ed (50) and that, at the same time, "among high-ranking government sources there
was news of the contacts maintained recently between the two organizations:
Specifically, at a meeting of the ETA staff in San Juan de Luz consideration
was given to the position of organizing jointly with GRAPO a series of actions
by both organizations throughout the national territory. However. the American
secret services denied this connection when Gutierrez Hellado visited Washing-
ton in the sun of 1978." (51)

But perhaps the most important aspect of the attack of 21 July was that of
the direct provocation of the Army. Thereafter there would begin an entire
series of agreements and concomitant acts and objectives shared by terrorism
and coupism, that will be essential to understand the political evolution in
Spain during the following years.

In the sums): of 1978 connism had not yet manifested itself . but there were
already some very obvious urginga on the part of the extreme right wing news-
papers 31. ALCAZAR and El. IHPARCIAL, and by the magazine PUMA NUEVA. With
reference to the letter from a military man on active duty published in BL
MARCIAL, CANDID 16 stated: "It is. quite certainly, the beat contribution
to an entire plan devised by the civilians to take the military out of their
barracks and to set up a new regime; a plan put into effect months after the
death of Generalisimo Ptanco which, in some of its points. would receive the

65

“MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approval of some military conanders disturbed over the current political

situation and concerned over the progressive deterioration of public order
in the Basque provinces." (52)

The urging for coupism on the part of the aforementioned media was obvious.
On 22 July, 81. ALCAZAR, under the headlines "Mourning in the Army, Tension

in Spain," published two photographs; of the attacks accoqanied by a long
article which stated, among other things: "Urgent measures no longer suffice;
those authorized to do so must take imediate measures." It was obvious that.
to EL ALCAZAR. those "authorized" were not governors whom it described as
“shallow, irresponsible politicians." In an article published on the same
front page, the editor of the organ of the National Confederation of Combatants
declared: "It is now time to put things in their places, and for everyone to
accept the role that is incumbent on him." And, subsequently, he remarked:
"The ills that (Spain) is suffering have only that unequivocal origin: the

political inability of ambitious rulers and the old wisdom of the professionals
in .1“ :rnational subversion."

Despite the fact that it claimed that "the swords are raised high in our poli-
tical group," FUERZA NUEVA denied its inclination toward coupiam. "Spain is
at a time of extreme danger, ready to sound the starting signal. The consent
made by a newsman in Congress recently, aloud and looking at his watch ("What
time does Pavia arrive7") was neither capricious nor humorous (...). And when
that time comes (and we would not venture to say whether it will be the best)
we do not know, ne'- have we done anything to foster it in these pages, despite

the fact that we have been claimed‘.to have a coupist nature and disposition."
(53)

In other publications, the tone was equally harsh, although with very notable
ideological variations. In its very severe editorial, ABC stated: "We denounce
the fact that the Chamber of Deputies has remained silent for half an hour,
hearing the justifications by a representative of the Basque people to the
effect that the bombs connected with'ikurrina,‘ the elimination of the servants
of public order by gunfire and all the monstrosities ranging from kidnapping to
shooting in the neck are logical results of the insufficient degree of 'democra-
tization' which should be improved imediately, placing the current assassins

in the high-ranking positions of tomorrow}: autonomous administration. Neither
a murmur nor an angry voice interrupted that series of foolish remarks (...)."
It later declared: "Terrorism (...) can succeed only in a state which refused to
meet the first of its obligations: that the citizens can continue to live."

It also took the opportunity to note that, ”It is also obvious that the bruta-
lity of the so-called 'uncontrolled elements' cannot be put on the same level
as the teams of assassins supplied with machine guns." (54)

At the other extreme of the ideological arc, EGIN, criticizing the Iiinistry of
Interior's decision not to a-_ow the dissemination of the ETA (m) comnique
claiming the attack in Madrid, wrote: "At this point, it is sufficiently clear
that ETA military is not only an armed organization seeking to perpetuate the
dialectics of the machine guns. ETA military has stated in various ways what
its political alternative for Buskadi at present is, and what the minimal
points; on the basis of which arms would be unnecessary are." It concluded

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFIWCJAI.lﬂSEZ(MVLY

by saying: "To advocate the opportunity for the armed organizations to be
able to explain the motives for their actions is not taking sides with them.
It is defending the principle of freedom of speech to its final consequences
and opposing the use of censorship as a means of political action." (55)

As might have been imagined, the uneasiness in the Armed Forces was growing.

A few days earlier, great shock was caused by the comments made, on the occasion
of an official visit to Argentina, by Lt Gen Liniers, then Army Chief of Staff,
wherein he cited the "legitimacy of the Argentine enterprise in which the
people and the Army have marched together," and referred to the fact that "Spain
and Argentina (...) have always marched through history by parallel routes."

In statements to LA NACION, Liniers depicted himself as a constitutionalist
military man, but it was inevitable that, in the charged Spanish political
atmosphere , his speech to Videla should be interpreted as another factor for

alarm to a regime which was beginning to find itself beset simultaneously by
the blows from terrorism and the current specter of coupism.

When ETA Acts, GRAPO Falls

One of the most repeated coincidences in the history of terrorism in Spain is
that when ETA carries out any of its most spectacular strikes, it is not long
before the police action arrests a large number of GRAPO members. The situation
is present, with the force of evidence, possibly owing'to the fact that GRAPO's
more defective structure makes it more vulnerable at the times when police
activity is intensified. But there is nothing odd about the fact that this
strange circumstance has nurtured the doubts of those who iuspect that GRAPO

is an artificial structure which takes advantage of the perturbation of vaguely
revolutionary, alienated elements putting them in the service of a destabiliz-
ing operation carefully planned by those who hope to win everything by a
provoked involution of democracy in Spain.

Roberto Conesa who, in early 1977, had become renowned as a result of the
fortunate outcome of the Oriol and Villaescuss kidnappings, was responsible

for conducting the investigations relating to the latest terrorist attacks,

the perpetrators of which were undoubtedly associated with ETA. Conesa did

not arrest any ETA members, failing in his investigations..as the police cordon
deployed for several days starting on 21 July in the vicinity of Madrid and the
towns in the Guardarrama mountains had failed. But very few days thereafter,
Conesa announced the arrest of seven GRAPO militants, including the members of
the commando unit which had assassinated Jesus Haddad, general director of
prison institutions. At the same time, police sources who accepted the ETA
claim for the attack of 21 July as truthful, admitted that GRAPO "could have
cooperated in the assassinations." No sufficient explanation was ever given
for this hypothesis.

The arrests of the GRAPO members cited by Conesa had taken place before the 21
July attack. and hence there were some who thought that, "It was obviously a
smokescreen to conceal the failure represented by the capture operation."

Conesa was criticized by political leaders of various parties, who reproached
him for his "excessive" infiltrations into groups like GRAPO which, nevertheless,
did not impede their terrorist activity. (56)

67

FOI(HHNCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Very soon after the assassination of the two Army chiefs, the Congress passed
two very important laws associated with the battle against terrorism. The
first was the Antiterrorist Law, the so-called law against arnsd groups,
replacing the decree-law which had been passed a month earlier. The second

was the Police Law, whereby the "grays," the armed police so closely linked
with the former Franco regime, were to be called national police, also changing
their uniforn so as to achieve a new image that had nothing to do with the past.

With the connections between ETA and GRAPO unproven, there was no doubt of the
coincidences between the two organizations in their plans and also, on occasion,
on the tine of perpetrating their attacks. On 28 August, when a nonth had
already elapsed without any death, following the double assassination in Madrid,
four members of the state security forces, as the for-er forces of public order
were called after the passage of the police law, were killed almost simultane-
ously in different parts of Spain. In Hondragon, ETA assassinated Aurelio
Salgueiro Lopez, a corporal in the intelligence service of the civil guard.
Also, in Guipuzcoa, in Iron, ETA killed an intelligence service police inspec-
tor, Alfonso Estevas Guilnan. That same day, GRAPO killed the civil guardsman
Manuel Vazquez Cacharron in Santiago de Compostela, and the armed policeman
Luis Antonio Rodriguez Garcia,in Barcelona.

These four simultaneous attacks evoked a violent reaction from the General

Police Corps' professional association, which issued a note in which they declared
themselves "painfully fed up" and attacked the political parties for their state-
ments protesting against the terrorist attacks, which they considered "hollow"

and for the sole purpose of "engaging in politics." The Bilbao police profession-
a1 association went even further and, after accusing the whole society of being

a "silent accomplice," cited the possibility that the police might reach "a

limit situation with unforeseeable consequences." In view of this tone, some
commentaries, such as the 31 August editorial in INPOKHACIONBS, nentioned the
police "gauging together."

The response from the more unequivocally democratic press was overwhelning.
EL PAIS devoted two consecutive editorials to the issue. In the first one,
alluding once again to the Conesa case, it wrote: "Nevertheless, it should be
made clear that this is not an attempt to turn Hr Conesa into the scapegoat for
the failure of the security services to halt the terrorist offensive and dis-
cover its leadership centers, its sources of financing and its national and
international backers. It is merely the symbol of a certain type of police
official poorly adapted to the new situation." It concluded by saying:'1h
citizens are painfully fed up with seeing the officials affiliated with the
state payroll, whose members are being assassinated with impunity, incapable
of discovering the assassins and naintaining an atnosphere of insecurity in
the streets." (57)

The next day, BL PAIS returned to the issue, criticizing the notes fron the
aforementioned professional association. It gave a reminder that, "It is

an obvious falsehood that the authoritarian regimes are more capable of coping
with the terrorist offensive than is a democratic system”; and it went on to

say that, "The general police corps should be required to renew its work methods

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and to multiply its efforts to locate and arrest those who are threatening not
only the lives of public order officials but also those of the rest of the
citizens, thanking it when it has complied with this." (58)

M00 MARIO agreed, stating that, "to atop this state of affairs, it scene
to us most important that the police discover and put at the disposal of the

justice system those guilty of the criminal actions that have been conﬁned
in our country." (59)

CANDID 16, in addition to giving an extensive report on the status of the
police in which. incidentally, it noted that theamsoeiation which was the
author of the notes "has begun to be manipulated, particularly by leading
neabers of the former sociopolitical brigade, in other words, the Prancoiat
political police,” published an editorial signed by Juan Tomas de Salas in
the form of a letter to the "Mess” integrist police" wherein. among many
other things, it stated: "He citizens of this country are painfully fed up
with your intolerable attitude of rebellion against the regime which, for the
first time in our recent history, we, an overwhelming majority of Spaniards,
have selected." It declared: "The magnanimity of the new regime cannot be
taken for weakness"; and concluded by saying: "And if you, Messrs integrist
police. do not wish to serve the society of the Spanish people on this new
path that we have undertaken, return the weapons that we have given you and
return to private life with your dictatorial nostalgia. If you do not wish
to defend us, we shall not ask you for an accounting; we only ask you to
resign, so that other better police may occupy your positions and better
protect your companions and all of us."

In the same issue, the editor of the magazine, Jose Oneto, stressed the matter,
writing:"we areaadly disappointed by an increasing ineffectiveness in the battle
against terrorism and against co-aon crime (...)"; recalling that, "In 1977
alone, the investment program awarded to the ninistry of Interior to operate
the general police corps, civil guard and armed police amounted to 12 billion
pesetas, almost triple the amount in 1976, the last year of Prancoiem." (60)

This quadruple simultaneous attack conitted when vacations were reaching their
end caused many to think that "terrorism, too, owners," as EL PAIS headlined
its editorial of 29 August. According to the Madrid newspaper, ”It would appear
as if (...) the terrorists have reached the conclusion that the sunset vacations
deprived their provocations of the proper reverberation, and decided to suspend
their activity until the citizens' return to normality :insused a suitable
reception for their escalated violence in the sensitivity and fears of the
citizenry."

In fact, when the vacation period had ended, the tragic monotony of terrorism
returned. 0n 6 September, in Aguinaga (Guipuzcos), the taxi driver Amncio
Barreiro Geus was assassinated; on 23 September, in Vitoria, it was the turn
of the armed policeman Juan Antonio Perreiro, when he fell into a trap set by
telephone, along with his companions .; and on 25 September, in San Sebastian,
the guardsmsn Lorenzo Soto and Jose Zafra were fatally machine-gunned when

they had finished making a purchase intended for the civil guard headquarters.
0n 2 October, forest guards-an Ramiro Quintero Avila was assassinated in Lizsraa
(Guipuzcoa).

69

POROFFIGALUSEONLY
FI”!(NHH(JAI.USE¢MNLY

ETA (m)'a decision to attack the Army was confirmed on 3 October. when Corvette
Capt Francisco de Asia Liesa Morote, second commander of the Navy in Bilbao,
was assassinated in his own residence. In the newspaper reports, this attack
seemed to be connected with a hypothetical arms smuggling. In fact, a few
days earlier. a ship registered in Bilbao, the "Allul," had been stopped by

the British police and subsequently released. The vessel was carrying arms
bound for Bilbao. but when it reached Spanish jurisdictional waters, the Navy
authorities did not find arms or anything suspicious. A file was opened to
investigate the matter, and it would appear that Capt Liess was appointed to
draw it up, although this point was never confirmed by the authorities.

0n 3 October, when the speculation regarding this affair was occupying extensive
news space, Liesa was assassinated by an ETA commando unit which entered his
residence and questioned the Navy officer before shooting him in the head, in
the presence of his wife and three seamanship students. ETA took credit for

the attack in a communique, justifying the act "for his repressive action

aimed particularly at preventing ETA from receiving any assistance from abroad
by ocean routes." The questions that this incident raised remained unanswered.

Starting then, ETA lent its terrorist action a rapid pace. The cold language
of statistics reflects the fact of approximately one assassination every two
days. In fact, during October there were thirteen fatalities, mainly civil
guardsmen (six) and armed policemen (three). In November, another 13 were
assassinated: four civil guards-en, one of them retired, two armed police
corporals, six countrymen and one magistrate from the Supreme Court, Jose
Francisco Hateu Canovas, who was assassinated in Madrid on 13 November.

It was the attack upon Hateu that aroused major emotion after the attack

upon the military men on 21 July. Hateu had been president of the abolished
Court of Public Order, and was considered a harsh man with a definitely Franco-
ist profile. His selection as a target gave the impression that the terrorism,
in addition to being directed toward the Army, was intended to attack the
magistracy, another great national institution. It was clear that there was

a well-defined plan to dismantle the state.

In the strictly political realm, the Basque problem continued to show a definite-
ly negative aspect. All the attempts to have PNV accept the draft Constitution
had failed, despite the first additional provision, the so-called “privilege"
one, wherein recognition and guarantee "of the historical rights of the privi-
leged territories" were accepted. To the nationalists, this principle had been
distorted, because in the third paragaph of this regulation the incorporation

of these historical rights was made subject to the Statute of Autonomy, which

had to be put to a referendum and ratified by the General Cortes.

EGIN, reflecting the proposals of the radical nationalists, expressed the view
that recognition of the historical rights "would be tantanount to the right to
self-determination, in this case translated into the return of our independence
and sovereignty to a mere personal link with the King of Spain." As is evident,
this is no longer a federal concept but, at the most, a loose confederalism
that would leave Spain reduced to a structure of the British Commonwealth type
wherein a head of state cannon to two or more states which are fully sovereign
and independent in all other respects is maintained only from a purely formal,

symbolic standpoint.
70

F‘lRIJFFICJAI.USIICMNLY
FOI1DFFKJA1.US£1NNLY

Since this was obviously not the concept called for in the first additional
provision, EGIN thought that, "In the end, it is the subordination of reintegra-
tion and updating of the privilege to the Spanish legal order, established
according to its principles and its unified constitution on a higher scale
(...). Thus, the repeal of the lawn of 1839 and 1876 does not entail the
return of sovereignty, but rather the weaving of a new militarism." BGIN
wanted only the first two paragraphs of the first additional provision to be
accepted "provided there is a guarantee that there will be no subjection of
the Basques to state unitarism (...); because to accept the third paragraph
could only be regarded as surrender and subjection to the constitutional text
and then it would not make sense to call for its rejection." (61)

In fact, on the issue of the Constitution, PNV ended up aligning itself with
the "abertsale" radicals. Possibly to counteract this position which was as
extreme as it was immature, PNV called for a demonstration against terrorism
on 10 October. In the summons, it did not cite ETA expressly. The document
referred to the "new incidents wherein the supreme value of life has been
downgraded in a brutal, manner that is incomprehensible from our political
standpoint." It asked "our people to proclaim, publicly and collectively,
their absolute repudiation of terrorism."

Although, as the president of PNV, Carlos Caraicoechea, wrote, the summons "was
not intended to arouse new antagonism or confrontation," (62)reaction from the
"abertzale" leftist parties was negative. HASI described it as "betrayal";

81A called it "improper and untimely." Letamendia claimed that, "PNV had
occasion to demonstrate against terrorism when the police entered the bull

ring at Pamplona, or at the time of Barandiaran's death in San Sebastian. It
cOuld have called for a demonstration then, and it did not do so. Now it is
calling one against ETA and, by extension, against the 'abertzale' left." (63)

Some thought that they observed in the PNV initiative an announcement of a
Copernican shift in this party's attitude toward terrorism. BL PAIS wrote:
"The caution with which PNV has criticized the criminality of ETA to date
(...). and certain unfortunate statements from some of its leaders concerning
the political profit that this violence could bring them, could not help but
arouse the suspicion that the heirs of Sabino Arana and Jose Antonio Aguirre
were dedicated to the dangerous game of strengthening their negotiating posi-
tions with the threatening argument that peace in the Basque Country would be
feasible only if their demands were entirely and completely met." BL PAIS
was of the opinion that the calling of the demonstration "has dispelled the
evidence on which that suspicion was based as if by magic." (66)

Butbefore the demonstration was held on 28 October, the complex Basque political
world underwent many vicissitudes which altered the original positions. The
opposing attitude of the "abertzales" forced the ever fluctuating PNV to declare
that the demonstration represented "a denunciation of terrorism, of ETA, of

the extreme right and of the so—called institutional violence." This latter
reference meant that UCD would decide not to hack the demonstration, while

PSOB hesitated. In another communique, PNV went so far as to offer ETA a
reconsideration of its summons, "if the Basque violent groups formally
announce the cessation of the violent action." Telesforo Honzon, the old

71

FOR‘OFFKJAILUSI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nationalist who had evolved toward the most radical "abertzale" positions,

wrote in EGIN: "Gentlemen, you promise to reconsider your position if ETA
pledges to surrender its arms. But, gentlemen, why do you address ETA, and

not the Spanish Government? In your ebbs and flows, according to the prevailing

wind, did you not go so far as to say that the demonstration of 28 October
was directed mainly against the institutionalized terrorism? So, why do you
not address the Spanish institutions, asking them to cease the state terrorism
for once and for all. as an essential requisite for your calling off the

demonstration? Do you not see that your own contradictions are caught in the
web of your own words?" (65)

ETA, for its part, during the days preceding the demonstration, unleashed a
campaign of intimidation that was reflected in an increase in the attacks and
assassinations. (66) The demonstration was finally held on Saturday, 28 October,
with some 35,000 persons participating. An "abertsale" counter-demonstration
was harshly repressed by the police, and there were considerable injuries.

On 30 October, along the line of the attacks against news media, a package-bomb
exploded at EL PAIS. very seriously wounding three workers, one of whom, a 19-
year old youth, Andres Praguaa, died 2 days later. As in so many other instances,
the flood of telephone claims to the attack by groups with the well-known
initials (Triple A, GRAPO, GAS [Trade Union Action Group]) introduced absolute
confusion regarding the origin of the criminal act. GRAPO later denied its
perpetration, while the Triple A reiterated it. In fact, there was every indi-
cation that the extreme right had been responsible for the attack. The reper-
cussions in the media were enormous, with a series of condemtions by political
and trade union leaders who viewed in the incident an intention for destabiliza-

tion on the very eve of the final voting on the Constitution by the Congress of
Deputies and the Senate.

The escalation of terrorism in the Basque Country seriously upset the forces of
public order, the prime target of the attacks. The morale of the armed police
agents in particular suffered the impact of the situation, and incidents occur-
red. On 5 October, a demonstration comprised mainly of wives of the policemen
went to the Bilbao civil government, shouting "He do not want medals, we want
our husbands." On 16 October, with the emotion aroused by the death of two
companions, the day before in Bilbao itself, serious incidents took place at
the Basauri barracks on the occasion of the funerals. The deputy inspector
general of the armed police, Timon de Lara, the general director of security,
Mariano Nicolas and the civil governor of Vizcaya, Salazar Simpson, were the
object of insults, and were even prevented from leaving the barracks. The
incidents ended about 1600 hours, and severe disciplinary measures were imme-
diately adopted. At the same time, over 300 married policemen with a year of
service in the Basque Country were transferred out of the Basque Country. It
was later learned that, a few days earlier, men and women known for their
extreme right wing ideas, had engaged in agitation efforts among the policemen's
wives, inciting them against the government and other authorities.

ETA: Kills More to Negotiate Better

The final quarter of 1978 was a key period in the battle against terrorism.
Although the PNV politicians stressed that "a Buskadi in peace is not viable

72
INJR!0FFICJAI.IISE1(HVLY
FOR OIINCIAI.US£€0NLY

if there is no progress toward its self-government," (67) there were increasing
numbers of those who did not trust that the so-called "political measures" would
serve to curb the terrorism. The very history of the transition was proving
exactly the contrary, because the maximalism of ETA and of many other “abertsales”
did not consider itself satisfied with formulas which, to them, were merely
"halfway measures." The rejection of the so-called additional provision for
"privilege" which we mentioned previously attested quite clearly to this. Hence,

the idea that it was necessary to become used to living with the ETA terrorism
became more and more entrenched.

At the same time, reports were reaching the information services subordinate to
the government citing the imminence of a major ETA offensive. It was a way of
expressing the repudiation by the "abert:ales“ of the constitutional text that
was to be put to a referendum in December. But this tactical objective was
quite compatible with the major ETA strategy of the time. which clearly sought

to provoke the Army, so as to foster its intervention. It was to be the
notorious, feared "Ulsterization."

The ETA (m) staff thought that the involvement of the Armed Forces in the anti-
terrorist battle, with the resultant "occupation" of the Basque Country, would
automatically improve the position of ETA, "the Basque Armed Forces," as Teles-
foro Monron called the terrorist organization, upon benefiting from the status
as a de facto belligerent group with all the elements of prestige that such a
situation would entail. Moreover, the militarization of the conflict would mean
unlimited expansion of the repression which, in turn, would reinforce the ties
between ETA and the Basque people. At a time when ETA had already felt popular
support weakening on various occasions, this psychological objective assumed a
completely priority nature.

It was, therefore, quite consistent that, in the instructions issued by the

ETA (m) leadership to the con-ando units, in addition to the forces of public
order. the civil governors, members of the Army and ”Hispaniets" were cited as
targets of the future attacks. In connection with the military elements, they
were asked to take into account, "if possible, the higher rank of their members."

0n the other hand, ETA appeared ready to eliminate the type of armed action
based on small commando units, and to approach the tactic of guerrilla warfare,
based on larger units and, as we have already noted, on the use of more sophis-
ticated weapons. (68) In a way, it involved combining the tactics of the urban
guerrillas and the rural guerrillas. It did not appear to be coincidental that,
a few weeks before, the guiding signals had started appearing unused,sonething
which entailed additional difficulty, except for those familiar with the terrain,
such as the ETA members. lmitating the ideas of the Latin American guerrillas,
who considered it feasible to "liberate" a given locality or area, as in the
case of the Uruguayan "Tupamsros" in 1969, when they occupied the city of Panda,
ETA (m) proposed, if the occasion should arise, to occupy some section of the
Basque Country symbolically and as an act of propaganda. (69)

But, apart from these military or psychological objectives, ETA (m) proposed a
political objective: forcing the government to negotiate. ETA thought that
the one speaking to the government should not be it, but rather KAS, the

73

INJI10FFICIAL lEﬂB(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Socialist "abertzale" coordinating group, whose "alternative" we already know.
Hence, we can note how the issue of negotiations always remained at the top
level of attention. And the government itself thought that some type of
indirect negotiation might prove beneficial. although at times when terrorism
was growing worse, it became very difficult to consider this idea at all use-
ful. In this connection, several months later a report was released to the
effect that “Rodolfo Martin Villa, minister of interior, was in Geneva (Switzer-
land) last sunset (in 1978), traveling incognito. to meet with a delegation
from ETA politicomilitary. The meeting did not take place, because Martin

Villa did not receive sufficient guarantees that the meeting would be kept
secret." (70)

The isnediste events confirmed this expansion of ETA (m) activities, reflected
in more deaths and an extension of the type of persons selected as victim. On
30 October, ETA shocked its own sympathizers by assassinating Ignacio Olaiz
Hichelena, a leading Guipuzcoan member of the pro-amesty negotiating group.

his friends first attributed the crime to the extreme right, but an ETA nonuni-
que dispelled all possible doubt. ETA had decided "to execute him after lo
months of meticulous, hazardous investigation" which resulted in his identifi-
cation as someone infiltrated by the police, according to the organisation.

A few days later. on 2 November, two ordinary laborers were assassinated (Juan
Cruz hurtado, a carpenter in Guernica, and Rafael Recaola Lands, a worker in
Lezo), whom ETA accused of being "ultrafaacists and police confidantes." The
same day. a builder, Jose Legasa, was also assassinated for refusing to pay the
revolutionary tax. 0n 9 Rovember, another worker, Luis Candendo Perez, was
assassinated in Anzuola (Guipuzcoa). Candendo was a DC!) militant. Two years
later, the government party was to be one of the priority targets of ETA,
especially of the "poli-milis."

The extension of its armed action to different sections of the Basque Country
was confirmed. Now it was no longer, as in the case of Carrero Blanco, a

totally exceptional action, but rather normal action which unquestionably
meant that ETA had an infrastructure and some logistical backup in certain
sections of Spain. We have already mentioned the assassination of magistrate
Hateu in Madrid. on 15 November, the most important action at this final period
of 1978. But signs of ETA's presence in other areas were also beginning to
appear. The police estimated that the Basque organisation owned safe apartments
outside of the Basque Country, in Madrid and Barcelona. The death threats
signed by ETA which were received in Andalucis by about 20 persons, including

a considerable number of military, gave reason to think that it also had areas
in cities such as Granada, Seville and Halsga. If ETA was located in Andalucis,
it was admitted that there might possibly be some contact with GRAPO, which was
apparently well established there. Conesa's trips to Costa del Sol were inter-
preted in this sense. However, the fact is that the authenticity of these
threats could never be proven, although some months later the presence of ETA
(p-m) in Andalucis was confirmed when it unleashed a campaign against tourism.

(71)
The virulence of the terrorism during this final period of the year, before and
after the constitutional referendum held on 6 December, (72) turned the

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

phenomenon of violence into a leading element in political life. Stealing the
march on the plan of the democratic political parties and trade union federations,
New Force and other extreme right groups organized a demonstration "against
terrorism and its accomplices" which took place in Madrid on 6 November, with

an organization and deployment of a paramilitary nature. Hith the excuse of
terrorism. it was actually an attempt to attack democracy and promote a "no" vote
in the constitutional referendum. To the extremists, the "accomplices" of terror-
ism were, in one way or another, all the democratic politicians. MMMDO DIARIO
stated: "This is a despicable attempt to manipulate the antiterrorist sentiments
to be monopolized by the extreme right. The presence at the demonstration of
people involved in arms trafficking, who had to answer for some unexplained
activities to the common courts, at least reveals that they are not repelled by
violence (...). The extreme right condemns only the violence of those whom it

considers its enemies. Its own it calls holy, or gives it the name of a ”crusade."
(73)

In opposition to these demonstration organised by the extreme right, on 10 Novem-
ber another one took place, called by the majority trade union federations, CCOO
and UGT, and backed by the political parties. During the following days. there
was an inevitable argument as to which of the two demonstrations had been most
heavily attended. On 10 November, all over Spain, more than 100 demonstrations
were held, promoted by the democratic organizations.

0n 8 and 9 November, in the parliamentary area, the plenum on public order
requested by the Popular Alliance-leader, Manuel Frags Iribarne, took place.

For as minutes, Frags delivered a speech replete with statistical data to prove
that public order did not exist, because "public order is like health: either

one has it or does not have it." Frags stressed the great disproportion between
the figures on those killed by terrorists and the terrorists killed. The Alliance
leader emphasised: "Out of a total of 36 deaths in 1977, only four were terrorists;
and out of 76‘ wounded, three were terrorists. In 1978 (9 months), there were

59 deaths and 627 wounded, but only six and one, respectively were terrorists.

It is unnecessary to say who seems to be winning." He quoted a commentary from
L8 PIGARO dated 9 October which stated, in connection with the Spanish statistics
that, "They refer to the ranks of the "Boy Scouts," the Italian Red Brigades and
the assassins of the Baader gang, and prove that assassination has become a

basic political argument in post-Franco Spain." He noted that terrorism is an
instrument of revolutionary war, citing the support represented for it by other
political acts, "including the permission for illegal congresses, such as that

of MASI, which was attended by Deputy Letamendia." of course, this reference
evoked a speech by the Basque deputy who, after explaining, raised his fist

and cried: “Cora Euskadi Askatuta!" and submitted his resignation as a deputy.

To a large extent, this was a logical decision, after having left EIA and, there-
fore, Buskadiko Bekerra, a coalition with which he had been elected to join

HAS! and, through it, the Herri natasuna [Popular Unity] coalition.

Martin Villa answered Praga, to prove that the police action against terrorism
and common crime was showing good results. According to Martin Villa, "There

is no serious public order situation (...); what does exist is a serious problem
of terrorism which emerges from the notion of public order as an extraordinary
phenomenon." He continued: "But for many years we have suffered terrorism in
Spain; it did not appear as a result of any weakness, lack of foresight, inhi-
bition. leniency or omission by the Suarez governments." After discussing the

75
FOIlOIFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

various types of terrorism, he stated: "The real problm at present is ETA (...)

which shares the features of revolutionary terrorism and independence-oriented
terrorism."

All the parliamentary groups participated. expressing opposition to terrorist.
The PM deputy, Jose Angel Cuerda, submitted a plan for the pacification of
Euskadi sponsored by his party, and consisting of 15 points, which were a
response to the other 15 points contained in Martin Villa's plan. Finally,

the Congress passed s declaratory notion in which statements were made condeln-
ing violence and claiming its incompatibility with the democratic system. It

called upon the government to "adopt all the necessary measures, within the
bounds of law, to isolate and eradicate terrorism."

Before ending, November 1978 was to witness several incidents of major signifi-
cance: the already mentioned assassination of magistrate Hateu, and the breakup
of the military plot that was to be known as "Operation Galaxie," the leading
members of which were civil guard Lt Col Antonio Tejero and armed police Capt
Ricardo Seen: de Inestrillas. both had had a long career in the history of
coupism against democracy. as unfortunate as it was incomprehensible.

At that time. insufficient stress was placed on the close relationship that exist-
ed between terrorism and coupism. It was necessary to wait until 23 February 1981
for this connection to appear with all its evidence. however, the still slight
perspective given by just a few years has made us realize how the phenomenon of
terrorisn nurtures coupism. "Operation Galaxie" was possible because terrorism
had reached its paroxysmal level. Moreover, one need only read the recent
history of Argentina and Uruguay, where the imediate effect of the systematic
terrorism of the hontoneros and Tupsmsros has been the military coup.

On 15 November, a few days before the abortive "Operation Galaxie," an event
occurred in Guipuzcoa which had major repercussions. On that day, the head-
quarters of the civil guard of Arechavaleta was machine-gunned from a car.

The civil guardsnen came out to pursue it, reaching it at hondragon, where the
attackers attempted to flee on foot, and "without carrying weapons,” as was
emphasized in a note from the interior advisory board of the Basque General
Council. The civil guard's account, on the other hand, described an armed
confrontation. The two fugitives were killed by the shots from the civil guard.
A third person who remained in the car was wounded. Shortly thereafter, other
civil guard members arrived, and apparently fired at their own companions. not
recognizing then because they were not in uniform. As a result of this shooting,
a woman. hrs Emilia Lassa, who was about 150 meters away,was killed, and three
other persons were wounded. The presumed ETA members who were killed were Jose
Maria Iturrioz Garmendia and Roberto Aramburu Uribarren.

As a result of these incidents, a protest denonstration was organized. The note
from the Basque General Council mentioned previously condemned the action of

the civil guard. Alluding to "a public force which fires without thinking,"

it expressed this opinion: "This act mat be judged with great calmness,

because it is due to one of these two causes: either an irresponsible lack of
reflection, or an even more dangerous attitude: that of a public force acting
against a population as an enemy society."

76

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR 0F71C1Al.lEﬂE(H‘LY

This note evoked the annoyance of Martin Villa, while the protest demonstration
was a cause of further confrontations between the police and the demonstrators.

Five days later, when 30 armed policemen were engaged in sports exercises at
the Basauri barracks in Bilbao, they were machine-gunned from the nearby high-
way by members of ETA stationed at the guardrail. Two armed policemen, Benjamin

Sznchez and Jose Benito Sanchez, were killed; and 13 other companions were wound-
e .

According to BL PAIS, a vicious circle had been established in the Basque Country
which was proving difficult to break. "ETA has caught the state and the demo-
cratic forces in a difficult dilemma. The desire of the government and the
parliamentary groups to achieve a political solution for Buskadi has been met
from the terrorist side with a criminal offensive against the security corps,
whose members have begun to be shot down in ambushes with impunity (...). The
final goal of its (terrorism's) direct rejection of the political solutions is,
precisely, to provocate police action that will make the possibility of those
tragic accidents implicit" (a reference to the Hondragon incident). (74)

The ETA's action multiplied, as if the terrorists were attempting to take their
strategy of provocation to its final consequences. ETA (p-m) opened a new

front on 27 November, when it kidnapped the representative of the Ministry of
Education and Science of Guipuzcoa, Jose Javier Crespo, who was released 2

days later, to the surprise of many, in Madrid, in a display of maneuvering
capacity. It had made an unsuccessful attempt to kidnap the education represen-
tatives in the three Basque provinces and Navarre, as the beginning of a "cultur-
al offensive." It involved an attempt to reclaim the Basque people's linguistic
and cultural rights, although the police also saw in the operation the goal of
intimidating the officials assigned to the Basque Country.

After sssassinating a janitor. Alejandro Hernandez Cuesta, in Iran on the last
day of November, ETA (m), on the first day of December, in Onate, killed the
civil guardsman Manuel Leon Ortega. and at Blast Furnaces of Vizcaya, stole 86
million pesetas in one of the most productive holdupe in the entire history of
the organization. On the eve of the constitutional referendum (5 December),

ETA assassinated two members of the general police corps, Commissioner Jose
Maria Serrats Chivite, and Deputy Commissioner Gabriel Alonso Perez-Gil, as well
as a municipal policeman, Angel Cruz Salcines, in a San Sebastian bar. This was
its way of saying "no" to the Constitution which was being voted on the next day.

when the referendum was held, there was a large number of abstentions, 32.33
percent. which disturbed the politicians, because it was a sign that the so-
called "disenchantment" had penetrated certain sections of the country. of

the 67.66 percent who voted, only 7.9 percent voted "no" to the constitutional
text proposed to them. These were by no means alarming figures for the new
democratic regime, but the abstention, a third of the voters, was considered
very high, and the explanations put forth (mistakes in the census, bad weather
on 6 Decenber. and lack of interest because it was thought that the Constitution
would be approved anyway) did not prove convincing.

77

IOI4OFFKJA1.USI(NVLY
INJR<OINHCIAI.IISEI(HNLY

In the Basque Country. the abstention was greatest (36.68 percent) in the
combined three provinces of Alava, Guipuzcoa and Vizcaya, as sure the negative
votes (23.31 percent). This meant that only 43.31 percent of the Basques
approved the Constitution, which was not exactly a good omen. 0n the other

hand, these results could not cause surprise, given the PNV's abstention '
canpaign and the atmosphere of terror created by ETA.

With the Constitution approved, s new phase began in the hazardous political life
of Spain, wherein terrorism was to continue occupying a preeminent place. It

had often been thought that the goal of the terrorists was to prevent arriving

at the Constitution. It was immediately realized that the terrorism was continu-
ing and that its virulence might jeopardize the denocracy whose lost formidable
adversary it was. Despite the menace of "Operation Galaxie," the involutionary
coupism had not yet shown its claws. But the terrorism, no less potentially
involutionary, appeared determined to destroy the efforts to consolidate a

regime of liberties.
FOOTNOTES
1. BL PAIS, 28 September 1977, editorial: "Destabilization Plan."
2. CAHBIO 16, No 306, 9 October 1977, "The Assassins Go Free," p 10.
3. CANBIO 16, No 300, 11 September 1977, "Hunger for a Hero," pp 13 ff.

4. CAMBIO 16, No 302, 25 September 1977, "'Apala': End of the Hard Times", p
3b.

5. CAHBIO.16, No 298, 28 August 1977, "Uncontrolled Commando Units: the Ben Is
Lifted," pp 26 and 25.

6. CAHBIO 16, No 303, 2 October 1977, "Buskadi: the Dialectics of the Coup,"
pp 27 ff; EL PAIS, 10 September 1977, p 12.

7. BL PAIS, 11 September 1977, editorial: "The Isolation of the Basque Extremists."
8. CANDID 16, No 303, 2 October 1977, "ETA: the Discord Grows," p 29.
9. Ibidem.
10. CAHBIO 16, No 307, 30 October 1977, "The Basques of the IRAs," pp 10 ff.
11. CAHBIO 16, No 307, 30 October 1977, "GRAPO: the Enemy Is within," pp 66 and
47. Espinosa's adventurous history was described by himself in a long
interview granted to Jose Diaz Herrera. See CAHBIO 16, No 532, 8 February

1982. "Adventures of an Infiltrsted Person," pp 20 ff, and No 533, 15
February 1982, "I Announced Carrero's Death," pp 36 ft.

12. CAHmIO 16, No 306, 23 October 1977, "Ultraright: the Gang in Disgrace,"
pp 38 and 39.

78

FOR‘OFFK]A1.USE(NVLY
13.

1‘.

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.
20.

21.

22.

23.
210.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.

was OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CANDID 16, No 306, 23 October 1977, editorial: "Thin "orb," p 3.

CANDID 16, No 308, 6 Nova-her 1977, "GRAPO Final Operation: Attack Against

Suarez." p 19, and No 312, 4 November 1977, "This Is How Suarez Is Protected,"
pp 37 and 38.

081A, 29 Novenber 1977, p 6.
DIARIO 16, 28 November 1977, editorial: ”Unwrthy Parlia-ntarianﬂ," p 5.

El. PAIS, 29 Rove-her 1977, editorial: "A Necessary Aaaunption of a Position'.‘
p 8.

El. PAIS, lo January 1978, editorial: "Peace at the Doors of Eusltadi," p 6.
EL PAIS. 13 January 1978, p 13.

CAHBIO 16, No 319, 22 January 1978, "ETA: the Dynamite In Its Bands,” pp 17
ff, and BI. PAIS, 2 February 1978, editorial: "Ultimatun of Peace,” p 6.

EL PAIS, 13 January 1978, p 13.

El. PAIS, 20 January 1978, editorial: "The Legalization of Basque Separation,"
p 6.

HUNDO DIARIO, 20 January 1978, editorial: 'Magnaninity of Denocracy," p 3.
CAMBIO 16, No 321, 29 January 1978, "B: [left‘I] in Lenoniz," pp 28 and 29.
CAMBIO 16, No 321, 29 January 1978, "The Karky Scale Case," p 24.

BI. ALCAZAR, 26 January 1978.

El. PAIS, 26 January 1978, editorial: "Crinas and Public Order," p 6.
mo DIARIO, 26 January 1978, editorial: "Rho- Does Crime Benefit7," p 3.
CAHBIO 16, No 322, 5 Pebruary 1978, "The Price of Liberty," p 18.

CAHBIO 16, No 322, 5 February 1978, "To "in North Africa." p 19; No 323.
12 February 1978. ”HPAIAC: the Canary was Silent," p 26; No 326, 5 March
1978, "Africa Wants the Canaries: the ﬂoors Are Contact," pp 22 ff; No 327.
12 Hatch 1978. "Canaries Adrift," pp 30 and 31.

DIARIO 16, 9 March 1978, p 15.

31a.CAHBlO 16, No 333, 23 April 1978, "Once Upon a Tine There was an Attack,"

32.

pp 34 ff; also see No 336, 30 April 1978, "Spain-Algeria: an Eye For an Eye,"
pp 24 and 25; No 337, 21 Hay 1978, "Cubillo 'Affaire': The Han who Paid
Bounedienne," p 34.

ABC, 19 April 1978.
79

MOWISIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

33. El. PAIS, 31 January 1978, p 16, and 2 February 1978, p 7.

34. CAMBIO 16, No 331, 9 April 1978, "From a Good Source," p 9.

35. CAMBIO 16, No 331. 9 April 1978. "ETA, You Have Gone Too Far," pp 37 and 38.

36. BL ALCAZAR, 22 March 1978, "They Are All to Blame," p lo.

36a.1'he individual list of the dead is as follows:

Raul Vesga Alonso, armed policeman, 07-05-78, Vitoria (Alava)

Antonio Perez 8030, armed police-an, 07-06-78, Vitoria (Alava)

Carlos Gutierrez Gonzalez, armed policeman, 07-05-78, Vitoria (Alava)
Francisco Gonzalez Jimenez, armed policeman, 07-05-78, Vitoria '(Alava)
Manuel Lopez Gonzalez, civil gusrdaman, 09-05-78, Panplona (Navarre)
Juan Diaz Resano, civil murdsman, 09-05-78, Palplona (Navarre)

Francisco Lopez Gonzalez, civil guardsman, 09-05-78, Pamplona (Navarra)
Agustin Hernandez Martin, civil guardaman, 09-05-78, Panplona (Navarre)
Juan Marcos Gonzalez, civil guardsman, 09-05-78, 5. Sebastian (Ouipuzcoa)
Manuel Inigo Blanca, civil guardsman, 09-05-78, 8. Sebastian (Guipuzcoa)
Juan Jimenez Bermudez, civil guardsmsn, 09-06-78, s. Sebastian (Guipuzcoa)
Jose Amado Juan, civil guardsman, 09-05-78, 8. Sebastian (Guipuzcoa)
Jose Barroso Cabrera. civil guardsman, 12-05-78, 3. Sebastian (Guipuzcoa)
Manuel Veiga Lopez, civil guardmn, 13-05-78, Galdacano (Vizcaya)

Francisco Lopez Ruiz—Sanchez, civil guardsman, 13-05—78, Galdacano (Vizcaya)

Julia Gonzalez Cordoba, their worker, 13-05-78, Galdacano (Vizcaya)

Juan Echevarri Echevarri. second lieutenant, civil guard, 17-05-78, Panplona

Alfredo Aristondo Trincado, member of Franco guard, 18-05-78, Pasajes de
S. Juan

Jose Maria Merquelanz Sarriegui, taxi driver, 23-05-78, Irun (Guipuzcoa)
Rafael Caapanario Rivera, civil guardsman, 28-05-78, Tolosa (Guipuzcoa)
Francisco Jimenez Pacheco, civil guardsman, 28-05-78, Toloss (Guipuzcoa)
Jose San: de la Fuente-Gonez, civil guardsman, 28-05-78, ‘l'olosa (Guipuzcoa)

37. CAMBIO 16. No 338, 28 May 1978, editorial: "PNV Does Not Have the Floor,"
p 21.

38. CAMBlO 16, No 3106, 9 July 1978, "ETA: Deaths, Deaths, Deaths...," pp 101 ff.

39. CAMBIO 16, No 338, 28 May 1978, "Jose Maria Benagaa: the m Conditions Are

Negotiable,“ pp 27 and 28; and "Tarradellaa: There Is No Recourse Other Than

to Negotiate with ETA," pp 31 and 32.

1.0. CAMBIO 16, No 339, lo June 1978, "Jesus Sancho Rot, on HA: :l'arradellas Is
Negotiating on His Own."

61. BL PAIS, 17 May 1978, editorial: "The Basque Labyrinth," p 6.
1.2. ABC, )9 May 1978, editorial:"0nderlying Negotiations and Comitments With
ETA, " p 2, and 1 June 1978, editorial: "Impossible Dialog," p 2; ABC

stressed that line, 8 June, "In Exchange for Nothing," and 21. June, "Nego-
tiate, For What?“

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
103.

64.

“Se

46.

107.
48.

b9.

50.

$1.

52.
53.
$4.
55.

56.

57.
S8.
59.

60.

6l.

FOE OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EL SOCIALISTA, 28 Hay 1978, "The Madrid Government Should Negotiate With
ETA," p A.

EL PAIS, 29 June 1978, editorial: "Dying in Buakadi," p 8.

CAHBIO 16, No 341., 9 July 1978, editorial: "Why Do They Want to Kill Us7,”
p 11; see also article cited in note 38.

The others killed by ETA in June 1978 were: 3 June, Eusebio Sanchez Sanchez,
civil gusrdsman from Barscaldo; 21 June. Antonio Garcia Caballero, municipal

policeman in Toloaa; 27 June, Francisco Martin Gonzalez, armed police eer-

geant, and Jose Luis Gutierrez Dias, a policeman from the same corps in San
Sebastian.

CAMBIO 16, No 330, 2 April 1978, "From a Good Source," p 5.

CAHBIO 16, No 347, 30 July 1978, "Conspiracy," pp 16 and 15.
INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE, 12 Hay 1981, "Calvo Sotelo Sees Kremlin's
Imprint on Spanish Basque Terrorist Group," by James H. Markham (New York
Times Service).

CAHBIO l6 .

See CAHBIO 16, No and article cited in noce «'08, and No 369, 13 August 1978,
"‘No Fronts Against Terrorism," p 19.

camera 16. No 347, 30 July 1978, "Unrest," pp 16 ff.

l-‘UBRZA NUEVA, 22 July 1978, editorial: "The Swords Held High," p 5.
ABC. 22 July 1978, editorial. "Dying in Hadrid," p 2

5618, lo August 1978, p 13.

CAMBIO 16, No 348, 6 August 1978, "Terrorism: Conesa Returns to the Breach,"
pp 18 and 19.

El. PAIS, 30 August 1978, editorial: "The Responsibility of the Police," p 6.
El. PAIS, 31 August 1978, editorial, "Between Polly and Threat," p 6.

HUNDO DIARIO, 31 August 1978, editorial: "The Responsibility of Bach," p 3.
CAHBIO 16, No 353, 10 September 1978, editorial: "Messrs Integrist Police,"
by Juan Tomas de Salas, p 11; and.l‘.'8adly Disappointed." by Jose Oneto, p 13;
"The Police Are Not Operating," pp 110 ff.

EGIN, 30 September 1978, editorial: "The Additional Provision," p 15.

81

I70!“ CIALUSEONLY
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

67.

68.

69.
70.

71.

72.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

051A, 12 October 1978, "The Meaning of an Appeal," by Carlos Garaicoechea.
EGIN, 12 October 1978, "Different Reactions to the PNV Proposal."

EL PAIS, 12 October 1978, editorial: “The Demons of the Polemic," p 8.
EGIN, 26 October 1978, "How Horriblel," by Teleaforo Honaon.

This is the list of those killed by ETA in October 1978:

Ramiro Quintero Avila, forest guardsman, 02-10-78, Lizarza (Guipuzcoa)
Francisco de A. Liesa Horote, corvette captain, naval commander of the
Bilbao Command, 03-10-78, Bilbao

Anselmo Vidal Duran, first corporal of the civil guard, 09-10-78, Blgoibar
(Guipuzcoa)

Angel Pacheco Pale, civil guardsman, 10-10-78, Marquise (Guipuzcoa)
Ramon Huino Fernandez, armed policeman, 13-10-78, Bilbao

Elias Garcia Gonzalez, armed policeman, 13-10-78, Bilbao

Alberto Villena Castillo, civil guardaman, coast guard specialist, 16-10-78,
Lequeito (Vizcaya)

Luciano Mata Corral, civil guard sergeant, 22-10-78, Les Arenas, Guecho
(Bilbao)

Luis Gancedo Ruiz, civil guardsman, 22-10-78, Guecho (Bilbao)

Jose Benito Diaz Garcia, armed policeman, 25-10-78, Bilbao

Epifanio Vidal Vazquez, laborer, 25-10-78, Durango (Vizcaya)

Andres Silveiro Martin, civil guardsman. 25-10-78, Basauri (Vizcaya)
Ignacio Olaiz Hichelena, driver, 30-10-78, Andoain (Guipuzcoa)

EL PAIS, 28 October 1978, Statements of the PNV President, Carlos Garsico-
echea, p 16.

CAHBIO 16 published the following item "from a good source“ in No 365 (2
December 1978), p 7: "The Basque armed organization ETA has begun an escala-
tion to arm itself to the teeth. Recently, mortars and weaponry with greater
offensive capacity must be added to its traditional pistols and machine guns.
High-ranking civil guard chiefs fear that the mortars may be used to bomb
headquarters in the Basque Country, which would cause situations of incalcu-
lable seriousness."

cmmo 16, No 360, 29 October 1978, "This Is How an "ill Act," pp 27 ff.
CAMBIO 16, 18 Hatch 1979, "From a Good Source," p 5.

CAHBIO 16, No 361, 5 November 1978, "How ETA Is Financed," pp 22 ff, and
No 363, "CIA Against ETA," pp 25 and 26.

This is the list of those assassinated by ETA during the months of November
and December. totaling 27:

Jose Legasa, builder, 02-11-78, Irun
Juan Cruz Burtado, carpenter, 02-11-78, Guernica (Vizcaya)

82

FOI'OFFICLAI.USE(MVLY
Rafael Lecaola Landa, laborer, 02-11-78, Lezo (Guipuzcoa)
Mariano Criado Ramajo, civil guardsman, 06-11-78, Tolosa (Guipuzcoa)
Luis Candendo Perez, iron and ateel worker, 09-11-78, Anzuela (Guipuzcoa)

Jose Rodriguez de Lama, civil guardsman, 11-11-78, Villarreal de Urrechua
(Guipuzcoa)

Leoncio Revilla Alonso. civil guardsman, 11-11-78, Villarreal de Urrechua
(Guipuzcoa)

Emilia Larrea, 15-11-78, Mondragon (Guipuzcoa)

Jose Francisco Mateu Canovea, magistrate, 16-11-78, Madrid

Jose Benito Sanchez Sanchez, armed police corporal, 20-11-78, Basauri
(Vizcaya)

Benjamin Sancho Majido, armed police corporal, 20-11-78 Baaauri (Vizcaya)
Elias Blexpe, taxi driver, 25-11-78, Amorebieta (Vizcaya)

Heliodoro Arriaga Ziaurri, retired civil guards-an, 27-11-78, Villabona
(Guipuzcoa)

Alejandro Hernandez Cuesta, janitor, 30-11-78, Irun

Manuel Leon Ortega, civil guardaman, 01-12-78, Onate (Cuipuzcoa)

Jose Maria Serrais Chivite, chief of the Renteria police station. 05-12-78,
San Sebastian

GabrielAlonso Perez Gil, deputy commissioner of the general police corps,
05-12-78, San Sebastian

Angel Cruz Salcinea, municipal policeman, 05-12-78, San Sebastian

Vicente Rubio Erano, retired military man, 09-12-78, Santurce (Vizcaya)
Saturnino Sola Argaiz, industrialist, 13-12-78, Vitoria

Juan Jimenez Gomez, municipal police chief, 13-12-78, Pasajea (Guipuzcoa)
Diego Fernandez Montea, retired infantry colonel, 17-12-78, San Sebastian
Joaquin Maria Azaola Martinez, alias "Jokin," draftsman, 19-12-78, Guecho
Vizcaya

Pedro Garrido Caro, merchant, 23-12-78, San Sebastian

Jose Maria Arrizabalaga Artocha, chief of the Iraditionalist Youth, 27-12-
78, 0ndarroa (Vizcaya)

Elisardo Lampil Belmonte, taxi driver, 30-12-78, Yurre (Vizcaya)

Jose Luis Vicente Canton, pensioner. 31-12-78, Llodio (Alava)

73. MMNDO DIARIO, 7 November 1978, editorial: "The Challenge of the Extreme
Right," p 3.

74. EL PAIS, 17 November 1978, editorial: "Basque Country: the Vicious Circle,“
p 8.

COPYRIGHT: Alejandro Munoz Alonso, 1982.

2909
C50: 6000/0020 END

83

INJR‘OFIWCJAI.1EHE(MVLY