FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10612

24 JUNE 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 40/ 82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
non

JPRS publications contain information prinrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by s ques-
tion snark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes uithin the body of an
item originate with the source. rm. within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WES]!!! 0F
HATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
REST EUROPE REPORT

(3000 40/82)

Comems

THEATER FORCES

FRANCE

Nam Forces in North Indian Ocean Increase
(Paul Ring; MES D'AUJOURD'HUI, Mar 82)

ITALY
Falklands Conﬂict a Test for Military Technology
(Stefano 811vestri;EUROm, 31 May 82).....................
TERRORISM
FRANCE
Carlos' Activities, Friends. KGB Tiea Examined
(Jean Can; PARIS MATCH, 1h Mn 82).
TUNE!

Armenian Arrested for Smuggling, ASALA Connection
(Ml-"Am AIF‘LRABI, 1h’20 W 82)....eoaaoeeaaaonooeooaaaol

POLITICAL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Doubt Over Prench-Gernen PAH-2 Helicopter Lingers at Hanover
(AIRBTcosmS. 22 my 82) OOOOOOOCOOOOO‘OOO0.0.0.0....

Fir-s Show Helicopters, by Jacques Horisset
PAB‘Z Seen To Be Vital. by Pierre Lensereux

FRANCE
Briefs
Adapted Exocet in Testing
Fiber Optics Guide Torpedo
Anti-Aircraft Decoy
GENERAL
SPAIN

Details of Recently Uncovered Aeroflot Spy Net Recounted
(“”10 16, 10 my 82) OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOCO00.0.0000...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NAVAL toms IN NORTH INDIAN OCEAN manner:
Paris was D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Har 82 pp 18-19

[Krticle by Chief Surgeon Paul Ring, chief medical and

personnel staff officer,
French naval forces, Indian Ocean: "The Navy in the I

ndian Ocean"

ﬂag The size of the R401 [maritime forces, Indian Decay
shows French concern with that imense zone where vital
interests may be threatened. The Navy provides a perment

presence made possible by the deployment of my combat and
logistical support vessels.

The Forces

tial task of navies. The importance of our possessions in the Indian Ocean
had led France solidly to establish its naval forces in the region, centered
on the base at Diego Suarez. The revision of the Franco-Malagasy agreements
and abandonment of that dockyard have entailed mjor shifts in deployment of

our military and maritime forces. The operational ships of the ZMOI
Ocean Maritime Zone? have thus be ' ‘

The F1101 is comnded by a rear admiral embarked with his staff aboard the
comand ship La Charente. Besides that vessel, which is also a supply tanker,
the force has assigned to it four corvettes, the multi-mission repair ship
Jules Verne, a light transport vessel, aid two patrol vessels; more recently
the supply tanker Isere was assigned to it, and the missile-launching escort
vessel Kersaint attached as a permanent reinforcement. In addition, an Atlan-
tic type patrol aircraft and a marine commando unit complete the permanent
reinforcements. These forces have been periodically strengthened by units

from metropolitan France, either singly or in groups constituted like the
chsson and Saphir missio .

q
Iranian conflict, and the danger of individual or coordinated actions capable
of affecting petroleum traffic, have led maritime nations to strengthen sig-
nificantly their forces in the northern Indian Ocean.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first days of the conflict the French navy placed in the area a patrol
intended to intervene without delay in the event of any threat to our merchant
ships. The capability was needed to face a triple threat: from the air, from
the surface, and from mines. The air threat is significant because of the con-
fined waters which place the theater of operations within range of land-based
aircraft; the surface threat is represented essentially by patrol boats armed
with sea-to-sea missiles; and the geographic context lends itself perfectly to
mining. The Sea of Own patrol and the DAHOI [indian Ocean Anti—Mine Division?
are intended to counter that triple threat. The submarine threat, on the other
hand, is very weak in the Arabian-Persian Gulf, owing to both the shallow depths
and to the characteristics of the forces deployed there.

At the Gates of the Gulf

The Sea of Oman patrol is permanently constituted by a group of three vessels,
that is, at least:

One vessel with high anti-aircraft capability (missile-launching escort vessel
or frigate);

One vessel with high anti-surface capability equipped with MM 38 missiles;
One supply tanker.

The constraints imposed by length of patrols, ship maintenance, and operational
requirements-particularly for anti-aircraft defense--have required a consider-
able reinforcement in ships.

As for the MI, it consists entirely of ships which have come from metropoli-
tan France: two minehunters, one ocean minesweeper, two coastal minesweepers,
and the logistical support vessel La Loire. It has in addition a team of mine
disposal divers.

Some 20 vessels today are part of the MI, some assigned and some attached as
temporary reinforcements. Host of them operate at sea more than 200 days per
year.

The facilities provided by the Republic of Djibouti to the French armed forces
under the defense agreement between the two countries make available a very
useful strong point relatively near the theater of operations. It is in fact
at Djibouti that the logistical support ships are most often stationed, that
the DAHOI is based, and it is from there that relief personnel is sent to units.
From there, ships leaving on patrol have it or 5 days' transit to the Sea of
Oman. After the hot moistness of the Gulf of Aden, the turbulence of the mon-
soon is met in the Arabian Sea; then, having weathered the now familiar Ras al
Had, we meet in the Sea of Oman a climate once again like that of the Gulf of
Aden. The relieving ship takes its place in the group and makes contact with
its predecessor, to which it brings mil, spare parts, and at times personnel.
The patrol then begins. An attentive watch, contacts with French merchant
ships, traffic study, and keeping track of the situation in the zone are the
essentials of this extended operational activity. Fuel economy dictates slow

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
steaming, at times with a single screw. The distressing heat must cause no
drop in operational efficiency or slowing of reactions: individual or group
Lraining, daily action stations, and resupply at sea serve to break the seem-
ing monotony of "the rounds at sea." At mid-patrol, a short call at Karachi
often allows-while remaining on 6 hours' sailing a1ert--the taking on of fresh
stores, which are not indispensable, but welcome in the mess.

In Southern Haters Too

Its responsibilities in the Sea of Oman have brought a reduction of other MI
activities. However, even though the inherent mobility of these naval forces,
and their availability, has allowed them to make their weight felt at those
points where the course of events required, a presence south of the Equator

is not on that account neglected. In addition to the support and transport
missions carried out by the Lflagshipg Champlain, the patrol vessels Altair
and Epee, and a corvette in rotation, continue to keep watch over our economic
zone. The recent interception of Formosan trawlers has fully shown the useful-
ness of this mission.

Vigilance and Endurance

By its prompt deployment of the Oman Sea patrol the French navy showed its
capacity for rapid response to an overseas threat. By maintaining that patrol
continuously for 18 months it affirmed its role as a full-time oceanic navy
able to keep the sea. The crew of the corvette Comandant Bordais, which
made a 42-day patrol without putting in to port, can testify to that. If guns
have not spoken in these sensitive seas-~and who would complain of that’2--our
naval forces are there, and by their very presence reduce the probability of
combat.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces armees francaises "Armees d'Aujourd'hui"

61145
080: 3100/496

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PALKLANDS CWLICT A TEST FOR MILITARY TECHNOLOGY
Milan BURDPEO in Italian 31 May 32 pp 36-37
[Article by Stefano Silvestri]

[Text] "The winning weapon is the nuclear sub-arias." This is the conclusion
drawn by David Owen, Britain's fornsr minister for Foreign Affairs, now one

of the leaders of the new British social democratic parliament. The Falkland
war has many aspects-historical, political and moral-but what counts nest

in the long run is the fact that it has become the first real test of naval
war technology. The problem is the confrontation between ship and missile.

In 1973. after the Yom Kippur Har between Arabs and Israelis, Ian Smart-~then
vice director of the London Institute for Strategic Studies-said: "It was
like the battle of Crecy in the loo-year war between the English and the
French. At that time the English archers massacred the French armoured
calvary using long and powerful bows. Today the Egyptians' antitank anti-
aircrsft missiles have massacred the Israeli armoured troops and bombers.

we are on the threshold of a technological revolution."

An Exocet nissile launched froa an airplane 60 km away sufficed to destroy
a modern destroyer. A little earlier. an HKZh Tigerfish torpedo sank an
Argentine cruiser, the General Belgrano. Is this the end for large surface
ships?

This question, which affects Italy directly too, has stirred up heated
arguments in our armed forces. We are about to launch our new through-deck
cruiser, the Giuseppe Garibaldi, whose design more or less resembles that of
the small British aircraft carriers Invincible and Hermes now engaged in the
South Atlantic. It is supposed to carry helicopters to combat submarines,
but it can also carry fighter aircraft which take off vertically or on a
short runway, like the Sea Barrier. Is this a good choice or a mistake?

1n the event of war, should we resign ourselves to the idea of seeing the
Garibaldi sink during the first minutes of the war?

This is an iaportant question for the navy. It would not be the first tine
we did everything wrong. During the last war our surface ships-dwhich see-ed
very powerful-didn't manage to sink a single enemy ship.

h
FOR 0FFK]AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At that tine our errors were mainly technological: we didn't have radar, and
a major portion of our communications were intercepted by the eneny. But it
was also a question of the strategies we chose; we had no effective air

cover or support for our navy.

Today Admiral Angelo Monassi, chief of staff of the navy, is explicitly asking
for "reliable and rapid air support" and for "close integration of operations,
and therefore of command, between aircraft and ships;" he calls this "the

key element of feasibility and success for military operations at sea." The

aeronautic branch says the navy wants to get its own private air force this
way.

Admiral Franco Micali-Baratelli, former chief of staff of the navy and one
of the Dc's main military experts at present, says that in fact the navy
should have the power to nake autonomous choices, within the framework of
its budget, as to whether it should acquire one or two new ships or buy
some airplanes. But this obviously puts an end to any idea of common
defense planning (and therefore to any hope-~however vague--of ever
rationalizing expenditures).

The lesson to be learned from the battle of the Falklands is naturally
ambiguous. Many people say that the sinking of the British destroyer
Sheffield could have been avoided.

But in fact the Sheffield's problems had been known for a long time. la the
latest yearbook of the British Royal United Services Institute (the famous
Brassey's, which has been published for the past 92 years), naval weapons
expert Roger Villsr pointed out the defensive weaknesses of the missile
system on that fighter. The Sheffield was armed with Sea Dart missiles;
these are rather large, alnost 6.5 asters long, weighing half a ton, and
have a range of more than 30 km and a velocity of about Mach 2. Due t.
their limited range they could not hit the French-Argentine Super Etendard
fighter from which the Exocet missile was fired.

They should have hit and struck down the missile. But to do this, the Sea
Dart (relatively "slow," even though it is faster than the French antiship
missile, which had a velocity of almost Mach 1) needed more warning.

According to reports, it had only about 25 seconds' warning; this, as Villsr
points cut. is because the radar on British ships is not rapid enough or
powerful enough, as is the American ANISPY-lA, for example-the core of the
Aegis antiaircraft and antimissile defense system. But AR/SPY-la radar,
besides being very expensive, weighs at least 60 tons by itself and is built
for a type of v.5. ship that is about twice as heavy as the British destroyer.

These may be good reasons. But not having radar means not being able to
defend oneself. The British have tried to offset this vulnerability by
developing the Sea Rolf, a brand new missile which is smaller than the Sea
Dart (a couple of meters long with a weight of only 78 kg), faster, and can
hit an attacker with a much shorter warning period. Its purpose is to
enhance what is called "point defense," in other words defense close to the
ship, after an attack has already been launched.

5
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Sea wolf missiles have certainly downed some Argentine Skyhawk fighters,
and maybe some antiship missiles too, in the Falklands war. But what use

is a defensive device that flies at a speed of little more than Mach 2
against a Soviet SS-N-l9 antiship missile, which flies at the same speed?
0r--still worse-—what hope does a surface ship have of surviving an attack
by a Soviet Charlie submarine, which can fire without any warning-while
submerged-~a volley of eight supersonic SS-N-7 missiles, all aimed at the
same target, from a distance of about 50 km, without giving the target ship
any time at all to reset, for all practical purposes?

The 0.8. answer to this threat has been to develop further the idea of the
task force-a naval squadron built around a large nuclear aircraft carrier
like the Nimitz, which has a tonnage of almost 100 thousand tons and carries
about a hundred airplanes. Obviously these ships are also vulnerable to
large-scale missile attack, but they broaden their defense perimeter
enormously by using coordinated submarines, escort ships and airplanes.

These squadrons use every means to increase their effectiveness, even
satellites, which provide information about the movements of enemy surface
ships and trace the exact trajectory of missiles having a longer range.

But the need for defense runs the risk of undermining the very concept

of the U.S. task force. The Nimitz, cruisers like the Ticonderoga-equipped
with the Aegis system-and the new fighter atomic submarines like the

Los Angeles, coordinated among themselves thanks to the “avatar satellite
network and the Jtids navigation system, operate more like a defensive
structure than an offensive task force.

The United States, with its enormous technological and financial power, is
about to attain its goal of having a complete and continually updated map

of everything moving on and below the surface of the sea. But it will use
this map above all to defend ships.

In other words, the task force can extend a protective shield having a radius
of about 200 km around itself, mainly based on the use of Hawkeye radar
airplanes, P-lb interceptor fighters, and offensive submarines. But to do
this it uses 70 percent of its military capability. The Soviets, on the
other hand, have developed a formidable offensive capability, likewise

based on satellites; apparently the Argentine attack on the Sheffield was
facilitated by information provided by Cosmos satellites which the USSR had
launched into orbit in the South Atlantic.

At sea the Russian fleet is deploying its new 32-thousand-ton Kirov-type
cruisers equipped with SS-N-l9 antiship missiles that fly at a speed of
Mach 2.5 for about 500 km (well outside of the defensive range of the task
force); they defend themselves with antiaircraft and antiship SS-N-e
missiles which attain the considerable speed of Mach 5. These are comple-
mented by the new Oscar-type submarines, which are armed with SS-N-l9s,
and Alfa-type fighter submarines which can travel faster than #2 knots
(about 80 km/hour) at a depth of 700 meters.

6
FOR OFl-‘IGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All this cannot help but worry NATO. The experience of the Falkland war is
already indicative: the pro-western Argentines have been able to give the
British fleet serious trouble even though they lack modern Soviet weapons.
They have purchased weapons from France, Great Britain and the United States:
three NATO countries which have adopted a "philosophy" that is more defensive
than offensive. The Argentines' missiles have a much more limited range than
the Soviets', and theyfly at much lower, subsonic speeds (less than Mach 1).
And yet they were able to sink the Sheffield. "hat would the Argentines have
done if they had had Soviet weapons?

This is a serious matter for Italy. He certainly cannot set up an American-
type task force. The tonnage of our entire fleet is equivalent to that of
the Nimitz and a couple of escort cruisers alone. The Garibaldi is not meant
to be any bigger than the British Invincible (in fact it should be even less
than 20 thousand tons). It was conceived as a ship to fight submarines.

But what is the sense in building a ship for defense against submarines that
is so large and vulnerable it is an ideal target for enemy attack, if we
can't defend it?

The usefulness of these aircraft carriers is undeniable, but it is mainly an
offensive usefullness; they serve as mobile platforms to transport offensive
aircraft far from their bases of operation. Without their two small
aircraft carriers, the English would not have been able to attack the
Falklands. The Dutch, who have no aircraft carriers, keep a battleship,

a regiment of marines, and a whole group of fighter bombers in their
possessions in the Antilles to defend them from Venezuelan claims.

The Italians, to defend their new aircraft carrier, should create a naval

air force, including some very expensive radar airplanes. But then they
could only use the Garibaldi within the range of land-based aircraft, and
that would obviously greatly reduce its value an an offensive ship.

of course it would still function against submarines thanks to the use of
helicopters. But once again, a vicious circle is appearing from which
there is no way out: the defensive weapon must be defended.

Thus we come inevitably to David Owen's conclusion: everything that is on
the surface, and is therefore visible, is vulnerable. The defense of such
surface craft ends up paralyzing all available military capabilities, thus
diminishing offensive potential. That which remains invisible, however,
like the nuclear submarine, doesn't need such sophisticated defenses and can
concentrate all its potential on its main task: attack.

The whole Brigish blockade of the Falklands was based, in fact, on three or
four nuclear submarines. They have proved to be practically invulnerable,
and by themselves have forced the large Argentine fleet to stick to its
bases. Italy has no nuclear sub-arines, nor has it developed the technology
for them. It missed an opportunity to do so twice: once at the beginning of
the 1960s, when it suspended studies for the development of a naval nuclear
engine; and again, more recently, when a project came to light for a joint
Italian-French nuclear fighter submarine.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Rizzoli Editore

9855

cso: 3106/219 7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CARLOS' ACTIVITIES, FRIENDS, KGB TIES EXAHIHED
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 16 Hay 82 pp 51, 52, 76
[Article by Jean Cau: "Carlos, and the High Lifeﬁ7

[lent] It is beginning to become clear why a bomb ex-
ploded on Rue Harbeuf.

The Carlos Mystery

Still dazed from the shock of the Rue Harbeuf explosion,
the French are realizing to their horror that their
country is caught up in the complicated intricacies

of inter-Arab politics. And, since the darkness which
descended that morning, they know that now they are the
target of killers from the "Mysterious East." Since it
is always necessary to find an individual to blame, they
think they see behind the smoke of the massacre the
mask of a certain Ilitch Ramirez, tragically famous
under the name "Carlos." But who is this Carlos and

who is providing him weapons so he can attack, in Paris,
both a Lebanese newspaper and passers-by? A nerciless
struggle is taking place in the Middle East; it has split
the Arab world in two. On one side there are the
Lebanese Shiites, the very special novenents which have
brought a reign of terror to Syria under the control of
Rif'at el Asad, the brother of the president of the
Republic and the Iranians. 0n the other side: the
Lebanese nationalists who refuse to be gobbled up by
Syria, the Iraqis and the najority of the PLO. HATAN
AL ARABI, the Lebanese newspaper on Rue Harbeuf, belongs
to the second group. And France is proposing a policy
in the Middle East which does not suit Syria's game.
That is why the passars-by on Rue Marbeuf were tar-
geted at the same time as the Lebanese weciiy. Carlos
is one of the close associates of Rif'at e1 Asad. who
wants to poison at any price relations between France
and his country. After the assassination of Ambassador
Delanare and two French officials in Beirut, the gangrene
was exported to France-

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Son of a millionaire, trained in terrorism in Ouba and Moscow, fanatic about
revolution, and crazy about girls.

He is never seen. He is feared everywhere. He is thought to be behind every
bomb that explodes. He has already killed many people. Perhaps he
organized the attack on Rue Harbeuf. He is certainly very dangerous. But

he has also become a myth. Who is this stubborn and invisible madman

who was named Ilitch by a very wealthy father, a kind of "conservative" of
the Revolution, and who, under the name Carlos, today terrifies the whole
world?

I . Education

when a child was born into the household of Jose Ramirez and his wife Maria
Sanchez, on 10 October 1909, there was a joyous outburst: It's a boy! "He
will call him Ilitch, like Lenin," said his father who, after almost having
become a priest, during his adolescence, abandoned his faith and adopted
another one, Stalinist communism.

[low he managed to reconcile this new faith with a sharp business sense
in real estate, which made him a millionaire with a prosperous business
in his native Venezuela, raisins one of the mysteries known only to the
dreamy idealists of the Western middle class.

But that is the way it goes: the fathers eat the green grapes of ideologi-
cal fanaticism and the sons develop an appetite for it and become activists.
One day Ilitch Ramirez y Sanchez will be called Carlos. Still, at least his
two younger brothers, baptized Vladimir and Lenin, have been better able to
cope with their names and have not followed in the footsteps of their older
brother....

At 17, Ilitch was sent to school abroad. his father thought this would help
him overcome his shyness and would get rid of his completes. Actually,
(0.x. Dr Freud?) this young man was somewhat pudgy, both his features and his
body, and suffered from the nickname "muchacho gordo," (the little fat kid).
He ended up in Cuba and, as with other "well-born (etc.) souls," here he was
in Campo Hatanzas, the pupil of Comrade General Victor Simonov (of the KGB)
who was instructing his large flock in the art of subversion. In 1967,

the Cubans landed small rebel groups on the coast of Venezuela, to stir up
trouble in Caracas. Twice Carlos landed. Twice he was arrested by the
police. Twice he was released. At that point, his parents got divorced and
his mother, accompanied by Lenin and Vladimir, went to live in London and--
she was much younger than her husband-do live her own life.

11. The Road to Moscow

Ilitch, however, took the road to Moscow and, more precisely, to lumunba
University (called officially, in all seriousness, "The University of Friend-
ship Among Peoples"...) which accepts students from the Third World and where
the KGB selects, as from a fish hatchery, the best students to be trained

9
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
for subversion and its numerous variants, running from terrorism to assas-
sination. But, surprise! Ilitch was expelled, in 1969, for "anti-Soviet
provocations and dissipated living." Later. Carlooologists who will go over
his career with a fine tooth comb, will wonder if this expulsion was not
trumped up with the help of Carlos himself so as to give him the reputation
of an unimportant playboy troublaaker with whom the KGB would not want to
compromise itself. A mere war strategem. Whatever the case, the wayward
student, after being "expelled," went on to East Berlin and then to London
to see his mother and then to the Middle East where, according to him, he
asked Palestinian groups in Jordan to train him in guerrilla warfare. The
proposal was accepted and Carlos studied in the training camps at Mount
(Gilead) and Um-(Juraysat) before going into combat. Then, he was once
again in London where he killed some time waiting for an assignment.

III. How To Become Carlos

A green light. He returned in 1973 to Beirut where he expressed his impa-
tience. Then he was given a green light to kill Lord Seif (president of
Marks and Spencer stores), an outspoken Zionist. lie went to his house on
30 November 1973 and fired three shots at him. Lord Seif survived. In an
interview with the newspaper AI. "ATM! Al. ARABI, Ilitch calmly explained his
failure: "A comrade had given me an old revolver and five rounds of amni-
tion. Well, to bring off an assassination successfully, you need two
pistols, one with a silencer, the other a very powerful one to defend your-
self in case of surprise. You also need two grenades and a driver. That is
what is considered the strict minimum if you want the operation to succeed.
So you can see what a position I was in with only five rounds and a single
pistol that I had not even tried out." Put yourself in his place. In any
case, on that day Ilitch became Carlos. One month later, once again in
London. he tossed a bomb into an Israeli bank. It exploded but only
slightly wounded a typist. No luck, he explained, "the bomb had slid over
the floor."

Then he hopped over to Beirut. And then on to Paris to dynamite the CRT?
Lbffice of French Broadcasting and Television? (it did not go off) and to
conduct an operation against three newspapers: L'ARCHE, MINUTE and
L'AURORE, accused of being Zionists and fascists. Another quick trip, to
Holland this time, to take hostage the ambassador of France in order to
negotiate the release of a member of the Japanese Red Army. That ended in
gunfire. Two policanen and one of the terrorists were wounded. Actually, it
was only a partial failure, because of poor coordination, and Carlos left
hastily for Paris where he learned that the Japanese had succeeded in taking
the ambassador ("I don't know why they didn't kill him," he said later) but
that the French were refusing to give in to the terrorists' demands. So
then Carlos threw two grenades into the Drugstore, at Saint-Germain—des-
Pres. That resulted in 2 dead and 30 injured-and he warned the French
Government that he would resort to even bloodier acts if the Japanese
'terrorist was not released. Since the Drugstore incident suggested that
these threats not be taken lightly, the slant-eyed comrade was put aboard a
Boeing and landed somewhere in the Middle East. "A complete success,"
claimed Carlos.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IV. A wild Guy, Full of Fun

This is the most difficult section of the article to write because now I
have to come to some conclusions. “ho is Carlos? He is nothing like, for
example, the Russian anarchists at the beginning of the century, with their
drawn faces and wild eyes, slouching along walls, hiding under their cost a
bomb which they are planning to toss into the car of a grand duke. He has
nothing in common with these passionate mystics. His style, Carlos' style,
is rather that of finding in the Revolution a kind of euphoria, a kind of
"high.“ Life, which he considers unimportant for others, he loves. Drink-
ing, eating well, smoking big cigars, strumming the guitar, playing cards,
dancing. that is his “01E" side. This wild guy really loves to kick up his
heels and knock someone around with his claws drawn, as if he were only a
nice stuffed tiger. Unfortunately, the tiger is made up of real flesh and
blood, with claws and fangs. When he strikes, he kills. But what goes on
in his head? "I am not a professional killer," he says. "It is not easy to
shoot point blank someone who is looking at you...." He fires, however, in
the name of the Revolution, as if shaken by a calm orgasm, and the "guy who
is full of fun" becomes a cold angel of death. Then, life begins again,
between raids, and the girls, lots of girls, comfort the terrorist. There
was Angela Otoala, the young waitress at a Spanish restaurant, 23 years old,
and pretty, whom he seduced in 1973 in London. There was Maria Romero, also
in London, a Colombian lawyer, older (39 years old) and a former member of
the Secretariat of the Colombian Communist Party, who fell for his charms.
In Paris, there was Nancy Sanchez, a Venezuelan studying anthropology at the
Sorbonne, and Angela Armstrong, the very young English girl born in South
Africa. On Rue Toullier, the Fifth Arondissement, a few steps away from the
Pantheon where Nancy was renting an apartment, it was a nonstop party. Every-
one had a good time. The students living in the maid's rooms on the sixth
floor were always welcome. They were offered a drink and permitted to use
the shower or to wash their jeans. Very nice, these Americanos. You
couldn't ask for better hospitality. Did the girls know who their boyfriend
was? No. Probably not. But why ask questions? Carlos, a virtuoso of fake
identities was only for them a Venezuelan friend, funny and cosmopolitan,
who was working for an "international company" and had plenty of money. If
he was using their studios or apartments as hideouts, he obviously refrained
from admitting it to these young women. Other questions: for whom was Carlos
working during those years? Officially, if we can use the term, for the '
Palestinians, alongside the PLO. Unofficially, to find that out you have to
zigzag your way through a labyrinth of international terrorism, bumping up
against artificial mirrors, having to retrace your steps 10 times, going
around in circles, going from the Red Brigades to the ETA [iasqua Fatherland
and Liberty Group], to the RAF lied Army Faction, Germany], from the EA! to
the Japanese, etc.... If you don't let yourself get caught up in this mare's
nest, one fixed point remains, around which are centered the "trips" of
Carlos: the services (and among them the most special ones) of the KGB.
Thus, and according to the most reliable information, the famous terrorist
is said to be in Damascus, in Syria, close to Rif'at e1 Asad (the brother of
President Rafe: el Asad), the head of a militia composed of 50,000 men in
political police work so serious that it often worries his own brother.

And everyone in Damascus knows that Rif‘at “is playing for" the Soviets....

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V . llccs tomb

The further adventures of our man. In 1976, the attempt to launch a rocket
attack at Orly against a plane belonging to the Israeli airline El A1. A
failure. In December 1975, the stakes were raised. In Vienna, during a
meeting of OPEC, a terrorist group led by Carlos and made up of two Germans,
a Palestinian and two Lebanese, attacked the building where the oil ministers
were meeting. Three were left dead and one wounded. And the ministers
were held captive. The Austrian Government capitulated and the DC 9 which
they boarded as hostages, along with their captors, ended up, after a wild
odyssey, landing in Algiers, where the right of asylum was granted the
terrorist group in exchange for the hostages. Why this "action," as Carlos
called it? So that the rich oil states do not forget, under the shower of
dollars they are receiving, that they must serve the Palestinian cause. All
right. It's as good an explanation as any.

But it was 5 months earlier, on 27 June 1975, in Paris, that Carlos carried
out, if not his bloodiest exploit, at least his boldest. The police, acting
on information from an informer, a certain Hokarbel, who was the contact
between Carlos' team and the FPLP [Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine] raised (unarmed!) Rue Toullier, where the terrorist was living.
Hokarbel, had stated to the police that a certain Maya Lara, a Venezuelan, in
whom they were interested, was there; the police want in. They were also
carrying in their pockets a photograph in which, next to Hokarbel, appeared...
another man. He is the one who opened the door. They politely asked him if
he knew Mokarbel. Be politely answered that he did not know anyonc by that
name. They politely told him that this man claimed to know him and they
showed him the photograph. He politely asked where Mokarbel was. They
politely told him that he is over there in a car. He politely asked if he
could see him. of course. The police went to get Hokarbel. Hhen they came
back, it was to meet their death. Two were shot dead and a third wounded.
Hokarbel, lastly, got a bullet between the eyes and was finished off with a
bullet in the temple for good measure. And from one building to the next,
Carlos, leaping like a deer, got down to the street and finally made his way
to a hideout on Rue Amelie, rented by a friend, Sylvie Manuela. From that
hideout, he left, once more, to disappear in the wilds of the other side of
the Mediterranean, from which he did not reappear, as we said before, until
he showed up in Vienna. Since then....

VI. Fingerprints

Since then the trail of Carlos has become vague and is lost. Did the real
man fly off into the heaven of myths to repose in his frightening glory?
Is he in Libya, in Yemen, in Lebanon, in the East, in Syria? Everywhere and
nowhere at the same time? Has he become a professor or doctor of
terrorism, given his vast experience and is he planning acts of terrorism
or is he putting a stamp of certification (seriously) on those who are
carrying them out? Recently, we know, and this is his most recent sign of
life after a long absence, he threatened Hr Deferre, leaving fingerprints
to authenticate his message, if two of his terrorist friends arrested in
France were not freed. They were not. LE CAPITOLE blew up. Carlos? Not
Carlos? Who knows or will know?

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a v“ VI I |\ Ina. \uu, u.‘l.l

V11. 5 Business and a War

Unquestionably, Ilitch Ramirez has created a famous nickname and has suc-
ceeded in raising himself up to terrorism, is highest rung and he is the
number one world star. That being said, as the saying goes. one lends only
to the rich, which is sometimes a mistake, as Carlos is now being credited
for what has been done by someone else. Actually terrorism is not limited to
a single man, a kind of bogey man, present everywhere and everywhere
invincible. Terrorism is a business. Deliberate. Calculated. Perfected.
Terrorism is a war. In the limelight, Carlos is only the most famous
footsoldier. It remains to be seen who are the officers who, in the shadows,
order the disorder of this army of terror.

And that, more frightening than Carlos, is the real question.

 

[Photo caption] Behind the tragic smoke on the rue Marhuef emerges the
shadowy figure of Carlos, but more than he, it is his "protectors" who
have declared war on France.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse SA

8956

C50: 6131/509 13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ARMENIA" ARRESTED FOR SHUGGLING. ASALA CORRECTION
London AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 16-20 Hay 82 p 27

[Article: "Turks Arrest Lebanese Armenian Connected with Smuggling Operation,
ASALA"]

[Text] It's been determined that the process of arming the secret Armenian army
is being carried out by a smuggling organization in Turkey that is being managed

from Cyprus by a Lebanese Armenian called Fahe Ohanes Koligian who lives in the
Turkish sector of the island.

Turkish police investigations have led to the arrest of 1,000 persons suspected of
belonging to the aforementioned smuggling organization. Some of them admitted that
they were using Turkey as a base for smuggling various weapons, munitions and
equipment to various countries of the Biddle East, especially Lebanon and some
countries of the Gulf.

It's been determined that the organization actually began operations 18 years ago
and that the value of the weapons, goods and merchandise that it smuggled exceeds
2.5 billion dollars. Fahe had gone to Istanbul in 1965 to direct the organization,
but then he soon moved his_office to Cyprus after forming friendships with various
Turkish and Greek organizations on the island. These friendships placed some
Cypriot customs representatives at his disposal.

AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI has learned that when a police force in the Turkish sector of
the capital, Nikosia, raided the office of the Import-Export company Fahe manages.
the aforementioned businessman was able to escape arrest and fly back to Lebanon
on a private airplane. It was established that that import-export company was the
actual command post for the secret smuggling operation that included weapons.
narcotics. electric and electronic equipment. pharmaceuticals and surgical
supplies.

In Instanbul Turkish police arrested Ahmed Tenir who is considered the "godfather
of the Turkish Mafia" and Fahe's major partner.

COPYRICRT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

8592
C50: 4604/34

1%

’08 OPTICIAL UB! OIL!
[Article by Werner P. D'hein]

[Text] For the sake of a Christian-liberal government in Bonn, CDU-chief
Kohl must give up important cabinet posts. PDP and 050 insist upon influential
government posts.

The prize is not yet in the bag. and they are already fighting over the spoils.
Opposition leader Helmut Kohl boasted that "without any difficulty," he

could "practically overnight" present a complete government cabinet. if the
FD? were to switch over to a center coalition. In the COD. however.

irritation is growing over Kohl's quick cabinet sleight-of-hand. Only 8 of
the 16 ministerial posts are reserved for the CDC. the rest--end particularly
the attractive ones-the 080 and FD? will share.

Prominent Christian Democrats are murmuring about "betrayal." Kohl
supposedly has sold out the interests of his own party in order to finally
become chancellor. The critics are doing him an injustice there. Truth is
that the influential government posts were already spoken for by the time
Kohl started making up his list. 080 chief Franz Josef Strauss had directed
the show from behind the scenes.

“hen the Bavarian minister-president. first of the opposition leaders to
publicly announce at the beginning of the year that the PDP, in a coalition
with the Christian Union, could "of course" retain its present ministerial
posts, the CD0 leadership had at first no misgivings. No one considered
taking the Foreign Ministry away from Hans-Dietrich Genacher if he helped
Kohl attain the chancellorship. Despite his involvement in the contributions
affair. Otto Graf Lambsdorff was to retain the Ministry for Economics,
Gerhart Baum of the liberal left the Ministry of the Interior. and old
liberal Josef Brtl the Ministry of Agriculture.

The can was alerted only when the clever 08p chief demanded "at least the
same representation" for his Bavarian party in the Kohl cabinet. According
to Strauss. the CSU, with 10.3 percent of the votes in the last Bundestag

15
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

elections and 52 seats, has almost the sane parliamentary strength as the 1’0?
with its 10.6 percent and 53 seats. For himself, Strauss claimed the Finance
Ministry which is of special importance at the present critical time. His

second-in-co-Iand in Bonn, 081] state party chief Friedrich Zi-ermann, he put
in charge of the Federal Armed Forces [Defense Ministry] and filled two other

influential ministries with Oscar Schneider (Housing) and Ilans Meier (Education
and Science).

One of Kohl's advisers excuses the empty hands with which his boss now faces
his own people by saying. "one can hardly object to treating the 0811 no worse
than the FDP." For high-powered cw politicians. such as the raspe-zted
economic expert Kurt Hiedenkopf, or defense expert Manfred Hoerner who in the
past pitched in for the CW in the security policy discussions. there are no
appropriate cabinet jobs available. Messe's CDU prince, Alfred Dregger. if he
does not become Minister President in Hiesbaden this fall, would hardly have
a chance for an important cabinet seat in Bonn.

Kohl can place only three shining lights in the CD!) part of his cabinet.

The Ministry for Social Affairs is planned for Berlin senator Norbert Bluem,
chief of the CW employees' organization "Social Cornittees." CD!) Secretary
General Beiner Geissler. for a long tine at loggerheada with Kohl, is to
exchange his party job for the Ministry for Youth. Family and Health. And

the Ministry of Justice is to go to a non of the new CDU generation. Halter
Uallnann, mayor of Frankfurt.

The rest of his team remains colorless--a council of techmcrats from the
Bundestau: Dieter Schnlte for [the Ministry of] Transport, Christian Schwarz-
Schilling for Post [and Telecommications] (because he made a specialty of
the new nedia), Heinz Riesenhuber for Research and Technology, and Volhar
Koehler for Economic Cooperation.

COPYRIGKT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG b 00.

9917
cso: 3103/«90

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DOUBT OVER FRERCH-CERHAN PAH-2 HELICOPTER LINGERS AT HANOVER
Firms Show Helicopters
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 22 May 82 pp 26-27
[Article by Jacques Horisset: "Helicopters: In the Shadow of the PAH-2"]

[Excerpts] Six helicopter manufacturers were directly represented at Hanover:
Agusta, Aerospatiale, Bell, NBS [Hesserschmitt-Bolkow-Bloahm], Sikorsky and
Westland. Real novelties were relatively rare, of course, but not totally ab-
sent.

with Agusta, the emphasis was mainly in the IPR [Instrument Flight Rules]-
equipped A-lO9: the Milanese builder has now sold 306 A-lO9's, including a good
15 of the A-109 Mark II, an improved version which is now the only one being
marketed. The rate of production is four machines per month. Four A-lO9's
have been sold to the PRC, and the number will soon be six, because of two con-
tracts on the point of being finalized.

0n the other hand, no new information was given on the A-129 Mongoose, one of
whose basic missions is antitank warfare and which could quite obviously be one
of the candidates for filling the German needs (PAH-2 program)--but on condi-
tion. of course. that the Franco-German program (HBB-Aerospatiale) is not
launched. which would open the doors of the German market to the American,
British and Italian industrialists. The situation, in this area, remains "op-
en," despite the efforts of H33, Aerospatiale, the French and German engine
manufacturers and the equipment and missiles industries of the two countries to
find a solution offering the best possible cost-effectiveness ratio.

The same discretion prevails at Aerospatiale and in HBB; but Euromissile has
taken a strong stand for a Franco-German program (see following article, by
Pierre Langereux).

Contrary to what had been announced, Aerospatiale did indeed present, in addi-
tion to an Ecureil, an Ecureil-Z (AS-3558, No 5027) and a Daupine-ZH, a Super
Puma--AS-3323, Ho 2005--which had just come back from a series of tests in
freezing conditions north of the polar circle, conducted from Tromsoe, Norway.
The machine left Hanover for Bretigny in the afternoon of 18 Hay. We shall
come back to this test program, which will constitute an important element in

17
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USI'. ONLY

the integral all-weather certification (flight in freezing conditions) of the
AS-332, as was the case also for the certification already obtained by the
AS-330 Puma.

HBB presented the new Bo-lOS LS, of course, and the BK-ll7. The 30-105 LS has
two Allison 250-C28C turboengines of 550 RP, as against 2 X 425 HP; the extra
power thus provided enables the machine, which has been undergoing tests since
last October (it has 35 hours of flying time), to be usable with better condi-
tions in hot weather or at altitude. It is hoped that certification of the
30-105 LS will be obtained by the end of this year, and the first deliveries
are planned for next year.

The BK-ll7 presented was the lead machine of the series and has been flying
since 23 April; a first lot of 100 of them has been launched (71 for the H38
marketing zone and 29 for the marketing zone reserved to Kawasaki).

MBB has also published the first data on the bench tests of a new rotor without
any mechanical articulation (including pitch), which is the material result of
the studies and research carried out in cooperation with Vertol in recent
years. This new rotor should fly on a 30-105 quite soon.

PAH-2 Seen to Be Vital
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 22 May 82 p 34

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "The Future of Franco-German Cooperation Rests on
the PAH-2"]

[Text] Franco~German cooperation in armaments, launched by the two governments
20 years ago and conducted for the last 10 years within the framework of the
Euromissile group, was an important theme of the 1982 Hanover Exposition.

Euromissile is showing very positive results. The order book currently stands
at more than Fr 20 billion, 55 percent of it for export, it was announced by
Marcel Horer, president of Euromissile, who anticipates a turnover of about

Fr 5 billion for 1982.

Aerospatiale and M33 are producing each month 1,900 Milan antitank missiles and
70 firing posts, 1,000 Hot antitank missiles and 15 firing posts, and 350 Ro-
land ground-to-air missiles and 6 firing posts, it was stated by Sepp Hort,
chairman of the Euromissile members' assembly.

Thus, Franco-German cooperation in these three programs is providing work for
aout 13,000 persons in the two countries, including the subcontracts, which are
sizable (80 percent for Roland). Furthermore, the cooperation was recently ex-
tended also to Great Britain, which is associated with Buromissile in the new
EMDG [expansion unknown] group for development of the future medium-range and
long-range third-generation antitank missiles (cf AIR ET COSMOS, No 900, p 43
[See JPRS L/lO496, dated 6 May 82, No 28/82 of this series, pp 31-321). EHDG
is also to be the cooperation structure for development of other missiles and
eventually for artillery rockets, Hr Rort declared.

18

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
However, some shadows are creeping over Franco-German cooperation. Last year,
defense-budget compressions led the PRC to "defer" the orders for Roland
(installments 3 and 4) for the Luftwaffe and the Navy and also those for the
Milan (installment 4). Hr Hort considers, though. that Milan installment a and
the Roland installments for the Luftwaffe could be reinstituted.

But the essential problem is in fact that of the Franco-German cooperation on
the new HAC [Antitank Helicopterl/PAH-Z antitank-helicopter project.

"It is important for France and the PRC to reach an understanding rapidly in
order to laucnh this program, which is necessary for the future of Franco-Cer-
man cooperation." Roger Chevalier, vice president of Aerospstiale, declared un-
ambiguously. The FRG is, of course, experiencing financial difficulties in its
more than Pr 2 billion participation in this program. But it is also tempted
toward trans-Atlantic cooperation with the United States for development of
this new helicopter and its weapons system.

But there is no doubt that such an attitude, which wOuld in fact lead to the
introduction of an American competitor into the European market, would sound
the death knell of Franco—German cooperation. Therefore, this is not only a
technical choice but a political one!

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

11267
080: 3100/706

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USI1MQLY
BRIEFS

ADAPTED BXOCET IN TBSTING--Adaptstion of the Exocet antiship missile, AH—39
air-to-surface version, to the Atlantic New Generation (ANG) maritime-patrol
airplane is in progress. The first phase of adaptation of the AH-39 to the ANC
began in March 1982 with the dropping of three mockups of AM-39 missiles at the
Flight-Testing Center (CEV) of Cazaux in the Landes (France). He recall that
adaptation of the AH-39 missile to the Navy's Super Btendard carrier-based
plane was completed on 2 February 1982, with the success of the last qualifica-
tion firing, made on that date against a towed Trimaran marine target. Four
out of five AH-39 firings from Super Etendarda of the French Air Force were
successful, one having failed for a reason independent of the weapon system.
Certain firings were dc‘e by a Super Etendard of the French aircraft-carrier
Clemenceau in the presence of Argentine flyers. Since then, as is known, AM-39
missiles have been fired by Argentine Super Btendsrds in combat, and one of
these missiles destroyed the “,100-ton British destroyer "Sheffield." Valida-
tion firings of the HATRA lNechanics, Aviation and Traction Co] Magic air-com-
bat missile have also been done by a Super Btendard of the aircraft-carrier
Clemenceau at the Mediterranean Testing Center (CEN), in cooperation with the
teams of the CEV and of the manufacturer. [Text] [Paris AIR ET COSMOS in
French 22 May 82 p 1.7] (COPYRIGHT: A. a c. 1982] 11267

FIBER OPTICS GUIDE TORPEDO--The ECAN [Naval Arms and Construction Establish-
ment] of Saint-Tropes and the Thomson-CSF company have just begun development
of the New Light Torpedo (NTL) for the Navy's submarines. Thomson-CSF expects
that it will take a to 5 years to complete development of the new NTL torpedo,
which should go into mass production in 1987, it was recently declared by a re-
presentative of the submarine-activities division of the company. The NTL tor-
. pedo is the first French wire-guided torpedo using optical fibers. It is con-
sidered to be a competitor of the British Sting-Ray light torpedo, but faster.
Thomson-68F has specified that the NTL torpedo would have a limited range of

20 to 30 km by the wire-guidance technique. But the NTL torpedo would never-
theless have a greater range than that of the new French F-l7 torpedo that has
just been placed in service, in January 1982, in the French Navy and several
foreign navies. In addition, it was decided in 1979 to modernize the F-17 tor-
pedo to make it multipurpose, so as to equip the Navy's conventional-propulsion
and nuclear-prOpulsion (SNA) attack submarines with it. [Text] [Paris AIR ET
COSMOS in French 22Hay 82 p 47] [COPYRIGNT: A. 6 C. 1982] 11267

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I
Thomson-cs? [General Radio Go] and Thomson-Brandt for this ccutrsct, which consti-
tutes the first applicaticn_ of the Bessie decoy-lamcher. The Scene will be used

siles fired against ships. The electronic-warfare action of the Sagaie system

will be joined with that of CSBE'a Dsgaie decoy-launcher and of the close-self-
defense weapons systems. Each Ssgsie system will comprise two carriages, each

with 10 decoy-launching rockets (electromagnetic and infrared), as well as the

cases for the control mechanisms, aiming. power supply, processing, supervision
and maintenance. The designing of the Sngaie munitions has been assigned by

CSO: 3100/1708

21
FOR OFFICIAL US£(MVLY
DETAILS OF RECENTLY UNCOVERED ABROFLOT SPY NET RBCOUNTBD

Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 10 May 82 pp 23-29

[Text] The Soviet commercial airline company in Spain has another business
besides flying. In the past 3 years four of its employees--two last week-
have left the country after being linked with espionage activities, with
their pilots suspected of being more than just operators of planes. This
story tells about the life of the two Aeroflot nen in Madrid, where as in
any sinister tale, the sordid underground work or spying is nixed up with
a still unexplained death.

At the beginning of this year, Esther, a British air hostess, who was trying
to buy a bottle of brandy in the Barajas airport, lost a heel off her shoe.
So as not to fall, she grabbed onto a pilot, whose briefcase fell from his
hand onto the floor, spilling out its contents.

The stewardess, somewhat upset and enbarrassed, apologized to the owner of

the briefcase, and set about helping him to gather up the papers which were
scattered on the floor.

At that noment, two men who were dressed in the sane uniform as the pilot
pushed her roughly aside, hurriedly gathered up the papers, and put them into
the briefcase again.

Incredulous and suprised by the rude behavior of the crew nembers, Esther
looked for the broken off heel of her shoe and went away. Then she renenbered
two things. The crew menbers were wearing the Aeroflot emblen, and the papers
which they had not allowed her to touch were made up of strange combinations
of nunbers and ciphers. They were undoubtedly coded messages.

A few months after this episode, two colleagues of the strange Aeroflot crew
were expelled from Spain for carrying on-activities harmful to the national
security. The two spies, Vasiliy Nikolayevich Pedorin and Vladimir Lukich
Tirtishnikov, director and~assistant director, respectively, of the Soviet
airline company, left Spain for good last Thursday, after the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs gave them a week to collect their belongings and get out.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Agent of Influence

Vasiliy Fedorin, age 48, was born in Olguino, Saratov Province, in the Soviet
Union. He studied engineering in the Patrice Lumumba University, that great
Soviet center of higher education where so many Russian agents and revolutionary
leaders have served their apprenticeship; and he married Yanna Petrovna

Fedorina, a young woman of Eurasian appearance, born in Polotsk, Belorussia,
in October 1940.

After spending several years working in Spanish-speaking countries, Pedorin
was assigned to Morocco in the mid '70's as an agent of the GRU, the military
branch of the KGB, using the cover of a representative of the Aeroflot

company in Rabat. In April 1980 the Soviet authorities transferred him to
Madrid.

Tall and thin, with a wide face, high cheekbones and blue eyes, Vasiliy
Fedorin arrived in Spain as director of Aeroflot, replacing its former head,
Oleg Suranov, who had been espelled from the country after having been

accused of carrying on espionage activities. This made him a suspicious
person from the start.

Subjecting him to strict surveillance, the agents of the Ministry of Defense's
cz-mterintelligence service, who began to follow him from the very day he
arrived in Barajas, soon noticed that under the cover of the director general
of Aeroflot and of a prosaic Soviet aeronautical engineer, there was concealed
a person of refined culture, with courteous and educated manners, who dressed
with a certain elegance, spoke Spanish and French perfectly, and who had

come to Spain for something more than selling airline tickets.

However, there was something that did not fit in. After months and months of
being followed and watched, Pedorin had not decided to reactivate the network
of Soviet agents which his predecessor, Oleg Suranov, had set up in the
country.

One day things changed; The pretended director of Aeroflot suddenly left
his office and proceeded to a centrally located Madrid cafeteria, where he
had a meeting with a journalist from a mass circulation daily newspaper.

There was nothing strange about the meeting. 0n the other hand, there was
something strange about Pedorin's behavior. Too many precautions for it to
be an ordinary meeting.

A 'Pully Trained Field Han'

Before keeping the appointment, the sham Aeroflot director had nade two calls
from a phone booth, had changed taxis twice, had gotten out 300 meters away
from the place of the meeting, crossed the street twice before going to

the pedestrian crossing in order to see if he was being followed, and then

went into the cafeteria, where for an hour two Russians had been setting up
a discreet syst- of counter-surveillance.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
After this first meeting, which was followed by many others, Spanish
counterintelligence found the key to the problem: Fedorin was not an
operations agent. He was an agent of influence, and his mission in Spain

was to set up a network of journalists who would write under the orders of
the Soviet Union.

All Spanish counterespionage operations then were centered around unmasking
him. For several months agents of the 63810 [Higher Center for Defense
Intelligence] and the fake director general of Aeroflot played a cat-and-
mouse game. Every time that someone laid a trap for him, Fedorin sniffed
it out. Finally, last March, Vasiliy Fedorin, one of the most astute men
in Soviet military espionage in Spain, fell into the snare of the national
security services.

“In the murky and stormy world of spies," a specialist told CAMBIO 16, "when
someone discovers a network belonging to the opposite side they can only

do two things: either liquidate the agents, or force them to work for their
captors. Anything but put them into prison." That was what happened to
Fedorin. The CBSID "turned around" one of his spies, made him into a double
agent, and used him to dig the grave for his boss.

Something similar happened to Tirtishnikov, "assistant director general" of
Aeroflot, who accompanied Fedorov on his journey "into the cold." One of
the men from his own network, captured by Spanish counterespionage, sold
him out unceremoniously.

Vladimir Tirtiahnikov was born in North Korea 3“ years ago. The son of a
Soviet father and a Korean mother, he studied engineering in the USSR, and
joined the military branch of the KGB. He carried out several missions in

the Middle East, and during one of his stays in the Soviet Union for recycling
he married Tat'yana Mikhailovna Tirtishnikova, a Muscovite 4 years older

than he, by whom he has a young child.

The KGB took 6 years to prepare the ground for putting him into Spain.

As an inspecting engineer from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Tirtishnikov
travelled to the country with some regularity, and began to make friends
with several people. Fifteen months ago he was finally posted to Madrid
with the cover of assistant director general of Aeroflot.

Gifted with a special talent for outwitting the vigilance of Spanish
counterintelligence, Tirtishnikov was a "fully trained field man," interested
in all kinds of information, but especially in anything related to the plans
of the Spanish Armed Forces in regard to Spain joining NATO, and the supplies
of military material which the United States was prepared to sell to the
Madrid authorities; as well as the training and capabilities of the Spanish
military men who were going to fill positions of responsibility within the
Western military bloc.

Fedorin and Tirtishnikov are not the only spies who have been detected in
Aeroflot. Nor are they the first to be expelled for taking advantage of their
cover in the Soviet airline company to carry on their nefarious work.

26
FOR 0FFNJAL.USE(NVLY
3")“ II'I’I‘ II‘I. tn‘l. "I‘.l'

On Friday, 15 March, 1980, Oleg Suranov--age 61, tall, with a robust build,
partly bald and beggy-eyed--left Spain after the 0851!) found proof of his
covert espionage activities when he was "sold", by scans of a double agent,
sons plans of the electronic‘systa of the French liirage aircraft, in which
Suranov had shown interest.

Born in Leningrad, harried and with two children, Suranov was also an
aeronautical engineer and director of Aeroflot in Spain, a position that
allowed his to be on good terms with the pilots of the western airline

companies-assay of whom had previously been military pilotsuand to keep
informed about some of the secrets of NATO.

Another Soviet GRU agent who was detected by Spanish counterintelligence was
Gennadiy Katychev, a heavy individual, of mediun height, with rosy cheeks
and an oblique expression, who in 1979 was the comercial director for

Spain of the Soviet airline coqaany.

At the end of 1980 Katychev was promoted to assistant director general of
Aeroflot in Spain; and the Western secret services, who had thought he night

he a Soviet agent, detected some links in what could be his network of
informants.

The KGB, which had set up a discreet counteraurveillance system to protect
hill. then noticed that he was ”blown," and in order to prevent the collapse
of the network of agents, they decided in January 1981 to transfer hill to
another "rezidientura" (the KGB station in a country).

A couple of years before, Enrique Lope: Alcantara had suffered a worse fate.
lie was a former Spanish ailitary nan aged 58, a personal friend of the former
director of Aeroflot in Spain, and former sales manager of the Soviet
co-ercisl airline company.

On 19 March 1979, 2 days after having made a trip to the Soviet Union. Lopez
Alcantara was found dead in the seat of a "Citroen cs" at no. 3 Canillejas
Street in Madrid.

Three years after it occurred, his death is still surrounded by mystery.
He was apparently attacked by some criminals, who assaulted him for the
purpose of robbery, but none of his possessions were missing, and his car
was still parked in the garage.

The wound that caused his death was also very strange. A simple cut on the
back of the knee ended his life. The cut, which severed the fenoral artery
of the for-er Aeroflot sales manager with diabolical precision, either
happened by sheer chance, as the family thinks, or was the work of an
experienced professional.

Shortly before his death the Russians had named to the post of Aeroflot sales
sanager a person when they trusted completely: Nieves Cuervo Blisslde, a
relative of Vicente Guervo, the "Russian boy" who heads the Hispanic-Soviet
Friendship Association, one of the two associations for friendship with the

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USSR which exist in this country, and which receives direct support and
funding from the KGB.

Everything seems to indicate that Aeroflot, whose activities in Spain began
before the death of Franco and the opening of diplomatic relations with

the East, has been the most important center of the GED, the military
branch of the KGB, ever since the first Russian Tupolev landed at the
Earajas airport.

Western military intelligence sources think that more than half of the staff
of this company-dmade up of four Soviets and too Spaniards--are using their
positions as cover for carrying out espionage activities.

They also believe that the crews of the Russian planes, which have been
landing uninterruptedly at Barajss on Mondays and Saturdays for about a
dozen years, are working for Soviet military intelligence as couriers and
as agents in charge of securing information inside the country.

During the 26 hours that they usually stop over, the two Aeroflot pilots

and the four air hostesses which make up each crew usually spend most of
their time outside the hotel, dressed in civilian clothes and almost without
police surveillance.

The government suspects that some of the pilots or air hostesses have already
set up their own networks of informants, although there.is still no
information to prove it.

One thing that seems clear, though, is that the seemingly harmless Soviet
Tupolevs which travel to Spain are taking advantage of their arrivals and
departures from Madrid to photograph the military installations of the
Torrejon de Ardoz base, and to compare the material that they obtain with
the information sent by Soviet spy satellites.

Foreign political observers find it strange that Soviet aircraft are allowed
to land at an airport like Barajas which is situated barely 20 kilometers
from the most important Spanish-0.8. base in the country, when normally

they would be forbidden to come within 100 kilometers of it.

But that is not the only thing that is strange. 0n Princessa Street, in
Madrid, where the Aeroflot offices are located, the Soviet spies work at
night and sleep during the day. And it is this not-so-strange predeliction
for dark, silent and patient work that makes Aeroflot a company that does
its flying in low places as well as high ones.

Aeroflot Personnel in Spain

Vasiliy Fedorin, director general. Expelled. Sergey Sesikov, assistant
director general and commercial director. Suspected of espionage.

Vladimir Tirtishnikov, assistant director general. Expelled. Valeriy
Smirnov, field director.

26
FOR‘OFFNC1A1.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂieves Cuervo Elizalde. head of programing and reservations. Nationality:

Span ﬁsh,
I.

Antonio Modesto Dias, head of pro-otion. Nationality: Spanish.
COPYRIGHT: 1982. INFOIHACION Y REVIS‘I'AS. s.A.

8131
cso: 3110/162 END

27
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY